==PAGE:1==
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
MSc Eng in Design and Innovation
Quantitative Biomechanics
in Trampoline Gymnastics
and TeamGym Trampet
A Study of Performance Analysis Technologies and Design
of a Sensor-Based Learning Tool for Training Sessions
By Christoffer Nayberg
2023
==PAGE:2==
↑Cover photo by Zuma Press, Inc. on Alamy.
==PAGE:3==
Thesis title: Quantitative Biomechanics in Trampoline Gymnastics and TeamGym Trampet
Sub-title: A Study of Performance Analysis Technologies and Design of a Sensor-Based Learning
Tool for Training Sessions
Author:
Christoffer Nayberg (s152763)
Supervisors:
Mirko Salewski, Associate Professor — Department of Physics
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor — Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
External advisors:
Andreas Top Adler, Performance Engineer — Team Danmark
Peter Jensen, Chief of Sports — Københavns Trampolin Klub
Project period: February 23rd — August 4th, 2023
ECTS credits: 30
Education: MSc Eng in Design and innovation
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
↑Photo by Bo Tureby.
Summary
While the development and implementation of new technologies for performance analysis
in sports has aﬀected the way coaches coach and athletes train in many sports over the past
decades, the same cannot be said for trampoline gymnastics and TeamGym. In these disci-
plines, the body of research in biomechanics is generally limited, and the implementation of
quantitative technologies in training contexts almost non-existant.
This thesis explores opportunities in the application of quantitative technology, speciﬁcally
for motion analysis purposes, in trampoline gymnastics and the TeamGym trampet disci-
pline. The thesis comprises several individually comprehensive parts, presented in the fol-
lowing order: 1. A preliminary research part, where a theoretical foundation is established
for the project using primary as well as secondary research methods. 2. The development
and validation of a simulation framework based on a simple cylinder-based model of the hu-
man body, capable of simulating aerial motion resulting from body movements while som-
ersaulting. The purpose was to provide a simple and accessible tool for coaches and other
stakeholdersinterestedinquantitativeanalysisofaerialtechnique. 3. Astudyintothequality
of data extracted from a single inertial sensor unit measuring trampoline and trampet skills,
by comparison to data from an optical marker-based motion capture. Four high-level tram-
poline athletes and 5 high-level TeamGym athletes were recruited for performing a variety
of skills in the motion capture cage on original equipment. Optical marker tracking, sensor
data capture, and video capture from two angles was carried out concurrently, and the result-
ing data processed to extract orientation data and other measures. 4. Agile development of
a concept for a learning tool intended for trampoline and trampet training sessions, based
on the results of the sensor data study and preliminary research.
Results indicate that a single wearable sensor, which can be worn by using a clothing attach-
ment clip, is suitable for measurement and extraction of data related to identiﬁed perfor-
mance measures in the two disciplines. Disadvantages include the lack of joint angle mea-
suring for posture estimation. A learning tool based upon such a wearable sensor connected
to a tablet equipped with a wide angle camera lens is recommended as a suitable way of im-
plementing quantitative technology in training, to the beneﬁt of athletes and coaches.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
↑Photo by Esben Dan Pedersen.
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Physics at the Technical University
of Denmark in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in
Engineering degree in Design and Innovation.
As a long-time coach in TeamGym and performance gymnastics, I have always had great in-
terest in the technical aspects of these complex disciplines, and found available material and
knowledge curiously sparse. This curiosity is what has led me to take on this project.
The project was carried out in collaboration with Andreas Top Adler, Performance Engineer
at Team Danmark, and Peter Jensen, former Olympic trampolinist and Chief of Sports at
Københavns Trampolin Klub, under the supervision of Mirko Salewski, Associate Professor
at the Department of Physics, DTU, and co-supervision of Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor
at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU.
Technical University of Denmark, August 4, 2023
Christoﬀer Nayberg
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
↑Photo by Julie Bennike Hansen.
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to the following individuals and organizations
for their invaluable support and contributions to this project:
Mirko Salewski, Professor at the Department of Physics, DTU, for his excellent supervision,
guidance, and expertise in the ﬁeld of biomechanics, for managing the contact with Team
Danmark and other key stakeholders, always supporting me in my ideas and for making this
project possible.
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science & Head of Studies for the MSc programme in Human-Centered Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, DTU, for his extraordinary co-supervision, support and guidance, as well as insights
on data processing, design and user experience.
Lazaros Nalpantidis, Professor at the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering &
Head of Studies for the MSc programme in Autonomous Systems, DTU, for providing access
to, and guidance in the use of, the motion capture system in the Autonomous Systems Test
Arena.
Andreas Top Adler, Performance Engineer at Team Danmark, for his expertise and for help-
ing in the recruitment of an elite trampoline athlete for the ﬁnal motion capture session.
Peter Jensen, former Olympic trampoline athlete & and Chief of Sports at Københavns Tram-
polin Klub, for his valuable insights and participation in the ﬁnal recording event.
Maila Walmod, former elite trampoline athlete on the national Danish team & Chief Coach
for the trampoline division of Roskilde Gymnastikforening, for participating in motion cap-
turesessionsandforexcellentsupportandinsightsintotheculture, focusareasandcoaching
in trampoline gymnastics.
A number of colleage coaches and former colleagues, some of whom are dear friends of
mine, for participating in the design workshop, helping with ideation, synthesis and insights.
SeveralelitetrampolineandTeamGymathletesfromRoskildeGymnastikforeningandRoskilde
==PAGE:10==
vi
Acknowledgements
TeamGym, for participating in motion capture data acquisition sessions and providing excel-
lent input during testing sessions throughout the design process.
Christopher Lucas Scurrah Grundsøe, my roommate and dear friend, for supporting me
and providing valuable insights and advice throughout the project.
My family and close friends, for their unwavering support, encouragement, and motivation
throughout this research journey.
I am grateful for the opportunity to work on this project, and for the knowledge and experi-
ence gained throughout the process.
==PAGE:11==
“ We are continually faced by great opportunities brilliantly
disguised as insoluble problems ”
— Lee Iacocca
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research questions and project goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Preliminary research
9
2.1
Competition rules and scoring systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Performance analysis and biomechanics in sports
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Biomechanics of trampoline and trampet performances . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Motion analysis techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Field research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Discussion and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
Secondary research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Simulating aerial motion
27
3.1
Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Modeling the human body . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Body orientation framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Aerial motion mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
Model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Simulation output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.7
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:13==
Contents
ix
3.8
Discussion and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Measuring aerial motion
41
4.1
Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5
Results and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Discussion and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Concept development
59
5.1
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Iteration 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Iteration 2: Usability testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
Iteration 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.5
Discussion and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Conclusion
71
6.1
Research questions and project goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Reﬂection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3
Future implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Bibliography
75
A
Interview with trampoline gymnastics coach
79
B
Subject information letter and consent form
83
C
Project plan - Gantt chart
91
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
Focus on performance analysis in sports is generally intensifying with the development and
implementation of new technologies and techniques, and has become increasingly relevant
for many stakeholders; coaches, managers, and performance analysts among others [15].
As a result, the role of technology in many sports has changed dramatically over the past
decades, aﬀecting the way coaches and athletes conduct training [13].
In the world of gymnastics, however, the advancements in technology does not appear to
have inﬂuenced coaching and competition practices in such a signiﬁcant way. While sub-
stantial biomechanical research has been conducted over the past decades, providing in-
creased understanding of techniques and the physical loads involved in a variety of gymnas-
tics skills, this research has been primarily focused on understanding existing techniques by
applying biomechanics to observed and measured skills performed in competition settings
in an eﬀort to reduce the risk of injuries, rather than the exploration of new techniques or
optimization of performance. And although some research has been conducted with perfor-
mance improvement as the primary motivation, and feasibility and beneﬁts of implement-
ing several types of technology for evaluating the performance of a variety of gymnastics
skills has, in fact, been demonstrated, only a small number of new technological solutions
have been implemented in practice as a result.
Thus, introducing reliable technology into training environments has been suggested to be
one of the most fundamental ways of using biomechanical knowledge to improve perfor-
mance in gymnastics in the future [10].
Furthermore, the vast majority of the biomechanical research conducted in gymnastics has
focused on the more traditional gymnastics disciplines, particularly artistic gymnastics [10].
For the two disciplines being subject of this project, trampoline gymnastics and TeamGym,
the body of research is much more limited [7], and only a few performance analysis technolo-
gies are marketed for training in trampoline gymnastics [11], none for TeamGym.
As a result, coaches in these disciplines must continually rely primarily on their own expe-
rience and observations when providing feedback to athletes during training, which can
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
hinder the discovery of hidden performance issues and potential improvements in training
methodology [11] [27]. Research has shown that in complex sports, relying on observation
and memory alone is unreliable for providing accurate information [28].
As repeatedly stated by coaches and trainers during more than 100 open interviews about the
role of wearable technology in sports, at the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)
in the united states [18]:
“ You are guessing if you are not measuring. ”
1.1
Background
1.1.1
History of gymnastics
The development of gymnastics as a sport can be traced back as far as to 776 BC in Greece,
where it was practiced for its entertainment value. Gymnastics was also practiced during the
Roman Empire, where it was used as training for other sports and as part of military train-
ing. However, what can be termed modern gymnastics was founded in the early 19th century
with the ﬁrst gymnastics club opening in Germany in 1811. Gymnastics was one of the initial
nine sports eligible for competition when the Olympics returned in 1896, and since the 1972
Olympics, when Olga Korbut from the Soviet Union won the gold medal and became a sports
sensation worldwide, gymnastics has been one of the most popular Olympics sports [17].
1.1.2
Trampoline gymnastics
Trampoline gymnastics started in the United States in 1936 with the creation of the trampo-
line itself, and was oﬃcially recognized as a sport in 1976 [17]. The discipline was included
in the Olympic Games in the year of 2000, and has gained popularity as a competitive sport
since then [11].
In trampoline gymnastics, athletes perform routines of skills on a trampoline, primarily con-
sisting of somersaults and twists, often at great heights and speeds, showcasing strength, ﬂex-
ibility, coordination, and aerial awareness – see ﬁgure 1.1. Athletes can compete individually
or in pairs, where the two athletes perform synchronized skill routines side by side [17].
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Background
3
Figure 1.1: Athlete performing a straight somersault with a half twist on a competition trampoline.
1.1.3
TeamGym
TeamGym is a relatively young gymnastics discipline originating from Scandinavia. The dis-
cipline was later adopted by European Gymnastics (the governing body for gymnastics in
Europe) in 1996 under the name Euroteam, and the ﬁrst oﬃcial European Championships
was held in 2010. Since then, it has gained remarkable popularity, particularly in the nordic
countries, and is gaining traction throughout Europe as well as other countries around the
world 1.
In TeamGym, teams of athletes compete against each other in three disciplines; ﬂoor, tum-
ble and trampet. In the ﬂoor discipline, choreographed routines are performed on felt ﬂoor
mats, incorporating elements of ﬂexibility, balance and acrobatics. In the tumble discipline,
athletes perform series of acrobatic skills on a long, narrow track called a tumbling track. In
the trampet discipline, athletes perform acrobatic skills on a so-called trampet, which is a
slanted mini-trampoline, landing on a crash mat [1] – see ﬁgure 1.2.
1www.europeangymnastics.com/discipline/teamgym/intro
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: The three disciplines in TeamGym; floor (top), tumble (bottom left) and trampet (bottom
right).
1.2
Scope
This project focuses solely on performances in trampoline gymnastics and the trampet sub-
discipline in TeamGym due to the wide variety of skills, complexity of movements, and dif-
ferences in the equipment involved in the many diﬀerent disciplines within gymnastics.
Additionally, inordertofurtherlimitcomplexityandestablishthebestpossiblebasisforcom-
paringperformanceinthetwodisciplines, onlyskillsperformedontrampetwithoutvaulting
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Research questions and project goals
5
table are considered.
Many aspects of training, analyzing, and measuring within this scope are relevant, and al-
though an attempt is made to cover all areas of signiﬁcant importance, the main focus is on
gaining a fundamental understanding of the biomechanics involved, providing an overview
and analysis of diﬀerent motion capture and analysis technologies that show potential ap-
plicability, as well as understanding the context of training sessions and competitions in the
disciplines.
1.3
Research questions and project goals
Two primary research questions are considered in this thesis:
1. How can diﬀerent techniques for the execution of skills in trampoline gymnastics and
TeamGymtrampetbequantitativelyanalyzedandcomparedbycoachesandotherstake-
holders who are not experts in biomechanics?
2. How can a quantitative performance analysis technology be implemented in trampo-
line gymnastics and TeamGym trampet training sessions in a way so that it provides
value to gymnasts as well as coaches while taking into account the learning context
and environment?
In order to answer to the research questions outlined above, eﬀort will be made to meet the
following goals:
1. To identify and provide a fundamental overview of the most important biomechanical
indicators of performance in the diﬀerent phases of a performed skill.
2. To provide a framework for evaluation of diﬀerent techniques based on biomechanical
modeling and simulation.
3. To design and develop a concept for a learning tool that captures quantitative perfor-
mance measures and communicates technical feedback to athletes and coaches.
4. To demonstratethe feasibility ofimplementing thedevelopedconceptin therealworld.
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
1.4
Thesis structure
This project has followed a structure inspired by the revamped double diamond process by
Dan Nessler [24] – see ﬁgure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: The revamped Double Diamond process used as a framework in the project [24].
Within the ﬁrst diamond in the double diamond process, research is conducted to gather a
foundationofknowledgeandinsightsintoproblemsandopportunitiesintheﬁeldofinterest.
In the second diamond, the focus switches to solving the identiﬁed problems and exploiting
identiﬁed opportunities.
The linear process assumed at ﬁrst sight when looking at ﬁgure 1.3, however, does not repre-
sent the process of this project. While work has been carried out within the two diamonds,
and has been related to each other through the same logical progressions presented, the ap-
proach applied have moved back and forth between the diamonds.
1.4.1
Diamond I: Research
Work done in the ﬁrst diamond in this project is covered in chapter 2 and chapter 4.
Chapter 2 explores the intricacies of the disciplines, from the governing competitive frame-
workstorelevantresearchinbiomechanicsandperformanceindicatoridentiﬁcation, aswell
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Thesis structure
7
asexistingmotionanalysistechnologies, andthusprovidesthetheoreticalfoundationforthe
work presented in the remainder of the thesis.
Finally, chapter 4 investigates the quality and reliability of motion data acquired by a single
wearable inertial sensor by comparison to data from a highly precise optical marker-based
motion capture system. Additionally, video is captured from two angles and data from the
marker-based system is used as reference data for supplementary evaluation of the simu-
lation framework. Data is acquired from high-level trampoline and TeamGym athletes per-
forming selected skills on original equipment set up in the motion capture cage.
1.4.2
Diamond II: Development
Work done in the second diamond in the project is covered in chapter 3 and chapter 5.
Chapter 3 covers the development and validation of a framework for simulating the motion
resulting from complex movements of the body while air-borne. The framework is based on
rigid body modeling and the principle of angular momentum conservation, and allows for
quantitative comparative studies of aerial techniques.
Chapter 5 presents the agile development of a concept for a learning tool for trampoline and
trampet training sessions, based on a wearable inertial sensor connected to a tablet.
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER2
Preliminary research
This chapter presents the research work done in the initial phase of the project, serving as a
theoretical foundation for the remainder of the thesis. It covers fundamental knowledge and
relevant theory, as well as ﬁndings from the initial ﬁeld work carried out in the project.
2.1
Competition rules and scoring systems
When discussing performance analysis in trampoline gymnastics and TeamGym, it is impor-
tant to be aware of the rules and scoring criteria governing competitions in the two disci-
plines.
2.1.1
Trampoline gymnastics
Athletescompetingintrampolinegymnasticsmustperformroutinesconsistingof10sequen-
tial skills with no intermediate straight bounces, and no skill can be repeated. Athletes per-
form two such routines in a qualiﬁcation round, one of which usually includes special re-
quirements, and one voluntary routine in the ﬁnals.
When performing skills, athletes must show recognizable body position, either the straight,
piked or tucked position, and there are certain requirements applied to these positions.
For the straight body position, the angle between the thighs and upper body must be greater
than 135◦. For the pike position, the angle between the thighs and upper body must be equal
to or less than 135◦and the angle between the thighs and lower legs must be greater than
135◦. For the tucked position, both the angle between the thighs and the upper body, and
the angle between the thighs and the lower legs, must be equal to or less than 135◦[12].
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Preliminary research
2.1.1.1
Scoring system
Inindividualtrampolinecompetitions, fourscoresaregivenafteraperformancewhich, com-
bined, gives the total score; the D-score for the degree of diﬃculty, the E-score for execu-
tion, the H-score for horizontal discplacement (HD), and ﬁnally the T-score for time of ﬂight
(TOF).
The D-score is an open score based on the amount of somersault and twist rotation for each
element, and points are added for the pike or straight body position.
For the E-score, deductions are made depending on the execution quality demonstrated by
the gymnast by two judges, and the median of the deductions are subtracted from a starting
score of 20 points.
H-score deductions are calculated automatically by a device measuring the landing position
of the athlete between jumps, and are deducted from a starting score of 10 points.
The T-score is also added automatically by the measuring device, and is equal to the time the
athlete spends in the air while performing the 10 skills.
In synchronized trampoline competitions, an additional score, the S-score, is given for syn-
chronicity [12].
2.1.2
TeamGym
Teams competing in TeamGym at the international, or highest national, level must consist
of between 8 and 10 gymnasts, and gymnasts participate in three disciplines; ﬂoor, tumble
and trampet.
In the ﬂoor discipline, all competing gymnasts must participate. The gymnasts perform a
rhythmic choreography to music, between 2 minutes and 15 seconds long and 2 minutes and
45 seconds long. The choreography must contain certain formations as well as 10 diﬃculty
elements within the categories of balances, jumps/leaps/hops, acrobatics, ﬂexibility and a
group element.
In the tumble discipline, gymnasts must perform three rounds of tumble series, where each
series consists of a combination of at least two or three elements, depending on age group.
The ﬁrst round must be a team round, where all gymnasts perform the same series. Addition-
ally, one of the rounds must consist of forward tumbling series only and one of backwards
series only. The ﬁnal element performed in a series must not be repeated in the diﬀerent
rounds. Six gymnasts must perform in each round, and can vary between rounds. The tum-
ble series are also performed to music, and must be completed within 2 minutes and 45 sec-
onds.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Competition rules and scoring systems
11
In the trampet discipline, gymnasts must perform three rounds of elements in the trampet.
The ﬁrst round must, once again, be a team round, where all gymnasts perform the same ele-
ment. Additionally, one of the rounds must be performed with vaulting table, and one round
without vaulting table. Elements must not be repeated in the diﬀerent rounds, and, once
againg, six gymnasts must perform in each round. Trampet elements are also performed to
music limited to 2 minutes and 45 seconds.
As is the case in trampoline gymnastics, TeamGym gymnasts must also show recognizable
body positions when performing skills, and the requirements are similar to those in trampo-
line gymnastics – see ﬁgure 2.1 [9].
Figure 2.1: Requirements for the body positions in TeamGym [9].
2.1.2.1
Scoring system
In TeamGym competitions, three scores are given for each discipline; the C-score for compo-
sition, D-score for diﬃculty, and the E-score for execution.
The C-score deals with the composition requirements of each discipline, and deductions can
be made from a starting score of 2 points if requirements are not adhered to.
The D-score is an open score, and is based on a system of element base values and added
values for greater diﬃculty.
For the E-score, deductions are made depending on the execution quality demonstrated by
each gymnast for each skill performed. The deductions are averaged between judges, and
then deducted from a starting score of 10 points [9].
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Preliminary research
2.2
Performance analysis and biomechanics in sports
Performance analysis in sports aims at evaluating improvements in performance, technical
expertise and the physical condition of athletes over time [26], and a key focus area within
performance analysis is the use of performance-related variables and indicators to model
performance in training as well as competitions. The ﬁeld is highly interdisciplinary, and
many types of measures are considered depending on the discipline of interest – physical,
positional, technical, tactical, psychological, as well as pedagogical. A plethora of techniques
are used, common examples being video analysis and a wide range of tracking systems for
acquiring data [15].
Biomechanics in sports refers to the study of mechanical principles of human movement,
and involves analysis of motion, forces and energy transfer during sports activities. Under-
standing the biomechanics involved in sports can help coaches and athletes improve tech-
nique and training methods and lead to the development of new training methods as well
as equipment. Another focus area within biomechanics is injury prevention. Several tech-
niques are used in biomechanical research, including biomechanical modeling and simula-
tionandtheanalysisofdata fromawiderangeof technologies, forexamplewearablesensors,
motion capture systems, and force plates [27].
2.3
Biomechanics of trampoline and trampet performances
Trampoline performances can be divided into two main phases; a contact phase and an
aerial phase. For trampet performances, four phases are relevant; the approach run (or run-
up), the contact phase, the aerial phase and the landing. The disciplines share similarities in
the contact phase, and in terms of biomechanical analysis, the aerial phase is identical be-
tween the two. In the following, each phase is evaluated from a biomechanical perspective,
and relevant performance measures are identiﬁed and highlighted.
2.3.1
The approach run (trampet)
In the trampet discipline, gymnasts starts their performance with a run-up towards the tram-
pet. While no studies are available detailing the biomechanics of exactly the run-up in the
TeamGym trampet discipline, it is remarkably similar to the run-up in the vaulting discipline
in artistic gymnastics, where athletes are allowed to run from a maximum distance of 25 me-
ters from the front edge of the vaulting table [14]. In the trampet discipline, gymnasts are
allowed to run from a maximum of 25 meters from the front edge of the trampet [1].
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Biomechanics of trampoline and trampet performances
13
It is clear that the approach velocity is highly correlated with performance – even as high
as over 90% has been reported [5]. However, the velocity of importance is the one obtained
by the gymnast just before impact with the trampet bed, and several research studies report
decreases in approach velocity during the ﬁnal step, also called the hurdle [14].
Research has also shown that athletes use vision to control the distance and timing of their
ﬁnal steps before the hurdle, even though the run-up distance is known by the athlete, and
earlier onset of this vision control is correlated with greater performance scores [5]. This
indicates that athletes could beneﬁt from practicing visual control of their run-up as early as
possible, while maintaining maximum velocity.
Related to the technique of running, running velocity is determined by stride length and
stride rate, and so a runner should attempt to take longer strides as the velocity increases. Ad-
ditionally, when elite sprinters initiate a sprint, their center of mass is in front of the contact
point between foot and ground, however, after only three steps, the center of mass is behind
the contact point. This indicates that athletes should avoid leaning forward once they have
picked up speed [20].
2.3.1.1
The hurdle
The hurdle describes the jump from the last step in the run-up into the trampet (from one
foot to contacting the trampet bed with both feed). Here, the gymnast must maintain as
much kinetic energy as possible from the run-up [5], while preparing for maximum energy
delivery to the trampet springs during the contact phase.
2.3.2
The contact phase
The contact phase in a trampoline can be separated into two phases; a depression phase,
where energy is transferred from athlete to the trampoline springs, and a recoil phase, where
the majority of the stored energy in the springs is delivered back to the athlete, being accel-
erated mostly upwards.
In order to increase jump height and TOF when jumping on the trampoline, athletes must do
work during the contact phase to deliver additional energy to the springs. This is done by ex-
tension of the body, primarily through the knee, hip and shoulder joints, although extension
of the ankles also contributes signiﬁcantly. The athlete makes contact with the bed while in a
“compressed” body position, and then extends to a more straight body position while raising
the arms above the head, eﬀectively “pushing” the trampoline bed further down, increasing
the amount of energy stored in the springs, while “pushing” the COM of the body upwards.
Since the spring force increases as the deﬂection of a spring increases, the biggest potential
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Preliminary research
for delivering the maximum amount of energy to the springs is when the trampoline bed is
at its lowest point during contact.
During the recoil phase, the athlete has the ability to impact how much of the energy deliv-
ery goes to linear momentum (that is, to accelerate the athlete upwards) and angular mo-
mentum (to make the athlete rotate). For forward somersaults, hip ﬂexion is used to initiate
rotation, and for backwards somersault, hyperextension of the back and the hips is used. By
performing one of these movements while in contact with the trampoline bed, the athlete ex-
erts a horizontal force against the bed, and the opposite acting reaction force is what changes
the directionality of the total force experienced by the athlete away from the COM of the ath-
lete, making the athlete rotate. Hence, it is possible to generate angular momentum during
the contact phase, without traveling horizontally.
However, Whenﬂexingthehipsoroverextendingthebackandhips, someenergyisinevitably
absorbed, because the athlete is eﬀectively shortening his or her body, or lowering his or her
moment of inertia, while still in contact with the bed. Thus, it can be considered “costly” to
initiate angular momentum, although it is of course necessary for performing somersaults.
An optimal take-oﬀtherefore depends on the skill the athlete needs to perform. Suﬃcient
angular momentum must be generated to execute the skill with proper technique, but too
much angular momentum production comes at the cost of reduced height and TOF. And
since TOF is one of the most signiﬁcant indicators of performance in trampoline gymnas-
tics, and also constitute a signiﬁcant part of the resulting score in competitions, producing
too much angular momentum should be avoided. The same, of course, is true for producing
too little angular momentum, which results in either sub-optimal execution or inability to
execute the skill at all [7].
In a trampet, the dynamics of the contact phase are obviously diﬀerent, however, the same
fundamental principles also apply here. Since the trampet is much stiﬀer than a trampoline,
and the contact time is signiﬁcantly shorter, however, TeamGym athletes usually utilize hip
ﬂexion to a larger degree, and knee ﬂexion to a smaller degree, before contact with the bed,
comparedto trampolineathletes. This is due tothe increasedstabilityandstrengthexhibited
by the hip joint.
2.3.3
The aerial phase
Once the athlete has left the trampoline or trampet bed, the trajectory of the center of mass
(COM) of the body is determined, and, since the air resistance is negligible, the angular mo-
mentum produced during the contact phase is conserved. This means that the time of ﬂight
(TOF) of the jump is determined, and the athlete will rotate about the angular momentum
axis with constant angular velocity until the inertial properties of the body change, that is,
when the athlete moves body limbs [29].
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Biomechanics of trampoline and trampet performances
15
Considering a simple example, where an athlete is performing a somersault without twists,
the aerial motion can be analyzed in one dimension. The angular velocity, 𝜔, in such a sce-
nario is given by:
ℎ= 𝐼· 𝜔⇐⇒𝜔= ℎ
𝐼,
(2.1)
where ℎis the angular momentum, 𝐼is the moment of inertia of the athlete about the axis of
rotation, and 𝜔is the angular velocity.
As seen in equation (2.1), the angular velocity depends only on the moment of inertia of the
body, since the angular momentum is constant – thus, changes in angular velocity are deter-
mined solely by changes in the body position of the athlete.
When moving between the three fundamental body positions recognized in trampoline gym-
nastics and TeamGym – the tucked, piked, and straight position – the moment of inertia of
the body changes rather dramatically, perhaps surprisingly so. The moment of inertia of the
body in the piked position is approximately 1.6 times the moment of inertia in the tucked
position, and in the straight position, the moment of inertia is close to four times that of the
tucked position [2]. So when an athlete moves from the straight body position to tucked, the
angular velocity increases four-fold.
Because of this, the required angular momenta for performing diﬀerent skills diﬀer signiﬁ-
cantly from each other. For example, performing a double straight somersault, with or with-
out twists, requires substantially more angular momentum than performing a triple tucked
somersault, assuming the TOF is somewhat similar between the two. And since increased an-
gular momentum production during the contact phase always results in reduced TOF, limit-
ing the amount of angular momentum producedisdesiredwhen performingtucked or piked
skills.
Additionally, changing from the straight body position to the tucked position changes the
rotational energy of the athlete. The rotational energy of a rotating body is given by:
𝐸𝑟𝑜𝑡= 1
2𝐼𝜔2 = 1
2ℎ𝜔.
(2.2)
As seen in equation (2.2), the rotational energy is linearly proportional to the angular velocity.
This is due to the centrifugal force experienced by the athlete. As such, the rotational energy
of the athlete must be increased four-fold in order to go from the straight to the tucked po-
sition, and this energy is delivered by the athlete through work against the centrifugal force.
This means that it will be harder, and take more time, for an athlete to achieve the tuck or
piked position if too much angular momentum is produced during take-oﬀ.
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Preliminary research
In conclusion, athletes should adjust the amount of angular momentum generated during
the contact phase depending on the skill performed.
2.3.3.1
Aerial twisting
Diﬀerent techniques for producing twist exists. While in contact with the trampoline bed, for
example, an angular momentum can be produced about the longitudinal axis of the athlete,
resulting in twisting while airborne. However, if this technique is used, the athlete will still
twist when landing, unless producing tilt while in the air to counter the twist, resulting in
landing while tilted.
Anothertechniquefortwistingistheso-called“cat”-twist. Thistechniqueisbasedoncounter-
rotation of body limbs, resulting in twisting even with no angular momentum acting on the
athlete [29].
Preferred by coaches, however, are aerial twisting techniques [8]. These techniques depend
on an angular momentum about the somersault axis. Essentially, some of the somersault
velocity can be converted to twist by tilting the body, such that the angular momentum acts
on two of the local athlete axes rather than one. One might imagine, that if achieving a tilt
of the body of 90◦while airborne, then the angular momentum would be acting solely about
the longitudinal axis of the athlete – see ﬁgure 2.2 [29].
Figure 2.2: Visualization of the mechanics of aerial twisting initiated by tilt production [29].
2.3.4
The landing (trampet)
The optimal technique for landing on both feet from high airborne skills has been shown to
be with the feet spaces roughly shoulder width apart and with even weight bearing distribu-
tion between them. In addition, a controlled ﬂexion of the hips and knees along with exten-
sion of the ankles is recommended. Landing correctly is important to prevent injuries, as the
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Motion analysis techniques
17
ground reaction force acting on a foot during a poor landing can be several times higher than
that of a controlled landing [6].
2.4
Motion analysis techniques
Motion analysis speciﬁcally deals with the measurement and analysis of human movement,
and is usually based on quantitative data, making it one of the more precise techniques used
in performance analysis.
2.4.1
Simulation
Computer modeling and simulation has been utilized in the biomechanical analysis of many
gymnastics skills [10]. Of relevance to the disciplines investigated in this project are in par-
ticular aerial simulation models, since the mechanics governing the motion and movement
of athletes in the air is the same across disciplines and calculations are less complex due to
the absence of inﬂuence by equipment.
Several simulation models have been developed and used to gain knowledge in biomechan-
ics, and for trampoline gymnastics, the contact phase [7] as well as the aerial phase [33, 3]
have been simulated, in order to ﬁnd optimal techniques.
2.4.2
Video feedback and modeling
Video feedback refers to simple playback of a video captured during the performance of a
skill, while video modeling refers to showing an athlete a video of an expert performing the
desired skill. Video feedback is a well supported technique for improving performance and
even motivation, and the combination of video feedback and modeling has shown eﬀective-
ness in improved performance in a shorter time-period than training and coaching alone [4].
It can be a powerful tool for instant movement analysis, and especially in recent years, where
cameras in phones and tablets have become better, it has become an easily accessible tool.
The main downside to video capture is the lack of ability to capture quantitative data [10].
2.4.3
Motion tracking technologies
Many systems based on diﬀerent technologies exist for tracking human motion.
Opticalmarker-basedmotioncapturesystemsareregardedasthemostreliableandaccurate.
These systems, however, are also characterized by a number of disadvantages – most notably,
==PAGE:32==
18
2 Preliminary research
they are usually costly, require athletes to wear a suit with markers attached, and it is often
time consuming to capture and process the data.
Markerless motion capture systems also exist, having the advantage of not interfering with
the free movement of the athlete being tracked. These systems use computer image process-
ing techniques to reconstruct the three-dimensional motion based on video recordings or
data from other sensors.
Finally, motion can be tracked using diﬀerent types of wearable sensors. Systems based on
electromagnetic signals exist, where small electrical coils within each sensor generates small
electrical currents when moving. These systems require a space with a well-deﬁned electro-
magnetic ﬁeld, and are aﬀected by metallic objects. Inertial sensors, based on accelerom-
eters and often also gyroscopes and magnetometers, are another type of wearable sensor
technology, having the advantage of being usable in a wide variety of conditions. When data
from such sensors are used to determine location and orientation of a dynamically moving
body or object, however, processing is needed in the form of fusion algorithms [26].
The market for wearable sensors is growing rapidly, and the use of wearables is already highly
entrenched in certain sports, such as athletics [18]. Inertial sensors are the most common
type of wearable used in sports [19].
2.5
Field research
Although literature research is immensely valuable, becoming familiar with the intricacies
of the disciplines, the culture, processes and tasks involved, provides a diﬀerent perspetive.
Thus, several commonly applied methods in general ﬁeld research, as well as in design think-
ing, were applied.
2.5.1
Survey
AspartofaprojectconductedintheDTUcourse‘DigitalLearningTechnologyandEntrepreneur-
ship’ in the autumn of 2022, a survey was sent out to gymnastics coaches within a Facebook
group [23], containing questions about the challenges faced and technology used in training
by the coaches. 20 coaches in a variety of gymnastics disciplines responded, 15 of which were
coaching in the tumble and trampet disciplines in TeamGym. Unfortunately no coaches in
trampoline gymnastics responded.
This survey provides a great fundamental bases for understanding common pains and chal-
lenges experienced by coaches.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Field research
19
2.5.1.1
Problems experienced by coaches during training
Repeated problem areas discovered from the survey can be summarized as:
• Gymnasts often have a hard time understanding the feedback given to them
• Athletes are afraid of injuries and trying new things
• Not enough time for tailoring training sessions to the individual gymnast
• Not enough time to provide quality feedback to all gymnasts
• Not enough time for suﬃcient physical training
• Facilities are often crowded and access to equipment can be lacking
• Keeping gymnasts motivated and balancing training with social life can be a challenge
Interestingly, by far the most common complaint from these coaches were lacking the time
to do diﬀerent things properly. As such, it is important to keep in mind, that a learning tool is
likely to be rejected by coaches unless it can either save them time, or at least require minimal
time and eﬀort.
In terms of the technology used by coaches, all coaches reported having encountered the
use of video capture in training. Most reported the use of phones and delayed video sys-
tems displaying a delayed video feed continuously, so athletes can watch themselves after
performing a skill.
Only a few coaches reported encountering other digital technologies used in training; one
coach reported the use of time and velocity analysis, one reported the use of a stopwatch,
and one reported the use of sound, with no further explanation.
Most coaches, however, reported several issues experienced in the use of video tools. The
problems experienced can be summarized as:
• It is time consuming to analyze video for each gymnast
• Requires an extra person for ﬁlming or troublesome setup and maintenance
• Most automatic systems only oﬀer delayed feed, so video can only be watched once
and cannot be paused
• Quality video equipment is expensive
• Young athletes are easily distracted if using phones
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Preliminary research
In conclusion, the survey indicates that lack of time, required eﬀort, lack of useful features,
and cost are signiﬁcant barriers standing in the way of adopting currently available technolo-
gies, although the use of video tools appear to be very common.
2.5.2
Fly on the wall
Fly on the wall refers to a simple observational method for gathering information about en-
vironments, cultures and activities.
The idea is to simply observe and take notes, without intervening with the environment, in
order to obtain the most unbiased information – in other words, be a ﬂy on the wall.
Several visits were payed to the training facility of the trampoline department of Roskilde
Gymnastikforening, where the Fly on the wall-method was practiced, in order to gain deeper
insights into the culture, coaching methods and practicalities – see ﬁgure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Pictures from visits to the training facility in Roskilde.
Key ﬁndings from the visits can be summarized as:
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Discussion and conclusions
21
• The atmosphere is very calm and positive, and conversations are happening almost all
the time
• Coaches seem to be always rather busy, although very positive, even when relatively
few athletes attend
• Athletesareofteninstructedtoworkindependentlyontechnicaldevelopment, orgiven
a number of drills they need to perform within a certain timespan, within boundaries
set by the coach, while the coach moves between gymnasts to help those who need it
• A stopwatch is sometimes used to measure the TOF of athletes, and results are written
on a list for comparison
• An old video recording system is available, but the ﬁeld of view of the camera is too
narrow, so only a portion of the performed skills can be seen
• Every training sessions ends with a short conversation, where each gymnast is invited
to talk about how the training was for them, what was good and what could be better
After observing training sessions, informal conversation was engaged with the coaches and
questions regarding the use of technology were asked.
Insummary, theclubislookingforanewandbettersolutionforvideofeedback, butavailable
solutions are not targeted to the sport and are deemed expensive for what they oﬀer.
2.5.3
Trampoline coach interview
A total of nine questions were sent to a high-level coach in trampoline gymnastics – see re-
sponses in appendix A.
The responses received resonates with the ﬁndings in the survey, however a recurring theme
in the responses is ﬁnding the balance in the use of technology (mostly video, once again),
and the importance of considering the training environment when introducing new technol-
ogy, as there can be unexpected consequenses, such as distractions or a decrease in social
interactions.
2.6
Discussion and conclusions
Many valuable ﬁndings are extracted from this research work.
==PAGE:36==
22
2 Preliminary research
2.6.1
Techniques for evaluation of technique
Of the methods used for biomechanical analysis of technical performance, simulation mod-
els have shown great results. However, the main downside to these methods is the lack of
availability to coaches and other stakeholders. Thus, a simulation framework for evaluation
of technique that is accessible and easy to use would provide key stakeholder with the tools
needed to perform biomechanical analysis, without being experts. Simply making such a
tool more accessible could help bridge the gap between research and practice.
2.6.2
Key performance measures
Based on the biomechanical research and taking the evaluation systems implemented in the
disciplines into account, the measures having the highest inﬂuence on performance in the
diﬀerent phases of a trampoline or trampet skill were:
The run-up (TeamGym):
• Approach velocity: The achieved velocity during the run-up, as measured before con-
tact with the trampet bed.
• Hurdle step eﬃciency: Research has shown that deceleration during the hurdle step is
common, and should be avoided since it can impact the eﬀective velocity achieved just
before impact with the trampet.
• Visual planning: Some research indicate a relationship between when the gymnast
starts to adapt his or her steps based on vision. Earlier onset of vision control was cor-
related with higher performance.
The contact phase:
• Balance between linear and angular velocity: The key important performance indica-
tor here is the ability to control this balance.
The aerial phase:
• Timing of somersault position: Achieving correct body positions at the correct time,
e.g. opening from tucked or piked positions at the right time for a good landing or re-
bounce.
• Timing of twists: Being able to initiate and terminate twists at the right time to optimize
control.
==PAGE:37==
2.6 Discussion and conclusions
23
The landing:
• Equal force distribution between feet: This is important for injury prevention.
• Absorption of energy: The absorption of the energy during landing depend on correct
ﬂexion of the hips and knees, and extension of ankles, during landing.
2.6.3
Training context and technologies
Findings from the survey and ﬁeld work clearly indicate that coaches in TeamGym and tram-
poline gymnastics have very limited time for analysis and feedback during training sessions,
and generally do not use technologies if they require too much eﬀort to use, or if they take
away from their time. This picture is even supported in the literature [10].
Taking this and the physical environments of training facilities into account, the inertial sen-
sors possess several advantages over other technologies; they do not require large setups or
speciﬁc conditions to measure data, they can connect to mobile devicese as well as comput-
ers, and other research have indicated that the technology ﬁts motion analysis tasks, even
in trampolining, although there have been concerns about the size of the sensors in earlier
literature [11]. The size and weight is now negligible.
Consideringthetrainingcontext, wheretimeisasparseresourceandminimaleﬀortrequired
for the setup of a system is a primary concern, minimizing the number of sensors needed
for a solution is deemed critical. Thus, a single sensor attached to the body near the usual
placement of the COM of an athlete is an interesting proposition. Clothing clips and other
attachment solutions are available, making it possible to attach a sensor with very minimal
eﬀort.
The main disadvantage to inertial sensors are somewhat comprehensive processing needed
to obtain orientation measures, as well as common data reliability issues such as integration
drift, making position determination diﬃcult over time.
Another valuable ﬁnding is the general positivity expressed towards the use of video capture,
while there are simultaneously many time and eﬀort related complaints. Video feedback is
a well established technology, with good research indicating signiﬁcant beneﬁts in learning
situations. At the same time, video capture possesses many of the qualitites lacking from
inertial sensors – visual feedback and the ability to evaluate form and body position details.
Thus, ﬁnding a way to combine video capture with the use of a single inertial sensor, while
minimizing the time and eﬀort required to use the developed system, could prove to be a
highly successful strategy.
==PAGE:38==
24
2 Preliminary research
2.7
Secondary research questions
Due to the attained knowledge of the research presented in this chapter, a set of more speciﬁc
secondary research questions were devised:
1. Can a simulation model based on a simple model of the human body and requiring
only basic input variables be used for comparative studies of technique?
2. Is it possible to make such a simulation framework so easy to use, that an average coach
is able to?
3. Can a single inertial sensor provide suﬃcient data and quality of data to extract biome-
chanical measures and performance indicators relevant in training?
4. Can a single inertial sensor be combined with a video capture tool, to provide visual
feedback as well as biomechanical performance measures in a way that will not require
signiﬁcant eﬀort or time from coaches?
==PAGE:39==
2.7 Secondary research questions
25
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER3
Simulating aerial motion
Thischapterdocumentsthedevelopmentofasimulationframeworkintendedforquantitative
comparative analysis of aerial technique. The aim while developing this framework was to
create a quantitative analysis tool that could potentially be used by people with no speciﬁc
knowledge in biomechanics. The developed framework models the body of an athlete based
on only height and weight, and simulates the motion resulting from the movement of body
limbs while rotating in the air. The biomechanical principles that guided the development of
this framework were heavily inspired by, and in part built upon, the work presented by M. R.
Yeadon in four sub-articles under the title The simulation of aerial movement [30, 31, 32, 33].
3.1
Considerations
The purpose for developing this framework is to enable simulations of human aerial motion
with reasonable precision – that is, achieving an accuracy that enables the use of the frame-
work for comparatively studying the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of diﬀerent techniques, e.g.
for twist initiation – while maximizing ease of use of the developed framework, by avoiding
very high complexity, allowing it to be used as a tool by coaches and others for analyzing
diﬀerent techniques and optimizing performance.
The utilized model of the human body must, as such, be able to adequately represent the
inertial properties of a real human body and support common athlete movements and body
positions, while at the same time remaining as simple as possible.
The biomechanical principles that guided the development of this framework were heavily
inspired by, and in part built upon, the work presented by M. R. Yeadon in four sub-articles
under the title The simulation of aerial movement [30, 31, 32, 33].
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Simulating aerial motion
3.1.1
Assumptions
A number of assumption have been made when developing this framework:
• Humanbodypartdimensionsandpropertiescanbesuﬃcientlyestimatedsolelybased
on body height and weight.
• Movement of body parts can be approximated by rigid bodies rotating about point
joints.
• Cylindersprovidereasonableestimatesoftheinertialpropertiesofbodysegments(lon-
gitudinal location of center of mass within each body segment taken into account).
• Air resistance and drag is negligible.
3.2
Modeling the human body
The body is modeled as 11 rigid cylinders, 𝑆𝑘(𝑘= 0, 10), representing body segments linked
at joints,𝑂𝑘(𝑘= 1, 10), around which they can rotate relative to each other with three degrees
of freedom – see Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Visualization of the cylinder-based model in its local coordinate system (𝑓𝑥, 𝑓𝑦, 𝑓𝑧). The
athlete is seen from the back, meaning the 𝑓𝑥-axis points towards the left hand side of the athlete,
𝑓𝑦points backwards (out through the back) and 𝑓𝑧points up towards the head.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Body orientation framework
29
The cylinders are modeled with the attributes mass, 𝑚, length, 𝑙, and radius (calculated from
gyration radii), 𝑟, relative to the speciﬁed athlete height (𝐻) and weight (𝑀) – as presented in
Table 3.1. The attributes are derived from analyzed data based on body scannings of college-
aged caucasian males and females [25].
Body segment number(s)
Body segment
𝑚
𝑀[%]
𝑙
𝐻[%]
𝑟
𝐻[%]
0
Lower trunk
21.73
16.85
8.28
1
Upper trunk
21.73
17.81
8.28
2 (left), 3 (right)
Upper arm
2.71
16.18
3.62
4 (left), 5 (right)
Lower arm and hand
2.23
20.40
2.64
6 (left), 7 (right)
Thigh / upper leg
14.16
24.25
5.11
8 (left), 9 (right)
Lower leg and foot
5.7
32.34
3.63
10
Head
6.94
13.95
5.15
Table 3.1: Attributes of the 11 body segment cylinders.
3.2.1
Joint angles for achieving all body positions
In order to allow for all possible body positions, three angles for each joint, 𝛼1,𝑘, 𝛼2,𝑘and
𝛼3,𝑘(𝑘= 1, 10), describe the orientation of each body segments relative to the segment it is
attached to; 𝛼1 generally represents ﬂexion/extension (forward/backward rotation), 𝛼2 rep-
resents adduction/abduction (rotation to the sides), and 𝛼3 medial/lateral rotation (twisting
of the body segment about its own longitudinal axis).
3.3
Body orientation framework
The orientation of the body can, at any time, be determined by three orientation angles; the
somersault angle, 𝜙, the tilt angle, 𝜃, and the twist angle, 𝜓. More precisely, these angles de-
ﬁne the orientation of a rotating coordinate system, 𝑓, relative to a ﬁxed reference coordinate
system, 𝑖. In this work, the orientation of the body is deﬁned as the orientation of the lower
part of the trunk, meaning the the rotating 𝑓-frame follows the lower trunk of the body (𝑆0 in
the cylinder-based body model), with its origin located at the center of mass (COM) of 𝑆0, as
illustrated in Figure 3.1. The basis of the 𝑖-frame will be referred to as [i𝑥, i𝑦, i𝑧], whereas the
basis of the 𝑓-frame will be referred to as [f𝑥, f𝑦, f𝑧].
The three orientation angles are deﬁned such that successive rotations through them – ﬁrst
𝜙about the 𝑖𝑥-axis, then 𝜃about the 𝑓𝑦-axis (after rotation through 𝜙), and ﬁnally, 𝜓about
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Simulating aerial motion
the 𝑓𝑧-axis – determine the orientation of the body (or rather, the orientation of segment 𝑆0,
which in this work is chosen to represent the orientation of the body) – see Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Visualization of how the orientation of the human model can be determined by rotating
successively about the three orientation angles 𝜙, 𝜃and 𝜓.
However, the angles may also be deﬁned independently from each other, such that they de-
termine the orientation of the body regardless of any movement history, as follows:
• Somersault angle, 𝜙: Angle from basis vector i𝑧to the plane spanned by i𝑥and f𝑧, mea-
sured in positive direction about i𝑥.
• Tilt angle, 𝜃: Angle from the plane spanned by i𝑦and i𝑧to basis vector f𝑧, measured in
positive direction about f𝑧× i𝑥(positive when the i𝑥-component of f𝑧is positive).
• Twist angle, 𝜓: Angle from the plane spanned by i𝑥and f𝑧to basis vector f𝑥, measured
in positive direction about f𝑧.
These deﬁnitions enable measured angles from e.g. video material to be used comparatively
with simulated angles. Note, though, that if one wishes for the values of the angles to inform
not only about the orientation of the body in space, but also about the movement history
of the aerial performance (in particular, the number of somersaults and twists performed at
the time of measurement), then 2𝜋(one full rotation) should be added for each complete for-
ward somersault and/or left twist, or withdrawn in the case of backward somersaults and/or
right twists, performed prior to the time of measurement.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Aerial motion mechanics
31
When simulating an entire performance from beginning to end, this becomes a non-issue,
since new orientation angles are then continuously calculated based on prior angles, angular
momenta and body position changes.
3.3.1
Rotation matrices
With the above angle deﬁnitions in mind, three rotation matrices, each transforming a re-
spective angle for a vector from the 𝑖-frame to the 𝑓-frame can be deﬁned as:
R1(𝜙) =

1
0
0
0
cos 𝜙
sin 𝜙
0
−sin 𝜙
cos 𝜙

, R2(𝜃) =

cos 𝜃
0
−sin 𝜃
0
1
0
sin 𝜃
0
cos 𝜃

, R3(𝜓) =

cos𝜓
sin𝜓
0
−sin𝜓
cos𝜓
0
0
0
1

.
The matrices can be multiplied to obtain a single matrix, which transforms vectors from 𝑖-
frame to 𝑓-frame:
R3(𝜓)R2(𝜃)R1(𝜙)(v𝑗)𝑖= R𝑖𝑓(v𝑗)𝑖⇐⇒R𝑖𝑓=

cos 𝜃cos𝜓
sin 𝜙sin 𝜃cos𝜓+ cos 𝜙sin𝜓
−cos 𝜙sin 𝜃cos𝜓+ sin 𝜙sin𝜓
cos 𝜃sin𝜓
−sin 𝜙sin 𝜃sin𝜓+ cos 𝜙cos𝜓
cos 𝜙sin 𝜃sin𝜓+ sin 𝜙cos𝜓
sin 𝜃
−sin 𝜙cos 𝜃
cos 𝜙cos 𝜃

.
3.4
Aerial motion mechanics
In the following, the subscripted letter after a parenthesis denotes the coordinate system in
which the attribute or measure in the parenthesis is deﬁned (most prominently, 𝑖-frame or
𝑓-frame coordinates).
3.4.1
Angular velocity
The total angular velocity of frame 𝑓relative to frame 𝑖, 𝝎𝑓𝑖, can be expressed as:
𝝎𝑓𝑖= 𝑑𝜙
𝑑𝑡i𝑥+ 𝑑𝜃
𝑑𝑡f’𝑦+ 𝑑𝜓
𝑑𝑡f𝑧,
(3.1)
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Simulating aerial motion
where f’𝑦=
f𝑧×i𝑥
|f𝑧×i𝑥| represents a unit vector in the direction that f𝑦would have had if no twist
had occured.
In the 𝑓-frame, the coordinates of 𝑑𝜙
𝑑𝑡i𝑥depend on the tilt and twist angles, the coordinates
of 𝑑𝜃
𝑑𝑡f’𝑦only depend on the twist angle, and 𝑑𝜓
𝑑𝑡f𝑧is independent of all other angles:
(𝝎𝑓𝑖)𝑓= R3(𝜓)R2(𝜃)

𝜔i𝑥
0
0

+ R3(𝜓)

0
𝜔f’𝑦
0

+

0
0
𝜔f𝑧

.
(3.2)
A rotation matrix for the angular velocities can be derived from (3.2):
(𝝎𝑓𝑖)𝑓= R𝜔

𝜔i𝑥
𝜔f’𝑦
𝜔f𝑧

=⇒R𝜔=

cos 𝜃cos𝜓
sin𝜓
0
−cos 𝜃sin𝜓
cos𝜓
0
sin 𝜃
0
1

.
3.4.2
Moment of inertia
The inertia tensor about the COM of a body segment – which is modeled as a cylinder – in its
own local reference coordinate system, (𝑠𝑥, 𝑠𝑦, 𝑠𝑥), where 𝑠𝑧is the length axis of the cylinder,
is:
(I𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚)𝑠=

𝐼𝑘,s𝑥
0
0
0
𝐼𝑘,s𝑦
0
0
0
𝐼𝑘,s𝑧

=

1
12𝑚𝑘(3𝑟2
𝑘+ 𝑙2
𝑘)
0
0
0
1
12𝑚𝑘(3𝑟2
𝑘+ 𝑙2
𝑘)
0
0
0
1
2𝑚𝑘𝑟2
𝑘

,
(3.3)
where 𝑚𝑘is the mass, 𝑟𝑘is the radius and 𝑙𝑘is the length of segment 𝑆𝑘.
In 𝑓-frame coordinate, this inertia tensor is given by:
(I𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚)𝑓= R𝑇
𝑖,𝑓𝑠(I𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚)𝑠R𝑖,𝑓𝑠,
(3.4)
whereR𝑖,𝑓𝑠istherotationmatrixthattransformsvectorsfrom 𝑓-coordinatesto𝑠-coordinates.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Aerial motion mechanics
33
3.4.3
Angular momentum
While airborne, the gravitational force acting on a body simply accelerates the COM of the
body. As such, neglecting air resistance, there is no torque about the COM of the body. This
means angular momentum for the body must be conserved during the ﬂight of the athlete,
which serves as the fundamental basis for the following.
The total angular momentum of the system about the COM of the whole body,𝐶, is constant
in 𝑖-frame coordinates due to the principle of conservation of angular momentum, and is
equal to the sum of angular momentum contributions from each body segment:
h =
𝑛
∑
𝑘=1
h𝑘.
(3.5)
where h𝑘is the angular momentum contribution of 𝑆𝑘.
Each of these contributions can be calculated as the sum of the angular momentum resulting
from translational motion of the COM of the segment relative to 𝐶, ℎ𝑘,𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠, and the angular
momentum resulting from the rotational motion of the segment about its own COM, ℎ𝑘,𝑟𝑜𝑡
[16]:
h𝑘= h𝑘,𝑟𝑜𝑡h𝑘,𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠= I𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚𝝎𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚+ 𝑚𝑘r𝑘× v𝑘,
(3.6)
where I𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚is the moment of inertia tensor for 𝑆𝑘about its own COM, 𝝎𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚is the angular
velocity of 𝑆𝑘about its own COM, r𝑘is the position vector of the COM of 𝑆𝑘relative to 𝐶and
v𝑘is the velocity vector of the COM of 𝑆𝑘.
When there is no internal movement of the body segments about the joints, the angular mo-
mentum acting on the 𝑓-frame, h𝑓, is equal to the total angular momentum, h, which is then
equal to the product of the inertia tensor for the whole body relative to its COM and the an-
gular velocity of the 𝑓-frame relative to the 𝑖-frame:
h = I𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦,𝑐𝑜𝑚𝝎𝑓𝑖.
(3.7)
However, movement of body parts relative to each other is, in practice, always involved, and
is required for an athlete to manipulate his or her inertial properties in order to, for example,
increase or decrease somersault velocity or initiate twisting. Since the orientation of the ath-
lete is deﬁned by the orientation of the lower part of the trunk (𝑆0), the angular momentum
acting on the 𝑓-frame, h𝑓, is the measure is of interest, and for as long as there is movement
of body segments relative to each other, h𝑓is not equal to h. For example, if no angular mo-
mentum is acting on an athlete (h = 0), and the athlete moves from a straight body position
==PAGE:48==
34
3 Simulating aerial motion
to a piked position (rotating the hip joint), then the total angular momentum acting on the
athlete remains zero, but the lower trunk (and thus the 𝑓-frame) will rotate about i𝑥. From
the point of view of the 𝑓-frame, the body experiences an angular momentum eﬀect which is
the opposite equal of the angular momentum eﬀect generated by the movement of body seg-
ments relative to 𝑆0, h𝑟𝑒𝑙. Therefore, taking movement of body parts into account, the overall
angular momentum equation becomes:
h = h𝑓+ h𝑟𝑒𝑙.
(3.8)
Since h𝑟𝑒𝑙can be calculated in the 𝑓-frame using equation (3.6) for 𝑆𝑘(𝑘= 1, 10) and sum-
ming them, it is convenient to simply write the angular momentum balance from (3.8) in
𝑓-frame coordinates:
(h)𝑓= (h𝑓)𝑓+ (h𝑟𝑒𝑙)𝑓⇐⇒(h𝑓)𝑓= (h)𝑓−(h𝑟𝑒𝑙)𝑓= R3(𝜓)R2(𝜃)R1(𝜙)(h)𝑖−
𝑛
∑
𝑘=2
(h𝑟𝑒𝑙,𝑘)𝑓, (3.9)
where (h)𝑓is the total angular momentum rotated to 𝑓-coordinates and (h𝑟𝑒𝑙,𝑘)𝑓is the angu-
lar momentum eﬀect from the internal movement of segment 𝑆𝑘relative to the COM of the
whole body, in 𝑓-coordinates:
(h𝑟𝑒𝑙,𝑘)𝑓= (𝐼𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚)𝑓(𝝎𝑟𝑒𝑙,𝑘,𝑐𝑜𝑚)𝑓+ 𝑚𝑘(r𝑘)𝑓× (v𝑘)𝑓.
(3.10)
3.5
Model parameters
In order to simulate a performance using the framework, one must specify parameters for
physical measures, simulation and animation parameters, along with an array of moments
in time coupled with body positions. The code will then produce linear transitions between
the speciﬁed body positions, arriving at the positions at the speciﬁed times, and simulate the
resulting aerial movement of the whole body. The outputs from the simulation are orienta-
tion angle plots for the entire jump and optionally simulation videos – one in full speed and
one in half speed.
The following parameters must be speciﬁed:
Physical parameters:
• Athlete height: 𝐻[𝑚]
• Athlete weight: 𝑀[𝑘𝑔]
==PAGE:49==
3.5 Model parameters
35
• Local gravitational force: 𝑔[ 𝑚
𝑠2 ]
• Angular momentum: ℎ0[ 𝑘𝑔𝑚2
𝑠
] (negative number for backwards somersaults)
• Initial body orientation angles: [𝜙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝜃𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝜓𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡][𝑟𝑎𝑑]
Simulation parameters:
• Simulation calculation interval: 𝑑𝑡[𝑠] (default is
1
1200𝑠)
• Time of ﬂight: 𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙[𝑠] (duration of the simulation)
• Folder name: 𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟[𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔] (where to save plots and animations)
Animation parameters:
• Create animation video: 𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒[𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛] (if set to 1, the code produces an MP4
video ﬁle)
• Activate height: ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡[𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛] (if set to 1, the animation includes vertical transla-
tion)
• Framerate: 𝑓𝑝𝑠[𝑠−1]
• Viewpoint elevation angle: 𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛[◦]
• Viewpoint horizontal angle: 𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒[◦]
Export options:
• Exportjointpositions: 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡_𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠[𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛] (ifsetto1, thecodeproduces
a CSV ﬁle)
• Export orientation: 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡_𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛[𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛] (if set to 1, the code produces a CSV
ﬁle)
Movement speciﬁcation:

[𝑡0
𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛0]
[𝑡1
𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛1]
[𝑡2
𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛2]
...
...
[𝑡𝑛
𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑛]

==PAGE:50==
36
3 Simulating aerial motion
Movement is speciﬁed by the body positions at the diﬀerent time values the code will auto-
matically simulate linear joint movement between the speciﬁed body positions. Each body
position is deﬁned by 30 joint angles, three angles per joint.
3.6
Simulation output
When running a simulation, the framework produces plots containing the orientation angle
histories for somersault, tilt and twist – see example in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Example of plots generated by the simulation framework, visualizing orientation curves
for a double pike somersault with 1.5 twists in the second rotation.
Additionally, there is an option to export an animation of the simulated skill, as well as op-
tions for exporting joint positions and orientation data to CSV ﬁles.
==PAGE:51==
3.7 Validation
37
3.7
Validation
Simulations made with this framework have been compared to results obtained by M. R.
Yeadon for two seperate skills see ﬁgure 3.4 for a single straight somersault with 1.5 twists,
and ﬁgure 3.5 for a double piked somersault with 1.5 twists in the second somersault.
Figure 3.4: Orientation curves for a straight somersault with 1.5 twists simulated using this frame-
work compared to results obtained by M. R. Yeadon using extracted data from video of a real life
performance of the skill [30].
Part of the variation seen in the results are due to a diﬀerently deﬁned orientation basis in the
framework used by M. R. Yeadon as compared to the framework presented in this thesis. In
the model used by M. R. Yeadon, the orientation is deﬁned by a plane spanned by knee joints
and shoulder joints, as opposed to following the orientation of the lower part of the trunk.
==PAGE:52==
38
3 Simulating aerial motion
Figure 3.5: Orientation curves for a double pike somersault with 1.5 twists in the second rotation
simulated using this framework compared to results obtained by M. R. Yeadon using his simulation
framework, as well as extracted data from video of a real life performance of the skill [30].
Additionally, it is worth noting that because the model simulates body movements as linear
changes in joint angles between deﬁned body positions at deﬁned points in time, instanta-
neous changes in the simulated movement occur at these points in time, which obviously
can never happen in real life. This results in non-smooth curves, which is especially notice-
able on the plots for tilt-angle because the tilt is plotted in degrees rather than rotations.
==PAGE:53==
3.8 Discussion and conclusions
39
3.8
Discussion and conclusions
Based on the comparative results, the simulation framework performs well, especially con-
sidering the signiﬁcantly less complicated modeling of the human body as compared to the
model used by M. R. Yeadon. It is reasonable to conclude that the framework produces sim-
ulations that, when compared to real world data, are suﬃciently precise for conducting per-
formance optimization studies, such as comparative studies of e.g. twisting techniques.
In terms of achieving the goal of developing a framework that is as easy to use as possible,
the model is not yet in a place where almost anyone can use it. Since it is entirely code based,
andno graphicaluser interface is implemented, usingitwillrequiresomeintroductiontothe
structureand parameters. However, thereisgreatpotentialtodeveloptheframeworkfurther,
in order to achieve the desired level of usability. A good starting point, perhaps, would be
simplifying the way joint angles are speciﬁed. Some joints could also be limited based on
real world joint limitations, reducing the number of joint input parameters.
3.8.1
Limitations and future implications
As of now, the human model within this framework is limited in that it can only represent
a single body type, which is based on average numbers from college-aged males. Multiple
body types can be deﬁned in order to better approximate diﬀerent athletes.
The model may also be further improved upon by allowing movement of e.g. the shoulder
joint relative to the upper trunk body part, in order to allow for more complext movements –
in real life, the shoulder joint in particular can be moved around quite a lot. The accuracy of
the simulation results may also be improved upon by deﬁning diﬀerent moments of inertia
values for each cylinder about their two lateral axes. However, one of the goals of developing
this framework was to keep it as simple as possible, and the results suggest that the model is
indeed more than adequate for the intended purposes of use.
Finally, the framework solely allows simulations of jumps with take-oﬀand landing in the
same spot. This makes sense for simulating trampoline or trampet performances where hor-
izontal displacement is relatively irrelevant and take-oﬀand landing occur at approximately
the same height, but the framework could be expanded to support simulation of aerial skills
in other sports, e.g. dives, bar dismounts, double-minitrampoline skills and more. This may
beachievedbyallowingdiﬀerentstartandendheightsaswellashorizontalmovement. Since
thiswill not aﬀect thesimulated movementaboutthecenterofmassoftheathlete, itwillonly
be beneﬁcial for visualization purposes, but can, for the same reason, be implemented with
relative ease if desired.
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER4
Measuring aerial motion
This chapter presents the data acquisition sessions carried out in the Autonomous Systems Test
Arena (ASTA) at DTU, along with comparative analysis of the results. Furthermore, simula-
tions of selected performances are included, and extracted biomachanical measures are com-
pared between skills performed by diﬀerent athletes, on trampoline as well as on trampet.
4.1
Considerations
Building on the learnings from the preliminary research presented in the previous chapter,
the highest purpose of carrying out data acquisition sessions is to evaluate the feasibility of
using data from a single inertial sensor to determine biomechanical measures.
However, other purposes include gathering precise motion data for future biomechanical
analysis, and to provide new reference data for evaluation of the simulation framework.
4.2
Experimental setup
4.2.1
The motion capture system
The motion capture sessions took place within the OptiTrack motion capture cage in the
ASTA building at DTU, measuring 16 meters long, 12 meters wide and 8 meters tall – see
ﬁgure 4.1.
The system comprises 16 Prime 17W wide angle cameras connected via ethernet cables to a
PoE+ switch, which is then connected to a computer.
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Measuring aerial motion
Figure 4.1: The OptiTrack motion capture cage, located in the ASTA building at DTU.
In addition, an OptiTrack mo-cap velcro suit was worn by the athletes, with 47 accompany-
ing OptiTrack M4 optical markers attached at strategic positions for estimation of body part
orientation and joint angles – see ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The mo-cap suit with markers attached.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Experimental setup
43
4.2.2
Gymnastics equipment
Trampoline skills were performed on a Eurotramp Grandmaster Exclusiv Premium competi-
tion trampoline with a 6x4 mm webbed bed, with attached end decks with safety mats, which
was set up close to the center of the motion tracking cage to ensure the best visibility of all
cameras – see ﬁgure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The Eurotramp GrandMaster Exclusiv Premium trampoline with end decks attached, set
up in the motion capture cage.
Trampet skills were performed on a Euro Gymnastics Equipment (Eurogym) MD Super G
trampet with 36 springs, and athletes would land on a Eurogym TeamGym landing mat, with
an additional soft landing mat on top – see ﬁgure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: The Eurogym MD Super G trampet and TeamGym landing area, and part of the run-up
mat, set up in the motion capture cage.
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Measuring aerial motion
4.3
Methodology
5 skilled TeamGym athletes between the ages of 15 and 18 years old, and 3 skilled trampolin-
ists, were recruited for two independent recording sessions at ASTA. Additionally, a fourth
highly skilled trampolinist was recruited for a separate recording event in collaboration with
Team Danmark and Peter Jensen (former Olympic trampolinist), with the attendance of the
students of the ’Physics of Sports’ course at DTU along with the DTU press. All participating
athletes were actively, or recently, competing at the highest national level or above.
4.3.1
Prior to arrival of athletes
Before the athletes showed up at the facility, all gymnastics equipment was transported to
ASTA and set up within the motion capture cage, and the OptiTrack motion capture system
was calibrated using the Motive software and the calibration wand – see ﬁgure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: The Motive software program running on a computer connected to the 16 infrared Opti-
Track cameras in the cage, just after calibration.
Additionally, the iPhone and iPad was set up at similar height and placed carefully to capture
the performed skills from the side and front. The iPhone and iPad were conﬁgured to auto-
matically correct for radial distortion using the ultra wide camera lenses on both devices.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Methodology
45
A second iPhone was then used to connect to the Movesense sensor through the Movesense
Showcase app, and a test-run was performed to ensure everything was working.
4.3.2
Prior to recording
Beforeinitiatingrecordingsateachevent, theathleteswereintroducedtothepurposeof, and
the data acquired during, the sessions, as well as the procedure to follow. Time was given to
ask questions, and each participant was asked to sign a consent form – see appendix B. Sub-
sequently, they were provided time for a warm-up, and allowed to perform warm-up skills
on the equipment.
Then, one athlete at a time was asked to wear the motion capture suit, and the optical mark-
ers on the suit were re-positioned to ensure correct placement. The Movesense sensor was
activated and placed in the front of the motion capture suit pants. Once again, the athlete
was allowed to perform warm-up skills on the equipment before the recordings were started.
Oncetheathletewasready, recordingwasinitiatedforthemotioncapturesystem, theiPhone,
the iPad and ﬁnally the Movesense sensor.
4.3.3
Performance of skills
All trampoline athletes were asked to perform the following skills:
• Rudolf / rudy: A forward somersault in the straight body position with 1.5 twists
• Half out / double out (tuck): A double somersault in the tucked body position with a
half twist in the second somersault
• Double back (tuck): A double backwards somersault in the tucked body position
• Full half (tuck): A double somersault in the tucked or pucked body position with a full
twist in the ﬁrst somersault and a half twist in the second somersault
• Rudi out / rudy out (pike): A double somersault in the piked body position with 1.5
twists in the second somersault
All TeamGym athletes were asked to perform the following skills:
• Rudolf / rudy: A forward somersault in the straight body position with 1.5 twists
• Half out / double out (tuck): A double somersault in the tuck body position with a half
twist in the second somersault
==PAGE:60==
46
4 Measuring aerial motion
• Half out / double out (pike): A double somersault in the pike body position with a half
twist in the second somersault
• Full half (straight): A double somersault in the tuck or puck body position with a full
twist in the ﬁrst somersault and a half twist in the second somersault
In addition, the athletes were asked to perform more challenging skills depending on their
level. For example, three trampoline athletes performed a half out in the pike position and
one trampoline athlete performed a full half in the straight body position, while two Team-
Gym athletes performed a triﬃs / triple out (tuck) – a triple somersault in the tuck position
with a half twist in the third somersault – see ﬁgure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: A TeamGym athlete performing a triple somersault with a half twist in the end.
Between each skill, the athletes were asked to stand still on of the trampoline, or the landing
mat for TeamGym athletes, facing the front-recording camera for about 5 seconds, to ensure
distinguishability during data analysis. If the execution of any of the skills was not satisfac-
tory, the athlete was kindly asked to perform it again.
4.4
Data processing
After each recording session, the collected data was processed and analyzed in several ways.
All data was processed using custom Python scripts.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Data processing
47
4.4.1
Motion tracking data
For selected athletes, four selected markers in the OptiTrack motion capture data were la-
beled manually in the Motive software program with the goal of being able to determine the
orientation of the lower part of the trunk, in order to compare to the sensor data – see ﬁgure
4.7.
Figure 4.7: Assigning labels to markers in the Motive software program.
Since the markers occasionally become invisible to the OptiTrack system during recording
due to being covered by limbs or the trunk when pointing downwards during somersaulting,
locating them out of sight of the infrared cameras, it is desirable to identify which markers
are visible for the largest duration of the recordings.
During testing, the markers located on the back of the athlete, and in particular towards the
sides of the back, were the most consistently visible. Because of this, four markers placed
on the lower back of the athlete were selected for orientation estimation. While the sensor
was positioned in the front of the motion capture suit pants, which can potentially result in
a slightly diﬀerent orientation to the orientation as measured from the lower back side of the
trunk, the visibility consistency was prioritized in order to avoid large gaps in the data.
After the labeling process, position data for the four selected markers was exported to CSV
ﬁles and saved. Gaps in the data for each marker were then manually ﬁlled using linear in-
terpolation. Gaps were generally very short, most being between less than 0.01 (single frame
gaps) and 0.05 seconds long, and the largest gap found was less than 0.3 seconds.
==PAGE:62==
48
4 Measuring aerial motion
4.4.2
Sensor data
The Movesense sensor captures raw accelerometer, gyroscope and magnetometer data, and
thus, signiﬁcant processing is required to make it usable. In order to obtain the orientation
of the athlete over time from the sensor data, the gyroscope data can be utilized.
However, since a gyroscope records angular velocity, deriving the orientation of the sensor
requires integration of the signal. This leads to the issue of integration drift over time, a very
common issue in dealing with sensor data. As the signal is discrete, even extremely small
errors in velocities add up to larger and larger errors in the calculated orientation over time.
A common solution to the above is to implement a so-called fusion algorithm, and make use
of the accelerometer and magnetometer data to stabilize and correct the calculated orien-
tation over time. Since gravity aﬀects the accelerometer signal, the direction of the gravity
vector can be estimated as long as the sensor is not moving or rotating fast. Magnetometer
data can similarly be used to deﬁne a reference direction, as long as no strong and changing
magnetic ﬁeld is aﬀecting the sensor.
One popular algorithm for fusing the signals is the Madgwick algorithm. This algorithm has
proven to be one of the most stable fusion algorithms, and is thus implemented in several
Python libraries – in this project, the ‘imufusion’ package was used 1.
In addition to integration drift, gyroscope data, in particular, is aﬀected by a so-called sensor
bias, which occurs due to calibration errors within the sensor. This error was handled by
recording data from the sensor for 20 seconds on each day of recording, while the sensor
was lying still on a ﬂat surface, so the direction of gravity was known. The recorded signal
corresponds to the sensor bias, and was subsequently subtracted from the raw data.
Furthermore, the libraries implementing the Madgwick algorithm are usually used for deter-
mining the orientation of solid objects with a sensor attached ﬁrmly, and thus assumes that
the orientation of the sensor equals the orientation of the object being tracked. In the case
of this project, the sensor was attached to the pants of the motion capture suit, meaning the
exact orientation of the sensor relative to the orientation of the athlete could not be assumed.
As such, before feeding the signal to the algorithm, the approximate orientation of the sensor
relative to the body of the athlete was calculated using data from an initial period of time in
the recordings, during which the athlete was standing still. The direction of the gravity vec-
tor was calculated and used to estimate how much the sensor was tilted and rotated relative
to the body. Finally, how much the sensor was twisted relative to the body was estimated by
experimenting with diﬀerent values and comparing the resulting plots.
Other, perhaps better, approaches to solve this of course may exist. In the case of the Team-
Gym Trampet discipline, the correct forward pointing axis of the global coordinate system
1pypi.org/project/imufusion/
==PAGE:63==
4.5 Results and analysis
49
could be estimated based on accelerometer data from the run-up, for example. However,
since the corrections needed were fairly small, and results usable most of the time even with-
out the twist adjustment, this was left for future investigation.
After initial processing, the resulting signals were fed to the Madgwick algorithm. The algo-
rithm allows for certain parameters to be speciﬁed, for example count-down timers for re-
setting the orientation output based on the estimated gravity vector and the magnetometer
data. This countdown value was set at a value such that the orientation was reset between
performed skills, when the athlete was not rotating and twisting, in order to avoid errors.
This would not be necessary if a single skill, or single set of consequtive skills, was recorded
at a time, as would be the case for trampoline and trampet performances in training.
4.5
Results and analysis
Here, the results from two selected athletes, one trampolinist and one TeamGym gymnast,
are presented.
Two skills performed by each athlete were selected for comparison with the optical marker-
data from the OptiTrack system. Additionally, one of these skills, for each of the two athletes,
was simulated based on the video captured from two angles during the recording session, in
order to enable the comparison of curves from the sensor, OptiTrack system and simulation
output altogether.
Data for the tilt angle is not considered, due to inconsistencies in curves from the sensor
after the application of the fusion algorithm. Since changes in tilt angles are usually relatively
small compared to somersault and twist angles, this angle is more sensitive to small errors
in the estimated orientation.
It was found that even minor changes made to the input parameters of the fusion algorithm
could sometimes result in signiﬁcant changes to the returned tilt angles. Thus, it was con-
cluded that at this stage, the tilt angles supplied by the sensor and processing framework are
unreliable.
The athletes who participated in the recording sessions have been numbered in order of par-
ticipation, and the number preﬁxed with a “T” for trampoline athletes and “TG” for Team-
Gym athletes. As such, trampoline athlete number 4, for example, is referred to as T4, and
trampet athlete number 2 is referred to as TG2, in the following.
==PAGE:64==
50
4 Measuring aerial motion
4.5.1
Trampoline
The trampolinist selected for the analysis was athlete T4, who was recruited through Team
Danmark.
4.5.1.1
Double back (tuck)
The selected skill for analysis using all three technologies is the double back (tuck); a double
backwards somersault in the tucked position. In this particular case, though, the athlete was
instructed to open from the tucked position into the piked position before fully opening to
the straight position, in order to be able to observe the eﬀect on angular velocity [21].
In ﬁgure 4.8, somersaults and twists recorded with the optical motion tracking system, the
sensor, and derived from the simulation created based on the captured video, is presented.
Figure 4.8: Tuck double backwards somersault with specific opening, performed by trampoline ath-
lete 4. The dotted horizontal black lines indicate the beginning and end of the aerial phase. The
dotted horizontal black lines indicate the beginning and end of the aerial phase.
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Results and analysis
51
The TOF measured for this skill was 1.40s, corresponding to a jump height (deﬁned by body
COM displacement) of:
1
8𝑔𝑡2 = 2.40m.
Based on the simulation of this double back tuck, the angular momentum achieved by the
athlete during take-oﬀwas found to be approximately −92𝑘𝑔𝑚2
𝑠
.
Comparative plots showing the somersault and twist curves from the OptiTrack system, sen-
sor, and simulation, can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Somersaults (left) and twists (right) as measured by the sensor and the OptiTrack system
compared to the orientation output of the simulation model, for a tucked double backward somer-
sault, performed by trampoline athlete 4. The dotted horizontal black lines indicate the beginning
and end of the aerial phase.
4.5.1.2
Full half (straight)
The second skill selected for analysis is the full half (straight); a double forward somersault
in the straight position, with a full twist in the ﬁrst somersault and a half twist in the second.
In ﬁgure 4.10, somersaults and twists recorded with the optical motion tracking system and
the sensor is presented.
==PAGE:66==
52
4 Measuring aerial motion
Figure 4.10: Straight double forward somersault with 1.5 twists, performed by trampoline athlete
4. The dotted horizontal black lines indicate the beginning and end of the aerial phase.
The TOF measured for this skill was 1.32s, corresponding to a jump height (deﬁned by body
COM displacement) of:
1
8𝑔𝑡2 = 2.14m.
Comparative plots showing the somersault and twist curves from the OptiTrack system and
the sensor can be seen in ﬁgure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Somersaults (left) and twists (right) as measured by the sensor and the OptiTrack sys-
tem, for a straight double forward somersault with 1.5 twists, performed by trampoline athlete 4.
The dotted horizontal black lines indicate the beginning and end of the aerial phase.
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Results and analysis
53
4.5.2
Trampet
The TeamGym gymnast selected for the analysis was athlete TG2.
4.5.2.1
Rudy (straight forward somersault with 1.5 twists)
The selected skill for analysis using all three technologies is the double back (tuck); a double
backwards somersault in the tucked position. The athlete in this particular case, however,
was instructed to open from the tucked position into the piked position before then opening
fully to the straight position, in order to be able to observe the eﬀect on angular velocity [22].
In ﬁgure 4.12, somersaults and twists recorded with the optical motion tracking system, the
sensor, and derived from the simulation created based on the captured video, is presented.
Figure 4.12: Straight forward somersault with 1.5 twists, performed by trampet athlete 2. The
dotted horizontal black lines indicate the beginning and end of the aerial phase.
The TOF measured for this skill was 1.18s, corresponding to a jump height (deﬁned by body
==PAGE:68==
54
4 Measuring aerial motion
COM displacement) of:
1
8𝑔𝑡2 = 1.71m.
Based on the simulation of this rudy, the angular momentum achieved by the athlete during
take-oﬀwas found to be approximately 56𝑘𝑔𝑚2
𝑠
about the global somersault 𝑥-axis, but in-
terestingly also approximately 7.5kg m2
s
about the global 𝑦-axis, corresponding to the frontal
axis (or tilt axis) when the athlete has not yet rotated in any direction (standing straight). This
indicates that the athlete produced some amount of the twist during the contact phase.
Comparative plots showing the somersault and twist curves from OptiTrack, sensor, and sim-
ulation, can be seen in ﬁgure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Somersaults (left) and twists (right) as measured by the sensor and the OptiTrack sys-
tem compared to the orientation output of the simulation model, for a straight forward somersault
with 1.5 twists, performed by trampet athlete 2. The dotted horizontal black lines indicate the be-
ginning and end of the aerial phase.
4.5.2.2
Full half (straight)
The second skill selected for analysis is the full half (straight); a double forward somersault
in the straight position, with a full twist in the ﬁrst somersault and a half twist in the second.
In ﬁgure 4.14, somersaults and twists recorded with the optical motion tracking system and
the sensor is presented.
==PAGE:69==
4.5 Results and analysis
55
Figure 4.14: Straight double forward somersault with a full twist in the first somersault and a half
twist in the second, performed by trampet athlete 2. The dotted horizontal black lines indicate the
beginning and end of the aerial phase.
The TOF measured for this skill was 1.28s, corresponding to a jump height (deﬁned by body
COM displacement) of:
1
8𝑔𝑡2 = 2.01m.
Comparative plots showing the somersault and twist curves from the OptiTrack system and
the sensor can be seen in ﬁgure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Somersaults (left) and twists (right) as measured by the sensor and the OptiTrack sys-
tem, for a straight double forward somersault with a full twist in the first somersault and a half
twist in the second, performed by trampet athlete 2. The dotted horizontal black lines indicate the
beginning and end of the aerial phase.
==PAGE:70==
56
4 Measuring aerial motion
4.6
Discussion and conclusions
The primary purpose for conducting this study was to investigate the usefulness of the data
captured by the wearable inertial sensor.
As can be seen in the plots presented, the resulting data is not entirely perfect, which is es-
pecially is the case for the tilt angles. However, out of all recorded skills, there were no cases
where the performed skill was not determinable by observing only the sensor data. Addition-
ally, while the sensor may occasionally slightly over- or underestimate either somersault or
twist, this may, at least in part, be remedied by simple rounding techniques, since the errors
observed are generally small.
Determining the TOF of the performed jump is possible with great precision, due to distin-
guishable data patterns, from which the jump height can be determined, assuming the land-
ing area is at approximately the same level of elevation as the take-oﬀ, which is generally the
case in both disciplines.
Thedataisalsosuﬃcientfordeterminingagoodapproximationoftheangularvelocityabout
somersault as well as twist axes by simple diﬀerentiation of the curves, and allows for usable
analysis of timing measures, such as twist initiation.
The sensor data, in conclusion, is generally good, and can be used to extract a wide range of
valuable performance measures.
4.6.1
Limitations
The analysis of the run-up in TeamGym may be one of the bigger challenges, as in this phase,
one of the most important performance indicators is approach velocity. While this can be es-
timated using the sensor data, velocity and position data extracted from sensor accelerome-
ters is notoriously prone to be aﬀected by integration drift. However, there are workarounds
to circumvent this issue, and another approach to the issue could be to individually analyze
the acceleration achieved during every step in the run-up, in order to identify common is-
sues, such as that of gymnasts decelerating during the last step.
And while the data is generally promising for extraction of many of the other performance
measures of interest, the required level of processing may be an issue. The sensor units need
occasional calibration, and ﬁnding a way to determine the orientation of the sensor relative
to the person wearing it without requiring a calibration process before every instance of use
may prove somewhat challenging.
One approach to this in the case of the TeamGym trampet discipline is to use the run-up data
as calibration data. The average direction of acceleration towards the trampet must provide
==PAGE:71==
4.6 Discussion and conclusions
57
a good approximation of the forward pointing axis of the global coordinate system (corre-
sponding to the frontal axis of the athlete during the run-up). This could be used to enhance
and automate the calibration process for trampet performances. In trampoline gymnastics,
a similar approach could be used during the initial jumping on the trampoline, where the
average axis of acceleration and deceleration would be the global vertical axis.
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER5
Concept development
In this chapter, the process of developing a concept for a learning tool for training sessions is
documented. In this process, focus has mainly been on the discovery of opportunities in the
solution space within boundaries set to ensure the feasibility of realizing the developed concept
in the real world. The aim has not been on reaching a ﬁnal and fully speciﬁed solution, but
rather to exemplify the possibilities allowed by the technologies investigated in the context of
a learning situation, and to test the developed concept in a practical setting.
5.1
Methodology
An agile development mindset was adopted for the development of the concept. Agile devel-
opment is characterized by incremental development of a product or service through itera-
tive processes, allowing for accelerated delivery to market [34]. Thus, the learning tool con-
cept has been developed through three iterations; iteration 1 focusing on idea generation
and selection within set boundaries, iteration 2 focusing on usability testing, and iteration 3
focusing on features.
5.1.1
Requirements
To guide the concept development process, the following requirements were decided upon,
prior to the beginning of development:
• The concept should be based on a single wearable inertial sensor connected to a device
capable of recording video, such that both video and sensor data is obtained.
• The concept should be able to extract valuable quantitative performance related data,
and present this data in an easily understandable way to the user
• Once set up, coaches and athletes should be able to interact wirelessly with the system.
==PAGE:74==
60
5 Concept development
5.2
Iteration 1
The ﬁrst iteration started with a simple ideation phase, where two brainstorming activities
were carried out; classic brainstorming and negative brainstorming. Negative brainstorming
refers to the process of ideating on the worst possible solutions, then analyzing the generated
bad solutions in an attempt to ﬁnd unexpected new opportunities. As a starting point, it
was decided that the brainstorming activities would target primarily the TeamGym trampet
discipline. During the brainstorming sessions, the physical form of the solution had to be
taken into account.
5.2.1
Brainstorming
After the brainstorming sessions were over, the aﬃnity mapping method was used to group
similar ideas. These ideas were then combined into proposed solutions, and features of each
solution detailed. Three proposed solution ideas were generated as a result – see ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: The three solutions sketched on post-its with details written on post-its underneath
each idea, after the affinity mapping process.
5.2.1.1
Idea 1: Integrated video management system
Since coaches has expressed a lack of features in existing video feedback systems installed in
training facilities, the idea is to implement video analysis features into an integrated video
capture system. The system provides video control functionalities such as scrolling back in
timeandsaving clips of video under speciﬁcgymnasts, whilecontinuingto recordother gym-
nasts, as well as tools for simple two-dimensional biomechanical analysis, e.g. analysis of
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Iteration 1
61
body angles, drawing tools, and features for comparing multiple performances to identify
improvement or diﬀerences. Furthermore, users can connect wearable sensors to the sys-
tem, and link the sensor to their gymnast ID in the system. That way, the system can detect
when the athlete performs a skill, and automatically save a recording in the correct athlete
folder. Finally, the system utilizes the sensor data to determine what skill was performed,
and name the saved video clips accordingly.
This solution would automate the otherwise time-consuming video capture process, as well
as automatically keep order in video ﬁles.
5.2.1.2
Idea 2: iPad analysis app with sensor
Modern iPads, and especially the iPad Pro models of recent years, have cameras capable of
recording video of great quality, and Pro models are even equipped with a wide angle cam-
era lens, signiﬁcantly improving the ﬂexibility in possible placement of the iPad for video
capture purposes in a facility. Thus, this idea is a system comprised of an iPad (Pro), a tripod,
one or more sensors with clothing attachment clips or belt, and an iPad application. The
sensors can be connected to the iPad and the iPad placed on the tripod in a location suitable
for capturing video of the performed skills. Now, the system can detect when an athlete is
running towards the trampet, and automatically start ﬁlming the athlete as well as capturing
inertial data from the sensor. This data is used to derive performance measures, such as run-
up-velocity, TOF, and somersault and twist rate, which is linked to the captured video clip
of the skill and saved. The athlete can now ﬁnd the skill on the iPad, and is presented with
speciﬁc performance measures along with the video clip. The performance measures can be
compared to other gymnasts on the team.
Thissolutionwouldprovidevaluablebiomechanicsmeasuresaswellasvideofeedbackwhile
being portable.
5.2.1.3
Idea 3: Data driven scoring system on phone
Since wearable inertial sensors exist in very small sizes, and can be worn with practically
no eﬀect on performance and even without the athlete noticing the sensor, a database of
a large number of performances could be built. Sensors could be worn by athletes during
competitions, and a motion proﬁle as well as speciﬁc performance related measures saved in
the database alongside scores given by the judges. Imagining such a database exists, this idea
is system that measures the same type of motion proﬁle and performance measures for a skill
performed by an athlete during training. This way, the system can compare motion proﬁles
and performance measures to the ones in the database, and based on similarity algorithms
andaweightingofthescoreimpactoftheperformancemeasures, thesystemcanprovidethe
==PAGE:76==
62
5 Concept development
athlete with a realistic scoring of the performed skill after execution. This could also be used
for TeamGym round scoring, using 6 sensors, one on each athlete. The system is accessible
through a simple smartphone app, and video can be linked to the performance as well.
This solution would provide a unique method of evaluation that is directly related to compe-
tition outcomes.
5.2.2
Idea selection
Fourselectioncriteriaweredeﬁnedforevaluationoftheideas; feasibility, value, convenience,
and potential.
Feasibility was evaluated based on the time it may take to develop the solution, how costly
the development and ﬁnal solution is thought to be and how easily a club, coach or athlete
can get started using it. Value was evaluated based on the usefulness of the provided data
or feedback within the context of a typical training situation, for athletes as well as coaches.
Convenience is evaluated based on how much time and eﬀort the solution will require from
coaches, where a higher score corresponds to less time and eﬀort, or even saved time and
eﬀort. Potential is evaluated based on the potential for expanding the idea to a bigger target
segment as well as the potential for adding new features and building on the functionality of
the idea.
Scores on the four criteria for all three ideas were given by qualitative assessment, as a num-
ber between one and seven – see table 5.1.
Criterion
Feasibility
Value
Convenience
Potential
Idea 1
4
4
7
4
Idea 2
5
6
5
7
Idea 3
2
4
5
6
Table 5.1: The three solution ideas evaluated on the four determined evaluation criteria.
The clear winner in terms of these criteria is idea 2 with 23 points in total, whereas idea 1
received 19 points and idea 3 received 17 points. Thus, idea 2 is selected for further work.
Idea 1 oﬀers the highest convenience, saving time for athletes as well as coaches by automat-
ing the video capture and ﬁle organization process. However, the system provides less actual
performance related data or feedback, and is less ﬂexible than a mobile solution, and would
cost more and require more time to set up. And while idea 3 can provide a unique value in
certain situations, for example during test competitions or training sessions close to compe-
titions, for the most part, a competition score evaluation is not what is needed during normal
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Iteration 2: Usability testing
63
training. At the same time, building the database would be time consuming and require the
cooperation of governing bodies. In addition, the main idea could be implemented into idea
2 or even 1 at a later point, if desired. Finally, idea 2 provides a great basis for agile develop-
ment and testing.
5.3
Iteration 2: Usability testing
In the second iteration, focus was on testing practicalities of the solution in the real world.
5.3.1
Prototyping the app
Thus, an initial user interface was designed and prototyped in the online available prototyp-
ing software, Figma – see wireframes for the prototype in ﬁgure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Wireframes detailing the flow of the simple app, for one of the connected sensors. When
a performed skill is clicked, performance measures are displayed and the video can be played.
This prototype, although very simple, was deemed suﬃcient for initial testing.
==PAGE:78==
64
5 Concept development
5.3.2
Testing the concept
A testing session was planned and scheduled with the coaches of a team of Junior TeamGym
athletes. To guide the testing session, a simpliﬁed user journey was created – see table 5.2.
Step
Image
1. The tripod is set up, the iPad is mounted to it, and it is
then placed in a practical position that allows for good video
capture.
2. The app is opened and the sensors are connected via blue-
tooth.
3. The sensors are handed over to the gymnasts, who attach
ittotheirshortsusingtheattachmentclipsortothestomach
using a velcro belt.
4. A gymnast wearing a sensor performs a skill in the tram-
pet.
5. The Gymnast goes to the iPad, clicks the color of the sen-
sor being worn, and is presented with performance mea-
sures and a video clip.
Table 5.2: The five steps in the simplified user journey imagined for the solution. Images shown to
the right were taken during prototype testing.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Iteration 2: Usability testing
65
Before the prototype testing, a tripod was purchased, and three Movesense sensors were
color-coded using stickers in the colors shown in the wireframes in ﬁgure 5.2 – see ﬁgure
5.3.
Figure 5.3: The three color coded Movesense sensors used in testing.
At the training session, gymnasts were brieﬂy introduced to the concept, and informed that
the app did not, in fact, work correctly. Three athletes were then asked to imagine that the
app worked, wear a sensor, and perform a skill, then go to the iPad and interact with the
prototype.
5.3.3
Feedback and findings
The athletes as well as coaches present generally liked the concept, and were excited for it to
perhaps become a reality in the future. No issues were found when interacting with the app,
however, some suggestions for what could be implemented into the solution were made, pri-
marily being ideas for games and challenges using performance measures from the sensors.
In terms of ﬁtting into the context of a training session, the concept seemed to work well
within the environment. Video was tested from a relatively short distance to the trampet
and landing area, and was usable from a variety of locations, due to the wide angle lens cam-
era. The suspected importance of having such a lens was proven correct, if the solution is
to be used in training environments where the iPad cannot be positioned far away. The at-
tachment of sensors to the shorts of the gymnasts was problem free, and the attachment
appeared to be robust. Two out of the three gymnasts reported almost not feeling the sensor
==PAGE:80==
66
5 Concept development
being there at all, while the third gymnast reported feeling the the sensor clip, being slightly
annoying.
After talking to the athletes, there were diﬀerent opinions about whether or not the system
should initiate recordings automatically when a gymnast starts running towards the trampet,
or if the gymnast should initiate the recording using a gesture (e.g. tapping the sensor three
times, or waving at the camera). The advantage of automatically initiated recording is that
a gymnast can simply wear the sensor and forget about it being there, whereafter all skills
performed during a session will be available. The disadvantage to this approach is that it
may not always desirable to record all performances, and it will result in a large number of
recordings to be managed.
5.4
Iteration 3
The third iteration focused on the exploration of possible features that the solution might be
able to oﬀer.
5.4.1
Workshop
Four highly experienced coaches in TeamGym and performance gymnastics were recruited
for participation in a workshop, with the primary goal of synthesizing ideas for features – see
ﬁgure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: The coaches in the workshop, brainstorming.
An overview of the activities carried out during the workshop can be seen in table 5.3.
==PAGE:81==
5.4 Iteration 3
67
Activity
Description
Time allocated
1. Introduction
Introduction to the workshop, followed by a
general introduction to the project and re-
search questions.
10 minutes
2. Brainstorm
A short individual brainstorm about the most
prevalentanddiﬃcultchallengesexperienced
bytheparticipantsascoaches, duringtraining.
Purpose is to facilitate a focus on problems
rather than solutions for now. Post-it notes are
used for documentation.
3 minutes
3. Brainstorm
A short individual brainstorm about the most
prevalentanddiﬃcultchallengesexperienced
by the participants as gymnasts, during train-
ing. Post-it notes used again.
3 minutes
4. Aﬃnity mapping
A team activity, with the aim of clustering the
problems and challenges in groups of similar-
ity. Participantsareencouragedtotalkanddis-
cuss, and allowed to add new problems if they
remember some they had forgotten.
10 minutes
5. Solution scope
A short introduction to the scope and require-
ments set for development, namely the use of
a single inertial sensor combined with video
capture.
5 minutes
6. Experience to prototype
The participants are introduced to the ﬁrst
prototype developed. Sensors are layed out
and the prototyped app is open on the iPad.
3 minutes
7. Talk and ideate
In pairs, participants are asked to come up
with all the useful and/or fun measures one
could capture using a sensor.
5 minutes
8. Talk and ideate
In pairs, participants are asked to come up
with all the useful and/or fun features one
could capture using a sensor.
10 minutes
2. Present favorites
Still in pairs, participants are asked to select
2-3 measures and/or features of interest, and
combine and draw their best ideas based on
those, then present the ﬁnal outcome to the
other pair.
15 minutes
11. Thank you and bye!
The participants are thanked for their partici-
pation and valuable input.
5 minutes
Table 5.3: Overview of the activities of the workshop.
==PAGE:82==
68
5 Concept development
5.4.2
Findings
A large number of ideas and concepts was produced during the workshop. Towards the end
of the workshop, pairs of coaches presented their favorite ideas for features, after which they
were documented on post-it notes. The following feature ideas were presented:
5.4.2.1
Challenges and games
Either the athlete chooses a challenge or game, or lets the system choose one for them. Then
the performance of the participants is measured using the inertial sensor, and scores given.
Challenges can include:
• Who can achieve the greates run-up velocity?
• Who generates the most power during the take-oﬀ?
• Who can achieve the highest rate of somersaulting and/or twisting?
• Who can open the earliest in a speciﬁed skill?
The pair of coaches suggested scoreboards could be introduced, both locally in the club, but
also online scores in the challenges. They also suggested that certain games related to perfor-
mance in the trampet discipline could be included, such as games that require fast running
acceleration. An example given is the “Red light, green light” game, where the system could
measures if players still move after “red light” is shown on the tablet screen.
5.4.2.2
Specific performance analysis methods
The system can make a measurement based on the choice of the athlete, then provide per-
formance measure based feedback in the selected topic. Examples er:
• The gymnast selects a skill he or she would like to learn, then performs any skill with
maximum run-up velocity and take-oﬀpower. The system then calculates the TOF
and angular momentum achieved, and compares this with database values for require-
ments to perform a desired skill, in order to provides feedback to the gymnast on what
needs to be improved before attempting the skill.
• The gymnast can choose diﬀerent training modes in the app, depending on what the
gymnast would like to work on as well as current energy levels and mood of the athlete.
==PAGE:83==
5.5 Discussion and conclusions
69
• The system can measure relevant performance measures for a speciﬁc skill, then rec-
ommendaspeciﬁctechnicaldrilltobepracticedbythegymnastforawhile, afterwhich
a new attempt at the skill is performed. The system can then determine if there was an
improvement in performance and provide feedback.
• Inertial measurement supported technical training. The system asks the gymnast to
achieve a certain measure in a technical drill, and provides real-time feedback to the
gymnast and can give notive once the measure has been achieved.
These features generally encourage a high level of autonomy for athletes along with provid-
ing a highly individualized experience for athletes.
5.5
Discussion and conclusions
While none of the ﬁndings resulting from the prototype testing or workshop has been imple-
mented in the concept, which would otherwise be considered the norm in an agile develop-
ment process, the aim was to explore opportunities for future development of the concept
as well as investigate the feasibility of implementing such a tool in the real world.
The results of the prototype testing was positive, and no apparent barriers to the practical
development of the concept, or arguments speaking against the adoption of such a tool in
real training sessions, has been identiﬁed.
The concept developed, while not being a very well deﬁned solution yet, oﬀer many oppor-
tunities in terms of features and focus areas.
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER6
Conclusion
This project has aimed to contribute to the relatively small body of research available in the
investigated gymnastics disciplines, especially in TeamGym. Comparing inertial sensor ori-
entation data for trampoline and trampet skills with data extracted from an optical marker-
based motion tracking facility has, to the knowledge of the author, not been done before, and
while the results presented in this thesis primarily provide data on and insight into biome-
chanical performance measures that have been investigated in the past, the obtained data
can be used for further analyses and potentially the extraction of additional relevant perfor-
mance measures in the future.
Oneinterestingsuchmeasureistheamountofangularmomentumproducedwhendiﬀerent
types of skills are performed. While the diﬀerences in moment of inertia for diﬀerent body
positions, and the need for athletes to balance angular momentum with height, are well es-
tablished, the actual optimal balance for the performance of speciﬁc skills in diﬀerent body
positions, would be useful to know.
Another example is related to the contact phase of trampet performances. No studies has
investigated the dynamics or detailed mechanics of the trampet take-oﬀ, to the knowledge of
the author. While many of the same fundamental principles that apply to the contact phase
in trampolining are transferable to the trampet contact phase, the dynamics of the trampet
take-oﬀare much more complicated. The data collected from TeamGym athletes as part
of this project includes the motion of the athletes during take-oﬀ, and thus may be used to
investigate the trampet take-oﬀdynamics in detail in the future.
6.1
Research questions and project goals
The two primary research questions guiding this project were related to the development
of a framework for analysis of technique and the challenges of implementing a quantitative
technology in practical trampoline and trampet training context.
==PAGE:86==
72
6 Conclusion
The simulation framework presented in this thesis was developed with the aim of making
such analysis more accessible to coaches and other interested individuals. While the frame-
work, at this time, can not be considered particularly user-friendly or easy to use, due to the
lack of a graphical user interface and the need for understanding of the orientation angles of
body parts relative to each other, eﬀorts have been made to improve the intuitive nature of
the framework. As of now, the the framework developed in the project requires signiﬁcantly
less knowledge and expertise to use, compared to other available frameworks, and requires
only two measures of the athlete for modeling of the body; height and weight. Validation
results suggest that the model performs very well, especially considering the dramatic sim-
pliﬁcations applied as compared to other frameworks and models in use [33].
The concept development process carried out as part of the project, as well as the collection
and analysis of sensor data, provide a strong foundation for the continued work towards a
truly beneﬁcial learning tool for trampoline and trampet training sessions. The technolog-
ical requirements to the developed concept are proven feasible by the results presented in
chapter 4, and the design, learning context and implementation concerns associated with
the concept have been considered in the development process. Altogether, this constitutes
a proof-of-concept.
6.2
Reflection
Due to delays in the planned recording sessions, caused by lack of availability to equipment
as well as athletes, the initial project plan could not be followed – see appendix C. However,
after having the delivery date for the report delayed by six weeks, the project was back on
track, and could be carried out almost according to the original plan, although with some
minor changes.
Given more time, the opportunities in extraction of useful measures from the data are large –
however, the analysis carried out is suﬃcient to answer to the research questions. Processing
the sensor data proved to be more challenging than expected, and especially after the ﬁrst
recording sessions, much time was spent on achieving decent results. However, in the end,
the data has proven suﬃcient for the initially intended purposes, and even more.
In conclusion, the project can be deemed a success, and the results as well as future outlook
is promising.
==PAGE:87==
6.3 Future implications
73
6.3
Future implications
As indicated by the very broad variety of possible solutions suggested during the workshop,
and during prototype testing, the technology is ﬂexible and applicable in a plethora of con-
texts. Since the measurement of motion using the sensor is almost independent of the en-
vironment, and waterproof wearable sensors exist, the technology is principally applicable
to all sports. While the analysis performed in this study is related to trampoline and trampet
performances, the data acquisition methodology and combination of sensor and video data
can be applied elsewhere.
However, even withing the intended use case scenario for the concept, there is ample room
and opportunity for implementation of new features in the existing design.
==PAGE:88==
74
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
2022DirectivesforEquipment-Teamgym.Tech.rep.2021.URL:www.europeangymnastics.
com.
[2]
Almir Atikovic, Nusret Smajlovi, and Almir Atikovi. RELATION BETWEEN VAULTDIFFI-
CULTY VALUES AND BIOMECHANICAL PARAMETERS IN MEN’S ARTISTIC GYMNAS-
TICS. Tech. rep. 2011, pp. 91–105. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
265087770.
[3]
Wojciech Blajer and Adam Czaplicki. Modeling and inverse simulation of somersaults
on the trampoline. Tech. rep. 2001, pp. 1619–1629.
[4]
Eva Boyer et al. “VIDEO MODELING BY EXPERTS WITH VIDEO FEEDBACK TO EN-
HANCE GYMNASTICS SKILLS.” In: Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 42.4 (Decem-
ber 2009), pp. 855–860. ISSN: 1938-3703. DOI: 10.1901/jaba.2009.42-855.
[5]
Elizabeth Bradshaw. “Gymnastics: Targetdirected running in gymnastics: A prelimi-
nary exploration of vaulting.” In: Sports Biomechanics 3.1 (January 2004), pp. 125–144.
ISSN: 17526116. DOI: 10.1080/14763140408522834.
[6]
Elizabeth J. Bradshaw et al. HOW SAFE ARE THE CODE OF POINTS LANDING TECHNI-
CAL REQUIREMENTS IN ARTISTIC GYMNASTICS? PRELIMINARY RESULTS. Tech. rep.
2016.
[7]
David John Burke. The Mechanics of the Contact Phase in Trampolining. Tech. rep. 2015.
[8]
Eve Charbonneau et al. “Optimal control as a tool for innovation in aerial twisting on a
trampoline.” In: Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 10.23 (December 2020), pp. 1–17. ISSN:
20763417. DOI: 10.3390/app10238363.
[9]
European Gymnastics. 2022-2024 Code of Points - Teamgym, Seniors and Juniors. Tech.
rep. 2021. URL: www.europeangymnastics.com.
[10]
R. Farana et al. Current issues and future directions in gymnastics research: biomechan-
ics,motorcontrolandcoachinginterface.2023.DOI:10.1080/14763141.2021.2016928.
[11]
Diogo Ferreira and Tribolet De Abreu. Applying Embedded Systems and Sensor Tech-
nologies to Trampoline Gymnastics. Tech. rep. 2018.
==PAGE:90==
76
Bibliography
[12]
FIG. 2022-2024 Code of Points - Trampoline Gymnastics. Tech. rep. 2021. URL: https:
//www.gymnastics.sport/publicdir/rules/files/en_TRA%20CoP%202022-2024.pdf.
[13]
Nicolas Frevel, Daniel Beiderbeck, and Sascha L. Schmidt. “The impact of technology
on sports A prospective study.” In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change 182
(September 2022). ISSN: 00401625. DOI: 10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121838.
[14]
ToshiyukiFujihara.REVISITINGRUN-UPVELOCITYINGYMNASTICSVAULTING.Tech.
rep. 2016. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317887591.
[15]
Miguel-Angel Gomez-Ruano, Sergio José Ibáñez, and Anthony S Leicht, eds. Perfor-
mance Analysis in Sport. Frontiers Research Topics. Frontiers Media SA, 2020. ISBN:
9782889662937. DOI: 10.3389/978-2-88966-293-7. URL: https://www.frontiersin.
org/research-topics/8605/performance-analysis-in-sport.
[16]
DonaldT.Greenwood.PrinciplesofDynamics.2nd.Prentice-Hall,Inc.,EnglewoodCliﬀs,
New Jersey, 1987, p. 143.
[17]
Kasia Kilijanek and Kristen Sanchez. “History and overview of gymnastics disciplines.”
In: Gymnastics Medicine: Evaluation, Management and Rehabilitation. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, October 2019, pp. 1–14. ISBN: 9783030262884. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-030-26288-4{\_}1.
[18]
Tony Luczak et al. “State-of-the-art review of athletic wearable technology: What 113
strength and conditioning coaches and athletic trainers from the USA said about tech-
nology in sports.” In: International Journal of Sports Science and Coaching 15.1 (Febru-
ary 2020), pp. 26–40. ISSN: 2048397X. DOI: 10.1177/1747954119885244.
[19]
Sam McDevitt et al. Wearables for Biomechanical Performance Optimization and Risk
AssessmentinIndustrialandSportsApplications.January2022.DOI:10.3390/bioengineering9010033.
[20]
A. Mero, P. V. Komi, and R. J. Gregor. Biomechanics of Sprint Running: A Review. 1992.
DOI: 10.2165/00007256-199213060-00002.
[21]
Christoﬀer Nayberg. Simulation of a performed double back (tucked) on trampoline,
side by side with video footage. 2023. URL: https://youtu.be/C5ebzIZwY8E.
[22]
Christoﬀer Nayberg. Simulation of a performed rudy (rudolf) in trampet, side by side
with video footage. 2023. URL: https://youtu.be/-RcmKjngnJA.
[23]
Christoﬀer Nayberg, Rasmus Nissen Dahl, and Tonny Chen. Gymnastics Coach Feed-
back Form [Google Form]. 2022.
[24]
Dan Nessler. How to apply a design thinking, HCD, UX or any creative process from
scratch Revised & New Version. 2018.
[25]
Paolo de Leva. “Adjustments to Zatsiorsky-Seluyanov’s segment inertia parameters.”
In: Journal of Biomechanics 29.9 (1996), pp. 1223–1230. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0021-9290(95)00178-6.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
77
[26]
Basilio Pueo and Jose Manuel Jimenez-Olmedo. “Application of motion capture tech-
nology for sport performance analysis.” In: (2017).
[27]
Wei-HsunTai,RuiZhang,andLiangliangZhao.“Cutting-EdgeResearchinSportsBiome-
chanics:FromBasicSciencetoAppliedTechnology.”In:Bioengineering 10.6(June2023),
p. 668. ISSN: 23065354. DOI: 10.3390/bioengineering10060668.
[28]
Getu Teferi and Dessalew Endalew. “Methods of Biomechanical Performance Analyses
in Sport: Systematic Review.” In: American Journal of Sports Science and Medicine 8.2
(2020), pp. 47–52. DOI: 10.12691/ajssm-8-2-2. URL: http://pubs.sciepub.com/ajssm/8/
2/2.
[29]
Fred Yeadon. The physics of twisting somersaults. Tech. rep. 2000, pp. 33–37.
[30]
M. R. Yeadon. The simulation of aerial movementI. The determination of orientation
angles from ﬁlm data. Tech. rep. 1990, pp. 59–66.
[31]
M. R. Yeadon. The simulation of aerial movementII. A mathematical inertia model of
the human body. Tech. rep. 1990.
[32]
M. R. Yeadon. The simulation of aerial movementIII. The determination of the angular
momentum of the human body. Tech. rep. 1990.
[33]
M. R. Yeadon, J. Atha, and F. D. Hales. The simulation of aerial movementIV. A computer
simulation model. Tech. rep. 1990.
[34]
Ting Zhang and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. “Agile Planning and
Development Methods.” In: (2011).
==PAGE:92==
78
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIXA
Interview with trampoline
gymnastics coach
==PAGE:94==
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Interview with trampoline coach:
General:
What are some of the main challenges you experience when coaching 
gymnasts (can be anything, also practicalities)?
Super broad question! Differences in maturity when planning the training. Being 
one coach short and feeling like I sometimes don’t give some gymnasts enough 
attention and help. The admin work behind the scene! 
What are some common frustrations experienced by trampoline 
gymnasts?
2. I coach an age group of primarily kids and youngsters for competition level 
and for them overthinking/fear/mental blockage is a mental frustration. And 
then maybe even worse or at least equal to is injuries and having to be patient 
when the body is trying to communicate in some way. Not often but happens
I coach an age group of primarily kids and youngsters for competition level and 
for them overthinking/fear/mental blockage is a mental frustration. And then 
maybe even worse or at least equal to is injuries and having to be patient when 
the body is trying to communicate in some way. Not often but happens
Biomechanics and knowledge:
From where have you acquired your knowledge about biomechanics, 
technique and skill requirements?
The trampoline instructor education covers trampoline specific twisting 
biomechanics. I have a bachelor degree in sports science where one course 
covered basic biomechanics of sports. And on top I have had more 
biomechanics and done some basic analysis as part of my coach diploma 
education (diplomtræner)
Do you think having access to more specific knowledge regarding 
biomechanics would benefit you as a coach?
I think knowledge is always important, but accessibility and usage after gaining 
more knowledge is equally as important. Just studying and not putting the stuff 
into use is a waste
Technology:
Do you find video capture useful in training sessions?
==PAGE:95==
6.
1.
7.
8.
9.
Yes very much. But with a balance (see 7.) 
Do you use other digital technologies when coaching?
If yes, which, and how do they benefit you and/or your athletes?
No not currently
Do you experience any challenges, annoyances or other negative 
aspects to using video analysis, or any other digital technologies, 
during training sessions? If yes, please elaborate.
It is a balance. And finding that balance is in my opinion achieved by educating 
the gymnasts (and coaches) in what the video is for and when it doesn’t matter. 
Looking for what to change and specific technical details is very useful. But if 
athletes end up looking just for looking it takes away presence from the group 
and they are not helping team mates, learning from others, getting ready for 
next turn or socialising. Just watching “mistakes” again and again is also a 
backside to be aware of. Gymnasts who are very self critical might need 
tutoring in how to use it and work with inner dialogue. And there is some basic 
learning thing that seems off to me if it’s just watched for mistakes (then that is 
repeated) - so the development and learning aspect of looking for what-can 
-be-better-next-time seems important to me
Do you think it would benefit you in your coaching if you had access to 
quantitative performance measures after your athletes performed a 
skill (for example the height of the jump, timing details for e.g. twisting 
or opening, how much angular momentum/rotational energy was 
produced during take-off, etc.)?
Yes and no. Yes if it is easy to get an overview of and used strategically. No if it 
is time costly and the gymnasts reduce their own reflections and awareness 
because it can just be shown on a screen. The time of flight is quite essential to 
trampolining so I see great value in that. Positions potentially too. Take off 
angles could be interesting too
If you could have access to any such biomechanics related 
performance measures after a gymnast had performed a skill, which 
ones do you think would be most beneficial to you and your athletes? 
Please elaborate on why.
- kinda continuing what I wrote in former question. ToF, take off angle, positions 
in rotation, kick out position vs height of skill when kicked out, when the prep 
for landing starts (should be straight body position until horizontal)
==PAGE:96==
82
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIXB
Subject information letter and
consent form
In english and danish.
==PAGE:98==
 
 
8 
 
Subject information letter (EN) 
 
Dear participant, 
In this letter we will inform you about the purpose of the experiment and the procedures. It is 
important that you read the letter carefully. If you have any questions, do not hesitate to contact us 
(contact info) for clarification. 
 
Your rights as participant 
Your participation in this experiment is voluntarily. This means that you can leave the experiment at 
any point in time without consequences for yourself, and without having to give a reason. However, 
in accordance with GDPR rules, your research data collected before you withdraw your consent will 
not be deleted. We will ask you to give informed consent to participate in this study, once you have 
been informed about the experiment. 
 
Purpose of the research project 
There are three aims of the experiment: 
1) To compare the accuracy and reliability of movement data derived from a small sensor, attached 
to the front of the body, compared to data derived from video recordings from 2 angles. The derived 
data from these technologies are compared with data from an optical marker-based motion capture 
system, which very precisely measure the position of markers attached to a velcro suit that you will 
be asked to wear during the experiment. Data from the motion capture system is used as reference. 
2) To validate a simulation model, which has been developed for quantitative comparison of 
techniques, by comparing data from the motion capture system and the sensor with simulations of 
your performed skills. The goal is to assess whether the model is accurate/good enough that 
conclusions can be drawn with reasonable certainty about which techniques are the most effective 
by comparison, by simulating the different techniques – for example techniques for twist initiation. 
3) To obtain data that can be used for quantitative analysis of movement patterns, biomechanical 
phenomena and the technique used to achieve the performed skills. From the data obtained, 
several interesting biomechanical measures can be derived – for example, the height of your jumps, 
rotational energy and speed, and timing of movements. These measures will be used to study some 
of the biomechanical requirements that must be met in order to perform the skills, and as a basis 
for a comparative study of how effective different techniques are in achieving these requirements. 
 
Data storage and handling 
The collected data will be stored locally on Christoffer's personal computer as well as an external 
SSD disk, and derived/processed data will be published in the report for Christoffer's master thesis 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
9 
 
and possibly in a scientific article. Derived/processed data will therefore become available to the 
public. If desired, your data can be anonymized before publication. Your name and where you 
practice your sport will not be published. 
The collected data are: 
1. Your weight and height. 
2. Marker position data from the motion capture system. 
3. Accelerometer, gyroscope and magnetometer data from the small sensor attached to the 
Velcro pants. 
4. Video recordings from 2 cameras, recording from different angles. 
Processing of data: 
Data from the motion capture system, the sensor and the cameras will be treated and processed in 
order to derive movement-related, biomechanical measures such as (but not limited to): 
1. The height of your jumps 
2. Angular momentum and angular velocities (rotational energy and velocity, including twist 
velocity). 
3. Positions of body parts (e.g. arms, legs, torso, head, etc.) during the performed skills. 
4. Angles in joints between limbs (e.g. elbow, knee, hip, etc.) during the performed skills. 
5. Orientation of the body, in this case determined as the orientation of the stomach, during 
the performed skills. 
 
Methods 
After you have been informed about the entire procedure, you will be given the opportunity to do 
a little warm-up so that you feel ready. You will then be asked to put on the velcro suit with markers 
and the sensor. We then check that the markers fit correctly and that the suit fits comfortably 
enough for you to perform the skills. Before the recordings begin, we agree which jumps you will 
perform, and you will be asked to enter the motion capture area where the gymnastics equipment 
is. The recordings will then be started, and the procedure is: 
1. You will be asked to stand on the trampoline (if you are a trampoline jumper) or on the 
landing mat (if you are a TeamGym gymnast) facing one of the cameras with your arms raised 
to horizontal level to the sides, then to stand still for approx. 5 seconds. 
2. You will then be asked to perform a skill (you can always notify us if you do not feel 
comfortable performing the skill, in which case it will be skipped). 
3. Steps 1 and 2 are now repeated until all jumps have been performed twice. If the jumps are 
not completed satisfactorily, you can simply try again. 
4. Finally, you will once again be asked to stand still with your arms raised to horizontal level 
to the sides for approx. 5 seconds. 
Once all skills have been performed and recorded, you can exit the motion capture area and 
remove the velcro suit. You will be offered a cold soft drink and some snacks. 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
10 
 
Informationsbrev til deltageren (DK) 
 
Kære deltager, 
I dette brev informeres du om formålet med eksperimentet og proceduren. Det er vigtig du læser 
brevet grundigt. Hvis du har spørgsmål, så tøv ikke med at kontakte Christoffer (tlf.: 53 60 87 47, 
mail: christoffer@nayberg.dk) for afklaring. 
 
Dine rettigheder som deltager 
Din deltagelse i eksperimentet er helt frivillig. Dette betyder, at du til enhver tid kan stoppe og 
forlade eksperimentet, uden konsekvenser for dig og uden du behøver begrunde hvorfor. I 
overensstemmelse med bestemmelserne i GDPR, vil data indsamlet før du trækker dig fra 
eksperimentet dog blive gemt og kan. Vi vil bede dig give informeret samtykke til at deltage i 
eksperimentet, så snart du har modtaget den nødvendige information. 
 
Formål med forsøget 
Der er tre formål med forsøget: 
1) At sammenligne nøjagtigheden og pålideligheden af bevægelses-data udledt fra en lille sensor, 
påsat forsiden af kroppen, sammenlignet med data udledt af videooptagelser fra 2 vinkler. Udledt 
data fra disse teknologier sammenlignes med data fra et optisk markør-baseret motion capture 
system, som meget præcist kan måle positionen af markører påsat en velcro-dragt, som du vil blive 
bedt om at have på under forsøget. Data fra motion capture systemet bruges som reference. 
2) At validere en simuleringsmodel, som er udviklet til kvantitativ sammenligning af forskellige 
teknikker, ved at sammenligne data fra motion capture systemet og sensoren med simuleringer af 
dine spring. Målet er at vurdere, hvorvidt modellen er nøjagtig/god nok til, at man med rimelig 
sikkerhed kan drage konklusioner om hvilke teknikker der ved sammenligning er mest effektive, ved 
at simulere de forskellige teknikker – for eksempel forskellige teknikker til skrue-igangsættelse. 
3) At indhente data, som kan anvendes til kvantitativ analyse af bevægelsesmønstre, biomekaniske 
fænomener og din anvendte teknik til opnåelse af de udførte spring. Af den indhentede data kan 
udledes adskillige interessante biomekaniske mål – for eksempel højden på dine spring, 
rotationsenergi og -hastighed og timing af bevægelser. Disse mål vil blive brugt til at studere nogle 
af de biomekaniske krav der skal opfyldes for at kunne udføre de forskellige spring, og som grundlag 
for et lille sammenligningsstudie af hvor effektive forskellige tekniker er til opnåelse af disse krav. 
 
Opbevaring og behandling af data 
De indsamlede data vil blive opbevaret lokalt på Christoffers personlige computer samt en ekstern 
SSD-disk, og udledte/behandlede data vil blive publiceret i rapporten for Christoffers 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
11 
 
kandidatafhandling, samt muligvis i en videnskabelig artikel. Udledte/behandlede data vil derfor 
blive tilgængelige for offentligheden. Hvis det ønskes, kan din data anonymiseres før publicering 
finder sted. Dit navn og hvor du træner din sport vil ikke blive offentliggjort.  
De indsamlede data er: 
1. Din vægt og højde. 
2. Positions-data for markørerne under alle springene fra motion capture systemet. 
3. Accelerometer-, gyroskop- og magnetometer-data fra den lille sensor der påsættes velcro-
bukserne. 
4. Videooptagelser fra 2 kameraer, som filmer fra hver sin vinkel. 
Behandling af data: 
Data fra motion capture systemet, sensoren og kameraerne vil blive behandlet og processeret med 
henblik på at udlede bevægelses-relaterede, biomekaniske mål såsom (men ikke begrænset til): 
1. Højden på dine spring 
2. Angulært momentum og vinkelhastigheder (rotationsenergi og -hastighed, herunder 
skruehastighed). 
3. Positioner for kroppens lemmer (eks. arme, ben, overkrop, hoved osv.) under springene. 
4. Vinkler i led mellem lemmer (eks. albue, knæ, hofte osv.) under springene. 
5. Orientering af kroppen, i dette tilfælde bestemt som orientering af maven, under springene. 
 
Metoder 
Efter du er blevet informeret om hele proceduren, vil du få mulighed for at lave lidt opvarmning, 
så du føler dig klar. Du vil derefter blive bedt om at tage velcro-dragten med markører samt 
sensoren på. Vi kontrollerer herefter, at markørerne sidder korrekt, og at dragten sidder 
komfortabelt nok til at du kan springe i den. Før optagelserne igangsættes, aftaler vi hvilke spring 
du skal udføre, og du bliver bedt om at gå ind i motion capture-området, hvor gymnastik-udstyret 
står. Herefter vil optagelserne blive igangsat, og proceduren er: 
1. Du vil blive bedt om at stille dig op på trampolinen (hvis du er trampolinspringer) eller på 
landingsmåtten (hvis du er TeamGym gymnast) med kroppen rettet mod det ene kamera 
og med armene hævet til vandret ud til siderne, og stå stille i ca. 5 sekunder. 
2. Herefter vil du blive bedt om at udføre et spring (du kan altid give besked, hvis du ikke føler 
dig tryg ved at udføre springet – i så fald springes det over). 
3. Skridt 1 og 2 bliver nu gentaget indtil alle spring er udført to gange. Hvis ikke springene 
gennemføres tilfredsstillende, kan du blot prøve igen. 
4. Til slut bliver du endnu en gang bedt om at stå stille med armene hævet til vandret ud til 
siderne i ca. 5 sekunder. 
Når alle spring er udført og optaget, kan du forlade motion capture-området og tage velcro-
dragten af. Du vil blive budt på en kold sodavand og lidt snacks. 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
12 
 
Informed consent form (EN) 
[to be filled out by experimenter before the experiment] 
Experiment: ___________________________________________ 
Investigator: ___________________________________________ 
[to be filled out by the participant before the experiment] 
I confirm that: 
- 
I was satisfactorily informed about the study concerned both verbally and in writing by means of the 
subject information letter. 
- 
I have had the opportunity to put forward questions regarding the study and that these questions 
have been answered satisfactorily 
- 
I have carefully considered my participation in the experiment 
- 
I participate of my own free will 
I agree that: 
- 
My data will be acquired and stored for scientific purposes as mentioned in the subject information 
letter in fully anonymized form 
- 
My data may be published in fully anonymized form 
Furthermore, my data may be stored for scientific purposes and published in non-anonymized form 
I understand that: 
- 
My participation is voluntary, and I have the right to withdraw from the experiment at any time 
without having to give a reason 
- 
Should I withdraw from the experiment, my research data collected before my withdrawal may still 
be used for research purposes 
- 
My privacy is protected according to Danish law and European guidelines (GDPR; EU 2016/679) 
- 
My consent will be sought every time I participate in a new experiment 
I give my consent to take part in this experiment: 
 
_____________________________________ 
___________________________________ 
Full name 
 
 
 
Date of birth 
 
_____________________________________ 
___________________________________ 
Date, Place 
 
 
 
Signature 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
Signature legal guardian (if under the age of 15) 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
13 
 
Erklæring om informeret samtykke (DK) 
[udfyldes af forsøgsleder inden eksperimentet] 
Eksperiment:  ___________________________________________ 
Forsøgsleder:   ___________________________________________ 
[udfyldes af deltager inden eksperimentet] 
Jeg bekræfter at: 
- 
Jeg blev informeret i tilfredsstillende grad om den pågældende undersøgelse, både mundtligt og 
skriftligt ved hjælp af emneoplysningsbrevet 
- 
Jeg har haft lejlighed til at stille spørgsmål vedrørende undersøgelsen, og disse spørgsmål er blevet 
besvaret tilfredsstillende 
- 
Jeg har nøje overvejet min deltagelse i forsøget 
- 
Jeg deltager af egen fri vilje 
Jeg giver samtykke til at: 
- 
Mine data vil blive indsamlet og opbevaret til videnskabelige formål som nævnt i oplysningsbrevet i 
fuldt anonymiseret form 
- 
Mine data må publiceres i fuldt anonymiseret form 
Mine data må ydermere opbevares til videnskabelige formål og publiceres i ikke-anonymiseret form 
Jeg forstår at: 
- 
Min deltagelse er frivillig, og jeg har til enhver tid ret til at trække mig fra forsøget uden at skulle give 
en begrundelse 
- 
Skulle jeg trække mig fra forsøget, kan mine forskningsdata indsamlet før min tilbagetrækning stadig 
bruges til forskningsformål og kan publiceres 
- 
Mit privatliv er beskyttet i henhold til dansk lovgivning og europæiske retningslinjer (GDPR; EU 
2016/679) 
- 
Mit samtykke vil blive indhentet hver gang jeg deltager i et nyt eksperiment 
Jeg giver mit samtykke til at deltage i dette eksperiment: 
 
_____________________________________ 
___________________________________ 
Fulde navn 
 
 
 
Fødselsdato 
 
_____________________________________ 
___________________________________ 
Dato, Sted 
 
 
 
Underskrift 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
Underskrift værge (hvis under 15 år) 
==PAGE:104==
90
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIXC
Project plan - Gantt chart
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
==PAGE:108==
==PAGE:109==
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Building 101A
2800 Kongens Lyngby
