==PAGE:1==
 
Technical University of Denmark 
PETROPHYSICAL LOG AND 
CUTTINGS ANALYSIS OF 
DIATOMACEOUS SHALE 
Author 
Georgios Bampaniotis 
Supervisors 
Leonardo Teixeira Pinto Meireles, Researcher 
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering 
Ida Lykke Fabricius, Professor 
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering 
 
 
JULY 2023 
KONGENS LYNGBY 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments 
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors: Leonardo Teixeira Pinto 
Meireles (Researcher at the Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering) 
and Ida Lykke Fabricius (Professor at the Department of Environmental and Resource 
Engineering) for giving me the opportunity to study such an interesting subject as 
petrophysics. Furthermore, I would like to thank Mr. Meireles for providing me with the 
necessary materials and advice in order to complete the project. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Abstract 
The current project researches the petrophysical logging data interpretations and 
investigates into new methods to provide an accurate assessment of the porosity and 
the density of diatomaceous shale, originating from the Lark formation in the North Sea. 
The analysis of the examined properties was conducted based on both the evaluation of 
petrophysical logging data and the interpretation of the laboratory measurements. The 
experimental procedures consisted of solid and liquid displacement methods which 
determined the density and the porosity of the samples. A comparative study between 
the logging data and the cuttings samples was performed in order to improve the quality 
of the assessment. The emerging results can be summarized as follows. 
The grain density was estimated between 2.7 gr/cm3 and 3.0 gr/cm3. The results 
provided a reduced estimate of grain density in comparison to the grain density derived 
from the neutron porosity log. The deviation was attributed to differences of the density 
of water as well as the pressure and temperature contrast between laboratory and in 
situ conditions. 
The porosity was estimated between 38% and 48%. It was derived from the density log 
and the grain density estimation. It was determined that clay content influenced the 
porosity estimate. Furthermore, the degree of saturation also affected the results. 
The bulk density was initially estimated by three separate experimental procedures. The 
most accurate laboratory estimation, provided bulk density results ranging between 2.0 
gr/cm3 and 2.2 gr/cm3. The reasonable deviation between the results and the density 
log was attributed to both the parameters mentioned above, the fluid density and the 
saturation. 
Finally, a final bulk density estimation was derived from porosity and grain density 
estimations discussed above. It demonstrated an excellent correlation to the previously 
examined bulk density estimations. The final bulk density results fluctuate between the 
other results. The density log represents a the maximum limit and the laboratory 
estimation represents a minimum limit respectively. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1: Introduction………………………………………………………………………………9 
Regional Setting………………………………………………………………………………..9 
Geology…………………………………………………………………………………………10 
Stratigraphy…………………………………………………………………………………..11 
Data Description……………………………………………………………………………..13 
Chapter 2: Well Logs…………………………………………………………………………………14 
Gamma Ray……………………………………………………………………………………14 
Resistivity………………………………………………………………………………………17 
Density…………………………………………………………………………………………19 
Neutron porosity……………………………………………………………………………..22 
Chapter 3: Materials & Methodology……………………………………………………………..27 
Mercury displacement………………………………………………………………………27 
Sand displacement I…………………………………………………………………………28 
Sand displacement II………………………………………………………………………..30 
Sand displacement III……………………………………………………………………….30 
Pycnometer…………………………………………………………………………………….31 
NMR……………………………………………………………………………………………..32 
Chapter 4: Results & Discussion………………………………………………………………….33 
Bulk density…………………………………………………………………………………..33 
Grain Density…………………………………………………………………………………45 
Porosity…………………………………………………………………………………………48 
Saturation……………………………………………………………………………………..52 
Final bulk density……………………………………………………………………………56 
Chapter 5: Conclusion………………………………………………………………………………58 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Location of the Tyra field amongst other fields in the Danish North Sea………10 
Figure 2: Tyra field cross section & chalk formation map…………………………………….12 
Figure 3: Gamma Ray Log…………………………………………………………………………..14 
Figure 4: Cuttings lithology curve.………………………………………………………………..15 
Figure 5: Sand – Clay content effect on a formation……………………………………………16 
Figure 6: Gamma ray – density cross plot………………………………………………………..16 
Figure 7: Shale volume percentage curve………………………………………………………..17 
Figure 8: Resistivity Log……………………………………………………………………………..18 
Figure 9: Density Log………………………………………………………………………………...19 
Figure 10: Caliper Log………………………………………………………………………………..21 
Figure 11: Density derived porosity curve……………………………………………………….22 
Figure 12: Neutron porosity Log…………………………………………………………………...24 
Figure 13: Grain density solution curve………………………………………………………….25 
Figure 14: Neutron porosity solution accuracy………………………………………………...26 
Figure 15: Neutron porosity log correction charts……………………………………………..26 
Figure 16: Sand Weight Deviation………………………………………………………………...40 
Figure 17: Lab bulk density comparison………………………………………………………...43 
Figure 18: Bulk density comparison……………………………………………………………...44 
Figure 19: Lab grain density curve………………………………………………………………..47 
Figure 20: Grain density comparison……………………………………………………………..47 
Figure 21: Porosity comparison……………………………………………………………………50 
Figure 22: Density derived porosity solution curve…………………………………………....51 
Figure 23: Density derived porosity comparison……………………………………………….51 
Figure 24: Oil content curve………………………………………………………………………..54 
Figure 25: Oil saturation curve…………………………………………………………………….55 
Figure 26: Bulk density solution curve…………………………………………………………..56 
Figure 27: Final bulk density comparison……………………………………………………….57 
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables 
Table 1.0: Depth correlation of the data………………………………………………………….13 
Table 2.0: Neutron porosity correction parameters……………………………………………24 
Table 4.1: Metal spheres expected volumes……………………………………………………..33 
Table 4.2: Metal spheres calculated volumes……………………………………………………34 
Table 4.3: Mercury displacement output………………………………………………………...34 
Table 4.4: Mercury displacement bulk density results………………………………………..35 
Table 4.5: Metal spheres expected volumes II…………………………………………………..37 
Table 4.6: Metal spheres calculated volumes II…………………………………………………37 
Table 4.7: Sand displacement measurements………………………………………………….38 
Table 4.8: Sand displacement results…………………………………………………………….39 
Table 4.9: Sand material results…………………………………………………………………..40 
Table 4.10: Sand displacement final measurements………………………………………….41 
Table 4.11: Sand displacement final results…………………………………………………….42 
Table 4.12: Pycnometer measurements………………………………………………………….45 
Table 4.13: Pycnometer final results……………………………………………………………...46 
Table 4.14: Laboratory porosity results………………………………………………………….49 
Table 4.15: Nuclear magnetic resonance measurements…………………………………….53 
Table 4.16: Oil content and oil saturation results……………………………………………..54 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Regional Setting 
The Tyra field is a gas condensate field located in the Danish North Sea. The exploration 
of the field occurred in 1968, discovering a layer of wet gas hosted in the regional chalk 
formation. Further exploration revealed an underlying oil layer whose estimated 
reserves revealed a significantly smaller volume of oil compared to the overlying wet gas 
reserves. In a gas condensate reservoir type, it is anticipated that the volume of liquid 
phase will initially increase as the pressure drops due to the production, in a 
phenomenon described as retrograde condensation. This phenomenon will eventually 
reverse when the pressure drops below the retrograde condensation pressure limit. 
When the exploration of the field was completed, it was decided that two separate well 
complexes will be constructed for operational convenience, named Tyra West and Tyra 
East. The development of the project started in 1982 and by the end of 1984 production 
was set to begin. Since then, the Tyra field continuously produced gas until a planned 
short term shutdown which took place in 2019. 
After many years of exploitation, the volume of fluid within the porous medium has been 
steadily diminishing and the fluid pressure has been reducing. So the stresses applied 
on the formation increase, as less fluid contributes to support the overburden pressure. 
Although gas injection can substantially counterbalance the fluid pressure reduction 
and enhance gas production, in the case of the Tyra field the resulting rock compaction 
could not be effectively evaded after many years of production. 
As the phenomenon of rock compaction grows in scale, rock subsidence can be observed 
as a direct result. In several situations, subsidence is not homogeneously distributed 
on the formation, but rather displays its dependance on the regional stresses. It can be 
noted for example, that faults affect the extent of a subsidence area. Most importantly, 
subsidence can negatively affect the production of the wells, so it is thoroughly studied 
when it is recorded. 
In Tyra field, a significant degree of subsidence had been observed which was estimated 
at 5m around the platforms. The fluid transport could possibly be affected. Therefore, it 
was decided that a required redevelopment of the existing infrastructure on the well 
==PAGE:10==
complexes should take place in order to ensure operational integrity. After the scheduled 
restoration project has been recently completed, the Tyra field production is expected to 
resume in the summer of 2023. 
 
Figure 1: Location of the Tyra field amongst other fields in the Danish North Sea 
Source: Reference [4] 
Geology 
The Tyra field locates in the North Sea central graben, as presented in figure 1 above. 
The process of its creation as well as the geological environment of the region will be 
described in the current section. The North Sea central graben lays across an elongated 
area approximately in the middle of the North Sea. It extends from north of the Dutch 
coast until south of the Norwegian coast. 
During Jurassic period, the heat provided by the mantle resulted to an uplift in the 
regional crust. The crust expanded as the provided heating persisted. Eventually, the 
crust thinned out. The process is described by geologists as rifting. By late Jurassic 
period, the whole area of what is now recognised as the North Sea was expanding and 
it was steadily forming. Subsequently, the area began filling with sediments and cooling. 
This process resulted to subsidence and collapse of the regional crust. In the meanwhile, 
==PAGE:11==
many faults were created. The subsided area between two major faults in the middle of 
the North Sea, is described as the North Sea central graben. 
The regional cooling continued and the rifting process decelerated. The crust failed to 
break completely, thus classifying the rifting process as failed rifting. The organic rich 
sediments which were deposited during this period, have composed the source rock of 
hydrocarbon deposits in the region. These sediments have formed sedimentary rocks 
which are described in literature as mudstones. 
During Cretaceous period, the climate was warm and the mean sea level was higher 
than the modern level. Large concentrations of phytoplankton, algae and organic shells 
have been deposited in the North Sea. These sediments have eventually formed the 
calcite rich chalk formations which cover a considerably large area across the North 
Sea. Chalk formations demonstrate high porosity and have composed the reservoir rock 
of hydrocarbon deposits in the region. Moreover, they have effectively blocked the 
migration of hydrocarbons in a further upward direction. 
During Paleogene period, the calcite rich sediments have progressively stopped being 
deposited resulting to the upper limit of the chalk formations in the North Sea. The last 
chalk deposits date back to Danian age. The rifting process also progressively stopped 
during this period as the North Sea obtained its modern shape. The conclusion of rifting 
resulted to further regional cooling and subsidence. In the end, the basin which had 
been formed in the North sea, began filling with clay sediments. Studies have concluded 
that clay deposits dominate the upper layers of the Danish North sea. 
Stratigraphy 
Lark Formation 
The lark formation was formed from the lithification of Paleogene period clay sediments 
mentioned in the geology section above. More accurately, its lower limit dates back to 
Priabonian age of late Paleogene period and its upper limit dates back to Serravallian 
age of mid Neogene period. Its thickness varies across its length, as it becomes more 
thin towards the southwest. 
The lark formation displays a vital importance to the current project, as all the cuttings 
samples originate from that specific formation. The dominant lithology of the formation 
==PAGE:12==
is described as dark brown to grey coloured mudstones. The term “mudstone” is used 
to describe sedimentary rocks comprised of a mixture of clay and silt. Clay refers to clay 
sized silicate minerals. Silt refers to silt sized grains of quartz or feldspar. When a clastic 
sedimentary rock exhibits fissility or else a cleavage plane parallel to its stratification, 
then the term “shale” is used instead of the term “mudstone”. In order to clarify on the 
terminology used on the current project, the term ”shale” will be preferred. 
Chalk Formation 
According to Doyle et al. [1], the chalk formation can be distinguished in four chalk 
units. The upper two units had been formed during Danian age (early Paleogene), while 
the lower two units had been formed during Maastrichtian age (late Cretaceous). The 
uppermost chalk unit labelled as “D1” is described as mudstone of foraminiferal origin. 
This unit is characterized by high effective porosity as a result of many interconnected 
fractures. Underlying is the other Danian chalk unit labelled as “D2”. It is described as 
a chert and mudstone mixture which displays extensive laminations. The unit directly 
below is the top Maastrichtian chalk unit labelled as ”M1”. This unit is also described 
as mudstone and it is characterized by severe fragmentation. The lower unit labelled as 
“M2” is a mudstone which also display high effective porosity. 
 
Figure 2: Tyra field cross section & chalk formation map 
Source: Reference [1] 
From the map of figure 2, further information regarding the hydrocarbons in Tyra field 
can be derived. The gas – oil contact was estimated at approximately 6570 ft. The oil – 
water contact surface displays an inclination towards a west – southwest direction. 
Therefore, the oil thickness fluctuates from around 100 ft. on the eastern area to around 
200 ft. on the western area of the field. The oil – water contact was estimated accordingly 
around 6670 ft. in the northeast and around 6770 ft. in the southwest. Furthermore, 
the total thickness of the chalk formation can be observed across the map. 
==PAGE:13==
Data description 
The data of the project originate from a well labelled as “TEC-7” in the east complex of 
the Tyra field. The dataset has been provided by a combination of two primary sources. 
Firstly, it is comprised of well logs which have been acquired during the drilling process. 
The well logs of gamma ray, resistivity, density, caliper and neutron porosity are 
presented in the next chapter. The correlation between the measured depth of the logs 
and the true vertical depth is presented in the table below. Furthermore, additional data 
regarding the operational parameters during drilling have been collected. Secondly, it is 
comprised of well cuttings which have been also collected during drilling. The samples 
have been stored in labelled bags. Each sample correlates to a depth interval. In Table 
1, the logging data depths are correlated to the labelled samples depths. 
Sample Depth (ft.) 
Measured Depth (m) 
True Vert. Depth (m) 
6900 
2103.12 
1658.46 
6940 
2115.31 
1667.43 
6980 
2127.50 
1676.40 
7000 
2133.60 
1680.89 
7020 
2139.69 
1685.37 
7040 
2145.79 
1689.86 
7060 
2151.89 
1694.35 
7080 
2157.98 
1698.85 
7100 
2164.08 
1703.44 
7120 
2170.17 
1707.82 
7140 
2176.27 
1712.31 
7160 
2182.36 
1716.81 
7200 
2194.56 
1725.79 
7240 
2206.75 
1734.80 
7280 
2218.94 
1743.79 
7320 
2231.13 
1752.80 
7360 
2243.32 
1761.83 
7400 
2255.52 
1770.84 
Table 1: Depth correlation of the data 
Project Objective 
The objective of the project is to provide an accurate assessment of the porosity and the 
density of diatomaceous shale, originating from the Lark formation in the North Sea. 
The analysis of the examined properties will be conducted based on both the evaluation 
of petrophysical logging data and the interpretation of the laboratory measurements. A 
comparison between logs and cuttings will be performed to emphasize their qualitative 
differences. Finally, all the derived conclusions will be discussed. 
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2: Well Logs 
Gamma Ray 
The 1st log curve to be displayed is the gamma ray log. It measures the gamma radiation, 
also described as photons, emitted from the nucleus of an atom when it reaches an 
excited state. The atoms emit radiation of unique ranges of energy. Gamma radiation 
occurs naturally as a result of radioactive decay. That describes the atoms transition 
from a higher energy state to a lower energy state. The most common elements exhibiting 
this behaviour are potassium, thorium and uranium. 
Gamma ray log curve is presented in figure 3. There are two points of interest regarding 
this particular log curve. Firstly, it can be used in cooperation with the cuttings lithology 
curve in order to derive information regarding the lithology of the samples. The term 
“lithology” is used to describe the characteristics of the formation, especially its mineral 
composition and grain size. Secondly, the gamma ray log can be used in order to obtain 
a shale volume percentage curve in response to the log values. 
 
Figure 3: Gamma Ray Log 
At first glance, it can be noted that the majority of the values fluctuate between 45 and 
85 API units. According to literature, the values demonstrate consistency with the limits 
of the typical shale responses of marine environment deposition origins. The trend of 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
35
45
55
65
75
85
95
Depth (ft)
GR (API units)
Gamma Ray Log
==PAGE:15==
the curve can be clearly observed being related to the depth. The log values decrease as 
the depth increases for the examined section of the well. 
The gamma radiation measured in shale formations is directly relevant to the content 
of clay minerals that are contained in their composition. On one hand, clay minerals 
attract cations of radioactive elements because they are naturally negatively charged. 
Traces of thorium for example, can be attached to clay through this process. On the 
other hand, some clay minerals contain potassium in their chemical structure, such as 
the Illite group, which increases the measured radiation. Therefore, as it was suggested 
by the study of Hassan et al. [8], the degree of gamma radiation in shales derives mainly 
from its potassium and thorium contents. 
 
Figure 4: Cuttings lithology curve 
In figure 4, the cuttings lithology plot has been constructed. The lithology data used for 
this plot have been collected from data of the drilling operational parameters. The 
volume percentage of clay can be noticed on the left side and the volume percentage of 
silt on the right side. It can be observed that the trend of the cuttings lithology curve 
correlates to the gamma ray log curve. Evidently, on the shallower section of the well, 
clay sized silicate minerals express the dominant lithology of the section. The opposite 
can be stated on the deeper section of the well, where silt sized grains of quartz express 
the dominant lithology of the section. The transition zone occurs at around 7120 ft. 
depth. On the well section below that zone, the shale rock can be described as “silty 
shale”, while on the upper section it can be described as “muddy shale”. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Depth (ft)
Cuttings lithology (%)
Clay Percentage
Silt Percentage
==PAGE:16==
A comparison between figure 3 and figure 4, can confirm the clay content influence on 
the gamma ray log curve. As it was suggested above, the more clay content contained 
in a formation, the higher will be the measured gamma radiation. In order to examine 
more clearly the resulting contrast, the following figure 5 is displayed. 
 
Figure 5: Sand – Clay content effect on a formation 
Source: Reference [9] 
According to figure 5 provided by Heslop [9], the grain size distribution of a formation 
affect its porosity as well as its weight distribution mechanism, from grain supported to 
mud supported. Undeniably, silt grains are significantly finer in size and smaller in 
volume than sand grains. Therefore a comparison between silt and clay would not 
demonstrate the extensive degree of deviation noticed in figure 5. 
The second application of the gamma ray curve is to obtain a shale volume percentage 
curve. According to Heslop [9], a useful tool to indicate the limits of the shale volume 
curve is the gamma ray – density cross plot. It is presented in figure 6 below. The upper 
limit representing 100% shale, was indicated at 95 API units and the lower limit 
representing 0% shale was indicated at 39 API units. 
 
Figure 6: Gamma ray – density cross plot 
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
90.00
100.00
1.90
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
GR (API units)
Density (gr/cc)
GR / Density cross plot
0% Shale
100% Shale
==PAGE:17==
The resulting shale volume curve will be calculated from the following equation. GRlog 
refers to gamma ray log values, GRmax refers to log values representing 100% shale (clay 
content) and GRmin refers to log values representing 0% shale (clay content). 
𝐺𝑅= 𝐺𝑅𝑙𝑜𝑔−𝐺𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝐺𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝐺𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑛
 (2.1) 
Finally, the resulting curve is presented in the figure 7 below. 
 
Figure 7: Shale volume percentage curve 
Resistivity 
The 2nd log curve to be displayed is the resistivity log. It is based on the electrical 
properties of rocks, specifically their ability to resist electric current. Naturally, rock 
materials behave as electric current insulators and formation water behaves as electric 
current conductor. Therefore, the resistivity log curve is a combination of both of these 
contradicting attributes of a rock formation. 
Water conductivity can be determined by the amount of electrolytes in its composition. 
The most abundant electrolyte in water is chloride but other ions such as sodium are 
most certainly contained as well. Thus, water conductivity depends on its salinity. In 
general, dissolved ions demonstrate great conductivity of electric current. The opposite 
can be stated for other formation fluids, such as hydrocarbons. They behave as electric 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Depth (ft)
Vsh (%)
Volume of shale (%)
==PAGE:18==
current insulators and typically display high values of resistivity. That explains why 
resistivity measurements became part of the traditionally performed techniques used 
for hydrocarbon exploration. 
The resistivity log curve in logarithmic scale is presented in figure 8 below. 
 
Figure 8: Resistivity Log 
The resistivity measured in shale formations is directly relevant to the content of clay 
minerals contained in its composition. The clay minerals behave as electric current 
conductors. Therefore, the log curve is a combination of three parameters other than 
the natural resistivity of the rock material. The parameters can be noted as: water, 
hydrocarbons and clay minerals content in the formation. 
The deep resistivity curve in figure 8 displays lower values than the medium resistivity 
curve. Thus the drilling mud was more resistant than the formation fluid. So, it can be 
concluded that oil based mud was used while drilling this section of the well. 
Furthermore, in correlation to the lithology curve, lower resistivity values could have 
been expected in the upper section of the well where clay minerals are concentrated on 
considerable quantities. However, the trend of the curve fluctuates depending on water 
saturation as well. It is suggested that the salinity of the formation is also a significant 
factor. In conclusion, the resistivity log curve provides a lot of information but a decisive 
interpretation could be performed only in comparison to other log curves. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.5
Depth (ft)
Resistivity (Ohm*m)
Resistivity Log
Res Deep
Res Medium
==PAGE:19==
Density 
The 3rd log curve to be displayed is the density log. It measures the amount of gamma 
radiation scattered back towards the tool after it had been interacted with the formation. 
There are two mechanisms which reduce the amount of gamma radiation received by 
the tool. They are described as “”Compton scattering” and “Photoelectric absorption”. 
Compton scattering occurs when the gamma ray is deflected after its interaction with 
an electron. Photoelectric absorption occurs when the gamma ray is absorbed following 
its interaction. Both mechanisms depend on the energy level of gamma radiation, since 
it reduces with each interaction with matter. Furthermore, they depend on the size of 
an atom, since higher atomic number correlate to more electrons in an atom resulting 
in higher amount of gamma radiation scattered. Therefore, the chemical composition of 
a rock, in a broader term its mineralogy, directly affect gamma radiation measurements 
due to its distinct interactions with the atoms. In conclusion. the bulk density of a 
formation can be estimated as its relation to the tool measurements was based on the 
atoms properties. 
The density log curve is presented in figure 9 below. 
 
Figure 9: Density Log 
The features of the density log curve in figure 9 can be summarized in the following 
three comments. Firstly, a steady sequence of low values of density can be noticed in 
the upper section of the well. It can be suggested that represents the effect of clay on 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
1.90
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Density Log
==PAGE:20==
the log values. Subsequently, density values increase in rapid succession until a peak 
is reached at around 7000 ft. depth. Third and finally, another lower peak can be noticed 
in the deeper section of the well at around 7350 ft. depth. The qualitative evaluation of 
the curve is discussed below. 
Density log values can diverge from the actual bulk density values of the formation. In 
its principle, the logging tool measures the electron density of the formation which 
occasionally might not be equivalent to the bulk density. The equation that describes 
the relation between them is presented as follows. 
𝜌𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑛= 2 𝑍
𝐴∗𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘 (2.2) 
Where ρbulk refers to bulk density, ρelectron refers to electron density, Z is the atomic 
number of an atom and A is the atomic mass of an atom. For most elements the ratio of 
(2Z/A) ≈ 1. Therefore, the electron density measurements can be directly converted to 
the bulk density values displayed on the density log. 
However, it has been established that the gamma radiation interaction with certain 
atoms could not be satisfied by equation 2.2 described above. The most important atoms 
that display this behaviour are hydrogen, sodium and chloride. Regarding the hydrogen 
concentration, a calculated correction is applied on the measurements. Therefore, the 
effect diminishes since the hydrogen interactions are properly accounted for when the 
measurements are converted to bulk density values. 
Yet, a deviation from the actual bulk density values can be discovered in correlation to 
salinity. The deviation increases proportionally to the increase of salinity concentration. 
The resulting density log demonstrate accurate bulk density values for fresh water 
formations, while the salinity concentration remains a possible source of error. 
Another possible source of error that can negatively affect the quality of bulk density log 
values, is described as borehole roughness. It should be noted that gamma radiation 
encounters the drilling mud during its path towards the logging tool. The drilling mud 
naturally displays lower density than the formation fluid. That could be converted to 
lower values of bulk density according to the volume of mud in the borehole. 
Density log values are corrected in relation to the borehole diameter. However a 
formation could collapse during drilling, forming a larger in diameter section of the well 
which is described as a caving. A density log deviation would occur that should be taken 
==PAGE:21==
into consideration. A borehole diameter curve, described as caliper log, is presented in 
figure 10 below in order to evaluate the quality of the bulk density log. 
 
Figure 10: Caliper Log 
It can be observed that the borehole diameter curve progresses smoothly across the 
examined section of the well. It ranges from 13 in. to 14 in.. A tiny section of 
exceptionally high values can be noticed around 7150 ft. depth, which will be taken into 
consideration during the interpretation of results. In general, the quality of the bulk 
density values of the log is not affected by borehole roughness. 
The most important application of the density log curve is to produce a density derived 
porosity curve. The resulting curve will be calculated from the following equation. Where 
φρ is the density derived porosity, ρbulk refers to bulk density log values, ρgrain refers to 
grain density values and ρfluid refers to fluid density values. 
𝜑𝜌= 𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘
𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−𝜌𝑓𝑙𝑢𝑖𝑑
 (2.3) 
An initial estimation of the density derived porosity is presented below. It is necessary 
to clarify that high deviation will probably be observed in the current estimation in 
comparison to the final results. Both values of grain density and fluid density had been 
universally selected for the total length of the well, thus resulting in a significant volume 
of error. Naturally, a well is comprised of a combination of different lithologies across its 
length. Moreover, the salinity of water is a factor that should be taken into consideration. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
12
13
14
15
16
Depth (ft)
Well Diameter (in)
Caliper Log
==PAGE:22==
The higher the salinity concentration, the less accuracy will be provided in the density 
derived porosity curve. 
Constants 
 
Grain density (ρgrain) was suggested at 2.6 gr/cm3. 
 
Fluid density (ρfluid) was suggested at 1.2 gr/cm3. 
Finally, the resulting curve is presented in the figure 11 below. 
 
Figure 11: Density derived porosity curve 
Neutron porosity 
The 4th and final log curve to be displayed is the neutron porosity log. It measures the 
amount of neutrons scattered back towards the tool after it had been interacted with 
the formation. The principles of neutron porosity log are similar to those of density log 
with one fundamental difference. The neutron tool measures neutrons instead of 
photons in the case of the density tool. 
Once again, the energy level of neutrons reduce with each interaction with matter. Some 
interactions reduce very effectively the amount of neutrons received by the tool. Atoms 
of low mass have a larger probability of reducing the neutron energy than heavier atoms. 
A significant example is the hydrogen atom which very efficiently reduces or even 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Depth (ft)
Φ (%)
Density derived porosity
==PAGE:23==
eliminates the neutron energy. That mechanism is described as scattering. Another 
important interaction occur when the neutron is absorbed by the atom. That mechanism 
is described as absorption. The chloride atom in particular displays this behaviour. 
The ratio between the hydrogen concentration of a formation divided by the hydrogen 
concentration of fresh water, is described as the hydrogen index. By measuring the 
hydrogen index of a formation, its porosity can be derived. A formation fully saturated 
with fresh water displays a quantity of hydrogen index equivalent to the porosity of the 
formation. This specific condition describes the only situation where the hydrogen index 
measurements can be directly converted to porosity values. Therefore, it is established 
how hydrogen concentration determines the values of neutron porosity log. 
However, the neutron porosity log dependence on the hydrogen index could negatively 
affect its values on occasions where the hydrogen index diverge from the standard 
conditions. There are some parameters which fluctuate the quantity of hydrogen index 
measurements, resulting in errors on the derived porosity. Therefore the effect of each 
parameter on the hydrogen index should be corrected. The neutron porosity correction 
charts which are presented in figure 15 in the end of the chapter, have been established 
in order to diminish any undesired effects and derive a corrected porosity output. 
The charts utilize an input of the initial uncorrected neutron porosity log and display 
the effect of various parameters on its value. As a result, a corrected net value is 
calculated as the total sum of hydrogen index corrections from the logging tool value. 
Table 2 presents the parameters, their values, as well as the resulting corrections of 
hydrogen index in porosity units (p.u.). More analytically: 
 
The parameters of well diameter, mud weight and mud pressure have been 
collected from the logging data. 
 
The well temperature has been derived from an estimation of the geothermal 
gradient. It is reminded that the true vertical depth of the examined section of 
the well extends from 1658 m to 1771 m. At an average depth of 1715 m, well 
temperature can be estimated at 160oF. 
 
The water salinity has been derived from additional data of the water composition 
of a neighbouring well. It was indicated that the salt content was calculated at 
around 100000 mg/L. 
==PAGE:24==
Well Parameters 
Quantity 
Hydrogen Index 
Correction (p.u.) 
Diameter 
12 in. 
-2 p.u. 
Temperature 
160oF 
+1 p.u. 
Water Salinity 
100000 ppm 
+3 p.u. 
Mud weight 
13 lbm/gal 
+3 p.u. 
Mud pressure 
3000 psi 
-5 p.u. 
Net correction 
 
 0 p.u. 
Table 2: Neutron porosity correction parameters 
It can be concluded that the hydrogen index corrections counterbalance each other on 
this specific scenario. Therefore it can be suggested that the neutron porosity log values 
should not be modified as the net correction of the parameters was calculated at zero 
porosity units. All of the correction charts are presented analytically in figure 15. 
Consequently, the neutron porosity log curve is presented in figure 12 below. 
 
Figure 12: Neutron porosity Log 
At first glance, it can be noted that the majority of the values fluctuate from 40% to 50% 
porosity. The upper section of the well demonstrates higher values of porosity. The same 
section in figure 9, demonstrates lower values of density as it was earlier commented. 
That phenomenon is described as the “shale effect” and it is the result of high clay 
concentration further verified by the cuttings lithology plot in figure 4. Underneath the 
transition zone observed at around 7020 ft. depth, neutron porosity curve progresses 
smoothly across the remaining section of the well. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Depth (ft)
Φ (%)
Neutron Porosity Log
==PAGE:25==
Neutron porosity log was eventually used in order to estimate the grain density of the 
samples. The grain density will be derived as the solution of equation 2.3 below. Setting 
the appropriate parameters is critical for the accuracy of the solution. 
𝜑𝜌= 𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘
𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−𝜌𝑓𝑙𝑢𝑖𝑑
 (2.3) 
As mentioned above the grain density solution will be based on the neutron porosity log 
which is indicated as φρ in the equation. Bulk density (ρbulk) will be derived from the 
density log values and fluid density (ρfluid) will be a constant value derived from water 
composition data of a neighbouring well. Fluid density (ρfluid) was estimated according 
to the dataset at 1.07 gr/cm3. It can be noted that the fluid density value apparently 
deviates from the fresh water density value at 1.00 gr/cm3. 
The resulting grain density solution curve is presented in the figure 13 below. 
 
Figure 13: Grain density solution curve 
A chart exhibiting the accuracy of the solution in regard to neutron porosity log is 
presented in figure 14 below. It can be observed that the neutron porosity solution curve 
is perfectly overlaying the neutron porosity log curve, indicating that the calculated 
solution achieved a validating accuracy. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
2.60
2.70
2.80
2.90
3.00
3.10
3.20
3.30
3.40
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Grain density solution
==PAGE:26==
 
Figure 14: Neutron porosity solution accuracy 
 
Figure 15: Neutron porosity log correction charts 
Source: Reference [20] 
Neutron porosity solution accuracy 
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3: Materials & Methodology 
Mercury displacement 
The objective of the 1st experiment was to measure the volume of the samples and use 
it to calculate the bulk density of the samples. The proposed method was to submerge 
the samples in liquid mercury, better known as the mercury displacement method. The 
method provides some significant advantages over other similar techniques. 
First and most important advantage is that liquid mercury does not invade the porous 
channels of the samples. Therefore, the sample would not be saturated with the liquid 
mercury medium. Furthermore mercury is not chemically reactive with the sample, so 
its properties will remain unaffected. Finally, mercury is a heavy metallic element and 
its buoyancy is notably higher than other substances used for similar displacement 
methods such as water. That property help to amplify the volume differences between 
the samples and make the measurements more distinct. 
The basis of the mercury displacement method is the Archimedes principle. It suggests 
that the buoyant force on a submerged object is equal to the weight of the liquid 
displacement. The same principle is applied on construction of ships and submarines. 
As mentioned above, in the lab experiment the objective is to measure the volume of the 
sample. It can be achieved by calculating the weight of the sample which is equivalent 
to the weight of the fluid displacement when the sample is fully immersed. Moreover, 
when the fluid density is homogenous, the weight is proportional to the volume. 
Method 
The experimental procedure is explained in the following steps. All the laboratory tools 
and the necessary materials used to conduct the experiment are mentioned as well. 
Before the experiment began a support structure was assembled. It was comprised of a 
metallic base supporting a metal arm, parallel to the lab surface, which ended to a metal 
rod. The metal rod was vertical both to the metal arm and to the lab surface. It had a 
small metal cage in its tip, that was used to host the sample and submerge it in the 
liquid mercury medium. The metal arm had a screw in its tip in order to allow the metal 
rod to be constricted or loosened up accordingly. 
==PAGE:28==
Some important features of the structure were handled carefully in order to nullify the 
possibility of interfering with the experiment. The metal arm was kept parallel to the lab 
surface in order to avoid creating any undesirable angle on its connection to the metal 
rod. Subsequently, the metal rod kept vertical to the metal arm and in extent also 
vertical to the lab surface in order to avoid creating any undesirable angle when the 
cage inserted the samples in the liquid mercury medium. 
The liquid mercury was placed in a volumetric container, which was laying on top of a 
scale. The volume of liquid mercury inside the volumetric container, allowed the metal 
cage to be fully submerged without being in contact with any surface of the container. 
Prior to the beginning of the experimental procedure, the metal rod was marked just 
above the metal cage in order to ensure that it will be correctly submerged until the 
designated marker for every measurement of the samples. 
When the experimental setting described above was properly arranged, the metal rod 
was positioned accordingly in order for the metal cage to be submerged without a sample 
inside until the designated marker. The scale was reset in order to nullify the weight of 
the metal cage, marking the beginning of the experiment. 
At first, a calibration of the experiment was conducted using two metal spheres of known 
volumes. Thus, the experiment volume output could be compared to the calculated 
volume of the metal spheres. The objective of the calibration was to observe any possible 
deviation from the expected volume of the spheres and derive conclusions accordingly. 
At last, the weight of the samples was individually measured. Thereafter, each sample 
was submerged into the liquid mercury medium. The weight on the scale was recorded 
and the volume of the sample was calculated. In conclusion, a laboratory spatula was 
used to remove the sample and insert the next one, repeating the process until the 
experiment was completed. 
Sand Displacement I 
The objective of the 2nd experiment was to measure the volume of the samples and use 
it to calculate the bulk density of the samples. It was proposed as an alternative, after 
the mercury displacement method could not produce reasonable results. 
The sand displacement method requires a uniformly graded sand medium to be utilized 
instead of liquid mercury. Some advantages introduced in the mercury displacement 
method can also be applied to the sand displacement method. The solid sand medium 
==PAGE:29==
could not possibly invade the porous space of the samples or chemically react with the 
grains. In conclusion, the sand displacement method implements the principles of 
displacement discussed above. 
Method 
The experimental procedure is explained in the following steps. The design of the 
experiment was comparatively simple in regards to the previous displacement method. 
Therefore, all the laboratory tools and the necessary materials used to conduct the 
experiment can be listed as follows: Sand grains material of 0.6 mm in size, a metal 
sieve, a glass container, a scale, a laboratory spatula and a ruler. 
At first, the sand material was passed through a sieve in order to ensure that the sand 
medium is uniformly graded. It was noticed that the sand material contained several 
sand clusters, possibly being formed either from previous experiments or from humidity 
during its containment. The sand material grain size is 0.6 mm and the selected sieve 
of 1 mm in diameter was able to block all the sand clusters. 
Then, a glass container was selected. The empty container weight was measured first. 
Then the container was filled with water and measured again. The objective was to derive 
the volume of the container as the difference between the two previous measurements 
divided by the water density. 
The glass container was dried completely before progressing further the experimental 
procedure. Afterwards, it was filled with the sand material. A ruler was used at the 
opening surface of the container to push out the overflowing sand grains. The sand 
surface formed a flat line with the container rim. Then, the density of the sand material 
was calculated by subtracting its weight measurement to the empty container weight 
and divided by the volume of the container. 
Before any measurements occurred regarding the cuttings samples, a calibration of the 
experiment was conducted again using three metal spheres. The volumes of the metal 
spheres were known. They were used in comparison to the experimental measurements 
of volume. The sole objective of the calibration was to observe any possible deviation 
from the expected volume of the spheres and derive conclusions accordingly. 
Subsequently, the weight of the samples was individually measured. Thereafter, each 
sample was covered within the solid sand medium. As suggested at the reference paper, 
the samples were not placed close to the bottom or the top of the container, leaving at 
least 1 cm gap between the samples and the container surface. The container was kindly 
==PAGE:30==
shaken and a ruler was used to level the sand surface. The weight on the scale was 
recorded and the weight of the sand displacement was calculated. The mass balance 
equilibrium indicates that the weight of the sample plus the weight of the container filled 
with sand, equals to the total weight containing both the sample and the sand plus the 
weight of the sand displacement. 
Finally, the volume of a sample is equal to the volume of its sand displacement, which 
can be calculated by the ratio between the weight of the sand displacement and the 
density of the sand. Therefore, the bulk density which is the objective of the experiment 
can be derived accordingly. 
Sand Displacement II 
The objective of the 3rd experiment was to measure the impact of the improvement 
suggestions made as the conclusions of the previous experiment. More specifically, to 
investigate on how the packing of the sand material grains affected the results of the 
sand displacement method. The experiment was conducted with the sand material only. 
Measurements with the cuttings samples were not conducted. 
In the current experiment, the volume of the selected container was significantly 
reduced and its opening surface on the top was narrow, in order to minimize the 
previously observed deviation regarding the overflowing sand grains disposal. For each 
measurement, the container was filled with the sand material and its weight was 
recorded. Then, some pressure was applied on top and it was placed on a vibrating table 
for a total time of one minute. It was observed that the sand surface gradually receded 
as a result of shaking. Then, more sand was added on top, more pressure was applied 
and one more minute passed on the vibrating table. The experimental procedure carried 
on for three cycles on each measurement. Finally, its weight was recorded again. 
Sand Displacement III 
The objective of the 4th experiment was to measure the volume of the samples and use 
it to calculate the bulk density of the samples. The overview of the experiment can be 
explained as follows. The same procedure of sand displacement described in the 2nd 
experiment will be used, while simultaneously including the improvements derived from 
the 3rd experiment. To summarize the improvements: A smaller container was selected, 
a vibrating table was used and pressure was applied before each measurement. Also, a 
more accurate estimation of the sand material parameters was derived. 
==PAGE:31==
Pycnometer 
The objective of the 5th experiment was to calculate the grain density of the samples. 
The principles of the experiment are similar to the liquid displacement method described 
above. Theirs differences can be attributed to the method of derivation of the sample 
volume. The water volume in a pycnometer displays two important values: when it is 
only filled with water and when it is filled with water and sample. The subtraction 
between the discussed volumes represent the volume of the sample. Therefore, unlike 
the other methods, the water displacement is not measured in the current method. 
The most essential tool of the experimental procedure is the pycnometer. It is practically 
a glass volumetric container with a stopper. The stopper displays a hollow cylinder in 
the middle across its length, in order to allow any overflowing volume of liquid to be 
discharged. That feature allows the volume of the pycnometer to be a constant value, 
while the weight of the pycnometer fluctuates according to the weight of the materials 
which are placed inside. 
Another important tool utilized in the current experiment is the vacuum chamber. It is 
practically a glass chamber which is sealed on top with a lid also made of glass. It is 
connected to a pump which removes the air from the inside of the chamber, creating a 
low pressure environment. When a liquid sample is placed inside the chamber, the gas 
originated within the liquid will be removed in a process described as degassing. 
Method 
The experimental procedure is explained in the following steps. All the laboratory tools 
and the necessary materials used to conduct the experiment are also mentioned. 
At the first part, the weight of each sample was individually measured, followed by the 
weight of the empty pycnometer. Succeedingly, a mortar and pestle was used in order 
to crush and grind each sample. A fine grained material was produced. Finally, the 
samples were placed in plastic volumetric tubes and were filled with water. All of the 
plastic tubes were placed in the vacuum chamber in order to extract the gas from the 
water. Extra containers filled with water were also added in the remaining space of the 
vacuum chamber. The samples were left to saturate under vacuum for 48 hours. 
At the second part, the weight of the pycnometer filled with degassed water was initially 
measured. The volume of the pycnometer filled with water was calculated from equation 
4.9. Subsequently, the samples were transferred to the pycnometer. The water of the 
==PAGE:32==
volumetric tube was removed first, using a pipette, into an empty container. Then the 
volumetric tube was emptied of the sample that was laying on the bottom using a small 
metal spatula. It was transferred into the pycnometer with a funnel. Next, the water of 
the sample was used to clean the volumetric tube, the spatula and the funnel from 
traces of sample in order to ensure that all of its volume had entered the pycnometer. 
Finally, the pycnometer was filled with the remaining water and the stopper was placed 
on top. The exterior surface of the pycnometer was dried with a towel and the weight on 
the scale was recorded. The volume of the pycnometer filled with water and sample was 
calculated from equation 4.11. In conclusion, the volume of the sample was calculated 
as a subtraction between the described pycnometer volumes. 
Nuclear magnetic resonance 
The nuclear magnetic resonance measurements provided the cumulative porosity total 
fraction which in combination to the estimated bulk volume of the core derived the oil 
volume of the samples. Subsequently, the oil weight of the samples was calculated as 
the product of the oil volume when multiplied by the oil density. 
The parameters selected in the software interface can be summarized as follows: The oil 
density (ρoil) was selected at 0.8 gr/cm3. The core diameter was selected at 2.5 cm and 
the core length was selected at 1 cm. Therefore, the bulk volume of the core was 
calculated at 4.909 cm3. Furthermore, the signal to noise ratio (SNR) was selected at 40 
and the maximum T2 was selected at 40 ms. 
The nuclear magnetic resonance measurements were collected in an excel file and the 
results are presented accordingly in the following chapter. 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4: Results & Discussion 
Bulk density 
In this section, the bulk density results of the experiments are presented and discussed. 
Subsequently, a comparative plot of the results is constructed. Furthermore, their 
correlation to bulk density log curve of figure 9 is analysed. 
Mercury displacement 
Metal spheres 
The results of the two metal spheres used for the calibration of the experiment are 
presented first. The diameter of the spheres was measured and the expected volume 
was calculated as: 
Sample Name 
Diameter (cm) 
Volume (cm3) 
Sphere A 
0.952 
0.452 
Sphere B 
1.799 
3.048 
Table 4.1: Metal spheres expected volumes 
The volume of the spheres was calculated as: 
𝑉= 4
3 ∗𝜋∗𝑟3 = 4
3 ∗𝜋∗(𝑑
2)
3
 𝑐𝑚3 (4.1) 
The density of liquid mercury (ρmercury) which will be a constant value for the duration of 
the experiment was estimated according to literature at 13.595 gr/cm3 at 20oC. 
The spheres were immersed into the liquid mercury medium, their weight was measured 
and the experimental volume was calculated as: 
𝑉𝑠=
𝑊𝐷
𝜌𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑦
 𝑐𝑚3 (4.2) 
Where WD represents the weight of the spheres which is equivalent to the weight of the 
fluid displacement and ρmercury represents the liquid mercury density. The output is 
displayed in table 4.2 below. 
==PAGE:34==
Sample Name 
Weight (gr) 
Volume (cm3) 
Sphere A 
10.9 
0.802 
Sphere B 
45.5 
3.347 
Table 4.2: Metal spheres calculated volumes 
Discussion 
It can be observed that the results demonstrate higher than expected values. Deviation 
was calculated at 0.35 cm3 in the 1st example and 0.35 cm3 in the 2nd example. This 
output was not encouraging and suggest a possible failure in the experimental design 
or during the experimental process. 
Cuttings samples 
The results of mercury displacement method for the cuttings samples are presented 
next. The experimental measurements are displayed on the middle column of the table. 
The cuttings volume was calculated from equation 4.2 and is displayed on the right 
column of the table. 
Sample Name 
Total Weight (gr) 
Volume (cm3) 
6900 
40.4 
2.972 
6940 
39.9 
2.935 
6980 
41.5 
3.053 
7000 
32.4 
2.383 
7020 
35.1 
2.582 
7040 
33.8 
2.486 
7060 
35.2 
2.589 
7080 
37.3 
2.744 
7100 
26.6 
1.957 
7120 
30.2 
2.221 
7140 
29.9 
2.199 
7160 
31.1 
2.288 
7200 
31.7 
2.332 
7240 
38.0 
2.795 
7280 
34.6 
2.545 
7320 
33.7 
2.479 
7360 
38.9 
2.861 
7400 
45.3 
3.332 
Table 4.3: Mercury displacement output 
Finally, the bulk density was derived from the following equation: 
𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= 𝑊𝑠
𝑉𝑠
 ( 𝑔𝑟
𝑐𝑚3) (4.3) 
==PAGE:35==
Where Ws represents the weight of the samples and Vs represents the volume of the 
samples displayed on the right column of table 4.3. The results of bulk density are 
presented in table 4.4 below. 
Sample Name 
Sample Weight (gr) 
Bulk dens. (gr/cm3) 
6900 
7.94 
2.672 
6940 
7.90 
2.692 
6980 
7.95 
2.604 
7000 
7.86 
3.298 
7020 
7.80 
3.021 
7040 
7.89 
3.174 
7060 
7.83 
3.024 
7080 
7.96 
2.901 
7100 
6.41 
3.276 
7120 
7.80 
3.511 
7140 
7.80 
3.547 
7160 
7.92 
3.462 
7200 
7.93 
3.401 
7240 
8.07 
2.887 
7280 
8.01 
3.147 
7320 
7.94 
3.203 
7360 
8.35 
2.918 
7400 
9.67 
2.902 
Table 4.4: Mercury displacement bulk density results 
Discussion 
The results are significantly higher than the typical bulk density values for this type of 
lithology. This suggestion was based on comparable measurements existing in the 
researched literature. Bulk density values are ranging from 2.9 gr/cm3 to 3.5 gr/cm3. 
Therefore it is evident that they could not be utilized in order to obtain a meaningful 
assessment of the bulk density. In conclusion, it was determined that it was necessary 
to derive the bulk density of the samples using some other method. 
The current discussion section, is an attempt to comment on possible failures of the 
experimental design or errors during the experimental process that resulted to this 
specific output. The purpose solely remains to help future research obtain a more 
accurate output when using a well established and fully proven method, which is the 
mercury displacement method. 
At first, it is possible that the metal cage might be occasionally in contact with the 
volumetric container walls. That could possibly contribute to an increase of the weight 
measurement on the scale. The metal rod which had the metal cage on its tip, was kept 
==PAGE:36==
vertical to the container, but possible contact could not be observed due to the dense 
liquid mercury medium. 
Second and most important, the process of removing the sample from the mercury 
medium after each measurement, was not well designed. The laboratory spatula tool 
that was used, could be removing traces of mercury between the sample material which 
was instantly disposed. As the experiment progressed, that could lower a bit the volume 
of mercury, while simultaneously diverging the measurements from the reset scale 
constant. That could possibly contribute to a decrease of the weight measurement on 
the scale. 
Third and last, the scale used (<6 kg) did not display the same accuracy as the initially 
intended scale (<0.65 kg) due to the large amount of dense liquid mercury required to 
submerge the cage until the designated marker. Apart from the experimental design, 
the reference paper suggests that the roughness of the grains may cause higher values 
of grain volume than expected of about +0.1%. That could contribute as well to the 
increased values and the deviation observed regarding the results. 
Sand Displacement I 
Constants 
The values that have remained constant during the experiment are presented first. 
 
Water density (ρw) was estimated according to literature at 0.998 gr/cm3 at 20oC 
 
Empty container weight (Wc) was measured at 60.81 gr 
 
Water filled container weight (Ww) was measured at 124.74 gr 
The volume of the container was calculated as: 
𝑉𝑐= 𝑊𝑤−𝑊𝑐
ρ𝑤
 𝑐𝑚3 (4.4) 
 
Container Volume (Vc) was calculated at 64.06 cm3 
 
Sand filled container weight (Ws) was measured at 157.58 gr 
 
Sand density (ρs) was calculated at 1.511 gr/cm3 
==PAGE:37==
The density of the sand was calculated as: 
ρ𝑠= 𝑊𝑠−𝑊𝑐
V𝑐
 ( 𝑔𝑟
𝑐𝑚3) (4.5) 
Metal Spheres 
The results of the calibration section of the experiment are presented next. The weight 
and the diameter of the spheres were measured and the expected volume was calculated 
using equation 4.1. The output is displayed in table 4.5 below. 
Sample Name 
Weight (gr) 
Diameter (cm) 
Volume (cm3) 
Sphere A 
3.733 
0.934 
0.427 
Sphere B 
13.051 
1.402 
1.443 
Sphere C 
15.757 
1.488 
1.725 
Table 4.5: Metal spheres expected volumes II 
The spheres were placed within the solid sand medium. Then, the weight of the system 
was measured. The weight of the sand displacement and the experimental volume of the 
spheres were derived from the equations explained below. 
The weight of the sand displacement was calculated as: 
𝑊𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙. = 𝑊𝑠+ 𝑊𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒−𝑊𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 (𝑔𝑟) (4.6) 
Where Ws is the weight of the container filled only with sand, Wsample is the weight of the 
sample presented in the left column of table 4.5 and Wtotal is the weight of the container 
filled with sand and sample presented in the left column of table 4.6. 
The volume of a sample is equal to the volume of its sand displacement. Therefore it was 
calculated as: 
𝑉𝑠= 𝑊𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙.
𝜌𝑠
𝑐𝑚3 (4.7) 
Where WDispl. represents the weight of the sand displacement derived from equation 4.6 
and ρs represents the sand density derived from equation 4.5. The results are displayed 
in the following table below. 
Sample Name 
Total Weight (gr) 
Sand Dis. (gr) 
Volume (cm3) 
Sphere A 
160.248 
1.065 
0.705 
Sphere B 
168.067 
2.563 
1.697 
Sphere C 
170.289 
3.048 
2.018 
Table 4.6: Metal spheres calculated volumes II 
==PAGE:38==
Discussion 
It can be suggested that the results continue to demonstrate higher than expected 
values. The deviation has decreased in comparison to the previous experiment and it 
fluctuates around 0.25 cm3. Nevertheless it remains at a high enough degree, that 
further improvements in the experimental procedure are required. 
Cuttings samples 
The measurements of the sand displacement for the cuttings samples are presented 
next. The weight of the samples is displayed in the middle column and the total weight 
of the system is displayed in the right column of the following table. 
Sample Name 
Weight (gr) 
Total Weight (gr) 
6900 
3.990 
158.940 
6940 
4.086 
159.025 
6980 
4.021 
159.087 
7000 
4.136 
159.273 
7020 
3.918 
159.209 
7040 
4.065 
159.294 
7060 
4.075 
159.369 
7080 
3.984 
159.268 
7100 
3.979 
159.211 
7120 
3.970 
159.158 
7140 
4.047 
159.372 
7160 
4.155 
159.435 
7200 
3.919 
159.148 
7240 
3.917 
159.077 
7280 
4.129 
159.193 
7320 
3.987 
159.044 
7360 
4.004 
158.961 
7400 
3.968 
158.912 
Table 4.7: Sand displacement measurements 
The volume of the samples was derived from equations 4.6 & 4.7 which were described 
above. Subsequently, the bulk density was calculated from equation 4.8 as follows: 
𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= 𝑊𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
𝑉𝑠
 ( 𝑔𝑟
𝑐𝑚3) (4.8) 
The results of volume and bulk density are presented in table 4.8 below. 
Sample Name 
Volume (cm3) 
Bulk dens. (gr/cm3) 
6900 
1.741 
2.292 
6940 
1.748 
2.337 
==PAGE:39==
6980 
1.664 
2.416 
7000 
1.617 
2.558 
7020 
1.515 
2.586 
7040 
1.556 
2.612 
7060 
1.513 
2.693 
7080 
1.520 
2.621 
7100 
1.554 
2.560 
7120 
1.583 
2.507 
7140 
1.493 
2.711 
7160 
1.523 
2.729 
7200 
1.556 
2.518 
7240 
1.602 
2.445 
7280 
1.665 
2.479 
7320 
1.670 
2.387 
7360 
1.736 
2.306 
7400 
1.745 
2.274 
Table 4.8: Sand displacement results 
Discussion 
It can be suggested that the results have significantly improved in comparison to the 
previous experiment. Bulk density values are ranging from 2.3 gr/cm3 to 2.7 gr/cm3. 
However they could not be considered an optimal assessment of bulk density. Therefore, 
researching for methods to reduce inaccuracies and improve the experimental 
procedure was essential. The task required to investigate each step of the experiment 
separately and suggest which parameters could lead to a higher degree of uncertainty. 
Eventually, some suggestions could be derived in that regard. These suggestions 
represented possible improvements on the experimental procedure. First of all, the 
opening on the top of the container was large enough to allow a fluctuating amount of 
sand grains to be removed when the ruler flattened the sand surface parallel to the 
container rim. This specific task had not produced the desirable experimental 
repeatability. Therefore, it was decided to be further investigated and improved. 
Secondly, the size of the sand grains (0.6 mm) could be large enough to create air 
pockets between the grains. Sand of lower diameter (0.2 mm) was briefly used, but the 
suggestion was abandoned as it created issues with the laboratory equipment. 
Therefore, it was decided to improve the grains packing by using a vibrating table and 
applying further pressure on top after each filling of the container. All suggestions made 
above, were applied in the laboratory as a new experiment focusing around the grains 
packing of the solid sand material. The results of this procedure are presented in the 
following section. 
==PAGE:40==
Sand Displacement II 
Sand material 
The weight measurements of sand material are presented in table 4.9 below. The column 
on the left display the weight of the sand material before applying pressure or using the 
vibrating table. The middle column display the weight of the sand material after the 
experimental procedure. The column on the right display the calculated sand density, 
derived from equation 4.5 presented above. 
Sand Input Weight (gr) 
Sand Output Weight (gr) 
Sand Density (gr/cm3) 
24.79 
25.23 
1.5153 
24.53 
24.94 
1.4979 
24.74 
25.12 
1.5087 
24.78 
25.19 
1.5129 
24.67 
25.07 
1.5057 
24.61 
25.04 
1.5039 
24.80 
25.16 
1.5111 
24.62 
24.99 
1.5009 
Table 4.9: Sand material results 
A curve displaying the deviation between the sand input and the sand output, that will 
help to quantify the degree of deviation, is presented in figure 16 below. 
 
Figure 16: Sand Weight Deviation 
Discussion 
From figure 16, it can be concluded that 0.4 gr weight on average can be gained from 
better distribution of the grains. This suggestion only applies for the selected container 
and under no circumstances can it be more generic. Furthermore, the calculated 
averages of sand density and sand filled container weight will be used as constant values 
when necessary for the remaining of the project. Both values are presented as follows: 
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Weight (gr)
Sand Weight Deviation 
==PAGE:41==
 
Sand filled container average weight (Ws) was calculated at 25.09 gr 
 
Sand average density (ρs) was calculated at 1.507 gr/cm3 
It can be commented that the sand density value is slightly lower than the previously 
calculated sand density. As it is a significant parameter, it is expected that a more 
accurately estimated value will reduce the degree of deviation. 
Sand Displacement III 
Constants 
The values that have remained constant during the experiment are presented first. 
 
Water density (ρw) was estimated according to literature at 0.998 gr/cm3 at 20oC 
 
Empty container weight (Wc) was measured at 71.47 gr 
 
Water filled container weight (Ww) was measured at 88.09 gr 
 
Container Volume (Vc) was calculated from equation 4.4 at 16.65 cm3 
 
Sand filled container weight (Ws), was derived from the previous experiment and 
was calculated at 25.09 gr 
 
Sand density (ρs), was derived from the previous experiment and was calculated 
at 1.507 gr/cm3 
The measurements of the sand displacement for the well samples are presented next. 
The weight of the samples is displayed in the middle column and the total weight of the 
system is displayed in the right column of the following table. 
Sample Name 
Weight (gr) 
Total Weight (gr) 
6900 
5.08 
26.36 
6940 
5.25 
26.38 
6980 
5.34 
26.45 
7000 
5.41 
26.64 
7020 
5.13 
26.62 
7040 
4.87 
26.56 
7060 
4.81 
26.51 
7080 
5.44 
26.69 
7100 
4.63 
26.36 
7120 
4.35 
26.30 
7140 
4.76 
26.39 
==PAGE:42==
7160 
5.03 
26.44 
7200 
4.38 
26.17 
7240 
4.41 
26.26 
7280 
4.98 
26.46 
7320 
4.73 
26.45 
7360 
4.79 
26.43 
7400 
5.51 
26.62 
Table 4.10: Sand displacement final measurements 
The weight of the sand displacement was calculated using equation 4.6. The volume of 
the sample which is equal to the volume of its sand displacement was calculated 
accordingly using equation 4.7. 
Finally, the bulk density was calculated from equation 4.8 which is presented below. 
𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= 𝑊𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
𝑉𝑠
 ( 𝑔𝑟
𝑐𝑚3) (4.8) 
The final results of volume and bulk density are presented in the following table. 
Sample Name 
Volume (cm3) 
Bulk dens. (gr/cm3) 
6900 
2.530 
2.008 
6940 
2.629 
1.997 
6980 
2.643 
2.021 
7000 
2.563 
2.111 
7020 
2.390 
2.146 
7040 
2.258 
2.157 
7060 
2.251 
2.137 
7080 
2.550 
2.134 
7100 
2.231 
2.075 
7120 
2.085 
2.086 
7140 
2.298 
2.072 
7160 
2.444 
2.059 
7200 
2.191 
1.999 
7240 
2.152 
2.050 
7280 
2.397 
2.078 
7320 
2.238 
2.114 
7360 
2.291 
2.091 
7400 
2.643 
2.085 
Table 4.11: Sand displacement final results 
To conclude about the bulk density results, a comparative plot of the bulk densities that 
have been calculated from the experiments, is presented in figure 17 below. 
==PAGE:43==
 
Figure 17: Lab bulk density comparison 
Discussion 
The final sand displacement results demonstrate lower values of bulk density in 
comparison to the previous experiments. Bulk density values are ranging between 2.0 
gr/cm3 and 2.2 gr/cm3. Their difference to the initial sand displacement results can be 
mainly attributed to better packing of the grains, as well as to more accurate estimation 
of the sand material parameters. The selection of a smaller volume container, also 
contributed as the inaccuracies deriving from the opening surface were significantly 
reduced. The average bulk density deviation between the sand displacement results was 
calculated at around 0.423 gr/cm3. The results of the final experiment will be used when 
necessary as the laboratory bulk density values for the remaining of the project. 
Regarding the initial sand displacement results, the bulk density values are ranging 
from 2.3 gr/cm3 to 2.7 gr/cm3. It can be commented that the values of bulk density 
follow a similar curve sequence as the final results curve except from one section of the 
well. From 7100 ft to 7200 ft, an unexpected peak can be noticed, which can only be 
attributed to experimental error. The similarities between the two sand displacement 
curves would have been more clear if the curve on that section displayed a smooth 
downslope line instead of a peak. 
Regarding the mercury displacement results, no qualitative interpretation can be 
suggested. The bulk density values are ranging from 2.9 gr/cm3 to 3.5 gr/cm3, which is 
beyond the degree of typical values according to the researched literature. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Lab bulk density comparison
Sand Disp. III
Sand Disp. I
Mercury Disp.
==PAGE:44==
Finally, a comparison between the laboratory bulk density and the bulk density log is 
presented in figure 18 below. 
 
Figure 18: Bulk density comparison 
Discussion 
The laboratory results expectingly demonstrate lower values of bulk density than the 
logging tool results. As it was suggested in density log chapter above, the correction 
applied to the measurements of gamma radiation during logging, essentially correlate 
them to bulk density values of a formation fully saturated with fresh water. Additionally, 
an increase from the actual bulk density values can be observed with a proportional 
increase of the salinity of the formation fluid. Therefore a better assessment of bulk 
density can be derived from the density log when the fluid density will be more 
accurately estimated. 
On the contrary, the experimental procedure was based on dry samples. Whether the 
samples have been saturated to a certain extend or not, will be investigated further on 
the saturation section below. A deviation from the actual bulk density values can be 
suggested due to a possible degree of saturation. The difference between the two bulk 
density curves can be attributed to both of the discussed parameters of fluid density 
and saturation. Nevertheless, the trend of the curves reveal a strong correlation between 
them which further validates the accuracy of the laboratory results. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
1.90
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Bulk density comparison
Density Log
Lab bulk density
==PAGE:45==
Grain density 
In this section, the laboratory grain density results are presented and discussed. 
Furthermore, their correlation to the grain density solution derived from the neutron 
porosity log in figure 13 is analysed. 
Pycnometer 
The values that have remained constant during the experiment are presented first. 
 
Water density (ρw) was estimated according to literature at 0.997 gr/cm3 at 25oC. 
 
Empty pycnometer weight (Wc) was measured at 42.82 gr 
 
Water (degassed) filled pycnometer weight (Ww) was measured at 141.90 gr 
The volume of water filled pycnometer was calculated as: 
𝑉𝑤1 = 𝑊𝑤−𝑊𝑐
ρ𝑤
 𝑐𝑚3 (4.9) 
 
Water filled pycnometer volume (Vw1) was calculated at 99.378 cm3 
The measurements of the pycnometer for the cuttings samples are presented next. The 
weight of the samples is displayed in the middle column of table 4.12 below. Then, the 
samples were saturated with degassed water in a vacuum chamber for 48 hours. The 
total weight of the system which was measured last, is displayed in the right column of 
the same table. 
Sample Name 
Weight (gr) 
Total Weight (gr) 
6900 
4.763 
144.944 
6940 
4.994 
145.118 
6980 
5.222 
145.269 
7000 
4.678 
145.027 
7020 
4.697 
144.996 
7040 
4.922 
145.193 
7060 
4.755 
145.072 
7080 
4.523 
144.892 
7100 
5.433 
145.431 
7120 
5.166 
145.298 
7140 
4.989 
145.153 
7160 
5.428 
145.414 
7200 
4.649 
144.835 
7240 
5.071 
145.156 
7280 
4.940 
145.103 
==PAGE:46==
7320 
4.824 
145.039 
7360 
4.851 
145.045 
7400 
5.567 
145.491 
Table 4.12: Pycnometer measurements 
The weight of the water inside the pycnometer was calculated as: 
𝑊𝑤2 = 𝑊𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙−𝑊𝑐−𝑊𝑠 (𝑔𝑟) (4.10) 
Where Wc is the weight of the empty pycnometer, Ws is the weight of the sample and 
Wtotal is the total weight of the pycnometer filled with water and sample. 
The volume of water in the system was calculated as: 
𝑉𝑤2 = 𝑊𝑤2
𝜌𝑤
 𝑐𝑚3 (4.11) 
The volume of the sample can be calculated as a subtraction between the water volume 
when the pycnometer is only filled with water and the water volume when the 
pycnometer is filled with water and sample. The equation is displayed as follows: 
𝑉𝑠= 𝑉𝑤1 −𝑉𝑤2 𝑐𝑚3 (4.12) 
Finally, the grain density was derived from equation 4.8 as described above. 
The final results of volume and grain density are presented in the following table. 
Sample Name 
Volume (cm3) 
Grain dens. (gr/cm3) 
6900 
1.724 
2.763 
6940 
1.781 
2.804 
6980 
1.858 
2.810 
7000 
1.556 
3.007 
7020 
1.606 
2.925 
7040 
1.634 
3.013 
7060 
1.588 
2.995 
7080 
1.535 
2.946 
7100 
1.908 
2.848 
7120 
1.773 
2.913 
7140 
1.741 
2.865 
7160 
1.920 
2.828 
7200 
1.719 
2.704 
7240 
1.820 
2.786 
7280 
1.742 
2.836 
7320 
1.690 
2.855 
7360 
1.711 
2.835 
7400 
1.982 
2.809 
Table 4.13: Pycnometer final results 
==PAGE:47==
The laboratory grain density curve is presented in figure 19 below. 
 
Figure 19: Lab grain density curve 
A comparison between the laboratory grain density curve and the grain density solution 
derived from the neutron porosity log is presented in figure 20 below. 
 
Figure 20: Grain density comparison 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
2.60
2.70
2.80
2.90
3.00
3.10
3.20
3.30
3.40
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Lab grain density
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
2.60
2.70
2.80
2.90
3.00
3.10
3.20
3.30
3.40
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Grain density comparison
Grain density solution
Lab grain density
==PAGE:48==
Discussion 
The pycnometer results demonstrate reasonable values of grain density. The values 
fluctuate from a 2.7 gr/cm3 minimum limit to a 3.0 gr/cm3 maximum limit. The grain 
density curve sequence in figure 19 correlates to the bulk density curve sequence in 
figure 18 across the examined section of the well, which is encouraging regarding the 
accuracy of the results. For example, the maximum grain density is observed at a depth 
interval between 7000 ft. and 7100 ft., which is the same depth interval where the 
maximum bulk density is observed as well. The results of the pycnometer will be used 
when necessary as the laboratory grain density values for the remaining of the project. 
The laboratory results demonstrate a correlation to the grain density solution curve. It 
can be observed that lab grain density curve fluctuates in conformity to the lower limits 
of the grain density solution curve. For the laboratory results, it was expected to display 
lower values than the calculated grain density solution derived from the neutron 
porosity log. The deviation can be attributed to two reasons. 
Firstly, the water density displays contrasting values in comparison. In the laboratory, 
the samples were saturated in degassed fresh water. Water density was estimated at 
0.997 gr/cm3 at 25oC. On the contrary, the water density used for the grain density 
solution was derived from the water composition data. Water density was estimated 
according to the dataset at 1.07 gr/cm3. Therefore, the salinity of water influences the 
observed deviation between the results. 
Secondly, the in situ pressure and temperature conditions of the well are different from 
the laboratory pressure and temperature conditions. It can be briefly noted that 
temperature is inversely proportional to density, while pressure is proportional to 
density. Any deviation resulting from different measuring conditions can be naturally 
transferred to the results. Nevertheless, it can be concluded that the laboratory results 
can be positively assessed. 
Porosity 
In this section, the porosity derived from the laboratory results is initially presented. 
Subsequently, its comparison to the neutron porosity log curve is discussed. Finally, a 
density derived porosity curve is calculated from the grain density results and its 
correlation to the laboratory porosity is analysed. 
==PAGE:49==
The laboratory porosity was derived from equation 2.3, previously presented in the 
density log section. It is as follows: 
𝜑𝜌= 𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘
𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−𝜌𝑓𝑙𝑢𝑖𝑑
 (2.3) 
The laboratory results of bulk density and grain density were used accordingly. 
Regarding fluid density, the familiar constant value of 1.07 gr/cm3 was assigned in 
respect to the acquired data. Table 4.14 with the porosity results is presented below. 
Sample Name 
Porosity (%) 
6900 
46.79 
6940 
48.80 
6980 
47.54 
7000 
48.27 
7020 
43.89 
7040 
45.94 
7060 
46.52 
7080 
45.22 
7100 
45.52 
7120 
46.91 
7140 
46.27 
7160 
45.85 
7200 
45.40 
7240 
45.00 
7280 
44.97 
7320 
43.46 
7360 
44.17 
7400 
43.64 
Table 4.14: Laboratory porosity results 
Discussion 
The laboratory porosity results demonstrate that porous space occupies a significant 
fraction of the formation. The values fluctuate from a minimum limit of 44% in the 
deeper section of the well to a maximum limit of 49% in the shallower section of the 
well. It can be suggested that the laboratory porosity curve in figure 21 below correlates 
to the clay content of the cuttings lithology curve previously discussed in figure 4. The 
porosity curve increases in conformity to the increase of the clay percentage across the 
examined section of the well. Clay exhibits a substantially large surface area which is 
able to maintain more fluid within the porous medium, resulting in higher porosity 
values. Therefore, it can be suggested that clay content influences the porosity values. 
==PAGE:50==
In order to evaluate further the laboratory porosity results, a comparison to the neutron 
porosity log is presented in figure 21 below. 
 
Figure 21: Porosity comparison 
Discussion 
The lab porosity curve correlates remarkably well to the neutron porosity log curve. It 
demonstrates higher values than the average values of the neutron porosity log. As 
mentioned above, lab porosity was derived from dry bulk density laboratory results. Dry 
bulk density exhibits lower values than water saturated bulk density as it was indicated 
in the bulk density comparison section above. Therefore, the numerator of the density 
ratio in equation 2.3 is increased and the laboratory porosity results are proportionally 
increased as well. 
Furthermore, possible inaccuracies in the neutron porosity log were derived from its 
dependence on the hydrogen index measurements, as already discussed above. Even 
though, a net correction method was applied on the neutron porosity log, a possible 
deviation can be still expected at a minor degree. Therefore, an improved assessment of 
porosity can be derived from the density log and the grain density results. 
Subsequently, the density derived porosity solution curve was calculated using equation 
2.3 for one final time. Bulk density (ρbulk) values were derived from the density log, grain 
density (ρgrain) values were derived from the laboratory grain density results and fluid 
density (ρfluid) was derived from the water composition data at 1.07 gr/cm3. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Depth (ft)
Φ (%)
Porosity comparison
Neutron Log
Lab porosity
==PAGE:51==
The resulting density derived porosity solution curve is presented in the figure 22 below. 
 
Figure 22: Density derived porosity solution curve 
Finally, a comparison between the density derived porosity solution curve and the lab 
porosity curve is presented in figure 23 below. 
 
Figure 23: Density derived porosity comparison 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Depth (ft)
Φ (%)
Density derived porosity solution
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Depth (ft)
Φ (%)
Porosity comparison
Porosity solution
Lab porosity
==PAGE:52==
Discussion 
The density derived porosity solution demonstrates lower values than the lab porosity 
results. The values fluctuate between 38% and 48%. It can be noticed that in specific 
sections of the well, such as the section between 6900 ft. and 7000 ft. and the section 
between 7300 ft. and 7400 ft., the porosity curves approach each other. Meanwhile, on 
other sections a wider deviation between the curves occurs. At a first glance, it can be 
suggested that the density derived porosity solution positively correlates to the lab 
porosity results. 
Additionally, it can be commented that both of the density derived porosity curves in 
figure 23 above, share many similarities. First of all, the fluid density value was derived 
from the same constant value in both situations. Secondly, the grain density is defined 
by the laboratory results in both occasions. Therefore, the observed deviation between 
the two porosity curves can be attributed to the bulk density. 
The contrast between lab and log bulk density values was previously discussed. 
However, it should be noted again that a significant parameter influencing the porosity 
curves is none other than saturation. Therefore, it was concluded that the samples 
saturation will be studied in order to be able to derive a final bulk density estimation. 
Saturation 
In this section, the nuclear magnetic resonance measurements are presented and the 
oil volume of the samples is derived. Subsequently, the oil content within the pores of 
the samples is calculated and the oil content curve is constructed. Finally, the oil 
saturation is derived and its curve is presented and discussed. 
Nuclear magnetic resonance 
The measurements are presented in the following table. The oil weight of the samples is 
displayed in the middle column and the oil volume of the samples is displayed in the 
right column. Last, the total weight of the samples is displayed in the left column. 
Sample Name 
Total Weight (gr) 
Oil Weight (gr) 
Oil Volume (cm3) 
6900 
7.94 
0.339 
0.424 
6940 
7.90 
0.352 
0.440 
6980 
7.95 
0.376 
0.469 
7000 
7.86 
0.372 
0.465 
==PAGE:53==
7020 
7.80 
0.346 
0.432 
7040 
7.89 
0.381 
0.476 
7060 
7.83 
0.347 
0.434 
7080 
7.96 
0.328 
0.410 
7100 
6.41 
0.278 
0.348 
7120 
7.80 
0.357 
0.446 
7140 
7.80 
0.329 
0.411 
7160 
7.92 
0.426 
0.533 
7200 
7.93 
0.379 
0.474 
7240 
8.07 
0.314 
0.393 
7280 
8.01 
0.370 
0.463 
7320 
7.94 
0.343 
0.428 
7360 
8.35 
0.316 
0.395 
7400 
9.67 
0.323 
0.404 
Table 4.15: Nuclear magnetic resonance measurements 
The oil volume was derived from the nuclear magnetic resonance cumulative porosity 
total fraction when multiplied by the bulk volume of the core. The oil weight was 
calculated as the product of the oil volume when multiplied by the oil density. 
Naturally, the values of oil density and bulk volume, have remained constant during the 
measurements. The value of oil density (ρoil) was selected at 0.8 gr/cm3. Furthermore, 
the bulk volume of the core was estimated at 4.909 cm3 from the following core inputs. 
The value of the core diameter was selected at 2.5 cm and the value of the core length 
was selected at 1 cm. 
Subsequently, the void ratio (e) was calculated using the lab porosity (φ) results as: 
𝑒=
𝜑
1 −𝜑 (4.13) 
The oil content (wo) was calculated next, as the ratio between the oil weight (mo) and the 
total weight (ms) of the sample, presented in equation 4.14: 
𝑤𝑜= 𝑚𝑜
𝑚𝑠
∗100% (4.14) 
Finally, the oil saturation can be derived from equation 4.15. The numerator is 
comprised of the grain density and the oil content while the denominator is comprised 
of the void ratio and the oil density. It should be mentioned that grain density (ρgrain) 
was derived from the grain density results. 
𝑆𝑜= 𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛∗𝑤𝑜
𝑒∗𝜌𝑜𝑖𝑙
∗100% (4.15) 
==PAGE:54==
The resulting oil content and oil saturation are presented in the following table 4.16. 
Sample Name 
Oil content (%) 
Oil Saturation (%) 
6900 
4.27 
16.76 
6940 
4.46 
16.38 
6980 
4.72 
18.31 
7000 
4.74 
19.08 
7020 
4.44 
20.73 
7040 
4.83 
21.38 
7060 
4.44 
19.09 
7080 
4.12 
18.36 
7100 
4.34 
18.51 
7120 
4.57 
18.84 
7140 
4.22 
17.54 
7160 
5.38 
22.48 
7200 
4.78 
19.44 
7240 
3.90 
16.58 
7280 
4.62 
20.05 
7320 
4.32 
20.03 
7360 
3.78 
16.94 
7400 
3.34 
15.14 
Table 4.16: Oil content and oil saturation results 
The resulting oil content curve is presented in figure 24 below. 
 
Figure 24: Oil content curve 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
Depth (ft)
Oil percentage (%)
Oil content (%) 
==PAGE:55==
Discussion 
The oil content of the samples mainly fluctuates between 4% – 5%, even though values 
below 4% can be observed in the lower section of the well, at around 7300 ft. depth. 
Moreover, a peak of the oil content curve can be noted at the depth interval between 
7100 ft. and 7200 ft. depth, which displays a value marginally above 5%. In order to 
provide a better assessment, the oil saturation curve was constructed. 
Finally, the oil saturation curve is presented in figure 25 below. 
 
Figure 25: Oil saturation curve 
Discussion 
First of all, it is decisively evident that the samples have been saturated with oil to some 
extent. The degree of saturation mainly fluctuates between 16% – 20%, even though at 
some depth intervals, peaks can be noted along the curve with saturation percentages 
above 20%. The saturation results in figure 25 result to the following conclusions. 
It can be suggested that since oil is less dense than water, the estimation of bulk density 
from the experimental procedure display lower values of bulk density than the values it 
would have displayed if the samples were saturated with water. On the contrary, the 
density log display higher values of bulk density, since they were derived from a fully 
saturated formation during the logging procedure. The laboratory degree of saturation 
is significantly lower, thus the bulk density is expected to display lower values as well. 
Therefore, the degree of saturation is affecting the bulk density estimations. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
Depth (ft)
So (%)
Oil saturation (%)
==PAGE:56==
Final bulk density 
In this section, the final bulk density solution is derived from the porosity and the grain 
density results. Then its curve plot is constructed and presented. Finally, a bulk density 
comparison plot is presented and discussed. 
The final bulk density solution was derived from the following equation 4.16 as: 
𝜌𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘= 𝜑∗𝜌𝑓𝑙𝑢𝑖𝑑+ (1 −𝜑) ∗𝜌𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 (4.16) 
Where grain density (ρgrain) values represent the grain density results, porosity (φ) values 
represent the density derived porosity solution results and lastly fluid density (ρfluid) was 
derived from the familiar water composition data constant value at 1.07 gr/cm3. 
The final bulk density solution curve is presented in the figure 26 below. 
 
Figure 26: Bulk density solution curve 
Discussion 
At first glance, the bulk density solution curve in figure 26 displays a similar curve 
sequence to the bulk density log in figure 9. The difference between them can be 
attributed to the degree of saturation. The density log provides an estimate of bulk 
density considering a fully saturated with fresh water formation. The final solution curve 
provides an estimate of bulk density considering that the calculated degree of saturation 
is filled with fresh water. The laboratory results provide an estimate of bulk density 
considering that the calculated degree of saturation is filled with oil. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
1.90
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Bulk density solution
Bulk density solution
==PAGE:57==
Finally, a comparison between the bulk density solution curve and the bulk density 
curves of  the laboratory results and the density log, are presented in figure 27 below. 
 
Figure 27: Final bulk density comparison 
Discussion 
The final bulk density solution curve demonstrates an excellent correlation to the other 
bulk density curves. The curve of the final estimation fluctuates in conformity to the 
other curves, in the deviation space between them. The suggestion made above 
regarding the range of values of the solution curve can be confirmed. In the current 
comparison plot it displays values within the limits set by the other curves. The density 
log curve displays higher values than the solution curve and the laboratory curve 
displays lower values respectively. 
Furthermore, it can be noticed that possible inaccuracies regarding the laboratory 
results become more conspicuous. On the shallower section of the well, at a depth range 
from 6900 ft. to 7000 ft., the laboratory curve display values which overlay the solution 
curve. It can be suggested that the laboratory results overestimated the bulk density 
values on that section. On the contrary, the laboratory curve display values significantly 
lower at a depth interval around 7200 ft. It can be similarly suggested that the laboratory 
results underestimated the bulk density values on that section. Overall, it can be 
concluded that the bulk density solution exhibits an excellent assessment of bulk 
density in comparison. 
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
1.90
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
Depth (ft)
Density (gr/cc)
Final density comparison
Lab bulk density
Bulk density solution
Density Log
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
In the current project, an assessment of the porosity and the density was derived, 
regarding shale rocks originating from the Lark formation in the North Sea. The data 
have been provided from a combination of sources. They consist of petrophysical logging 
data of the well “TEC-7” and samples of cuttings from the same well. The examined 
section of the well, ranges from 6900 ft. to 7400 ft. measured depth. 
Initially, a presentation of the logging data was performed. It included gamma ray, 
resistivity, density, caliper and neutron porosity logs. The evaluation of each well log 
produced separate conclusions regarding the properties of the formation. The emerging 
conclusions can be summarized as follows. 
The gamma ray log was combined with the cuttings lithology curve in figure 4 in order 
to present the dominant lithology of the shale rocks. It was determined that the upper 
section was primarily consisted of clay while the lower section was primarily consisted 
of silt. The transition zone occurred at around 7120 ft. depth. Therefore it was concluded 
that porosity was expected to be higher on the upper section than on the lower section 
of the well. Moreover, a shale volume curve was obtained. 
The resistivity log demonstrated a deviation between deep and medium resistivity 
curves. The medium resistivity curve, which is affected by the drilling mud, was 
confirmed to be more resistive than the deep resistivity curve, which is affected by the 
formation fluid. So, it was determined that oil based mud was used during drilling. 
The density log was examined in regards to the accuracy of its bulk density values. It 
was established that the further a fluid density deviated from the fresh water density, 
the higher the degree of error could be observed in the log. Therefore, salinity was 
determined to be a significant parameter for the qualitative evaluation of the curve. 
Furthermore, a caliper log was presented and it was decided that bulk density was not 
affected by borehole roughness. Finally, a rough estimate of a density derived porosity 
was produced which expectedly displayed high deviation from the final porosity solution. 
The neutron porosity log was evaluated in regards to the effects of several parameters 
which increase the degree of error on the porosity measurements. The net correction of 
the parameters was estimated to be zero. A combination of neutron porosity and density 
logs demonstrated a “shale effect” deviation between them located in the upper section 
==PAGE:59==
of the well, ranging between 6900ft. and 7000 ft. depth. Finally, a grain density solution 
curve was produced based on the neutron porosity log. 
Subsequently, the experimental procedures provided the laboratory assessment of the 
examined properties. The interpretation of the laboratory measurements was performed 
in accordance to the experimental techniques. A comparison between the log curves and 
the laboratory results was considered fundamental to improve the assessment. The 
emerging conclusions can be summarized as follows. 
The laboratory bulk density was estimated by three separate experimental procedures. 
The first method displayed a high degree of deviation in comparison to measurements 
described in the existing literature. Bulk density values were ranging from 2.9 gr/cm3 
to 3.5 gr/cm3. The second method displayed significantly improved results in 
comparison to the previous method. Bulk density values were ranging from 2.3 gr/cm3 
to 2.7 gr/cm3. However, it was decided that it would be beneficial to further explore the 
margin of improvement regarding the experimental procedure. The third method 
produced an accurate estimation of bulk density, the values were ranging between 2.0 
gr/cm3 and 2.2 gr/cm3. The deviation from the results of the second method was 
attributed to better packing of the grains, as well as to an accurate estimation of the 
sand material parameters. 
The comparison between the laboratory results and the density log demonstrated a great 
correlation between them. The reasonable deviation between their curves was attributed 
to both the parameters of fluid density and saturation. It was concluded that a better 
assessment of bulk density could be derived from the density log when the fluid density 
would be assessed more accurately. 
The laboratory grain density was estimated by the pycnometer method. Grain density 
results were ranging from 2.7 gr/cm3 to 3.0 gr/cm3. Its comparison to the grain density 
solution based on the neutron porosity log provided the following suggestions. The 
laboratory results demonstrated lower values than the calculated grain density solution. 
The detected deviation was attributed to differences of the density of water as well as 
the pressure and temperature contrast between laboratory and in situ conditions. 
Succeedingly, a porosity estimation was derived from the laboratory results. The values 
fluctuated between 44% and 49%. It was observed that the porosity curve correlated to 
the cuttings lithology curve, since it fluctuated proportionally to the clay content 
percentage. Therefore, it was determined that clay content influenced porosity values. 
==PAGE:60==
Moreover, a comparison between the laboratory results and the neutron porosity log 
confirmed that the laboratory estimation was higher than the log. The deviation was 
attributed to the differences between the bulk density estimations which were discussed 
above. Therefore a more accurate estimation of porosity can be obtained from the 
combination of the laboratory grain density and the density log. 
The density derived porosity solution provided an accurate estimation of porosity. The 
values fluctuated between 38% and 48%. It was evident that the porosity solution 
demonstrated lower values than the laboratory porosity. The observed deviation was 
once more attributed to the bulk density. However, it was determined that the saturation 
of the samples will be examined before the final bulk density estimation. 
The percentage of oil content within the pores of the samples was derived following the 
results of the nuclear magnetic resonance method regarding the oil volume of the 
samples. Consequently, the oil saturation was calculated. It was determined that the 
samples were saturated with oil. The degree of saturation fluctuated from 16% to 20%. 
Therefore, the assessment of bulk density from the experimental procedure provided a 
reduced estimate of bulk density, since oil is less dense than water. On the opposite 
side, the assessment of bulk density from the density log provided an increased estimate 
of bulk density, since the formation is considered fully saturated with fresh water during 
the derivation of the logging measurements. 
Finally, the final bulk density estimation demonstrated an excellent correlation to the 
previously discussed bulk density curves. The final bulk density curve fluctuates in the 
space between the other curves. The density log curve represents the maximum limit 
and the laboratory curve represents the minimum limit respectively. Furthermore, it 
can be noted that possible inaccuracies regarding the laboratory results were observed 
during the final bulk density comparison. Overall, it can be concluded that the final 
bulk density estimation provides an excellent assessment of bulk density in comparison. 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
Reference List 
[1] M.C. Doyle, J.M. Conlin: “The Tyra Field North Sea Oil and Gas Reservoirs” (1990), 
Volume 2, Pages 47 – 65. 
[2] A.E. Gurevich, G.V. Chilingarian: “Subsidence over producing oil and gas fields, and 
gas leakage to the surface” (1993), Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering, 
Volume 9, Pages 239 – 250. 
[3] G.M. Holm: “Distribution and origin of overpressure in the Central Graben of the 
North Sea” (1998), Volume 70, Pages 123 – 144. 
[4] F. Jakobsen, H. Lindgreen, H.P. Nytoft: “Oil-Impregnated flint in Danian chalk in the 
Tyra field, North Sea central graben” (2014), Journal of Petroleum Geology, Volume 37, 
Pages 43 – 53. 
[5] P. Schiøler, J. Andsbjerg, O.R. Clausen, G. Dam, K. Dybkjær, L. Hamberg, et al.: 
“Lithostratigraphy: Westray Group, the Lark Formation” (2007), Geological Survey of 
Denmark and Greenland Bulletin, Volume 12, Pages 63 – 73. 
[6] A. Al-Rawas, T. Cheema, M. Al-Aghbari: “Geological and Engineering Classification 
Systems of Mudrocks” (2000), Science and Technology, Special Review, Pages 137 – 155. 
[7] R.F.P. Ηardman: “Chalk Reservoirs of the North Sea” (1982), Bulletin of the 
Geological Society of Denmark, Volume 30, Pages 119 – 137. 
[8] M. Hassan, A. Hossin, A. Combaz: “Fundamentals of the differential gamma ray log 
interpretation technique” (1976), Trans. SPWLA 17th Annual Logging Symposium, 
Paper H. 
[9] A. Heslop: “Gamma ray log response of shaly sandstones” (1974), Trans SPWLA 15th 
Annual Logging Symposium, Paper M. 
[10] K. Bhuyan, Q.R. Passey:  “Clay estimation from GR and Neutron porosity logs” 
(1994), SPWLA 35th Annual Logging Symposium. 
[11] T. Matsui, S.G. Park, M.K. Park, S. Matsuura: “Relationship between Electrical 
Resistivity and Physical Properties of Rocks” (2016), Near Surface Geoscience 2016 – 
First Conference on Geophysics for Mineral Exploration and Mining, Pages 1 – 5. 
[12] E.I. Parkhomenko: “Electrical Resistivity of Rocks” (1967), Pages 127 – 129. 
[13] D.V. Ellis: “Formation Porosity Estimation from Density Logs” (2003), Petrophysics, 
Volume 44, Pages 306 – 316. 
[14] J.J. Pickell, J.G. Heacock: “Density logging Geophysics” (1960), Volume 25, Issue 
4, Pages 891 – 904. 
[15] D.V. Ellis, C.R. Case, J.M. Chiaramonte: “Porosity from Neutron Logs I: 
Measurement” (2003), Petrophysics, Volume 44, Pages 383 – 395. 
==PAGE:62==
[16] D.V. Ellis, C.R. Case, J.M. Chiaramonte: “Porosity from Neutron Logs II: 
Interpretation” (2003), Petrophysics, Volume 45, Pages 73 – 86. 
[17] D.V. Ellis: "Neutron Porosity Devices: What Do They Measure?" (1985), SEG Annual 
Meeting, Pages 11 – 17. 
[18] R.H. Widmyer, G.M. Wood: “Evaluation of Porosity Derivation from Neutron Logs” 
(1958), Journal of Petroleum Technology, Volume 10, Pages 57 – 60. 
[19] J. Tittman, H. Sherman, W.A. Nagel, R.F. Alger: “The sidewall epithermal neutron 
porosity log” (1966), Journal of Petroleum Technology, Volume 18, Pages 1351 – 1362. 
[20] Schlumberger: “Log Interpretation Chartbook” (2009), Schlumberger, Houston, TX, 
Page 60. 
[21] L. Weiren, O. Tadai, T. Manabu, D. Sato, et al.: “An Experimental Study on 
Measurement Methods of Bulk Density and Porosity of Rock Samples” (2015), Journal 
of Geoscience and Environment Protection, Volume 3, Pages 72 – 79. 
[22] J.A. Franklin: “Suggest Methods for Determining Water Content, Porosity, Density, 
Absorption and Related Properties and Swelling and Slake-Durability Index Properties” 
(1979), International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Science & Geomechanics 
Abstracts, Volume 16, Pages 141 – 156. 
[23] C. Ridgway, P.A.C. Gane: “Complete determination of bulk density and coating 
porosity” (2007), Coating and Graphic Arts Conference, TAPPI. 1, Pages 35 – 84. 
[24] A.L. Flint, L.E. Flint: “Particle Density Methods of Soil Analysis, Part 4: Physical 
Methods” (2018), U.S. Geological Survey, Pages 229 – 240. 
[25] T. Gupta, M. Yellishetty, T.N. Singh: “Measurement of Bulk volume and Density of 
Irregular Solid Samples by Sand Displacement Method” (2017), Rock Mechanics & Rock 
Engineering, Volume 50, Pages 639 – 645. 
[26] M. Franzini, M. Lezzerini: “A mercury-displacement method for stone bulk-density 
determinations” (2003), European Journal of Mineralogy, Volume 15, Pages 225 – 229. 
[27] M.S. Zamiri, J. Guo, F. Marica, L. Romero-Zerón, B.J. Balcom: “Shale 
Characterization Using T1-T2 Magnetic Resonance Relaxation Correlation Measurement 
at Low and High Magnetic Fields” (2023), Petrophysics, Volume 64, Pages 384 – 401. 
[28] “Density determination by pycnometer” manual written by: RNDr. A. Bucsi, PhD., 
doc. RNDr. J. Gallova, CSc., Ing. J. Oremusova, CSc., prof. RNDr. D. Uhrikova, CSc. 
[29] R.L. Kleinberg, H.J. Vinegar: “NMR Properties of Reservoir Fluids” (1996), The Log 
Analyst, Volume 37, Pages 20 – 32. 
[30] D.V. Ellis, J.M. Singer: “Well Logging for Earth Scientists” (2007), 2nd edition. 
