==PAGE:1==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
1 of 106 
 
 
 
Maria Holst Riise s164125 
Degradation investigation of custom synthesized deuterium labelled polymers 
MASTER THESIS PROJECT 30 ECTS 
 
Submitted August 19th 2023 
Supervisors: Kristoffer Almdal and Nanna B. Hartmann 
 DTU Chemistry and DTU Sustain 
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
2 of 106 
 
Preface and acknowledgements 
This Master thesis is the final project in the Master of Advanced and Applied Chemistry at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU). The project corresponds to 30 ECTS out of the total 120 ECTS in a masters 
program. 
It has been carried out in collaboration between the departments DTU Chemistry and DTU Sustain and has 
been supervised by Professor Kristoffer Almdal and senior scientist Nanna B. Hartmann. 
I would first and foremost like to thank both my supervisors for giving me the opportunity to learn the skills 
and knowledge for a project that combines both chemistry and environmental studies, as well as for 
guiding me through the project with patience and humor.  
I would also like to thank Mariusz Kubus for answering many of my practical questions, Christina Breth 
Nielsen for her help in analyzing data and Kasper Enemark-Rasmussen for assisting me with NMR 
measurements and interpretation. And a special thank you to all the very helpful staff of DTU Chemistry 
that helped me fix, maintain, and save all of the equipment that I had to use during this project.  
Lotte Nielsen from DTU Health tech was also incredibly helpful by taking the time to guide me with size 
exclusion chromatography and MALDI-TOF. 
I would also like to thank the people at DTU Sustain and Lundtofte Mølleåværk that helped me with all the 
preparation for the respirometer tests and technician Jonas Tiedjen Bang for all his assistance. 
Last, but not least, a big thank you to my friends and family that have supported me throughout this 
project. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
3 of 106 
 
Abstract 
One of the significant issues we face today is the environmental impacts caused by plastic due to the great 
global use of plastics and the durability of the material. While some polymers are considered 
biodegradable, many are still problematic as their lifetime far extends the period of use.  
The objective of this project was to perform the initial steps in developing a method that can use deuterium 
labelling of polymers to track degradation. Polyolefins are a type of polymers that are both known to be 
difficult to degrade and that also have the ability to be deuterated in the synthesis process, making them a 
good potential for deuterium labeling that does not require deuterated monomers. 
To facilitate a faster degradation rate than that of the industrial equivalents, the polymers in this project 
were specifically designed to be similar to the naturally occurring compounds, fatty alcohols. 
The results of this project demonstrate that it is possible to synthesize short polybutadiene and 
polyisoprene with monohydroxylated end groups and to saturate monohydroxylated polybutadiene into 
polyethylene without loss of the functional group. 
It was also successfully confirmed that both the short, functionalized polybutadiene and resulting 
polyethylene could biologically degrade 6,32±0,75% and 2,57±0,55% respectively in a 35-day respirometer 
test. The percentage of degradation also suggested that it would indeed be possible to measure the level of 
deuterium in post degradation inoculum with the currently available FT-IR methods.  
The findings of this study lay the foundation for the development of a deuterium labelling of polymer 
method that can be used in combination with mineralization tests. The potential uses for such a method 
are both in waste management, development of new biodegradable polymer materials and estimating the 
fate of the current polymer waste. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
4 of 106 
 
Resumé 
Project objective: 
• 
To synthesize and characterize sets of end-functionalized short chain homopolymers, polystyrene, 
polyisoprene, polybutadiene, and polyethylene.  
• 
Then hydrogenate polymers and accurately characterize all the polymer samples produced.  
• 
Followed by test the level of mineralization of polymers in inoculum using respirometer. 
Setting 
The experimental part of the project was performed in the laboratories of DTU Chemistry under the 
guidance of Kristoffer Almdal and at DTU Sustain under the supervision of Nanna B. Hartmann. 
Report 
The report should contain a coherent description of the data obtained with appropriate visual tools used. 
There should also be a theoretical literature-based part, which should describe: 
• 
The background information of plastic accumulation and degradation issues in nature. 
• 
A comparison of the methods already established to measure the degradation of plastics. 
• 
The theory behind the synthesis of the different types of plastics produced in the project. 
Additionally, the report should contain: 
• 
Experimental method description 
• 
A coherent presentation of all relevant results. 
• 
Discussion of the results and what needs to be investigated in the future. 
• 
Conclusion based on the results obtained. 
Learning objectives specific to this project: 
Gain experience with anionic synthesis of end-functionalized polymers in both theory and practice including 
how to saturate polymers through hydrogenation and deuteriation.  
Obtain an understanding of how respirometer degradation tests of plastics are performed and the pros and 
cons of different types of degradation tests. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
5 of 106 
 
Abbreviations 
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen demand 
BODt - Total Biochemical Oxygen Demand  
COD - Chemical oxygen demand 
CP/MAS - Cross-Polarization Magic-Angle-
Spinning 
CPS - Carboxyl terminated Polystyrene 
DOC - Dissolved organic Carbon 
EO - Ethylene Oxide 
FA - Fatty acids 
FT-IR - Fourier Transformation InfraRed 
GS-MS - Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry 
HDPE - High Density Polyethylene 
LCFA - Long chain fatty acids 
MALDI-TOF - Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption - 
Ionization Time-of-Flight 
MMA – Methyl methacrylate 
Mn – Average Molecular Number 
MP - Microplastic 
Mw – Average Molecular weight 
NaAcetate - Sodium acetate 
NMR - Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
O/N - Overnight 
PBD - Polybutadiene  
PBD-OH - monohydroxylated polybutadiene 
PBT - Polybutylene terephthalate 
PC - Polycarbonate 
PDI - Polymer dispersity index 
PIP - Polyisoprene 
PIP-OH - Monohydroxylated polyisoprene 
PE – Polyethylene 
PE-OH - monohydroxylated Polyethylene 
PET - Polyethylene terephthalate 
PS - Polystyrene 
sBuLi – Sec-butyl lithium  
SEC - Size Exclusion Chromatography  
SO - Styrene Oligomer 
TBC - 4-tert-butylcatechol  
Tg – Glass transition temperature 
ThCO2 - Theoretical Carbon dioxide 
ThOD - Theoretical oxygen demand 
THF  - Tetrahydrofuran 
Tm – Melting temperature 
TOC - Total organic carbon 
TSS - Total Suspended Solid 
Vl - Liquid 
Vtot - Total volume 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
6 of 106 
 
List of figures and tables 
Figures 
Figure 1: The different categories of plastic recycling.
 
Figure 2:Overview of different types of plastic degradation. 
 
Figure 3: Examples of C-C backbone polymers and heteroatomic backbone polymers.
 
Figure 4: Biotic degradation steps of polymers.
 
Figure 5: Biological pathway of fatty acid degradation through beta-oxidation cycle, where the fatty acids 
can be repeatedly shortened by being turned into activated acyls.
 
Figure 6: OxiTop® flask with pressure gauge lid and bottle neck insert for NaOH pellet. The CO2 enters the 
neck insert through open slits in the top.
 
Figure 7: Intrinsic vs. extrinsic labelling is illustrated simplistically with the blue dotted chain as the 
monomers units of a polymer chain and the orange dot indicating where the label is positioned. Intrinsic 
labelling has the label as an inherent part of the polymer chain itself, whereas extrinsic labelling is 
performed by adding an additional label to the polymer.
 
Figure 8: The chemical structure of polystyrene.
 
Figure 9: Chemical structure of polybutadiene isomers.
 
Figure 10: Chemical structure of polyethylene.
 
Figure 11: Polyisoprene isomer structures.
 
Figure 12: General reaction mechanism for activation, propagation and termination of anionic 
polymerization, figure reprinted from Reusch, William et al. (2013)73.
 
Figure 13: Mechanism of termination to add carboxylic acid via CO2 with PS as an example.
 
Figure 14: Possible reaction and side-reactions that can happen when end functionalizing an anionic 
polymerization with carbon dioxide. P=Polymer.
 
Figure 15: Chemical structure of 2 molecules dimerizing due to hydrogen bonding between acid groups.
 
Figure 16: The 3 different types of polymer position isomers.
 
Figure 17: The mechanism of hydrogenation of polyalkenes with a solid metal catalyst, figure reprinted 
from Reusch, William (2013)84.
 
Figure 18: Illustration of the inside of a size exclusion chromatography column with different sizes of 
molecules passing through.
 
Figure 19: Matrix and polymer relative solubility.
 
Figure 20: The cationization agent AgTFA.
 
Figure 21: Overview of the experiments performed in the project.
 
Figure 22: Reaction Scheme for 1,2-dibromoethane reaction with lithium reagent.
 
Figure 23: Set up for filling schlenk flask with CO2.
 
Figure 24: Alumina column attached to a Schlenk flask placed in water bath and with an argon/vacuum line.
 
Figure 25: CPS synthesis reaction set up for the fourth batch, CPS4. PI is short for Pressure indicator.
 
Figure 26: Reaction mechanism for polymerization and functionalization of PIP-OH.
 
Figure 27: Reaction set up for monomer and ethylene oxide preparation for isoprene synthesis. The lines 
are closed off one at a time to distill isoprene from a round bottomed flask, into the flask containing 
dibutyl-magnesium and then finally into the ampoule. Ethylene oxide is moved from the original flask and 
condensed into another ampoule.
 
Figure 28: Reaction mechanism for polymerization and functionalization of monohydroxylated 
polybutadiene.
 
==PAGE:7==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
7 of 106 
 
Figure 29: Set up for transferring 1,3-butadiene and Ethylene Oxide from gas flasks into schlenk flasks, as 
well as purifying 1,3-butadiene.
 
Figure 30: Reaction setup for monohydroxylated polybutadiene synthesis. EO = Ethylene Oxide, PI = 
Pressure indicator.
 
Figure 31: Reaction scheme for hydrogenation of monohydroxylated polybutadiene.
 
Figure 32: At the left is the filter set up, in the middle the set up for polymer and solvent, and at the right 
the autoclave. The polymer-solvent set up is attached with point f to valve B initially and after ended 
reaction, it is switched out by attaching tube m to valve B.
 
Figure 33: IR spectra for CPS1 (black, top) and CPS4 (red, bottom), carbonyl band at 1712,16 cm-1 for CPS1 
and 1706cm-1 for CPS4.
 
Figure 34: Left: H-NMR spectra. Right: 13C-NMR spectra, CPS1 in red and CPS4 in blue.
 
Figure 35: H-NMR spectra of PIP-OH (red) and PIP (blue).
 
Figure 36: H-NMR spectra for PBD-OH.
 
Figure 37: 13C-NMR spectra for PBD-OH is shown in red at the top and CP/MAS 13C-NMR for PE-OH in blue 
at the bottom.
 
Figure 38: SEC chromatogram for the PS standards in the range 1250-96000 g/mol.
 
Figure 39: SEC chromatogram for PIP (blue) and PIP-OH (red).
 
Figure 40: SEC chromatogram for PBD-OH (blue), CPS1 (red), CPS4 (black) and CPS900 (grey).
 
Figure 41: SEC chromatogram of PS oligomers with 2,4,6,7,8 and 9 monomer units.
 
Figure 42: MALDI-TOF spectra for CPS4 (top) marked in green and CPS1 (bottom) marked in green.
 
Figure 43: MALDI-TOF spectra for CPS900 (top) marked in blue and PS 1250 (bottom) marked in green 
standard
 
Figure 44: Overlaid spectra of PS1250 (green), CPS900 (blue) and CPS4 (red) in the range 600-2500 m/z.
 
Figure 45: MALDI-TOF spectra of PBD-OH. The orange arrows indicate the polymer fractions with n number 
of monomer units.
 
Figure 46: MALDI-TOF signal comparison of PIP at the top and PIP-OH at the bottom.
 
Figure 47: The average percentage of mineralization of CPS1 and CPS900 measured over 28 days with 
OxiTop®. CPS1 is shown in black and CPS900 in red with the standard deviation shown in grey and light red 
respectively.
 
Figure 48: The average percentage of mineralization of PE-OH and PBD OH measured over 35 days with 
OxiTop®. PE-OH is shown in black and PBD-OH in red with the standard deviation shown in grey and light 
red respectively.
 
Figure 49: Average percentage of mineralization measured over the last five days of testing for each 
individual bottle and the mean of the measurements for each type of sample. To the left: CPS 900 and 
CPS1, to the right PBD-OH and PE-OH.
 
Figure 50: Comparison of average BOD (mg/mL) measurements for CPS1 (grey), CPS900 (red) and blanks 
(blue), with shaded error bars.
 
Figure 51: MALDI-TOF spectra of PS 1250 standard in green, CPS900 in blue and CPS1 in yellow. The two 
arrows indicate the dimers of CPS1 with 7 and 8 monomers in each of the side of the dimer, i.e.. a total of 
14 or 16 monomer units in the whole dimer. The peaks in between have an uneven number of monomer 
units, meaning that the chains that have created those dimers are of different lengths.
 
Figure 52: Blank average measurement of Biochemical Oxygen Demand in mg/mL with the bottle only 
containing inoculum. Blanks from batch 1 are in black with grey shaded area indicating the standard error 
and Blanks from batch 2 are in red, with pale red indicating standard error.
 
==PAGE:8==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
8 of 106 
 
Figure 53: Comparison of Sodium acetate mineralization in batch 1 and batch 2 of respirometer testing. 
Samples from batch 1 are in black with grey shaded area indicating the standard error and samples from 
batch 2 are in red, with pale red indicating standard error.
 
Figure 54: The physical appearance of the polymers produced in this project, on the surface of water prior 
to degradation testing. From left to right, polystyrene, polyethylene and polybutadiene.
 
Figure 55: IR spectra for CPS1.
 
Figure 56: IR spectra for CPS4.
 
Figure 57: SEC chromatogram for CPS900.
 
Figure 58: SEC chromatogram for CPS1.
 
Figure 59: SEC chromatogram for CPS4.
 
Figure 60: SEC chromatogram for PBD-OH.
 
Figure 61: SEC chromatogram for PIP.
 
Figure 62: SEC chromatogram for PIP-OH.
 
Figure 63: MALDI-TOF for PS 1250 in the range 700-2500 m/z.
 
Figure 64: MALDI-TOF for CPS1 in the range 700-2000 m/z
 
Figure 65: MALDI-TOF for CPS900 in the range 500-3000 m/z.
 
Figure 66: MALDI-TOF for CPS4 in the range 700-2500 m/z.
 
Figure 67: MALDI-TOF for PBD-OH in the range 500-1500 m/z.
 
Figure 68: MALDI-TOF for PIP in the range 500-2000 m/z.
 
Figure 69: MALDI-TOF for PIP-OH in the range 500-2000 m/z.
 
Figure 70: MALDI-TOF for 2 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z.
 
Figure 71: MALDI-TOF for 4 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z.
 
Figure 72: MALDI-TOF for 7 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z.
 
Figure 73: MALDI-TOF for 8 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z.
 
Figure 74: MALDI-TOF for 9 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z.
 
Figure 75: H-NMR for CPS1 with peak detection.
 
Figure 76: 13C-NMR for CPS1 with peak detection.
 
Figure 77: H-NMR spectra for CPS4 with peak detection.
 
Figure 78: 13C-NMR spectra for CPS4 with peak detection.
 
Figure 79: H-NMR spectra for PBD-OH with peak detection and integrals.
 
Figure 80: 13C-NMR spectra for PBD-OH with peak detection
 
Figure 81: Solid state CP/MAS 13C-NMR for PE-OH with peak detection.
 
Figure 82: H-NMR of PIP-OH with peak detection and integrals.
 
Figure 83: 13C-NMR spectra for PIP-OH with peak detection and integrals.
 
Figure 84: H-NMR for PIP with peak detection and integrals.
 
Figure 85: 13C-NMR for PIP with peak detection.
 
Figure 86: Average blank measurements from batch 1 of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the 
standard error.
 
Figure 87: Average blank measurements from batch 2 of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the 
standard error.
 
Figure 88: Average Sodium acetate measurements from batch 1 of respirometer test. The shaded area 
shows the standard error.
 
Figure 89: Average Sodium acetate measurements from batch 2 of respirometer test. The shaded area 
shows the standard error.
 
Figure 90: Average measurements of CPS1 from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard 
error.
 
==PAGE:9==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
9 of 106 
 
Figure 91: Average measurements of CPS900 from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the 
standard error.
 
Figure 92: Average measurements of PBD-OH from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the 
standard error.
 
Figure 93: Average measurements of PE-OH from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard 
error.
 
Figure 94: The largest pieces of PE-OH from each bottle was removed and inspected at the end of the 35-
day respirometer test. The polymer had started out light gray in color, but had brown microbial growth 
attached to the surface by the end of the test.
 
Figure 95: The top layer of liquid in each bottle with PBD-OH was extracted to illustrate the growth of the 
white bacteria colonies forming inside the PBD-OH droplets on the surface of the inoculum after 35 days. 
The bacteria colonies were clearly forming within oily droplets of PBD-OH and not directly in the aqueous 
inoculum.
 
 
Tables 
Table 1: Phylogenetic group division of the core populations in Danish waster water treatment plants 2009-
201153.
 
Table 2: Chain isomer structure of polymer depending on solvent.75, 76
 
Table 3: Hansen Solubility parameters for carbons dioxide in THF and Benzene, values from Hansen 
Solubility Parameters A user’s handbook81.
 
Table 4: Overview of the synthesized polymers, the monomer, inhibitors, inhibitor removal, initiator and 
compound used for termination.
 
Table 5: Amounts of reactants and solvents used for CPS experiments.
 
Table 6: SEC parameters for initial SEC tests for PS standards and PS samples.
 
Table 7: SEC parameters for PS standards and final tests of all samples.
 
Table 8: Retention volumes for the PS standard samples.
 
Table 9: Calibration curve calculations based on the PS standards.
 
Table 10: Overview of the polymer samples, the fit used to calculate for each, the Mn, Mw, Mz, Mp, PDI.
 
Table 11: Overview of all chemicals used throughout the project.
 
Table 12: Overview of the polymer samples, abbreviations and appearance.
 
Table 13: Stock solutions for respirometer test.
 
Table 14: Samples, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH measurements for Batch 1 of 
respirometer test.
 
Table 15: Samples, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH measurements for Batch 2 of 
respirometer test.
 
Table 16: ThOD calculations for Batch 1 of respirometer test.
 
Table 17: ThOD calculations for Batch 2 of OxiTop test.
 
Table 18: Experimental values for monomer, solvents and initiator for the polystyrene syntheses. The 
theoretical heat of reaction and the potential heating if only solvent is considered. The amount of CO2 
needed for functionalization to ensure that it was under 1L.
 
Table 19: Experimental values for monomer, solvents and initiator for the PBD-OH synthesis, as well as the 
amount of dibutyl magnesium used and ethylene oxide.
 
Table 20: Experimental values for monomer, solvents and initiator for the PIP-OH synthesis, as well as the 
amount of dibutyl magnesium used and ethylene oxide. The theoretical heat of reaction and the potential 
heating if only solvent is considered.
 
==PAGE:10==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
10 of 106 
 
Table 21: Values for estimating reaction time of polybutadiene and polyisoprene in n-hexane at different 
temperatures. 89
 
Table 22: Reaction rate estimations for the synthesis of PBD-OH and PIP-OH.
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
11 of 106 
 
1 Content 
 
Preface and acknowledgements
 
Abstract
 
Resumé
 
Abbreviations
 
List of figures and tables
 
Figures
 
Tables
 
1 
Content
 
2 
Introduction
 
2.1 
Objectives
 
2.2 
Hypotheses
 
3 
Literature
 
3.1 
The Plastic problem
 
3.1.1 
Microplastics
 
3.2 
Degradation of plastics
 
3.2.1 
Weathering
 
3.2.2 
Biotic degradation
 
3.2.3 
Degradation tests
 
3.2.4 
Manometric Respirometer test
 
3.3 
Labelling or Doping of polymers
 
3.3.1 
Deuterium detection
 
3.4 
Choice of polymers
 
3.4.1 
Polystyrene
 
3.4.2 
Polybutadiene
 
3.4.3 
Polyethylene
 
3.4.4 
Polyisoprene
 
3.5 
Polymer synthesis
 
3.5.1 
Anionic polymerization 
 
3.5.2 
Functional end termination
 
3.5.3 
Polymer phase transition
 
3.5.4 
CO2 solubility
 
3.5.5 
Hydrogenation and Deuteration
 
3.5.6 
Characterization of short chain polymers
 
==PAGE:12==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
12 of 106 
 
4 
Materials and methods
 
4.1 
Polymer synthesis
 
4.1.1 
Gillman double titration
 
4.1.2 
Solvent drying (THF)
 
4.1.3 
Polystyrene synthesis
 
4.1.4 
Polyisoprene synthesis
 
4.1.5 
Polybutadiene synthesis
 
4.2 
Hydrogenation of polymers
 
4.3 
Characterization of polymers
 
 
 
4.3.2 
FT-IR
 
4.3.3 
Size exclusion Chromatography (SEC)
 
4.3.4 
MALDI TOF
 
4.4 
Biodegradation test preparation
 
5 
Results and data
 
5.1 
Polymer synthesis
 
5.1.1 
FT-IR
 
5.1.2 
NMR
 
5.1.3 
SEC
 
5.1.4 
MALDI-TOF
 
5.2 
Biodegradation results
 
6 
Discussion
 
6.1 
Synthesis results and challenges
 
6.1.1 
Carbonation
 
6.1.2 
Saturation of functionalized polybutadiene
 
6.1.3 
Characterization
 
6.2 
Biodegradation test
 
6.2.1 
Challenges and limitations of respirometer tests
 
6.3 
Deuterium detection
 
7 
Conclusion
 
8 
Future work
 
8.1 
Developing the deuterium labelling test
 
8.2 
Uses for a deuterium labelling test method
 
8.3 
Further considerations
 
==PAGE:13==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
13 of 106 
 
9 
References
 
10 
Appendix
 
10.1 
Chemicals
 
10.2 
FT-IR
 
10.3 
Polymer samples
 
10.4 
SEC chromatograms
 
10.5 
MALDI-TOF
 
 
 
10.5.2 
PBD-OH
 
10.5.3 
PIP and PIP-OH
 
10.5.4 
PS Oligomers
 
10.6 
NMR
 
10.6.1 
CPS1
 
10.6.2 
CPS4
 
10.6.3 
PBD-OH
 
10.6.4 
PE-OH
 
10.6.5 
PIP and PIP-OH
 
10.7 
Biodegradation data
 
10.7.1 
Stock solutions according to OECD 301F
 
10.7.2 
Sample, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH measurement.
 
10.7.3 
Calculated ThOD
 
10.7.4 
Graphs for blank samples, Sodium acetate and polymers
 
10.7.5 
Biofilm and bacteria colonies
 
10.8 
Synthesis additional information
 
10.8.1 
PS synthesis Calculations
 
10.8.2 
PBD synthesis calculations
 
10.8.3 
PIP synthesis calculations
 
10.8.4 
Kinetics and reaction rate
 
10.8.5 
Detailed reaction description of hydrogenation
 
10.8.6 
Oligomer separation
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
14 of 106 
 
2 Introduction 
Plastic is used as a material in just about every sector globally due to their properties that can be adjusted 
to fit a multitude of purposes and uses1. While the durability of plastics makes the materials useful in a wide 
variety of applications, it is also one of the main issues when it comes to getting rid of it. The amount of 
plastic waste generated and spreading in the environment is so large that it has become one of the greatest 
global pollution issues, and the solid plastic waste is also known as white pollution.2,3 
On top of the plastic materials primary way of polluting, plastics also tend to accumulate Persistent, Bio-
accumulative, and Toxic (PBT) compounds over time, which makes the discarded plastics harmful potential 
even greater. 4 
Plastic materials can either degrade through abiotic or biotic pathways, where abiotic includes many 
physical and chemical ways of degradation and biotic include those where microorganisms are key to the 
degradation.5 The biodegradability of many plastics is currently being investigated and depending on the 
degradation method there are large varieties in the estimated degradation times. The lack of standardized 
testing and reporting is problematic as it makes it difficult to compare different types of plastic and because 
some plastics might be deemed as biodegradable even though that is only the case under very specific 
conditions.6  
Some specific strains of bacteria and fungi have been shown to degrade a few of the polymers that were 
otherwise considered non-biodegradable such as PET and PE, and more strains and their respective 
enzymes continue to be identified.7 This indicates that there might be potential for biodegradation that has 
not been explored. There is still a lack of knowledge about how exactly many types of polymers, polyolefins 
in particular, are affected by biotic degradation pathways, and they have long been considered completely 
non-biodegradable. 
To understand the scope of the polymer waste problem, the future fate of the waste and what can 
potentially be expected, it is necessary to be able to accurately understand what will happen to the 
polymers in the environment. What happens to the waste polymers also determines how to deal with the 
current and future waste. It is necessary to have accurate degradation tests when developing and testing 
new biodegradable polymers, exploring recycling options and when making laws and regulations about 
what plastic materials are legal to produce and the waste management of the plastic. 
The current methods for testing degradation of polymers are mostly testing partial degradation, not the full 
mineralization into water and carbon dioxide, which is especially problematic when it comes to measuring 
microplastics. Respirometer tests as a standalone, measure mineralization but does not give information 
about whether the products stem from full degradation or partial degradation, unless the polymer 
completely degrades. This means there is a lack of tests for slow degrading polymers that can confirm that 
the polymers have degraded completely and not just into byproducts. Intrinsic labelling has been explored 
with carbon isotopes and metal doping to cover this gap, but deuterium labelling has not. 
This project is set up to lay the groundwork for exploring deuterium labelling of polymers combined with 
respirometry biotic degradation tests to determine whether mineralization of polyolefins is possible, and if 
it is, at what rate. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
15 of 106 
 
Problem statements 
The main target of this project is to test the initial stages of the development of a method that can be used 
to measure the mineralization of polyolefins through biodegradation. To reach the intended target the 
following considerations have been included: 
• 
Identification of needs in further developments of degradation testing methods for polymers. 
• 
A critical selection of which functionalized short chain polyolefins to be synthesized.  
• 
Which methods of synthesis were feasible within the time and practical constraints of the project. 
• 
Which characterization methods were suitable and possible. 
• 
What are the limitations of the chosen biodegradation test and how do the characteristics of the 
polymer influence the test results. 
2.1 Objectives  
The objective of this project is to perform the initial tests in the development of a method that can 
combine deuterium labeling of polymers with respirometric testing. The combination of such methods 
could be used to give both a quantifiable and qualitative measurement for the mineralization of polymers. 
Polyolefins are used in this project to experimentally explore the feasibility of using respirometry 
degradation tests for these otherwise non-biodegradable polymers. They are also chosen as polybutadiene 
and polyisoprene contain double bonds that can potentially be deuterated in future tests, instead of having 
to perform synthesis with deuterated monomers. 
The polymers in this project are synthesized to be chemically similar to naturally occurring fatty alcohols in 
hopes that it will facilitate easy degradation and thereby be significantly measurable. It is necessary to test 
on polymers that are likely to degrade within the timeframe of the project. 
As of now the standardized respirometer tests are primarily used to confirm whether a polymer is 
completely biodegradable or not, whereas the combination of respirometer degradation and deuterium 
tracking could be used to investigate partially degradable polymers and the degree of mineralization. 
2.2 Hypotheses 
The main hypotheses for this project are as follows: 
• 
It is possible to make short chain carboxylic acid end functionalized carbon backbone polymers 
such as polystyrene, polyisoprene and polybutadiene through anionic polymerization for use as 
model compounds. 
• 
It is possible to saturate the double bonds in these polymers with deuterium or hydrogen without 
damaging or changing the end group functionalization. 
• 
It can be proved that even polymers that are not completely biodegradable still mineralize to some 
extent when exposed to microbial life.  
• 
Although polyolefins do not usually degrade biologically at a measurable rate, with the 
modifications in length and functional end group, the polymers polyisoprene, polybutadiene and 
polyethylene synthesized in this project could theoretically degrade in aqueous environment with 
microbial organisms present, because they are similar in size and chemical composition to fatty 
acids.  
• 
Polystyrene is not expected to degrade measurably regardless of functionalization and length. 
• 
A 28 day respirometer test is sufficient to measure a significant amount of degradation of the 
model compounds. 
==PAGE:16==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
16 of 106 
 
• 
It is possible to measure the amount of deuterium present in the inoculum after degradation, by 
using FT-IR spectroscopy and thereby determine the amount of polymer that has been degraded 
completely into water and carbon dioxide. 
3 Literature 
A literature review was performed to get an overview of the currently available knowledge and describe 
how the already known science can be used to develop new methods and experiments relevant for the 
project. 
This review contains a description of the role of plastic in the environment, the possible natural abiotic and 
biotic degradation of plastics, the different tests methods used to measure degradation as well as the 
theoretical background for many of the necessary experimental considerations and characterization 
methods. 
The sources used are a combination of scientific books, journals, reviews and databases as well as statistical 
databases and all online available articles have been accessed through DTUFindit.  
3.1 The Plastic problem 
Plastic pollution of the environment is a rising problem as the waste streams going in are much greater 
than the natural degradation rate can process and as a result plastic and microplastic waste accumulate 
globally in nature.4  
The amount of plastic produced globally each year continue to rise and was in 2019 was calculated to be 
460 Mt of which only 9 % was recycled, 69% was either incinerated or placed in landfill and an entire 22% 
was mismanaged or uncollected8. The production is estimated to rise to exceed 1 billion tons in 20609. 
The end destination for plastics that are not recycled are to be burnt, be placed in landfill or discarded into 
the environment. While burning discarded plastic material in waste facilities can be performed to minimize 
the release of harmful substances, inefficient burning that often occurs in areas lacking good waste 
infrastructure, can release harmful and carcinogenic substances.10 
The recycling of plastics can be categorized as closed-loop or open-loop, where close-looped is for materials 
that can be recycled in a manner that gives the recycled material close to identical properties as the virgin 
material, whereas open-looped recycling means that the recycled material has different properties and are 
used for different purposes than the virgin material11. 
The majority of all plastic material is recycled mechanically12 through remelting, which is only available for 
thermoplastic, not thermoset plastic i.e., polymers with crosslinking between the polymer chains. Although 
remelting of plastic theoretically can be repeated almost indefinitely, the reality is that the quality of the 
material will degrade with each recycling cycle and time13. Efficient recycling also requires the proper 
infrastructure to collect, sort and clean the plastics10. 
Other recycling options include chemical recycling, where pyrolysis or gasification in particular are used for 
polyolefins11. An overview of the different types of recycling methods is shown in Figure 1. 
==PAGE:17==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
17 of 106 
 
Figure 1: The different categories of plastic recycling. 
As for the plastic that ends up in the environment, it tends to accumulate in waterways and eventually 
reach the ocean. The amount of plastic waste already present in riverways is so large that even if all future 
waste was managed correctly, the leakage of plastic waste into the oceans would continue for decades8. 
The larger pieces will break into smaller microplastics over time and keeping track of the fate of the plastic 
waste in the environment has proven to be difficult.14 
Plastic waste in the environment is a problem for many types of wildlife as plastic material can damage or 
block space in digestive systems and hydrophobic pollutants can be absorbed into the plastic surface and 
thereby ingested by the organisms15.  
It is therefore of great importance to be able to estimate the persistence of plastic materials to get the full 
picture of how plastics will accumulate and the level that natural environments will be exposed to in the 
future. 
3.1.1 Microplastics 
Microplastics (MP) are defined as plastic particles smaller than 5mm and as plastic nanoparticles if less than 
0,1um in size16. The particles come in different forms that can be divided into roughly 5 types; foam, 
fragments, nurdles, microbeads, and fibers17. Microplastics are further categorized as being either primary 
if they were produced in a size of less than 5mm or secondary if the particles originate from larger plastic 
items that have been degraded.18 
It was estimated that microplastics accounted for 12% of the mismanaged plastic waste globally in 20198. 
The problem with microplastics in particular, is that due to the small size, it is very difficult to remove the 
particles from the environment and it also poses difficulties in tracking the amounts of microplastic present 
in the environment.  
Microplastics are a global waste issue and at this point particles have been found even in the most remote 
uninhabited regions such as the artic19. The spread of the microplastics currently in the environment is 
virtually impossible to control, but further pollution can be limited. 
==PAGE:18==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
18 of 106 
 
Methods to remove microplastic that has ended up in natural waterways or the ocean are currently being 
investigated.20 Water treatment facilities for both drinking water and waste water can remove 
microplastics with varying results, depending on the exact methods and can be used to prevent 
microplastics entering the waterways from water treatment facilities.21 Some methods have been 
performed to separate MPs from soil via floatation as the density of the plastic is lower than the soil22. 
It is of high importance and interest to find ways to accurately assess the amounts, types, and fate of 
microplastic in the environment for several reasons. First off, to assess the possible effects on the 
environment and human health, but also to identify the sources of pollution and be able to make policies 
and regulations to prevent further pollution. It is also important to spread public awareness of the issue to 
promote change in both use and waste treatment of plastics. 
3.2 Degradation of plastics 
The durability of polymers is one of the advantages of the material but is problematic in respect to 
pollution. The rate of degradation can be difficult to predict for most polymeric materials, as it depends on 
many different factors, both in regard to the degradation conditions and the properties of the specific 
polymer. Only a select few polymers are created to degrade at specific rates to release compounds within 
the polymer structure in pharmaceuticals or agricultural use.23 
There are 3 categories of polymer degradation; the two major categories are depolymerization and random 
scission, the third category is functional group elimination which only applies to the polymers containing 
functional groups either in the backbone or side chains23,24. Depolymerization is when the polymer chains 
are shortened from the end of the chain by losing a small section at a time, whereas random scission is 
when the polymer chain is cut through somewhere in the middle of the chain.  
The rate and type of degradation of plastics depends on the chemical composition of the backbone and 
functional groups, the length of the polymer, the crystallinity, and the surface area to volume ratio. 
The composition of the backbone determines how easily the chain scission can occur. The molecular weight 
determine how easily depolymerization occurs, as polymers with shorter chain length will degrade more 
rapidly than those with very long chains, as the proportion of possible depolymerization reactions 
happening at the end of the chains Is higher.23  
Surface area is a factor when it comes to any type of degradation that requires interaction between the 
surface of the polymer and the surroundings. High crystallinity results in densely packed polymer chains 
that are less likely to come in contact with other substances that can facilitate the degradation process. A 
study on the degradation of PLA showed that the degradation rate slowed with an increase in crystallinity, 
which was amongst other things due to a lower water diffusion that affected the biodegradability.25 
Plastic degradation can also be separated into abiotic or biotic degradation, and a selection of the subtypes 
of degradation is shown in Figure 2 and are further described in the following sections. 
The combination of biotic and abiotic types that occur in the natural environment are collective known as 
weathering 24. 
==PAGE:19==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
19 of 106 
 
Figure 2:Overview of different types of plastic degradation.  
3.2.1 Weathering 
Natural degradation of polymers, also known as weathering, consists of many different types of 
degradation happening simultaneously and affecting each other, which makes it difficult to replicate in 
standardized laboratory tests. The combination of degradation types that occur in weathering highly varies 
depending on the conditions in a specific area. 
Accelerated weathering conditions are often used in laboratory degradation tests, where the natural 
environment is simulated but with known degradation factors exaggerated. This is necessary as the 
degradation processes can be so slow that studying them in real time under purely natural conditions 
would be unattainable. 
The natural degradation of synthetic polymers and in particular polyolefins in the environment is a very 
slow process. Many studies have been performed to assess the weathering of plastics, but with varying 
results as it depends on both the conditions and at what stage the plastic waste is considered degraded.26 
Polymer can be classified as biodegradable or non-biodegradable depending on whether the polymer can 
be decomposed via microorganisms.27 It is however also necessary to define the exact conditions that make 
biodegradation possible for each type of polymer, as they can for example be biodegradable in compost, 
but not in marine water as is the case for PLA. 28 
The ambiguity over whether a plastic is biodegradable or non-biodegradable that can arise from different 
conditions can make it difficult to compare the many studies of biodegradation of polymers. 
The International Organization of Standardization (ISO) have made several standards for measuring the 
degradation of plastics, to establish criteria for when something is biodegradable or not. ISO 14851 is one 
such test, which is used to measure the ultimate aerobic ultimate aerobic biodegradability of plastic 
materials in an aqueous medium29  and it is also the test used in this project. 
==PAGE:20==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
20 of 106 
 
3.2.1.1 
Abiotic types of degradation and the effects on biotic degradation 
The typical abiotic degradation routes for polymers are considered to be ozonolysis, hydrolysis, oxidation, 
photochemical, thermal and mechanical degradation. 
Ozonolysis, the reaction with ozone, can affect polymer degradation by cleaving double bonds and 
introducing groups containing oxygen30, which in turn makes the polymer more susceptible to other types 
of degradation. As it does not happen evenly all over, it can increase the roughness of the polymer surface, 
which in turn can benefit biofilm formation and increase biotic degradation31.  
Hydrolysis occurs when polymers with heterogenous bonds in  the backbone undergo reactions with 
water31. The heterogenous polymers contain elements that are more prone to react with water than 
carbon. Some examples are Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyurethane (PUR) as shown in Figure 3, 
that contain polyesters or polyamides that can be hydrolyzed.  
Figure 3: Examples of C-C backbone polymers and heteroatomic backbone polymers. 
Oxidation of polymers can happen through thermo-oxidative degradation, photo oxidation or as a part of 
the ozonolysis reaction process. 
Thermal degradation can damage the polymer structure through chain scission, depolymerization or by 
elimination side groups32. The effect of thermal degradation on biotic degradation depends on the Tm of the 
specific polymer. If the Tm is lower than the temperature of possible biotic degradation it can have a large 
contribution to the overall degradation, whereas a high Tm means that no significant thermal degradation 
will take place prior to biotic degradation.31  
Photochemical degradation is more likely to occur if the polymer contains carbonyl groups, as they can 
absorb UV radiation, which can facilitate bonding cleavage.23 UV-radiation causes chain scission of the 
carbon-carbon bonds in the polymer chains. 
Mechanical degradation occurs when polymers fragment, bent, or are otherwise damaged by mechanical 
stresses and strains. It has been shown to speed up the process of biotic degradation of biopolymers, by 
increasing the available surface area 31. 
3.2.2 Biotic degradation 
Biological degradation of polymers can be divided into several steps; first of the long polymer chains can be 
shortened to oligomers, then the oligomers can be divided into monomers and finally the monomers can 
be mineralized into water and CO2 or microbially assimilated as shown in Figure 4. 
==PAGE:21==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
21 of 106 
 
Figure 4: Biotic degradation steps of polymers. 
Biotic degradation of polymers that are unable to enter directly into bacteria occurs in 4 steps; biofilm 
formation, depolymerization, bio assimilation and finally mineralization. 
Some polymers can be degraded by microorganisms through oxidation or hydrolysis reactions.23 Oxidized 
groups on the surface of polymers gives higher hydrophilicity, which in turn makes them easier to degrade 
by microorganisms. 
A long list of bacteria and fungi strains have been connected to the microbial degradation of polyethylene 33 
and several types of bacteria have been shown to be able to metabolize PET and the enzymes responsible 
for the hydrolyzation of the PET backbone have been identified.34 
Recent studies have also found that two strains of bacteria obtained from common soil from 
the  Pseudomonas  and Acinetobacter genus respectively were able to degrade Polystyrene.35 One theory is 
that PE can be degraded biologically through the same metabolic pathways as those bacteria use for 
olefins36. The digestive bacteria of waxworms are also being studied to investigate their potential to 
biodegrade PE37. 
Bacteria can use enzymatic reactions to metabolize bioavailable compounds. Enzymatic reactions with 
synthetic polymers would require that part of the polymer can access the active site in the enzyme, where 
the catalysis of the cleaving reaction would occur. Surrounding the active site is the binding site, which 
determines which size, hydrophobicity and charge of a substrate that can fit. Most enzymes are highly 
selective in which substrate they can interact with.38 
For a polymer to break down enzymatically, it must have a three-dimensional shape that fits into the 
tertiary structure of the binding site as well as suitable polarity and charge. The binding site can have 
different shapes such as a cleft, pocket or tunnel.38 The bulkiness and stiffness of the polymer chain will 
have a large effect on which active sites can be accessed. 
Temperature also influences how biodegradable a polymer is, as it can change the flexibility of polymer 
chains and thermophilic conditions are favorable for degradation39. 
Highly crystalline polymers are generally difficult to degrade enzymatically as the chains are bound so 
tightly that the chains cannot easily access the active sites, whereas amorphous polymers are more likely to 
have individual separate chain ends that can bend into the correct position33. 
3.2.2.1 
Metabolism of naturally occurring fatty acids and fatty alcohols 
One possible route on how microorganisms might degrade polymers, is if the polymers are very similar to 
compounds that the organisms would naturally metabolize. This could either be as fatty acids or fatty 
alcohols, both of which are possible carbon sources for bacteria. One study confirmed the catabolism of 
both in Pseudomonas putida, which is a very common soil bacteria strain40. 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
22 of 106 
 
Fatty acids 
Exogenous fatty acids can be metabolized through different mechanisms in bacteria to be incorporated in 
phospholipid synthesis41 .  
Fatty acids containing less than 6 carbons in the main chain are considered as short fatty acids, between 6-
12 carbon atoms are medium length fatty acids, above 12 are long fatty acids (LCFA)42 and chains with 
above 22 carbon are very long fatty acids (VLCFA)43.  
Naturally occurring fatty acids consist of aliphatic chains with carboxylic acid ends and can be saturated or 
unsaturated and linear or branched. Short chain polymers with carboxylic acid end functionalization and 
only carbon backbone would be chemically similar to the saturated, branched LCFA. Functionalized 
polyisoprene in particular is very similar to some isoprenoid fatty acids. 
The degree of saturation in naturally occurring fatty acids changes how easily the fatty acids are 
metabolized in microorganisms. Fatty acids containing a few double bonds will be more readily 
biodegradable compared to a completely saturated fatty acid, as unsaturated fatty acids require several 
additional enzymes for the degradation process. Which specific enzymes depends on the placement of the 
double bonds.44 
Although enzymatic degradation of polymers can occur outside of the microorganisms through exogenous 
enzymes as described in the previous section, it is also theoretically possible that parts of the degradation 
can take place intracellular.  
The transportation and degradation of LCFAs has been studied in Escherichia Coli (E.Coli), which is a 
common type of bacteria present in sewage wastewater and would also be very likely to come into contact 
with polymers discarded in nature. The metabolism of fatty acid in E.Coli has been studied for more than 50 
years42, which means that it is possible to give a qualified estimate of how this particular bacteria might 
catabolize polymers similar to fatty acids. 
The LCFAs that E.Coli  naturally degrade are activated and then moved across the bacteria membrane with 
transportation enzymes 45. As mentioned in section 3.2.2 biotic degradation of polymers will usually occur 
through enzymatic reactions happening outside of the bacteria cells. If polymers could be degraded via 
some of the enzymes responsible for fatty acid catabolism, it is unknown whether it would occur inside or 
outside of the cells as transportation across the membrane poses an obstacle. 
Saturated FAs are degraded through beta-oxidation by first activating them to fatty acyl CoA, then cleaving 
at the beta carbon to make shorter fatty acids, by shortening the original by 2 carbons in each cycle.46 The 
reaction occurs at the functional acid group of the fatty acid which illustrates the importance of why end 
functionalized polymers might have a better chance of being degraded biologically compared to the 
unfunctionalized. 
 
 
Figure 5: Biological pathway of fatty acid degradation through beta-oxidation cycle, where the fatty acids can be repeatedly 
shortened by being turned into activated acyls. 
==PAGE:23==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
23 of 106 
 
Fatty alcohols 
Fatty alcohols are very similar to fatty acids, the only difference being that the end group is a primary 
alcohol instead of a fatty acid. They are either oily liquids or solid waxes, and appear naturally both 
bacteria, plants and animals, for example as plant wax and beeswax.47 
Fatty alcohols can be oxidized into fatty acids naturally through the fatty alcohol cycle and are also 
produced from fatty acids biologically. Fatty acids have a variety of biological uses and also act as 
intermediates in several biological processes48. 
Fatty alcohols are proven to be readily biodegradable up to a length of C18 and are generally considered 
non-toxic49,50.  
3.2.3 Degradation tests 
Many different techniques have been developed to test the degradation of polymers. As opposed to field 
studies of polymer degradation, controlled field studies or laboratory-controlled studies can be tweaked to 
test which specific possible factors might speed up or slow down the processes, both in terms of conditions 
and polymer characteristics. To obtain information on the potential degradability of polymers it can be 
necessary to speed up the degradation process because the natural degradation is oftentimes a yearlong 
slow process, which is untenable to perform. 
The majority of the tests for polymer degradation, measure partial degradation, which happens by cleavage 
or structure change of the backbone or the loss of sidechains.  
Partial degradation techniques include testing changes in surface topography, molecular weight 
distribution, chemical structure or mechanical properties, or size of particles or mass 51.  
The partial degradation test give insight into many of the degradation processes that can occur, but are 
limited in that the tests cannot tell what compounds are formed in the final stages of degradation when the 
polymers or by-product compounds get below a certain size. 
There have also been developed some very specific degradation tests for individual polymers, that are not 
widely applicable yet. For PET degraded enzymatically, it is possible to test the amount of backbone ester 
bonds being cleaved, by estimating the number of enzymatic reactions. This type of test only gives 
information about the cleaving of polymer into monomer units and is therefore also a partial degradation 
test.  
Respirometric analysis, the method described in the following section, can be used to test for full 
degradation of polymers i.e. mineralization into CO2 and water. The OxiTop® respirometer is one such way 
of a measuring system used to estimate the amount of polymer that has been degraded to CO2 and water 
but is limited in the way that it does not give specific information about partially degraded polymers. 
Respirometric analysis is just one type of test that can be used to understand the biological degradation of 
plastics in the environment. Other types of tests that investigate natural degradation pathways of plastics 
are accelerated photo-ageing, tests in aqueous conditions, or in soil. Comparison of the different types can 
show under what conditions the polymers would be expected to degrade fastest. Polyethylene for example 
has been shown to degrade more rapidly in sea water than in soil in several studies33. 
3.2.4 Manometric Respirometer test 
Respirometer tests measure the total Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) from organisms in a solution by 
pressure change. The oxygen demand is measured indirectly by measuring the production of CO2. The tests 
==PAGE:24==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
24 of 106 
 
flasks contain sodium hydroxide pellets stored in the neck of the bottle as shown in Figure 6, that react with 
the produced CO2 as shown in equation 
). The removal of CO2 from the gas phase causes a drop in 
pressure inside the flask. 
 
2𝑁𝑎𝑂𝐻(𝑠) + 𝐶𝑂2(𝑔) →𝑁𝑎2𝐶𝑂3(𝑎𝑞) + 𝐻2𝑂(𝑙) 
 
The drop in pressure is converted to BOD by using the equation below, where Vtot is the total volume of the 
bottle, Vl is the sample volume, T is the measuring temperature, T0 is 0⁰C, R is the gas constant, M(O2) is the 
molecular weight in oxygen given in mg/mol and p(O2) is the difference in partial pressure for oxygen. 
 
𝐵𝑂𝐷= 𝑚𝑔/𝑚𝑜𝑙
𝑅∙𝑇(𝐾) ∙(𝑉𝑡𝑜𝑡−𝑉𝑙
𝑉𝑙
+ 𝑇
𝑇0
) ∙𝛥𝑝(𝑂2) 
Figure 6: OxiTop® flask with pressure gauge lid and bottle neck insert for NaOH pellet. The CO2 enters the neck insert through open 
slits in the top. 
The amount of degradation is calculated based on the theoretical oxygen demand (ThOD) of full conversion 
vs. the actual oxygen demand. The ThOD is calculated based on the element composition of the tested 
compound, i.e. how much O2 would be needed for respiration to convert the given compound fully.  
The test performed in this project were based on the ISO 14851 method with OECD 301F standard media, 
which is a method using manometric respirometry to measure oxygen consumption.52 
The microbial component used in OECD 301F comes from activated sludge water collected at wastewater 
facilities. There is no specified composition of microorganic life that should be present or tested for, which 
limits the replicability of the test somewhat in cases where a specific type of bacteria may be crucial for 
which compounds are degraded. 
However, the composition of bacteria in Danish wastewater treatment plants has been studied thoroughly 
in the MiDas-DK project and although there are individual differences from one water treatment facility to 
another, the majority of the species composition is consistent across both the country, seasons and over 
several years of time.53 
The phylogenetic groups present in the core populations, that is bacteria with a ≥90% occurrence in the 
wastewater treatment plants and minimum abundance of 0,25%, were as shown in Table 1. 
==PAGE:25==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
25 of 106 
 
Table 1: Phylogenetic group division of the core populations in Danish waster water treatment plants 2009-201153. 
Phylogenetic group 
Percentage % 
Actinobacteria 
36 
Betaproteobacteria 
23 
Chloroflexi 
9 
Bacteriodetes 
6 
Candidate division TM7 
5 
Gammaproteobacteria 
4 
Nitrospira 
3 
Alphaproteobacteria 
2 
Firmicutes 
2 
Other 
9 
 
One limitation of respirometer measurements is that it is not possible to separate which carbon dioxide 
and water is formed from degraded polymers and which is formed through other processes. 
3.3 Labelling or Doping of polymers 
Labelling of polymers has been used to study the degradation of polymers, the transportation of 
nanoparticles and as a way to identify the type of plastic. 54,55 
Since neither the partial degradation nor the full degradation tests can give the entire picture of what 
exactly happens to polymers step by step, it is useful to combine the full degradation tests with labelled 
polymers. The methods combined can ensure that the polymer is fully degraded and the labels can be used 
to confirm that it is indeed the actual polymer that has been degraded. 
The different types of labelling of polymers include metal doping55 and fluorophore labels54 extrinsic to the 
polymer backbone and intrinsic labelling with 13C isotopes as a part of the backbone 51. It should 
theoretically also be possible to synthesize polymers with intrinsic deuterium in place of some or all 
hydrogens. 
Figure 7: Intrinsic vs. extrinsic labelling is illustrated simplistically with the blue dotted chain as the monomers units of a polymer 
chain and the orange dot indicating where the label is positioned. Intrinsic labelling has the label as an inherent part of the polymer 
chain itself, whereas extrinsic labelling is performed by adding an additional label to the polymer. 
The extrinsic labelling with metal doping and fluorophores works by attaching either the metal or 
fluorophore to the polymer as illustrated in Figure 7 and tracking the metal or fluorophore.  
Metal doping with palladium has been used to track nanoparticles of polyacrylonitrile55 and fluorophores 
have been used to track ingestion of polystyrene microbeads by Daphnia Magna54. 
The major shortcoming of extrinsic labelling for degradation testing is that the polymer chain might be 
more durable than the attachment of extrinsic label. For metal doping it was noted that there was some 
leaching of the rare metal55 and in the study with fluorophore detection and there were problems with 
==PAGE:26==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
26 of 106 
 
premature quenching of fluorophore56. If the compound to be detected is lost before the polymer has 
actually degraded it defeats the point of using extrinsic labelling for degradation studies.  
As for labelling polymers with 13C, by incorporating the isotope in the polymer chain, it is guaranteed that 
the polymer degradation and the detection of 13C are connected. Older tests with 14C were even more 
complicated as all equipment and work processes have to be suitable for working with radioactive 
substances. 
Deuterium marking polymers as another way of intrinsically labelling has been suggested, but not tested 
yet. Deuterium labelling would be a cheaper and simpler alternative to synthesize compared to labelling 
with 13C, but the possible drawback are the uncertainties of the exact details of how to detect the 
deuterium after the degradation. 
3.3.1 Deuterium detection 
Deuterium, 𝐻
1
2 , is a stable hydrogen isotope with a molecular mass of 2,014 g/mol compared to hydrogen 
that has a molecular mass of 1,008 g/mol. The natural abundance of hydrogen and deuterium is 99,985% 
hydrogen and 0,015% deuterium57. 
If polymer degradation was to be detected through deuterium, the detection would need to be performed 
into stages; at first to confirm the amount of deuterium the synthesized polymer contained and second to 
measure the amount of heavy water produced after degradation. Depending on the initial percentage of 
deuterium in a polymer the heavy water after degradation would either be D2O or HDO. 
The choice of detection method of deuterium depends on the relative amount deuterium in a sample and 
the other components of the sample.  
One method of distinguishing between the isotopes is through their mass by using mass spectrometry, such 
as GS-MS 58. Deuterium and hydrogen can also be distinguished in H-NMR, as their spin is different and only 
hydrogen is detectable through H-NMR59. The method could be used to estimate the amount of deuterium 
in a synthesized polymer but would not be suitable for detecting the trace amounts of heavy water 
produced after degradation. 
FT-IR techniques have been used to detect the deuterium-hydrogen ratio in ice caps60 and would be the 
first method of choice to measure trace amounts of semi heavy water, HDO, in polymer degradation 
samples. 
3.4 Choice of polymers 
The following section is background information about the polymers synthesized and investigated in this 
project. This is general information about the polymer types. The polymers produced in this project will 
vary somewhat from industrial equivalents as they do not have the same length, isomeric type or 
functionality.  
All of the polymers in this project are possible to synthesize directly through anionic polymerization, except 
for polyethylene that can be synthesized by saturation of polybutadiene. 
3.4.1 Polystyrene 
Polystyrene (PS) is one of the most produced polymers globally at 15,61 million tons in 2021, which 
accounted for 7% of the total amount of resins produced in 2019.61 Polystyrene is synthesized through 
anionic polymerization from styrene as shown in Figure 8. 
==PAGE:27==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
27 of 106 
 
Figure 8: The chemical structure of polystyrene. 
PS has a wide array of applications varying from packaging, to medical equipment and is especially known 
as polystyrene foam used for disposable food containers.62 
Estimates for degradation time in natural environments range from 1063 to 900 years64 depending on the 
specific type of polystyrene and conditions. PS has been considered non-biodegradable for a long time, but 
in recent years studies have identified bacteria strains that were able to at least partially digest PS. 65 
It is not expected that PS will break down biologically to a measurable degree in a 28 days respirometer 
test, such as the tests performed in this project, even with modifications, due its bulky shape. It was chosen 
to synthesize to optimize and troubleshoot the synthesis method for the other anionic polymerizations. 
3.4.2 Polybutadiene 
Polybutadiene (PBD), also known as synthetic rubber, is a type of polyolefin. The main industrial use of PBD 
is as vulcanized rubber in the shape of tires. It’s currently estimated that 1000 million tires reach the end of 
their use every year66. 
The synthesis conditions of PBD can be adjusted to give the different isomer combination that are shown in 
Figure 9. 
Figure 9: Chemical structure of polybutadiene isomers. 
The ratio and specific combination of isomers affects the crystallinity and Tg, where 1,4-cis and 1,4-trans 
PDB both have Tg of approximately -107⁰C, whereas 1,2-vinyl PBD has a Tg of approximately 0⁰C67. PBD 
containing high amounts of 1,2-vinyl isomers are significantly stiffer than PBD with majorly 1,4 isomers, so 
the 2 types are used for different purposes. 
3.4.3 Polyethylene 
Polyethylene (PE) is the most common plastic and it accounted for 32% of the total amount of plastics 
produced globally in 2018 35 It is used for many applications; the most well-known uses are as plastic 
bottles and packaging. PE is extremely durable and has been considered non-biodegradable for decades37 , 
but recent studies have identified bacteria strains that were able to partially digest PE68,69. The polystyrene 
in this project is synthesized by saturation polybutadiene as shown in Figure 10. 
Figure 10: Chemical structure of polyethylene. 
==PAGE:28==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
28 of 106 
 
Compared to Polystyrene and Polybutadiene, it does not contain any double bonds as it is a saturated 
hydrocarbon.  
Polyethylene is often separated into the categories high density polyethylene (HDPE) and low density 
polyethylene (LDPE), where the change in density is dependent on crystallinity. 
3.4.4 Polyisoprene 
Polyisoprene (PIP) is a type of polymer that can be created synthetically or naturally, and it is the main 
component of natural rubber. It has a variety of uses such tubing, and medical equipment, but the majority 
of all PIP is used for tires70. Polyisoprene can form 4 different isomer structures as shown in Figure 11. 
Figure 11: Polyisoprene isomer structures. 
Natural rubber mostly consists of 1,4-polyisoprene, but whether it is majorly as cis or trans isomer depends 
on the source, and it can be either amorphous or crystalline in structure24. Biodegradation of polyisoprene 
is primarily an issue in the shape of vulcanized rubber, as the crosslinking of the polyisoprene chains 
reduces water absorption in the material and lowers permeability71. Several strains of bacteria have 
however been found to be able to use natural rubber as a carbon source72.  
3.5 Polymer synthesis 
Many factors must be taken into consideration when synthesizing a polymer, and particularly when 
synthesizing polymers outside of the regularly produced sizes or functionalities. This section will describe 
the theoretical background of the polymerization type, the end functionalization and modification 
methods.  
It will also describe the theory behind some of the practical conditions that are necessary to understand 
and perform the different syntheses. 
3.5.1 Anionic polymerization  
Anionic polymerization is a type of controlled chain growth polymerization. It has been chosen over other 
polymerization methods in this project as it can give a narrow molecular weight distribution even for very 
short chain polymers and is suitable for multiple types of end-functionalization including carboxylic acids 
and alcohols.  
The reaction mechanism for anionic polymerization is shown in Figure 12.
 
Figure 12: General reaction mechanism for activation, propagation and termination of anionic polymerization, figure reprinted from 
Reusch, William et al. (2013)73. 
==PAGE:29==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
29 of 106 
 
The challenges with anionic polymerization are that the reaction conditions must be completely deprived of 
air and water, as any contamination can cause preliminary termination. 
3.5.1.1 
Polyisoprene and polybutadiene isomerization: effect of solvent 
As described in section 3.4 the  polyisoprene and polybutadiene can form several possible isomers.  
Polyisoprene can in theory have 4 isomers within the polymer all of which are illustrated in Figure 11, but 
the ratio of which isomers are formed depends on the polymerization conditions. In anionic polymerization 
with cyclohexane as solvent the cis-1,4 isomer is the dominant form. If the polar solvent tetrahydrofuran 
(THF) is added a mix of isomers will form, with the 3,4-addition isomer dominating74, the ratios are shown 
in Table 2. 
Polybutadiene will primarily form 1,2 isomers if using THF as solvent but will make a combination of cis and 
trans 1,4 isomers in hydrocarbons such as n-heptane as shown in Table 2.  
Table 2: Chain isomer structure of polymer depending on solvent.75, 76 
Initiator 
Solvent 
Cis-1,4 
Trans-1,4 
1,2 
3,4 
 
 
Polyisoprene 
n-buLi 
Cyclohexane 
80 
15 
0 
5 
n-buLi 
THF 
0 
30 
16 
54 
 
 
Polybutadiene 
n-buLi 
n-heptane 
43 
50 
7 
 
n-buLi 
THF 
0 
9 
91 
 
3.5.2 Functional end termination 
The termination of polymers with CO2 in anionic polymerization needs the appropriate solvents to form 
carboxylic acid end groups. Different ratios of apolar and polar solvent mixtures can result in the end 
groups either becoming an acid or a ketone, or the polymers dimerizing and becoming double of the 
intended length. 
A ratio of 1:4 THF, benzene will result in 100% acid functionalization for both PS and PI, compared to only 
50% acid functionalization for PS or 60% for PI in pure benzene.77 
The termination reaction with CO2 to form a carboxylic acid end group is shown in Figure 13. The possible 
reactions forming by products are shown in Figure 14. 
Figure 13: Mechanism of termination to add carboxylic acid via CO2 with PS as an example. 
==PAGE:30==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
30 of 106 
 
 Figure 14: Possible reaction and side-reactions that can happen when end functionalizing an anionic polymerization with carbon 
dioxide. P=Polymer. 
 
3.5.3 Polymer phase transition 
It is important to consider the glass transition temperature, Tg, of the polymers in this project as a change 
between rubbery and glass phase affects both the purification methods available during synthesis and 
possibly the bioavailability of the polymer in degradation tests.  
Flory-Fox equation 
The number average molecular weight of a polymer correlates with the Tg, as shown in the Flory-Fox 
equation 
.  
 
𝑇𝑔(𝑀𝑛) = 𝑇𝑔, ∞+ 𝐾
𝑀𝑛
 
Where K is a value based on the free volume in the specific type of polymer and Tg,∞ is the maximum 
possible value for glass transition temperature of a theoretical polymer with Mn=∞. 24 
The Flory-Fox equation can be used to estimate whether a polymer will be liquid or solid at room 
temperature based on the molecular weight. This is of particular importance when producing low 
molecular weight polystyrene as the polymer will have a glass transition temperature equal to room 
temperature for Mn=1050 g/mol, as shown in equation 
)78: 
 
𝑇𝑔(𝑃𝑆) = 250𝐶= 1050𝐶+
−0.84 ∙105 ( 𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙) ∙°𝐶
𝑀𝑛
⇒𝑀𝑛= 1050 𝑔/𝑚𝑜𝑙 
The above values for K are specifically for anionicly produced polystyrene, as a study by (same ref as above) 
has shown that Tg of the same type of polymers with the same number average molecular weight (Mn) 
depends on the Polymer Distribution Index (PDI), and that a broad distribution will cause a lower Tg.  
End functionalization effect on Tg 
End-functionalization of a polymer changes the glass transition temperature and will generally increase Tg if 
a rigid end group is added and slightly lower Tg if a flexible alkyl group is added79. This should be noted as 
even a change in anionic polymerization initiator could make a difference in Tg due to the alkyl group left 
behind on the “front” end of the polymer. 
PS with carboxylic acid end functionalization has a significant difference in Tg compared to pure PS, possibly 
due to a dimerization of the polymer chains through intramolecular hydrogen bonding between pairs of 
carboxylic acid end groups. Multiple molecules that hydrogen bond into a long chain shape are also called 
through catenation, has been shown to be possible for several naturally occurring carboxylic acids80. 
==PAGE:31==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
31 of 106 
 
Figure 15: Chemical structure of 2 molecules dimerizing due to hydrogen bonding between acid groups. 
Since the Flory-Fox equation is based on the free volume which depends on the amount of chains, 
dimerization could have a large impact on Tg, as it effectively halves the amount of polymer chains. Dimers 
of carboxylic acids can form as show in Figure 15. 
The ability to dimerize would however be affected by how easily the carboxylic acids groups could reach 
each other, which depends on the distance between them. The longer the polymer chain the larger the 
distance and a short chain polymer might therefore be more affected by dimerization compared to long 
chain polymer. 
Effect of stereoisomerism on Tg 
Polymers can have 3 different types of position isomers of the side chains as shown in Figure 16. The 
isomerism of a polymer with sidechains can have a large effect on Tg, but how much of an effect the 
isomerism has largely depends on the type of sidechains. Large sidechains or sidechains with charges will 
cause a greater difference than small neutral sidechains. 
The reason that the isomerism affects how crystalline the polymer can be, is that the placement of the side 
groups determines how neatly the polymer chains can pack next to each other. All the polymers 
synthesized in this project have atactic isomerism. 
Figure 16: The 3 different types of polymer position isomers. 
3.5.4 CO2 solubility 
The CO2 gas solubility in different solvents is an important consideration when synthesizing polymers that 
need to react with CO2 in solution to form the carboxylic end group.  
The Hansen parameters are used to determine the solubility or miscibility of a compound. The three 
parameters to be considered are: polar, dispersion and hydrogen bonding. 
While these parameters are determined for CO2 in water, THF and benzene as shown in Table 3, they have 
not been determined for all possible organic solvents. One such solvent relevant for anionic 
polymerizations is cyclohexane. 
==PAGE:32==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
32 of 106 
 
Table 3: Hansen Solubility parameters for carbons dioxide in THF and Benzene, values from Hansen Solubility Parameters A user’s 
handbook81. 
 
THF 
Benzene 
Polar 
5,7 
0 
Dispersion 
16,8 
18,4 
Hydrogen bonding 
0 
2 
Molar volume 
101,2 
89,4 
 
Although the Hansen parameters have not been determined for CO2 in cyclohexane, the solubility has been 
determined experimentally within certain temperature ranges. Equation 
) can be used to calculate the 
mole fraction of CO2, 𝑥𝐶𝑂2, in cyclohexane as a function of the temperature in the range 283,2-313,2 K at 
101,3kPa.82 
 
ln(𝑥𝐶𝑂2) = 0,11850 + 454,47/(𝑇/𝐾) −1,1454 ln(𝑇/𝐾) 
This is important information to consider for CO2 end functionalization of polymers, when adjusting volume 
and temperature. 
3.5.5 Hydrogenation and Deuteration 
Hydrogenation of polymer containing carbon-carbon double bonds will give the equivalent single bonded 
polymer. Hydrogenation is a heterogenous reaction on the surface of solid catalyst particles, where the 
surface has adsorbed hydrogen that can react with the double bonds through the complexation shown in 
Figure 17. Deuterating works the same chemically but would result in 2 deuterium atoms added per broken 
double bond instead of hydrogen, one on each carbon atom83.  
Figure 17: The mechanism of hydrogenation of polyalkenes with a solid metal catalyst, figure reprinted from Reusch, William 
(2013)84. 
3.5.6 Characterization of short chain polymers 
Several different methods are used to characterize each polymer. The main theory behind the main 
characterization methods are described in this section.  
3.5.6.1 
NMR 
Nuclear Magnetic resonance (NMR) works by measuring the spin of atom nuclei in a sample. Only some 
atoms have a spin that can be measured through NMR, and among those hydrogen and 13C isotopes are the 
most widely used. 
The placement of the peaks determine the chemical environment of each nuclei and the integrals of the 
peaks determine the relative amounts of the hydrogen atoms or 13C isotope. Combined it can be pieced 
together to find the structure of the tested compound. 
==PAGE:33==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
33 of 106 
 
With polymers it is however not a straightforward task to identify specific atoms or groups, such as end 
groups. The quantity of end group atoms is so much smaller than that of the atoms in the backbone and 
side chains that the signal might drown in noise. This is especially the case for long chain polymers or 
polymers with end groups that give signals very similar to those of the backbone atoms. 
This is particularly challenging with 13C-NMR as the resonance of 13C nuclei is about 6000 times lower than 
that of proton resonances59. 
3.5.6.2 
SEC 
Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) is a method that separates molecules based on their molecular 
weight. The sample compound is dissolved and run through a column containing porous beads, some 
columns contain silica beads others a gel stationary phase. Columns can be suitable for different molecular 
weight ranges depending on the exact material and volume of the column.85 
The elution time through the column will depend on the size of the molecules, as large molecules will have 
a shorter path through the column compared to the small molecules that can have long paths through the 
porous material as shown in Figure 18.85 
Figure 18: Illustration of the inside of a size exclusion chromatography column with different sizes of molecules passing through. 
The refractive index of the molecules passing through the column is measured to give a chromatogram. The 
mobile phase used needs to be suitable for the compound measured in both solubility and so that there is 
no or little overlapping of the peaks in the chromatogram. 
To estimate the size of polymer samples with SEC it is necessary to create calibration curve with standard 
polymers of known sizes and narrow PDI. Plotting the logarithm of the molecular mass versus the elution 
volume can then be used to estimate the molecular weight of an unknown sample. 
3.5.6.3 
MALDI-TOF 
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption - Ionization Time-of-Flight (MALDI-TOF) is a mass spectrometry method 
used to calculate the mass of a sample molecule by splitting the molecule into ions.59 
The sample is ionized by a laser and accelerated with an electric field, before entering a flight tube. The 
time of flight depends on the mass to charge ratio and is measured by a detector at the end of the tube. 
The sample material is mixed with a matrix that helps with getting the sample ionized as the matrix solution 
absorbs the energy and then transfers it to the sample compound.85 The matrix solution needs to match 
==PAGE:34==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
34 of 106 
 
with the hydrophobicity of the sample polymer for this effect to work, and a selection of polymer and their 
suitable matrices is shown in Figure 19. 
Figure 19: Matrix and polymer relative solubility. 
A cationizing agent can be added to the matrix solution by adding a salt, and the ion can then be used as a 
reference point and to improve the measurements. For non-polar polymers, such a salt is usually contains a 
soft Lewis acid metal ion. The cationizing agent can attach to the polymer or polymer fragments and form a 
large positive ion [Polymer+Cation]+. Many different silver salts have been used as cationization agents in 
polymer measurements, an example of such a cationizing agent is AgTFA shown in Figure 20. 
Figure 20: The cationization agent AgTFA. 
There are several methods to apply the analyte and matrix to the sample plate, with the dried droplet 
being the simplest. With the dried droplet method, the analyte and matrix are mixed prior to applying it to 
the sample plate, and it requires that the analyte is soluble in the matrix. For insoluble analytes the 
solid/solid compressing application method can be used as an alternative.86 
4 Materials and methods 
In this section the polymer syntheses are described as well as the characterization methods of the polymers 
and the respirometer degradation test. An overview of the of the synthesized polymers, the polymerization 
method, functionalization, solvent and degradation test is shown in Figure 21. 
==PAGE:35==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
35 of 106 
 
Figure 21: Overview of the experiments performed in the project. 
4.1 Polymer synthesis 
Five types of polymers were synthesized and a monocarboxylated polystyrene was purchased for 
comparison purposes. The synthesis of these five polymer types; monocarboxylated polystyrene (CPS), 
monohydroxylated polyisoprene (PIP-OH), polyisoprene (PIP), monohydroxylated polybutadiene (PBD-OH) 
and monohydroxylated polyethylene (PE-OH) are described in the following sections. 
All the polystyrene samples that were attempted to be functionalized with carboxyl acid were called 
carboxylated polystyrene and abbreviated as CPS and a number corresponding to the order they were 
made in. The purchased polymer had an Mn of 900 and was abbreviated throughout this project as CPS900. 
Tables with the details of the calculated values for each synthesis can be found in appendix 10.8 “Synthesis 
additional information” along with estimations of reaction rates and potential heating of solvent when 
applicable for the specific synthesis. A list of chemicals used throughout the project can be found in 
appendix 10.1 “Chemicals”. 
All polymers were synthesized through anionic polymerization under inert atmosphere and Table 4 shows a 
small overview of the polymers and the corresponding monomer, inhibitor, initiator and termination. PE-
OH is not shown as it was synthesized from the PBD-OH by saturation of the double bonds. 
Table 4: Overview of the synthesized polymers, the monomer, inhibitors, inhibitor removal, initiator and compound used for 
termination. 
Polymer 
Monomer 
Inhibitor 
Inhibitor removal 
Initiator 
Termination 
PS-COOH (CPS) 
Styrene 
TBC 
 
CO2 
PIP-OH 
Isoprene 
TBC 
Alumina column 
 
EO 
PIP 
Isoprene 
TBC 
Dibutylmagnesium 
 
MeOH 
PBD-OH 
1,3-butadiene 
TBC 
Dibutylmagnesium 
 
EO 
 
The first of the following sections “Gillman double titration” and “Solvent drying” describe the method 
parts that were general for all the anionic polymerizations and the following are for each specific 
polymerization. 
==PAGE:36==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
36 of 106 
 
4.1.1 Gillman double titration 
The concentration of active sec-butyllithium was found by Gillman double titration. This test was 
performed on the day of the polymerization to ensure accurate results, as sBuLi can deteriorate relatively 
fast in case of contamination. The concentration of sBuLi can also do the opposite and rise if cyclohexane 
solvent evaporates through a perforated septum. 
One titration is performed with a solution of sBuLi mixed with water to get the total amount of base. 
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡= 𝐿𝑖𝑂𝐻 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦+ 𝐿𝑖𝑂𝐻 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝐻2𝑂  
A second titration is performed with sBuLi mixed with 1,2-dibromoethane to determine the amount of LiOH 
present in the sBuLi, also known as the accidental base. 1,2-dibromoethane only reacts with RLi to form 
LiBr as shown in Figure 22, so the base neutralized in the titration is the already present LiOH impurity. 
 
Figure 22: Reaction Scheme for 1,2-dibromoethane reaction with lithium reagent. 
The results of each titration are then used to calculate the organolithium compound concentration. 
 
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝐵𝑢𝐿𝑖= 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡−𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 
The sBuLi solutions used were meant to have a concentration of 1,4 M in cyclohexane, but the double 
titration revealed a range between 0,77-1,4M, showing the importance of performing the test. The exact 
concentrations calculated for each use of sBuLi in CPS synthesis can be found in appendix 10.8.1. 
4.1.1.1 
Solution preparations 
0,05g Phenolphthalein was mixed in 50 mL water and 50 mL methanol.  
8,3 mL of 37% HCl is added to 1000 mL demineralized water and titrated with a 0,193M NaOH solution. The 
HCl solution was determined to have a concentration of ~0,1M (0,0969 M). 
1,2-dibromoethane solution 
A 10% 1,2-dibromoethane, 90% cyclohexane solution was prepared by mixing 5 mL 1,2dibromoethane in 45 
mL cyclohexane and run through an alumina column into a 2 necked Schlenk round bottomed flask filled 
with argon. The flask was then evacuated and the solution frozen with dry ice, then melted and stored 
away from light. 
4.1.1.2 
Titration 
Two conical Schlenk flasks with magnets were evacuated and filled with argon twice. 2 mL of water was 
added to one flask and 2 mL of 1,2-dibromoethane-cyclohexane solution was added to the other. 1 mL of 
~1.4M sBuLi in solution was added to each flask dropwise while stirring. A white precipitate forms in the 
the flask containing 1,2-dibromoethane. Once the reaction is finished 20 mL of water and 1-3 drops of 0,5% 
phenolphthalein solution is added to each flask. The content of both flasks turns pink, but the content in 
the flask containing 1,2-dibromoethane-cyclohexane solution splits in an aqueous and cyclohexane layer, 
where the cyclohexane layer remains clear. Each of the flasks are titrated with 0,1M HCl until the color 
changes to completely clear. 
==PAGE:37==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
37 of 106 
 
4.1.2 Solvent drying (THF) 
3Å molecular sieves are suitable for removal of water as the size perfectly fits the size of water molecules, 
whereas larger sieve sizes are better for removing other compounds such as methanol. 
The sieves were activated by heating to 250⁰C O/N and a 2 neck Schlenk round bottom flask was baked at 
150 ⁰C O/N. Anhydrous THF was obtained from a dry solvent Puresolv MD-7 system. The prebaked flask 
was filled with molecular sieves, attached to the dry solvent system, and evacuated prior to filling it with 
THF. The solvent was left to dry for 3 days which is sufficient to ensure <4.1 ppm of water87. 
THF has a tendency to damage rubber septums, so glass stoppers were used and every time THF was 
removed from the flask for use, there was an argon flow in through the tap neck and out through the main 
frosted glass neck. The solution was stored away from light. 
4.1.3 Polystyrene synthesis 
The synthesis attempts at making CPS were partially or completely unsuccessful, so there was no final 
method that could be replicated in later experiments. The procedure followed and the changes made are 
described in the following section. 
The amounts of reactants and solvent used in each experiment are shown in Table 5 and detailed 
calculations can be found in appendix 10.8.1 “PS synthesis Calculations”. 
Table 5: Amounts of reactants and solvents used for CPS experiments. 
Batch 
CPS1 
CPS2 
CPS3 
CPS4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37,7 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
Theoretical polymer Mw (g/mol) 
 
 
 
 
 
The polystyrene oligomers used for comparison in SEC and MALDI-TOF were synthesized in an earlier 
project as described in appendix 10.8.6. 
4.1.3.1 
PS polymer formation 
First synthesis of functionalized polystyrene, CPS1 
A preliminary test batch of PS was synthesized to test the reaction set up, resulting in the sample CPS1. An 
overview of the different polymer samples synthesized can be found in Appendix 10.3. 
==PAGE:38==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
38 of 106 
 
The reaction flask was heated to 250⁰C prior to the reaction and then evacuated and filled with argon. 
Styrene and cyclohexane were mixed in a 1:10 volume ratio and run through an alumina column to remove 
TBD inhibitor, directly into the reaction flask without further drying.  
Approximately 5-15% weight loss of monomer-cyclohexane solution will occur due to some of it staying in 
the alumina column. The reaction flask should be weighed 
before and after filling to determine the exact loss, to 
calculate an accurate amount of initiator needed.  
A 1L round bottomed Schlenk flask was baked at a 150 ⁰C 
O/N and attached to the system shown in Figure 23. The 
flask was evacuated and filled with 99,99% CO2 gas three 
times to ensure no other gas was present. The flask filled 
with CO2 gas, was kept closed and attached to the reaction 
flask as well.  
The reaction flask was cooled to 0⁰C prior to adding 
initiator, to ensure the reaction didn’t overheat, as the 
short chain polymer length means that many initiation and 
propagation reactions happen simultaneously. This in turn 
causes a potential to have enough reaction heat created 
fast enough to significantly change the temperature of the 
reaction mixture, to above the desired 40⁰C for 
propagation. 
The initiator, sec-butyllithium, was added with an argon filled syringe through septum and the solution 
changed color from clear to intense red, indicating the formation of styryl anions. The reaction was kept at 
40⁰C for 1h to ensure that the propagation was complete. The CO2 gas was then let into the reaction flask 
and left overnight. A color change was visible after the first hour, and the solution was opaque yellow the 
following day. 
The reaction mixture was heated briefly to 60⁰C to ensure that the reaction was complete and 2 mL 37% 
HCl was added with syringe to neutralize the polymer end. The yellow color disappeared when adding acid, 
but the solution remained cloudy. 
The polymer solution was added to an extraction funnel using acetone to get any remains out of the flask. 
An equivalent amount of demineralized water was added to the funnel and the organic layer turned white. 
It was left for 30 min to settle, the washing water was discarded and the organic phase was washed twice 
more with water.  
The solvent was evaporated on rotary evaporator (rotary evaporator) at 40⁰C and 50 mbar. The polymer 
turned foamy and stringy once most of the solvent has evaporated and the pressure was shifted between 
500 mbar and 50 mbar repeatedly to collapse the bubbles forming, to avoid getting the polymer to overfill 
into the rotary evaporator system. 
The polymer was dissolved in 40 mL acetone and precipitated in 400 mL methanol in an ice bath. The white 
precipitate was filtered on a buchner glass filter with a porosity 4 and dried under vacuum O/N. 
 
Figure 23: Set up for filling schlenk flask with CO2. 
==PAGE:39==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
39 of 106 
 
Second synthesis of functionalized polystyrene, CPS2 
The second batch of PS (CPS2) was synthesized as the first batch, but with a 
cyclohexane-styrene mix that was run through an alumina column into a flask and 
then put through two freeze-pump-thaw cycles in dry ice before adding it to the 
reaction flask to ensure that the monomer solution was sufficiently dry. The set 
up is shown in Figure 24. 
After 1h of reaction at 40⁰C the solution was cooled to 0⁰C and an amount of THF 
equivalent to an end volume concentration of minimum 25% was added to 
facilitate the correct end functionalization. As THF speeds up the propagation 
reaction, the cooling was a precautionary measure. 
The first batch of THF used for synthesis was bottled anhydrous THF which was 
run through an alumina column to remove inhibitor and then put through 3 
freeze-pump-thaw cycles, using liquid nitrogen to freeze it. The THF was in a 
round bottom Schlenk flask, which was attached to the main reaction flask. The 
reaction solution turned clear immediately upon adding THF, indicating water impurities causing premature 
reaction termination. Since the issue was with water impurities in THF, the drying method of all following 
experiments was changed to using molecular sieves as described in section 4.1.2. 
The CO2 gas was let into the reaction mixture and 2 mL 37% HCl was added afterwards, although the 
correct end functionalization was not possible due to the premature termination. The solvent was 
evaporated on rotary evaporator in the same manner as described for the first batch, but resulted in an oily 
substance instead of a powder and no further purification was performed. 
Third synthesis of functionalized polystyrene, CPS3 - Testing THF dryness 
After changing the drying method of THF, a test batch was run to examine whether the THF was sufficiently 
dry. A small batch of only 10 mL monomer-cyclohexane solution was reacted with sBuLi and 50 mL of THF 
was added to ensure that even with a great excess of THF the reaction would not be terminated by water 
contamination. The THF was added through the septum with an argon filled syringe instead of through an 
attached Schlenk flask. The color remained bright red, indicating that the drying with molecular sieves had 
removed all water. 
The polymer sample solution, CPS3, was discarded as no CO2 was added and it would therefore have been 
impossible to get the correct end functionalization. 
Fourth synthesis of functionalized polystyrene, CPS4 
The modified reaction set up for the fourth batch, CPS4, is shown in Figure 25. The glass equipment was 
prebaked, 250⁰C for the reaction flask and 150⁰C O/N for the Schlenk flasks used. The 1:10 styrene-
cyclohexane mix was run through an alumina column and dried with 3 freeze-pump-thaw cycles. The 
reaction flask was evacuated and filled with argon. Styrene-cyclohexane was added to the reaction flask 
and cooled to 0⁰C prior to adding sBuLi. The reaction mixture was then heated to 40⁰C for 1h and turned 
clear red, then cooled to 0⁰C again before adding THF. 
Molecular sieve dried THF was added through the septum and the solution remained clear red. 
The tap to the CO2 flask was opened, but no color change was visible after 1h. The flask containing CO2 was 
gently heated with a heat gun to approximately 30⁰C to expand the gas and push it into the reaction flask. 
Figure 24: Alumina 
column attached to a 
Schlenk flask placed in 
water bath and with an 
argon/vacuum line. 
==PAGE:40==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
40 of 106 
 
A slight pressure increase was observed and the solution turned clear 10 min after heating indicating 
terminated polymerization. 
2 mL 37% HCl was added to the reaction flask, and the reaction mixture was washed with water 3 times. 
The organic phase was kept and the solvent evaporated on rotary evaporator at 40⁰C, 50 mbar. The 
resulting white polymer was dissolved in 20mL acetone, precipitated in 200 mL methanol at 0⁰C, filtered 
through a 4 porosity Buchner glass filter and dried under vacuum for 24h. 
Figure 25: CPS synthesis reaction set up for the fourth batch, CPS4. PI is short for Pressure indicator. 
4.1.4 Polyisoprene synthesis 
In this section the experimental description of PIP-OH synthesis is described and the exact amounts used of 
the different solvents and compounds alongside with the calculated potential reaction heat can be found in 
appendix 10.8.3 “PIP synthesis calculations” and the reaction rate estimations at different temperatures 
are shown in appendix 10.8.4 “Kinetics and reaction rate”. 
Figure 26: Reaction mechanism for polymerization and functionalization of PIP-OH. 
Solvent preparation 
Cyclohexane was run through an alumina column and put through 3 freeze-thaw cycles. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
41 of 106 
 
Monomer preparation 
A two necked round bottom Schlenk flask was heated to 250⁰C, then cooled, evacuated and filled with 
argon. 1mL 1M dibutyl magnesium in heptane was added to the flask along with a stirrer magnet under 
argon flow. The dibutyl magnesium was vacuum dried and a flask containing isoprene was connected to the 
same Schlenk line as shown in Figure 27. The line was evacuated and closed, then the isoprene was distilled 
through the line into the flask containing dibutyl magnesium, which was cooled with liquid nitrogen. After 
all isoprene had been transferred, the solution was left on ice while stirred for 30 min.  
The isoprene was then distilled into an ampoule cooled in a dry ice, isopropanol bath and left overnight. 
 
Figure 27: Reaction set up for monomer and ethylene oxide preparation for isoprene synthesis. The lines are closed off one at a time 
to distill isoprene from a round bottomed flask, into the flask containing dibutyl-magnesium and then finally into the ampoule. 
Ethylene oxide is moved from the original flask and condensed into another ampoule. 
Polymerization 
The reaction flask was baked at 250⁰C, then evacuated and filled with argon 3 times. 
The round bottomed Schlenk flask with cyclohexane and the ampoule with isoprene were connected 
directly to the reaction flask and the ampoule containing ethylene oxide was connected to the reaction 
flask via glass metal line.  
 
Cyclohexane was added to the reaction flask and kept at a temperature of 10 ⁰C. Sec-butyllithium was then 
added with argon filled syringe through a septum. The isoprene was added after the initiator and the water 
bath removed. The solution heated itself slowly and stabilized at 30.5⁰C after 1h. The solution was heated 
to 40⁰C for 1h to speed up the reaction time . 
 
==PAGE:42==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
42 of 106 
 
A sample of the solution was taken through a double tipped needle directly into a flask with methanol to 
examine the polymer without end functional group. 
 
Ethylene Oxide was added carefully into the reaction flask and after ended reaction concentrated 4 mL HCl 
in 40 mL MeOH was added via syringe to the solution. 
 
Precipitation 
The polymer solution was dried on rotary evaporator at 40⁰C and 70 mbar, the pressure was lowered 3 
times to ensure all solvent had evaporated. 
 
4.1.5 Polybutadiene synthesis 
In this section the experimental description of PBD-OH synthesis is described and the exact amounts used 
of the different solvents and compounds can be found in appendix 10.8.2 “PBD synthesis calculations” and 
the reaction rate estimations at different temperatures are in appendix 10.8.4 “Kinetics and reaction rate”. 
Figure 28: Reaction mechanism for polymerization and functionalization of monohydroxylated polybutadiene. 
Monomer purification 
The 1,3-butadiene monomer was purified with dibutyl magnesium as follows; A two neck Schlenk flask was 
evacuated, heated to 250⁰C and filled with argon. A magnet and 2 mL of dibutyl-magnesium was added to 
the flask and the dibutyl magnesium was vacuum dried until all heptane was evaporated.  
The gas flask containing 1,3-butadiene was attached to the Schlenk line as illustrated in Figure 29 and the 
line was evacuated all the way down to the flask containing dibutyl-magnesium which was placed in liquid 
nitrogen. The Schlenk line was then closed off and filled with 1,3-butadiene which was let into the round 
bottomed Schlenk flask and frozen in the flask. The gas flask was closed first and the tube connecting it to 
the line gently heated to make sure none of the 1,3-butadiene was stuck. The tap to the round bottomed 
flask was then closed and the liquid nitrogen was switched out with ice to melt the solution, and it was 
stirred for 30 min. 
1,3-butadiene was then transferred by evaporating it from the round bottomed flask through the Schlenk 
line into a cylindrical Schlenk tube placed in a dry ice-isopropanol bath.  
The round bottomed flask was cleaned with methanol to avoid the reaction of any leftover 1,3-butadiene. 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
43 of 106 
 
Ethylene Oxide 
The Schlenk line was evacuated to remove any leftover 1,3-butadiene, and the gas flask was replaced by an 
Ethylene Oxide(EO)  gas flask. 8 mL of EO was added to a cylindrical Schlenk flask placed in a dry ice-
isopropanol bath, through the line as illustrated in Figure 29. 
Figure 29: Set up for transferring 1,3-butadiene and Ethylene Oxide from gas flasks into schlenk flasks, as well as purifying 1,3-
butadiene. 
Polymerization 
The reaction flask shown in Figure 30, was evacuated and baked at 250⁰C then filled with Argon. 
The flask containing 1,3-butadiene and ethylene oxide were attached to the reaction flask while kept 
cooled in their respective dry ice-propanol baths. 
Cyclohexane was run through an alumina column and then through 3x freeze-pump-thaw cycles before 
adding it to the reaction flask and kept at 15⁰C. 
sBuLi was added to the reaction flask with an argon filled syringe and stirred with the cyclohexane. 1,3-
butadiene was added by repeatedly gently lifting the monomer container and cooling it with ice in between 
each addition. The reaction mixture was kept at 20⁰C for the first 18h hours, then heated to 40⁰C for 6h to 
ensure completion of the reaction before adding EO. The EO was added slowly in the same manner as the 
1,3-butdaiene and a pressure increase was observed, then left to react for 30 min.  
The reaction flask was carefully opened and 3 mL concentrated HCl in 50 mL methanol was added. A slight 
heat increase of 2⁰C occurred, and the clear solution turned cloudy. 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
44 of 106 
 
Figure 30: Reaction setup for monohydroxylated polybutadiene synthesis. EO = Ethylene Oxide, PI = Pressure indicator. 
Polybutadiene rotary evaporator and precipitation 
The solution was washed with 400 mL water three times until the washing water turned clear. The solvent 
was evaporated on the rotary evaporator at 70 mbar until only the liquid polymer remained. 
 
4.2 Hydrogenation of polymers 
A full detailed description of the hydrogenation with the specific set up can be found in appendix 10.8.5, 
this is an abbreviated version. Figure 31 shows the reaction mechanism and Figure 32 shows the reaction 
set up. 
The first step of the hydrogenation process was to bake palladium oxide catalyst in an autoclave at 120⁰C 5 
bar pressure with hydrogen to adsorb hydrogen to the palladium surface. After the catalyst has been 
baked, the autoclave is evacuated. 
Figure 31: Reaction scheme for hydrogenation of monohydroxylated polybutadiene. 
The polymer and cyclohexane solvent are mixed and bubbled through with nitrogen in a closed flask, then 
introduced into the autoclave with the baked catalyst through a needle to avoid any oxygen getting in. 
Additional solvent that has also been bubbled through with nitrogen was added through the needle 
afterwards to flush any remaining polymer through the needle connection.  
Hydrogen was again added, this time to a pressure of 35 bar and the polymer solution is left to react O/N. 
The pressure is then lowered to 7 bar and the temperature is set to 80⁰C before the polymer was pushed 
from the autoclave into a container with a filter to remove the catalyst. 
==PAGE:45==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
45 of 106 
 
Figure 32: At the left is the filter set up, in the middle the set up for polymer and solvent, and at the right the autoclave. The 
polymer-solvent set up is attached with point f to valve B initially and after ended reaction, it is switched out by attaching tube m to 
valve B. 
 a is the heating element, b the autoclave, c the thermoelement, f the needle connection to the polymer solution flask, i is the quick 
lock nitrogen tube, k is nitrogen supply, m is the tube connecting the filter to the autoclave, u is the quick-lock for nitrogen tube 
attachment to the filter. 
The polymer solution was dried on rotary evaporator at 40°C and 70 mbar. The polymer left behind was a 
solid grey goo. The dark color was due to a small amount of catalyst that had run past the filter. 
4.3 Characterization of polymers 
The polymers synthesized in this project have been characterized through a combination of several 
methods described in this section.  
Samples for H-NMR were dissolved in deuterated chloroform (CDCl3) to a concentration of 1 mg/mL 
sample. Samples for 13C-NMR were dissolved in CDCl3 to a concentration of 50 mg/mL sample to better 
facilitate the  
All liquid NMR samples were tested on a Bruker AVANCE 400 MHz system. Solid CP/MAS 13C-NMR for 
polyethylene was tested with Bruker AVANCE 600 MHz system 5mm, CP-MAS solid state probe. 
All data treatment was performed in Topspin v3.6.2. 
4.3.2 FT-IR 
The FT-IR machine used for characterizations of polymers was a Perkin Elmers Spectrum 100 FT-IR 
spectrometer. IR was only measured for solid polystyrene samples. 
==PAGE:46==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
46 of 106 
 
4.3.3 Size exclusion Chromatography (SEC) 
The average-number molecular weight (Mn) was determined with size exclusion chromatography (SEC). The 
instrument used was a Viscotek Differential Refractometer viscometer model 200 DM400 60Hz, SIL-10AD 
VP Shimadzu Autosampler and LC-10ADVP Shimadzu Pump.  
For the first round of SEC testing a Silica Nucleosil 300-7-OH was used with toluene as sample solvent and 
mobile phase and with the parameters described in Table 6. 
Standard row with for PS was created with 96.000, 68.000, 17.050, 6200, 3600, 2050 molecular weight PS. 
Table 6: SEC parameters for initial SEC tests for PS standards and PS samples. 
Parameter 
 
Flowrate 
0,75 mL/min 
Acquisition time 
10 min 
Injection volume 
100uL 
Solvent 
Toluene 
Column 
ET 250/4 Nucleosil 300-7-OH 
230mm x 
Silica matrix, pore size 300Å, particle size 7 µm 
Macherey-Nagel 
 
For the second round of SEC testing a PLgel MIXED E column was used with THF as sample solvent and 
mobile phase and the parameters shown in Table 7. 
Standard row with for PS was created with 17.050, 6200, 5670, 3250, 2698, 2050, 1250 molecular weight 
PS. 
Table 7: SEC parameters for PS standards and final tests of all samples. 
Parameter 
 
Flowrate 
1 mL/min 
Acquisition time 
15 min 
Injection volume 
100uL 
Solvent 
THF 
Column 
PLgel 3um MIXED E Column 
300mm x 7,5mm 
Crosslinked porous polystyrene divinylbenzene matrix  
Polymer laboratories 
 
Before each test the solvent flask was changed from the recycling flask to a new flask and the waste line 
was moved to a separate flask. A baseline test was run for a minimum of 10 min to ensure stability and 
correct the refractive index (RI) to be as close to 0 as possible. After each test was finished the waste and 
inlet lines were moved back to a recycling flask. For the initial tests with toluene as solvent the flow was 
reduced to 0,2 mL/min when the machine was on standby.  
The solvent was changed from toluene to THF due to the low molecular weight samples and standards 
having peaks too close to the mobile phase peak.  
==PAGE:47==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
47 of 106 
 
The solvent was changed by initially letting a volume of 50:50 toluene THF solution run through and then 
afterwards a 100% THF. The pump was left with a flow of 0,75 mL/min overnight before testing and a 
baseline of 60 min was measured to check the stability. After changing the solvent to THF the standby flow 
was kept the same as the test flow at 1 mL/min to ensure stability and was only reduced if no tests were 
performed for several days. 
After change of solvent a batch of PS standards was run to ensure that the measurements were stable, but 
it was determined that the accuracy with the combination of silica column and THF was not satisfactory. 
The column was flipped and the system was left to run overnight again and tested with a 60 min baseline, 
and standard PS samples but it was still not sufficient. 
The column was changed to a MIXED E gel column specifically designed for measuring molecules under 
30.000 g/mol accurately. 
This column was also flipped to test whether the measurements were more stable depending on the 
direction of the column. 
The final measurements of both PS standards and all samples were performed under the condition 
described in Table 7. 
It was also tested whether short oligomers could be used as standards to get a higher accuracy in the low 
range. PS oligomers with the length of 2,4,6,7,8, and 9 monomer units were examined with SEC. 
4.3.4 MALDI TOF 
2,5mg/mL polymer sample in THF samples as well as a 0,1 M Dithranol in toluene solution and a 0,02 M  
AgTFA in toluene solution were prepared prior to testing.  
The samples were tested with a Bruker Daltonics Autoflex speed MALDI-TOF instrument and the data 
treated with the corresponding software flexControl and flexAnalysis. 
The PS standards, oligomers and PS samples as well as the functionalized PBD were all tested as follows: 5 
µL polymer sample, 10 µL Dithranol solution and 1 µL AgTFA solution were mixed for 30 sec with vortex and 
0,5 µL of each sample were plated in duplicates on a MTP 384 polished steel target frame.  
The tests were performed with a laser intensity of 85%, 2000 shots and a frequency of 50 Hz. 
The PIP samples were tested in the same manner but were mixed in a 10 µL polymer sample, 10 µL 
Dithranol solution and 1 µL AgTFA ratio. A sample of standard 1000 g/mol Mw, 1,09 PDI, PIP from polymer 
laboratories LTD, was tested alongside the synthesized PIP samples for comparison purposes. The standard 
was a 20% PIP in benzene solution and was tested in a ratio of 0,1 µL PIP benzene solution, 10 µL Dithranol 
solution and 1 µL AgTFA. 
All PIP samples were performed with a laser intensity of 95%, 2000 shots and a frequency of 50 Hz. 
4.4 Biodegradation test preparation 
Mineralization of polymers was tested with the manometric respirometer set up OxiTop® system and the 
OECD 301F “Ready Biodegradability test” procedure was followed. Consumption of oxygen and subsequent 
production of CO2 that was turned into sodium carbonate created a lowering in pressure that was 
measured for the duration of the test. The OxiTop® system automatically converted the pressure to the 
equivalent consumption of oxygen. 
==PAGE:48==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
48 of 106 
 
The data was analyzed in excel and visualized in OriginPro.  
Activated Sludge preparation 
1L of activated sludge was collected from the wastewater treatment facility “Lundtofte/Mølleåværket 
WWTP” and run through a 500µm sieve, then aerated for 4 days at room temperature for batch 1 and 2 
days for batch 2. The first batch of sludge was collected at the 20th of march and the second batch at the 
31st of may 2023. 
Mineral media 
Mineral media was prepared according to OECF 301F and the specific concentrations of each stock solution 
and the final mineral are described in appendix 10.7.1 “Stock solutions according to OECD 301F” . 
The media was left at room temperature for 4 hours prior to the test to ensure it had the same 
temperature throughout the test. 
Total Suspended Solids measurement 
Three microfiber filters were primed by running 20 mL of milliQ water through each and drying them at 
104⁰C overnight. 
The filters were weighed and 5 mL of the activated sludge was run through each of them. The filters were 
dried for 1h at 104⁰C and weighed again. 
The amount of total suspended solid (TSS) was calculated for the activated sludge solution. TSS was 
measured to be 28,26 mg/mL for the first batch of sludge water and 4,69 mg/mL in the second batch.  
Respirometer test 
All tests were performed in triplicates. Blanks contained only sludge water and mineral media.  
Samples with 100 mg/L of Sodium acetate were tested as a positive control next to the polymer samples for 
each batch to confirm bioactivity of the inoculum.  
Polymer samples with 273,9 mg/L of polymer CPS1 and CPS900 respectively were tested in the first batch 
and 100 mg/L PBD-OH and PE-OH were tested in the second batch.  
Solid polymers were added directly to the flasks after the liquids, but liquid polymers were added before 
any other component to ensure the largest possible surface area available by avoiding large polymer 
agglomeration at the surface. 
Inoculum was added to all flasks to give a concentration of 30 mg/L dry mass, and the flasks were filled with 
mineral media up to 365mL. 387 µL of sludge water was added for the first batch and 2,333 mL was added 
for the second batch due to the difference in TSS of the sludge water batches. The exact amounts of sample 
and inoculum of are shown in appendix 10.7.2 “Sample, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH 
measurement.”. 
One pellet of solid NaOH was added to each flask stopper and the respirometers were tightly sealed. The 
bottles were placed in shakers at 20±1⁰C. BOD was measured between 0-80mg/L as the headspace volume 
has a limitation in its capacity for BOD. 
After the measurements were finished the pH of each bottle was measured to ensure that there had not 
been overflow of sodium hydroxide into the flasks that could cause inactivation of the inoculum. The pH 
==PAGE:49==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
49 of 106 
 
measurements are also shown in appendix 10.7.2 “Sample, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH 
measurement.”. 
Batch 1 was measured for 28 days and batch 2 was measured for 35 days. 
5 Results and data 
In this section the results of the syntheses, the characterization of the polymers synthesized and the 
respirometer measurements of CPS900, CPS1, PE-OH and PBD-OH are presented. 
5.1 Polymer synthesis 
Monocarboxylated polystyrene (CPS) was not synthesized to a satisfactory degree. The CPS1 sample 
synthesized contained only a minimal amount of functionalized polymer in the sample, and the sample 
CPS4 contained approximately 50:50 ratio of functionalized polymer as it did unfunctionalized based on 
MALDI-TOF results. 
Monohydroxylated Polybutadiene (PBD-OH) was successfully polymerized and the structure confirmed by 
H-NMR and 13C-NMR.  
A sample of PBD-OH was hydrogenated to form monohydroxylated polyethylene (PE-OH) successfully. The 
structure of the PE-OH was confirmed by solid CP/MAS 13C-NMR. 
Monohydroxylated polyisoprene (PIP-OH) was also synthesized successfully and confirmed by NMR and 
MALDI-TOF, as well as by comparison with the results for unfunctionalized polyisoprene (PIP). 
The characterization results are illustrated and further explained in the following sections. Full sized 
spectra, chromatograms and graphs can be found in appendix. 
5.1.1 FT-IR 
FT-IR was used as the first initial method to characterize CPS1 and CPS4. It was expected to see carbonyl 
stretches from the COOH group, to confirm that reaction with CO2 had occurred, as well as a broad OH 
band between 2800-3400cm-1. The carbonyl peak appeared, but only very weakly, for both CPS1 and CPS4 
but neither showed the broad OH band as shown in Figure 33. 
The spectra for the two samples were almost identical as shown in Figure 33 despite the differences in the 
polymer samples confirmed through MALDI-TOF as described in the results section 5.1.4.1. The full sized 
spectra can be found in appendix 10.2. 
==PAGE:50==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
50 of 106 
 
Figure 33: IR spectra for CPS1 (black, top) and CPS4 (red, bottom), carbonyl band at 1712,16 cm-1 for CPS1 and 1706cm-1 for CPS4. 
5.1.2 NMR 
Below are the NMR results for both H-NMR and 13C-NMR spectra for the synthesized polymer samples as 
well as CP/MAS 13C-NMR for PE-OH. Full spectra are in appendix 10.6. 
NMR for CPS samples 
The samples CPS1 and CPS4 were tested with both H-NMR and 13C-NMR and both sets of spectra are 
shown in Figure 34.  
Neither of the samples showed the expected peak for COOH at 11-12ppm in the H-NMR spectra, but OH 
groups are generally broad and can disappear into the baseline. The spectra for CPS4 did show a peak at 
2,21 ppm that was not present for CPS1, which might correspond to the CH2 group next to a COOH group. 
There was also a peak at 1,47 ppm that was much stronger for CPS4 than CPS1, but it could not be 
accurately assigned to a specific hydrogen group. 
The 13C-NMR had no measurable difference between the two samples and neither showed the expected 
peaks for a carbon in a COOH group at 155-185 ppm, nor a peak between 185-220 ppm indicating a ketone 
which could appear due to polymer dimerization.  
 
Figure 34: Left: H-NMR spectra. Right: 13C-NMR spectra, CPS1 in red and CPS4 in blue.  
 
==PAGE:51==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
51 of 106 
 
NMR for polyisoprene samples 
The H-NMR spectra of PIP-OH can be seen in Figure 35 and showed a signal at 3,63 ppm which was absent 
at the spectra for PIP, and fits with the expected value of a CH group next to an alcohol. Based on the 
integrals, 1,41% of the total amount of hydrogen was in this peak which is higher than what would be 
expected for a fully functionalized sample indicating an uncertainty in the NMR measurement or that the 
polymers were actually shorter than expected and therefore had a higher ratio of end-groups to chain 
hydrogens.  
13C-NMR spectra comparison for PIP-OH and PIP confirmed the presence of alcohol group with the peak at 
62,0 ppm equivalent to a CH group directly bonded to an alcohol only appearing for PIP-OH. The full spectra 
for both PIP-OH and PIP can be found in appendix 10.6.5. 
The ratio of isomers was calculated to be 6,4% 3,4 addition and 93,6% a combination of 1,4 cis and trans 
isomers from the peak at 4,7ppm in the H-NMR. 
Figure 35: H-NMR spectra of PIP-OH (red) and PIP (blue). 
The H-NMR spectra for PBD-OH was used to calculate the amount of functionalization to be 99% based on 
the peak at 3,64 ppm for the CH2 group bonded to the alcohol end group. It was calculated by taking the 
theoretical percentage of hydrogens in the CH2 group compared to the percentage of hydrogens in the 
integral for CH2 peak as shown in Figure 36. 
==PAGE:52==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
52 of 106 
 
Figure 36: H-NMR spectra for PBD-OH. 
The 13C-NMR for PBD-OH and PE-OH are shown in comparison in Figure 37 and both have the peak at 
61,9pmm for the carbon directly bonded to the alcohol end group, showing that the alcohol end group was 
not damaged or changed by the saturation of PBD-OH.  
The spectra for PE-OH had no peaks in the range for double bonded carbons indicating a successful 
saturation of all double bonds. The broad peaks at 32,2 ppm and 34,2 ppm indicate the different CH2 
groups in the polymer chain. 
The spectra for PBD-OH shows peaks at 129,9 ppm and 130,4 ppm for double bonded carbon. There is also 
a small peak at 114,7 ppm which fits the value for a double bonded carbon in a CH2 group at the end of a 
1,2-vinyl isomer. 
Figure 37: 13C-NMR spectra for PBD-OH is shown in red at the top and CP/MAS 13C-NMR for PE-OH in blue at the bottom. 
==PAGE:53==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
53 of 106 
 
5.1.3 SEC 
All the results presented in this section are with the final measurement conditions and parameters 
described in the materials and methods section 4.3.3 Table 7: SEC parameters for PS standards and final 
tests of all samples. The individual chromatograms for samples can be found in Appendix 10.4 “SEC 
chromatograms”. 
To create a standard curve, PS standard samples were measured for Mw 1250, 2050, 2698, 3200, 5970, 
6200, 17050, 68000 and 96000 and the chromatograms can be seen in Figure 38. As the peaks for both 
68000 and 96000 were in the same spot it was clear that PS with Mw over 68000 were above the 
measurable limit for the column, so the 68000 and 96000 standards were not used for calculating the 
calibration curve. 
Figure 38: SEC chromatogram for the PS standards in the range 1250-96000 g/mol. 
It was necessary to perform a new calibration whenever a measurement was taken as there was shown to 
be a significant amount of variation from one test batch to the next if separated by more than a day. 
Several sets of calibration curves had to be discarded and retested due to too high variation in the values. 
The variations occurred due to several factors such as issues with the pumping system, solvent, and 
unstable flow. The way to determine whether the flow was consistent was to track the down peak of the 
solvent, as it must appear at the exact same retention volume for each measurement. 
The measured retention volumes for the PS standards are noted in Table 8 and the corresponding 
calibration curve values in Table 9 . 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑏𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑣𝑒 1:  𝑓(𝑥) = 2,70410 + 1,72033𝑥−0,35622𝑥2 + 0,01799𝑥3 
 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑏𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑣𝑒 2:  𝑓(𝑥) = 4,29198 + 0,9197𝑥−0,23657𝑥2 + 0,01209𝑥3 
 
==PAGE:54==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
54 of 106 
 
Table 8: Retention volumes for the PS standard samples. 
 
Calibration 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 9: Calibration curve calculations based on the PS 
standards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10: Overview of the polymer samples, the fit used to calculate for each, the Mn, Mw, Mz, Mp, PDI. 
CPS1 
CPS4 
CPS900 
PBD-OH 
PIP-OH 
PIP 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The calculated values for the sizes of all the polymer samples as well as the PDI are shown in Table 10. 
Figure 39 and Figure 40 show the chromatograms for the polymer samples in comparison and as expected 
PIP and PIP-OH are completely overlapping.  
The CPS1 and CPS4 samples show a higher PDI than aimed for at 1,429 and 1,352 respectively. However, 
the CPS sample purchased (CPS900) show a much broader peak and thereby PDI than the ones synthesized 
in the lab. The PDI of the CPS900 sample was supposed to be only 1.5, but our calculations showed a PDI of 
2,857.  
 
==PAGE:55==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
55 of 106 
 
Figure 39: SEC chromatogram for PIP (blue) and PIP-OH (red). 
Figure 40: SEC chromatogram for PBD-OH (blue), CPS1 (red), 
CPS4 (black) and CPS900 (grey). 
PS oligomers synthesized in a separate project were examined for use as very low molecular weight 
standards for SEC. The SEC chromatographs for the selected oligomers are shown in Figure 41. Although it 
was possible to identify which part of the signals corresponded to the oligomers in all the samples except 
for the 6 unit oligomer, the peaks were not clear and separate enough to be deemed useful as standards. 
Figure 41: SEC chromatogram of PS oligomers with 2,4,6,7,8 and 9 monomer units. 
5.1.4 MALDI-TOF 
The individual MALDI-TOF spectra can be found in appendix 10.5. In this section several spectra are shown 
in comparison to each other. 
==PAGE:56==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
56 of 106 
 
5.1.4.1 
Polystyrene 
The Polystyrene samples tested with MALDI-TOF were CPS1, CPS4, CPS900 and PS 1250 standard for 
comparison purposes which are all shown in Figure 42 and Figure 43.  
The samples CPS1 and CPS900 clearly showed fragments with gaps equivalent to the size of styrene 
monomers, whereas the gaps in the CPS4 had a very different pattern containing several different sets of 
patterns overlapping, each with gaps equivalent to the monomer size. 
 
Figure 42: MALDI-TOF spectra for CPS4 (top) marked in green and CPS1 (bottom) marked in green. 
Figure 43: MALDI-TOF spectra for CPS900 (top) marked in blue and PS 1250 (bottom) marked in green standard  
==PAGE:57==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
57 of 106 
 
PS 1250 vs CPS900 
The unfunctionalized PS samples had no overlap with the CPS900 sample in the monomer fraction signals. 
The fractions patterns were off-set by 44 m/z equivalent to the mass of a COOH group. PS1250 fit with 
[𝑠𝐵𝑢𝐿𝑖(𝐶8𝐻8)𝑛+ 𝐴𝑔]+ and CPS900 fit with [𝑠𝐵𝑢𝐿𝑖(𝐶8𝐻8)𝑛𝐶𝑂𝑂𝐻+ 𝐴𝑔]+. 
CPS1 
CPS1 had overlap with the monomer fraction signals of PS1250, and partial overlap with CPS900, as well as 
a third dominant fraction pattern that does not fit with either of them. The overlap with PS1250 only occurs 
for fractions below 1311 m/z, indicating that some short polymers were unfunctionalized. The partial 
overlap with CPS900 can be seen all the way through but is appears more clearly in the larger fragments 
towards the end of the spectra indicating that some polymers of all sizes, but primarily the larger ones were 
actually functionalized with COOH groups.  
The third and dominant fraction pattern is by all likelihood a dimerized form connected by a ketone as 
mentioned as a possible side-reaction in section 3.5.2 “Functional end termination”. The m/z values for 
such a polymer were calculated and fit with the pattern. 
CPS4 
The CPS 4 patterns overlapped with both PS1250 and CPS900 as seen in Figure 44, indicating that the 
polymer sample consisted of both unfunctionalized and functionalized PS. The ratio based on the intensity 
of the peaks was that CPS4 consisted of 50,77±0,5% COOH functionalized, and 49,22±0,5% unfunctionalized 
PS. 
Figure 44: Overlaid spectra of PS1250 (green), CPS900 (blue) and CPS4 (red) in the range 600-2500 m/z. 
5.1.4.2 
PS oligomers 
The PS oligomers with 2,4,7,8 and 9 monomer units were tested alongside the synthesized polymer 
samples. The oligomer fractions were used as comparison for the PS samples to help identify the size of the 
individual fragments appeared. The spectra for the oligomers can be found in appendix 10.5. 
==PAGE:58==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
58 of 106 
 
5.1.4.3 
Polybutadiene 
The spectra for PBD-OH shown in Figure 45 showed a 54 m/z gap pattern from the butadiene monomer 
unit and the values of the polymer fragments were equivalent to PBD-OH complexes with silver ions, 
[M+Ag]+. 
Figure 45: MALDI-TOF spectra of PBD-OH. The orange arrows indicate the polymer fractions with n number of monomer units. 
5.1.4.4 
Polyisoprene 
The MALDI-TOF results for the synthesized PIP and PIP-OH clearly showed a difference between the 
functionalized and unfunctionalized polymer as shown in Figure 46. Both results showed fraction patterns 
with gaps of 68 m/z equivalent to the mass of the monomer unit of PIP, but the gaps for the PIP and PIP-OH 
samples were offset with a value of 42 m/z equivalent to the difference in mass given from the ionized 
form of end group made from ethylene oxide [CH2CH2O]-. 
The peak values for both PIP and PIP-OH corresponded to the mass of the polymer silver complexes 
[M+Ag]+. 
The PIP-OH was functionalized to at least a degree of 99,15% based on the fact that no measurable peaks 
were visible at the same m/z as for the unfunctionalized PIP and that the noise accounted for 0,85% of the 
total peak height. 
==PAGE:59==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
59 of 106 
 
Figure 46: MALDI-TOF signal comparison of PIP at the top and PIP-OH at the bottom. 
5.2 Biodegradation results 
All separate graphs for both blanks, Sodium acetate tests and polymer tests are shown in full size with 
shaded standard error bars in appendix “10.7.4 Graphs for blank samples, Sodium acetate and polymers”. 
In this section the measurements for the polymer samples are depicted in comparison with each other. 
To determine the BOD, the average blank measurements from the flasks containing no sample were 
subtracted from the measured values of those with sample and divided by the sample concentration in the 
bottles, all measured in mg/L.  
𝐵𝑂𝐷𝑠(𝑡) =
𝐵𝑂𝐷−𝑏𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑘
𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
 
ThOD (mg O2/mg sample) is calculated for each sample type with the equation: 
 
𝑇ℎ𝑂𝐷(𝑚𝑔 𝑂2/𝑚𝑔) =
16 ∙(2 ∙𝐶+ 1
2 (𝐻−𝐶𝑙−3𝑁) + 3𝑆+ 5
2 𝑃+ 1
2 𝑁𝑎−𝑂)
𝑀𝑊
 
Where C, H, Cl, N, P, Na and O indicate the number of the corresponding atoms in the compound. As the 
polymers in question only contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen it can be shortened to: 
 
𝑇ℎ𝑂𝐷(𝑚𝑔 𝑂2/𝑚𝑔) =
16 ∙(2 ∙𝐶+ 1
2 ∙𝐻−𝑂)
𝑀𝑊
 
The mineralization percentage was then calculated by finding the ratio between the actual biochemical 
oxygen demand, BOD, and the theoretical oxygen demand, ThOD, if all sample had mineralized.  
 
𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 % =
𝐵𝑂𝐷𝑠(𝑡)
𝑇ℎ𝑂𝐷(𝑚𝑔 𝑂2/𝑚𝑔) 
Standard error was calculated for each set of triplicates. 
==PAGE:60==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
60 of 106 
 
 
𝑆𝐸= 𝜎
√𝑛 
 
The graph showing the mineralization percentage over time for CPS1 and CPS900 can be seen in Figure 47 
and the graph for PE-OH and PBD-OH in Figure 48. 
Figure 47: The average percentage of mineralization of CPS1 and CPS900 measured over 28 days with OxiTop®. CPS1 is shown in 
black and CPS900 in red with the standard deviation shown in grey and light red respectively. 
Figure 48: The average percentage of mineralization of PE-OH and PBD OH measured over 35 days with OxiTop®. PE-OH is shown in 
black and PBD-OH in red with the standard deviation shown in grey and light red respectively. 
==PAGE:61==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
61 of 106 
 
The average of the five last measured points was used to show the final percentage of mineralization in 
each bottle in Figure 49. 
Figure 49: Average percentage of mineralization measured over the last five days of testing for each individual bottle and the 
mean of the measurements for each type of sample. To the left: CPS 900 and CPS1, to the right PBD-OH and PE-OH. 
This shows that there was on average a mineralization percentage of 0,15±0,06% of the CPS900 sample, 
0,36±0,00% of the CPS1 sample, 6,32±0,75% for PBD-OH and 2,57±0,55% for PE-OH. 
The degree of mineralization is however so low for CPS900 that it cannot be considered significant due to 
the level of uncertainty, which becomes clear when comparing the average measurements with the blanks 
as the error of the blanks overlap with the average value for CPS900 as shown in Figure 50. 
The measurement for CPS1 was also deemed insufficient evidence of mineralization as the slope of the 
calculated mineralization percentage turned negative after peaking at 19 days. This should not happen in a 
respirometer measurement and is further discussed in section 6.2.1.2 “Possible errors in measurement”. 
Figure 50: Comparison of average BOD (mg/mL) measurements for CPS1 (grey), CPS900 (red) and blanks (blue), with shaded error 
bars. 
 
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
D28 [%]
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Mean
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
D35 [%]
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Mean
==PAGE:62==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
62 of 106 
 
6 Discussion 
The hypotheses and corresponding discussion have been divided into three sections: One regarding the 
synthesis of the polymers, a second regarding the biodegradability and a third about the potential 
detection of deuterium.  
The plan for this project had to be adjusted throughout due to several challenges and a rough timeline is 
shown below.  
 
6.1 Synthesis results and challenges 
Hypotheses: It is possible to make short chain carboxylic acid end functionalized carbon backbone polymers 
such as polystyrene, polyisoprene and polybutadiene through anionic polymerization for use as model 
compounds. 
==PAGE:63==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
63 of 106 
 
The syntheses of short PBD-OH, PIP-OH and PIP were successful, but the polymers were not made with 
carboxylic acid functional end groups as originally planned.  
The synthesis of carboxylated polystyrene was overall unsuccessful despite several attempts at correcting 
and changing conditions, and it showed that it was complicated to obtain the correct COOH 
functionalization with anionic polymerization in small batches with the available set up. The 
functionalization choice was changed from carboxylic acid to alcohol for polybutadiene and polyisoprene to 
avoid further difficulties. 
Synthesis conditions test with PS 
Polystyrene was chosen to test the conditions because the monomer is a liquid witch is easier to work with 
compared to a gas and because the negative ion complex with lithium has a clear orange-red color that can 
indicates when the reaction starts and stops. This was used to figure out which parts of the set up might 
cause premature termination due to the presence of water or air through leaks. Then polyisoprene and 
polybutadiene would be synthesized with the same end group functionalization. 
Choice of functional group 
The synthesis method for functionalization with CO2 gas posed significant problems and it is necessary to 
get complete functionalization if the polymers are to be used for further experiments. Partial carboxy 
termination or other impurities present, such as different end group or dimers, would be difficult to 
separate from the correctly functionalized polymer. 
Alcohol functionalization was used as alternative instead of carboxylation for polyisoprene and 
polybutadiene. The polymers would then be similar to fatty alcohols instead of fatty acids, which also have 
the potential to biodegrade. 
Biodegradation-promoting additives have been studied as a method to speed up the degradation of PE, but 
was not effective 88. Synthesizing these polymers with functional end groups is an alternative method to try 
and speed up the degradation. 
Solvent choice 
Initially pure cyclohexane was chosen for polystyrene because although a narrow PDI can be obtained 
through anionic polymerization, it becomes difficult to do so for short chain polymers if the reaction rate is 
too high. The propagation reaction speed for polystyrene in pure THF is much higher compared to in a 
mixture of cyclohexane and THF. If only THF is used, the reactions conditions also have to be kept at -78⁰C 
which poses its own set of challenges in regard to the set up.  
It was however made clear that THF was necessary to facilitate the functionalization reaction as the first 
sample, CPS1, synthesized with only cyclohexane barely contained any carboxylic acid groups. Cyclohexane 
in combination with THF was chosen for the following synthesis, but as the later synthesis of CPS4 also did 
not have full functionalization it was made clear that the proper functionalization and narrow PDI cannot 
be obtained simultaneously under the wanted conditions. Another point supporting this was the fact that 
the fully monohydroxylated polystyrene purchased (CPS900), did have the correct functionalization, but not 
a particularly narrow PDI. It is however possible to obtain a narrow PDI in THF, but only at temperatures 
below -104⁰C89. 
Cyclohexane was used for the polymerization of polybutadiene because it primarily facilitates 1,4-addition, 
which in turn creates polyethylene when hydrogenated. 
==PAGE:64==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
64 of 106 
 
Unfunctionalized polymer equivalents 
It was prioritized to synthesize several different types of polymers instead of several modified versions of 
the same polymers. It was deemed of higher interest to figure out whether any of the polymers could be 
used for the method, rather than testing the slight differences that might occur with a small change in 
polymer length. 
It was prioritized to only synthesize and test the functionalized polymers as the unfunctionalized polymers 
are expected to be less degradable. 
It was proven in the final synthesis of polyisoprene that it was possible to extract a sample from the 
reaction mixture prior to functionalization without introducing significant premature termination. Due to 
the difficulties with premature termination during several of the first syntheses, it was not chosen to do 
this for the polystyrene or polybutadiene, to avoid introducing any further risks. 
It was prioritized to test the functionalized polymers CPS1, PBD-OH and PE-OH without their 
unfunctionalized equivalents due to time constraints and because the focus was to test if there was any 
biodegradability at all, particularly for PE. The biodegradability of PS and PE have already been tested in 
multiple studies and reviews have described that both are extremely difficult to biodegrade.26 
PBD has already been proven to be able to biodegrade somewhat with a specific Moraxella bacteria strain, 
if the chain length was kept very short, but that is not quite comparable to this study were a the bacteria 
for degradation were simply those found in wastewater90. There are limited studies about how PBD 
degrades under natural conditions as a homopolymer, because PBD is more often used as an additive or in 
combination with other polymers such as isoprene in rubber products.91 
6.1.1 Carbonation 
The polystyrene syntheses were performed 4 times in total in an attempt to solve problems with solvent 
choice, insufficient drying of solvent and difficulties with carbonation. 
In the first batch synthesized of polystyrene, CPS1, the synthesis was performed with only cyclohexane as 
solvent which turned out to be insufficient to get the wanted carbonation.  
The major polymer fragmentation pattern measured with MALDI-TOF fit with the sizes calculated for 
dimerized polymers connected by a ketone, P2CO, which is described in section 3.5.2 “Functional end 
termination”. The fraction pattern fits with the masses of the dimer complexes 
 [(𝑠𝐵𝑢𝐿𝑖(𝐶8𝐻8)𝑛)2𝐶𝑂+ 𝐴𝑔]+, an example which is also marked on Figure 51 is: 
 
𝑃𝑛=8 = (57,12 + 104,15 ∙8) ∙2 + 12,01 + 15,99 + 107,07 = 1916,51 𝑔/𝑚𝑜𝑙 
 
Other options that were examined and ruled out with MALDI-TOF were formation of trimers with tertiary 
alcohol or hydrogen bonding between two acid groups as described in section 3.5.3 “ 
Polymer phase transition”.  
==PAGE:65==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
65 of 106 
 
Figure 51: MALDI-TOF spectra of PS 1250 standard in green, CPS900 in blue and CPS1 in yellow. The two arrows indicate the dimers 
of CPS1 with 7 and 8 monomers in each of the side of the dimer, i.e.. a total of 14 or 16 monomer units in the whole dimer. The 
peaks in between have an uneven number of monomer units, meaning that the chains that have created those dimers are of 
different lengths. 
The results for CPS1 show minimal acid group formation, although similar experiments performed with 
benzene as solvent, have given a 50:50 ratio of acid to ketone formation77. It could either be due to the 
difference between cyclohexane and benzene as solvents or caused by issues with insufficiently getting CO2 
into the reaction solution in the initial experiments and thereby having a low concentration of CO2 present 
for carbonation. If the CO2 was too slow to get to the polymer ends it could facilitate ketone formation 
even further as the polymer segments that had already reacted with CO2, might be more accessible to react 
with than CO2 for the remaining unfunctionalized polymer segments. 
The SEC results for CPS1 also showed a Mw of more than double the expected at 1800 g/mol compared with 
the theoretically calculated Mw which was only supposed to be 769 g/mol. The high Mw was initially written 
off as caused by issues with the initiator, as the first batch of initiator had a much lower concentration than 
expected at 0,77M instead of 1,4M. 
In the second batch, CPS2, the solvent was changed to a mixture of cyclohexane and THF, as it has been 
shown that synthesis in 75% benzene and 25% THF have had a 100% acid end group functionalization. The 
THF was however insufficiently dried and oxygen free, and the synthesis was terminated prematurely as 
soon as the THF was added, which was indicated by a sudden change from bright orange color of the PS-
lithium complex to completely clear. 
The third batch, CPS3, was a quick test to see if the change in THF drying method was sufficient and the 
batch was not purified or dried for further testing. The test was performed with only a small amount of 
monomer and initiator and a large excess of THF to ensure that the THF was not cause for termination. 
The fourth batch, CPS4, was performed with a cyclohexane and THF, but was still only partially successful.  
==PAGE:66==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
66 of 106 
 
As the issue with carbonation persisted despite having changed the solvent to 25% THF for CPS4, it was 
suspected that CO2 addition method might have been a factor adding to the poor results. The CO2 was 
added from above and as CO2 has a density of 1,6 g/L compared to argon at 1,664 g/l, the CO2 gas may not 
have reached the surface of the liquid optimally. Although the flask containing the CO2 gas was heated 
gently to facilitate mixing, it would have been better to introduce the gas through a needle and bubble it 
through the liquid. 
6.1.2 Saturation of functionalized polybutadiene 
Hypotheses: It is possible to saturate the double bonds in these polymers with deuterium or hydrogen 
without damaging or changing the end group functionalization. 
The saturation of PBD-OH and subsequent characterization through NMR showed that it is possible to 
saturate the short polymer and keep the functional alcohol group, which was to be expected with a primary 
alcohol group. It was however not tested with functionalized polyisoprene or saturated with deuterium due 
to time constraints.  
6.1.3 Characterization 
IR was not sufficient as a method to determine carbonation of PS samples, as the peaks for carboxylic acid 
OH stretch were either too weak or not present at all, most likely due to the small ratio of end group to 
chain.  
Characterization of Polyethylene was only performed with solid state NMR. It could have been done with 
liquid NMR at high temperatures to facilitate solubility but was determined to be sufficient with solid state 
NMR as the primary target was to ensure that all double bonds had been hydrogenated. 
6.1.3.1 
SEC 
The Polystyrene samples were first attempted to characterize with SEC with toluene as a solvent. Due to 
the very low molecular weight of the samples, the sample peaks were overlapping with the toluene peak. 
The SEC experiments were adjusted to be with THF as a solvent. 
There was insufficient separation on the silica column and silica columns do not measure linearly at Mw 
under 1000 g/mol for PS. So the column was changed from a Nucleosil 300 OH (Diol), 7.0 µm, 4.6 x 13 mm 
silica column to a PLgel 3 µm MIXED-E, 300 x 7.5 mm column made specifically for low molecular weight 
measurements, and the flow parameters were adjusted accordingly.  
The polymer peaks showed a slight tailing when measured which persisted regardless of change in solvent, 
test parameters such as flow rate, column direction and column type. The peak points were accurate, but 
the tailing means that there was some slight uncertainty when it comes to the peak integrals. 
The columns were turned in opposite flow direction and back again to ensure that the tailing was not due 
to damage in one end of the column. 
It was only possible to acquire PS standards down to a size of 1250 Mw, which meant there was a lack of 
standard peaks below some of the sample sizes. It was attempted to test very short oligomers with known 
sizes in place of regular standard PS, but the oligomer samples did not show clear separate peaks in SEC, 
although the specific oligomer peaks were identifiable. There is therefore a slightly higher uncertainty in 
the calculations for the shorter polymers compared to the longer ones. 
==PAGE:67==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
67 of 106 
 
6.2 Biodegradation test 
Hypotheses: It can be proved that even polymers that are not completely biodegradable still mineralize to 
some extent when exposed to microbial life. 
The functionalized polybutadiene and polyethylene were tested with respirometer, but the Polyisoprene 
was not synthesized in time to perform a 28 days respirometer test.  
The degradation percentage of both PBD-OH and PE-OH did confirm that mineralization of these short, 
functionalized polymers was measurable. 
Earlier studies have confirmed biodegradability of fatty alcohols up to a length of C18, but the polymer 
PBD-OH and PE-OH samples had an Mw of corresponding to approximately C140 based on the SEC 
calculations49. 
Hypotheses: Although polyolefins do not usually degrade biologically at a measurable rate, with the 
modifications in length and functional end group, the polymers polyisoprene, polybutadiene and 
polyethylene synthesized in this project could theoretically degrade in aqueous environment with microbial 
organisms present, because they are similar in size and chemical composition to fatty acids.  
Carboxylic acid was the first choice of functional group, to make the polymer as chemically similar to fatty 
acids as possible, as it was hypothesized that it could facilitate faster degradation. 
Despite changing the functional group to alcohol there was still degradation, which shows that it is not 
necessary to functionalize with a carboxylic acid group for the polymers to be degradable. The alcohol 
functionalized polymers were however similar to fatty alcohols which can be converted into carboxylic 
acids50. 
The PBD-OH and PE-OH did show significant degradation, but it is uncertain exactly how much the 
functionalization contributed to the degradation, as the unfunctionalized equivalents were not tested as 
controls.   
Hypotheses: Polystyrene is not expected to degrade measurably regardless of functionalization and length. 
It was hypothesized and confirmed with the measurements of CPS900, that polystyrene would not degrade 
despite the short polymer length and COOH functionalization.  
The CPS1 sample initially tested with respirometer in batch 1, was tested for degradation prior to full 
characterization, as the characterization process turned out to be more complicated than expected. It was 
also tested early on to get familiar with the degradation method.  
The CPS1 sample did show some mineralization, but at only 0,36±0,00%, and with a sample that was shown 
to consist of three different types of polymers this cannot be considered a significant result as it is not 
possible to tell what part may have contributed to the minimal amount of mineralization. 
6.2.1 Challenges and limitations of respirometer tests 
Hypotheses: A 28 days respirometer test is sufficient to measure a significant amount of degradation of the 
model compounds. 
Although the test was sufficient to measure degradation, there were some factors that may have caused 
some uncertainties. These are discussed in the following sections. 
==PAGE:68==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
68 of 106 
 
6.2.1.1 
Degradation method duration 
Although the standardized ISO 14851 respirometer test runs for 28 days, it was decided that the second 
batch could run for an additional week when it was clear that it would not be possible to measure a third 
batch. 
The data for the first 28 days would still be comparable regardless and the only reason that longer tests of 
90 days were not chosen in the first place was due to the time limitations of the project. 
6.2.1.2 
Possible errors in measurement 
The pH of all bottles was measured after finished testing to ensure that there had been no overflow of 
NaOH from the cap insert. In earlier tests high pH had been an issue, as cap inserts of two different sizes 
were used and the smaller size had given problems with overflow. The maximum pH values measured was 
8.67 for batch 1 and 8.15 for batch 2 as shown in appendix 10.7.2, indicating no overflow as that will usually 
give values above pH 9. In cases of overflow, the pH rises so much that the microbial life dies off. This was 
avoided by only using one pellet of NaOH in each insert, as well as using the deepest possible inserts. 
The CPS1 samples showed a dip in the calculated mineralization percentage (BODs(t)/ThOD %) after 19 
days. The measurement should only be able to go up unless an error occurs such as a leak or temperature 
rise which could change the pressure. Although the bottles were placed in a thermostatically controlled 
cabinet, the temperature can sometimes rise if quick weather changes occur. The weather changes for the 
appropriate days were examined for the measurement of CPS1 and uneven heating was ruled out as a 
cause. None of the CPS1 bottles nor the blanks for that batch showed any sign of leaking, as all the 
measured values did rise, the CPS1 just did not rise as steeply as the blanks samples that were subtracted. 
The measured mineralization was very low at less than a percentage point, so it could be due to the error of 
blanks which were relatively large when compared to the measured values. 
6.2.1.3 
Difference in batches of activated sludge 
Although ISO 14851 is a standard procedure, it must be taken into consideration that the microbial 
composition is not exactly the same from one test batch to the next. Even though the activated sludge in 
this project has all been collected from the same water treatment facility, there are both small daily 
changes in composition and larger differences because of changes in season. The first batch was collected 
on the 20th of march and the second on the 31st of may, more than a month later. 
Both the concentration and the types of microorganisms present in the sludge will change from the winter 
season to the summer season and the BOD tests performed in this project span from April to July. When 
comparing results across different projects the variation of microbial composition can be even higher as it 
changes depending on both facility and country. 
The TSS of the batches was also significantly different from each other. The first batch had a TSS of 28,26 
g/L whereas the second batch was only 4,69 g/L and the consistency of the sludge was also visibly different 
with the first being a uniform thick mud and the second a thin mud containing large solid pieces of dirt. 
The TSS concentration determines the amount of sludge solution added to the flasks, but the suspended 
solid and microorganism concentration do not follow 1:1, meaning that while the dry matter might be 
higher, that does not necessarily correlate to a high microorganism content as the dry matter can also 
consist of silt. With a difference of roughly 1:6 in TSS for the 2 first batches, this potentially means that one 
test batch could have a much higher initial bacteria concentration. 
The blank measurements illustrated the difference in the batches clearly. In batch 1 there was only used 5,8 
mg/mL oxygen after 28 days, whereas the second batch had used 27,1 mg/mL as shown in Figure 52. This 
==PAGE:69==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
69 of 106 
 
was possibly worsened by different aeration times, 4 days for batch 1 and only 2 days for batch 2 due to 
practical issues.  
Figure 52: Blank average measurement of Biochemical Oxygen Demand in mg/mL with the bottle only containing inoculum. Blanks 
from batch 1 are in black with grey shaded area indicating the standard error and Blanks from batch 2 are in red, with pale red 
indicating standard error. 
The Sodium acetate mineralization was however very similar from batch to batch, as shown in Figure 53.  
The main difference being that the mineralization was a bit slower to kick off in the first batch, possibly due 
to the lower microorganism concentration. 
Figure 53: Comparison of Sodium acetate mineralization in batch 1 and batch 2 of respirometer testing. Samples from batch 1 are in 
black with grey shaded area indicating the standard error and samples from batch 2 are in red, with pale red indicating standard 
error. 
As it is so far undetermined which exact microorganisms might contribute to the degradation of polymers, 
this could affect the measured results. The first batch tested used a smaller amount of sludge water, and 
==PAGE:70==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
70 of 106 
 
also showed none or very little mineralization of the samples containing polymers, but the results might 
have differed with a higher initial microorganism concentration. 
6.2.1.4 
Effect of phase difference 
The polymer degradation test with OxiTop® was performed on polymers in different phases and it is 
uncertain what exact effect that might have on the bioavailability. 
While both the solid polymers and the liquid polymers pose many of the same issues with regards to 
bioavailability, such as hydrophobicity and insolubility, it has yet to be studied if the phase of the 
compound makes a significant difference. 
One factor that could cause a difference bioavailability between liquid and solid polymers is the change in 
surface tension. 
The solid polymers floated on the surface of the water whereas the liquid polymers were dispersed on the 
entire surface of the liquid, with no visible adherence to the bottle sides. The Polystyrene sample was a 
powder whereas the polybutadiene had a gum like consistency that floated as illustrated in Figure 54. 
Figure 54: The physical appearance of the polymers produced in this project, on the surface of water prior to degradation testing. 
From left to right, polystyrene, polyethylene and polybutadiene. 
It is uncertain how much of a difference in surface area that creates and whether there is a difference due 
to the solid primarily being at the surface between liquid and air, vs the liquid being completely submerged.  
By the end of the 35 day test cycle it did appear as if biofilm had formed on the PE and that bacteria 
colonies had formed inside the droplets of PBD. Pictures illustrating this can be found in appendix 10.7.5.  
It was discussed whether to incorporate a surfactant with the polyethylene sample to make it more 
bioavailable, but ultimately decided against it as the biofilm had been able to form. Other reasons against 
using a surfactant were that the surfactant would have to be both fitting for the polymer and optimally a 
type that would be likely to be found in nature to avoid testing under completely unrealistic conditions.  
Although some short fatty acids could fit both criteria, the possible surfactant would most likely be 
degraded along with the polymer, and possibly a lot faster than the polymer. While the amount of CO2 
created from the surfactant could be estimated by running a positive blank sample containing only 
surfactant and sludge inoculum, the fact that the surfactant would break down at all, would mean that the 
ratio of surfactant to polymer would change under the duration of the test. Additionally, the chosen 
surfactant would have to have little or no effect on the microbial life, which is relevant as some short chain 
fatty acids, such as caprylic acid, have anti-microbial effects.  
6.2.1.5 
Why narrow PDI is necessary for respirometer test 
Narrow PDI was highly prioritized, to get accurate estimations of which lengths of polymers were possible 
to biodegrade with respirometer test.  
As it is hypothesized that smaller chains break down easier than long chains, a high mineralization 
percentage for a polymer with broad PDI might just be due to a high content of small chains breaking 
==PAGE:71==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
71 of 106 
 
down, while the longer chains were left completely untouched. By obtaining a narrow PDI it lessens the 
relative amount of polymer chains that are significantly shorter than the average length. 
If it was only possible for the shortest chains to break down biologically and not the longer chains, the 
degradation rate would be expected to taper off once all the short chains were eliminated. Longer testing 
of the degradation would reveal whether the degradation rate tapers off before all the polymer sample has 
been degraded or continues to speed up until all the polymer chains have been degraded. 
6.3 Deuterium detection 
Hypotheses: It is possible to measure the amount of deuterium present in the inoculum after degradation, 
by using sensitive IR and thereby determine the amount of polymer that has been degraded completely into 
water and carbon dioxide. 
Although deuteration of the polymer samples were not performed and degradation tested, it is possible to 
give a estimate of the possibility of detection of heavy water from degraded polymer after these initial 
tests. 
With polybutadiene and polyethylene as examples, deuteration of polybutadiene would introduce a ratio 
of 1:3 deuterium to hydrogen in the resulting polyethylene chain. The deuterium would then be equal to 
0,069% of the mass of each monomer unit. 
If approximately 2,5% of the 100mg sample of polyethylene degraded as was shown in our results, that 
would be equivalent to 0,17 mg/L deuterium. As the deuterium would be transformed into semi heavy 
water upon degradation this would result in 1,65 mg/L HDO or 1,6‰. It is currently possible to detect down 
to 1‰ with FT-IR spectroscopy. 60 
In conclusion, this confirms that by all means it should be possible to use deuterium labelling and detection 
post degradation to confirm the mineralization of polyethylene. 
7 Conclusion 
Many methods have already been developed to investigate partial degradation of polymer degradation and 
respirometer tests alone can be used to determine the overall mineralization of biodegradable polymers. 
The limitation of respirometer tests is that it only measures the carbon dioxide created through 
degradation and does not give information about where exactly the carbon stems from.  
It is of interest to develop a method that can measure both the mineralization of polymers and confirm that 
the product specifically stems from the polymer to gain greater knowledge on how exactly polymers break 
down. This knowledge can be used both in estimating the time and process of the breakdown of the 
current plastic waste as well as in the creation of new biodegradable plastics. Deuterating polymers has 
been suggested to intrinsically label polymers and then measure the deuterium in degradation products, 
but this testing method has yet to be developed. 
The first step in developing such a method and the focus of this project, was to synthesize polybutadiene 
and polyisoprene that could potentially be saturated with hydrogen and confirm that the resulting 
polymers can also biologically degrade. These polymers can in future projects be synthesized with 
deuterium instead of hydrogen in the chain and the degradation can potentially be measured through 
detecting the final waste product, heavy water. 
==PAGE:72==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
72 of 106 
 
The objective of this study was to confirm that it is possible to biologically degrade the polymers 
polybutadiene, polyethylene and polyisoprene, by changing the length and functionality of the polymers. It 
was confirmed that short versions of polybutadiene and polyethylene with a molecular weight at 
approximately 2000 g/mol and monohydroxylated end functionalization were possible to degrade. 
Degradation of short fatty alcohols have been proven in earlier studies, but none that are as long as the 
polymers tested in this project. 
Firstly, the methods to synthesize these short polymers were investigated through anionic polymerization 
with the possibility of carboxylic acid functionalization using polystyrene as a substitute polymer. 
Synthesizing the polystyrene under conditions favorable for creating narrow PDI despite the short polymer 
length, i.e. in cyclohexane at room temperature, was proven to compromise the carboxylic acid 
functionalization. The conditions that are favorable for efficient functionalization, 100% THF at -78⁰C,  
would prevent a narrow PDI. 
The polymers polybutadiene and polyisoprene were instead synthesized with monohydroxylated ends to 
facilitate both narrow PDI and functionalization combined. The polybutadiene was saturated with hydrogen 
to investigate whether it was possible to do so effectively without compromising the functionalization.  
The reason why it was chosen to give carboxylic acid end functionalization was that polybutadiene, 
polyethylene and polyisoprene would then be chemically similar to fatty acids which was hypothesized to 
ease biological metabolism. The alcohol functionalization was similar to fatty alcohols and deemed a 
suitable alternative as that type of compound is also known to be metabolized in bacteria. 
The resulting monohydroxylated polyethylene and the monohydroxylated butadiene were tested for 
biological degradation in aqueous inoculum under aerobic conditions with a respirometer measuring 
biochemical oxygen demand. Both polymers showed significant degradation at 6,32±0,75% for PBD-OH and 
2,57±0,55% for PE-OH. 
For comparison the polystyrene samples both had mineralization percentages that were negligible. The 
monocarboxylated polystyrene sample, CPS900, had a mineralization percentage of 0,15±0,06% and the 
polystyrene containing a ketone, CPS1, has a percentage of 0,36±0,00%.  
In conclusion it was possible to both synthesize short polymers that can be saturated with alcohol 
functional end group and degrade them measurably with respirometer test. The degradation percentage of 
the polyethylene was also proven to be high enough that it should be possible to detect the resulting 
deuterium. 
The respirometer test runs for a minimum of 28 days, so it was only possible to perform a limited set of 
tests. For this reason PBD-OH and PE-OH degradation was tested, but not PIP-OH or the saturated 
equivalent. 
8 Future work 
This project was made as initial tests in preparation for creating a method to measure degradation of 
deuterium labelled polymers through tracking the deuterium, so there are many following steps that have 
to be investigated in future work. 
This combination of labelling and degradation methods would give not only a percentage of degradation, 
but also a certainty of exactly what is degraded. 
==PAGE:73==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
73 of 106 
 
8.1 Developing the deuterium labelling test 
First and foremost it is necessary to repeat the degradation tests to confirm the validity of the degradation 
of both PBD-OH and PE-OH, as that is the major find in this project. Secondly the degradation of the 
monohydroxylated polyisoprene should be investigated along with a hydrogenated version of the polymer. 
All of the tests should also be performed with an unfunctionalized equivalent to examine how much of a 
difference the functionalization has had on the level of degradation. 
The next major step in developing the method would then be to deuterate a batch of both the 
functionalized polybutadiene and polyisoprene created in this project. Tracking of the deuterium would be 
the third major step in developing the method.  The deuterated polymers should be tested with 
respirometer test and the resulting aqueous solution post testing, could be tested further examined with 
FT-IR spectroscopy to test for heavy water. 
8.2 Uses for a deuterium labelling test method 
The potential of the method being successful opens up for many uses in the overall study of polymer 
degradation. 
Production of biodegradable polymers is one field that could benefit from more precise knowledge about 
polymer breakdown. The new polymers that are produced in the future could better be tailored to become 
biodegradable when knowing exactly which parameters to tweak to increase degradability of polymers that 
are otherwise considered non-biodegradable. 
The treatment of polymer waste could also benefit from better knowledge about the breakdown processes. 
Many ways of increasing the degradation rate are already investigated, but by knowing exactly when a 
polymer becomes more biodegradable it would be easier to design these methods. 
Another important field that could benefit from knowing exactly what is required to breakdown polymers is 
in the estimation of the fate of polymer waste. A crucial part of that is to give accurate assessments of the 
timeframes in which polymers degrade, as the degradation process is not linear and has often been difficult 
to estimate accurately especially for non-biodegradable polymers under different environmental 
conditions. 
Intrinsic labelling can also be used to investigate whether a material is truly biodegradable and mineralize 
or whether it only partially degrades. Some materials are currently deemed biodegradable based on tests 
that do not actually confirm complete degradation, but only that the polymers must have at least 
fragmented into microplastics.  
A specific possibility would be to study the exact effect the length has on biodegradability of polyolefins. 
Specific length fractions of polymers could be separated in a similar way to how the PS oligomers used in 
this project were produced. Fractions could then be deuterated and tested with respirometer separately to 
see whether there is a threshold of length that caps the possibility of biodegradation.   
It would also be a relevant method to study polymers that consists of more than one type of monomer or 
plastic materials with a combination of different polymers. 51 
8.3 Further considerations 
There are also several practical adjustments that could be explored in future works.  
==PAGE:74==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
74 of 106 
 
Respirometer testing still needs further investigation in how much of a difference that the state of matter 
of the test material has. The available surface area of the polymer could possibly be improved in future 
tests of polyethylene. 
The concentration of polymer in respirometer tests was based on the maximum oxygen demand, ThOD, 
and the capacity for headspace volume of the OxiTop®. By repeating degradation tests several times and 
having an estimate for the degradation percentage, it would be possible to increase the amount of test 
material without risk of exceeding the capacity of the headspace. A higher concentration of test material 
could also increase the accuracy if there was no inhibitory effect created by any of the products. A higher 
concentration of test material would also make it easier to measure deuterium content in the post 
degradation inoculum. 
The possibility of creating polymers with carboxylic acid functionalization could be continued, but as 
significant degradation was shown with alcohol functionalization, it would not be the most important step 
to investigate further. 
A 28-35 day Respirometer BOD measurement with OxiTop® system was chosen as it is a test that is short 
term enough to be performed within the scopes of this project, but at the same time long enough that if 
degradation of the polymers occur it would start to show within this timeframe. Other degradation tests of 
longer duration, for example 90 days or 6 months are possible but would have to be performed in a 
different project.  
An alternative to Respirometer testing with the OxiTop® set up, is the Oxygen sensor spot test. Oxygen 
sensor spots can be placed both in the liquid and above and measure the oxygen concentration optically via 
luminescence. This type of testing would eliminate issues with overflow of sodium hydroxide and limited 
capacity due to headspace. 
In conclusion there are a lot of tests to be performed to fully develop the deuterium labelling, but also a lot 
also a lot of potentials applications for the method. 
9 References 
1. 
Zeenat, Elahi, A., Bukhari, D. A., Shamim, S. & Rehman, A. Plastics degradation by microbes: A 
sustainable approach. J King Saud Univ Sci 33, 101538 (2021). 
2. 
Hameed, M., Bhat, R. A., Singh, D. V. & Mehmood, M. A. White Pollution. 52–81 (2019) 
doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-0031-6.CH004. 
3. 
Samir, A., Ashour, F. H., Hakim, A. A. A. & Bassyouni, M. Recent advances in biodegradable 
polymers for sustainable applications. npj Materials Degradation 2022 6:1 6, 1–28 (2022). 
4. 
Alava, J. J. et al. A Call to Include Plastics in the Global Environment in the Class of Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative, and Toxic (PBT) Pollutants. Environ Sci Technol 57, 8188 (2023). 
5. 
Bher, A., Cho, Y. & Auras, R. Boosting Degradation of Biodegradable Polymers. Macromol 
Rapid Commun 44, 2200769 (2023). 
6. 
Chamas, A. et al. Degradation Rates of Plastics in the Environment. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 8, 
3494–3511 (2020). 
7. 
Mohanan, N., Montazer, Z., Sharma, P. K. & Levin, D. B. Microbial and Enzymatic Degradation 
of Synthetic Plastics. Front Microbiol 11, 580709 (2020). 
==PAGE:75==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
75 of 106 
 
8. 
Plastic pollution is growing relentlessly as waste management and recycling fall short, says 
OECD. https://www.oecd.org/environment/plastic-pollution-is-growing-relentlessly-as-
waste-management-and-recycling-fall-short.htm. 
9. 
Global plastic waste generation by application 2019-2060 | Statista. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1339200/global-plastic-waste-generation-outlook-by-
application/. 
10. 
Verma, R., Vinoda, K. S., Papireddy, M. & Gowda, A. N. S. Toxic Pollutants from Plastic Waste- 
A Review. Procedia Environ Sci 35, 701–708 (2016). 
11. 
Frączak, D. & Frączak, D. Chemical Recycling of Polyolefins (PE, PP): Modern Technologies 
and Products. Waste Material Recycling in the Circular Economy - Challenges and 
Developments (2021) doi:10.5772/INTECHOPEN.99084. 
How much can chemical recycling contribute to plastic waste recycling in 
Europe? An assessment using material flow analysis modeling. Resour Conserv Recycl 192, 
106916 (2023). 
13. 
Alassali, A. et al. Towards Higher Quality of Recycled Plastics: Limitations from the Material’s 
Perspective. Sustainability 2021, Vol. 13, Page 13266 13, 13266 (2021). 
14. 
Jambeck, J. R. et al. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science (1979) 347, 768–
771 (2015). 
15. 
Chatterjee, S. & Sharma, S. Microplastics in our oceans and marine health. The Veolia 
institute facts reports - Reinventing plastics doi:10.1021/acs.est.8b04180. 
16. 
de Souza Machado, A. A., Kloas, W., Zarfl, C., Hempel, S. & Rillig, M. C. Microplastics as an 
emerging threat to terrestrial ecosystems. Glob Chang Biol 24, 1405–1416 (2018). 
17. 
Issac, M. N. & Kandasubramanian, B. Effect of microplastics in water and aquatic systems. 
Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 28, 19544 (2021). 
18. 
Teofilović, V. et al. Development of novel labelling system for microplastics. Environmental 
labels and declarations – normative aspects / Etykiety I deklaracje  środowiskowe  – aspekty 
normatywne 9–18 (2021). 
19. 
Bergmann, M. et al. Plastic pollution in the Arctic. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment 2022 
3:5 3, 323–337 (2022). 
20. 
Padervand, M., Lichtfouse, E., Robert, D. & Wang, C. Removal of microplastics from the 
environment. A review. Environ Chem Lett 18, 807–828 (2020). 
21. 
Tang, K. H. D. & Hadibarata, T. Microplastics removal through water treatment plants: Its 
feasibility, efficiency, future prospects and enhancement by proper waste management. 
Environmental Challenges 5, 100264 (2021). 
22. 
Han, X., Lu, X. & Vogt, R. D. An optimized density-based approach for extracting microplastics 
from soil and sediment samples. Environ Pollut 254, (2019). 
23. 
P. Stevens, M. Polymer chemistry an introduction. (Oxford University Press, 1999). 
==PAGE:76==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
76 of 106 
 
24. 
Fried, J. R. Polymer science and technology. (Prentice Hall, 2014). 
25. 
Pantani, R. & Sorrentino, A. Influence of crystallinity on the biodegradation rate of injection-
moulded poly(lactic acid) samples in controlled composting conditions. Polym Degrad Stab 
98, 1089–1096 (2013). 
26. 
Ghatge, S., Yang, Y., Ahn, J. H. & Hur, H. G. Biodegradation of polyethylene: a brief review. 
Applied Biological Chemistry 2020 63:1 63, 1–14 (2020). 
27. 
Abhilash, M. & Thomas, D. Biopolymers for Biocomposites and Chemical Sensor Applications. 
Biopolymer Composites in Electronics 405–435 (2017) doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-809261-
3.00015-2. 
28. 
Royer, S. J., Greco, F., Kogler, M. & Deheyn, D. D. Not so biodegradable: Polylactic acid and 
cellulose/plastic blend textiles lack fast biodegradation in marine waters. PLoS One 18, 
e0284681 (2023). 
29. 
ISO 14851:2019 - Determination of the ultimate aerobic biodegradability of plastic materials 
in an aqueous medium — Method by measuring the oxygen demand in a closed 
respirometer. https://www.iso.org/standard/70026.html. 
30. 
Ozen, B. F., Mauer, L. J. & Floros, J. D. Effects of ozone exposure on the structural, mechanical 
and barrier properties of select plastic packaging films. Packaging Technology and Science 15, 
301–311 (2002). 
31. 
Bher, A., Mayekar, P. C., Auras, R. A. & Schvezov, C. E. Biodegradation of Biodegradable 
Polymers in Mesophilic Aerobic Environments. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 
2022, Vol. 23, Page 12165 23, 12165 (2022). 
32. 
Pielichowski, K., Njuguna, J. & Majka, T. M. Mechanisms of thermal degradation of polymers. 
Thermal Degradation of Polymeric Materials 9–11 (2023) doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-823023-
7.00001-0. 
33. 
Restrepo-Flórez, J. M., Bassi, A. & Thompson, M. R. Microbial degradation and deterioration 
of polyethylene – A review. Int Biodeterior Biodegradation 88, 83–90 (2014). 
34. 
Urbanek, A. K., Kosiorowska, K. E. & Mirończuk, A. M. Current Knowledge on Polyethylene 
Terephthalate Degradation by Genetically Modified Microorganisms. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 
9, 771133 (2021). 
35. 
Kim, H.-W. et al. Biodegradation of polystyrene by bacteria from the soil in common 
environments. (2021) doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126239. 
36. 
Restrepo-Flórez, J. M., Bassi, A. & Thompson, M. R. Microbial degradation and deterioration 
of polyethylene - A review. Int Biodeterior Biodegradation 88, 83–90 (2014). 
37. 
Ali, S. S., Elsamahy, T., Zhu, D. & Sun, J. Biodegradability of polyethylene by efficient bacteria 
from the guts of plastic-eating waxworms and investigation of its degradation mechanism. J 
Hazard Mater 443, 130287 (2023). 
38. 
Pravda, L. et al. Anatomy of enzyme channels. BMC Bioinformatics 15, 1–8 (2014). 
==PAGE:77==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
77 of 106 
 
39. 
Wang, F., Hidaka, T., Tsuno, H. & Tsubota, J. Co-digestion of polylactide and kitchen garbage 
in hyperthermophilic and thermophilic continuous anaerobic process. Bioresour Technol 112, 
67–74 (2012). 
40. 
Peter, S. et al. Genomic characterisation of clinical and environmental Pseudomonas putida 
group strains and determination of their role in the transfer of antimicrobial resistance genes 
to Pseudomonas aeruginosa. BMC Genomics 18, (2017). 
41. 
Yao, J. & Rock, C. O. Exogenous Fatty Acid Metabolism in Bacteria. Biochimie 141, 30 (2017). 
42. 
Pavoncello, V., Barras, F. & Bouveret, E. Degradation of Exogenous Fatty Acids in Escherichia 
coli. Biomolecules 12, (2022). 
43. 
Kihara, A. Very long-chain fatty acids: elongation, physiology and related disorders. J Biochem 
152, 387–395 (2012). 
44. 
Gyamfi, D., Awuah, E. O. & Owusu, S. Lipid Metabolism: An Overview. The Molecular 
Nutrition of Fats 17–32 (2019) doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-811297-7.00002-0. 
45. 
Jimenez-Diaz, L., Caballero, A. & Segura, A. Pathways for the Degradation of Fatty Acids in 
Bacteria. Aerobic Utilization of Hydrocarbons, Oils and Lipids 1–23 (2017) doi:10.1007/978-3-
319-39782-5_42-1. 
46. 
Martinelle, M. & Bioteknologi, I. Biochemistry 7th edition. 1, 1–5 (2014). 
47. 
Fatty Alcohol: Most Up-to-Date Encyclopedia, News & Reviews. https://academic-
accelerator.com/encyclopedia/fatty-alcohol. 
48. 
Dasouki, M. Peroxisomal disorders: Clinical and biochemical laboratory aspects. Biomarkers 
in Inborn Errors of Metabolism 235–282 (2017) doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-802896-4.00007-9. 
49. 
Environment Agency, T. OECD SIDS Long chain alcohols SIDS Initial Assessment Report For 
SIAM 22. (2006). 
50. 
Valoppi, F., Calligaris, S. & Marangoni, A. G. Stearyl Alcohol Oleogels. Edible Oleogels 219–234 
(2018) doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-814270-7.00009-5. 
51. 
Sander, M., Kohler, H. P. E. & McNeill, K. Assessing the environmental transformation of 
nanoplastic through 13C-labelled polymers. Nat Nanotechnol 14, 301–303 (2019). 
52. 
Development, O. for E. C. and. OECD guideline for testing of chemicals - Ready 
Biodegradability. (1992). 
53. 
Mielczarek, A. T. et al. The Microbial Database for Danish wastewater treatment plants with 
nutrient removal (MiDas-DK) - a tool for understanding activated sludge population dynamics 
and community stability. Water Sci Technol 67, 2519–2526 (2013). 
54. 
Rist, S., Baun, A. & Hartmann, N. B. Ingestion of micro- and nanoplastics in Daphnia magna – 
Quantification of body burdens and assessment of feeding rates and reproduction. 
Environmental Pollution 228, 398–407 (2017). 
==PAGE:78==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
78 of 106 
 
55. 
Mitrano, D. M. et al. Synthesis of metal-doped nanoplastics and their utility to investigate 
fate and behaviour in complex environmental systems. Nature Nanotechnology 2019 14:4 14, 
362–368 (2019). 
56. 
Wei, R., Oeser, T., Billig, S. & Zimmermann, W. A high-throughput assay for enzymatic 
polyester hydrolysis activity by fluorimetric detection. Biotechnol J 7, 1517–1521 (2012). 
57. 
Dreschhoff, G., Jungner, H. & Laird, C. M. Deuterium–hydrogen ratios, electrical conductivity 
and nitrate for high-resolution dating of polar ice cores. Stockholm Uni Press 72, 1–6 (2020). 
58. 
Meija, J., Mester, Z. & Ulivo, A. D. ’. Mass Spectrometric Separation and Quantitation of 
Overlapping Isotopologues. H 2 O/HOD/D 2 O and H 2 Se/HDSe/D 2 Se Mixtures. (2006) 
doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2006.02.008. 
59. 
L. Pavia, D., M. Lampman, G., S. Kriz, G. & R. Vyvyan, J. Introduction to spectroscopy. 
(Cengage Learning, 2015). 
60. 
Litvak, I., Anker, Y. & Cohen, H. On-line in situ determination of deuterium content in water 
via FTIR spectroscopy. (2018) doi:10.1039/c8ra03312a. 
61. 
Global plastic production share by type 2018 | Statista. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/968808/distribution-of-global-plastic-production-by-
type/. 
62. 
Properties of Polystyrene. 
https://polymerdatabase.com/polymer%20classes/Polystyrene%20type.html. 
63. 
Ward, C. P., Armstrong, C. J., Walsh, A. N., Jackson, J. H. & Reddy, C. M. Sunlight Converts 
Polystyrene to Carbon Dioxide and Dissolved Organic Carbon. (2019) 
doi:10.1021/acs.estlett.9b00532. 
64. 
Sikandar Shah, S., Ahmad, I. & Ishaq, M. Degradation study of used polystyrene with UV 
irradiation. Advanced Material Science 2, (2017). 
65. 
Kim, H. W. et al. Biodegradation of polystyrene by bacteria from the soil in common 
environments. J Hazard Mater 416, 126239 (2021). 
66. 
Pacheco-Torgal, F., Ding, Y. & Jalali, S. Properties and durability of concrete containing 
polymeric wastes (tyre rubber and polyethylene terephthalate bottles): An overview. (2012) 
doi:10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2011.11.047. 
67. 
Polybutadiene. https://www.polymerdatabase.com/Elastomers/BR.html. 
68. 
Sivan, A., Szanto, M. & Pavlov, V. Biofilm development of the polyethylene-degrading 
bacterium Rhodococcus ruber. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 72, 346–352 (2006). 
69. 
Yoon, M. G., Jeon, H. J. & Kim, M. N. Biodegradation of Polyethylene by a Soil Bacterium and 
AlkB Cloned Recombinant Cell. Journal of Bioremediation & Biodegradation 2012 3:4 3, 1–8 
(2012). 
70. 
Polyisoprene Elastomers - Chemical Economics Handbook (CEH) | S&P Global. 
https://www.spglobal.com/commodityinsights/en/ci/products/polyisoprene-elastomers-
chemical-economics-handbook.html. 
==PAGE:79==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
79 of 106 
 
71. 
Ali Shah, A., Hasan, F., Shah, Z., Kanwal, N. & Zeb, S. Biodegradation of natural and synthetic 
rubbers: A review. Int Biodeterior Biodegradation 83, 145–157 (2013). 
72. 
Linos, A. et al. Biodegradation of cis-1,4-Polyisoprene Rubbers by Distinct Actinomycetes: 
Microbial Strategies and Detailed Surface Analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol 66, 1639 (2000). 
73. 
Reusch, W., Farmer, S. & Schaller, C. Chain-Growth Polymers - Chemistry LibreTexts. 
Michigan State University 
https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Organic_Chemistry/Organic_Chemistry_%28Morsc
h_et_al.%29/Chapter_31%3A_Synthetic_Polymers/31.1%3A_Chain-Growth_Polymers 
(2013). 
74. 
Bywater, S. & Worsfold, D. J. Anionic polymerization of styrene effect of tetrahydrofuran. 
https://doi.org/10.1139/v62-236 40, 1564–1570 (2011). 
75. 
Morton, M. Organolithium polymerization of dienes. in Anionic polymerization principles and 
practice 146–153 (Academic press, 1983). 
76. 
Worsfold, D. J. & Bywater, S. ANIONIC POLYMERIZATION OF ISOPRENE1. Can. J. Chem. 
Downloaded from cdnsciencepub 42, (1964). 
77. 
Quirk, R. P. & Chen, W.-C. Functionalization of polymeric organolithium compounds. 
Carbonation. Die Makromolekulare Chemie 183, 2071–2076 (1982). 
78. 
Wall, L. A. & Aldridge, M. H. The Glass Transition Temperature of Monodispersed 
Polystyrenes and Their Binary Mixtures *. JOURNAL OF RESEARCH of the National Bureau of 
Standards-A. Physics and Chemistry 78, (1974). 
79. 
Huang, Y. et al. A facile end-functionalization of polystyrene by ATRP and click chemistry: 
Chain end effect on the glass transition temperature. React Funct Polym 151, 104566 (2020). 
80. 
Holý, P., Havlík, M., Tichý, M., Závada, J. & Císařová, I. Synthesis and Self-Assembly of 9,9’-
Spirobifluorene-2,2’,7,7’-tetracarboxylic Acid and Its Tetraamide. Non-Catenated Formation 
of Achiral Grid Layers with Large Chiral Pores. Collect Czechoslov Chem Commun 71, 139–154 
(2006). 
81. 
Charles M. Hansen. Hansen Solubility Parameters A User’s handbook. (CRC Press, 2000). 
82. 
Clever, H. L. Carbon dioxide in non-aqueous solvents at pressures less than 200 KPA. vol. 50 
(Pergamon Press, 1992). 
83. 
McMurry, J. Fundamentals of organic chemistry. (Mary Finch, 2011). 
84. 
Reusch, W. Hydrogenation of Alkenes - Chemistry LibreTexts. Michigan State University 
https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Organic_Chemistry/Supplemental_Modules_%28Or
ganic_Chemistry%29/Alkenes/Reactivity_of_Alkenes/Stereoselectivity_in_Addition_Reaction
s_to_Double_Bonds/Hydrogenation_of_Alkenes (2013). 
85. 
C. Harris, D. Quantitative Chemical Analysis. (Parker, Kate, 2016). 
86. 
Choi, S. & Ha, S.-H. Influence of Sample Preparation Method and Silver Salt Types on MALDI-
TOFMS Analysis of Polybutadiene. Macromol Res 16, 108–112 (2008). 
==PAGE:80==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
80 of 106 
 
87. 
Williams, D. B. G. & Lawton, M. Drying of organic solvents: Quantitative evaluation of the 
efficiency of several desiccants. Journal of Organic Chemistry 75, 8351–8354 (2010). 
88. 
Selke, S. et al. Evaluation of biodegradation-promoting additives for plastics. Environ Sci 
Technol 49, 3769–3777 (2015). 
89. 
Almdal, K. Absolute molar mas distribution determination by size exculsion chromatography 
synthesis of narrow molar mass distribution polymers. (Risø National Laboratories, 1989). 
90. 
Tsuchii, A., Suzuki, T. & Seiichi, F. Bacterial Degradation of 1,4-Type Poly butadiene. Agric Biol 
Chem 48, 621–625 (1984). 
91. 
Valentini, L. & Manchado, M. A. L. Classification of rubbers and components for harsh 
environmental systems. High-Performance Elastomeric Materials Reinforced by Nano-
Carbons: Multifunctional Properties and Industrial Applications 1–14 (2020) 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-816198-2.00001-3. 
  
10 Appendix 
10.1 Chemicals 
Table 11: Overview of all chemicals used throughout the project. 
1.4M sec-butyl lithium in cyclohexane 
1,3-butadiene 
 
106-99-0 
Phenolphtalein 
 
77-09-8 
Aluminium Oxide 
Alumina 
1344-28-1 
Diethyl ether 
Et2O 
60-29-7 
Isoprene 
 
78-79-5 
Calcium Hydride 
CaH2 
Dibutyl Magnesium 1M in heptane 
DiBuMg 
Toluene 
 
108-88-3 
Acetone 
 
67-64-1 
Sodiumhydroxide 
NaOH 
Benzophenone 
 
119-61-9 
Sodium 
Na 
7440-23-5 
Molecular sieves 3Å 
 
otassium dihydrogen phosphate
==PAGE:81==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
81 of 106 
 
Na2HPO4•2H2O 
MgSO4•6H2O 
 
FeCl•6H2O 
Ethylene oxide 
EO 
5% Palladium oxide on charcoal 
Pd 
7440-05-3 
 
10.2 FT-IR 
In this section are the full size IR spectra for CPS1 and CPS4. 
Figure 55: IR spectra for CPS1. 
Figure 56: IR spectra for CPS4. 
10.3 Polymer samples 
Table 12: Overview of the polymer samples, abbreviations and appearance. 
No. 
Name 
Description 
Appearance 
1 
CPS1 
Polystyrene, functionalized with CO2 
White powder 
==PAGE:82==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
82 of 106 
 
2 
CPS2 
Polystyrene - terminated prematurely 
Viscous pale yellow oil 
3 
CPS3 
THF test 
(Clear liquid, unprecipitated so far) 
4 
CPS4 
Polystyrene, functionalized with CO2 
White powder 
5 
CPS900 
Carboxy polystyrene, purchased 
White powder 
6 
PBD-OH 
Monohydroxylated polybutadiene 
approx.  
Clear liquid 
7 
PE-OH 
Polyethylene with OH end group made by 
saturating PBD-OH 
Viscous solid 
8 
PIP-OH 
Polyisoprene functionalized with OH end 
group 
Liquid 
9 
PIP 
Polyisoprene sample from PIP-OH synthesis 
prior to functionalization 
Liquid 
 
10.4 SEC chromatograms 
 
Figure 57: SEC chromatogram for CPS900. 
 
Figure 58: SEC chromatogram for CPS1. 
 
Figure 59: SEC chromatogram for CPS4. 
 
Figure 60: SEC chromatogram for PBD-OH. 
==PAGE:83==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
83 of 106 
 
Figure 61: SEC chromatogram for PIP. 
Figure 62: SEC chromatogram for PIP-OH. 
 
10.5 MALDI-TOF  
The individual MALDI-TOF measurements for all polymer samples, PS 1250 standard, as well as examined 
PS oligomers are shown in this section.  
The order is: PS1250, CPS900, CPS1, CPS4, PIP, PIP-OH, PBD-OH, PS Oligomers 2,4,7,8,9. 
Figure 63: MALDI-TOF for PS 1250 in the range 700-2500 m/z. 
==PAGE:84==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
84 of 106 
 
Figure 64: MALDI-TOF for CPS1 in the range 700-2000 m/z 
Figure 65: MALDI-TOF for CPS900 in the range 500-3000 m/z. 
==PAGE:85==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
85 of 106 
 
Figure 66: MALDI-TOF for CPS4 in the range 700-2500 m/z. 
10.5.2 PBD-OH 
Figure 67: MALDI-TOF for PBD-OH in the range 500-1500 m/z. 
==PAGE:86==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
86 of 106 
 
10.5.3 PIP and PIP-OH 
Figure 68: MALDI-TOF for PIP in the range 500-2000 m/z. 
Figure 69: MALDI-TOF for PIP-OH in the range 500-2000 m/z. 
==PAGE:87==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
87 of 106 
 
10.5.4 PS Oligomers 
Figure 70: MALDI-TOF for 2 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z. 
Figure 71: MALDI-TOF for 4 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z. 
==PAGE:88==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
88 of 106 
 
Figure 72: MALDI-TOF for 7 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z. 
Figure 73: MALDI-TOF for 8 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z. 
==PAGE:89==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
89 of 106 
 
Figure 74: MALDI-TOF for 9 unit oligomer PS in the range 100-1000 m/z. 
10.6 NMR 
The NMR spectra for each sample are shown in this section, grouped so that the different types of NMR 
measurements for each sample are kept together. 
10.6.1 CPS1 
Figure 75: H-NMR for CPS1 with peak detection. 
==PAGE:90==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
90 of 106 
 
Figure 76: 13C-NMR for CPS1 with peak detection. 
10.6.2 CPS4 
Figure 77: H-NMR spectra for CPS4 with peak detection. 
==PAGE:91==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
91 of 106 
 
Figure 78: 13C-NMR spectra for CPS4 with peak detection. 
10.6.3 PBD-OH 
Figure 79: H-NMR spectra for PBD-OH with peak detection and integrals. 
==PAGE:92==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
92 of 106 
 
Figure 80: 13C-NMR spectra for PBD-OH with peak detection 
10.6.4 PE-OH 
Figure 81: Solid state CP/MAS 13C-NMR for PE-OH with peak detection. 
==PAGE:93==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
93 of 106 
 
10.6.5 PIP and PIP-OH 
Figure 82: H-NMR of PIP-OH with peak detection and integrals. 
Figure 83: 13C-NMR spectra for PIP-OH with peak detection and integrals. 
==PAGE:94==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
94 of 106 
 
Figure 84: H-NMR for PIP with peak detection and integrals. 
 
Figure 85: 13C-NMR for PIP with peak detection. 
==PAGE:95==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
95 of 106 
 
10.7 Biodegradation data 
10.7.1 Stock solutions according to OECD 301F 
Four stock solutions, A, B, C and D, as described in Table 13 were prepared in 1 L of milliQ water each. 
Mineral media was then prepared prior to the test by mixing 70 mL of solution A and 7 mL of solution B, C 
and D respectively with 7 L of milliQ water. 
Table 13: Stock solutions for respirometer test. 
Stock solution 
Chemicals 
 
Concentration (g/L) 
A 
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate 
Dipotassium hydrogen phosphate 
Disodium hydrogen phosphate 
dihydrate 
Ammonium chloride 
 
pH adjusted to 7.4 with HCl 
KH2PO4 
K2HPO4 
Na2HPO4•2H2O 
NH4Cl 
8,5 
21,75 
33,4 
0,5 
B 
 
Calcium chloride, anhydrous 
CaCl2 
 
27,5 
 
C 
Magnesium sulphate 
heptahydrate 
MgSO4•7H2O 
22,5 
D 
Iron (III) chloride hexahydrate 
FeCl3•H2O 
0,25 
 
10.7.2 Sample, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH measurement. 
Table 14: Samples, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH measurements for Batch 1 of respirometer test. 
Batch 1 
Flask # 
Sample (mg) 
Media (g) 
Inoculum (µL) 
Total (g) 
pH 
1 blank 
0 
364,75 
387 
365,137 
2 blank 
0 
364,7 
387 
365,087 
3 blank 
0 
364,7 
387 
365,087 
4 Sodium acetate 273,9 mg/L 
100,3 
364,71 
387 
365,097 
5 Sodium acetate 273,9 mg/L 
100,1 
364,7 
387 
365,087 
6 Sodium acetate 273,9 mg/L 
99,7 
364,73 
387 
365,117 
7 CPS-900 
99,7 
364,74 
387 
365,127 
8 CPS-900 
100,7 
364,71 
387 
365,097 
9 CPS-900 
100,7 
364,78 
387 
365,167 
10 CPS4 
100,5 
364,7 
387 
365,087 
11 CPS4 
99,7 
364,72 
387 
365,107 
12 CPS4 
99,9 
364,71 
387 
365,097 
13 PCL PEO particles 
12,3 
364,73 
387 
365,117 
14 PCL PEO particles 
12,1 
364,79 
387 
365,177 
15 PCL PEO particles 
12,1 
364,71 
387 
365,097 
16 Sodium acetate 100mg/L 
36,5 
364,69 
387 
365,077 
17 Sodium acetate 100mg/L 
36,7 
364,73 
387 
365,117 
18 Sodium acetate 100mg/L 
36,8 
364,66 
387 
365,047 
 
==PAGE:96==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
96 of 106 
 
Table 15: Samples, media and inoculum amounts as well as final pH measurements for Batch 2 of respirometer test. 
Batch 2 
Sample (mg) 
Media (g) 
Inoculum 
(µL) 
Total (g) 
pH 
1 blank 
 
 
 
 
2 blank 
 
 
 
 
3 blank 
 
 
 
 
4 Sodium acetate 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
5 Sodium acetate 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
6 Sodium acetate 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
7 PE-OH 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
8 PE-OH 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
9 PE-OH 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
10 PBD-OH 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
11 PBD-OH 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
12 PBD-OH 100 mg/L 
 
 
 
 
 
10.7.3 Calculated ThOD 
Table 16: ThOD calculations for Batch 1 of respirometer test. 
Flask # 
ThOD (mg O2/mg) 
ThOD (mg O2) 
ThOD (mg O2/L) 
4 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
 
 
Table 17: ThOD calculations for Batch 2 of OxiTop test. 
Flask # 
ThOD (mg O2/mg) 
ThOD (mg O2) 
ThOD (mg O2/L) 
4 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
97 of 106 
 
 
10.7.4 Graphs for blank samples, Sodium acetate and polymers 
These graphs show average values of the BOD (mg/mL) measured for the blank samples and the 
BODs(t)/ThOD (%) for the samples containing Sodium acetate or polymer sample.  
Figure 86: Average blank measurements from batch 1 of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
==PAGE:98==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
98 of 106 
 
Figure 87: Average blank measurements from batch 2 of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
Figure 88: Average Sodium acetate measurements from batch 1 of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
==PAGE:99==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
99 of 106 
 
Figure 89: Average Sodium acetate measurements from batch 2 of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
Figure 90: Average measurements of CPS1 from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
==PAGE:100==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
100 of 106 
 
Figure 91: Average measurements of CPS900 from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
 
Figure 92: Average measurements of PBD-OH from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
==PAGE:101==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
101 of 106 
 
Figure 93: Average measurements of PE-OH from of respirometer test. The shaded area shows the standard error. 
10.7.5 Biofilm and bacteria colonies 
 
Figure 94: The largest pieces of PE-
OH from each bottle was removed 
and inspected at the end of the 35-
day respirometer test. The polymer 
had started out light gray in color, 
but had brown microbial growth 
attached to the surface by the end 
of the test. 
 
Figure 95: The top layer of liquid in each bottle with PBD-OH was extracted to illustrate the 
growth of the white bacteria colonies forming inside the PBD-OH droplets on the surface of the 
inoculum after 35 days. The bacteria colonies were clearly forming within oily droplets of PBD-
OH and not directly in the aqueous inoculum.  
 
10.8 Synthesis additional information 
The values used to calculate the amounts of solvents, monomer, initiator and functionalization compound 
for the different synthesis’ are given in the tables in this section. 
==PAGE:102==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
102 of 106 
 
10.8.1 PS synthesis Calculations 
Table 18: Experimental values for monomer, solvents and initiator for the polystyrene syntheses. The theoretical heat of reaction 
and the potential heating if only solvent is considered. The amount of CO2 needed for functionalization to ensure that it was under 
1L. 
CPS1 
CPS2 
CPS3 
CPS4 
Polymer unit length 
6,41 
5,03 
6,98 
11,12 
Polymer (g/mol) 
769,51 
625,66 
829,34 
1260,08 
Polymer (g) 
13,04 
13,53 
1,04 
10,85 
Polymer (mol) 
0,0169 
0,0216 
0,0013 
0,0086 
Styrene (g/mol) 
104,15 
104,15 
104,15 
104,15 
Start group sBu (g/mol) 
57,12 
57,12 
57,12 
57,12 
End group COOH (g/mol) 
45,02 
45,02 
45,02 
45,02 
Styrene (g) 
11,31 
11,32 
0,91 
9,97 
Styrene (mol) 
0,109 
0,109 
0,009 
0,096 
Styrene (mL) 
12,4 
12,5 
1,0 
11,0 
Initiator (mol) 
0,01694 0,021625 
0,00125 
0,00861 
sec-BLi Vol (mL) 
22 
17,3 
1,00 
7 
sec-Bli conc (mol/L) 
0,77 
1,25 
1,25 
1,23 
Cyclohexane (mL) 
133,2 
127,0 
9,0 
98,6 
Cyclohexane (g) 
103,09 
98,28 
6,97 
69,43 
Cyclohexane (mol) 
1,2250 
1,1678 
0,0828 
0,8250 
THF (mL) 
- 
37,7 
50,0 
30,0 
THF (g) 
- 
33,46 
44,38 
26,63 
THF (mol) 
- 
1,3629 
0,0966 
0,9628 
 
 
 
 
 
Heat of reaction (kJ) 
7,71 
7,72 
0,62 
6,80 
Heat of reaction (J) 
7706,97 
7717,75 
619,67 
6796,58 
Solvent heating ΔT (⁰C) 
40,5 
23,6 
26,7 
29,4 
Mol CO2 needed 
0,0169 
0,0216 
0,0013 
0,0086 
CO2 (g) 
0,75 
0,95 
0,06 
0,38 
CO2 (L) 
0,377 
0,481 
0,028 
0,191 
 
10.8.2 PBD synthesis calculations 
 
Table 19: Experimental values for monomer, solvents and initiator for the PBD-OH synthesis, as well as the amount of dibutyl 
magnesium used and ethylene oxide.  
PBD-OH 
Polymer unit length 
17,15 
Polymer (g/mol) 
1001,74 
==PAGE:103==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
103 of 106 
 
Polymer (g) 
35,06 
Polymer (mol) 
0,035 
Butadiene (g/mol) 
54,09 
Start group sBu (g/mol) 
57,12 
End group OH (g/mol) 
17,00 
Butadiene (g) 
38,45 
Butadiene (mol) 
0,600 
Butadiene (mL) 
50 
sBuLi (mol) 
0,035 
sBuLi in cyclohexane (mL) 
25 
sBuLi (mol/L) 
1,41 
Cyclohexane (mL) 
273,94 
Cyclohexane (g) 
212,0 
Cyclohexane (mol) 
2,519 
Dibutyl magnesium (mL) 
2 
Ethylene Oxide (mL) 
8,1 
 
10.8.3 PIP synthesis calculations 
Table 20: Experimental values for monomer, solvents and initiator for the PIP-OH synthesis, as well as the amount of dibutyl 
magnesium used and ethylene oxide. The theoretical heat of reaction and the potential heating if only solvent is considered.  
PIP-OH 
Polymer unit length 
21,06 
Polymer (g/mol) 
1508,3 
Polymer (g) 
21,49 
Polymer (mol) 
0,014 
Isoprene (g/mol) 
68,11 
Start group sBu 
(g/mol) 
57,07 
End group OH (g/mol) 
17,01 
Monomer (g) 
20,43 
monomer (mol) 
0,300 
monomer vol (mL) 
30 
Initiator (mol) 
0,014245 
sec-BLi Vol (mL) 
18,5 
sec-BLi m (g) 
14,2265 
Cyclohexane (mL) 
293,3196 
==PAGE:104==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
104 of 106 
 
Cyclohexane (g) 
227 
Cyclohexane (mol) 
2,697243 
Dibutyl magnesium mL 
0,5 
Ethylene oxide (mL) 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.8.4 Kinetics and reaction rate  
The reaction rate, kapp, of anionic polymerization for polyisoprene and polybutadiene is highly temperature 
dependent and the approximate reaction rates for both PBD-OH and PIP-OH synthesis were calculated via 
equation
), where [I] is the concentration of initiator in the full reaction solution volume: 
 
𝑘𝑎𝑝𝑝= 𝑘𝑝∙𝐾𝑒𝑞
√4
[𝐼]1/4 
The values for 
𝑘𝑝∙𝐾𝑒𝑞
√4
∙(104 ∙𝑀
1
4 ∙𝑠−1) for butadiene and isoprene in n-hexane were used for calculating an 
approximate reaction time for full conversion in the synthesis of polybutadiene and polyisoprene. Although 
the synthesis performed in this project used cyclohexane as a solvent, it is assumed that the similarity of 
the apolar solvents will result in comparable reaction rates. 
Table 21: Values for estimating reaction time of polybutadiene and polyisoprene in n-hexane at different temperatures. 89 
 
Temperature (⁰C) 
𝑘𝑝∙𝐾𝑒𝑞
√4
∙(104 ∙𝑀−1
4 ∙𝑠−1) 
20 
30 
40 
Isoprene 
2,9 
7,9 
24 
Butadiene 
0,52 
1,7 
4,2 
 
An example for PBD-OH reaction rate at 20⁰C is shown in the equations below and Table 22 shows the 
calculated values for both PBD-OH and PIP-OH. 
Initiator concentration: 
 
[𝐼] = 25𝑚𝐿∙1,41𝑀
357𝑚𝐿
= 0,098𝑀 
Reaction rate at 20⁰C: 
 
𝑘𝑎𝑝𝑝= 0,52 ∙(10−4 ∙𝑀−1/4 ∙𝑠−1) ∙(0,098𝑀)1/4 = 2,91 ∙10−5𝑠−1 
 
The reaction rate can then be used to estimate the reaction time via equation 
), where ty is the  
conversion percentage. 
 
𝑡𝑦=
ln (
1
1 −𝑦)
𝑘𝑎𝑝𝑝
 
==PAGE:105==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
105 of 106 
 
 
The reaction time necessary for 99% conversion was then used to estimate the necessary reaction time: 
 
𝑡0,99 =
ln ( 1
0.01)
2,91 ∙10−5 = 1,5 ∙104𝑠 
Table 22: Reaction rate estimations for the synthesis of PBD-OH and PIP-OH. 
PBD-OH 
PIP-OH 
Reaction solution (ml) 
357,0 
343,2 
Initiator conc (mol/L) 
0,098 
0,091 
[Initiator conc]^(1/4) 
0,55955 
0,54888 
kapp 20°C 
2,91E-05 
0,000115 
99% conversion time (h) 
43,96 
11,10 
kapp 40°C 
0,00024 
0,00132 
99% conversion time (h) 
5,44 
0,97 
 
10.8.5 Detailed reaction description of hydrogenation 
The polymer sample was poured into a 250mL round bottom flask with a magnet and 200mL cyclohexane. 
The flask was closed with a rubber septum, and bubbled through with nitrogen and stirred while the 
polymer dissolves. 
Per gram of polymer, 2,5g of 5% unreduced palladium oxide on calcium carbonate was used and placed in a 
hydrogenation autoclave with a stirring magnet. The ring seal is placed between the lid and bottom of the 
autoclave and all the bolts are tightened with a torque wrench to 20 Nm a minimum of three times. 
Once the autoclave was closed it was connected to the hydrogen source at valve A, as well as 
thermoelement c, the heating element was adjusted up and a flexible metal tube from the pump manifold 
at valve C as shown in Figure 32.  
The autoclave was evacuated by opening tap E on manifold 2 while heating gradually up to 120⁰C in 3 
steps. The evacuation was stopped once the pressure was below 200mtorr by closing the C tap. The 
hydrogen was then added up to 5 bar and the autoclave was left at 120⁰C for 1h to bake the catalyst. The 
temperature was then set to 0⁰C and cooled to an actual temperature of maximum 40⁰C while the 
autoclave was evacuated again to 200mtorr.  
The needle f was pushed through the septa on the polymer flask without submerging in the liquid while the 
polymer solution was still bubbled through with nitrogen, to push nitrogen through the f needle. The f 
needle tube is then attached to tap B while having an nitrogen flow.  
Valve A and C were closed, and valve B was opened to let in the polymer solution. Tap E was closed, and 
tap F was opened to fill manifold 2 with nitrogen, the pressure of nitrogen was adjusted on the valve at the 
nitrogen tube.  
Valve C was then opened to let nitrogen into the autoclave to an absolute pressure of 0,3 bar and then 
valve F and tap C were closed again. Valve B was opened to let the polymer solution into the autoclave 
==PAGE:106==
Maria Holst Riise (s164125)                                                                                DTU Chemistry & DTU Environment 
106 of 106 
 
without any nitrogen, then closed again. 200ml additional solvent was added through the polymer flask in 2 
batches and bubbled through with nitrogen while stirring for 1 min prior to adding it to the autoclave. 
Any nitrogen that might have entered the autoclave was removed (through Valve C, tap E). All taps and 
valves were closed and the tube attached to valve C was disconnected. 
The main valve on the hydrogen flask was opened and pressure was adjusted before opening valve D to let 
in hydrogen to manifold 1. Valve A was carefully opened to let hydrogen into the autoclave. Until a 
pressure of 35 bar was reached, then closed again.  
After O/N reaction time the pressure was lowered to 7 bar by opened valve C and letting hydrogen out. 
Once the temperature had settled to 80⁰C the solution was filtered.  
The nitrogen tube was attached to connection u in Figure 32, while valve G was open. A collection flask was 
placed under the filter and a pipe is connected from the autoclave at valve B to the filter by putting it 
through valve G. The polymer sample then flowed to the filter once valve B was opened. When the entire 
solution was moved to the filter valve G was closed to create an overpressure to push the solution through 
the filter.  
All equipment was cleaned immediately after use or reheated for cleaning to avoid any leftover polymer 
drying in the parts.  
10.8.6 Oligomer separation 
The oligomers used in this project were prepared in an earlier project as follows: 
PS 1250 standard was separated using SEC fractionation with an analytical Nucleosil column and a 
preparatory Kromasil column with a volume of 43mL. 500µL polymer solution with a concentrations of 
20mg/mL was injected and the column temperature was at 40⁰C. 
The eluent composition was changed from THF/MeOH 34,5/65,5 vol% to 41/59 vol% in the transfer 
between the columns. During collection of the fractions the polymer came out over approximately 39 mL, 
with an eluent rate of 5 mL/min. 
The polymer fractions were collected in the volumes: 
Fraction 1: 12 mL 
Fraction 2: 6 mL 
Fraction 3: 3 mL 
Fraction 4: 3 mL 
Fraction 5: 6 mL 
Fraction 6: 9 mL  
MALDI-TOF was used to analyze the fractions. 
