==PAGE:1==
Earthworm tissue serves as a
scaffold for CT26 mCherry cells
in a 3D environment
Authors
Sabrina Saleh
Student number: S193365
Supervisors
Professor Andrew Urquhart
Ph.D. student Grace de Malona Eriksen
35 ETCS
August 6, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
CCD Charge-coupled device
CPA
Cryoprotective agents
DAPI 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DE
Decellularization
ECM Extracellular matrix
FBS
Fetal bovine serum
GAGs Glycosaminoglycans
P/S
Pencilin-Streptomycin
PBS
Phosphate Buffered Saline
PLGA Polylactic co-glycolic acid
RE
Recellularization
RM
Regenerative medicine
RPMI Roswell Park Memorial Institute
SDS
Sodium Dodecyl sulfate
SLES Sodium Lauryl Ether Sulfate
TE
Tissue Engineering
WT
Worm Tissue
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Acknowledgement
1
1.1
Statement of conformity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Abstract
2
3
Introduction
3
4
Background
4
4.1
Regenerative medicine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2
Tissue engineering and scaffolds strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.3
Decellularization and Recellularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.3.1
Chemical agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.4
Literatture review of Decellularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.5
Earthworms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.6
Extracellular matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.6.1
Extracellular matrix in mammalian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.6.2
Extracellular matrix of earthworms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Aim
15
6
Methods & Materials
16
6.1
Culturing of CT26 mCherry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.2
Decellularization and Recellularization of earthworm
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6.3
Infusing of CT26 mCherry in worm tissue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.4
Staining worm tissue with DAPI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.5
Light microscope zeiss axio observer 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
7
Resultat and Analysis
22
7.1
Decellularization method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7.2
DAPI staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7.3
CT26 mCherry expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7.4
Decellularized worm tissue without CT26 mCherry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.5
Decellularized worm tissue with CT26 mCherry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8
Discussion
33
8.1
Optimization of the Decellularization process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.2
The outcome of the decellularization method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8.3
DAPI staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.4
CT26 mCherry expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.5
Decellularized worm tissue without CT26 mCherry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8.6
Decellularized worm tissue with CT26 mCherry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
9
Future Work
43
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Contents
9.1
Chemical detergents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
9.2
Perfusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
9.3
Freeze-Thaw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
10 Conclusion
46
References
47
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
1
Acknowledgement
1
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my supervisor, Andrew Urquhart, and Grace
De Malona Eriksen, for their unwavering support and invaluable guidance throughout the
project. Their assistance and advice have been helpful in the successful completion of my
experiment. I am also deeply grateful to Helene Ringvig and Lotte Nielsen, for generously
providing me with the necessary cells and chemicals, as well as their invaluable assistance
throughout the project. Furthermore, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Hakan
Gurbuz, for his expert supervision of the microscope and his unwavering support during
difficult times. His encouragement and guidance were an invaluable source of strength and
motivation throughout the project.
Lastly, I would like to express my special thanks to my husband, family, and friends for their
unending love and support. They stood by my side, providing encouragement and taking
care of my daughter while I was away from them. Their unwavering support has been a
constant source of strength and inspiration, and I am forever grateful.
1.1
Statement of conformity
The studies were performed at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark. This took place from February 2023 to August 2023 and constituted a project
equivalent to 35 ECTS-points. The studies were conducted in compliance with the general
guidelines outlined in the program requirements for the Master Thesis in Pharmaceutical
Design and Engineering.
All experiments were conducted at the Department of Health
Technology at the Technical University of Denmark’s facilities.
Page 1 of 46
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
2
Abstract
2
Abstract
Organ and tissue failure is a significant health issue. Traditional transplantation techniques
have limitations due to the need for more donors. Tissue engineering (TE) aims to regen-
erate tissues and organs to restore normal function. Decellularization (DE) is a promising
technique that has the potential to generate organs and tissues for use in transplantation and
regenerative medicine (RM). It involves removing cellular material from organs or tissues,
creating a nonimmunogenic graft that can be recellularized with stem cells or the patient’s
own cells.
Earthworm is a remarkable creature with the ability to endure extremely harsh environ-
mental conditions. Additionally, when injured, these creatures have the unique ability to
regenerate their bodies. The factors mentioned above have sparked a curiosity to delve into
the possibility of utilizing earthworm tissue as a potential scaffold in the field of TE.
The aim of this project is to extract acellular tissue from earthworms while preserving their
extracellular matrix (ECM) and vascular network. The plan was to repopulate the tissue
with epithelial cells, which is the standard approach for most DE methods. However, due to
complications and cost issues associated with obtaining epithelial cells, CT26 mCherry cells
were selected as an alternative for repopulation. These particular cells can be easily accessed
and identified due to their distinct trait of emitting a red fluorescent protein. Therefore, the
worm tissue (WT) will serve as a scaffold for the CT26 mCherry cells in a 3D environment
To investigate whether earthworm tissue can be used as a scaffold, a section of earthworm
was decellularized with 4% SDS by perfusing the detergent via gravity flow from a reservoir.
The decellularized earthworm tissue was then perfused with CT26 mCherry cell line, a type
of colorectal carcinoma found in BALB/c mice expressing a red fluorescent signal. The CT26
mCherry cell line was selected because it emits a red fluorescent signal that can be observed
through a microscope.
The application of the DE method yielded diverse results. The WT subjected to DE at-
tained a transparent state yet proved to be fragile and difficult to handle due to multiple
factors. On the other hand, the outcome of the perfusion process was successful after at-
tempting various techniques and methods. Based on the study, it is determined that the
DE of the earthworm tissue approach cannot be equated to the DE method used for mam-
malian tissue. This discovery could aid in advancing the DE technique for earthworms, and,
if optimized, may pave the way for using earthworms as scaffolds in the fields of RM and TE.
After reviewing multiple studies, it has been determined that the concentration of SDS
should not exceed 1%. Higher concentrations can be toxic to tissue and organs, leading to a
loss of the ECM structure. A potential alternative to SDS is SLES, which is less toxic and
may provide better results. Overall, there are numerous areas for improvement in the DE
process for WT so that they can serve as a scaffold for use in TE.
Page 2 of 46
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
3
Introduction
3
Introduction
A significant health issue our society faces is organ and tissue failure, which often requires
repair or replacement of the affected organ due to disease or accidents. Traditional trans-
plantation techniques rely on organs from living or deceased donors, but the gap between
donors and recipients has grown wider. Tissue engineering (TE) aims to replace or regenerate
human tissues or organs to restore normal function [1, 2]. TE is an exciting and emerging
field in biomedical sciences that focuses on regenerating and healing damaged tissue. In
recent decades, there have been significant advancements in TE, covering multiple research
areas, such as designing and processing biomaterials, improving cell-material interactions
and imaging, and surface characterization. There are various approaches for tissue regenera-
tion, including direct implantation of patient-derived cells, delivering bioactive molecules and
growth factors that target specific tissues, using cell-free scaffolding biomaterials, and devel-
oping cell-laden scaffolding structures that imitate the natural extracellular matrix (ECM)
of tissues [1, 2, 3, 4].
Recent studies have revealed a highly promising method known as decellularization (DE)
which holds potential for generating organs or tissue that could be utilized to aid patients
currently on the waiting list for such transplants. This method involves removing cellular
material from an organ or tissue, resulting in an acellular structure containing an ECM and
an intact vascular network. The elimination of cellular material makes the graft nonim-
munogenic while still maintaining the overall structure of the organ. Decellularized organs
and tissues can then be recellularized with stem cells or the patient’s own cells, creating an
autologous graft [3, 5, 6]
The use of DE technique to preserve organs and tissues for transplantation has shown great
promise. In the field of regenerative medicine (RM) and TE, DE earthworm tissue may
prove to be a valuable asset due to the unique properties of the earthworm itself. The cur-
rent project aims to utilize earthworms as a scaffold tissue for supporting CT26 mCherry
cells in a 3D environment. The utilization of CT26 mCherry is aimed at evaluating its ca-
pacity to bind to the worm tissue (WT) ECM and determining the earthworm’s potential
as a scaffold in the domain of TE.
The objective of this project is to provide an overview of the TE and DE field, with a specific
focus on the behavior of earthworms when exposed to DE and RE with CT26 mCherry. The
initial stage of the study involves DE of the earthworms to obtain acellular tissues that
preserve their ECM and vascular network. Following this, the decellularized earthworms
will be seeded with CT26 mCherry cancer cells internally. Finally, the project will observe
the CT26 mCherry cells inside the earthworm tissue to determine if they have adapted to
the internal environment of the earthworm.
Page 3 of 46
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
4
Background
4
Background
4.1
Regenerative medicine
Patients grappling with injuries or illnesses often require the transplantation of tissues or
organs.
The failure of organs and tissues presents one of our society’s most significant
challenges. Many people worldwide are in dire need of organ transplants due to traumatic
incidents or organ failure. About 17 people daily die waiting for an organ transplant, and
more than 100,000 are waiting for an organ alone in the United States [1]. Organ transplan-
tation typically requires the replacement of the affected organ by either an organ donor, alive
or deceased [2]. Researchers in the science fields of TE and RM use the ideas of cell trans-
plantation, material science, and bioengineering. This method creates natural alternatives
that will restore and tolerate normal function in diseased and damaged tissues and organs.
TE, stem cell transplantation, and cloning are just a few of the technological advancements
that fall under the umbrella of RM. One of the central principles of RM is TE, which applies
the ideas of engineering, materials science, and cell transplantation to creating biological
replacements that can maintain and restore the normal function of tissue and organ[7].
4.2
Tissue engineering and scaffolds strategies
One of the main types of TE strategies is using acellular matrices, which rely on the body’s
fundamental capacity to regenerate for optimal direction and orientation of new tissue growth
and matrices with cells [7]. Acellular tissue is often created by creating synthetic scaffolds
or mechanically and chemically removing cells from tissues to create collagen-rich matrices.
ECM proteins, released by the ingrowing cells, typically replace these matrices, which tend
to degenerate slowly upon implantation [8]. In order to restore or establish the normal func-
tion of a tissue, TE aims to replace or regenerate human tissues or organs.
There are three essential components of the TE; triad cells, scaffolds, and signaling molecules
that support one another. In particular, the scaffold offers structural, pharmacological, and
biomechanical cues to direct and manage cell activity, tissue growth, and integrated signal-
ing molecules[2]. There are numerous techniques and materials for TE, both natural and
synthetic, that can be used to create scaffolds. Synthetic scaffolds are advantageous because
their mechanical characteristics and structure may be altered and controlled to create the
ideal environment for a specific cell type or set of cells. Topography and Matrix stiffness are
characteristics that significantly impact how cells differentiate and grow.
In TE, soft hydrogels have been employed for soft tissues, while stiffer polymers such as
polylactic co-glycolic acid (PLGA) have been used in engineering bone tissue and cartilage.
These materials benefit from their programmable mechanical characteristics and customiz-
able composition[9, 10].
Interestingly, a matrix with rigidity comparable to genuine tissue can encourage differenti-
ation towards a desired lineage [11, 12]. In addition, the scaffold’s nano topography signif-
Page 4 of 46
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
4
Background
icantly impacts how cells are regulated. Nano topography can control the development of
stem cells into specific lineages such as muscle, bone, and neurons [13, 12, 11].
Thus, cell behavior can be regulated by tailoring the scaffold’s properties.
Technologies
like electrospinning and 3D printing enable the control of these properties by optimizing
the materials and processing parameters. Electrospun constructs, which consist of arranged
polymeric nanofibers, have been utilized in engineering several tissue structures, including
vascular grafts [11], bone [14], and myocardium [15].
Furthermore, 3D printing in scaffold design allows for integrating features like vasculature
[16, 17] and the control of scaffold architecture [2] using synthetic polymers or bio-inks.
These methods show great potential in their ability to control critical properties of scaf-
folds and subsequently manipulate cell behavior for tissue engineering. But there are many
challenges related to making artificial scaffolds that recapitulate the cell microenvironment’s
complexity and employ synthetic polymers or bio-inks[14, 15, 16].
Consequently, there is a growing interest in using naturally occurring ECM since creating
synthetic scaffolds that accurately mimic the intricacy of the cell microenvironment presents
several difficulties [11, 17].
4.3
Decellularization and Recellularization
DE involves removing cellular components from a tissue or organ to obtain the optimal
biological scaffold, leaving behind an acellular framework composed of the ECM and a com-
pletely functional vascular network. The resulting decellularized scaffold retains the original
organ structure by removing the cellular elements while becoming nonimmunogenic. This
means that a decellularized graft can be used without initiating an immune response from
the recipient[2]. Several methods to decellularize tissues and organs have been described
in the literature, and they are classified into chemical, physical, and biological agents [18].
Mechanical forces, nonthermal irreversible electroporation, and pressure have been applied
in physical DE. Nevertheless, it has been studied that these techniques are insufficient when
it comes to the DE of the whole organ. Meanwhile, biological agents typically encompass
DE enzymes, such as trypsin, chelating agents, and nucleases. Conversely, temperature con-
trol is preferred for achieving physical DE, such as employing freeze-thaw cycles before DE
and adjusting temperatures to optimize enzymatic activity [18, 19, 20] Lastly, the chemical
agents that are the most prevailing choice are categorized as bases, acids, hypertonic/hypo-
tonic solutions, as well as zwitterionic, nonionic, and ionic detergents[19, 21].
4.3.1
Chemical agents
Numerous studies have applied various chemical agents in the DE process.
Each agent
presents its own set of advantages and disadvantages; some of the agents will be highlighted
Page 5 of 46
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
4
Background
in the upcoming section. Various factors, including density, thickness, size, cellularity, and
lipid content of the initial tissue, influence the effectiveness of chemical DE treatment. As
mentioned, chemical agents are widely favored in DE strategies due to their confirmed abil-
ity to remove native cells rapidly and effectively from the tissue. Conversely, it should be
noted that chemical agents often fall short of completely eliminating cellular components
and may leave behind residual amounts of mitochondria, mitochondrial DNA, membranous
phospholipids, and dsDNA. This small amount of leftover material may trigger the immune
response and may also challenge the RE process [18].
In addition, chemical agents are usually cytotoxic, and in most cases, a further washing step
is needed after using chemical agents in the DE process. This step can be necessary since it
removes chemical agents’ residuals and remnants, or it can remove cellular debris that has
not been washed away from the DE process. The washing will help to remove these sub-
stances and promote a much more cell-free and cleaner tissue for the RE process. To speed
up the DE processes, chemical agents can be mixed, applied simultaneously, or used with
other DE techniques. But it is important to note that the order in which a tissue sample is
exposed to several chemical agents during protocols involving numerous DE agents is crucial
in the resultant ECM’s biomechanical characteristics and proteomics [22].
Detergents, also called surfactants, are quick, cheap, and effective decellularizing agents.
The two most used detergent agents are the ionic detergent Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
which can solubilize cell membranes and break protein-protein interactions. Also, SDS has
the advantage of removing nuclear compounds efficiently in less time than other chemical
agents. The second detergent is Triton X-100, which are nonionic detergent that disrupts
protein-lipid and lipid-lipid connections without impacting protein-protein interactions to
eliminate cellular content [22, 23, 24, 25].
Nevertheless, the benefits associated with detergents are accompanied by drawbacks as well.
SDS comes at the cost of more harm to the ECM matrisome since SDS treatment of tissue
can alter its microstructure and reduce the ECM’s biomechanical integrity [26].
The SDS concentration and tissue exposure period must be controlled for any SDS-based
method because prolonged exposure correlates with diminished ECM biomechanical capa-
bilities.
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), Fibronectins, ECM regulators, proteoglycans, and
secreted factors are also easily lost in the SDS-DE process.
Therefore, SDS is linked to the considerable loss of biochemical signals from a native ECM
[28, 29]. The most used concentrations of SDS in DE are usually between 0.1% and 1% based
on many studies. These two concentrations have shown the most significant effect under the
DE process [28, 29, 30, 31, 32].
It is important to note that removing residual SDS from a decellularized matrix can be a
challenging task, and its presence can negatively impact the RE process. This is because SDS
Page 6 of 46
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
4
Background
Table 1: An overview of the diverse chemical agents employed in decellularization techniques along with their respective
benefits and drawbacks.[27].
Page 7 of 46
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
4
Background
has high cytotoxicity and may expose antigenic sites on the collagen N and C termini [33].
When performing SDS treatment, it is common to use Triton X-100 detergent afterward.
Nonionic detergents, like Triton X-100, are preferred as they are believed to be gentler on
tissue compared to ionic detergents. This helps preserve the ECM proteome, which is cru-
cial [23]. Triton X-100 is a potent detergent, even though it is gentler than ionic detergents.
When used in high quantities, it can cause proteome issues. Triton X-100 concentrations
greater than 1% are typically not used in DE methods, while some studies have been suc-
cessful with concentrations as high as 3% when exposure times were adjusted appropriately
[26, 34, 35].
The use of Triton X-100 can result in negative effects like those of other detergents. These
include a significant increase in the stiffness of the resulting matrix, a reduced potential
for cell regrowth due to the presence of cytotoxic chemical residues, and a loss of impor-
tant bioactive molecules, such as proteoglycans and GAGs[23]. As previously stated, several
detergents are available for use in the DE process. Table 1 provides information on these
detergents, including their advantages and disadvantages.
Furthermore, decellularized tissues and organs can be repopulated with various cell types,
such as cells from patients or stem cells, enabling the creation of an autologous graft by the
process of RE. These cells will be introduced into the ECM or tissue scaffold. The objective
is to replenish the scaffold with viable cells that can adhere, multiply, differentiate, and carry
out functions within a tissue-like setting. The ECM and its remaining components play a
crucial role in directing the formation and development of cells during the RE process. It
has been observed that preserving the organ-specific ECM components like growth hormones
and structural proteins is essential to achieve an optimal RE outcome [36, 37, 38, 39, 40].
4.4
Literatture review of Decellularization
In essence, all human tissues and organs have undergone DE for use in TE, and numerous
studies have conducted experiments involving the DE of tissues and organs, followed by
the RE of the resulting acellular tissue and organ. In a comprehensive review by Karl H.
Hillebrandt, various studies exploring the DE and RE of organs are summarized, providing
an insightful overview of the field [41]. One interesting example of the review is the study
of the human heart, which is a highly intricate organ that operates through its biomechan-
ical function and relies on autonomous electrical stimulation for proper functioning. This
complex organ was first decellularized and recellularized in 2008 by Ott et al. from a rat
heart. Recellularizing the heart after DE with rat aortic endothelial cells and rat neonatal
cardiomyocytes caused the heart to exhibit contractile and electrical responses to electrical
stimulation [42].
Another interesting study about the liver organ that had revealed that hepatocyte transplan-
tation and artificial liver support systems are being explored as possible alternative therapies
Page 8 of 46
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
4
Background
for end-stage liver disorders. However, these methods cannot fully replace orthotopic liver
transplantation in clinical settings [43]. Extensive research has been conducted on the liver
organ in the fields of TE and RM due to its remarkable ability to regenerate. Significant
progress has been made in the area of liver organ bioengineering since the first report of
complete liver DE and RE in 2010 [44, 45]. One of Karl H. Hillebrandt’s reviews highlights
studies conducted in vitro that have successfully shown liver regeneration using different cell
types, including hepatocytes, endothelial cells, and a mix of mesenchymal stromal cells and
epithelial cells. These studies have shown that by cultivating liver cells with these different
cell types, metabolism, cell viability, and functionality can be restored. This is evidenced
by urea production, albumin secretion, enzyme regulation, and ammonium metabolism; all
achieved within 28 days [41, 46, 47].
The image in Figure 1 depicts a rat liver that has undergone both the DE and RE processes.
The liver was examined in its original (Figure 1(b)), decellularized 1(c), and recellularized
1(d) states using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. This type of staining highlights
the nuclei of cells (in purplish blue) and dyes the ECM and cytoplasm (in pink). Upon
analyzing the data presented in Figures 1(e), 1(f), and 1(g), it becomes evident that the
cells prior to DE (Figure 1(e)) possess visible nuclei, whereas the cells after DE (Figure 1(f))
do not possess visible nuclei. This suggests that the tissue has undergone a loss of cellular
material. Conversely, upon examining Figure 1(g), where cell nuclei are clearly present, one
can conclude that the tissue has undergone the RE process successfully [41].
Page 9 of 46
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
4
Background
Figure 1: (a) Sketch of decellularized and recellularized rat liver. (b) rat liver before decel-
lularization. (c) decellularized rat liver. (d) recellularized rat liver. (e) staining of liver cells
before decellularization. (f) staining of the decellularized liver to observe if there are cells.
(g) staining of the recellularized liver cells [41].
4.5
Earthworms
Earthworms play a crucial role in managing the environment within the ecosystem. Sci-
entists worldwide specializing in vermiculture have long known about the valuable role of
earthworms as effective soil managers, waste managers, plant growth promoters, and fertility
improvers [48]. They have a cylindrical, segmented body with a thin pigmented layer and
setae(longitudinal muscle) on most segments. Their circular and longitudinal muscles are re-
sponsible for their movement. Earthworms are hermaphrodites whose few gonads are located
Page 10 of 46
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
4
Background
in consistent segmental positions. Depending on the species and environmental conditions,
their lifespan ranges from 3 to 7 years. Their guts harbor numerous nitrogen-fixing and
decomposing bacteria. They have chemoreceptors to help them locate food. Interestingly,
their bodies are 65% protein of lysine, 14% lipids, 14% carbohydrates, and 3% ash on a dry
weight basis [49, 48, 50].
Earthworms possess the unique ability to break down or store heavy metals, inorganic/or-
ganic chemicals, and other harmful pollutants, including those involved in the Seveso disaster
of 1976 [51, 52]. In addition to their other abilities, they can consume bacteria, fungi, and
protozoa as food when they are present in soil or waste. They also seem to have an innate
understanding that anaerobic bacteria and fungi are harmful, so they prioritize feeding on
them to prevent their proliferation[49].
A recent study has revealed that earthworms residing in pathogen-rich surroundings do not
carry any evidence of pathogens remaining in their gut beyond 5mm. This indicates that
some internal mechanism within the worms eliminates the pathogens, rendering their excreta
(casting) free of any harmful agents. Inside the gut, the earthworm releases anti-bacterial
properties known as coelomic fluids that eliminate all the waste biomass and pathogens
[49, 51]. These fascinating organisms create antibiotics that eliminate harmful pathogens in
the waste and soil they live in, making the area nearly free of contaminants [53]. Figure 2
depicts the anatomy of earthworms.
Page 11 of 46
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
4
Background
Figure 2: An overview of the earthworm anatomy[54].
4.6
Extracellular matrix
4.6.1
Extracellular matrix in mammalian
In most animals and plants, the ECM is a vital component in all organs and tissues, playing
a key role in RM and TE. For DE and RE to occur, the ECM must be present and un-
damaged. The ECM comprises various components, including collagens, glycoproteins, and
glycosaminoglycans, that together form a building complex structure. The specific proteins
present in the ECM vary depending on the tissue or organ, affecting both their developmen-
tal and pathological conditions [55]. For the development of tissues and organs, the ECM
functions as a substrate to promote cell attachment. A physical barrier between various tis-
sues is also provided by the ECM. In addition to its physical functions as a physical barrier
Page 12 of 46
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
4
Background
and a substrate for cell adhesion, the ECM influences numerous cellular functions through
three mechanisms: control of the activity and availability of soluble factors, mechanical
stimulation from substrates of varying stiffness, and intracellular signaling triggered by cell
adhesion molecules [50, 56].
4.6.2
Extracellular matrix of earthworms
Previous studies on DE methods have primarily focused on mammalian tissue and organ
samples. Conversely, there is a gap in the literature when it comes to DE analysis of earth-
worm samples.
As a result, ECM of mammalian samples is being compared to that of
earthworms in order to fill this knowledge gap.
Earthworms are biologically different from animals; they belong to the Clitellata taxonomic
class, which includes the Hirudinea and Oligochaeta subclasses (the latter of which involves
of earthworms). Specifically, earthworms are part of the Haplotaxida order and Lumbricidae
family. The common earthworm is scientifically known as Lumbricus terrestris [49, 57].
An earthworm’s body wall comprises multiple layers, including the peritoneum that separates
it from the coelom, an exterior cuticle, a layer of nerve tissue, and longitudinal and circular
muscle layers. The cuticle "the ECM" is a thin, colorless, and transparent layer made up of
collagenous fibers, with multiple layers beneath it that are non-fibrous and uniform. It has
many tiny pores that are absent from the posterior part of each segment and are larger and
more asymmetrically distributed near the middle of each segment. The cuticle has tiny pores
that cover the sensory organs’ epithelium, The sensory cells are prepared with fine hairs for
their function. The epidermis is a single layer of various types of cells, where the supporting
cells have a columnar form and secrete the substance that creates the cuticle. Basal cells are
also present on the inner wall and are referred to as replacement cells. The epidermis has
characteristics that can help in the bioremediation of waste products resistant to removal,
including the presence of mucous or goblet cells and albumen cells. The mucous cells release
mucus across the cuticle’s surface to avoid desiccation and make it easier for earthworms to
crawl through the soil. It is unclear what the albumen cells do [48, 49]. Figure 3 depicts the
body wall of an earthworm.
Page 13 of 46
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
4
Background
Figure 3: The figure represents the body wall of an earthworm with its components [49].
Page 14 of 46
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
5
Aim
5
Aim
This research project aims to explore the potential of earthworms, a non-mammalian species,
as a scaffold for epithelial cells in a 3D environment. Epithelial cells are commonly used in
many decellularization methods; however, due to budget constraints and other obstacles,
CT26 mCherry cells will be used as a substitute for this study. The first step of the process
involves decellularizing earthworms to obtain acellular tissue that still contains its extracel-
lular matrix and vascular network. Subsequently, the decellularized worms will be implanted
with cancer cell CT26 mCherry internally for tissue repopulation purposes.
The aims:
1. To decellularize worms tissue to retain worm structure.
2. To seed CT26 mCherry into the earthworm’s internal for repopulation.
Page 15 of 46
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
6
Methods & Materials
6
Methods & Materials
Table 2, which is presented below, offers a detailed account of the chemical agents and
physical methods that were employed during this project. This includes a comprehensive
breakdown of the materials that were used at each stage of the study.
Table 2: List of materials used in each step of the study.
6.1
Culturing of CT26 mCherry
The CT26 mCherry cell line is a type of colorectal carcinoma found in BALB/c mice with the
expression of a mCherry red fluorescent signal, which was obtained from the cryopreservation
cell bank at the technical university of Denmark (DTU). To notify, The CT26 mCherry cell
line had a passage number 5 at the initiation. The CT26 mCherry cells were retrieved from
cryopreservation and placed in metal beads to warm up. Then, they were transferred to a
falcon tube containing heated growth media with Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI),
5% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). Afterward, the cells
were centrifuged at 2100 rpm and 23°C for 5 minutes; after removing the supernatant, the
pellet was resuspended using the growth media. The CT26 mCherry cells were cultured
in a T25 flask with growth media; the cells were then incubated in a 5% CO2 humidified
incubator at 37°C. The media was changed every two days, and after three days, the CT26
mCherry cells had reached a confluency of 50-60% (Figure 4), and 85-90% after five days.
After achieving the desired confluency, the cells were split by trypsinizing them with 0.05%
trypsin-EDTA. The cells underwent multiple passages and reached a passage number of 12.
Cells were cultured inside the worm’s intestine while some were used as a control group. The
control group was plated in a 6-well plate with varying numbers of cells in each well.
Page 16 of 46
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
6
Methods & Materials
Figure 4: The figure depicts CT26 mCherry cells reaching a confluence level of 50-60%.
6.2
Decellularization and Recellularization of earthworm
In general, earthworms are not regulated animals. Therefore, it is prioritized to treat them
with maximum care and compassion during research. The DE method was developed based
on the DE of spinach leaves by a former master’s student named Grace de Malona Eriksen.
She was inspired by a previous study that also used this technique [58]. The DE method
has since been optimized with the help of other studies[27, 59, 60].
Giant Canadian night crawlers (Earthworms) were bought from fishing store suppliers. The
earthworm was placed in the freezer overnight at -20°C, followed by submerging them in dry
ice with acetone for 10 seconds to eliminate any parasites. Note that the freeze and thaw
method was employed due to the presence of live parasites. The earthworm was divided into
three sections. The first section extends from the mouth to the end of the clitellum, the
second section from after the clitellum to halfway down the body segments, and the third
section from the second section to the tail. To empty the gut of the worm, glass capillary
Page 17 of 46
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
6
Methods & Materials
tubes with a volume of 1-5 μL were used. The capillary tube was rolled from the end section
of the tissue to the second end, which pushed the Vermicast (worm feces) out of its intestine.
This process was repeated multiple times to ensure the complete emptying of the Vermicast
as seen in Figure 5(1).
Figure 5: Image of the steps involved in the decellularization process. 1) Process of emptying
the Vermicast of the worm tissue. 2) Polyethylene tubing that is inserted into the worm
tissue. 3) The worm’s tissue with the polyethylene tubing connected to the reservoir setup.
4) The setup of the reservoir.
In order to facilitate the insertion of polyethylene tubing inside the WT, the capillary glass
was delicately inserted into the worm’s gut, which was then followed by the placement of
polyethylene tubing, with two holes that were made by cutting them with a scalpel, as
illustrated in Figure 5(2) note that the tube had a closed end. Next, the tissue worms with
the polyethylene tubing were cannulated using an 18G syringe needle into the tubing as seen
in Figure 5(3). A reservoir was constructed to enable the flow of 4% SDS liquid through
rubber tubes by gravity, which then allows for perfusion through the needles.
The WT
was treated with 4% SDS for approximately 30 minutes. Next, the WT was washed with
Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) for 10 minutes, using the same flow as for SDS. Before
use, the decellularized WT was placed in a 50 mL falcon tube containing PBS. Once the
decellularized worms were prepared for usage, they were carefully placed in a 6-well plate.
Page 18 of 46
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
6
Methods & Materials
6.3
Infusing of CT26 mCherry in worm tissue
Two techniques were employed to infuse CT26 mCherry in the WT. Initially, 530000 cells
were infused with growth media into the WT gut through a 25G syringe. The second method
involved using a 1000 μL pipette to deliver 795000 cells with media into the gut via polyethy-
lene tubing. This process was repeated three times to ensure that the cells were inside the
gut. All the WT was placed in a 6-well plate for microscopic observation, with one of the
wells containing 795000 CT26 mCherry cells as a control. The nucleocounter software was
used to determine the quantity of CT26 mCherry cells in a 10 ml falcon tube containing
the cells in media. Table 3 provided below is a List of the number of CT26 mCherry cells
infused in WT through different methodologies.
Table 3: List of the number of cells cultured in worm tissue.
6.4
Staining worm tissue with DAPI
To ensure proper infusion of DAPI, the decellularized WT was placed in a well plate and
injected with DAPI from the intestine using a 25G syringe needle. This step was repeated
several times to guarantee adequate distribution.
6.5
Light microscope zeiss axio observer 2
During the experiment, the Zeiss Axio Observer 2 light microscope which possesses the ca-
pabilities of Epifluorescence Microscopy, was used at DTU to serve multiple purposes for this
experiment. This microscope has autofluorescence properties, allowing for observation of the
earthworm’s autofluorescence characteristics. Fluorescence imaging is typically carried out
using fluorescence microscopes, which consist of several crucial components. These include
a light source, which was traditionally a mercury vapor lamp or a xenon arc but can now
be replaced with LEDs that are powerful. Another important component is the incoming
light filter, known as the excitation filter; this filter limits the wavelengths of the light that
is incoming to only those that can excite the sample.
Next, the mirror or dichroic beam splitter is responsible for reflecting the excitation light to-
wards the sample, and the detector only receives the light that was emitted and transmitted
Page 19 of 46
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
6
Methods & Materials
back. An emitted light filter called the emission filter, is responsible for transmitting only
the desired wavelengths of the released light from the experiment and prevents unwanted
light that passing through the filter of excitation. To detect the emitted light, fluorescence
imaging typically uses a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera, which is connected to a com-
puter that displays the image. To achieve high-quality epifluorescence imaging with a high
ratio of signal-to-noise and high resolution, it is important to use a certain color of bright
incident light to excite the sample. It’s also crucial to have the ability to identify the signif-
icantly dimmer fluorescence emitted from the sample. When the incident excitation light’s
wavelength closely matches the fluorescence wavelength, reflections of the incident light may
occur on optical surfaces like lenses, mirrors, and filters inside the microscope. The presence
of reflections can strengthen the background of an image, resulting in a lower signal-to-noise
ratio and ultimately compromising the image’s overall quality [61].
Table 4 indicates the specific autofluorescence emission ranges (EM) observed for CT26
mCherry, decellularized WT, decellularized WT with DAPI, and lastly, decellularized WT
with CT26 mCherry.
Table 4: The specific autofluorescence emission ranges observed for CT26 mCherry, decellu-
larized worm tissue with DAPI, and decellularized worm tissue with CT26 mCherry
Page 20 of 46
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
6
Methods & Materials
Table 5 offers details on the observable characteristics of mammalian tissue at different wave-
lengths. Firstly, these parameters are employed for observing WT. However, the microscope
available does not allow for the exact selection of desired wavelengths from Table 5. As a
result, the selected wavelength range for each characteristic was in between the selected. For
example, to observe functional proteins in WT with an autofluorescence EM of 280 to 350,
the selected EM was 330 nm.
Table 5: Offers details on the appearance of mammalian tissue under different wavelengths.
[62].
Page 21 of 46
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
7
Resultat and Analysis
7.1
Decellularization method
The DE process, illustrated in Figure 6, covers a time frame of 35 minutes. Figure 6(1)
depicts the tissue prior to the DE process, where it appears brown and fixed as if it were
alive. Figure 6(2) illustrates the tissue after 5 minutes of the DE process, where some of
the brownish color had been lost. Figure 6(3) taken after 10 minutes illustrates that the
tissue has almost lost all its colors. Figure 6(4) taken after 35 minutes, depicts the WT
as completely colorless. The four decellularized tissue samples had varying outcomes, with
some being completely free of cells and others retaining a slight brown color on the cuticle.
Nevertheless, all the WT had been decellularized on the inside and were colorless.
The
cuticle tissues that weren’t fully decellularized had an extra 10 minutes with 4% SDS, but
unfortunately, the color did not change, and the tissue became more fragile than the others.
Figure 6: Image of the decellularized worm tissue at different times. 1) Worm tissue not
decellularized. 2) Worm tissue after 5 minutes of the decellularization process. 3) Worm
tissue after 10 minutes of the decellularization process. 4) Worm tissue after 35 minutes of
the decellularization process.
7.2
DAPI staining
4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) is often used in fluorescence microscopy. It binds to
regions in DNA that are rich in adenine and thymine. Also, DAPI can effectively stain both
fixed and live cells because it can penetrate and intact the cell membrane [63]. In order
to confirm that the DE process was successful and that no traces of cell or DNA material
remained, DAPI staining was performed on one of the decellularized WT. The WT clearance
confirms the absence of cellular or DNA material, with only the longitudinal muscle visible in
Figure 7(a) where the arrow points. As depicted in Figure 7(b) of a study done by K. Tajima
et al., the examination indicated the presence of a stained blue cellular material. However,
Page 22 of 46
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
after undergoing DE, Figure 7(c) demonstrated a complete absence of cellular evidence. [64].
When comparing Figure 7(c) to DE-treated WT seen in Figure 7(a), the samples showed no
presence of cellular material.
Additionally, the DAPI-stained WT was observed at 464 nm, which aligns with the theoret-
ical EM [65].
Figure 7: a) Decellularized worm tissue with DAPI staining. b) Display canine kidney before
decellularization. The pre-decellularization image was stained with DAPI to highlight the
presence of cells. c) Display the post-decellularization, where no visible cells are present [64].
7.3
CT26 mCherry expression
The illustration in Figure 8 displays the CT26 cell line expressing mCherry at varying cell
quantities ranging from 1 to 6 million. Based on the data, there appears to be a direct
relationship between the rise in cell count, which can range from 1 to 6 million, and the
brightness of the red hue exhibited by the dots. Table 6 provides the numbers of CT26
mCherry cells in each plate well and their Arithmetic mean intensity of CT26 mCherry. The
intensity of the CT26 mCherry increased as the number of cells increased. Figure 9 displays
a graph that shows the intensity of mCherry expressed in CT26 at different cell numbers.
CT26 mCherry was observed at the 610 EM, which corresponds with the theoretical EM
provided by FPbase [66]. In Figure 10, CT26 mCherry is shown at a 40x magnification,
revealing approximately 2 million cells present.This visual representation provides an insight
into the microscopic structure of cells when viewed at higher magnification.
Page 23 of 46
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
Figure 8: Images of the CT26 mCherry with varying quantities of cells at 5x magnification.
Figure 9: Graph presents the cells number of CT26 mCherry over the arithmetic mean
intensity of CT26 mCherry.
Page 24 of 46
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
Figure 10: CT26 mCherry at a magnification of 40X
Table 6: Number of CT26 mCherry cells in each plate-well and their Arithmetic mean
intensity of CT26 mCherry
Page 25 of 46
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
7.4
Decellularized worm tissue without CT26 mCherry
Note that all images were taken at a 5x magnification level between the intestinal wall and
cuticle. The WT shown were treated with instant freezing at around -80°C. Figure 11(a),
with an EM of 500 nm, displays the worm’s longitudinal muscle, which is bright green in
color. The muscle is the only structure visible in this figure. In Figure 11(b), the EM mea-
sures 481 nm and shows either the blood vessels or the nerves surrounding the intestinal
wall. Additionally, a small amount of longitudinal muscle is visible. Figure 11(c) shows part
of the longitudinal muscle, which is bright blue in color, and a dead nematode is also visible
but not as bright in blue color as the longitudinal muscle. Lastly, figure 11(d) is taken at
an EM of 700 nm, which only displays part of the intestinal wall. Figure 12 showcases the
WT, emphasizing the cuticle section where the longitudinal muscle is clearly visible. The
longitudinal muscle is displayed in vivid color in Figures 12(a) and 12(b), which were cap-
tured at EM of 455 nm and 517 nm, respectively. It is worth noting that this WT was not
subjected to instant freezing.
Page 26 of 46
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
Figure 11: Display a decellularized worm tissue at 5x magnification with different emission
ranges. a) Taken at an emission range of 500 nm where the bright color setae (longitudinal
muscle) are observed. b) Taken at an emission range of 481 nm, nerves or blood veins are
observed. c) Taken at an emission range 484 where the intestinal wall is slightly observed
with the setae and a nematode. d) Taken at an emission range of 700 nm where part of the
intestinal wall is observed.
Page 27 of 46
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
Figure 12: Illustration of worm tissue is provided, with a focus on the cuticle section. a)
Illustrates the cuticle and the longitudinal muscle at an emission range of 455 nm.
b)
illustrates the cuticle and the longitudinal muscle at an emission range of 517 nm.
7.5
Decellularized worm tissue with CT26 mCherry
Before utilizing the instant freezing method at -80 °C, the WT had live nematodes present
both inside and outside of the intestine. In Figure 13i(A), a live nematode is observed out-
side of the WT, encircled by CT26 mCherry. Figure 13i(B) displays several live nematodes
inside the WT. However, the quality of both figures is not optimal due to the unfortunate
loss of the original data. In Figure 13i(C), live nematodes were captured inside the WT
using an EM of 485 and a magnification of 5x. In Figure 13i(D), captured with brightfield
and magnified by 5x, two nematodes actively consume CT26 mCherry cells. Additionally,
a clump of CT26 mCherry cells is visible alongside the nematodes, indicated by the red arrow.
These live parasites caused aggressive proliferation and ingestion of CT26 mCherry. To en-
sure accuracy, a control was conducted only with CT26 mCherry. Upon imaging, the CT26
mCherry cell was clearly visible, and the WT was then placed on the cell for 24 hours to
confirm nematode ingestion of CT26 mCherry. The results indicated successful ingestion,
as there were no signs of CT26 mCherry remaining. Unfortunately, the results cannot be
displayed as the data has been lost.
After applying the freezing method, nematodes were found to be deceased without any
evidence of life. At 10x magnification, a brightfield image (Figure 13ii(E)) clearly depicts the
size and shape differences between the longitudinal muscle and adjacent deceased nematodes.
The longitudinal muscle measures approximately 1000 μm, which is twice as large as the
nematodes’, which is approximately 500 μm. This observation highlights the significant size
discrepancy between the two structures.
At a magnification level of 10x, Figure 13ii(F)
shows three dead nematodes outside the WT in another Brightfield image. Figures 13ii(G)
and 13ii(H) show Brightfield magnification images captured of a deceased nematode and
its longitudinal muscle, respectively, at a magnification of 20x. The images reveal a clear
Page 28 of 46
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
difference in the curvature of both the nematode and the longitudinal muscle, indicating a
variation in their shapes. The distinctive shape of the longitudinal muscle is particularly
noteworthy in Figure 13ii(H).
Page 29 of 46
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
(i)
(ii)
Figure 13: Caption on next page
Page 30 of 46
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
Figure 13: (Previous page.) i: A) A live nematode is observed outside of the worm tissue,
encircled by CT26 mCherry. B) Live nematodes inside the worm tissue. C) Live nematodes
were captured inside the worm tissue at magnification 5x and an emission range of 485. D)
Two nematodes consuming CT26 mCherry cells at a magnification of 5x using Brightfield.
ii: E) Longitudinal muscle and deceased nematodes adjacent to each other at a 10x magni-
fication using Brightfield. F) Deceased nematodes at a 10x magnification using Brightfield.
G) Represents a deceased nematode at 20x magnification using Brightfield. H) Longitudinal
muscle is present at 20x magnification using Brightfield.
It is important to take note that, at first, a 25G syringe was used for cell infusion before
implementing the pipetting method. This approach failed to observe any cells inside the
WT, despite the nematodes being deceased. Figures 14(a) and 14(b) depict two different
locations of the WT. Neither of the figures exhibits any signs of CT26 mCherry. However,
in Figure 14(b), besides the WT, there is some CT26 mCherry present.
Figure 14: a) Decellularized worm tissue with CT26 mCherry at 5x magnification; imaging
revealed no signs of CT26 mCherry present.
b) Decellularized worm tissue with CT26
mCherry under 5x magnification, no indications of CT26 mCherry within the worm tissue.
Conversely, CT26 mCherry is observed outside of the worm tissue.
The perfusion of the CT26 mCherry into the earthworm intestine using a pipette, made it
possible to observe the cells within the WT. Approximately 2 million cells were injected
during this process. In Figure 15, CT26 mCherry is displayed at 10x, 20x, and 40x magnifi-
cations, all taken from the same spot within the intestine.
Page 31 of 46
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
7
Resultat and Analysis
Figure 15: The CT26 mCherry observed in the intestine at varying magnifications 10x, 20x,
and 40x.
The images displayed in Figure 16 showcase the same location magnified at 10x. The first
image, labeled 16(a), displays the intestine wall segment known as the gizzard at an EM of
479 nm. The surrounding structures might be nerves or blood vessels. Additionally, some
of the CT26 mCherry cells are slightly noticeable. The second image, captured at an EM of
610 nm and labeled as 16(b), shows the CT26 mCherry. In this picture, CT26 mCherry is
visible in the intestine and around the intestinal wall.
Figure 16: a) Imaging of a decellularized worm tissue at an emission range of 479 nm, nerves
and blood vessels can be seen around the intestinal wall. b) Imaging of a decellularized worm
tissue at an emission range of 610 nm, CT26 mCherry is observed around the intestinal wall
and inside the intestine.
Page 32 of 46
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
8
Discussion
8.1
Optimization of the Decellularization process
Achieving the desired result through the DE process required numerous attempts and var-
ious methods. This section will outline several changes that were implemented to the final
DE method. This procedure was influenced by different DE methods, with some studies
using a combination of 1% SDS and 0.1% Triton X-100. As a result, these specific chemicals
and concentrations were utilized[60, 27]. At the start, two earthworms were subjected to
freezing temperature at -20°C. They were each divided into 5 pieces, which were washed with
n-heptane for 30 seconds and then with PBS. The tissues of worms 1-5 were treated with
formaldehyde for an hour, while the tissues of worms 6-10 were not treated with formalde-
hyde. The WT 1-10 were each placed in a 15 mL falcon tube with 1% SDS for 48 hours,
followed by treatment with a mix of 0.5% citric acid and 0.1% Triton X-100 for 24 hours.
After this, they were treated with 0.1% Triton X-100 and 30% hydrogen peroxide as a com-
bination for another 24 hours. The results are shown in Figure 17.
Figure 17: a) Worm tissues treated with formaldehyde. b) Worm tissues treated without
formaldehyde.
Unfortunately, the DE method used did not yield the desired results, as all the worms ex-
hibited stiff tissues. This could be attributed to various factors, including the formaldehyde
used in the process. Formaldehyde is known to be a chemical fixative and stabilizer that
preserves cellular organelles and proteins. Formaldehyde can bind to amino acids like lysine,
histidine, and cysteine in tissues and organs, leading to stiffness [60]. This may have been
a contributing factor to the observed stiffness in worms 1-5, as shown in Figure 17(a). The
tissue worms ranging from 6-10 also displayed some stiffness, but not to the same extent
as those treated with formaldehyde. This stiffness could be attributed to the Triton X-100
treatment; as previously mentioned, Triton X-100 has been known to enhance the stiffness
of ECM [27].
The protocol utilized in this study was inspired by a previous master’s student who had
worked with DE spinach leaf. However, since spinach leaves and earthworms are two dis-
tinct specimens, the chemical composition needed to be adjusted accordingly. After careful
consideration, it was determined that the use of n-heptane in the protocol was unnecessary.
This chemical has been known to remove cuticles from plants but has not been used in DE
protocols for mammals before. Similarly, citric acid and hydrogen peroxide were used in the
Page 33 of 46
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
spinach leaf protocol but were not deemed necessary since they have not been used in the
mammalian DE protocol. Consequently, these chemicals were eliminated from the protocol.
Figures 18(a) and 18(b) display a screening test for WT using Formaldyhde and Triton X-
100. Group A was subjected to a 30-minute formaldehyde treatment, while group B received
a 1-hour treatment. Both groups were subsequently treated with different concentrations of
SDS (1%, 2%, 3%, and 4%) for a duration of 24 hours. It was anticipated that there would
be a certain level of transparency in the WT, particularly in the sample that was subjected
to a high concentration of SDS. nevertheless, the result demonstrates that the WT main-
tained its rigidity and remained unaltered. In Figure 18(c), four tissue worms were treated
with varying percentages of SDS and Triton X-100, as well as formaldehyde, for different
durations. The outcome of this experiment was consistent with the previous one. These two
experiments were just a couple of many attempts made to decellularize WT using formalde-
hyde and Triton X-100. Despite multiple attempts using Triton X-100 with and without
formaldehyde, the desired outcome was not achieved even with varying concentrations and
time. Therefore, formaldehyde and Triton X-100 were eventually eliminated from use since
they caused stiffness and had a negative effect on the DE process.
Page 34 of 46
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
Figure 18: a) and b) Illustrations of the results of the effects of formaldehyde and SDS treat-
ment on worm tissue under varying concentrations and durations. C) Result of worm tissue
treated with varying concentrations of formaldehyde with different duration and intervals
and concentrations of Triton X-100.
In the experiment depicted in Figure 19 below, SDS was the only detergent utilized after
eliminating formaldehyde, Triton x-100, citric acid, hydrogen peroxide, and n-heptane. Four
earthworms were subjected to varying concentrations of SDS (1%, 2%, 3%, and 4%) for 24
hours. The earthworms treated with 1%, 2%, and 3% SDS exhibited fragility, and those
with 4% SDS were surprisingly different from the other tissues, as the worm’s body was not
as fragile and did not fall apart like the others. The outcome of utilizing a 4% SDS solution
was not anticipated, given the fact that it has been established that high concentrations
of SDS can lead to tissue fragility and disintegrate the ECM [60]. Curiously, even when
utilizing a lower concentration of SDS, such as 1%, the result obtained from the WT sample
was also unexpected. It was expected that a lower concentration of SDS would lead to a
better-preserved tissue sample.
Additionally, the WT with 4% SDS displayed much more transparency than the others.
Based on the results obtained, it has been decided that the present study will use 4% SDS
as it yielded the best outcome.
Page 35 of 46
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
Figure 19: Four earthworms treated with different concentrations of SDS.
After finding the right concentration for SDS, the setup of the DE method was inspired
as mentioned before. Initially, cannulating the WT only with a syringe proved difficult as
the WT did not have polyethylene tubing inside the gut, causing it to fall before and after
DE. Additionally, the flow from the reservoir was controlled by an intravenous infusion flow
regulating Valve Hose, seen in Figure 20, which was very slow at the start of the experiment.
Consequently, it took 5-6 hours for the tissue to decellularize. However, changing the flow
to flow-gravity resulted in the SDS running faster through the WT, reducing the time to
3-4 hours for the DE process. It was also essential to empty the earthworm vermicast from
the gut, as this led to better results in both time reduction and a clearer WT. After DE,
the WT was screened under a microscope, and nematodes were found in the internal part
of the WT. In order to eliminate the nematodes, the earthworm was subjected to a freezing
process where it was left in a -20°C environment overnight. The WT was then thawed and
finally instantly frozen at -80°C temperture using dry ice, which along with emptying the
vermicast, played a crucial role in achieving a clearer tissue and reducing the time to 35
minutes for the DE process.
Page 36 of 46
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
Figure 20: Intravenous infusion flow regulating tool that controls the flow of the SDS
8.2
The outcome of the decellularization method
In most DE methods, SDS concentration is not high, and it is combined with other chemicals
to preserve an intact and undamaged ECM. Before beginning the DE process, it is crucial
to select the appropriate DE reagents that match the composition and structure of the
tissue and organ to avoid damaging the ECM’s native composition.
Several factors can
affect tissue and organs’ ability to be decellularized, such as lipid content, cellular density,
and thickness[60]. In Table 7, a range of organs have been decellularized utilizing diverse
combinations and concentrations of chemical agents. It is observed that SDS and Triton
X-100 were predominantly used at concentrations below 1%.
As previously mentioned, various concentrations of Triton X-100 were utilized alone and in
combination with SDS, resulting in stiffness and lack of transparency in the WT. This is
likely due to Triton X-100’s ability to stiffen the ECM [27]. Therefore, Triton X-100 was
excluded from the final DE protocol.
It was expected that the WT would be colorless, but some parts of the tissue may not have
been fully reached by the SDS due to fragility, causing the tissue to fold. In Figure 6(3), the
tissue surrounding the needle appears unclear, possibly because the SDS did not reach the
top portion. Throughout the experiment, it was observed that the WT exhibited significant
fragility that impacted its overall performance. Specifically, when the WT was exposed to
a particularly rigorous treatment involving a 4% SDS solution for a duration of 35 min-
utes. This concentration is much higher than what is typically used in other studies, where
SDS levels range from 0.5% to 1%. As previously mentioned, SDS is effective in remov-
ing nuclear compounds more quickly than other chemical agents. However, there are also
drawbacks associated with using SDS as detergents. SDS can harm the ECM matrisome, as
Page 37 of 46
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
tissue treated with SDS may experience changes in microstructure and reduced biomechan-
ical integrity [26]. Additionally, SDS in DE may cause the loss of GAGs, fibronectins, ECM
regulators, proteoglycans, and secreted factors, resulting in a significant loss of biochemical
signals from a native ECM. It is possible that the factors previously mentioned have con-
tributed to the significant fragility observed in the WT.
The utilization of dry ice and acetone to achieve instant freezing significantly weakened
the WT. Prior to implementing the instant freezing process, the tissue exhibited greater
resilience, taking approximately 3-4 hours to undergo DE. The instant freezing and thawing
method facilitated the process of emptying the intestine with greater ease. This particular
approach leads to a substantial loss of cellular material and internal body parts in the WT.
It is worth mentioning that the detrimental effects of the freezing process can be traced
back to the negative impacts that freezing and thawing can have on cells containing water.
These negative impacts can be numerous and can significantly affect the overall quality and
functionality of the cells.
This occurs when ice crystals are formed, leading to physical
harm to the cell structures.
The consequences of the disruption of cell membranes can
result in damaged cellular function, leakage of cellular material matter, and cellular stress.
Furthermore, the osmotic condition and temperature change can activate cellular stress
response and harm the cell components. Additionally, exposure to freezing temperatures
can dehydrate cells, leading to negative effects on the normal interactions and function
of biomolecules and solutes inside the cell due to their increased concentration.
All of
these factors can either reduce cell viability or cause cell death[67]. The DE method for
mammalian organs has been extensively researched and refined over the years. Earthworms
have a distinct anatomical structure, cellular composition, physiological functions, scale, and
complexity compared to mammalian organs and tissues [36, 55, 49]. Due to these factors and
the fact that earthworms have not been decellularized previously, the DE technique utilized
for mammalian organs may not be suitable for earthworms.
Page 38 of 46
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
Table 7: Present various chemical agents in varying concentrations that have been used to
decellularize a variety of organs [60].
8.3
DAPI staining
K. Tajima et al. conducted a study to confirm the effectiveness of the DE process in elim-
inating cellular material. The study decellularized canine kidney samples and used DAPI
staining before and after the process. The results demonstrated the loss of cellular matter
and the absence of nucleus cells [64]. After comparing the results of K. Tajima et al. with the
stained decellularized WT, it was confirmed that the DE of the WT was successful. This is
evident in Figures 7(a) and 7(c) where no cellular material was observed compared to Figure
7(b). As previously stated, the SDS and freeze and thaw procedure effectively eliminates the
cellular material of the WT[67, 60]. Based on the observation of the longitudinal muscle, it
can be inferred that this component is not a cellular material. To ensure the accuracy of the
results, it is suggested to perform DAPI staining on a WT that has not undergone DE and
compare the outcomes with a decellularized WT.
8.4
CT26 mCherry expression
The objective of the study was to investigate if the quantity of CT26 mCherry (ranging
from 1-6 million) affected its observation in the WT. The results showed that even with 2
million cells in the WT, CT26 mCherry was clearly observable once the suitable parameters
for the cells were identified. However, due to the complexities and optimizations involved
in the research, it was not possible to analyze WT with different quantities of CT26 mCherry.
Page 39 of 46
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
8.5
Decellularized worm tissue without CT26 mCherry
In order to analyze the CT26 mCherry cell distribution inside the WT, the decellularized
WT was initially observed in the absence of CT26 mCherry cells. The WT was examined us-
ing various EM. As depicted in Figure 11, the tissue was treated with instant freezing, while
WT which was not treated with instant freezing is shown in Figure 12. This comparison
was made to determine if instant freezing had any impact on the observation of the tissue
structure. The difference in position between Figure 11 (treated with instant freezing) and
Figure 12 (untreated) necessitates a comparison with Figure 14 (also treated with instant
freezing), Essentially, to gain a better understanding of details, it is necessary to compare
Figure 12 with Figure 14. Despite the different EM used in the imaging, the structures are
clearly visible in both Figures 12 and 14. The cuticle, segment of the body, and longitudinal
muscle are all present and correctly arranged, indicating that instant freezing did not affect
the structure. The discovery of nematodes occurred subsequent to the capture of Figure 12.
Consequently, the same EM could not be employed for the untreated WT with instant freez-
ing as the presence of viable nematodes would have interfered with the process. Nonetheless,
the results suggest that instant freezing does not interfere with the structural integrity of the
tissue. Unfortunately, It was anticipated that the CT26 mCherry cell distribution would be
limited to the intestine of the WT. The distribution of the CT26 mCherry was noted in both
the intestinal and non-intestinal areas, indicating that despite the similarities in structure
(Figures 12 and 13), the distribution varied. This leads to the conclusion that the instant
freezing process had an adverse effect on the internal structure of the WT that may have
led to the rupture of the intestinal wall.
The green longitudinal muscle in Figure 11(a): this muscle or the so-called seta is composed
of chitin, a nitrogenous polysaccharide that is darkened and strengthened by the absorption
of insoluble proteins called scleroproteins (fibrous proteins)[49]. Table 4 informs that intra-
cellular fibrous protein would be observed between the EM of 495- 525 which complies with
what is observed in Figure 11 (a). Figure 11(b) is observed at 481 nm, which is the EM where
proteins and lipids are expected to be observed. The long, thin tubes that are visible may be
the nerves surrounding the intestine, as nerves are largely composed of lipids and according
to Table 4, lipids are typically observed in this spectrum. It’s essential to grasp that SDS
in DE has the capability to eliminate various components of cells, including solubilized and
denatured proteins found in the cytoplasmic membrane and ECM, as well as specific protein
membranes. Additionally, the detergent can solubilize and disrupt nucleic acids, as well
as intracellular lipid structures and membrane lipids such as cholesterol and phospholipids.
While SDS is effective in removing the majority of cellular elements, it’s important to note
that certain cellular structures and specific lipid groups may not be entirely solubilized by
SDS, hence requiring further specific extraction or processing methods to ensure complete
elimination [35, 3]. The components present in Figure 11(b) may potentially contain lipids,
indicating their presence in the observation.
The EM was altered to 484 nm and 700 nm in the last two figures 11(c) and 11(d). In
contrast, Figure 11(c) showed a slight observation of the intestinal wall and a deceased
nematode. Figure 11(d), on the other hand, had little to observe. According to Table 4,
Page 40 of 46
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
flavins, proteins, and lipids should be visible in this EM. It is possible that the DE process
and SDS detergent removed most of the tissue components as mentioned earlier in this
section. Note that Figure 11(a) was taken in close proximity to Figures 11(b),11(c), and
11(d), which were all captured from the same position.
8.6
Decellularized worm tissue with CT26 mCherry
Instant freezing was a crucial step in the DE process, as it was necessary to eliminate the
nematodes.
If the WT sample was not infected with these nematodes, and the instant
freezing method was not employed, preserving a more robust and less fragile WT sample
would have been possible. Based on Figures 13i(A) and 13i(D), nematodes were observed
to be actively consuming the CT26 mCherry prior to utilizing the instant freezing method.
The most conclusive evidence of this was observed when the WT was exposed to the CT26
mCherry for 24 hours resulting in the complete ingestion of all cells. The utilization of the
rapid freezing technique at a temperature of -80°C proved to be effective as the nematodes
were found to be lifeless, as presented in Figures 13ii(E), 13ii(F), and 13ii(G).
Upon first observations in this experiment, it was challenging to differentiate between the
longitudinal muscle and nematodes due to their similar shapes, as evidenced in Figure 13ii(G
and H). After closely analyzing live nematodes and comparing their size to the non-moving
longitudinal muscle, it became easier to distinguish between the two. This finding was backed
up by existing literature, which affirms that nematodes come in different sizes and shapes,
making it possible to tell them apart from longitudinal muscles. [68].
DE-worms that did not undergo snap freezing treatment and were directly perfused with
CT26 mCherry cells through a 25G syringe without undergoing washing with PBS, the
results exhibited no presence of cells within the worm. There could be several reasons for
this, but the most convincing reason was that live nematodes were ingesting the cell, as
confirmed by the results. When the nematodes were deceased by instant freezing the WT
and CT26 mCherry were injected through the 25G syringe, and CT26 mCherry was expected
to be visible, but Figures 14(a) and 14(b) showed no sign of cells inside the WT. Also, these
WT were not washed with PBS. It is possible that the use of the syringe caused the CT26
mCherry cells to rupture due to the high pressure when perfusing. Also, cell rupture may
have been caused by the 4% SDS remaining inside the WT since SDS can provide cell lysis
within seconds, which may cause protein denaturation[69].
The CT26 mCherry cells became more easily observable after switching to the pipetting
method. This may be due to the gentler perfusion of the CT26 mCherry cells and the WT
being treated with PBS for 10 minutes with multiple washes, which could have played a
crucial role in the cell condition, as Figures 15(a), 15(b), and 15(c) illustrates.
Figure 16(a) displays a clear view of the gizzard (intestinal wall) and its neighboring com-
ponents, which could be either nerves or blood vessels as mentioned before. The EM of 479
nm is expected to show lipid accumulation, as outlined in Table 4. Image 16(a) serves as a
reference point for the distribution of CT26 mCherry. Figure 16(b) shows the same image
as Figure 16(a), but at an EM of 610 nm, which is expected to reveal the distribution of
Page 41 of 46
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
8
Discussion
CT26 mCherry cells. In this image, the CT26 mCherry can be seen around the intestine wall
and inside the intestine. However, the distribution of CT26 mCherry is not as anticipated
since it was only inserted inside the gut and not randomly distributed. It is probable that
the DE process, which is accountable for the stochastic dispersion of CT26 mCherry, caused
the eruption of the intestinal wall. The dry freezing method, as previously mentioned, can
result in the formation of ice crystals from water which can lead to the disruption of cell
membranes. This in turn can cause damaged cellular function, leakage of cellular material
matter, and cellular stress. Additionally, the changes in temperature and osmotic conditions
can activate the cellular stress response, further harming the cell components[67]. The un-
satisfactory result of the cell disruption process may be caused by any of the factors that
have been identified earlier.
Page 42 of 46
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
9
Future Work
9
Future Work
9.1
Chemical detergents
For optimal outcomes during the DE process experiment, it would have been advantageous to
test various concentrations of SDS. Gradually increasing the concentration from 1% SDS to
2% and 3% would have allowed for more accurate comparisons. Using lower concentrations
may result in less delicate tissue due to the role of flow from the reservoir. Past DE methods
have shown that concentrations between 0.5% and 1% have been successful in producing
intact ECM and outstanding results for both organs and tissue [19, 26, 29, 34]. Another
potential improvement that may prove efficacious for the DE process is the substitution
of SDS with Sodium Lauryl Ether Sulfate (SLES). A comparative study was conducted to
determine the efficiency of these two detergents in decellularizing rat kidneys. The study
involved the perfusion of 1% SDS and 1% SLES on separate kidneys to determine which
detergent was more effective. The results of the study indicate that SLES is a superior
detergent for DE, as ECM of kidneys treated with SLES was significantly better preserved
than those treated with SDS. The preservation of the ECM is a critical aspect of the DE
process, as, without it, the decellularized tissue or organ is rendered useless. Therefore,
SLES may be a preferable detergent for the DE of WT [70].
9.2
Perfusion
Based on the observation, it appears that the current perfusion method for the CT26
mCherry in WT could use some improvement.
Injecting cells with media has led to a
reduction in the number of CT26 mCherry cells in the WT, possibly due to leakage through
the polyethylene tubing openings. To ensure the successful execution of this protocol, it is
necessary to modify the perfusion method. The illustration presented in Figure 23 showcases
an idea that can be used in the DE process, which is the utilization of a peristaltic pump
that is effectively connected to plastic tubing. This setup is combined with a decellularized
earthworm, which in turn facilitates the creation of a completely closed-circuit flow. The
closed-circuit flow could assist in the attachment of CT26 mCherry cells within the ECM of
the earthworm.
Page 43 of 46
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
9
Future Work
Figure 21: A peristaltic pump is connected to plastic tubing, and this setup is used in
combination with a decellularized worm to create a closed-circuit flow.
9.3
Freeze-Thaw
At the midway point of the study, nematodes were identified within the worm. These were
promptly eliminated through a rapid freezing technique which unfortunately caused damage
to the WT. The intended distribution of CT26 mCherry was originally designated only within
the intestine; Conversely, it was found to be randomly dispersed. It is likely that this is due
to the rupture of the intestinal wall which occurred because of the freeze-and-thaw method
utilized. This issue could be resolved through the implementation of an integrated approach
involving a combination of cryopreservation processes, cryoprotective agents (CPA), and
temperature control. Cryopreservation has the capacity to effectively preserve organs, tis-
sues, and cells via an ultra-low temperature cooling mechanism. However, if this process
is employed in isolation, it may result in the formation of ice crystals both within the ex-
tracellular and intracellular matrix, leading to damage and limited cellular mobility due to
changes in the chemical composition of the cells [59].
According to a recent study, the utilization of CPA and precise temperature control can
effectively maintain the integrity of tissue and organs by preventing the formation of ice
crystals[71]. Nevertheless, it should be noted that an excessively high concentration of CPA
Page 44 of 46
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis
9
Future Work
may result in toxicity to the tissue or organ, hence necessitating careful consideration of
concentration levels[71, 72].
Another study has revealed that incorporating extracellular trehalose to encapsulate cells
within a cytocompatible agarose hydrogel can produce superior results compared to using
CPA. This approach decreases the quantity of water present in the hydrogel encapsulation,
leading to a reduction in water structure and ice volume. This decrease helps to prevent
potential damage to the cells [73]. This innovative technique also holds the potential for
utilization in the DE process for preserving better WT.
Page 45 of 46
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis
10
Conclusion
10
Conclusion
The project’s main objective was to investigate the potential of earthworms as a scaffold for
CT26 mCherry cells within a 3D environment. Despite the initial aim, the high concentra-
tion of SDS turned out to be incredibly detrimental to the earthworm tissue. As a result,
the WT became too fragile and toxic to handle, rendering it unable to support the cells as
intended. This confirms that the WT is not a suitable scaffold for cell growth.
Upon examination of the decellularized WT without CT26 mCherry under a microscope, it
was discovered that there was minimal structure present. The only significant component
that could be observed was the longitudinal muscle, which was observed by various EM.
This confirms that the DE process that was applied had effectively eliminated most of the
organelles and cellular components within the WT. This result cannot be considered ideal
since the ultimate goal of DE tissue is to preserve an intact ECM that can retain its potential
for functioning during the RE process.
Observing cells within a WT requires the proper implementation of the perfusion method
and washing step. In fact, the success of this observation highly depends on it. The remains
of a high concentration of SDS within the WT, along with the use of a syringe, may have
resulted in the CT26 mCherry cell rupturing. This was evident as no signs of cells were
observed under these two conditions.
When the washing step was carried out with PBS and the perfusion switched to using the
pipetting method, the CT26 mCherry cell was observed. This observation highlights the
importance of utilizing the right equipment and providing the CT26 mCherry with the right
conditions for accurate results.
As previously mentioned, there was an observed side effect on the WT due to the freeze-
thaw method. The applied method resulted in the rupture of tissue within the intestinal
wall. During perfusion of the CT26 mCherry, it was noted that the cell distribution was
not limited to the inside of the intestine but also extended between the intestinal wall and
cuticle. It has been confirmed in the literature that the use of the freeze-thaw method can
cause ruptures in cells, tissues, and organs. To resolve this issue, adding additional agents
and methods to the freeze-thaw method is possible.
DE processes for earthworms are more complex than initially believed. A thorough under-
standing of the tissue and organ involved in DE is crucial in ensuring a successful outcome.
Due to its novelty, setting specific parameters for the DE process of earthworms proved
challenging. However, a combination of literature studies and predictions were utilized to
determine the parameters. It is important to note that earthworms are not classified as
mammalian tissue; therefore, their physiology and biology cannot be directly compared.
Nonetheless, if the appropriate DE protocol can be established for earthworms, they may
serve as a potential scaffold for RM and TE.
Page 46 of 46
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
References
References
[1] Sandra Pina, Viviana P. Ribeiro, Catarina F. Marques, F. Raquel Maia, Tiago H. Silva,
Rui L. Reis, and J. Miguel Oliveira. Scaffolding strategies for tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine applications. Materials, 12, 6 2019.
[2] Anna Gilpin and Yong Yang. Decellularization strategies for regenerative medicine:
From processing techniques to applications. BioMed Research International, 2017, 2017.
[3] Unai Mendibil, Raquel Ruiz-Hernandez, Sugoi Retegi-Carrion, Nerea Garcia-Urquia,
Beatriz Olalde-Graells, and Ander Abarrategi. Tissue-specific decellularization meth-
ods: Rationale and strategies to achieve regenerative compounds. International Journal
of Molecular Sciences, 21:1–29, 8 2020.
[4] Ebtehal Ahmed, Tarek Saleh, and Meifeng Xu. Recellularization of native tissue derived
acellular scaffolds with mesenchymal stem cells. Cells, 10, 7 2021.
[5] Qiong Wu, Ji Bao, Yong Jie Zhou, Yu Jia Wang, Zheng Gui Du, Yu Jun Shi, Li Li, and
Hong Bu. Optimizing perfusion-decellularization methods of porcine livers for clinical-
scale whole-organ bioengineering. BioMed Research International, 2015, 2015.
[6] Afarin Neishabouri, Alireza Soltani Khaboushan, Faezeh Daghigh, Abdol Mohammad
Kajbafzadeh, and Masoumeh Majidi Zolbin. Decellularization in tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine: Evaluation, modification, and application methods. Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 10, 4 2022.
[7] Chris Mason and Peter Dunnill. A brief definition of regenerative medicine. Regenerative
Medicine, 3:1–5, 1 2008.
[8] Anthony Atala. Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine: Concepts for clinical
application, 2004.
[9] Adam J. Engler, Maureen A. Griffin, Shamik Sen, Carsten G. BĂśnnemann, H. Lee
Sweeney, and Dennis E. Discher. Myotubes differentiate optimally on substrates with
tissue-like stiffness: Pathological implications for soft or stiff microenvironments. Jour-
nal of Cell Biology, 166:877–887, 9 2004.
[10] Krishanu Saha, Albert J. Keung, Elizabeth F. Irwin, Yang Li, Lauren Little, David V.
Schaffer, and Kevin E. Healy. Substrate modulus directs neural stem cell behavior.
Biophysical Journal, 95:4426–4438, 11 2008.
[11] Seunghan Oh, Karla S Brammer, Y S Julie Li, Dayu Teng, Adam J Engler, Shu Chien,
and Sungho Jin. Stem cell fate dictated solely by altered nanotube dimension, 2009.
[12] Matthew J. Dalby, Nikolaj Gadegaard, Rahul Tare, Abhay Andar, Mathis O. Riehle,
Pawel Herzyk, Chris D.W. Wilkinson, and Richard O.C. Oreffo. The control of hu-
man mesenchymal cell differentiation using nanoscale symmetry and disorder. Nature
Materials, 6:997–1003, 2007.
Page 47 of 46
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
References
[13] Evelyn K.F. Yim, Stella W. Pang, and Kam W. Leong. Synthetic nanostructures induc-
ing differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells into neuronal lineage. Experimental
Cell Research, 313:1820–1829, 5 2007.
[14] Seiichi Funamoto, Kwangwoo Nam, Tsuyoshi Kimura, Ayako Murakoshi, Yoshihide
Hashimoto, Kazuo Niwaya, Soichiro Kitamura, Toshiya Fujisato, and Akio Kishida.
The use of high-hydrostatic pressure treatment to decellularize blood vessels. Biomate-
rials, 31:3590–3595, 5 2010.
[15] Jia An, Joanne Ee Mei Teoh, Ratima Suntornnond, and Chee Kai Chua. Design and
3d printing of scaffolds and tissues. Engineering, 1:261–268, 6 2015.
[16] Vivian K. Lee, Diana Y. Kim, Haygan Ngo, Young Lee, Lan Seo, Seung Schik Yoo,
Peter A. Vincent, and Guohao Dai.
Creating perfused functional vascular channels
using 3d bio-printing technology. Biomaterials, 35:8092–8102, 2014.
[17] Anwarul Hasan, Adnan Memic, Nasim Annabi, Monowar Hossain, Arghya Paul,
Mehmet R. Dokmeci, Fariba Dehghani, and Ali Khademhosseini. Electrospun scaffolds
for tissue engineering of vascular grafts. Acta Biomaterialia, 10:11–25, 2014.
[18] Peter M. Crapo, Thomas W. Gilbert, and Stephen F. Badylak. An overview of tissue
and whole organ decellularization processes. Biomaterials, 32:3233–3243, 4 2011.
[19] Giuseppe Mazza, Krista Rombouts, Andrew Rennie Hall, Luca Urbani, Tu Vinh Lu-
ong, Walid Al-Akkad, Lisa Longato, David Brown, Panagiotis Maghsoudlou, Amar P.
Dhillon, Barry Fuller, Brian Davidson, Kevin Moore, Dipok Dhar, Paolo De Coppi,
Massimo Malago, and Massimo Pinzani. Decellularized human liver as a natural 3d-
scaffold for liver bioengineering and transplantation. Scientific Reports, 5, 8 2015.
[20] Carlos F. GuimarĂŁes, Luca Gasperini, Alexandra P. Marques, and Rui L. Reis. The
stiffness of living tissues and its implications for tissue engineering. Nature Reviews
Materials, 5:351–370, 5 2020.
[21] Alejandro Soto-Gutierrez, Li Zhang, Chris Medberry, Ken Fukumitsu, Denver Faulk,
Hongbin Jiang, Janet Reing, Roberto Gramignoli, Junji Komori, Mark Ross, Masaki
Nagaya, Eric Lagasse, Donna Stolz, Stephen C. Strom, Ira J. Fox, and Stephen F.
Badylak. A whole-organ regenerative medicine approach for liver replacement. Tissue
Engineering - Part C: Methods, 17:677–686, 6 2011.
[22] Carla M.F.C. Miranda, Luciano C.P.C. Leonel, Rafael R. CaĂąada, Durvanei A. Maria,
Maria AngĂŠlica Miglino, Mariano Del Sol, and Sonja E. Lobo. Effects of chemical and
physical methods on decellularization of murine skeletal muscles. Anais da Academia
Brasileira de Ciencias, 93, 2021.
[23] Robin Simsa, Arvind Manikantan Padma, Philipp Heher, Mats HellstrĂśm, Andreas
Teuschl, Lachmi Jenndahl, Niklas Bergh, and Per Fogelstrand.
Systematic in vitro
comparison of decellularization protocols for blood vessels. PLoS ONE, 13, 12 2018.
Page 48 of 46
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
References
[24] Morteza Alizadeh, Leila Rezakhani, Mostafa Soleimannejad, Esmaeel Sharifi, Maryam
Anjomshoa, and Akram Alizadeh. Evaluation of vacuum washing in the removal of sds
from decellularized bovine pericardium: method and device description. Heliyon, 5, 8
2019.
[25] Dominic M. Casali, Michael J. Yost, and Michael A. Matthews. Eliminating glutaralde-
hyde from crosslinked collagen films using supercritical co2.
Journal of Biomedical
Materials Research - Part A, 106:86–94, 1 2018.
[26] Haiwei Xu, Baoshan Xu, Qiang Yang, Xiulan Li, Xinlong Ma, Qun Xia, Yang Zhang,
Chunqiu Zhang, Yaohong Wu, and Yuanyuan Zhang. Comparison of decellularization
protocols for preparing a decellularized porcine annulus fibrosus scaffold. PLoS ONE,
9, 1 2014.
[27] Deana Moffat, Kaiming Ye, and Sha Jin. Decellularization for the retention of tissue
niches. Journal of Tissue Engineering, 13, 2022.
[28] Benjamin D. Elder, Sriram V. Eleswarapu, and Kyriacos A. Athanasiou. Extraction
techniques for the decellularization of tissue engineered articular cartilage constructs.
Biomaterials, 30:3749–3756, 8 2009.
[29] Qi Xing, Keegan Yates, Mitchell Tahtinen, Emily Shearier, Zichen Qian, and Feng
Zhao. Decellularization of fibroblast cell sheets for natural extracellular matrix scaffold
preparation. Tissue Engineering - Part C: Methods, 21:77–87, 1 2015.
[30] Lisa J. White, Adam J. Taylor, Denver M. Faulk, Timothy J. Keane, Lindsey T. Saldin,
Janet E. Reing, Ilea T. Swinehart, Neill J. Turner, Buddy D. Ratner, and Stephen F.
Badylak. The impact of detergents on the tissue decellularization process: A tof-sims
study. Acta Biomaterialia, 50:207–219, 3 2017.
[31] A. Schmitt, R. Csiki, A. Tron, B. Saldamli, J. TĂźbel, K. Florian, S. Siebenlist, E. Bal-
mayor, and R. Burgkart. Optimized protocol for whole organ decellularization. European
Journal of Medical Research, 22, 9 2017.
[32] Morteza Rashtbar, Jamshid Hadjati, Jafar Ai, Issa Jahanzad, Mahmoud Azami, Sadegh
Shirian, Somayeh Ebrahimi-Barough, and Esmaeil Sadroddiny. Characterization of de-
cellularized ovine small intestine submucosal layer as extracellular matrix-based scaffold
for tissue engineering. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research - Part B Applied Bio-
materials, 106:933–944, 4 2018.
[33] Juhi Chakraborty, Subhadeep Roy, and Sourabh Ghosh. Regulation of decellularized
matrix mediated immune response. Biomaterials Science, 8:1194–1215, 3 2020.
[34] Zucheng Luo, Yujie Bian, Wenting Su, Li Shi, Shi Li, Yonghuan Song, Gang Zheng,
Aiguo Xie, and Jixin Xue. Comparison of various reagents for preparing a decellularized
porcine cartilage scaffold, 2019.
Page 49 of 46
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
References
[35] H. Tebyanian, A. Karami, E. Motavallian, J. Aslani, A. Samadikuchaksaraei, B. Arj-
mand, and M. R. Nourani. Histologic analyses of different concentrations of tritonx-100
and sodium dodecyl sulfate detergent in lung decellularization. Cellular and Molecular
Biology, 63:46–51, 2017.
[36] Wei Yang, Quanyu Chen, Renpei Xia, Yujun Zhang, Ling Shuai, Jiejuan Lai, Xiaolin
You, Yan Jiang, Ping Bie, Leida Zhang, Hongyu Zhang, and Lianhua Bai. A novel
bioscaffold with naturally-occurring extracellular matrix promotes hepatocyte survival
and vessel patency in mouse models of heterologous transplantation.
Biomaterials,
177:52–66, 9 2018.
[37] Kentaro Kitano, Dana M. Schwartz, Haiyang Zhou, Sarah E. Gilpin, Gregory R. Wo-
jtkiewicz, Xi Ren, Cesar A. Sommer, Amalia V. Capilla, Douglas J. Mathisen, Allan M.
Goldstein, Gustavo Mostoslavsky, and Harald C. Ott. Bioengineering of functional hu-
man induced pluripotent stem cell-derived intestinal grafts. Nature Communications,
8, 12 2017.
[38] Kamal Hany Hussein, Kyung Mee Park, Lina Yu, Su Hyeon Song, Heung Myong Woo,
and Ho Hyun Kwak. Vascular reconstruction: A major challenge in developing a func-
tional whole solid organ graft from decellularized organs. Acta Biomaterialia, 103:68–80,
2 2020.
[39] Cynthia A. Batchelder, Michele L. Martinez, and Alice F. Tarantal. Natural scaffolds
for renal differentiation of human embryonic stem cells for kidney tissue engineering.
PLoS ONE, 10, 12 2015.
[40] Edward A. Ross, Matthew J. Williams, Takashi Hamazaki, Naohiro Terada, William L.
Clapp, Christopher Adin, Gary W. Ellison, Marda Jorgensen, and Christopher D.
Batich.
Embryonic stem cells proliferate and differentiate when seeded into kidney
scaffolds. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 20:2338–2347, 11 2009.
[41] Karl H. Hillebrandt, Hannah Everwien, Nils Haep, Eriselda Keshi, Johann Pratschke,
and Igor M. Sauer. Strategies based on organ decellularization and recellularization.
Transplant International, 32:571–585, 6 2019.
[42] Harald C. Ott, Thomas S. Matthiesen, Saik Kia Goh, Lauren D. Black, Stefan M. Kren,
Theoden I. Netoff, and Doris A. Taylor. Perfusion-decellularized matrix: Using nature’s
platform to engineer a bioartificial heart. Nature Medicine, 14:213–221, 2 2008.
[43] Benjamin Struecker, Nathanael Raschzok, and Igor M. Sauer. Liver support strategies:
Cutting-edge technologies. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 11:166–
176, 2014.
[44] Basak E. Uygun, Alejandro Soto-Gutierrez, Hiroshi Yagi, Maria Louisa Izamis, Maria A.
Guzzardi, Carley Shulman, Jack Milwid, Naoya Kobayashi, Arno Tilles, Francois Berthi-
aume, Martin Hertl, Yaakov Nahmias, Martin L. Yarmush, and Korkut Uygun. Organ
Page 50 of 46
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
References
reengineering through development of a transplantable recellularized liver graft using
decellularized liver matrix. Nature Medicine, 16:814–820, 7 2010.
[45] Thomas Shupe, Matthew Williams, Alicia Brown, Bradley Willenberg, and Bryon E.
Petersen. Method for the decellularization of intact rat liver. Organogenesis, 6:134–136,
2010.
[46] Omar Barakat, Shahrzad Abbasi, Gabriela Rodriguez, Jessie Rios, R. Patrick Wood,
Claire Ozaki, Laurie S. Holley, and Polly K. Gauthier. Use of decellularized porcine
liver for engineering humanized liver organ. Journal of Surgical Research, 173, 3 2012.
[47] Antje Butter, Khalid Aliyev, Karl Herbert Hillebrandt, Nathanael Raschzok, Martin
Kluge, Nicolai Seiffert, Peter Tang, Hendrik Napierala, Ashraf I. Muhamma, Anja
Reutzel-Selke, Andreas Andreou, Johann Pratschke, Igor M. Sauer, and Benjamin
Struecker. Evolution of graft morphology and function after recellularization of decel-
lularized rat livers. Journal of Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, 12:e807–
e816, 2 2018.
[48] Rajiv K. Sinha, Krunal Chauhan, Dalsukh Valani, Vinod Chandran, Brijal Kiran Soni,
and Vishal Patel. Earthworms: Charles darwinâs âunheralded soldiers of mankindâ:
Protective amp; productive for man amp; environment. Journal of Environmental Pro-
tection, 01:251–260, 2010.
[49] Clive A. Edwards and Norman Q. Arancon.
Biology and Ecology of Earthworms.
Springer US, 2022.
[50] Chun Min Lo, Hong Bei Wang, Micah Dembo, and Yu Li Wang. Cell movement is
guided by the rigidity of the substrate. Biophysical Journal, 79:144–152, 2000.
[51] J. Satchell. Earthworm Ecology: From Darwin to Vermiculture. Springer Netherlands,
1983.
[52] Silvia M. Contreras-Ramos, Dioselina Ălvarez Bernal, and Luc Dendooven.
Eisenia
fetida increased removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from soil. Environmental
Pollution, 141:396–401, 6 2006.
[53] O. Bajsa, J. Nair, K. Mathew, and G. E. Ho. Vermiculture as a tool for domestic
wastewater management. volume 48, pages 125–132. IWA Publishing, 2004.
[54] Benjamin.c, earthworms; https:/www.sas.upenn.edu/ rlenet/earthworms.html?fbclid=iwar016et7f-
tlgzjwji9pgyumd0x4dmexrw-vaeeu8qpdvhkjzr8rjxn4l8.
[55] Takashi Hoshiba, Guoping Chen, Chiho Endo, Hiroka Maruyama, Miyuki Wakui, Eri
Nemoto, Naoki Kawazoe, and Masaru Tanaka. Decellularized extracellular matrix as an
in vitro model to study the comprehensive roles of the ecm in stem cell differentiation. Stem
Cells International, 2016, 2016.
Page 51 of 46
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis
References
[56] Adam J. Engler, Shamik Sen, H. Lee Sweeney, and Dennis E. Discher. Matrix elasticity
directs stem cell lineage specification. Cell, 126:677–689, 8 2006.
[57] Clive A Edwards’ and K E Fletcher. Interactions between earthworms and micro-organisms
in organic-matter breakdown. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 24:235–247, 1988.
[58] Joshua R. Gershlak, Sarah Hernandez, Gianluca Fontana, Luke R. Perreault, Katrina J.
Hansen, Sara A. Larson, Bernard Y.K. Binder, David M. Dolivo, Tianhong Yang, Tanja
Dominko, Marsha W. Rolle, Pamela J. Weathers, Fabricio Medina-Bolivar, Carole L. Cramer,
William L. Murphy, and Glenn R. Gaudette. Crossing kingdoms: Using decellularized plants
as perfusable tissue engineering scaffolds. Biomaterials, 125:13–22, 5 2017.
[59] Jens O M Karlsson and Mehmet Toner. Long-term storage of tissues by cryopreservation:
critical issues, 1996.
[60] J. E. Arenas-Herrera, I. K. Ko, A. Atala, and J. J. Yoo. Decellularization for whole organ
bioengineering. Biomedical Materials (Bristol), 8, 2013.
[61] Donna J. Webb and Claire M. Brown. Epi-fluorescence microscopy. pages 29–59, 2012.
[62] Anna Cleta Croce and G. Bottiroli. Autofluorescence spectroscopy and imaging: A tool
for biomedical research and diagnosis. European Journal of Histochemistry, 58:320–337, 12
2014.
[63] Jan Kapuscinski. Dapi: A dma-specific fluorescent probe. Biotechnic and Histochemistry,
70:220–233, 1995.
[64] Kazuki Tajima, Kohei Kuroda, Yuya Otaka, Rie Kinoshita, Mizuki Kita, Toshifumi Oya-
mada, and Kazutaka Kanai. Decellularization of canine kidney for three-dimensional organ
regeneration. Veterinary World, 13:452–457, 3 2020.
[65] Spectrum
[dapi
(4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole);
https://www.aatbio.com/fluorescence-
excitation-emission-spectrum-graph-viewer/dapi46diamidino2phenylindole].
[66] Campbell.re,
steinbach.pa,
giepmans.bng,
palmer
ae,
tsien
ry
shaner
nc
;
https://www.fpbase.org/protein/mcherry/.
[67] Suria Jahan, Richa Kaushal, Roya Pasha, and Nicolas Pineault. Current and future per-
spectives for the cryopreservation of cord blood stem cells. Transfusion Medicine Reviews,
35:95–102, 4 2021.
[68] Silvia De Michelis, Claudio De Liberato, Cristina Amoruso, Corrado Battisti, and Monica
Carosi. First worldwide evidence of bronchopulmonary strongyle nematodes and the first
report on italy of cryptosporidium sp. in allochthonous nutria (myocastor coypus). Diversity,
15(5), 2023.
[69] Robert B. Brown and Julie Audet. Current techniques for single-cell lysis. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface, 5, 2008.
Page 52 of 46
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis
References
[70] Erin L. Keller and Jos J. Schall. A new species of monocystis (apicomplexa: Gregarina:
Monocystidae) from the asian invasive earthworm amynthas agrestis (megascolecidae), with
an improved standard for monocystis species descriptions.
The Journal of parasitology,
106:735–741, 11 2020.
[71] Kuldeep Rajpoot, Pratik Katare, Muktika Tekade, Mukesh Chandra Sharma, Suryanarayana
Polaka, Pinaki Sengupta, and Rakesh Kumar Tekade.
Toxicokinetic and toxicodynamic
considerations in drug research. Pharmacokinetics and Toxicokinetic Considerations - Vol
II, pages 751–776, 1 2022.
[72] Tae Hoon Jang, Sung Choel Park, Ji Hyun Yang, Jung Yoon Kim, Jae Hong Seok, Ui Seo
Park, Chang Won Choi, Sung Ryul Lee, and Jin Han. Cryopreservation and its clinical
applications. Integrative Medicine Research, 6:12–18, 3 2017.
[73] Mian Wang, Advitiya Mahajan, Jeffrey S. Miller, David H. McKenna, and Alptekin Aksan.
Physicochemical mechanisms of protection offered by agarose encapsulation during cryop-
reservation of mammalian cells in the absence of membrane-penetrating cryoprotectants.
ACS Applied Bio Materials, 2023.
Page 53 of 46
