==PAGE:1==
Development of in vitro experimental models
to study jet injection into gastrointestinal
tissue
Author: Robert Mandsfelt Eriksen
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Biomedical Engineering
Novo Nordisk
Alternative Delivery Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastroin­
testinal tissue
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Robert Mandsfelt Eriksen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Robert Mandsfelt Eriksen, 2023
University:
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Health Technol­
ogy, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
In cooperation with:
Novo Nordisk, Department of Alternative Delivery Technologies
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department for Oral Devices and
later Alternative Delivery Technology at Novo Nordisk, in cooperation with the Department
of Health Technology at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Robert Mandsfelt Eriksen ­ s174153
Signature
Date
ii
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Therapeutic or immunological drug delivery by means of jet injection into the digestive
tract, is an emerging technology with a growing interest. However, there is currently no
available in vitro model for validating the performance of the jetting devices in gastroin­
testinal tissue, before advancing to in vivo studies. In this project, a single­layered and
multi­layered gel based model were developed for studying the tissue response to jet in­
jection. The behavior of the gel models was analyzed using high speed video capture of
the jetting events, comparing the findings to jet characteristics recorded with a force sen­
sor. Ex vivo trials were conducted on excised tissue from minipigs, and the histological
effects of jetting analyzed, as a supportive study to the gel model evaluation. The single­
layer model revealed the effects of the jet force profile, demonstrating that the majority of
gel penetration occurs within the first 5 ms, as the force overshoots before settling in the
steady state. The multi­layered model proved capable of mimicking the tissue response to
inadequate, appropriate, and excessive force in jet injection. The gel models developed
in this project have the potential to be valuable tools in future research and development
of jet injection technologies for gastrointestinal jetting.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to extend my gratitude to my supervisors Assoc. Prof. Knud Erik Meyer from DTU
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, and Sr. Innovation engr. Todd Dun­
combe. Thank you Knud for giving great feedback on the report, providing theoretical
insight, and reassuring talks on the progression of the project. Thank you Todd for intro­
ducing me to the lab and guiding me through the integration into the company, for creating
possibilities for me to observe peripheral studies at Novo Nordisk related to this research,
for being a vital source of information and generously sharing your insight on prior work
in this field of research, for your abundant attention to this project, even in times of major
changes to the organizational structure and priorities, and for the extensive and greatly
appreciated feedback you have given in the process of writing this report.
I must also give my special thanks to thank Adv. QA. Professional Marie Sand Traberg,
for the time she co­supervised this project as Assoc. Prof. at DTU Department of Health
Technology. Thank you for your feedback on the report, and for helping directing the focus
of the project when it was needed.
I should also like to express my appreciation for the team members of the departments of
Oral Devices and Alternative Delivery Technologies at Novo Nordisk, for helping me with
the project, and generally contributing to a welcoming and inspiring work environment. In
particular Assoc. Sci. Isabelle Bilde Pfander, Assoc. Sci. Marta Rubio Huertas, and Inno­
vation Mng. Drago Sticker. Isabelle for introducing me to the laboratory and procedures,
and especially for her guidance in ex vivo procedures and rapid histology studies. Marta
for the introduction into gel model fabrication. Drago for inspiring talks and suggestions
on the gel model possibilities.
Finally I would like to thank my close family for their support and understanding throughout
the project. Especially to my father, Dean Steen Mandsfelt Eriksen, and his wife, Assoc.
Prof. Lynn Kahle, for their constructive feedback and proof reading of this report.
iv
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project and thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Clinical and technical background
4
2.1
The gastrointestinal wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Jet injection technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
In vitro models to assess jet injection delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theoretical concepts
10
3.1
Material characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Gel structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Fluid dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
The experimental setup
14
4.1
The jetting devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Jet characteristics
20
5.1
Visual jet characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2
Force profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Volume calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Ex vivo trials
26
6.1
Ex vivo protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2
Rapid histology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.4
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7
Development of the single­layer gel model
31
7.1
Human tissue­mimicking gel evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
Inter­gel jetting model comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7.3
Single layer Lorentz Jet ­trials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
8
Development of multi­layer gel model
42
8.1
2­layer gel model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
8.2
3­layer model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.3
Multi­layer Lorentz Jet trials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8.4
Gel­model ex vivo mimic trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
9
Discussion
55
10 Conclusion
57
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
59
A Appendix: Ex vivo rapid histology and post jetting results
63
B Appendix: Gel ex vivo mimic trial rapid ”histology”
72
C Appendix: Development account of the multi­layer gel models
76
D Appendix: Protocol for fabricating gelatin gel
81
E
Appendix: Protocol for fabricating agarose gel
83
F
Appendix: Protocol for fabricating 2­layer model gel
85
G Appendix: Technical drawing of the nozzle
87
H Appendix: Force profiles ­ raw data/mvng.avrg., void/no comparison
89
I
Appendix: tracking of the depot shape in HM gel during jetting
91
J
Appendix: Up­scaled images of depots in gels
93
vi
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This master thesis project is concerned with the development of needle­free jet injec­
tion technology for controlled drug delivery into gastrointestinal tissue. This chapter will
explain the clinical relevance of this technology, detail the overarching objectives of the
project, and outline the structure of the thesis.
1.1
Motivation
There are a wide range of administration routes to deliver therapeutics available on the
market. Each holds unique advantages and trade­offs in terms of ease of use and pharma­
cokinetic­pharmacodynamic efficacy for a particular therapeutic, disease, and patient pop­
ulation. Common non­invasive routes of administration include oral tablets, inhalation,
and transdermal applications. Simple methods are available to deliver a target drug to
the target biological barrier (the gastrointestinal tract, lung, or skin, respectively), in which
drug delivery occurs via passive absorption. While convenient for a user, this method
is only compatible with a small­subset of therapeutics that readily transit these biologi­
cal barriers. Most typically that includes small molecules, and excludes the majority of
protein, peptide, nucleic acid, and antibody therapeutics [1].
In contrast, the use of needles and syringes allows for drug delivery directly to the blood
or a target tissue. While overcoming absorption limitations, these more invasive meth­
ods accompany disadvantages such as tissue damage, needle stick injuries, and pain
[2]. Psychological factors such as needle phobia are also a significant disadvantage, dis­
couraging some people from taking vaccines, or even their required medication (such as
insulin) [3]. Most serious may be the issue of disease spreading by needles; a risk that
follows unsafe injection practices. A 2014 study found that 1.7 million people were in­
fected with hepatitis B virus, up to 315,000 with hepatitis C virus, and as many as 33,800
with HIV through an unsafe injection [4].
Needle­free jet injection (hereafter called jet injection) is an alternative technology to nee­
dles and syringes. By this method, the drug is injected into the tissue, as a highly ener­
gised and concentrated jet. This jet alone will breach the body’s physical barrier, without
the aid of a needle. The issues of needle phobia and disease transmittance by unsafe
needle practice, are thus addressed. There are multiple products on the market for jet in­
jection aimed at penetrating the skin [2]. This site of injection is associated with pain and
scarring, a major disadvantage of the technology [2][5]. Consequently, patient surveys
routinely find an overwhelming patient preference (>70%) for the use of oral administration
over injection technologies [6]. To meet the patient preference for oral administration with
the therapeutic technological need of direct injection beyond the gastrointestinal barrier,
there has been focused research and development on oral devices [7][8]. This motivates
the focus of this project, being jet­injection delivery into intestinal tissue.
The performance of jet­injection technologies will need to be validated before they can be
used on humans. This is achieved by testing the devices on ”models”,that approximate
human response in some capacity. In vivo studies are the most complex models which
produce the most valuable data. After clinical trials, using real and living animal tissue
give the most authentic response to jetting [9]. They provide drug delivery/effect analysis,
as well as histological analysis. Unfortunately, they are neither cheap nor convenient to
conduct. Moreover, ethical considerations regarding the use of laboratory animals calls for
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
1
==PAGE:10==
limiting in vivo trials to only what is required. In order to minimize the number of required
test animals, it is important to establish reliable in vitro test methods that emulate in vivo
conditions to allow for parameter optimization and well­designed studies prior. In the case
of jet injection, this includes considerations of jet force and volume.
There are three other methods commonly used to evaluate jet performance: High speed
camera recordings are used to assess the jet profile and flow, a force sensor to measure
the force of the jet, and ex vivo for histology analysis of the fluid deposit [10][11][12][13].
Force sensor and high speed videos are used to characterize the physical parameters
of the jet. Ex vivo jetting experiments are used to bridge the gap between jet physics to
make predictions about drug delivery. These tests are conducted using pieces of frozen
minipig jejunum tissue. Frequently, this is excess tissue isolated from terminated animals
for other studies or purposes, and the biological variability of this tissue lessens its relia­
bility. Moreover, the hygienic and safety precautions needed when working with intestinal
tissue make it an inconvenient model to work with. As an alternative, research have been
exploring the use of tissue mimicking models fabricated from gels [12][13]. However,
as much of research on jet injection has historically been focused on jetting through the
dermis (skin), so have the studies into this new approach [2][12][13][5].
The development of jet injection technologies into gastrointestinal tissue will benefit from
an economic and reproducible gel model to evaluate the performance of their jetting tech­
nologies. Such an in vitro model would be an efficient and convenient way to produce
data for quality assumptions. By developing robust procedures for the fabrication of the
gel, the results can be more reliable than for ex vivo tissue models. Being able to make
the models in the lab would make it cost­efficient as well. It is the aim of this project to
develop such a gel­based model for evaluating jet injection technologies.
1.2
Project description
This project aims to develop an in vitro gel model, for the use of evaluating jet­injection
devices. The model should be capable of mimicking the response of gastrointestinal
tissue for three outcomes relevant to jet performance: low jetting force inadequate to
breach the tissue, appropriate jetting force ideal for drug delivery (formation of a fluid
depot), and excessive jetting force resulting in perforation of the serosa. The jetting should
be characterized in terms of output force, and the model should be used for studying
the relationship of this force and penetration depth. As a comparative study, histological
examination of minipig jejunum tissue should be carried out post jetting ex vivo.
1.3
Project and thesis structure
The work of this project can be categorized into four phases / main projects, each con­
taining a number of sub­projects. Figure 1.1 provides an overview the project structure.
Project 1: Jet characterization Jet technologies were characterized by the properties of
the jet, including the jetting force profile, the appearance of the jet, the volume that was
ejected, and the corresponding parameters for the jetting tool that was used.
Project 2: Single­layer gels The development of the gel model was initiated using a
simple single­layer model, which was used for studying gel cutting in relation to jet force.
Project 3: Multi­layer gels The more sophisticated multi­layered models, with the goal
of developing one that could mimic the response of gastro­intestinal tissue.
2
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:11==
Project 4: Ex vivo histology Rapid histology on ex vivo samples was carried out as a
comparative study. A mimic trial was performed on the most advanced gel­model, for
ideal comparison to the ex vivo data.
Figure 1.1: Flowchart of the project structure. The work progressed through four phases
/ main projects: Jet characteristics, single layer gels, multi­layer gels, and ex vivo trials.
Each main main project can be divided into sub­projects, whose progression can be red
from left to right.
Every sub­project drew conclusions which inspired the proceeding development. Sub­
projects were occasionally revisited, reevaluated, and/or expanded in response to new
knowledge of opportunities. The thesis has been structured to emphasize the technolog­
ical progression of the work rather than the developmental process. A short descriptiion
of the chapters can be found in the following list:
• Chapter 2: Clinical and technical background knowledge which is the foundation of
this project, and the research to which it is connected. State of the art of jet injection
technologies and and how they are evaluated in research.
• Chapter 3: Theoretical concepts relevant for the development and discussion of
the gel models. Material characteristics, gel structures and flow dynamics.
• Chapter 4: The experimental setup and methods used to obtain the results of this
project. Presentation of the jetting devices in this project, and testing equipment.
• Chapter 5: Jet characteristics, for the configurations used throughout the project.
Study of the jet development and force profiles.
• Chapter 6: Ex vivo protocol and trials. High speed video and rapid histology results
to compare with the gel models.
• Chapter 7: The development of single­layer models and the evaluation of their value
as in vitro models for jet­injection delivery.
• Chapter 8: The development of multi­layer models. A pursuit of a design able to
model more qualitative aspects of the tissue response to jet­injection delivery and
comparison to ex vivo data.
• Chapter 9: Discussion of the value of these gel models and their applicability for
the intended use. Perspective on future developments of these models in relation
to state of the art.
• Chapter 10: Conclusion and summary of the project findings.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Clinical and technical background
Medical and engineering fields of science will be involved in this project. This chapter
covers the essential biology necessary to understand and discuss the work presented in
this thesis, as well as the state of the art for jet injection technologies and related in vitro
modelling techniques.
2.1
The gastrointestinal wall
The development of an oral­based needle­free jet injection device for drug delivery re­
quires an anatomical understanding of the gastrointestinal tract and tissue. The anatomy
of this is illustrated in Figure 2.1. The information in this section is sourced from the book
”Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology, 9’th Edition” by C. L. Vanputte, J. L. Regan, and
A. F. Russo [14].
Following the ventricle (stomach) in the digestive tract is the small intestine followed by
the large intestine. The first 25 cm of the small intestine is the duodenum, followed by
the six meter long jejunum. The latter is the specific tissue of concern in this project.
The small intestine is held in place by a membrane called the mesentary (not included
in the figure) through which the blood supply runs. The jejunum is lined by the fibrous
serosa on the side facing the internal human body, and the soft mocusa facing the lumen
of the intestinal tract. The serosa has a smooth­looking surface, and the lumen a velvety
appearance, arising from many small protrusions called villi. These features are useful
identification markers in ex vivo studies (chapter 6). The majority of nutrients is absorbed
in the small intestine. From here, nutrients are carried directly to the liver where they are
filtered before going into general circulation via the heart. The intestines rest in a watery
sack (the extended serosa) called the peritoneum.
Figure 2.1: Anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract, from a macroscopic to a cellular level.
This is the target tissue of the jetting technology of concern to this project. Illustration is
sourced from Encyclopedia Britannica[15].
4
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:13==
The jejunum consists of multiple layers of specialized tissues, illustrated in Figure 2.2.
From the lumen and in: The mocusa is a soft tissue that holds the protruding villi, and is
where nutrients are up­taken. The submucosa also consists of soft connective tissue and
blood vessels. The muscular and subserous layers are more dense layers, containing
smooth muscle cells, and the serosa is a fibrous layer. Drug delivery via jet injection
should be administered in the soft tissues where the blood vessels are numerous and
can carry the therapeutics into circulation. On the opposite side of the serosa lies the
watery peritoneum.
Figure 2.2: The layered jejunum tissue composition. This is the specific area of jetting for
this project. The illustration is sourced from Science Photo Library [16].
2.1.1
Animal models
While no gastrointestinal tract model is fully representative of human biology, animal mod­
els come closest. The jejunum is a suitable tissue to target, as drugs and nutrients are
taken up in this part of the intestinal tract [14]. In terms of bio­distribution and tissue thick­
ness, it is comparable to the duodenum [17]. However, it is far larger, making it easier to
target specifically [14]. For the jejunum, the optimal non­clinical model is the minipig, as
their small intestinal tissue is anatomically similar to that of humans [18]. The likeness in
scale and be appreciated in Figure 2.3. In vivo studies can be conducted with the animal
under anesthesia or in an ex vivo setting [18]. The in vivo trials are conducted by leading
the PEEK tubing through an endoscope. This carries the nozzle through the oral cavity,
and digestive to the jejunum where jetting commences. When the animal is euthanized,
the intestinal tissue can be collected for ex vivo studies.
From the in vivo studies, two insights can generally be extracted. The first is the uptake
of therapeutic agents into the circulatory system. This can be done while the pig is yet
alive, from blood readings after the jetting. The second is the histological changes to the
jetting, biological and physical. For this the pig must be terminated, the jejunum extracted,
chemically fixed in formalin, and sliced [1]. Therapeutic agents may affect the local tissue
biologically, or histology­dye may be used to detect how and where the depot formed. Ex
vivo studies also allow for the study of physical changes to the tissue, but the possibilities
are more limited. Removing the tissue from the animal compromises the models validity
to an extent, e.g. by killing the cells [9].
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Histological images of human (left) and minipig (right) small intestine. This is
the animal model being used in this project. The images are sourced from Pedersen et
al., 2023 [17].
2.1.2
Gastrointestinal tissue response to jet injection
The information in this section is empirical to this project. The physical response of the
tissue in vivo is illustrated in Figure 2.4. Here, the nozzle is jetting vertically down into the
gastrointestinal wall, from the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. The reader may consult
Figure 2.2 for a recap of the anatomical nomenclature. The fluid exits the nozzle with
enough energy to pierce the soft mocusa, although with some backsplash. It crosses the
tougher but thin muscle tissue layer, muscularis mucosae, and the soft connective tis­
sue in the submucosa before reaching the internal circular muscular layer. In the desired
scenario, it is here the jet meets too stiff resistance relative to the energy it carries. The ac­
cumulating fluid then expands, by splitting the muscular layer from the loose submucosal
tissue (middle frame). This is how the depots are observed to be forming in vivo. From
this depot, where the fluid is retained, the fluid will be absorbed into the submucosa. This
tissue is rich in vasculature, which carries the therapeutic agents into circulation. In an
undesired scenario, the jet carries yet too much energy at this stage, and so it continues
to cut through the muscular, subserous, and serous layers. This is the case illustrated in
the right frame. In such cases the fluid would enter into the peritoneum, in a canal directly
linked to the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. This area of the is not well protected by
the immune system, and has a higher clinical risk of infection. Another undesired scenario
is that the jet does not carry enough force to form a depot, which is illustrated in the left
frame.
6
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the jetting event occurring in vivo: inadequate jetting force (left),
ideal jetting force (middle), and excessive jetting force (right). Note that the illustration is
not made to accurate anatomical scale, to make it more comprehensible.
2.2
Jet injection technologies
Jet injection technologies are an alternative to syringes and needles, potentially able to
address many of their disadvantages. The concept of delivering therapeutics by these
means is not new, and more than 90 years of research and use has led the technology
to where it is today. This section will go over a brief historical account of the jet injection
development and common technical solutions they utilize today.
2.2.1
Developmental history
The use of jet injection as a method of drug delivery originates from grease­gun related
accidents in the 1920’s­1930’s. In 1937, a mechanic accidentally injected diesel into his
hand, inspiring the idea that therapeutics could be delivered in a similar manner [5]. The
first medical use of jet injectors came in the 1940’s with the self­injection device ”hy­
pospray” [19]. In the 1950’s­1960’s, jet injectors would be deployed in the efforts to eradi­
cate smallpox around the world. They were also widely used by the United States Military
for vaccinating military personnel in the field, motivated by their increased speed over
assembling individual doses in syringes for each patient [5][19]. The vaccines were deliv­
ered in muscle or subcutaneous tissue, which was reportedly painful and left a permanent
scar [5]. These early forms of injectors were designed as multi­use, not changing nozzle
between patients [2]. This solution was linked to the spread of diseases such as Hepatitis
B, and was discontinued in the 1980’s in favor of single­use nozzles [5][2].
2.2.2
Technological solutions
There are many types of jet injection devices, but they all generally have these three
functional units: Reservoir, Nozzle, and Power source. The Reservoir holds the fluid
which is to be jetted/injected. This chamber must be made of a mechanically strong
material to withstand the pressures required for jetting. The Nozzle is the exit­/endpoint
of the system. The fluid escapes the system through an orifice in the nozzle, with a small
diameter to create a focused jet. Jet injection nozzle orifices have been reported with
a diameter range of 50­360 µm. Wider orifices are associated with greater penetration
depths, but also with more pain for the recipient [2][20][21]. The power source acts as an
actuator for jetting delivery, energizing the fluid to a high velocity jet. This may be a direct
force, or energy stored in springs or pressurised Chambers. Examples of common force
actuators for jet injection devices are:
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
7
==PAGE:16==
• Spring loaded: Storing energy in a compressed spring is a simple and practical
actuation mechanism. Adjusting spring compression and piston friction can control
the jet.
• Gas­powered: Using expanding air to drive the piston. Typically this is compressed
air. There is an initial high velocity phase, suitable for cutting into the tissue, followed
by a low velocity phase, ideal for delivering the drug.
• Piezoelectric­based: Electric actuation allows for greater control over jet param­
eters. Piezoelectric actuators create a large force for a small displacement, in re­
sponse to a pulse. These jet devices have limited jetting volume capability. Multiple
rapid injections are often necessary.
• Lorentz force­based: A Lorentz force­based motor runs current through a tightly
wound coil of copper to create a magnetic force. This is used for energizing the fluid.
The jetting can be controlled by adjusting the current. These actuators produce
an initial high­pressure phase followed by a low­ pressure phase, which can be
controlled independently of each other.
• Laser­induced: Focusing a laser pulse inside a capillary tube, partially filled with
injection fluid, a vapor bubble is created. This emits a pressure wave that travels
through the injection fluid, producing a highly focused high­velocity jet.
2.3
In vitro models to assess jet injection delivery
This project concerns the development of in vitro models to study jet­injection delivery.
This section summarizes previous published work characterizing jet­injection technolo­
gies.
2.3.1
Jet characteristics
Different approaches are taken to analyze the characteristics of the jet. Using high­speed
video, the development of the jet is observed [22]. With the use of force sensors, the
output force or pressure of the jet is recorded along the jetting event, creating a force pro­
file [10][22][12]. This force profile will have a plateau­/steady state region, the the output
force stagnates. This stagnation pressure is commonly used as a metric for comparison
[23][10][12][13]. This project will use the term steady state force as reference to this region
of the force profile.
2.3.2
Gel models
Jetting into gels is a popular method for characterizing jetting for drug delivery applications
[10][11][12][13]. The jet must be able to both to cut into tissue past a biological barrier, and
deliver a liquid bolus of drug to a vascularized tissue, to facilitate efficient systemic uptake.
A gel can be an excellent model for these types of tissues and a jetted delivery. Much
like real tissue they can be soft or rigid, tough of fragile, and contain water. Poroelastic
gels can even absorb the fluid, as would the case be in vivo [12]. Further, the transparent
optics of many gels also enable the study of depot formation with high speed footage
[10][11][12][13]. This allows for a thorough assessment of the jet­cutting mechanics and
delivery. Such information cannot be readily obtained from in vivo or even ex vivo studies.
Single layer gels are the simplest version of tissue­mimicking models. While they do not
capture the true complexity of multi­layered tissue, they can be used to obtain a variety
of information about the mechanics of jet delivery. The development of fluid depots has
been observed using high­speed video [10][12]. From still frames, the dimensions of the
depot are measured, often reported in terms of penetration depth and width [12].
8
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:17==
The area and shape of the depot (as visible to the camera) are also examined from these
models [10][12]. Estimates of the fluid retained in the depots are made using pixel intensity
of monochrome high speed videos [12]. The material response has been examined by
the mechanical stress field during jetting [11].
Multi­layer gels have also been explored in literature. The motivation for these is to obtain
a more complex model, which resembles the layered target tissue [12]. The development
of the depot is likewise examined using high­speed video [12][13]. The size and shape of
the depots are examined as well, as it is of interest to know how much fluid is delivered
how far into the tissue [12][13].
Different types of hydrogels are being used in this field of study. Commonly, polyacry­
lamide is used, typically at 10% or 15% gel densities [10][12][13]. These gels are con­
sidered ideal for modelling jet injection, due to their stability and transparent optics [13].
Agarose is another gel used, noted for having similar benefits [12], and gelatin (derived
from porcine skin) have also been used for modeling jet injection [11].
When comparing the gel models to each other, or to the target tissue, Young’s modulus
is a common metric [10][12][13]. Relevant to the cutting is the fracture toughness of the
material. In the case of hydrogels, this characteristic is linked to the pore size of the gel
on a microscopic level (Further described in section 3.2)[12].Unique to multi­layer models
is the issue of the gel­layer interfaces. The gel­layer adherence has been previously
optimized in order to achieve tissue­like gel constructs [13].
2.3.3
Computer simulations
Alternatively to practical gel­models, software simulations can be used to study similar
scenarios. In these, the parameters of the jetting can be idealized, making it an interesting
comparison to practical studies. The work of Zhizhi Wang et al. [23] uses this method to
evaluate jet characteristics and material (target tissue) response.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Theoretical concepts
This chapter will go over the theoretical background for this project. A general look at
relevant material properties, a description of the structures and properties of gels, and
flow dynamics related to this project is provided.
3.1
Material characteristics
The material characteristics of polymers will briefly be accounted for in this section, as they
are relevant to the description and behavior of the gels in this project. Looking at the left
graph in Figure 3.1 the stress acting on a polymer in response to strain is plotted. Under
certain strain values, the gels will behave elastically, and no deformation will be permanent
[24]. The slope of the curve in this region is the Young’s modulus; a descriptive metric used
in this project for some gel models. Strain beyond the elastic region will cause permanent
deformation to the gel, and then fracture [24]. The middle graph to the right in Figure 3.1
shows the hysteresis curve for an elastic material. In the elastic region, all stored energy
is preserved in the material, and acts to return the gel to its original shape once the load is
removed [24]. The tissues this project aims to model, exhibit more viscoelastic behavior
[12]. In such a response to a load, some energy is lost to the material, as can be seen in
the bottom graph on the right in Figure 3.1 [24].
Figure 3.1: (Left) Stress­strain curve for a polymer. (Right) Hysteresis with the load con­
dition in the top graph, elastic material response in the middle graph, and viscoelastic
material response in the bottom graph [24].
The ability of a material to absorb energy and plastically deform without fracturing is called
toughness. This is given as the area below the curve on the left graph in Figure 3.1.
Fracture toughness is the ability of a material to resist fracture, or to resist the propagation
of a sharp crack under load. This is determined for a material by initiating a crack, and
acting on the material with a load (left in Figure 3.2)[25]. Fracture can occur in different
modes, illustrated on the right in Figure 3.2. The red areas represent the zone where
the material deforms plastically. Brittle fracture occurs rapidly, to an otherwise elastic
material, with no prior evidence to material deformation [25]. For ductile fracture, large
plastic deformations occur before fracture [25].
10
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: (Left) Load modes used in determining the fracture toughness of a material
(Right) Fracture modes of a material [25].
3.2
Gel structures
Gels are a soft material consisting of water and a polymer network spanning its system
[26]. They can be described as water trapped in a loose polymer mesh, and are formed
through a liquid to solid transition called gelation [26]. They have solid properties, being
able to sustain shear stresses [26]. Gels can be divided into two families of physically­
and chemically formed gels [26]. The former is held together by physical interaction and
is reversible (can return to a liquid state) [26]. The latter is created by chemical cross
linking, an irreversible transition [26].
Agarose is a natural polymer extracted from seaweed. The repeat unit is D­galactose and
3,6­anhydro­L­galactose [27]. it is synthesized by dissolving it in hot water [27]. Cooling
the solution will result in extensive hydrogen bonding between the polymer chains [27].
Gelatin is a gel formed from collagen, a protein produced by cells which appears in hu­
mans and animals [26]. When collagen is heated it breaks down into protein gelatin [26].
It swells and becomes softer in water, and shrinks and becomes smaller when dehydrated
[26]. It is a thermoreversible system: At low temperatures it is solid, but will melt when
heated [26].
Gels have a porous structure, which is relevant to a number of applications in science.
[28] Relevant to this project is the larger pores link to decreased fracture toughness [12].
The pore sizes of gels are in the 100 of nanometers (Figure 3.3), but present a wide
distribution of sizes [28]. It has been demonstrated that the pore size narrows as the
monomer concentration increases [28].
Figure 3.3: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of 1.0 % agarose gel (a), and 2.0
% agarose gel (b), demonstrating the scale and structure of the pores. Image is sourced
from Zhou et a.l, 2006 [29].
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
11
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Fluid dynamics
This section will account for the fluid dynamics which are used in this project. The jet
stream produced by a jetting device can be characterised for a number of metrics related
to the jetting force. The force profile of the jetting event can be obtained by jetting orthogo­
nally into a force sensor. The situation is illustrated in Figure 3.4. A Novo Nordisk internal
document has derived the relationship between jet force, pressure, and force of impact.
Following is a summary of the key theoretical conclusions that relate to this thesis.
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the fluid jet impeding on a perpendicular plane. This is the
situation under jetting force measurements.
There is an interest in determining which pressure the jet acts upon the target tissue or
gel mode (P2, [Pa] ). For this, it is necessary to first derive the pressure inside the nozzle
(P0, [Pa]). This will be derived using the output force (F, [N]) which is measured as in
Figure 3.4, and an expression for the average fluid velocity in the nozzle (¯v0, [m/s]). The
volume flow rate (Q,
[
m3/s
]
) will be the same in all cross sections of the stream, giving
the relationship in Equation 3.1. In this equation, A0
[
m2]
is the cross sectional area in
the nozzle, A1
[
m2]
is the cross sectional of the jet stream as it leaves the nozzle exit
orifice, and ¯v1 [m/s] is the average fluid velocity as the jet stream leaves the nozzle exit
orifice. For simplicity, it is assumed that the flow profile is flat throughout, so that v0 ≈¯v0
and v1 ≈¯v1, leading to the expression for v0 in Equation 3.2.
Q = A0¯v0 = A1¯v1
(3.1)
v0 = A1v1
A0
(3.2)
The next steps serve to obtain an expression for P0. Introducing Bernoulli’s formula Equa­
tion 3.3, P1 represents pressure just pass the nozzle exit [Pa], and ρ is the fluid density
[
kg/m3]
[30]. Assuming no viscous pressure loss when the fluid flows from the tube into
the nozzle, P1 can be eliminated. Substituting v0 from Equation 3.2 into Bernoulli’s ex­
pression, Equation 3.4 is obtained. This expression can be yet more simplified: For the
nozzle in this project, A2
1/A2
0 = 0.004, and so this term may be neglected, as in Equa­
tion 3.5.
P0 + ρv2
0
2
= P1 + ρv2
1
2
(3.3)
12
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:21==
P0 = ρv2
1
2
(
1 −A2
1
A2
0
)
(3.4)
P0 = ρv2
1
2
(3.5)
With Equation 3.5 an expression for P0 is obtained, but it does not yet depend on the
measured force. The force (F, [N]) exerted by a jet stream on a perpendicular plane,
can be obtained from the jet impact formula in Equation 3.6, which can be derived from
conservation of momentum for a control volume (Figure 3.4). v2 [m/s] runs perpendicular
to the force sensor plane and thus does not contribute considerably to the force acting on
the surface. If ρ is isolated in Equation 3.5, as in Equation 3.7, it can be substituted into
Equation 3.6. Finally an expression for obtaining the nozzle fluid pressure P0 from the
measured force F is found in Equation 3.8.
F = ρA1v12
(3.6)
ρ = 2P0
v2
1
(3.7)
P0 =
F
2A1
(3.8)
If Bernoulli’s principle is applied in the center of the stream (dashed line in Figure 3.4) all
the way to the perpendicular plane, the following is true: P2(r = 0) = P0. r [m], being the
radius from the center­line of the jet stream. As such, Equation 3.8 is also the force with
which the jet acts on the tissue or gel model, at r = 0.
The velocity of the jet stream can also be derived from Equation 3.6, by isolating v1 as
done in Equation 3.9. The ejected fluid volume jetted, Vdt [m3], over given time interval,
∆t [s] can be derived from the average nozzle velocity over that time period ¯v1,dt and the
nozzle cross sectional area A1.
v1 =
√
F
ρA1
(3.9)
Vdt = ∆tA1v1,dt
(3.10)
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
13
==PAGE:22==
4
The experimental setup
This chapter describes the experimental equipment used in this project, as well as the
setup for the different trials. The equipment accounted for in section 4.1 was developed
prior to this project. The experimental setups in section 4.2 have been devised for this
project, apart from the jet force measuring.
4.1
The jetting devices
In this project, two jetting devices were used with different power sources / actuation
mechanisms. One utilized a pressure chamber and valve to actuate jetting, while the
other utilized an electromagnetic voice­coil and the Lorentz force to actuate jetting. The
two devices are unique in their construction. The following sections serve to explain their
components and function.
4.1.1
The Pressure Jet ­ jetting device
The pressure actuated jet­injection device (hereafter called the ”Pressure Jet”) has been
a key part of the development in this project. The device setup is seen in Figure 4.1, and
a more comprehensible illustration is given in Figure 4.2. Off screen is a gas tank, which
connects to the pressure controller. The gas is nitrogen but this is not relevant to its func­
tion in the device. Steel reinforced rubber tubing [31] and high pressure Polyetheretherke­
tone (PEEK) tubing connect the pressure controller to the Poly carbonate reservoir. This
reservoir holds a piston which separates it into two compartments. Superior to the piston
is a pressurized gas compartment, and inferior to the piston is a liquid compartment. This
is the fluid which will be jetted. A solenoid valve seals the reservoir on the opposite end
of the pressure tubing. Following the valve is a three meter long PEEK tube. It is at the
end of this tube the nozzle is attached. The long tubing is required to ensure compatibility
with endoscope mediated in vivo studies [17].
Figure 4.1: The setup of the Pressure Jet jetting device, with all elements marked. The
Pressure Jet utilizes a pressurized nitrogen chamber and a high­speed valve to control
the magnitude and timescale of jetting. The function of the Pressure Jet is illustrated in
Figure 4.2.
14
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:23==
The Pressure Jet has two controlling mechanisms. The first is the pressure controller,
which manipulates the condition for the jetting (input pressure). The output force of the
jetting relates to the input pressure set by this controller. This relationship is explored
in section 5.2. The second controlling mechanism is the micro­controller box. This will
command the solenoid valve to open for a predefined time window when the blue button is
pressed. This allows the liquid to escape the reservoir, through the PEEK tubing, exiting
the nozzle. The valve time relates to the volume of the fluid which is jetted. Thus, it is the
pressure which sets the condition for the piston to push the fluid from the reservoir, and
the valve which allows it to do so.
Figure 4.2: Diagram of the Pressure Jet jetting device. The Nitrogen tank provides pres­
surized gas. The pressure controller sets the input pressure, which dictates the force
applied on the piston within the reservoir. When the valve is opened, the piston advances
axially and fluid is ejected towards the nozzle. Jetting time is dictated by the valve opening
time. The nozzle is where the fluid escapes the system and defines the diameter of jetted
solution.
4.1.2
The Lorentz Jet ­ jetting device
The Lorentz Jet is an electromagnetically actuated jetting device. The device setup is
seen in Figure 4.3, and an illustration of the functional parts are given in Figure 4.4. The
actuation and Lorentz force is directly controlled from a computer, through a drive unit.
This connects to a voice coil, which when activated, shunts a metal rod into a piston. The
piston is inserted into the fluid reservoir (as seen in Figure 4.3b). The other end of the
reservoir is connected to 2.8 m PEEK tubing, at the end of which the Nozzle is attached.
This tubing is what allows the device to be used in vivo, as covered in subsection 2.1.1.
The Lorentz Jet has three control mechanisms. Figure 4.4 illustrates the parts which
make up the device. The force with which the voice coil acts on the metal rod is controlled
by adjusting the current with the drive unit. This relates to the output force, which is
illustrated in section 5.2. Two parts of the rig are able to move independently along a
common axis. These constitute the two other control mechanisms, and are manipulated
by the rear dial and the top dial. The rear dial controls how far up the metal rod is able to
push. Thus, the fluid volume jetted is controlled by the rear dial. The top dial moves the
reservoir relative to the rest of the Lorentz Jet rig. The top dial needs to be adjusted to
move the reservoir closer to the metal rod after each jetting.
4.1.3
Sources of variability
Both jetting systems are comprised of parts that to some degree are compliant. Most
obvious is probably the three meter­long PEEK tube that connects the reservoir to the
nozzle, but also parts like the rubber rings on the piston or even the reservoir are com­
pliant. These components act as springs in the system that are tightened under pressure
when the jetting is actuated, and then recoil with a delay. This causes a storing of energy
in the system which is released with a delay during the jetting. The effect is an overshoot
in the force profile, which is observed in chapter 5: Figure 5.1, Figure 5.4, and Figure 5.6.
Another major source of compliance is air bubbles within the fluid compartment.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
15
==PAGE:24==
These are compressed when the fluid is pressurised, and expand later to release energy.
One has to take great care not to introduce these bubbles when loading the devices with
fluid. The Pressure Jet is known to have a less reproducible overshoot than the Lorentz
Jet. It is believed that bubbles trapped in the valve are a root cause of this. Another
source of variation is the friction between the piston and the reservoir. The piston should
regularly be lubricated to minimize this issue.
(a) The entirety of the Lorentz Jet rig.
(b) The Lorentz Jet reservoir.
Figure 4.3: The setup of the Lorentz Jet jetting device, with all elements marked. The
Lorentz Jet uses electro­magnetic actuation for the jetting. The function of the Pressure
Jet is illustrated in Figure 4.4. (I) base­plate, (II) driveware software, (III) 6” g­clamps,
(IV) Lorentz Jet rig, (V) Nozzle cradle, (VI) Drive Unit, (VII) PEEK tubing connector, (VIII)
reservoir, (IX) locking pin, (X) mounting holes, (XI) reservoir bracket, (XII) fill port, (XIII)
piston.
Figure 4.4: Diagram of the Lorentz Jet jetting device. The voice coil pushes the metal
rod into the piston when activated, causing the jetting. The rear dial can be adjusted to
increase or decrease the amount of fluid jetted. The top dial is used to prime the device
for jetting, after each run.
16
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:25==
4.1.4
The nozzle
The nozzle is the exit point of the jetting device, from where the jet originates. Figure 4.5
show the nozzle used in this project. The nozzle as shown in the schematic (d) is a three
part component. From right to left it consists of the tip of the PEEK tubing, a molded PEEK
fitting bit, and a precision machined metal end cap.
Figure 4.5: The nozzle of the jet injection devices. a: photos of the nozzle, b: CT scans of
the stainless­steel nozzle part, c: SEM image of the exit orifice of nozzle, d: schematic of
the combined assembly. Including the stainless­steel nozzle, PEEK nozzle adapter, and
PEEK tubing. The complete technical schematic can be found in Appendix G.
4.2
Data acquisition
Various equipment and software is used in this project, from the process of gel fabrication
to test and analysis. This section describes the equipment relevant to the process and
results.
High speed video is captured on a Photron FASTCAM SA­Z high speed camera. This
model is able to capture monochrome footage at up to 2,100,000 frames per second (fps)
[32]. Higher frame rates limits the cameras field of view, as fewer pixels are used to store
memory on the camera [32]. Practically this means that if a certain gel model forms large
depots, a decrease in fps is needed to capture the depot. For this project a maximum
of 100,000 fps is used. The lens mounted is a LAOWA 100mmF2.8 CA­dreamer Macro
2X. This piece is capable of magnification 2:1 to infinity, and has a focal length of 100
mm [33]. The video capture is controlled through the software Photron FASTCAM Viewer
(PFV4). This application intelligently captures few milliseconds (ms) of the jetting event
by detecting motion within the image [34]. These tools has make it possible to capture
high resolution, highly magnified, and high frame­rate footage of the jetting events in this
project. The high speed video setup is seen in Figure 4.6b. A more comprehensible
illustration is given in Figure 4.6a. Note: The project moved laboratory partway through,
and so some images will have the nozzle showing on the right and some on the left.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
17
==PAGE:26==
In some cases the gels were best mounted freely on the platform, and jetted horizontally.
Double sided tape was used here to avoid the gel slipping on the surface. Figure 4.7a
highlights this setup. In other cases the gel would be jetted vertically (down), whether due
to the properties of the gel or the method of fabrication. A different rig was then utilized
to hold the nozzle, which is seen in Figure 4.7b.
(a) Diagram of the high speed video setup.
(b) Photo of the high speed video setup.
Figure 4.6: The setup for high speed video capture. for the diagram in (a): (1) High speed
camera (2) lamps (3) background for contrast (4) nozzle (5) elevation­adjustable platform
(6) gel model (7) double sided tape. Note that the lamps are positioned differently in (a)
and (b).
(a) Horizontal jetting into the gel. Nozzle is
held in place by flat­ended screw.
(b) Vertical jetting into the gel. Nozzle is held
in place by red clamps.
Figure 4.7: Horizontal and vertical configurations for the gel jetting.
18
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:27==
The setup lighting rig is essential to capture high speed footage. A higher frame­rate
necessitates higher light exposure, to make up for decreased exposure time of the camera
[35]. The setup is lit by two GSVitec Multiled QT lamps. These are suitable for fast
imaging, and can provide an evenly­distributed white light, at up to 12000 lumen [36].
The lights are controlled by a Multiled G8 controller.
Video analysis was performed in the software Fiji, which is based on ImageJ [37]. This
tool allowed for measurements in the video, based on a scale set on a reference in the
image. The nozzle is designed with ring markers, spaced one millimeter apart. This was
used for reference in the scaling.
A weighing scale was used regularly for determining the relationship between a given
configuration for a jetting device, and the ejected fluid volume. Many different configu­
rations for both devices have been tested. Each have been authenticated by measuring
weight of the jetted fluid. Throughout this project, only jetting 80 and 100 µL was jetted,
with an error of ±0.5µL. The scale used was a Mettler Toledo excellence plus. Note: At
the lab transfer a new scale (Mettler Toledo) was available, but not with a resolution of
only 10 mg. Subsequently, all volumes for the Lorentz Jet are not authenticated with an
error of ±0.5µL.
Force measurements of the jet output were taken as illustrated in Figure 4.8. The nozzle
was placed to shoot perpendicularly into a force sensor, Kistler 9215A, at 1 mm distance.
The sensor is connected to a Kistler 5165A Amplifier. Data acquisition is performed on
computer software. The force sensor is very sensitive, such that even a temperature
change caused by droplets of water will affect the data.
(a) Diagram of the setup.
(b) Photo of the setup.
Figure 4.8: The setup for jet force profile capture.
Data analysis and plotting presented in this thesis was performed using video process­
ing program ImageJ Fiji [37], spreadsheet editor Microsoft Excel, and statistical analysis
and visualization software GraphPad Prism 9.
Gel fabrication of different in vitro models was a major focus of this project and protocols
varied for different gel types and configurations. The Gel fabrication process is described
subsubsection 7.2.1, subsubsection 8.1.1, and subsubsection 8.1.2, and the correspond­
ing protocols are included in Appendix D, Appendix E, and Appendix F.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
19
==PAGE:28==
5
Jet characteristics
The jet streams from the jetting devices were characterised visually and by the force
they generated. This allowed for the tuning of the jetting devices to match desired jet
characteristics and to understand the repeatability of the devices.
5.1
Visual jet characterization
High speed video acquisition captured the dynamic of jet development from the Pressure
Jet in Figure 5.1 upon initiation. The 100,000 FPS video demonstrates that accelerating
the fluid mass in the 3 m PEEK tubing (approximately 3 µL) is not instantaneous. For the
first 3 ms the fluid is ejected at a slow pace. Hereafter it is overtaken by the by a forceful
jet, and a collision is seen in the middle frame (5.20 ms after initiation). After some time
the jet becomes less energized and the flow better developed. For the jetting seen in this
figure, the valve time was 21 ms, and yet the first and last frames are taken 40 ms apart.
Figure 5.1: High speed video of the Pressure Jet ­ jet development, with 20 bar input
pressure and 21 ms valve time. The video is captured with 100,000 fps.
With the use of imaging software Fiji, the width of the jet was measured in the jetting event,
around 35 ms after jet initiation[37]. Figure 5.2 shows the jet width for the Pressure Jet,
at the input pressures 11, 17, and 20 bar. A more concentrated stream will result in better
cutting abilities [21]. The width was measured at 1 mm from the nozzle, the distance used
in this project, and 10 mm, as some of the gel­jetting videos are of this scale. The jet width
is close to the SEM­measured nozzle diameter of 0.254 mm for all input pressures, and
this even seems to hold true at a 10 mm distance. From this, the jet can be assumed to
have a reasonably developed flow.
20
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.2: Jet width measurements from high speed video capture, around 35 ms after
jet initiation. Every vertical line marks 1/2 of the nozzle exit­orifice diameter. All data
points represent the avrg. (full line) and std. (dotted line / colored area) for 3 trials.
5.2
Force profiles
The output force profiles for the jetting devices have been measured using a force sensor
(Figure 4.8). Figure 5.3 gives an overview of the terms that will be used to describe
the force profiles. The force profiles for jetting parameters being used in this project are
plotted in Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.6. There have been recorded for the Pressure Jet and
Lorentz Jet using a force sensor, as illustrated in Figure 4.8. The raw data is noisy, making
it difficult to read. This is due to the high sensitivity of the force sensor, and fluctuations of
the jet force arising from micro­bubbles in the fluid compartment [38]. The graphs shown
in the figure therefore display the 0.5 ms moving average of the data. The affect of this
filtering is illustrated in Appendix H.
Figure 5.3: Illustration of a typical force profile for the jetting. The terms used to describe
the force profiles are included.
5.2.1
Pressure Jet ­ force profiles
The Pressure Jet was used from the early stages of the project. In the initial experiments,
80 µL fluid was used for jetting, but this was changed to 100 µL in later phases. The force
profiles for these are plotted in Figure 5.4, for four input pressures. Some differences in
these plots may arise from the change in time and place they were obtained. The profiles
for 80 µL jets to not get to develop a clear steady state phase e.g. The overshoot is also
more exaggerated compared to that of the 100 µL jets.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
21
==PAGE:30==
In this project, three configurations for the Pressure Jet will reoccur periodically: 11 bar,
17, bar and 20 bar. These are chosen due to their relevance to jet injection in the gastroin­
testinal tract. In this work, 11 bar is used to represent a low inadequate input pressure for
drug delivery and 20 bar to represent an exaggerated jetting condition. The jet configu­
ration 17 bar represented an optimal condition for jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue.
14 bar is included in Figure 5.4 as an intermediary configuration.
The steady state forces for 80 µL are approximately: 48 mN for 11 bar, 55 mN for 14 bar,
86 mN for 17 bar, and 103 mN for 20 bar input pressure. The curves of the 100 µL jets
are nicely distributed in terms of duration, and steady state force: 59 mN for 11 bar, 75
mN for 14 bar, 95 mN for 17 bar, and 115 mN for 20 bar input pressure. An overview of
the characteristics is given in Table 5.1. Hereafter, the Jetting parameters will be referred
to by their steady state (output) force.
Figure 5.4: Force profiles of the Pressure Jet with 80 and 100 µL for input pressure: 11
bar, 14 bar, 17 bar, and 20 bar. The sampling rate of the force sensor was 200,000 sps.
The graphs are the 0.5 ms moving avrg. of the raw data. All data points represent the
avrg. (full line) and std. (dotted line / colored area) for 3 trials. Table 5.1 summarizes the
data.
5.2.2
Lorentz Jet ­ force profiles
The force profile of the Lorentz Jet can be altered through convenient means. The piston
and reservoir are able to move independently of each other, and the rig (Figure 4.3b).
This enables the Lorentz Jet to introduce air into the fluid compartment. Air bubbles are
generally undesired,as they have unpredictable effects on the jetting [38]. However, when
void of known volume is deliberately placed at the distal end of the system, it allows the
fluid to accelerate with less resistance, causing a predictable change to the force profile.
The procedure for introducing a void to the system is illustrated in Figure 5.5. The top dial
is turned to move the reservoir away from the metal rod. The piston is then pulled back
until it is in contact with the metal rod. This will cause the fluid to retract into the reservoir
from the nozzle and PEEK tubing, introducing a void near the nozzle. The volume of the
void is controlled by the top dial. The rear dial will have to be adjusted as well, to account
for the air in the system if a specific jetted fluid volume is to be maintained.
22
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.5: Introducing a void to the distal end of the Lorentz Jet device. The top dial is
turned to move the reservoir away from the metal rod. The piston is then pulled back in
contact with the metal rod. This pulls in air in the distal end of the system.
A wider range of jetting configurations have been characterized for the Lorentz Jet. Fig­
ure 5.6 shows the force profiles for the range of currents tested in the left plot. In the right
plot the same parameters are used, but now a 50 µL void has been added, as shown
in Figure 5.5. Both figures show a distribution of jetting time and steady state force. An
overview of the characteristics is given in Table 5.1. For the left plot, a steady state region
developed for all current inputs. For the right plot, the effects of adding a 50 µL void by
the nozzle are evident: a significant overshoot, followed by an elevated, but shortened,
steady state region compared to the left plot. For the current configurations of 3.33 A and
3.7 A, a steady state region does not quite form. A one for one comparison of all power
inputs force profiles, with and without a void, can be found in Appendix H.
Figure 5.6: Force profiles of the Lorentz Jet with 100 µL, with and without a 50 µL void by
the nozzle, for current: 1 A, 1.4 A, 1.8 A, 2.22 A, 2.46 A, 3.33 A, 3.7 A. The sampling rate
of the force sensor was 200,000 sps. The graphs are the 0.5 ms moving avrg. of the raw
data. All data points represent the avrg. (full line) and std. (dotted line / colored area) for
3 trials. Table 5.1 summarizes the data.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
23
==PAGE:32==
Pressure Jet
Pres., v. time
Max force
Ss. force
Settling time
Total jetting time
80 µL
11 bar, 37 ms
0.083
0.048
25
37
14 bar, 30 ms
0.087
0.055
20
37
17 bar, 22 ms
0.136
0.086
15
30
20 bar, 21 ms
0.158
0.103
15
30
Pressure Jet
Pres., v. time
Max force
Ss. force
Settling time
Total jetting time
100 µL
11 bar, 44 ms
0.825
0.059
13
57
14 bar, 37 ms
0.150
0.075
15
50
17 bar, 34 ms
0.155
0.095
20
43
20 bar, 30 ms
0.178
0.115
20
40
Lorentz Jet
Current
Max force
Ss. force
Settling time
Total jetting time
100 µL
1.00 A
0.020
0.015
10
125
1.4 A
0.051
0.029
22
87
1.8 A
0.049
0.040
15
85
2.22 A
0.090
0.062
15
67
2.46 A
0.135
0.072
25
55
3.33 A
0.180
0.113
27
52
3.7 A
0.197
0.123
27
50
Lorentz Jet
Current
Max force
Ss. force
Settling time
Total jetting time
100 µL
1.00 A
0.040
0.021
17
140
+ 50 µL void
1.4 A
0.070
0.035
20
90
1.8 A
0.090
0.045
20
75
2.22 A
0.160
0.062
22
67
2.46 A
0.150
0.073
25
60
3.33 A
0.230
0.110
35
50
3.7 A
0.250
0.120
35
45
Table 5.1: Jet characteristic data obtained from force profiles, with three trials. Max Force
is the avrg. peak force measured in Newtons, steady state (ss) Force is the avrg. force
in the steady state­/plateau region in Newtons, settling time is the time for the response
to reach steady state in ms, and total jetting time is the total duration of the jetting event
in ms.
5.2.3
Processed profiles
In section 3.3 formulas were derived that provide a means to extract additional informa­
tion from the force profiles. The expressions are provided again here in Equation 5.1,
Equation 5.2, and Equation 5.3. It should be noted that Equation 5.2 is derived from
an alternative jet­impact formula: F = 2ρAjetv2
jet. This expression models the surface of
impact as a deep curve, rather than a flat plane, but has been found empirically to better
fit the conversion of impact force to jet velocity.
P =
F
2Ajet
(5.1)
vjet =
√
F
2ρAjet
(5.2)
Vdt = ∆tAjetvjet,dt
(5.3)
24
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:33==
With these relationships it is possible to plot the jets pressure and velocity as a function of
time, as is seen to the left in Figure 5.7. The peak output pressure for this jet configuration
is found to be 20 bar, and the steady state pressure is 10 bar. Given the velocity in turn
allows for the (accumulated) jetted volume to be derived, with Equation 5.3. The velocity
and jetted volume is plotted together to the right in the figure, where their relationship is
apparent. The accumulated jetted fluid volume is seen to terminate around 100 µL. This
method can serve as a verification of the volume validation.
Figure 5.7: Pressure profile, velocity profile and accumulated jetted fluid volume, obtained
from the force profile of the Pressure Jet for 80 µL at 86 mN. The sampling rate of the
force sensor was 200,000 sps. The graphs are the 0.5 ms moving avrg. of the raw data.
All data points represent the measurements of a single trial.
5.3
Volume calibration
Throughout this project, the volume of jetted fluid will be either 80 µL or 100 µL. To calibrate
the devices to the desired volume, a vial was measured using a scale, and then again after
jetting into it. The difference in weight was then converted to volume. By changing the
configurations on the jetting device, multiple experiments were performed to narrow in
on 80/100 µL. Repeat measurements were then taken to verify the configuration­volume
relationship. For the Pressure Jet , this would mean changing the valve time (the time
window fluid is allowed to exit the system). Figure 5.8 shows the process of verifying
that 22 ms valve time for 86 mN. For the Lorentz Jet, the configuration to manipulate is
the rear dial, as illustrated in Figure 4.4. Quite simply, this relates to the height (h) in the
cylinder volume formula: Vc = h · π · r2.
Figure 5.8: Measuring the volume of ejected fluid from a jetting device at a given con­
figuration. From left to right: (1) Jetting into a glass vial, (2) the difference in weight is
measured on a scale, (3) multiple measurements are taken to approach the desired vol­
ume, (4) replicates are taken to ensure that the jetting configuration reliably will eject the
desired volume.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
25
==PAGE:34==
6
Ex vivo trials
To validate the performance of the gel models, ex vivo trials were conducted. These were
performed using minipig jejunum tissue, extracted from the very pigs used for the in vivo
trials. The tissue had been extracted after terminal trials, and kept frozen until these ex
vivo trials. The tissue would be prepared, and tested on a wide range of configurations
on the two jet injection devices. This range extended beyond the one used for the gel­
model trials. With this model being non­variable in design, interest was taken in seeing
the response to a wider range of parameters.
6.1
Ex vivo protocol
The tissue samples need preparation before the trials. They come as cut­outs of the
jejunum, frozen down. They will first need to be defrosted in a water bath. The following
steps can be followed in Figure 6.1: (1) the jejunum pieces are added to a container with
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) water, (2) carefully cut open with a scissor, (3) and placed
in a new container with PBS water. Here they are gently washed, and placed on a sponge
(4). Care is taken to not damage the fragile tissue, and to ensure the gastrointestinal
lumen facing side is upwards. One of two drops of PBS water is added on top of each
tissue piece, to keep them humid.
(a) Tissue preparation for ex vivo studies.
(b) jetting of tissue sample ex vivo.
Figure 6.1: Ex vivo preparation and jetting: (1) jejunum pieces in PBS solution, (2) tools for
cutting and handling tissue pieces, (3) washed tissue pieces in PBS solution, (4) sponges
ready for planting of tissue pieces, (5) nozzle, (6) tissue sample on sponge post jetting.
The jetting is conducted in a similar manner to the multilayered gel­models, being in a
vertical setup (Figure 6.1b). The event is in some cases captured on high­speed video.
Immediately after jetting, the amount of residual dye is observed, and a test for perforation
is carried out. This is shown in Figure 6.2a, where a clean paper cloth (8) is dabbed on
the downward side of the tissue (7), at the site of jetting. If the serosa has been perforated,
the cloth will soak up green dye. After these tests, residual dye is removed from the tissue
sample, which is then placed on dry ice, to freeze and fix the depot in place (Figure 6.2b).
26
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:35==
(a) Perforation test post jetting on tissue (7) with
paper cloth (8).
(b) Tissue samples post jetting placed on dry
ice.
Figure 6.2: Post jetting a test for perforation is immediately carried out before the sample
is placed on dry ice.
6.2
Rapid histology
Histological analysis of the post­ex vivo tissue samples is carried out with haste. The
frozen state they are kept in serves to fix them in their physical state post jetting. As the
samples are quite thin (1­2.5 mm), they heat up quickly once they are removed from the
dry ice. The process of rapid histology can be followed in Figure 6.3: A sharp knife (9)
is used to cut the sample in two (10), aiming for the site of jetting. A thin slice is then cut
from either half (11), and placed under a microscope. A ruler is kept in frame for scale
reference. The microscope is connected to a computer for image capture.
(a) Frozen tissue sample being sliced.
(b) Setup for microscope imaging.
Figure 6.3: Rapid histology procedure: Tissue samples were sliced with a sharp knife,
placed on a transparent surface, and then on top of a ruler under a microscope.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
27
==PAGE:36==
6.3
Results
High­speed video was captured for a limited number of trials. Figure 6.4 shows a montage
of the jetting event for a Lorentz Jet trial. Certain things can be observed: The backsplash
in the first frame which leads to residual dye and the growth of the depot. Some re­
flux of the liquid can be seen in the last frame. How the depot forms under the surface
is obscure to the camera, and the perforation cannot be witnessed, as is noted in the
histological image below in Figure 6.4. The sponge which the tissue rests on does not
seem compliant from Figure 6.4. Thus it does not mimic the viscous peritoneum.
Figure 6.4: Montage of the depot formation as observed in porcine jejunum tissue ex vivo,
using high speed video (30,000 fps), obtained with the Lorentz Jet with 100 µL at 72 mN.
Below is the depot for the same sampled, obtained by rapid histology.
Figure 6.5 shows three distinct yet common cases from the rapid histology results. In the
top image, achieved with the Lorentz Jet at 1.8A, is a case of low energy jetting. From the
histological image, a depot cannot confidently be said to have formed. A large amount of
residual dye is observed on top of the sample which supports the suspicion of no depot
having formed. In the middle case, achieved with the Pressure Jet at 86 mN, a clear depot
has been formed. This is considered the ideal case. The amount of residual dye reveals
that not all fluid has been retained and the reason may be the backsplash and re­flux
observed in Figure 6.4. In the bottom case, achieved with the Lorentz Jet at 110 mN and
with a 50 µL void, the serosa has clearly been perforated. The lack of a depot, residual
dye on top of the sample, and the deep, wide, and colored sponge area demonstrates
the excessiveness of the force used. It should be emphasized that Figure 6.5 displays
selected results, and that not all cases and depots looks alike.
Rapid histology provides some insight, lost to the camera in high­speed video capture. As
stated prior, ex vivo trials have been conducted for a wider range of configurations for the
two jetting devices. These results can be found in Appendix A. Table 6.1 surmises the
results. The number of trials are statistically weak, but some knowledge can be gained
from this study: The greater the output force applied with the jet, the greater the chance
of perforation of the serosa, and the weaker the output force applied with the jet, the more
fluid will end on top of­/outside the tissue.
28
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.5: Three outcomes of jetting into minipig jejunum tissue ex vivo, obtained with
rapid histology. The marks in the top of the images are spaced 1 mm apart. These
examples are hand­picked to illustrate three different response scenarios of the tissue to
jet injection with: inadequate force (top), appropriate force (middle), and excessive force
(bottom). To the right is the same tissue sample immediately post jetting. All ex vivo
results can be found in Appendix A. Table 6.1 summarizes the results.
Pressure Jet
48 mN
86 mN
No. of perforations
0/3
2/3
Amount residual dye
High
Mid
LAPI
29 mN
35 mN V
40 mN
45 mN V
62 mN
No. of perforations
0/3
1/3
0/3
3/3
2/3
Amount residual dye
High
High
High
Low
Mid
62 mN V
72 mN
73 mN V
113 mN
110 mN V
No. of perforations
3/3
2/3
3/3
3/3
3/3
Amount residual dye
Low
Mid
Mid
Mid
Low
Table 6.1: Results of the ex vivo trials. Three trials were conducted with each jetting de­
vice/configuration. Figure 6.5 may be used as a reference to the scale of the residual dye:
Top representing high, middle representing mid, and bottom representing low amount. ”V”
indicates the presence of a 50 µL void at the nozzle.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
29
==PAGE:38==
Faith in the results should be weighed against the vulnerabilities of this model. Biological
variability of the tissue samples causes issues of reliability for the outcomes. Examples of
these may be blood vessels, the mesentery, or other such structures passing beneath the
tissue piece. There is a also a non­negligent risk of damaging the tissue when preparing
it: It is handled with metal tweezers and scissors and spread out on plastic sponges,
all of which can potentially spoil the sample. The samples have also been frozen down
before use, surely to compromise the structural integrity of the tissue. The act of removing
the tissue from the live pig, where the local cells maintain the tissue structures and are
provided with the needed nutrients and resources by the blood stream, further introduces
uncertainties of its likeness to in vivo tissue [9].
6.4
Conclusions
It is possible to observe the formation of a depot with the use of high­speed video capture,
although only as it changes the surface with the setup used in this project. Rapid histology
allows for great insight into the tissue post jetting. From the images presented in this
report (Figure 6.5), it is apparent how the depot forms between the mucosa and muscle
layers, as illustrated in Figure 2.4. Biological variability of the tissue samples, and multiple
potential sources of tissue damage, give rise to uncertainties as to the reliability of the
data this model provides. These concerns over the of the ex vivo model motivates the
development of more robust in vitro gel models. The ex vivo data still serves as a useful
model for comparison in this project.
30
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:39==
7
Development of the single­layer gel
model
The following two chapters explore the use of gel models in order to establish a reliable
model for jetted drug­ delivery characterization. The goal is to develop an in vitro gel
model that can be used for studying and quantifying the jet’s ability to cut into tissue.
Additionally, it is of interest to design a model capable of generating representative depots
for jet injection in the intestinal tissue. The simplest gel model would be the first explored
in this project: The single layer gel model. The motivation for this investigation was to
assess how a mono­phase model may be useful in the study of jet cutting and delivery.
7.1
Human tissue­mimicking gel evaluation
For simplicity and ease­of­use, the investigation was initiated by exploring an available
off­the­shelf product: Human tissue­mimicking medical gelatin gel (HM gel) [39]. It is
commonly being used to test needle­delivery technologies [39]. This off­the­shelf product
is designed to match human tissue elasticity and acoustics. It is produced from 100%
synthetic gelatin. It is reported to have a number of relevant features for a reliable ex­
perimental model: self healing properties, non toxic, stable at room temperature, and it
does not dehydrate. Moreover, HM gel comes in different grades with different properties
[39].Those relevant to this project are listed in Table 7.1. Specifically, the modulus would
prove useful as a metric for comparison to other gels. This is clarified in section 7.2.
HM.g. No.
Young’s Modulus [MPa]
Density [kg/m3]
Needle Resistance [N]
#0
0.57
880
0.63
#1
0.37
936
0.46
#2
0.26
923
0.38
#3
0.19
982
0.29
#4
0.15
834
0.25
#5
0.10
898
0.21
Table 7.1: Material properties of the HM gel variants 0 ­ 5, extracted from the data­sheet
provided by the manufacturer. The numbering system is used by the manufacturer [39].
No information is provided on how the data is obtained.
All gels from Table 7.1 were jetted into using a common jet­force input. Metrics that
have been previously described in literature, Initial Penetration Depth (IPD) and Final
penetration Depth (FPD), are used evaluate jet injection in this project [12][13]. These
are illustrated in Figure 7.1. IPD is the depth to which the jet cuts in the first phase
of the jetting. After this initial cutting, a depot is generally seen to be forming. As the
depot grows, the depth of the depot increases. FPD is the final depth the depot reaches
after this occurrence. FPD is often mentioned as the maximum depth [12][13]. HM gels
would turn out to be both compliant and tough, meaning that the highest measured depot
depths resulted from elastic deformation rather than penetration. For this project this will
be reported as the maximum deformation depth (MDD).
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7.1: General progression of the jet injection event. IPD is the depth the jet cuts to
as it initially breaches the tissue. The FPD it the final depth of penetration when a fluid
depot has formed [12][13]. Note that this illustration show the event occurring in the skin,
whereas this project concerns jetting in the gastrointestinal tract. Illustration is sourced
from Mohizin et al., 2021 [12].
7.1.1
Method
The Pressure Jet was used with 86 mN for this study. This device is convenient to work
with and the 86 mN is a jet force of interest for pre­clinical in vivo trials. The jetting was
captured on high speed video using the setup from Figure 4.6b. The nozzle of the Pres­
sure Jet was placed 1 mm from the gel, perpendicular to its surface. The camera was
oriented orthogonal to the jetting. The video allows for analysis of the development of a
depot. The quantification of the image data was done using video processing software
FIJI, as demonstrated in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: Measuring the depot penetration depth in the open source video processing
software FIJI, a: markings on the nozzle are used to set the scale for the software, b: a
line is placed along the depot, c: the gray scale is plotted along the line and the depot
length is obtained from this plot.
7.1.2
Results and discussion
Figure 7.3 depicts the typical response exhibited by the HM gel model to jetting. On the
leftmost image is the jet penetrating the gel. This is where IPD is measured. As the jetting
continues the depot expands. At its maximum width, the MDD is measured (seen in the
32
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:41==
second frame from the left). The HM gels proved to be extremely compliant and resistant
to cracking. As a result, when the jetting event is ended, close to all liquid was expelled
by the contracting gel. This is where the FPD is measured. No fluid depots were left in
any of the gels post jetting. In some cases a scar was left, as seen on the left most frame.
In some cases of lower jetting force or HM gels with higher needle resistance, only elastic
deformation occurred and no scar was left post jetting.
Figure 7.3: Montage of the jetting event in HM gel 5 model for a 86 mN Pressure Jet
injection. Frames were captured by high speed video at 100,000 fps. Selected frames
highlight the quantitation of IPD, MDD, and FPD during a jet injection.
Using the software FIJI, the results from the high speed videos could be quantified. This
is displayed in Figure 7.4. For these graphs, each data­point shows the mean and stan­
dard deviation from five trials. Figure 7.4a shows the penetration and deformation depth
reported for all the HM gel models. Note the remarkably low variance in the MDD and
FPD across all gel models, the average coefficient of variation across all conditions was
8.2 · 10−3 and 1.2 · 10−3 , respectively. Such low error indicates that HM gels are very
reproducible models in terms of penetration depth. The penetration depth appears to cor­
relate inversly with the needle resistance, reported in Table 7.1. It seems intuitive that
reduced resistance would allow for greater penetration. It should be noted that HM gel 4
is an obvious outlier. The gel did have a different appearance, being filled with bubbles.
It may be suspected that this gel was either mislabeled, or of poor production quality.
Figure 7.4b shows the width of the cavities, measured on the widest part, in the first 50
ms of the jetting event. The magnitude of the width correlates inversely with the Young’s
modulus, reported in Table 7.1. It seems intuitive that a softer gel would allow for greater
expansion. Yet it is observed that the curves follow a frowning parabola, and even for the
softest gel, all fluid is expelled.
The Pressure Jet cuts into the HM gel model and the dimensions of the observed depots
are inversely related to the Young’s Modulus of the material. For all HM gel models,
virtually no fluid is retained in the gel after jetting. Thus it does not accurately depict the
liquid depot formation commonly observed in vivo or ex vivo [17]. However, some features
of the HM gel could make it useful model for evaluating penetration depths. It is very
stable, and can be kept in hot and dry environments without having its material properties
compromised. The HM gel has also shown to produce replicable results. These robust
features makes it reliable to measure against. There are only the five gels to chose from,
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
33
==PAGE:42==
and without the ability to fabricate modified HM gels in the lab, the options for custom
model development is limited.
(a) Penetration depths of the HM gels.
(b) Depot (maximum) width over during jetting of
the HM gels.
Figure 7.4: Data of the HM gel model response to jet injection, using the Pressure Jet for
80 µL at 86 mN. All data points represent the avrg. (full line) and std. (dotted line / colored
area) for five trials. Table 7.1 lists the mechanical properties for the gels included in these
figures.
7.1.3
Conclusions
The HM gel model is highly replicable in terms of MDD and FPD. It is very robust as it does
not dehydrate or melt in the conditions of this project, thus very convenient to work with.
Additionally, it possesses good optics for video capture. HM gel 5, which has a Young’s
modulus of 100 kPa, produces depots of large dimensions which are easy to study.
7.2
Inter­gel jetting model comparison
To expand upon the preliminary investigation of off­the­shelf HM gel as a single layer gel
model, the use of gelatin and agarose were investigated as gel models. As they were for­
mulated in the lab, these gels could be customized. In order to assess the performance
of these gels as compared to HM gels, a comparable condition was sought out. Their
Young’s modulus were matched to the the HM gel gel 5, at 100 kPa. This gel had showed
reliable jet­penetration behavior and was selected as the base condition for inter­gel com­
parisons. While Young’s modulus is far from the only parameter that defines the jetting/gel
interaction, it is a common metric for inter­gel comparison in literature, and a convenient
starting point for this investigation [10][12][13].
Young’s modulus for a material is determined experimentally, using specialized testing
equipment [24]. For this project, it was necessary to rely on the reported modulus values
of the gels from other studies on the subject. A literature search was conducted to find
the gel concentrations corresponding to the appropriate Young’s modulus. For agarose,
the work of Subhash et al., 2009, indicates a 1% monomer concentration formulated in
water yields 100 kPa, Figure 7.5a. The work of Taberlet et al., 2017, reports the modulus
of gelatin up to 80 kPa. By plotting this data in Excel and using a linear trend­line, 27%
monomer concentration was found to be a plausible ratio to obtain 100 kPa, Figure 7.5b.
34
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:43==
(a) The Young’s Modulus of gelatin, from the
work of Subhash et al., 2009 [40]
(b) The Young’s Modulus of agarose, from
the work of Taberlet et al., 2017 [41].
Figure 7.5: Young’s Modulus reported for gelatin and agarose gels in literature, reported
as functions of % monomer added to water.
7.2.1
Method
A robust fabrication process was essential to realize reproducible gel models. The proto­
col is described in detail in the following section. The gelatin and agarose gels are not as
stable as the HM gels. Gelatin was, in particular, extremely dependent on maintaining a
stable humidity and temperature even after gelation. A section is therefore dedicated to
the handling of the gel. Improvements to both gel fabrication and handling were continu­
ously made throughout the course of the project.
Gel fabrication
Gelatin and agarose are common thermoplastic hydrogels, regularly used in research
settings for various applications. Both were purchased in a purified powdered form from
Sigma Aldrich. To formulate a simple single­component gel, they were mixed with warm
water and then allowed to cool to form the gel.
Agarose Gel: This protocol describes the preparation of 80 ml of 1% agarose (w/w). 0.8
g of dried agarose powder was measured on a scale in a glass vial. Deionized water at
room temperature was added to the glass vial until 80 g was read on the scale. Then,
the components were mixed using the following method: stir mixture with spoon, place
in microwave at 385 W for 10 seconds, stop and stir, and repeat. This process was
repeated until the mixture was clear (1 min). This is a fast process, but care must be
taken to avoid overheating the mix. Later gels would be fabricated using a heated stirring
plate instead. A cylindrical glass container served as the mold for this gel. It was poured
into this container after mixing, making a model of dimensions: 47 mm diameter and 14
mm height. A general protocol for producing the agarose gel is found in Appendix E.
Gelatin Gel: This protocol describes the preparation of 20 ml of the 27% gelatin (w/w)
model. In order to produce a well­mixed gel­precursor solution for this high­mass percent
gel, the powder was added gradually to water. 14,6 ml of deionized water was measured
in a glass container on a scale. 5,4 g of gelatin powder was measured separately on small
plastic plates. The water was placed on a heated stirring plate, and the temperature set
to 75°C. To prevent water from evaporating, a glass lid was placed on top. Gradually the
gelatin powder was added under stirring. When all the powder was dissolved, the mixture
was poured into a Petri dish of around 50 mm in diameter, to a height of 5 mm. when
cured, it would be released from this mold, by cutting it into pieces. A general protocol for
producing the gelatin gel is found in Appendix D.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
35
==PAGE:44==
Storing hydrogels
The HM gel is a very stable material, which does not have to be kept in cool or humid
environments to preserve its material properties. The gelatin models, on the other hand,
will be affected by these elements. Strict protocols for controlling humidity and heat are
important for the models’ integrity. If the gel is left for just 24 hours, the water contents
of the gel will evaporate. As a result, the gel will shrink and become stiff. Leaving the
gel covered in water will alleviate this issue, making the gel act closer to the properties
reported in Figure 7.5b. Conversely, heat will cause the gel to melt. As the models
are placed under bright spots during high speed video capture, care must be taken to
minimize the exposure to this light. Agarose has not been observed to be as vulnerable
to the elements. No inquiry has been made into this matter in this project, however.
Jetting experiments
The Pressure Jet is used at input pressures 48, 86, and 103 mN. The HM gel 5 and
27%­gelatin were jetted horizontally, as shown in Figure 4.7a. The agarose was jetted
vertically as shown in Figure 4.6b. The jetting was captured on high speed video. FIJI
was used to quantify the penetration depths, as illustrated in Figure 7.2.
7.2.2
Results and discussion
An exemplary montage of how the HM gel behaves under jetting was seen in Figure 7.3.
Looking at Figure 7.6b, it is striking how similarly the gelatin model behaves to the HM
gel. This is not suprising, however, as both are gelatin­based gels.
The agarose gel behaves quite a bit differently, as seen in Figure 7.6a. It is the only single­
layer model tested to retain fluid in the formed depots in this project. The penetration and
depot dimensions are also notably larger: Approximately 3 mm for 27% gelatin and 12
mm for 1% agarose at their peak in Figure 7.6. During an injection, at approximately
3 mm below the surface, the gel cracks apart, forming disk­shaped depots. Watching
the development in high speed video, one can see vortexes created by the fluid stream,
carving out the depot. The optical qualities of the gel is inferior to the other models,
but still adequate for video capture of the depot formation. In this project, the model was
experienced to be robust with respect to storing and handling: It did not seem to dehydrate
or melt in the conditions under which it was used.
The penetration depths have been plotted in Figure 7.7. Each data point represents the
mean and a shaded region communicates the standard deviation of three trials. The differ­
ing depot shapes between agarose and the gelatin­ based gels models, is also apparent
in the penetration metrics. The mean MDD’s of the 1 % agarose gels are 12.3 mm, 13.3
mm, and 14.4 mm for the conditions 48 mN, 86 mN, and 103 mN respectively. While this
follows the expected jet pressure escalation, the variation is extremely large. This is due
to the brittle­like fashion in which the depots form into large random disk shapes. As such,
these jet penetration metrics impractical for use with agarose gel models.
For the gelatin­based gels, the penetration depths are neatly separated in relation to the
input pressure. The mean MDD’s of the 27 % gelatin gels are 2.9 mm, 3.4 mm, and
5.6 mm for the conditions 48 mN, 86 mN, and 103 mN respectively. Due to the small
and reproducible variation, gelatin­based gels combined with high­speed imaging show
promise for characterizing jetted delivery.
While the Humimic Medical gel and the lab­produced gelatin gel showed similarities, there
were some differences. The mean MDD’s of the HM gel 5 are 3.0 mm, 3.4 mm, and 4.9
mm for the conditions 48 mN, 86 mN, and 103 mN respectively. Notably, the penetration
depths for 86 mN input pressure lies closer to those of 103 mN, in the case of HM gel 5.
36
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:45==
(a) 1 % agarose model response to jet injection.
(b) 27 % gelatin model response to jet injection.
Figure 7.6: Montage of the jetting event in the gelatin and agarose models, captured by
high speed video.
The opposite is true for 27% gelatin. The three pressures represent unique outcomes in
vivo. This suggests the best choice of model, to maximize the experimental resolution,
might depend on the jet­force range of interest.
The HM gel 5 and the 27%­gelatin gel were not able to produce depots with any fluid
retained, and generally behaved much in the same way. They did, however, prove to be
a reliable model for quantifying how differences in jetting force related to the penetration
depth and gel cutting. The relatively small variance displayed in Figure 7.7 suggests good
reproducibility of these results in this preliminary investigation. The avrg. coefficient of
variance for HM gel 5 was 0.3 for IPD, 0.1 for MDD, and 1.4·10−3 for FPD. For 27 % gelatin
it was 0.2 for IPD, 0.1 for MDD, and 5.8·10−3 for FPD. The advantage of the HM gel over
27%­gelatin is the robustness of the material, making it very convenient to work with. The
advantage of 27%­gelatin over HM gel 5 is the ability to customize the model’s material
properties by changing the fabrication method. The aforementioned positioning of the 86
mN penetration depth, might mean HM gel 5 is a better model for distinguishing the low
input forces (48­86 mN) from the high (86­103 mN). The reverse is true for 27%­gelatin.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 7.7: Penetration depths for 27% gelatin (left), HM gel 5 (middle), and 1% agarose
(right). Obtained using the Concorde at 48 mN, 86 mN, and 103 mN. All data points
represent the avrg. (full line) and std. (dotted line / colored area) for 3 trials.
While evaluating jet output force is readily measured with a force sensor, how that force
translates to the ability to cut a material and delivery a liquid drug payload is more elu­
sive. The single layer gelatin­based models enables the investigation of the relationship
between the jets output force and cutting ability. Thus, these models add a new dimension
to the jet force­, pressure­, velocity­, and volume profiles obtained in section 5.2.
The agarose gel is the only one of the three evaluated mono­phase gels that produced
depots. These offered little useful information, however. The disk­shaped nature of them
made them hard to quantify. On video they might not develop perpendicularly to the
camera angle. It is generally not convenient to measure their sizes and fluid contents.
The large error in penetration depths displayed in Figure 7.7 also speaks to the irregular
nature of these depots. Agarose was determined to not be of much use as a single­layer
gel model.
7.2.3
Expanded modulus range trial
The results from the inter­gel model comparison for gels with 100 kPa sparked interest in
expanding the study to incorporate a range of of densities/ Young’s modulus. To include
the HM gels, the approach was to produce gelatin and agarose models of comparative
modulus to HM gel 4 and 3, that is 150 and 190 kPa respectively. It was immediately
apparent that this would not be possible for the gelatin model. This model is fabricated
mixing the monomer as a powder in water. The amount of powder needed to achieve 150
kPa saturated the water.
The agarose model did not have this problem, and trials were carried out. Two key findings
will be summarized here: The first is that the density of the agarose gel (for this range)
does not appear to affect the penetration depth. The second is that it does appear to
decrease the likeliness of the jet penetrating the gel at all. The failure mode of agarose
gel can be described as brittle, with a binary response to jetting: The jet either does or
does not breach the surface.
7.2.4
Conclusions
The HM gel 5 model and 27% gelatin model proved to be reliable in the study of pene­
tration depth, and thus the cutting of the gel by the jet. 1 % Agarose was the only model
demonstrating the ability to produce fluid retaining depots. However, the depots form in
obscure shapes which are inconvenient to measure in terms of size and contents. More­
over, the agarose model is not reproducible with respect to penetration depth. Agarose
appears to fails in a brittle­fashion.
38
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:47==
7.3
Single layer Lorentz Jet ­trials
The potential of the gelatin­gel models, and penetration depth metrics as a means to
assess and distinguish jet­cutting from escalating jet forces, was demonstrated in the
previous section (section 7.2). While useful, the overall driving force of the jet is one
parameter of many aspects of the jet force profile. In this experiment it is explored whether
a change in the jet force profile shape at the same drive force could be distinguished by
this gel model.
7.3.1
Method
The Lorentz Jet was used for jetting into in HM gel 5 for two power inputs, with and without
a 50 µL void (V) introduced at the nozzle (Figure 5.5): 62 mN, 62 mN + V, 113 mN, and
110 mN + V. This has previously been shown to alter the force profile with a significant
increase in overshoot (section 5.2). Figure 7.8 shows the case for the jetting parameters
used in this trial. For the 62 mN jet the overshoot/peak force is increased by 37 %, and
for the 113 mN jet it is increased by 16 %. HM gel 5 model was chosen for this project
due to its robustness.
The jetting was captured on high speed video, with the setup from Figure 4.6b. The
nozzle of the Concorde was placed 1 mm from the gel, perpendicular to its surface. The
camera was oriented orthogonal to the jetting injection. FIJI was used to quantify the
penetration depth, as previously illustrated in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.8: Comparison between the force profiles of the Lorentz Jet, with and without a
50 µL void by the nozzle, for to power inputs. All data points represent the avrg. (full line)
and std. (dotted line / colored area) for 3 trials.
7.3.2
Results and discussion
Figure 7.9 shows the difference in penetration depths for two Lorentz Jet power inputs,
with and without a 50 µL void (V) introduced by the nozzle (Figure 5.5).: 62 mN, 62 mN
+ V, 113 mN, and 110 mN + V. For both configurations, when there was an air­void at
the nozzle then there was a significant penetration depth increase. For the 62 mN power
input, there is a 1 mm increase in penetration depth for the IPD and MDD, and a 1.5 mm
increase for FPD. For the 113 mN power input, there is a 1 mm increase in depth for the
IPD and FPD, and a 1.6 mm for the MDD. This indicates that at the same driving power of
the device and steady state jetting force, increased jet cutting occurred with the addition
of inertial loading to increase the initial overshoot.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 7.9: Penetration depths for HM gel 5, comparing the Lorentz Jet at 62 mN with 62
mN + a 50 µL void (left), and at 113 mN with 110 mN + a 50 µL void introduced at the distal
end. All data points represent the avrg. (full line) and std. (dotted line / colored area) for
3 trials.
As demonstrated in Figure 7.8, the inclusion of a 50 µL void results in a larger jetting
overshoot, even at the same driving force. Despite this difference, the jetting steady
state force and total jetting time are close to similar with and without a void. It can then be
concluded that the overshoot causes the increase in IPD, MDD, and FPD that is observed
in Figure 7.9. This overshoot cuts deeper into the gel, allowing for the depot to grow larger.
This project demonstrates that the single­layer gel model can illuminate how different force
profiles translate to the cutting abilities of the jet.
To closer examine the relationship between jetting force gel cutting, Figure 7.10 plots the
penetration depth and the force profile on the same axis as a function of time. In general,
the penetration follows the force overshoot and recedes to a lower depth in the first 10 ­
15 ms. In the time frame where the force is at steady state, the depot grows to the MDD
before receding.
Figure 7.10 highlights that the overshoot plays an essential role in gel­cutting and depot
formation in the HM gel 5 model. The bulk of axial jet­cutting and observed penetration
depth is completed within the first 5 ms of jetting. As such, the initial overshoot peak
dictates this delivery depth for this model. It is noteworthy that the observed penetration
depth recedes after the initial peak (10­15 ms) and is close to the depth which is found
at the FPD (90 ms). This indicates that what is observed at the IPD, in addition to the
jet­cutting the material, is material compliance at the peak of the jet­ force profile in the
penetration depth. The FPD is likely a more robust metric to determine the extent of ma­
terial jet cutting. In the force stagnation phase of jetting, the fluid accumulation stretches
the elastic gel, which later expels the liquid. During this phase the penetration depth is
minimally increased, indicating that, for the HM gel 5 model, minimal jet cutting of the gel
occurs in the steady­state region of the force profile. Supporting this is the observation
that the 62 mN + 50 µL void configuration has a deeper FPD than 113 mN without void.
The force profile of the 62 mN + 50 µL void configuration has a wider overshoot region.
7.3.3
Conclusions
The findings of this project suggest that the overshoot of the force profile is directly tied
to the gel cutting. A larger overshoot on the force curve will result in deeper penetration
depths for the same jetted fluid volume. It is also demonstrated that the majority of the
gel cutting takes place in the first 5­10 ms, and that the continued jet stream has a minor
role in deepening the penetration.
40
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:49==
Figure 7.10: Jetting penetration depths for injection into a HM gel 5 as a function of time,
versus the force profile for the Lorentz Jet with steady state: 62 mN (top left), 62 mN + 50
µL void (top right), 113 mN (bottom left), and 110 mN + 50 µL void (bottom right). All data
points represent the avrg. (full line) and std. (dotted line / colored area) for 3 trials.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
41
==PAGE:50==
8
Development of multi­layer gel model
Single layer gels have proven to be useful for gathering quantitative data on the cutting
ability of a jet injection as a function of its force profile. While helpful, the resulting liquid
depot is not representative of the liquid depot that is formed when injecting into a multi­
layered tissue, such as the intestinal tissue of interest. In order to simulate this behavior in
an in vitro model, the continued work sought to imitate the layered structure of the target
tissue.
The approach chosen to lead model optimization was empirical rather than mimicking
material properties of the tissues in the gels. Nor was the goal to keep the layers accurate
to the anatomical scale. The priority was developing a model that produced insightful and
differential results for known jetting conditions of interest. The dimensions and material
choices of the model were varied to meet this priority. Appendix C chronicles the design
process for the multi­layered gel models.
The target tissue, as shown in Figure 2.2 can be simplified as a soft tissue region (mucosa,
submucosa), and a tough tissue region (muscle layer and serosa). In an ideal case, the
jet will penetrate the former and be stopped at the latter, splitting the layers apart to create
a large liquid depot between them. The model must be able to mimic this scenario, but
also the cases where the jet characteristics are sub­optimal for jet injection. From the ex
vivo trials, three such scenarios are shown in Figure 6.5. An illustration on how the ideal
model may mimic these results is shown in Figure 8.1: In cases where the jet carries
little force, the depots should be small or non­existent. In cases where the jet carries too
large a force, the tougher tissue layer should be breached. This is the case illustrated in
Figure 2.4.
Figure 8.1: Graphic depiction of how the ideal multi­layer model might responds to differ­
ent jetting conditions.
8.1
2­layer gel model development
The initial investigation into multi­layer gels, mimicking the response of tissue to a jet
injection, began with using two distinct layers of gel. The top layer was designed to imitate
the soft mocusa tissue layer, and the bottom to imitate the tough muscle tissue layer. A
42
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:51==
third layer would eventually be added to mimic the viscous peritoneum that surrounds the
jejunum.
8.1.1
Single gel type with variable gel densities
The first trials into 2­layer gel models were containing only one gel­type separated into two
distinct phases. These were produced with either gelatin or agarose, but not combined.
As this approach was found to be nonviable for the desired application, it was abandoned
early in favor of more promising designs.
Method
The 2­layer agarose model was designed with a 1% monomer concentration (100 kPa
Young’s Modulus) top layer, and a 2.5% monomer concentration (450 kPa Young’s Modu­
lus) bottom layer. They were both mixed with deionized water, and heated in a microwave
(385 W) in intervals, and poured into a cylindrical container (diameter of 47 mm), as de­
scribed in detail in subsubsection 7.2.1. The bottom layer cured at room temperature,
after gel monomer constituents for the top layer was poured atop the base layer and then
allowed to cure.
The 2­layer gelatin model got two designs. Both had a bottom layer of 27% monomer con­
centration (100 kPa Young’s Modulus), but with different top layers of 6.3% monomer con­
centration (10 kPa Young’s Modulus) and 8.4% monomer concentration (20 kPa Young’s
Modulus). The monomer was gradually added to deionized water, while on a heated
stirring plate (75°C), as described in subsubsection 7.2.1. They were poured into a cylin­
drical container with a 22 mm diameter. The bottom layer cured in room temperature,
after which the top layer was poured on top.
Results and discussion
Figure 8.2 shows the process of jetting into the 2­layer agarose gel. The crack­shaped
depot, characteristic of the agarose gel, propagated to the gel­gel interface (middle frame).
It then developed along the interface, eventually reaching the glass wall (last frame). In
all the trials, the bottom layer appeared to act as a hard border, not unlike the glass that
retained the model.
Figure 8.2: Result of jetting into 2­layer agarose gel model.
Figure 8.3 shows the results of jetting into the 2­layer gelatin models. The development
of the depot appeared similar to how it occurs in single­layer gelatin gels (Figure 7.6b),
and so a single frame is shown of each model. It is clear from these images that the
depots extended far enough to interact with the gel­gel interface. It is also apparent that
the stiffer bottom layer attenuated the depots further development: In the left frame, the
width of the depot just above the gel­gel interface is significantly broader than below it,
and in the right frame the depot width also seems to decline below the interface.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 8.3: Result of jetting into 2­layer gelatin gel models. Left: Top layer is 6.3 %
monomer (10 kPa Young’s modulus), bottom layer is 27 % monomer (100 kPa Young’s
modulus). Right: Top layer is 8.4 % monomer (20 kPa Young’s modulus), bottom layer is
27 % monomer (100 kPa Young’s modulus).
The 2­layer agarose model did develop a depot, which propagated along the gel­gel in­
terface. These are features that are known from in vivo scenarios that this project aims
to mimic (illustrated in Figure 2.4). However, the disc­shaped nature in which the depot
forms is still too detached from gastrointestinal tissue. The bottom layer simply acts as a
stiffer lower boundary in the 2­layer model act, similar to a shallow 1­layer agarose model
atop a hard plastic or glass surface. The 2­layer gelatin model did not show improvements
over its 1­layer counterpart, as no fluid was retained in a depot. The depot shape seems
barely disturbed by the crossing of the interface. The top and bottom gels seem to be
fused well enough to act as a single gel.
A common issue for these models were that they behaved as if the gel­gel interface had
fused very strongly. The goal of the multi­layer gel model was to develop one which could
split the layers apart, as observed in tissue. Here these gels have two obstacles. The first
is that monomers are mixed with water under high temperatures, and must be applied to
the mold hot. The second is that both gels are thermoplastics. The hot top layer likely
melts the top of the (already cured) bottom layer. Being of the same polymer, they would
not be opposed to mixing.
Conclusions
The 2­layer models in this project did not show encouraging results. However, they are
not to be completely dismissed by these findings, as models of potential worth given
further development. Nevertheless, the apparent strengths of the design suggested in
the following section removed any incentive for further exploration of these models.
44
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:53==
8.1.2
Multi­Gel type model
Figure 8.4: Development process of the multi­layer gel model, progressing from left to
right. Each successive iteration aimed at finding a design with the desired response to
jetting. Each iteration came in two varieties, representing two approaches to achieving
this response. To make the model more prone to depot formation, the top layer would typ­
ically: (1) be produced with a lower % monomer concentration, and (2) be made thinner,
compared to prior design. The development is accounted in detail in Appendix C.
The experience from the layered single­gel project inspired the pursuit of a multi­gel type
layered model. The hypothesis was that the use of different gel types would result in a
less robust fusion at their interface during gelation. This should cause the layers to split
apart, allowing for a large liquid depot to form; as is the case when jetting into gastrointesti­
nal tissue in vivo and ex vivo when a submucosal liquid depot forms (Figure 2.4). From
section 7.1 to section 7.2 it was established that jetting into gelatin gels produces linear
cylindrical cuts and then deform in a spherical matter. It was chosen as the top layer,
where the injection would be initiated and the depot was expected to form. In subsec­
tion 7.2.3 it was found that agarose reacts to jetting in an ”all or nothing” matter. A breach
of this layer would correspond to a perforation that would occur if the jet cut through the
muscularis and serosa. This simple metric is suitable to be mimicked by a material that
has this binary response. Thus a gelatin­agarose gel was decided upon.
The development of the multi­layer model progressed as illustrated in Figure 8.4. Changes
would be made to the composition and thickness of the gels, in pursuit of a model with
the three characteristic responses shown in Figure 8.1. A relevant and useful model to
study jetting into the intestine would be capable of differentiating between variable jetting
conditions. E.g. few depots for a low jetting force, consistent depots for an intermediate
jetting force, and depot’s plus perforation of the bottom layer for high jetting force. To
make the bottom layer more distinguishable from the top layer, color was added to the gel
during fabrication.
Method
After the first models showed encouraging results, emphasis was placed on increasing
control over fabrication and handling in the following designs. The goal of following itera­
tions of the 2­layer model was to find the dimensions and composition of the gels which
would yield the desired behavior. Gel densities and layer thicknesses were optimized until
a model produced results that reflected the first two scenarios of Figure 8.1.
For these trials, tissue­culturing plates would serve as convenient molds, being able to
hold 12 cylindrical models of 22 mm diameter (Figure 8.5a). Both gelatin and agarose
would eventually be mixed on a stirring plate rather than using a microwave. The liquid
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
45
==PAGE:54==
gel mix would be transferred to the wells/molds via pipette. Agarose would be given a
minimum of 1 hour to cure in a 4°C cooler, before the gelatin layer was added. The models
would rest for a day before being used for testing to ensure gelation was complete. One
hour before testing, deionized water was added atop the gel model to ensure hydration,
Figure 8.5a. During jetting the model would be placed on white paper cloth for detection of
jetted dye perforating the base layer of the gel, Figure 8.5b. A protocol for the fabrication
of this model is found in Appendix F.
To guide model development and optimization, the Pressure Jet was used for 48 mN, 86
mN, and 103 mN with 80 µL. The jetting and depot formation was captured on high­speed
video. After jetting the models can be lined up of for assessment, Figure 8.5c.
(a) Adding deionized water to
the gel model.
(b) Gel model on test stage
post jetting.
(c) gelatin­agarose gel mod­
els after trials.
Figure 8.5: Photos of the gelatin­agarose gel model use.
Results and discussion
The first iteration was a trial run that resulted in a good proof of concept, expressing all
three scenarios from Figure 8.1. Three results from the trial are displayed in Figure 8.6.
In the left frame is a case of the jet penetrating the top layer, but not carrying the force
to reach the gel­gel interface (scenario one). In the middle frame, the jet cuts a tunnel to
the interface, splits the two layers apart, and forms a depot (scenario two). In the right
frame such a depot is present again, but this time the jet also perforates the bottom layer
(scenario three). This model thus demonstrated the ability to model the jetting response
seen in gastrointestinal tissue (Figure 6.5).
Figure 8.6: Three scenarios of jetting into the first generation gelatin­agarose gel, demon­
strating the ability to model: No depot, ideal depot formation, and depot with perforation of
the serosa. Top layer: Gelatin, 8.4% monomer concentration (20 kPa Young’s modulus.
Bottom layer: Agarose, 2.5% monomer concentration (450 kPa Young’s modulus).
46
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:55==
The gelatin­agarose 2­layer design has demonstrated the ability to model the insufficient
jet force for delivery, optimal fluid delivery to a depot between soft and tough layers, and
the perforation of a tough base layer as jet­force dependant outcomes. This last response
to jetting has proven difficult to replicate in subsequent productions of the model.
The following development phase concluded in the model seen on the left in Figure 8.7.
To the right are the results after a Pressure Jet trial. In these results, a gradient in depot
occurrence is seen, which separates the three force inputs. This is another dimension
model which was aimed for: Results depending on the force input. Although this is a
sample too small for statistical reasoning, it marked a sensible end to the development
of the 2­layer model, although no perforation occurred. To obtain this feature would be a
goal for development of future models.
Figure 8.7: Results of jetting into gelatin­agarose model with the Pressure Jet at 48, 86,
and 103 mN. The red star marks the same gel shown in the two images.
The model lends itself well to quantifying the depot contents. The depots form in a disc­like
shape, orthogonal to the jet and parallel to the layers. Using the size and intensity of the
colored jetting fluid, the amount of fluid retained in the depot can be assessed. On the left
in Figure 8.8, a single model is marked in FIJI. Using this software, the mean pixel inten­
sity from the green color channel of the 8 bit RGB image can be measured. The darker and
larger the depot, the lower the pixel intensity (0 to 255 scale). On the right in Figure 8.8,
these values have been plotted for the batch in the Image. Each colored dot represents a
single model, and the overlying bars represent the mean and standard deviation for that
jetting parameter. It is intuitive to see that all models without a depot have a mean pixel
intensity above 90 (dotted line). For all depots in the 103 mN class, the fluid escaped
out of the side as the depot propagated to the edge of the model. These results also fall
neatly within a 50­75 mean pixel intensity range. This demonstration highlights the ease of
which this model is coupled with quantitation. This is a clear improvement over the more
random depots from the agarose models (Figure 7.6a). Figure 8.8 demonstrates that
a simple classification from pixel intensity could be used to describe successful deliver­
ies. This could potentially facilitate large screening investigations assessing over multiple
parameters.
The optics for these models are compatible with high­speed video analysis. As seen in
Figure 8.9 the two layers are easy to tell apart, as the agarose cures into an opaque gel
and the gelatin into a clear gel. This figure illustrates a montage of the development of a
depot, as it typically transpires: The jet cuts into the top layer, a spherical cavity develops
as the fluid accumulates, eventually reaching the gel­gel interface, the layers split apart,
and the elasticity of the top layer pushes the contents of the spherical cavity into this depot
at the interface. In some cases, less fluid ends in the depot than for other cases. There
may be back­splash, or the split at the interface may propagate to the side of the model,
allowing fluid to escape. Such cases are documented in Appendix J.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 8.8: Quantifying the depot contents using pixel intensity in video software FIJI.
Figure 8.9: Montage of the depot formation (outlined in red) in the gelatin agarose model.
Top layer: Gelatin, 7.3% monomer concentration (15 kPa Young’s modulus). Bottom
layer: Agarose, 2.5% monomer concentration (450 kPa Young’s modulus).
Figure 8.9 illustrates the excellent optics for capturing the high­speed jetted delivery into
these gel models, allowing for the studying of jetting delivery dynamics and depot forma­
tion. How well this this event, as it occurs in the gel model, represents the mechanical
response of intestinal tissue is speculative. Assuming there is a reasonable likeness be­
tween the two, this demonstrates an ability to gain a unique insight into the tissue response
to jet­injection delivery.
Conclusions
The 2­layer gelatin agarose model is a promising proof­of­concept for mimicking the re­
sponse of gastrointestinal tissue to jet injection. It has demonstrated the ability to form
fluid depots between the loose and sense layers, as is observed ex vivo. It further demon­
strates the ability to mimic tissue response to inadequate jetting force with no depot forma­
tion, and excessive jetting force with perforation of the dense bottom layer. More depots
also occurred in response to higher jetting forces, illustrating a force dependant behavior.
The depots form in a manner that is ideal for measuring size and fluid contents. The optics
of the model are ideal for studying the depot formation.
48
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:57==
8.2
3­layer model development
The 2­layer model has thus far been placed against the stiff platform. This does not match
in vivo conditions, where the watery peritoneum surrounds the gastrointestinal wall. To
model this, another layer was added to the model, which would introduce similar com­
pliance. The model shown in Figure 8.7 was the basis for the expansion into a 3­layer
model. A third soft layer was added below the dense agarose layer, which mimicked the
compliance of the peritoneum. Furthermore, it was the goal to explore ways to increase
the likelihood of perforation.
Method
The third layer would have to mimic water, but at the same time be able to support a
2­layer gel on top. Moreover, too soft gelatin gel has a risk of melting in the spots used
in the high­speed video setup (Figure 4.6a). As a practical compromise, the third layer
would be a gelatin gel designed to have a Young’s modulus of 5 kPa. They were produced
as a mat, poured into a wide circular mold (5.4 mm in diameter, 5 mm deep), and then
with a 2­layer model placed on top. A schematic representation is found to the far right in
Figure 8.4. A photo of the model is found in Figure 8.10b. Figure 8.10a shows a set of
these models, with the third layer being stored separately in the cylindrical containers on
the right.
It was hypothesized that the buckling of the middle layer would increase the chance of
perforation. To increase the chances of this occurring, the dense middle (agarose) layer
was made thinner. As an additional note on the use of this model: the bottom layer was
kept covered by deinoized water to avoid dehydration, in a cooler at 4 °C, and switched
out for every trial to avoid melting.
(a) Package of 3­layer gel models, kept in
separate containers.
(b) 3­layer gel model on the high speed
video stage, post jetting.
Figure 8.10: Photos from the production and use of the 3­layer gel model.
Results and discussion
In no case did a perforation of the dense agarose layer (representing the serosa) occur
in this trial. But the soft bottom layer was not without effect, as can be observed in Fig­
ure 8.11. This figure shows a snapshot from the high­speed video capture on the left, and
the same image zoomed in on the right. The middle layer can be seen buckling under the
stress asserted by the growing fluid depot.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 8.11: Snapshot of jetting into the 3­layer gel model with the Pressure Jet, captured
on high­speed video. On the right is the same image magnified. Top layer: Gelatin,
7.3% monomer concentration (15 kPa Young’s modulus). Middle layer: Agarose, 2.5%
monomer concentration (450 kPa Young’s modulus). Bottom layer: Gelatin, 5% monomer
concentration (5 kPa Young’s modulus).
Conclusions
Although no perforations resulted from the introduction of a third soft bottom layer and
the thinning the agarose layer, the results were encouraging. This model resembles in
vivo conditions better, and this affects the response of the tough layer. Any potential
perforation will also be possible to study due to the optics of the bottom layer.
8.3
Multi­layer Lorentz Jet trials
The difficulty of modeling perforation of the serosa motivated for trials with the Lorentz
Jet. In section 7.3 the effects of adding a void on Lorentz Jet’s force profiles have been
found to increase cutting ability. This study aimed to evaluate if this would translate to a
breach of the dense middle layer, hereby modelling the perforation of the serosa.
Method
The Lorentz Jet would be used with the force outputs: 72 mN, 73 mN with a 50 µL void,
113 mN, and 100 mN with a 50 µL void. Three replicates would be made for each config­
uration. The 3­layer model was used, to allow for viewing potential perforation events.
Results and discussion
The gels post jetting can be seen in figure Figure 8.12. From this there is an indication
that the void aids in the formation of depots, as more appear in those cases. This may
mean that the addition of a void aids in the formation of depots. Notably, the highest
jetting configuration is found to perforate agarose layer. On the right in the figure, the
pixel intensity has been plotted with the same method as shown in Figure 8.8. Once
again there seems to be a convenient classification metric for depots, at pixel intensity
below 90 (dotted line).
With this 3­layer model and the Lorentz Jet device, studying the response to a jet carrying
excessive force is now possible. Figure 8.13 shows a montage of such a jetting event:
The jet pushes the middle layer causing it to buckle, it eventually breaks, allowing the fluid
to escape into the bottom layer. The jet still carries enough force to form a depot in this
space. It should be noted that this development is not representative of all perforation
cases. The jet has been observed to shoot right through the middle layer, creating only a
small (if any) depot in the process.
50
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:59==
Figure 8.12: Results of jetting into the 3­layer gel model with the Lorentz Jet at two power
inputs, with and without a 50 µL void (V) introduced at the nozzle (Figure 5.5).: 62 mN,
62 mN + V, 113 mN, and 110 mN + V. Photos of results on the left, and pixel intensity for
the models plotted on the right. ’P’ marks cases of perforation.
Figure 8.13: Montage of the jetting event in the 3­layer gel model, where depot formation
and perforation is observed. Top layer: Gelatin, 4.4 mm deep 7.3% monomer concen­
tration (15 kPa Young’s modulus). Middle layer: Agarose, 2.5 mm deep 2.5% monomer
concentration (50 kPa Young’s modulus). Bottom layer: Gelatin, 5 mm deep 5% monomer
concentration (5 kPa Young’s modulus).
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
51
==PAGE:60==
These results provide insight into the jetting eventfor cases where the serosa is perforated.
The watery peritoneum is modelled with an elastic gel, but this has some upsides: The
penetration depth of this bottom layer allows for assessing what force the jet continues to
carry into the peritoneum. In vivo, a depot would not likely be formed, as the peritoneum
would not exert the same resistance as this gel does. The path of least resistance for
the jet would presumably lead the fluid to bypass the submucosa, rather than to force the
depot formation here.
Conclusions
The Lorentz Jet makes it possible to observe what effects a different force profile can have
on the multi­layer gel model. The result is a higher occurrence of depots and perforations
events. This further supports the model’s ability to respond differently according to the
jetting parameters.
8.4
Gel­model ex vivo mimic trial
In the interest of validating the multi­layer gel models performance, a study was designed
to mimic the ex vivo trials. It was conducted using the 2­layer gel model with identical
conditions, jet configurations, and devices. The data analysis was aimed at obtaining
the same information from these models as for the tissue samples in the ex vivo trials.
The 2 layer gel model was chosen over the 3­layer gel model as the sponge is the same
condition used for the tissues in the ex vivo trials. To check for perforations, a piece of
white paper cloth was placed beneath the model, as shown in Figure 8.14.
Figure 8.14: Demonstration of how perforations are observed with the 2­layer gel model.
Obtained with the Lorentz Jet for 100 µL at 73 mN.
8.4.1
Results and discussion
As the models are transparent it is easy to observe when depots form. Whether or not
they form seemed a more useful metric rather than the amount of residual dye, given the
more binary nature of the gel­models response. Table 8.1 summarize the result from the
this study. The results were assessed by way of rapid ”histology,” to compare with the
findings in Figure 6.5. To mimic the ex vivo conditions, the same procedure was used
post jetting (section 6.1): the gels were immediately placed on dry ice to rapidly freeze
and fix them in their physical state. The gels were then sliced and photographed with a
microscope. Again, three exemplary results are presented in Figure 8.15, with additional
examples in Appendix B. The top image shows a response to inadequate jetting force
with no depot formed, the middle image shows an ideal depot having formed, and the last
shows the case of perforation.
52
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:61==
Figure 8.15: Three outcomes of jetting into the multi­layer gel model for the same con­
ditions as the ex vivo trials. Images obtained with ”rapid histology”­like approach. The
marks in the top of the images are spaced 1 mm apart. These examples are hand­picked
to illustrate three different response scenarios of the model to jet injection with: inade­
quate force (top), appropriate force, and excessive force (bottom). All gel­model ex vivo
mimicking results can be found in Appendix B. Table 8.1 summarizes the results. Note:
Bottom layer was dyed with light blue color, and has shrunken considerably.
Pressure Jet
48 mN
86 mN
No. of perforations
0/3
0/3
Depots
0/3
2/3
LAPI
29 mN
35 mN V
40 mN
45 mN V
62 mN
No. of perforations
0/3
0/3
0/3
0/3
3/3
Depots
0/3
2/3
1/3
1/3
0/3
62 mN V
72 mN
73 mN V
113 mN
110 mN V
No. of perforations
0/3
0/3
0/3
0/3
3/3
Depots
2/3
1/3
2/3
3/3
3/3
Table 8.1: Results of the gel­model ex vivo mimic trials. Three trials were conducted with
each jetting device/configuration. ”V” indicates the presence of a 50 µL void at the nozzle.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
53
==PAGE:62==
The responses of the gel model do not completely mimic those of the ex vivo tissue, and
so it is not the same exact jetting conditions used in this figure, as it was in Figure 6.5.
However, the model does demonstrate the ability to mimic the different scenarios of in­
terest (no depot, depot, perforation), according to the jetting parameters used. The top
image shows a limited presence of fluid in the model, much like observed for the same
scenario ex vivo. The cross­sectional area of the depot in the middle image is compara­
ble to that seen in Figure 6.4 and Figure 6.5. The perforation scenario also resembles
the one from the ex vivo trial, in that little fluid remains in the tissue/gel, having passed
through for the most part.
8.4.2
Conclusions
Looking at Table 8.1, the small sample pools are again noted to be statistically unreli­
able. Nonetheless, there is a appreciable gradient of the depots, in correlation with the
increasing output force of the jet. The ability to model the perforation event is still clearly
sub­optimal. The ex vivo tissues strongly indicate a higher rate of serosa perforations.
The findings of this study do, however, match the results of the multi­layer Lorentz Jet
trials (section 8.3). It can be concluded that the model needs yet more optimization to
match the response of the tissue accurately. Be that as it may, the results on display in
Figure 8.15 proves the model’s ability to mimic the tissues physical response to jetting.
54
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:63==
9
Discussion
Ex vivo trials reveal gastrointestinal tissue response to jet injection
Ex vivo trials provided valuable insight of the jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue. The
physical alterations to the tissue and state of the liquid depot were observable for the im­
portant boundary conditions that was explored (no depot, depot, and perforation) through
rapid histology. However, confidence in the results should be weighed against the vulner­
abilities of this model. Excised intestinal tissue sections used in ex vivo are not equivalent
to the in vivo state, where local cells maintain the tissue structures and are provided with
the needed nutrients and resources by the blood stream. The tissue pieces have more­
over been frozen, reheated, and handled with sharp tools, providing many opportunities
to damage the tissue, and compromise the model.
In future work, the ex vivo model has the potential for improvement. The intra­tissue for­
mation of the liquid depot is obscured to a camera but may be viewed with medical imaging
modalities. Ultrasound imaging may allow for real­time footage of the depot formation, in­
side the tissue. Current frame rates in medical ultrasound are orders of magnitude slower
than a high­speed camera, but could be sufficient to gain some insight [42]. A means of
assessing the volume of fluid retained in the tissue depots would also increase the value
of the ex vivo model. Photographing tissue slices in rapid histology is an impractical ap­
proach. The samples melt rapidly, capturing images of multiple slices from the same
tissue is a challenge, and biases any quantitative analysis due to the inherent variability
of the selected slice position. Weighing the tissue samples immediately before and after
jetting is possible, but would require a means of removing all residual dye, and would be
complicated for perforation cases. A potential method may be to use a contrast agent in
the fluid, which could attenuate x­rays.
Single­layer gel models enable mechanistic jetting investigations
In this thesis single layer gel models are established to evaluate the cutting of jetted injec­
tion. It was discovered that the majority of cutting occurs within the first 5 ms, as the force
overshoots before settling in the steady state. Further, using this model, the relevance
of the force profile shape to jet gel cutting and delivery is demonstrated. This was done
at same Lorentz Jet drive force, but with and without an inertial loading (i.e., a nozzle
void). The resulting difference in force profile overshoot magnitude resulted in differential
penetration depths. This model may help researchers decide how to design the jetting
force profile for a specific drug­delivery application, to achieve a desired depth and de­
livery volume. Future advancements to the model should focus on developing software
solutions for automatic detection and measurements of the depot dimensions from video
data. This would greatly optimize the workflow related to data processing, making it an
accessible tool for researchers.
Multi­layer gel models mimic gastrointestinal jetted drug delivery
The multi­layered gel models developed in this project proved capable of mimicking the
tissue response to inadequate, appropriate, and excessive force in jet injection. Further,
these expected responses approximately tracked with changes to jet force that would be
expected, based on ex vivo and in vivo data. This model will be a valuable for researchers
to evaluate the performance of their jetting technology, before advancing in vivo studies.
With sufficient control over the fabrication process, the multi­layer model has the benefit
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
55
==PAGE:64==
of being more robust in its response to jetting than the ex vivo tissue models. Moreover,
unlike intestinal pig tissue it poses no bio­hazard risk and is thus more convenient to work
with and dispose of. Its transparent optics also allow for the direct study of the dynamics
jetting and depot formation. The model requires few and simple tools to produce, making
it accessible to most labs. The multi­layer model is easy for the researcher to customize­,
and can be scaled in production to their specific needs.
Future work on the multi­layer model should focus on tuning the jetting response to better
match that of gastrointestinal tissue. In its current state, jetting forces known to cause
the formation of a depot, ex­ or in vivo, may not do so for the model. Alterations should
be made to the material characteristics and dimensions, so that it may accurately predict
the outcome of a given jetting configuration. The usability of the multi­layer model may
also be improved by software automation. In this project, it has been proven that the con­
tents of the depots in the multi­layered models can be assessed via photo pixel­intensity
for multiple models in one image. A software solution for automatically categorizing the
depot contents would make the model more suitable for large­scale trials. Here it is imag­
ined that the models may be lined up post jetting and photographed, and that a software
solution would automatically generate plots and classifications.
Unique tissue­mimicking features of the multi­layer model compared to state of the
art
The vast majority of previous research on jet injection has been focused on jetting delivery
through the dermis (skin) [2][12][13][5]. This also seems the intuitive target tissue as it
is easily accessible. As such, the research into in vitro gel models focus on mimicking
this tissue [12][13]. The multi­layered model developed in this project uniquely mimics
the jejunum tissue. In the future, interest may grow in the jejunum as the target tissue
for jet injection[7]. In such a case, this model would become an important asset in the
researchers toolkit. Another unique feature of the model, compared to the state of the art,
is the approach to modeling depot formation. Commonly the depots are viewed, and the
contents measured, from an orthogonal angle to the jetting direction [12][13]. The multi­
layered model of this project is designing it to form a depot, and measure the contents,
normal to the jetting direction. This depot formation better reflects the tissue depots in the
gastrointestinal tract.
Future research into tissue­mimicking gel models for jet injection
The multi­layer models in this project are a simplification of the real tissue: consisting
of two isotropic, elastic, and mono­phase layers. In this project the gel models have
been compared to each other using Young’s modulus as a metric. Actual gastrointestinal
tissue is made of multiple directional layers, with uneven internal structures [14]. From
a material perspective it can be described as asymmetric, heterogeneous, visco­elastic
and and poro­elastic [12]. To develop a model closer resembling gastrointestinal tissue in
terms of material properties and anatomical scale may yield interesting results. A material
property which has not been discussed in this project, but is essential to the cutting of the
gel, is fracture toughness. This material property has been linked to the size of the pores
within the gel [12]. It would be insightful to test jetting parameters against this metric for
the gels.
56
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:65==
10
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to design gel models for in vitro testing of jet injection technolo­
gies for drug delivery in the gastrointestinal tract. These models were desired to provide
the means for examining penetration depth, fluid depot retained in tissue, and serosa per­
foration in jejunum tissue. This project has culminated in two model designs to meet these
needs: A single­layer gelatin­based model suitable for observing penetration depth, and a
multi­layer gelatin­agarose model, capable of modelling the formation of fluid depots and
potential perforation of the serosa. Both models are able to provide qualitative as well
as quantitative insight and data on the effects of jet injection in gastrointestinal tissue.
The gel models developed in this project have the potential to be valuable tools in future
research and development of jet injection technologies for gastrointestinal jetting.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Wojciech Pawlina and Michael H. Ross. Histology, a Text and Atlas, with Correlated
Cell and Molecular Biology. 2016.
[2]
Rajesh Vadlapatla et al. “Needle­free injectors”. In: Drug Delivery Devices and Ther­
apeutic Systems (Jan. 2021), pp. 199–211. DOI: 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 819838 -
4.00002-X.
[3]
C. Victor Spain et al. “Self­reported Barriers to Adherence and Persistence to Treat­
ment With Injectable Medications for Type 2 Diabetes”. In: Clinical Therapeutics
38.7 (July 2016), pp. 1653–1664. ISSN: 0149­2918. DOI: 10.1016/J.CLINTHERA.
2016.05.009.
[4]
Jacques Pépin et al. “Evolution of the Global Burden of Viral Infections from Unsafe
Medical Injections, 2000–2010”. In: PLOS ONE 9.6 (June 2014), e99677. ISSN:
1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0099677. URL: https://journals.plos.org/
plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0099677.
[5]
History of Jet Injection ­ Needle­Free Injection System. URL: https://jtip.com/
history-of-jet-injection/.
[6]
M. Quante, I. Thate­Waschke, and M. Schofer. “[What are the reasons for pa­
tient preference? A comparison between oral and subcutaneous administration].”
In: Zeitschrift fur Orthopadie und Unfallchirurgie 150.4 (Mar. 2012), pp. 397–403.
ISSN: 1864­6697. DOI: 10.1055/S-0031-1298347. URL: https://europepmc.org/
article/med/22422352.
[7]
Home | Biora Therapeutics, Inc. URL: https://www.bioratherapeutics.com/.
[8]
Alex Abramson et al. “Oral delivery of systemic monoclonal antibodies, peptides
and small molecules using gastric auto­injectors”. In: Nature Biotechnology 2021
40:1 40.1 (Aug. 2021), pp. 103–109. ISSN: 1546­1696. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-021-
01024-0. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-021-01024-0.
[9]
J. Malcolm Wilkinson. “Need for alternative testing methods and opportunities for
organ­on­a­chip systems”. In: Organ­on­a­chip (Jan. 2020), pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-12-817202-5.00001-2.
[10]
Yang Zhu et al. “Drug injection and dispersion characteristics of an air­powered
needle­free injector”. In: Medical Engineering & Physics 109 (Nov. 2022), p. 103906.
ISSN: 1350­4533. DOI: 10.1016/J.MEDENGPHY.2022.103906.
[11]
Yuta Miyazaki et al. “Dynamic mechanical interaction between injection liquid and
human tissue simulant induced by needle­free injection of a highly focused micro­
jet”. In: Scientific Reports 2021 11:1 11.1 (July 2021), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 2045­2322.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-94018-6. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-
021-94018-6.
[12]
Abdul Mohizin, Donghee Lee, and Jung Kyung Kim. “Impact of the mechanical
properties of penetrated media on the injection characteristics of needle­free jet
injection”. In: Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 126 (Aug. 2021), p. 110396.
ISSN: 0894­1777. DOI: 10.1016/J.EXPTHERMFLUSCI.2021.110396.
[13]
Abdul Mohizin and Jung Kyung Kim. “Dispersion profile of a needle­free jet injection
depends on the interfacial property of the medium”. In: Drug Delivery and Transla­
tional Research 12.2 (Feb. 2022), pp. 384–394. ISSN: 21903948. DOI: 10.1007/
S13346-021-01049-7/METRICS. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s13346-021-01049-7.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
59
==PAGE:68==
[14]
Cinnamon L. Vanputte, Jennifer L. Regan, and Andrew F. Russo. Essentials of
anatomy & physiology. 9th ed. New York: McGraw­Hill Education, 2016, pp. 451–
473.
[15]
Small intestine | Digestive Function, Structure & Length | Britannica. URL: https:
//www.britannica.com/science/small-intestine.
[16]
Small intestine, artwork ­ Stock Image ­ C021/2453 ­ Science Photo Library. URL:
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/598607/view/small-intestine-artwork.
[17]
Henrik Pedersen et al. “DRUG ADMINISTRATION INTO THE GASTROINTESTI­
NAL WALL – EUS AS GUIDING TOOL”. In: Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 97.6 (June
2023), AB893–AB894. ISSN: 0016­5107. DOI: 10.1016/J.GIE.2023.04.1956.
[18]
Vijay K. Singh, Karla D. Thrall, and Martin Hauer­Jensen. “Minipigs as models in
drug discovery”. In: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17460441.2016.1223039 11.12 (Dec.
2016), pp. 1131–1134. ISSN: 1746045X. DOI: 10.1080/17460441.2016.1223039.
URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17460441.2016.1223039.
[19]
Lisa A. Jackson et al. “Safety and immunogenicity of varying dosages of trivalent
inactivated influenza vaccine administered by needle­free jet injectors”. In: Vac­
cine 19.32 (Sept. 2001), pp. 4703–4709. ISSN: 0264­410X. DOI: 10.1016/S0264-
410X(01)00225-0.
[20]
Bruce G. Weniger and Mark J. Papania. “Alternative vaccine delivery methods”.
In: Vaccines (2013), p. 1200. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-4557-0090-5.00063-X. URL:
/pmc/articles/PMC7151876/%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC7151876/.
[21]
Oliver A. Shergold, Norman A. Fleck, and Toby S. King. “The penetration of a soft
solid by a liquid jet, with application to the administration of a needle­free injection”.
In: Journal of Biomechanics 39.14 (Jan. 2006), pp. 2593–2602. ISSN: 0021­9290.
DOI: 10.1016/J.JBIOMECH.2005.08.028.
[22]
Pankaj Rohilla et al. “Characterization of jets for impulsively­started needle­free jet
injectors: Influence of fluid properties”. In: Journal of Drug Delivery Science and
Technology 53 (Oct. 2019), p. 101167. ISSN: 1773­2247. DOI: 10.1016/J.JDDST.
2019.101167.
[23]
Zhizhi Wang et al. “Simulation and experimental study on the influence of needle­
free jet injection nozzle structure on injection performance”. In: Journal of Drug De­
livery Science and Technology 68 (Feb. 2022), p. 103043. ISSN: 1773­2247. DOI:
10.1016/J.JDDST.2021.103043.
[24]
Jr. William D. Callister and David G. Rethwisch. Material Science and Engineering.
9th ed. Wiley, 2011.
[25]
Fracture Mechanics | MechaniCalc. URL: https : / / mechanicalc . com / reference /
fracture-mechanics.
[26]
Eduardo Mendes and Pouyan Boukany. CH3373 Soft Materials Engineering (202223
Q2) ­ Gels. Delft, Nov. 2022.
[27]
Monolithic Materials: Preparation, Properties and Applications ­ Google Books. URL:
https://books.google.dk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=XjLHaF4r-zYC&oi=fnd&pg=PA121&
dq=chapter+6+-+monolithic+polysaccheride+materials&ots=4SEmt8YPKw&sig=
cWJH0Ypg7ROzGmdPIwA88P3A4fM&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=chapter%206%
20-%20monolithic%20polysaccheride%20materials&f=false.
[28]
Nadine Pernodet, Mounir Maaloum, and Bernard Tinland. “Pore size of agarose gels
by atomic force microscopy”. In: ELECTROPHORESIS 18.1 (Jan. 1997), pp. 55–
58. ISSN: 1522­2683. DOI: 10.1002/ELPS.1150180111. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/elps.1150180111%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
60
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:69==
abs/10.1002/elps.1150180111%20https://analyticalsciencejournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1002/elps.1150180111.
[29]
Jingfang Zhou, Meifang Zhou, and Rachel A. Caruso. “Agarose template for the
fabrication of macroporous metal oxide structures”. In: Langmuir 22.7 (Mar. 2006),
pp. 3332–3336. ISSN: 07437463. DOI: 10 . 1021 / LA052771S / ASSET / IMAGES /
LARGE/LA052771SF00008.JPEG. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/
la052771s.
[30]
James R. Welty, Gregory L. Rorrer, and David G. Foster. Fundamentals of Momen­
tum, Heat and Mass Transfer. 6th ed. Wiley, 2015.
[31]
KAPPAFLEX 1 ­ Hydraulic hoses ­ Hydraulics and high pressure hoses | Hydroscand.
URL: https://www.hydroscand.co.uk/uk_en/product/kappaflex-1-1103-03.
[32]
FASTCAM SA­Z – Photron. URL: https://photron.com/fastcam- sa- z- 2/?gclid=
EAIaIQobChMI1b_QnMrR_wIVeJFoCR3SpQMSEAAYASAAEgLop_D_BwE.
[33]
Laowa 100mm f/2.8 2x Ultra Macro APO ­ Laowa Lens. URL: https://www.laowalenses.
ca/product/100mm-ultra-macro-apo/.
[34]
PHOTRON | PFV 4 ­ Tech Imaging Services. URL: https://www.techimaging.com/
products/high-speed-cameras/software/photron-software/product/photron-fastcam-
viewer-4.
[35]
Sensitivity vs. Frame Rate in Low Light Imaging Teledyne Lumenera. URL: https:
//www.lumenera.com/blog/sensitivityversusframerate.
[36]
GSVitec Multiled QT high­speed lighting ­ eImaging. URL: https://eimaging.com.
au/wp/shop/lighting/led-lighting/multiled-series/gsvitec-multiled-qt-led-high-speed-
lighting/.
[37]
Johannes Schindelin et al. “Fiji: An open­source platform for biological­image anal­
ysis”. In: Nature Methods 9.7 (July 2012), pp. 676–682. ISSN: 15487091. DOI:
10.1038/NMETH.2019. URL: https://imagej.github.io/software/fiji/index.
[38]
D. D. Symons. “Inertial liquid loading on the nozzle of a needle­free injection device”.
In: http://dx.doi.org/10.1243/095440604322886973 218.2 (Feb. 2004), pp. 233–240.
ISSN: 09544062. DOI: 10.1243/095440604322886973. URL: https://journals.sagepub.
com/doi/epdf/10.1243/095440604322886973.
[39]
“MATERIAL DATA SHEET Humimic Medical Gelatin Synthetic Gelatin for Simulat­
ing Tissue”. In: (2020).
[40]
Jiwoon Kwon and Ghatu Subhash. “Compressive strain rate sensitivity of ballistic
gelatin”. In: Journal of Biomechanics 43.3 (Feb. 2010), pp. 420–425. ISSN: 0021­
9290. DOI: 10.1016/J.JBIOMECH.2009.10.008.
[41]
Nicolas Taberlet et al. “How tall can gelatin towers be? An introduction to elasticity
and buckling”. In: American Journal of Physics 85.12 (Dec. 2017), pp. 908–914.
ISSN: 0002­9505. DOI: 10.1119/1.5009667. URL: /aapt/ajp/article/85/12/908/
1039254/How-tall-can-gelatin-towers-be-An-introduction-to.
[42]
Maja Cikes et al. “Ultrafast Cardiac Ultrasound Imaging: Technical Principles, Appli­
cations, and Clinical Benefits”. In: JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging 7.8 (2014), pp. 812–
823. ISSN: 18767591. DOI: 10.1016/J.JCMG.2014.06.004. URL: https://www.jacc.
org/doi/10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.06.004.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendix: Ex vivo rapid histology and
post jetting results
Following are the rapid histology results of the ex vivo trials.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
63
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
 
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
 
==PAGE:80==
B
Appendix: Gel ex vivo mimic trial rapid
”histology”
Following are the rapid ”histology” results of the gel model ex vivo mimic trials trials. note
that the bottom layer has shrunken. it is colored blue.
72
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:81==
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
==PAGE:83==
 
==PAGE:84==
C
Appendix: Development account of the
multi­layer gel models
Bellow is an account of the development of the multi­layer models, and the triumphs and
failures of all the iterations.
76
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
==PAGE:85==
 
Gel I 
These gels were made without much documentation, just as a test to see if Glt/Ag could work. They show 
much promise, proving that thay can (a) respond to different pressures (b) create depots (c) for higher 
pressures model the perforation of the serosa. 
Issues were found to be: bottom layer was so thin it was hard to see on video. It was also difficult to know if 
it truly covered the entire bottom, or if it had been partially dissolved into the gelatin layer. 
 
Gel II 
Volume accounted for in both layers. Bottom layer made thick to ensure it covers entire bottom. Bottom 
layers colored to make them more visible. For II.a almost all jetting results in depots. For II.b only a single 
jetting results in depot: this is even though the jetting depot was clearly in contact with the border. No 
perforation of bottom layer in any model. 
==PAGE:86==
The coloring of the bottom layer was way too dark (evident below). The bottom layer hypothesized to be 
too thick for perforation. 10 kPa gelatine seemed too soft, resulting in depots too often. 20 kPa seemed too 
dense, arely allowing for any depot’s to form. 
But I.b showed that 20 kPa was not too dense, for depot formation. It was hypothesized a thinner layer 
might improve this ability. 
 
Gel III 
Bottom layer volume decreased by 50%, in the hope that this would allow for perforation in some cases. 
Less coloring was added. 
II.a and II.b seemed to be at extreme ends, in terms of allowing for depots to form. Gen III aimed to find the 
sweet spot in the middle, where depot formation might happen some of the time, and might depend on 
the input pressure. Two approaches were taken: (a) make the top layer of II.a softer, (b) make the top layer 
of II.b thinner. 
A slight improvement was observed, in that depot formation seemed to depend on pressure input. 
Although. Very few depots were formed over all. No perforation was observed. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
Gel IV 
The top layers for III.a and III.b have had their modulus decreased, respectively, to create these two new 
models. The goal for this generation was the same as for gen III: a where depot formation might happen 
some of the time, and might depend on the input pressure. The low amount of depots in gen III motivated 
the decrease in modulus for these models. 
Interestingly, IV.a has the same toplayer thickness and modulus as II.a did. Yet, where II.a resulted in 10/12 
depots, this model did not cause a single depot. A hypothesis emerged that there was an issue with the 
control of the gel-gel border during fabrication. 
IV.b produced the desired  outcome, however, in terms of depots. Although this is a statistically low 
sample: depots did occur more in correlation with input pressure. 
Still no perforation of bottom layer in either model 
 
Gel V 
Motivated by the positive result of IV.b, V.a was made with the same design. So was V.b but with a thinner 
bottom layer, in the hope this might cause perforation in some cases. The models were now also placed on 
a 5 kPa gelatin layer, effectively making them a 3-layered model. The hope was the the buckeling might 
contribute to perforation in some cases.  
More care was taken during fabrication: agarose was now made on a stirring plate to avoid overheating, 
and left to cool off in the fridge for 50 min, before the top layer was added. As both top an bottom layers 
are made with the same modulus, these come from a single batch, which has been shared between the 
models. 
The results were unexpected, in that so few depots formed. Too of the depots were formed, when jetting 
with increased distance between the nozzle and gel surface: V.a top left (an accident), and V.b bottom right 
(on purpose). I hypothesize that greater control over this distance might be a road to more reproducible 
results. 
Still no perforations. I do have faith in model V.b as being the best chance of future success. 
==PAGE:88==
 
Summary 
 
==PAGE:89==
D
Appendix: Protocol for fabricating
gelatin gel
Here is the protocol for fabricating the gelatin gel models in this project.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
81
==PAGE:90==
Protocol for gelatin fabrication
relationship of monomer % and modulus given below from literature
extracted data:
percent
E
5
5
10
27
15
49
20
71
25
30
35
40
find extended range using trendline:
 
Trendline can be used for determaning the % monomer needed to get desired modulus:
(%monomer) =  ((desired Youngs modulus) + 17) / 4,4
for
100
kPa:
26,59091 % gelatine
<- 27% gelatin used in project
for
190
kPa:
47,04545 % gelatine
for
260
kPa:
62,95455 % gelatine
for
20
kPa:
8,409091 % gelatine
for
15
kPa:
7,272727 % gelatine
for
5
kPa:
5
% gelatine
calculate the % monomer and water to mix for desired volume:
Desired model: volume
percent gelatin
gram gelatin
ml DM water
50
26,59091
13,29545
36,70455
75
26,59091
19,94318
55,05682
100
26,59091
26,59091
73,40909
Add water to glass container with magnetic pin. Place on stirring place at temperature of 60-75 degrees C
Gradually add monomer untill all is dissolved. May take uo to 1 hour for 27% . 
Place lid on top to prevent water from vaporizing.
for large volume models ( >5 mL) pour the liquid mix into the desired mold.
Alternatively use a marked pippet to transfer smaller accurate volumes while the mix is still on the heat
Let it cure in a cooler (5 degrees celcius). 
When cured, be sure to add water on top so that it does not dehydrate.
Mold may start growing on the gel after 2-3 weeks.
y = 4,4x - 17
0
50
100
150
200
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Youngs Modulus vs % monomer for gelatin
==PAGE:91==
E
Appendix: Protocol for fabricating
agarose gel
Here is the protocol for fabricating the agarose gel models in this project. In the beginning
of the project the monomer and water were mixed and heated in a microwave oven. the
approach was changed in favor of using a stirring plate, to ensure the mix would not
overheat.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
83
==PAGE:92==
Protocol for agarose fabrication
relationship of monomer % and modulus given below from literature
Plot covers a wide range. The % monomer needed to get desired modulus can be read directly.
calculate the % monomer and water to mix for desired volume:
Desired model: volume
percent gelatin
gram gelatin
ml DM water
50
1
0,5
49,5
75
1
0,75
74,25
100
1
1
99
50
2,5
1,25
48,75
75
2,5
1,875
73,125
100
2,5
2,5
97,5
50
1,75
0,875
49,125
75
1,75
1,3125
73,6875
100
1,75
1,75
98,25
50
1,38
0,69
49,31
75
1,38
1,035
73,965
100
1,38
1,38
98,62
Add both monomer and water to glass container with magnetic pin. 
Place on stirring place at temperature of 60-75 degrees C
Place lid on top to prevent water from vaporizing.
When mix is clear procede.
for large volume models ( >5 mL) pour the liquid mix into the desired mold.
Alternatively use a marked pippet to transfer smaller accurate volumes while the mix is still on the heat
Let it cure in a cooler (5 degrees celcius). 
==PAGE:93==
F
Appendix: Protocol for fabricating
2­layer model gel
Here is the protocol for fabricating the gelatin / agarose models.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
85
==PAGE:94==
Gelatin agarose model fabrication protocol
Find desired volume for model layers
number of wells: 36
Top layer:
mL gelatin per well:
2 mL
total volume gelatin needed:
72 mL
1.5 multiplier for buffer:
108 mL
for
15
kPa:
7,272727 % gelatine
mix :
7,854545 g gelatin monomer with:
100,1455 mL water
Bottom layer:
mL agarose per well:
0,5 mL
total volume agarose needed:
18 mL
1.5 multiplier for buffer:
27 mL
for
450
kPa:
2,5
% agarose
mix :
0,675
g agarose monomer with:
26,325
mL water
make bottom layer
Add both agarose monomer and water to glass container with magnetic pin. 
Place on stirring place at temperature of 60-75 degrees C
Place lid on top to prevent water from vaporizing.
When mix is clear procede.
Use a marked pippet to transfer the liquid gel to the mold while the mix is still on the heat
Let it cure in a cooler (5 degrees celcius). For a minimum of 1 hour.
make top layer (while bottom layer is curring)
Add water to glass container with magnetic pin. Place on stirring place at temperature of 60-75 degrees C
Gradually add monomer untill all is dissolved. May take uo to 1 hour for 27% . 
Place lid on top to prevent water from vaporizing.
Use a marked pippet to transfer the liquid gel to the mold while the mix is still on the heat
Let it cure in a cooler (5 degrees celcius). 
When cured, be sure to add water on top so that it does not dehydrate.
Mold may start growing on the gel after 2-3 weeks.
When fully cured the model can be easily removed from the mold by sticking a thin tool 
between the gel and the mold and running it around the edges
==PAGE:95==
G
Appendix: Technical drawing of the
nozzle
This is the technical drawing for the nozzle used in this project. the diameter of the exit
orifice in this project is 0.254 mm.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
87
==PAGE:96==
1
A
B
C
D
2
3
A
B
C
D
1
2
3
Kjul & Co. ApS
Hedeager 9
2605 Brøndby
DENMARK
 
www.task-force.dk
Material:
Ref.Cond.:
Scale:
Unit:
Format:
Revision change:
Surface finish:
Geometrical tolerancing:
General tolerancing:
Tolerancing principle:
CR - No.:
date/init.:
Replaces:
Rev. date/init.:
Approved-date/sign.:
Tool No.:
Article No.:
Part or Asm./Rev. No.:
Drawing/Rev. No.:
Sheet No.:
2.4
4.5
R1.5
3.6
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.3
A3
Sep-09-21 JP
mm
10:1
-
1/1
 MANY_NOZZLES  
 MANY_NOZZLES
B-B
M2,5
==PAGE:97==
H
Appendix: Force profiles ­ raw
data/mvng.avrg., void/no comparison
Figure H.1 illustrates the difference between the raw data obtained from the force sensor,
and the 0.5 ms moving average for the same signal. one can appreciate how noisy the
raw signal is, and how much more comprehensible the plot on the right is in comparison.
Figure H.1: Caption
The following is a comparison of the force profiles for all the power configurations used
on the Lorentz Jet, with and without a 50 µL void.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
89
==PAGE:98==
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Lorenz Jet | 1.00 A | 100 uL
Time [s]
21 mN + 50 uL void
15 mN
Force [N]
Force [N]
Force [N]
Force [N]
Force [N]
Force [N]
==PAGE:99==
I
Appendix: tracking of the depot shape
in HM gel during jetting
These following images were from early exploration of the use of tracking the edge of
the depot during jetting, and mapping the flow paths within the depot. It was not deemed
interesting enough to pursue further. All images are from the same jetting event.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
91
==PAGE:100==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
J
Appendix: Up­scaled images of depots
in gels
In the following are up­scaled versions of the images shown in this report. 1) 2) and 3)
are from Figure 8.6, 4) and 5) are from Figure 8.3, 6) is the image used for the front page
but it provides a good view of the 3­layer gel model jetting, 7) is from Figure 8.11, 8) is a
close up of HM gel 5 post jetting, and 9) are cases of the depots reaching the edge of the
model and shooting out the side. not an uncommon occurence for such small models.
Some agarose depots are included in the end, so one can appreciate their forms.
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
93
==PAGE:102==
 
 
1) 
2) 
==PAGE:103==
 
3) 
4) 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
5) 
6) 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
 
7) 
8) 
9) 
==PAGE:106==
 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
==PAGE:108==
 
 
==PAGE:109==
Development of in vitro experimental models to study jet injection into gastrointestinal tissue
101
==PAGE:110==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
