==PAGE:1==
DTU Manufacturing
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steel
August 7, 2023
Table 0.1
Author:
Joshua Woods;
s213606
Figure 0.1: Caption for your image (optional)
==PAGE:2==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
1
Preface
This thesis is submitted for the completion of the Master of Science in Materials and Man-
ufacturing Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of Civil
and Mechanical Engineering. The project is rated at 30 ETCS and has been carried out at the
Section of Materials and Surface Engineering. The project was completed in the period March
8th to August 8th 2023 and has been under supervision of Professor Marcel A.J. Somers and
Associate professor Thomas A.Christensen.
i
==PAGE:3==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
2
Abstract
This research investigates the susceptibility of cold worked stainless steels to Hydrogen embrit-
tlement with a specific emphasis on Austenitic stainless steel which will undergo a Martensitic
transformation upon deformation. The aim of the research is to provide a framework on future
research for high strength stainless steels to be used in contact with gaseous hydrogen in order
to maximise the possibilities for Power to X roll out and hydrogen production. This framework
will try to provide guidance for material selection for high strength stainless steels to be used
in contact gaseous hydrogen near it’s production source. The research will look to characterise
the materials in question, load them with hydrogen via cathodic charging and tensile test the
samples against each other and calculate embrittlement indexes. Also the fractured surface will
be investigated to try to diagnose the Hydrogen embrittlement failure mechanism.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
3
Acknowledgements
A special thanks to Marcel A.Somers who acted a supervisor for this work.
I thank him
for kindness, knowledge, curiosity and patience for guiding me through this project and the
subject of metallurgy as a whole. A special thanks to Thomas A.Christensen who was available
to discuss the topic of Hydrogen embrittlement and guidance for research. Also a very special
thanks to Matteo DeVilla for a huge amount of help with regards to this topic and discussions
of how to optimise mine and future hydrogen embrittlement experiments.
Also a big thanks to my family and friends for ongoing support throughout this process.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
4
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
AEC
Alkaline Electrolysis Cell
AIDE
Adsorption-induced dislocation Emission
IG
Intergranular
HE
Hydrogen Embrittlement
HEDE
Hydrogen Enhanced Decohesion
HELP
Hydrogen Enhanced Localised Plasticity
HESIV
Hydrogen Enhanced strain induced vacancies
HIPT
Hydrogen-induced phase transformation
MVC
Microvoid Coalescence
PEMAC
Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Cell
SOEC
Solid Oxide electrolysis Cell
TG
Transgranular
iv
==PAGE:6==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
v
==PAGE:7==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
5
Introduction
Energy Outlook
The urgency to shift towards green fuels is increasingly critical in order to mitigate potential
disasters due to extreme effects of climate change. There exists a methodology to manufacture
clean fuels that can power transport that requires a high energy density such as is the case with
ships, trucks, and planes. This has been termed Power to x. This strategy involves electrolysis
of water into hydrogen and oxygen. This hydrogen can be used in its gaseous or liquid form
directly as a fuel or can be synthesised with other gases such as nitrogen and carbon dioxide
to create fuels such as methanol, ammonia, and kerosene to power a combustion engine. As a
result of this initiative there is expected to be a huge increase is in the number of pipes and
components that are needed to handle pure hydrogen.
Figure 5.1: Hydrogen production projection
The idea of power to x is to use excess power as created from renewable resources when demand
for electricity is low to power the electrolysis of water and then synthesise other fuels. There are
three main electrolysis technologies available today and they are namely Alkaline electrolysis
cell (AEC), Solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) and Proton exchange membrane electrolysis
cell (PEMAC). Considering the cost of the equipment of PEMAC it isn’t a viable technology
for the quantity of hydrogen required to fuel the economy. Both AEC and SOEC look likely
to be used widely for the electrolysis of hydrogen. These processes are highly efficient in the
range of with AEC (66 to 79%) and SOEC (76-94%) with the efficiency depending on inputs
of pressure, temperature and whether free steam is available to preheat the water before the
electrolysis process is to operate [1]. These technologies are very promising to deliver quantity
of hydrogen needed to fuel our economy, however a major hurdle still needs to overcome which
is hydrogen embrittlement (HE) of steels.
Challenges of Hydrogen Embrritlement and ASME B31.12
Hydrogen embrittlement is the phenomenon when metals in contact with a hydrogen source,
the hydrogen can disassociate (or diffuse from a deposit) at the surface, and then is absorbed
1
==PAGE:8==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
as atomic hydrogen drastically reduces the steels mechanical properties. Johnson first came
up with this notion of hydrogen embrittlement in 1875, in which he showed a decrease in duc-
tility of steel and iron wires when exposed to hydrogen through acid and electrolysis exposure[2].
Currently, ASME code B31.12 in place for hydrogen handling but it is regarded by industry
and academically as outdated due to the steels used low strength.One of the steels used is A53,
It is used as it has excellent ductility, and this helps to avoid embrittlement by hydrogen. The
steel is also hot dip galvanised which will help to stop hydrogen being dissolved into the steel.
However, the process itself introduces hydrogen into the material and the material needs to
be annealed at 190 to 230C for 8 to 24hr to desorb the hydrogen [3]. Another feature which
the A53 steel has is pearlite, the interface between ferrite and cementite is a so-called strong
trap for hydrogen which are needed to make a material resilient to HE [4].Academically, it is
believed that a pipe of higher strength is possible to use in contact with gaseous hydrogen safely.
Austenitic stainless steel is resistant to hydrogen embrittlement due to their interstitial sites
having a high binding energy with the hydrogen. When the meta-stable austenitic pipes are
produced, they can become martensitic condition due to a stress induced transformation which
occurs during forming processes (drawing and rolling). The material to be studied and char-
acterised is 304 stainless steel which is a relatively cheap metastable stainless steel with good
forming characteristics. Below is a table showing some stainless steels and some of their prop-
erties, as well as A53 steel which is approved as safe for use in hydrogen as per ASME B31.12.
Table 5.1: Mechaniical properties of various steel [5]
Steel
Condition
condition
Price
(euro/kg)
Yield Strength
(Mpa)
Tensile Strength
(Mpa)
304
Wrought
(1/2 hard)
Martensitic
w/Austenite
2.34-2.67[5]
690-800
1020-1250
304
Annealed
Austenitic
2.34-2.67[5]
205-310
510-620
316
Annealed
Austenitc
2.86-3.42[5]
205-310
515-620
A53
wrought,
hot dipped,
galvanised
N/A
0.64-0.71[5]
240-280
415-484
EN 1.4369
Wrought
Austenitic
N/A
390
850
As can be seen, 304 can be work hardened quite considerably (due to phase change) which
gives it high strength per weight which will allow easy set up for remote sites for electrolysis in
comparison to the weaker A53 steel. Both 304 and 316 are widely used in piping application,
but 304 is better for work hardening and a slightly less expensive. The other steel EN 1.4369 is
an Austenitic stainless steel that does not undergo a phase change when work hardened. This
steel will be used as a comparison to 304 stainless steel.
Currently 316L steel is being used to transport hydrogen for pilot plants. Though it can be work
hardened by making the grains nanosized, it is not considered a high strength steel. Austenite
is generally softer than ferrite as it has more slip planes (24 versus 12). It doesn’t work harden
2
==PAGE:9==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
as well as ferrite, but is also more ductile.
Figure 5.2: 316 vs 304 strength versus elongation
As can be seen in figure(5.2) 304 in the work hardened condition is considerably stronger than
both the 316L and 316 steels, but they have entered into the territory of high strength which
makes them more vulnerable to hydrogen embrittlement (>1000 MPa). When work hardened
the material also loses some of its elongation. Also, this elongation tends to be drastically re-
duced in the presence of hydrogen[4]. This research will investigate the performance of both 304
and EN 1.4369 in their as received and cold worked condition and their resilience to hydrogen
embrittlement.
3
==PAGE:10==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
6
Background
6.1
Hydrogen absorption
Hydrogen molecules disassociate at the surface and enters the lattice as atomic hydrogen.
Atomic hydrogen can move into the metal from its surface and cause very severe embrittlement
issues like those faced by the oil and gas industry.
Hydrogen can enter the material in different ways such as:
1. As gas form - Hydrogen molecules (H2) disassociates at surface and enter the material in
atomtic form
2. Cathodic charging - Hydrogen evolution at surface, the high concentration at the sur-
face of the material acts as a chemical gradient and hydrogen enters the material (after
disassociation).
3. Corrosion processes - In a material there is local anodes and cathodes, the cathode can
produce hydrogen as part of its half reaction. the hydrogen can disassociate at the surface
and enter the material.
4. Surface deposits - Surface deposits such as hydrogen sulfide allows hydrogen to diffuse
out from the deposit and cause very severe hydrogen embrittlement.
5. During processing hydrogen can be adsorbed in the melt and high temperatures and get
trapped within the material (e.g during casting)[6].
The source of the hydrogen can be very important as it can exhibit different mechanical be-
haviour, i.e., experiments by Murakami et al found that under gaseous hydrogen loading the
material would soften, whereas under cathodic charging the material hardened. This could have
a significant impact on the hydrogen embrittlement phenomena at work. This makes creation
of experiments difficult as charging a material with hydrogen in gaseous hydrogen is expensive
and quite dangerous, whereas cathodic charging is relatively safe and cheap[7][8][9].
There a few factors which influence the degree of which a material is susceptible to hydrogen
embrittlement and they are:
1. Strength and residual stress in material.Hydrogen is attracted to areas of high stress as
they are high energy sites. This causes hydrogen to accumulate in areas of high stress.
2. Pressure temperature and exposure time.
3. Applied strain rate and surface condition.
4. Concentration of hydrogen or amount of hydrogen traps for hydrogen.
5. Metallic coatings and specific precipitates.
4
==PAGE:11==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
6. Microstructure of the material.
7. Solution in contact with metal.
8. Heat treatment of the material[6].
There are several different hydrogen embrittlement mechanisms which affect the mechanical
properties in different ways (i.e. change in toughness, tensile strength, fatigue strength or duc-
tility). It is how hydrogen interacts with defects within the microstructure of the material which
causes issues with mechanical properties. Hydrogen interacts with defects such as dislocations,
vacancies, precipitates and microcracks. The amount of hydrogen that can enter the material
depends on the hydrogen concentration at the surface (i.e. partial pressure or pressure in case
of pure hydrogen) or charging current density in the case of cathodic charging, but also what
controls the amount of hydrogen and can enter the material is number of defects and interstitial
sites within it[10]. I.e., a strained sample can dissolve more hydrogen into the material as the
dislocations that are created act as a defect for hydrogen to sit in its core or strain field.
Figure 6.1: Diagram showing locations where hydrogen sits in the lattice[11].
For high pressure hydrogen gas, the dissolved hydrogen concentration within the material occurs
according to Sieverts law:
CH = S ∗
p
PH2
(6.1)
Figure 6.2: Sieverts law[12].
Where CH is the concentration of hydrogen in the material, S is the solubility which depends
on alloy type and temperature and and PH2 is the partial pressure of hydrogen.
This formula is similar to the amount of hydrogen that can enter a material via cathodic
charging which is given by the formula:
5
==PAGE:12==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
CH = K ∗
√
i
(6.2)
Figure 6.3: Cathodic charging Hydrogen concentration [12].
Where K is a constant that depends on material (type, microstructure, and defects) hydro-
gen charging potential, hydrogen charging time and hydrogen charging method[12]. E.g., the
concentration of hydrogen recombination poison such as thiourea, KCN or AS2O3 and bath
chemistry (alkaline or acidic, pH level). Where K is also scaled by electro migration factor
given by:
ϕ = Z ∗eρ
kT
(6.3)
Figure 6.4: Electro migration factor [12]
Where Z* is the effective charge number, e is the electron charge, ρ is the resistivity of the
alloys, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature.
The local concentration of
hydrogen can affect which Hydrogen embrittlement mechanism is active within the material,
different phenomena can be active at different places within the material[12].
In order to understand how the different hydrogen embrittlement mechanisms work, how hy-
drogen interacts with microstructure must be understood; this will be discussed in detail in the
following section.
6.2
Hydrogen and dislocations
The presence of hydrogen within a metal has a very significant impact on dislocation behaviour
within the material.
The presence of hydrogen with a metal can increase the mobility and density of dislocations
within the material [7][13][10][14]. It can also a contrasting effect such as dislocation pinning at
a higher concentration of hydrogen [7][8][9], which can prevent the blunting of crack tip, which
helps to drop the stress intensity at the tip.
6
==PAGE:13==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.5: Diagram showing dislocation pinning and enhanced density and mobility adapted from[15]
One case of hardening or softening occurring has been shown using simulations to be an interac-
tion of kink pairs of screw dislocations. Considering figure (6.6), when a kink pair nucleates at
a hydrogen atom, the activation energy (also called binding energy) decreases when a hydrogen
atom moves to a stronger binding site E.g. β to α, inducing softening. Also, when a kink pair
nucleates the activation energy increases when a hydrogen atom moves to a weaker binding
site E.g., α to β, which induces hardening. When a kink pair meets a hydrogen atom while
expanding, the side ward motion of the kink pair is impeded; inducing hardening [16]. Softening
is typically associated with high temperatures and low concentration of hydrogen within the
material, whereas hardening occurs at low temperature and high hydrogen concentration[16].
Figure 6.6: Differential displacement maps of dislocation cores structures for body centered cubic
(bcc) Fe screw dislocations. The arrows indicate the direction and magnitude of the atomic displace-
ment with a complete arrow having magnitude of b/3. The stable locations for a hydrogen atom are
indicated.[7], below different binding energies at different places within the screw dislocation core.
7
==PAGE:14==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Hydrogen can use dislocations to move about material rather than slower diffusion, hydrogen
can sit in a dislocation strain field and move quickly about the lattice along dislocation lines
moving to areas of high stress. Dislocation motion along dislocation lines is easier in the pres-
ence of hydrogen, as the hydrogen shield the interactions between dislocations, allowing them
to move at lower levels of stress and sit closer together[9].
Hydrogen at a dislocation core tends to cause dislocation pinning where the dislocation needs a
higher level of stress to move. The hydrogen boosts the stress field of the dislocation core. This
causes the material to harden as the dislocation becomes pinned in position and not moving as
a stress is applied[7].
When Hydrogen sits in the dislocations stress field, it alters it. This causes the dislocation to
move at a lower stress level in certain directions (i.e. towards area of high stress). Hydrogen can
also lower the elastic interaction between dislocation helping to enhancing their mobility and
allowing them to sit close to together. Since dislocations are carriers of plastic deformation this
leads to enhanced plasticity when these dislocations interact with grain boundaries, crack tips
and interfaces which are responsible for a lot of hydrogen induced failures at a lower hydrogen
concentration within the materials this is called material softening [9][14][7].
Hydrogen shares a certain activation or binding energy with hydrogen whether it sits in its
strain field or at its core. It has a higher interfacial energy with the core, than in its strain
field. Therefore, a higher energy is needed to pull hydrogen out of its dislocation core. However
dislocations tend to sit in the dislocation strain field as it has a higher solubility in it[7].
Since dislocations don’t cross the grain boundary with ease, and the presence of hydrogen
doesn’t have a large effect on cross slip, hydrogen is dumped at it. The hydrogen will build up
at the grain boundary over time creating a driving force for diffusion. The hydrogen will then
diffuse across the grain boundary to be picked up by another dislocation that is emitted from
the grain boundary and continue it’s journey through the material[7].
Evidence of this build up of hydrogen at a grain boundary can be seen when a material failure
that is typically transgranular swaps to intergranular in the presence of hydrogen [7]. It can
also explain why materials with larger grains can be more susceptible to hydrogen embrittle-
ment, as the hydrogen concentration can increase at larger grain boundaries decreasing their
cohesiveness [17], reducing the grain is one way that could be used in order to design high
strength alloys as long as other mechanical properties are considered.
Dislocation and grain boundary interactions with hydrogen are summarised below:
• The presence of hydrogen within a metal can increase the mobility and density of dislo-
cations within the material due to a change in dislocation line energy , which decreases
the interaction effects between dislocations. This occurs when hydrogen content is in
equilibrium with the stress within the lattice [18][13][10][14][19].
• Hydrogen is tied strongly to a dislocation core or jog segment within a screw dislocation
but also has quite a strong affinity for the dislocations strain field[7].
8
==PAGE:15==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
• Dislocation pinning can occur at a higher concentration of hydrogen, preventing the
blunting of crack tips which reduces stress intensity around the crack tip, this happens
when the metal is supersaturated by hydrogen, this happens when solute excess is positive
[7][8][9].
• Hydrogen in a dislocation stress field of a dislocation can enhance the mobility and de-
crease the interactions between dislocations[18][10][14].
• The altered stress field allows dislocations to move in certain directions at a lower stress
level, enhancing plasticity[9].
• Dislocations interacting with grain boundaries lead to enhanced plasticity and material
hardening, as the boundaries cohesiveness will drop[14][7].
• Hydrogen can accumulate at grain boundaries, causing a switch from transgranular to
intergranular failures[7].
• Larger grain boundaries can be more susceptible to hydrogen embrittlement,due to a
higher concentration hydrogen decreasing their cohesiveness[17].
Some experiments conducted by the Savannah River laboratory in the 70’s shows proof of
the speed of which hydrogen moves about the lattice and increase in solubility due to plastic
deformation. The isotope of tritium was used as it is radioactive and thus can be detected
within the metal.
Figure 6.7: Hydrogen speed and solubility. L: Tritium Penetration into 304L stainless steel tensile
specimen exposed to for 15 days in 9067 p.s.i at 22C and then tested for fracture at 22C. R: Tritium
profile after deformation plotted after deformation on a probabiltiy scale, of a nickel tensile tube filled
with tritium compared with profile for diffusion only[10].
9
==PAGE:16==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Hydrogen concentration at dislocations was first introduced Kolachev et al.
in 1968 with
later edits, with the concentration of hydrogen at dislocations can be estimated by the lattice
hydrogen concentration C, through, this is the so called Boltzmann equation.
C = C ∗exp(−GB
RT )
(6.4)
Figure 6.8: hydrogen concentration at dislocations [20].
Where GB is the binding energy of hydrogen to dislocation, r is the gas costant and T is temper-
ature in Kelvin. Movement of hydrogen laden with dislocations will occur as long as maximum
velocity of the dislocation is below some critical velocity V ∗which can be approximated by:
V ∗= D
RT ∗(−GB
30b )
(6.5)
Figure 6.9: Critical velocity for hydrogen to be transported by dislocations [21]
Where D is the diffusivity of hydrogen in the lattice and 30b is an estimate of the effective
trapping radius of the dislocation with burgers vector b.When this speed is reached the hydro-
gen can be dropped in the interstitial within the lattice, this can also occur if the dislocation
is annihilated. Due to the microstructure and interactions between dislocations etc, an exact
strain rate at which this occurs is complex. However, for a large strain of 1010/cm2 the strain
rate of 103/s for iron and 10−1/s for nickel alloys and stainless steels, are strain levels at which
the hydrogen will stay tied to the dislocation. I.e. Ductility losses began to diminish in 310
stainless steel at around 10−1/s [14]. This is very significant as the nickel and stainless steels
can render the hydrogen harmless if the strain rate isn’t extremely low; whereas in ferrite this
strain rate can be 4 orders of magnitude higher to cause issues of this nature. This phenomena
allows hydrogen to accumulate in areas of high stress much more easily in materials with bcc
structure, and thus cause are more prone to severe hydrogen embrittlment.
The hydrogen can also become immobile when the dislocation comes close to a grain bound-
ary or internal precipitates. If interfacial energy of the hydrogen is stronger than that of the
dislocation then hydrogen can be stripped off the dislocation. The strength of these so called
traps will determine whether the hydrogen can be rendered relatively harmless or carried away
by dislocations, to an area when it can cause various issues[7].
The above formula (6.9) can be manipulated to find the maximum distance traveled by a
dislocation over time t
X∗= Dt
RT ∗(−GB
30b )
(6.6)
Figure 6.10: Distance Hydrogen transported by dislocation over time t [21].
Given that random walk diffusion is given by X = 4
√
DT. the values can be compared by:
10
==PAGE:17==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
X∗
X =
√
Dt
4RT ∗−GB
30b
(6.7)
Figure 6.11: Comparison of random walk diffusion to dislocation transport of hydrogen [21].
Where at room temperature (293K), GB = 26.8kJ/mol and b = 2x10−8cm respectively gives
X∗
X = 2x106 ∗
√
Dt
(6.8)
Figure 6.12: Simplified at room temparture 293K and b typical for α- Fe [21]
Considering this, during tensile testing in ferritic steels (D = 10−6cm2/s) over 104s hydrogen
transported by dislocation can be 5x105 greater than that of random walk diffusion[21].
This is significant as it shows us how quickly embrittlement issues can occur as hydrogen can
move quickly to area of high stress via dislocations (particularly for ferritic materials). Also,
it gives an insight into why slow strain rate tensile testing is most severe mechanical testing
method[22]. Since hydrogen isn’t dropped by the dislocation within the lattice where it can
become trapped. This is significant for some hydrogen embrittlement issues that include voids
as part of their mechanism. The hydrogen can either be transported to a defect such as a
void or crack, be stripped from their strain field causing a vacancy to grow into a void, or the
hydrogen sitting at a core can be impeded by a void and the hydrogen diffuse in. Also, if the
dislocation can keep the hydrogen in it’s strain field at higher velocity, it can transport more
hydrogen to an area more easily. This allows hydrogen to accumulate and allow decohesion and
material hardening to occur.
6.3
Hydrogen, vacancies and voids
Another way in which that hydrogen can cause embrittlement phenomena is the creation and
growth of voids and also how it interacts and creates vacancies in material. The presence of hy-
drogen within the material can increase the number of mobile dislocations and lowers the stress
level at which they can move .This extra dislocation movement can lead to more annihilation
which can create a vacancy, this is easier due to the fact that the presence of hydrogen reduces
the formation energy of vacancies. Also, interaction of jogged screw dislocation segments can
also create a vacancy [13]. These vacancies can travel along dislocation lines more easily due
to the drop in dislocation line energy and form clusters which is related to some hydrogen
embrittlement mechanisms.
Voids can form by dislocations carrying hydrogen in its strain field and coming to an obstacle
such as an intermetallic, precipitates, interface or inclusion etc. Since the hydrogen is impeded,
and the hydrogen has an attraction to the obstacles surface (due to high binding energy site
or stress field around inclusion), this continually occurs along the dislocation line until a void
is formed with high pressure filled with recombined H2 which can help cracks to propagate
11
==PAGE:18==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
(easier crack path through void), act as a crack initiator or increase stress so much in the grain
to have a local increase in stress that can facilitate a local phase transformation[23]. This is
favourable to occur as Hydrogen has a higher binding energy with microvoid versus dislocation
strain fields (35.2kJ/mol and 26.8kJ/mol)[24].
Figure 6.13: L:Schematic showing how hydrogen voids can grow; Micrograph showing crack initiation
starting around an intermettalic TiC particle adapted from [25].
Hydrogen can also be transported by dislocation to an area such a vacancy or a void, since the
binding energy of hydrogen is higher for a vacancy than in a dislocation strain field or cloud
as in figure (6.22), hydrogen gets stripped off the dislocation and is diffused into the vacancy,
this happens continually and hydrogen recombines to create H2, the vacancies grows to become
a void with a very high pressure due to its small size and relatively large concentration of
hydrogen. The hydrogen can be accommodated both elastically and if the concentration of
hydrogen becomes large enough, plastically, further degrading local mechanical properties [23].
6.4
Hydrogen Embrittlement mechanisms
All materials have cracks, and dislocations travel to these areas to work harden and blunt the
crack, however hydrogen can retard this process. It is how these dislocations interact with
the microstructure in the vicinity of a crack is one of the fundamentals in understanding the
different hydrogen embrittlement mechanisms. In this section, the main hydrogen embrittle-
ment mechanisms will be discussed. HEDE relates to a high concentration of hydrogen and
dislocation pinning, while HELP is typically enhanced dislocation nucleation, mobility and
interactions with microstructure; AIDE and HESIV are subsets of the HELP mechanism.
6.4.1
HEDE - Hydrogen enhanced decohesion mechanism
First introduced in 1959 by Triano, where hydrogen atoms sit in between the metal atoms
and reduce the cohesive strength of the material. The 1s electron of the hydrogen comes into
the shell of the 3d cell of the iron atom. The effect of this is that surface energy between
the atoms is reduced. When a tensile stress is exerted on the crack tip which surpasses the
cohesive strength beyond the crack tip, the crack propagates instead of blunts and a cleavage
failure (more often quasi cleavage fracture occurs) with a brittle initiation into ductile far away
from the previously hydrogen enriched area (the hydrogen diffuses after fracture)[12]. As local
12
==PAGE:19==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
hydrogen increases the degree of reduction of in the metallic interatomic forces increases, which
is quantitatively described as:
σcH = σc0 −β ∗C
(6.9)
Figure 6.14: Tensile stress required for decohesion to occur at crack [12]
Where σcH is the locally critical cohesive stress at the specific hydrogen concentration C, σc0 is
the critical cohesive stress without hydrogen and β is a material parameter. In relation to the
HEDE mechanism potential hydrogen accumulation areas include dislocation shielding region
around a crack tip, maximum hydrostatic stress sites and grain and phase boundaries at the
crack tip. When a tensile stress is applied to the crack, the dislocations do not move (where
moving helps to blunt the crack), causing the material to behave brittle and the crack propagates
while remaining sharp. With this kind of failure, it is typical to see a highly enriched area with
hydrogen with an intergranular failure. This type of mechanism is typically associated with
high applied stress and high local concentration of hydrogen [8]. Below is a schematic showing
the HEDE Types in which the crack will propagate under a tensile load rather than blunt:
Figure 6.15: HEDE mechanism types adapted from L:[12] R:[26]
6.4.2
HELP- Hydrogen enhanced local plasticity mechanism
This type of hydrogen embrittlement has more to with dislocations being more mobile rather
than interatomic interactions and dislocation pinning as with the HEDE model. Due to the
presence of hydrogen more dislocations are present and can move more easily. Also affected
is the dislocation slip behaviour.
Since dislocations are carriers of plastic deformation, an
increased amount of them means more plasticity in the material.
Typically this occurs at
the crack tip with an increase in plasticity at the area where plastic flow become easier[27].
Enhanced dislocation motion is facilitated by the decrease of the elastic interactions between
the dislocations and obsatcle due to the presence of hydrogen in solid solution. This enhanced
mobility of dislocations results in enhanced plastic flow in the hydrogen enriched area with an
overall loss in ductility. If this is to occur around a crack tip it could lead to the failure of the
material. Below shows a schematic of the HELP mechanism, with some voids present ahead
of the crack tip. Considering these voids have pressurised H2 in them, it allows for favourable
crack growth.
13
==PAGE:20==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.16: Help Schematic w/ Hydrogen voids [12]
This type of embrittlement phenomena has been seen in bcc, hcp and fcc. Consequently, the
intrinsic material flow varies with the hydrogen concentration and is typically higher where the
hydrogen concentration is lower. Its morphology is highly plastic locally, while macroscopic
deformation stays low, and fracture appears brittle in nature[27]. The degree to which this
occurs is due to the purity of the metal and the hydrogen gas pressure rather than the disloca-
tion type or the crystal structure. In the presence of hydrogen, the slip step and slip spacing is
reduced[12].
Consdering the HEDE (hardening) mechanism happens at higher concentrations of hydrogen
and HELP mechanism occurs at lower concentrations (softening), and that hydrogen concen-
tration varies throughout the material it comes as no wonder that most overall failures are due
to the synergistic interaction of these mechanisms[8].
6.4.3
HESIV - Hydrogen Enhanced Strain Induced Vacancies Mechanism
This mechanism relates to the increase of strain induced vacancies and the stabilising of va-
cancy clusters in the presence of hydrogen. This can act as a precursor to a hydrogen related
failure by nucleating a crack.
The increased dislocation activity leads to more vacancies that are increased due to more dis-
location jog interactions and increased dislocation annihilation where dislocation annihilate in
closely gliding planes. The formation energy needed to create a vacancy is dropped due to the
presence of hydrogen. Hydrogen can sit in these vacancies or in its proximity at an interstitial
and in doing so decreases their movement which helps to spread them throughout the material.
For example, In Iron, vacancies can migrate at low temperature which can help to stop the
forming of clusters, when hydrogen is present the mobility of these mono vacancies drop, and
the clustering of vacancies is promoted[13].
These vacancies amalgamate which is called microvoid coalescence (MVC) which is a high
density of vacancies. This mechanism is often a precursor to actual hydrogen induced failure,
such as increasing the stress so much as to facilitate a phase change, initiate a crack or to give
a crack an easy route to propagate.
14
==PAGE:21==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.17: HESIV mechanism[12].
6.4.4
AIDE - Adsorption induced dislocation emission
In AIDE, it’s hydrogen that it is in the atmosphere in the vicinity to the crack tip that causes
formation energy of dislocations to drop. The adsorption of hydrogen in the vicinity in the
crack tip causes the atomic bonds between the atoms to weaken. As the metal isn’t super
saturated with hydrogen; the dislocations have enhanced mobility. They can therefore create
voids in front of the crack tip leading to enhanced plasticity as per 6.13. This causes local
enhanced ductility at the crack tip and causes local increase in plasticity (easier material flow)
with an overall drop in macroscopic ductility[6][27].
Figure 6.18: AIDE schematic [27]
6.4.5
HIPT - Hydrogen iniatated phase transformation
Hydrogen can react with an element within the material and form hydrogen rich phases which
are brittle hydrides. These hydrides can form at crack tip and allow a favourable path for crack
propagation. However, no hydrides are stable in steel in hydrogen pressure up to 2 GPa but
this mechanism could be active in a material such as titanium[27]. These hydrides tend to be
brittle in nature and will form in areas with a high hydrogen concentration. So much like the
AIDE mode if external hydrogen is available at a crack tip; in a high concentration, hydrides
15
==PAGE:22==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
may form, allowing a hydrogen rich phase to form ahead of the crack tip. As they are brittle
when a tensile load is applied on the crack, the crack will propagate and advance[27].
6.4.6
Interplay of HELP and HEDE
When it comes to a hydrogen related failure, several embrittlement mechanisms are often at
work in simultaneously within the material. As the area of which is vulnerable to decohesion
such as a internal crack, grain boundary or interface etc must be enriched with hydrogen which
is transported by dislocations or via diffusion. The HELP model presumes enhanced and biased
mobility of dislocations which transports hydrogen from it’s source to the area that is vulnerable
to HE[8]. Also in support of this concept is the fact that hydrogen concentration isn’t homoge-
neous throughout the material, therefore different mechanisms can be working simultaneously
during operation. Materials have a critcal concentration where decohesion becomes dominant
(HEDE), whereas at lower concentration the HELP model and it’s associated embrittlement
phenomena dominate. This is explained in a diagram below.
Figure 6.19: Hydrogen concentration and its affect on mechanical properties [28]
One way to diagnose what failure mode is dominating a fracture is by looking at the fractured
surfaces of a metal with varying hydrogen content. This hydrogen content can vary for different
microstructures, I.e. solubility, diffusion rate etc (eg. an austenitic steel can tolerated a much
higher concentration of hydrogen than a martensitic one).
HELP = Quasicleavage = Transgranular + Microvoid coalescence
At lower concentrations of hydrogen, what is typically seen is a Quasicleavage morphology of
the fractured surface. Quasicleavage (QC) occurs when both plastic and brittle features present
in a fracture. As a material is strained plastically, voids are formed in the material, as these
grow and coalesce they link together and form a relatively flat surface. This appearance is
16
==PAGE:23==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
similar to cleavage, but cleavage is brittle and smoother and can appear along specific crys-
tallographic directions. In the case of this type of hydrogen embrittlement failure, the area of
QC, when observed closely will have Microvoid coalescence (MVC) and Transgranular (TG)
morphology[8]. The MVC features can occur due to reasons as discussed in section (3.3). The
fracture can occur transgranularly due to hydrogen being trapped at interstitial dislocations
within the grain, which alters the mechanical properties and allows fracture to occur along this
path, as discussed in section (3.1). This has a relation to V*,figure(6.9), where the dislocations
are travelling too fast to keep the hydrogen in their strain field and enrich an area to trigger
decohesion. Typically, this fracture is a surface that is smeared showing partially ductile and
partially brittle fracture. This relates to S5 in figure (6.20).
HELP>HEDE: Microvoid coalescence > Transgranular
Then as the hydrogen concentration increases further MVC begins to dominate on the fracture
surface and the fracture becomes more brittle in nature, i.e. a smoother cleavage like fracture,
and less like Quasicleavage observed on the material. This is in relation to hydrogen transport
to voids, where the hydrogen is effectively transported to the vicinity of the trap, the hydrogen
will then diffuse to the surface of the trap, in doing so causing a pressurised void which allows
favourable crack propagation. Also, the amalgamation of vacancies due to altered dislocation
behaviour regarding softening (enhanced dislocation mobility etc.). Also present will be trans-
granular failures which relates to hydrogen trapped at interstitial sites[13][8]. This relates to
S3 in figure (6.20).
HEDE>HELP: Transgranular (TG) > Microvoid coalescence (MVC)
As the Critical hydrogen concentration is approached and the decohesion mechanism becomes
dominant, this morphology will have transgranular (TG) dominating over the MVC, with a sig-
nificant loss in impact strength. In this case, as the specimen is loaded, hydrogen is transported
to these high stress areas via the dislocations and enriches the area with hydrogen causing the
decohesion mechanism to become dominant [8].This relates to the dislocation pileups when an
impingement occurs on the dislocation motion such as inclusion, precipitate, interface or grain
boundary. A crack is initiated by a HELP mechanism such as HESIV, or void formation due
to hydrogen. The crack grows until it meets and impingement, the dislocations then can create
a pile up trangrannularly or across an interface. This dislocation pile up will occur across the
grain and become enriched with hydrogen and HEDE takes over with dislocation pinning be-
coming prominent. Often this will occur across an interface such as an Austenite/Martensite
interface in a stainless steel. The cracks across these interfaces are called secondary cracks
[29][28]. They span the grain, and therefore the fracture appears transgranular. This relates to
S4 in figure (6.20).
HEDE Dominated: Intergranular + transgrannular + microcracks
As more hydrogen is loaded into the material there is a further drop in impact strength and the
Fracture morphology becomes intergranular and transgranular with some cracks. In this case
the sample does not need any more hydrogen to enrich its traps such as interfaces, precipitates or
17
==PAGE:24==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
grain boundaries, it loses most of its cohesiveness due to be enriched with hydrogen and cannot
absorb energy. With a slow tensile test the tensile strength drops drastically[8]. Hydrogen has
enriched these highly stressed areas and when a load is applied the crack just propagates along
these paths that are enriched with hydrogen. Transgranular fracture can occur in a martensitic
grain along lath boundaries for example. Whereas, in the case of grain boundaries, hydrogen
will enrich these areas causing grain boundary decohesion, therefore allowing favourable crack
propagation along grain boundaries. This refers to S2 in figure (6.20)
Figure 6.20: Hydrogen concentration, related mechanisms and fracture morphology [8]*This figure
will be referred to later during section 8.5 on fracture investigation
An example of this interplay was the failure of a high strength TRIP maraging steel where
Austenite was introduced via a heat treatment where it was successfully percolated with dif-
ferent amounts of reverted Austenite. Where it did show some improvements in the elongation
at a strain rate 10−3/s, improvements were not significant enough for the material to be used
safely in this hydrogen condition (cathodic charging at 0.5mA/cm2 in 5 pct H2SO4 aqueous
solution containing 3g/L NH4SCN). The volume fraction of reverted Austenite after 1hr heat
treatment at 600C was
10% and after 8hrs was 35%. The widths of the percolated Austenite
were 200nm and 500nm[30].
There is a significant loss of ductility in the steel with the 500nm of Austenite after hydrogen
loading (fracture of hydrogen at 3.8% elongation versus unloaded at 32% elongation. As the
sample was loaded the strain was partitioned into the Austenite in the form as stacking faults,
as the material is strained further, at a slow rate some large cracks (caused by microvoid
coalscence) begin to develop along the interface between Austenite and martensite; this is
exacerbated by the slow strain rate, the vacancies (HESIV) and/or hydrogen voids (HELP)
that is helped greatly by slow strain rate, this increases the stress so much in Austenite that a
stress induced phase transformation occurs causing a martensitic phase transformation. This
phase is then super saturated with hydrogen and failure happens intergranularly along the fresh
martensite and martensite boundary[30]. This intergranular failure is a symptom of the HEDE
mechanism, which was triggered by void formation and vacancy amalgamation as triggered by
HELP and a slow strain rate. Though not stated explicitly within the paper, the author thinks
18
==PAGE:25==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
that this is an example of HELP mediated HEDE failure.
Figure 6.21: HELP iniated phase transformation triggering HEDE [30].
A similiar failure was found by Kim et al on a 5.5 Ni steel which failed after the reverted
austenite was underwent a stress transformation into martensite under slow strain rate testing;
as it also showed secondary cracking along lath boundaries [31].
6.5
Hydrogen embrittlement Prevention
In order to avoid these, HE mechanisms the hydrogen can be trapped at sites within the lattice
before reaching these defects (i.e. crack tips). This section will focus on what can be done
practically and economically for piping systems and methods such as hard coatings and diffu-
sion barriers will not be discussed, as they are more suited to the component level.
Each of the different microstructural features have a different binding energy with the hydro-
gen, which requires a certain activation energy in order to get the hydrogen to move. This
movement can be occur via a chemical gradient, attraction to high internal/residual stress or
heat. The traps are called reversible and irreversible traps, which means when a hydrogen is
at an irreversible trap site it needs high amount of energy to move and thus cannot diffuse or
move via dislocations to a crack tip, interface or grain boundary and cause issues. The other
reversible trap sites do not trap hydrogen as strongly and this so called diffusible hydrogen
can go to the crack tip and cause embrittlement issues [3]. Below figure (6.22) a list of some
trapping sites within the metallic structure
19
==PAGE:26==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.22: Hydrogen trap sites activation energy [3].
If a material has a large number of strong traps, it can limit the diffusible hydrogen which is
thought to cause these issues with embrittlement. Bhadesia outlines some strategies for utilising
some strong traps and diffusion barriers in order to limit diffusible hydrogen that can lead to
embrittlement issues.
20
==PAGE:27==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.23: Strategies for mitigating hydrogen embrittlement [3].
6.5.1
Precipitates and coherency
One way to capture hydrogen is using irreversible traps. An irreversible trap is trap that shares
an interfacial energy with hydrogen greater than 60 kJ/mol[12]. Considering many hydrogen
embrittlement mechanisms involve dislocation interaction with hydrogen it comes as no surprise
that that this value is equal to the interfacial/activation energy as per figure (6.22) of a dislo-
cation core or jog = 60 kJ/mol. Though incoherent traps will not work, as they will degrade
the materials properties too greatly, and are found been shown to be ineffective as hydrogen
traps as in the over aged 465 martensitic stainless steel[32]. There is evidence to support the
use of partially coherent precipitate traps have some promising results in relation to resistance
to HE.
Partially coherent traps may work as effective hydrogen traps without having a detrimental
effect on the mechanical properties as with the vanadium and molybdenum carbides in high
strength HT10 steel.
The Molybdenum and vanadium helped to pull carbon out of solid
solution which can help to aid in embrittlement (aids in martensitic transformation to occur,
where transformed area inherits the hydrogen concentration and HEDE is triggered).
The
strain field around these precipitates is large enough to trap hydrogen while still maintaining
a high strength and toughness. The results of this paper were excellent in that the traditional
F22 Steel can be replaced by HT10 steel which has a significantly greater trapping capacity and
better comparable impact toughness (tests were not conducted in hydrogen atmosphere) than
the F22 steel that was used at this time. Also, of note from this study is the right-hand shift of
longer charging times of the thermal desorption spectra of the hydrogen. For this alloy at least,
21
==PAGE:28==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
it can be said that the strong traps tend to fill first hence the peak temperature of the shorter
charging times is shifted to the right. In this case it can be said that hydrogen has a higher
affinity with irreversible traps sites vs reversible trap sites[33]. There is a contradiction to this
rule however and that is hydrogen sitting at a dislocation core vs its strain field. Typically,
only when a metal is super saturated with hydrogen, a large quantity of hydrogen will sit at
the dislocation cores, but at lower concentration will sit in its strain field. Since hydrogen has
a higher solubility in the dislocations strain field and also their mobility is increased in this
region due to lattice distortion, which allows them to diffuse and accumulate here[7].
Figure 6.24: TDS spectra and impact strength of steels used in oil and gas industry adapted from
[33].
The above results figure ([33]) are also supported from another paper with a different exper-
imental approach on vanadium carbide containing martensitic high strength steels (strength
>1600MPa). When the vanadium carbides became bigger undissolved carbides led to a more
brittle fracture mode and thus decreased hydrogen resilience (all the while increasing hydrogen
content). The 0.2 V containing steel was showed the best and most stable (lowest standard
deviation) results with reference to fracture toughness. Due to the small number of large vana-
dium carbide precipitates (undissolved carbides) and relatively good trapping capacity of the
0.2V containing steel it obtains the highest hydrogen resilience of the materials tested. This is
not only the case for vanadium precipitates, the same occurred with a high strength marten-
sitic stainless type 465, where the slightly lower strength heat treated H1000 steel with it’s less
coherent precipitates of ηNi3Ti precipitates had a right hand side shift on the TDS spectra vs
the higher strength H900 steel[34].
22
==PAGE:29==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.25: TDS and slow strain rate tests [34].
Whereas the above figure (6.25) warrants some promising results another paper that focused on
precipitates (specifically nano sized niobium precipitants) based in 204 stainless steels showed
no significant change in trapping capacity[35]. The research didn’t focus on coherency of these
precipitates but as they are nanosized, it indicates a high coherency with the surrounding
matrix. The peak in being at quite a low temperature which indicates that a high amount
of diffusible hydrogen will be available during service, and this is not a good strategy for
stopping hydrogen from going to a crack tip or area vulnerable for hydrogen embrittlement and
causing an embrittlement related issue. Whether this is due to fact niobium, or whether type of
precipitate (carbide, nitride etc.) relates to the trapping capacity isn’t concluded in the study.
Figure 6.26: TDS spectra and make up special Niobium 300 series [35]
Some other studies have looked at precipitates and support this correlation between incoherency
and activation energy, some activation energies of these are highlighted below
23
==PAGE:30==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Precipitate
Binding/Activation Energy kJ/mol
NbC (incoherent)
63-68 [12]
Titanium Carbide (incoherent)
86.9 [36]
Fe3C
84 [37]
Though this is a valid strategy for preventing hydrogen embrittlement, care must be taken.
Due to the strong traps nature, and hydrogen transport by dislocations, if there is a high
concentration of hydrogen within the material, HELP can trigger HEDE, where cracks can
nucleate at precipitate, and enrich an area with hydrogen and trigger the HEDE effect. Using
this strategy, it would be advisable to discover how much hydrogen the material absorbs before
this phenomenon is triggered, and how much hydrogen will enter the material during operation.
Figure 6.27: Schematic and picture of Hydrogen assisted fracture of a low alloy steel with Vandanium
carbide preciptates, sample tempered at 200C, this crack iniation led to secondary cracks along lath
boundary adapted from[38].
6.5.2
Hydrogen and Austenite
Hydrogen has more an affinity for Austenite, and more can be dissolved, this is due to the
fact that Austenite has more interstitial sites for hydrogen to occupy. When hydrogen enters
the material and hydrogen goes into the lattice, it gets trapped due the binding energy it
shares with the atoms. In the Austenitic lattice it also has more near neighbours to interact
with hydrogen as it sits in interstitials, which will increase the interatomic interactions with
hydrogen helping to to prevent movement of the hydrogen by interaction with dislocations or
diffusion to crack tips. In relation to where it typically sits within a fcc lattice , it’s is in the
octahedral site, whereas within a bcc lattice, it typically sits within the tetrahedral site.
24
==PAGE:31==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.28: Hydrogen nearest neighbours[39]
Considering how close the hydrogen atom sits the the atoms in Austenite, and that it has more
nearest neighbours than in ferrite it has a high binding energy to the hydrogen (55kJ/mol)[12].
This causes a slower rate of diffusion of hydrogen through Austenite making it more difficult for
hydrogen to accumulate in areas of high stress and crack tips etc. and trigger embrittlement
problems. This slower diffusion also means dislocations need to travel much more slowly in
order to keep hydrogen in their strain field, which helps to prevent accumulation of hydrogen,
therefore hydrogen is more likely to be transported by diffusion than by dislocation in this
instance. As the hydrogen doesn’t accumulate, therefore HEDE becomes a less likely failure
mechanism. Below shows a comparison of diffusion rates of hydrogen in Austenite and Ferrite.
Figure 6.29: Hydrogen diffusion through different metals[3]
Though austenitic steels are less susceptible to hydrogen embrittlement than bcc and hcp steels
it can still occur in certain severe conditions such as cathodic charging with a slow strain rate
[22]. The sample evaluated was 316L stainless steel which is a steel grade is regarded as safe
25
==PAGE:32==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
for use in pure hydrogen. The test conducted was severe with a current density of 100mA/cm2
in a 1N H2SO4 and utilising a small amount of As2O3 as a recombination poison. The tests
conducted were Slow strain rate tests which are known to exacerbate hydrogen embrittlement
phenomena. With the uncharged specimen the strain to failure was 55 percent, whereas under
a SSRT in the range of 7x10−7 to 5x10−6 resulted in the strain to fracture reducing to 13-20
percent which is a very significant loss of ductility. The failure was caused by voids and HESIV
related issues which are exacerbated by the slow strain rate as hydrogen can stay in the strain
fields of dislocations and not get dropped in the strong interstitial cite within the Austenite[22].
When hydrogen is present within the material which can help to lower the stacking fault energy
and thus help to nucleate martensite within the material as shown in 304 stainless steel by
Pontini, which showed mean reduction of stacking fault energy of 40% across 3 temperatures
at a concentration of hydrogen of 274ppm[40]. However, when 316L stainless steel was loaded
with hydrogen gaseous in the temperature range with pressure of 45 MPa with a strain rate
3x10−6 showed little reduction in ductility. Whereas with the same conditions 304L showed a
significant reduction in elongation and reduction in area by 25% and 70% respectively. This
is due to Martensitic transformation that can happen in metastable Austenitic stainless steel
[41].
6.6
Ease of martensitic transformation
Of relevance to hydrogen embrittlement of stainless steels is the ease of which martensite (α′)
can form. Some factors need to be considered dictate how much martensite will nucleate in
304 stainless steel when undergoing tensile deformation such as nickel content (stacking fault
energy) [42][43] , grain size [44] and also process depending; deformation rate [45]. Also of note
is the intermediately phases between the γ and α′.Typically the bct α′ nucleates in two ways:
γ →ϵ →α′
(6.10)
γ →γtwin →α′
(6.11)
Figure 6.30: Deformation induced martensite steps [44]
Whether ϵ (dislocation glide) acts as precursor or γtwin depends on the stacking fault energy
which is related to the nickel content. Typically with a lower stacking fault energy, it’s is easier
to nucleate α′ with ϵ (which has a hcp crystal structure) as a precursor, as this stacking fault
energy increases with increasing nickel content the α′ becomes more difficult to nucleate with
a higher stress being needed. Martensite will nucleate in between shear band intersections
at lower stacking fault energy as well as at their intersection, but as it increases with the
nickel content it’s nucleation occurs where shear bands overlap [42][43]. Below figure (6.31)
summarises these points.
26
==PAGE:33==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 6.31: Martensite nucleation and Stacking fault energy[? ]
The presence of hydrogen within a material can however decrease the stacking fault energy with
its presence making it easier for martensite nucleate within a stainless steel[30][40]. Also, what
can have an effect of on the ease of Martensitic transformation of AISI 304 stainless steel is the
grain size of the material. This can be seen from the martensite volume of the materials when
the sample is stretched to its ultimate tensile strength[44]. Worth noting is that the left-hand
side is total Martensite content as observed by EBSD whereas the right side represents presence
of martensite within an Austenitic grain. This increase in martensite content up to a size of
34µm is attributed to a decrease in stacking fault energy. After this another mechanism takes
over the so-called TRIP (transformation induced plasticity) effect. This is an increase in shear
band density and intersection of shear bands. The shear bands consist of mechanical twins,
bundles of overlapping stacking faults and
are the usual nucleation sites for α′ Martensite.
These shear band intersections peak at a grain size of 34µm and this coupled with the low
stacking fault energy results in obtaining the most amount Martensite within the sample.
Figure 6.32: Martensite content vs grain size,stacking fault calculation based on gibbs free energy
[44]
Also of note is the morphology of the Martensite when it does nucleate. If the sample is rolled to
a very high reduction in the overall thickness then the Martensite will be mainly so dislocation
cell. This is shown below by a graph and TEM bright field images which shows Martensite type
27
==PAGE:34==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
dependence on rolling reduction. It is the formation of slip bands which is to account for the
difference in the structure of the martensite. During severe deformation some crystallographic
distortion takes place creating slip bands which changes the blocky lath martensite into so
called dislocation cell Martensite[19][46].
Figure 6.33: Martensite type vs rolling reduction [46]
28
==PAGE:35==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
7
Materials and methodology
7.1
Materials
Materials used for the purpose of this study were AISI 304 stainless steel and EN 1.4369. AISI
304 stainless steel is the most commonly used stainless steel in industry. In its annealed con-
dition this material is Austenitic. This Austenitic condition gives the material its excellent
corrosion characteristics. But the reason this material was chosen is that it can undergo a
Martensitic transformation if the material is stressed enough. This deformation was conducted
via two methods, both tensile stretching and rolling. The challenge with hydrogen embrit-
tlement is that materials with strength over 1000 MPa in tensile strength are susceptible to
hydrogen embrittlement. If 304 is not deformed and its strength is in the range of 510 to 620
MPa and it can perform well in a hydrogen environment. However, if the material is deformed
the materials strength can go up to and passed 1000 MPa (see figure 5.2). This high strength
can be attributed to a Martensitic transformation that occurs to the material when it is highly
stressed. These mechanisms were discussed in section (6.6). This stainless steel is commonly
used for brewing equipment, cafeteria equipment, cookware, cryogenic plant processing equip-
ment, food and dairy processing equipment etc.
EN 1.4369 is used as a reference material in this case. This stable Austenitic stainless steel will
not undergo a stress-induced transformation into Martensite due to the presence of nitrogen,
which has a strong stabilising effect on Austenite. The Manganese content in this material is
used to partially replace some of the nickel content while helping to lower the stacking fault
energy within the material. By lowering the stacking fault energy, the energy required to create
partial dislocations is reduced. As a result of increased interactions between these dislocations
within the material, metals with low stacking fault energy tend to exhibit high strength.The
steel has a high tensile strength (850MPa),and typically will be resistant to Hydrogen embrittle-
ment. It can also be strengthened via deformation, where the grains may undergo a Twinning
induced plasticity effect. This is due to the relatively high concentration of Manganese within
the material. The creation of internal twins in this case increases the materials strength and
toughness [17]. The material does have some precipitates, which can help to prevent embrittle-
ment depending on their coherency but it will be ignored in this study. It is rather to be used
a benchmark to see if stable Austenitic steel would be a better candidate for use with hydrogen
rather than an Austenitic steel with some Martensite.
Their chemical compositions are given below:
C
%
Cr
%
Fe
%
Mn
%
Ni
%
P
%
S
%
Si
%
N
%
304
0-0.08
18-20
65.8-74
0-2
8 to 11
0-0.045
0-0.03
1
nil
EN1.43369
0.07-0.015
17.5 - 19.5
63-70.2
5 - 7.5
6.5 - 8.5
0-0.03
0-0.15
0.5 - 1
0.2 - 0.3
29
==PAGE:36==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
7.2
Methodology
Uniaxial Tensile tests, bend test and sample preparation
Dogbone samples were were laser cut from 1mm AISI 304 stainless steels sheet in 2 runs where
simple experiments indicate chemical composition varied between the stock used. Dogbone
samples were also laser cut from 0.45mm sheet of EN 1.4369. A drawing of dogbone samples
are available in appendix A.1 and A.2.
To determine the stability of the Austenite a simple bend test was done on dogbone specimens.
This bent region was checked with a plain magnet to see if it became magnetic, if it did the
sample is said to have a low nickel content and less stable Austenite. With a high nickel con-
tent, the sample after bending the deformed region did not become magnetic. In the first batch
called 304b1, the bent region did not become magnetic, but in the second batch the bent region
became magnetic. It is speculated that the first batch of stainless steel AISI 304b1 did have a
high nickel content with reference to AISI 304 while 304b2 had a low nickel content.
Samples were uniaxially stretched and tested on a instron tensile tester 5500R 6025 with a
maximum 100kN load fitted with an instron T1223 load cell. After an initial tensile test of for
304 stainless from low nickel batch and high Manganese SS (EN 1.4369) where the failure strain
was discovered. Samples were then stretched to 93% of failure strain to used for further testing
and characterisation. Uniaxial Tensile tests and tensile stretching were performed at a strain
rate of 0.0006s. Results of initial tensile tests carried out on the high and low nickel content
304 and high Manganese are available in appendix A.3 and A.4. The results of the uniaxial
tensile stretch of the samples is also available in the appendix A.5 and A.6. Measurements
of the deformed dogbone crossection was done with an image and a scale bar is presumed to
be very accurate. A token from each sample was taken from each dogbone sample for further
characterisation. The length of the deformed gauge length was done with a vernier callipers
and presumed to be accurate to 1mm. The width of the deformed samples was measured with
a vernier callipers and presumed to be accurate to
+
−0.2mm.
Considering the accuracy of the laser cutter is
+
−0.2mm which will affect the width .2/13 = 0.015,
the measurement of force for the tensile tester is 0.5% and full scale travel is 0.1%.
Uncertainty in the stress is, where F=force and A = area, is given by:
(∆σ
σ ) =
r
(∆F
F )2 + (∆A
A )2(∆σ
σ ) =
p
(0.0052 + 0.0152) ∗100 = 1.6%
(7.1)
Uncertainty strain: where LF is the final length after stretch, and L0 is original length. Uncer-
tainty in L0 = .2/144 and 0.1% in full scale travel.
30
==PAGE:37==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
(∆ϵ
ϵ ) =
r
(∆LF
LF
)2 + (∆L0
L0
)2(∆σ
σ ) =
p
(0.0012 + 0.00142) ∗100 = .2%
(7.2)
Considering stretched samples have different gauge lengths and measurement accuracy is esti-
mated to be 1mm when it comes to measurement of gauge lengths and measurement accuracy
0.2mm on the width of the samples the sensitivity is calculation are tablulated below.
Table 7.1
Sensitivity calculation
Sample
Gauge
length
(mm)
Accuracy
(mm)
Width
(mm)
Accuracy
(mm)
Travel
accuracy
(%)
Force
accuracy
(%)
Stress
sensitivty
(%)
Strain
sensitivity
(%)
304dhi
190
1
10.4
0.2
0.001
0.005
2
0.5
High
Manganese
SS dhi
193
1
10.2
0.2
0.001
0.005
2
0.5
304rhi
230*
1
15
0.2
0.001
0.005
1
0.4
*Measurement of gauge length of rolled sample difficult due to deformed sample gauge length
not completely parallel.
Rolling of tensile samples
Samples from a lower nickel content AISI 304 stainless we rolled to 60% percent of their original
thickness in 3 passes with roller speed of 45 rpm with 600mm diameter. Measurements of the
deformed dogbone width was measured with a digital vernier caliper for the width and using
an image with a scale bar for the width for the thickness. A token from the rolled samples was
taken for a sample for further characterisation. Sample were deformed heavily going through
the rollers and rolled samples can be seen in the appendix(A.7).
Sample Table
This table defines the samples used within this research which should be used as a reference
for results. Appropriate names were given to each sample to ease further explanations.
31
==PAGE:38==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Table 7.2: sample table
Sample and condition
Name:
Notes:
AISI 304 High nickel content
304b1
Bend test carried out: not magnetic
AISI 304 low nickel content
304b2
Bend test carried out:magnetic
AISI 304 stretched to
93% of failure strain
304dhi
Comes from high nickel
content batch (b1)
AISI 304 stainless sample
rolled to 60% of original
thickness
304rhi
Come from low nickel
content batch (b2)
EN 1.4369
High Manganese SS
Lab scale produced
EN 1.4369 stretched to
93% of failure strain
High Manganese SS dhi
Additional samples
AISI 304 rolled to 50%
from low nickel content
batch (b1)
304b1rhi
Used to compare ease of
Martensite formation against
second low nickel batch.
AISI 304 token taken from
low nickel
content batch (b1)
304 b1 token
Polished on AL2O3 1000 grit
sandpaper with magnetism
checked before and after polish
AISI 304 token taken from
high nickel
content batch b2
304 b2 token
Polished on Al2O3 1000 grit
sandpaper with magnetism checked
before and after polish
AISI 304 stretched to 99.5%
of failure strain from high
nickel content batch
304b1dvhi
Used for magnetism measurement, taken
from region of slip
Light optical microscope, Hardness measurements and Grain measurement
Samples were embedded and then polished up to 1µm and OPS’d. Samples were etched with
Kalling’s reagent No.1 for 6-9 s. Light optical microscopy was performed an AX10 microscope
fitted with an Axiocam 305 color camera. Grain size was measured by measuring the diameter
of 10 grains on an etched sample and finding the average and standard deviation.
Hardness measurements were conducted on a struers rotopol with a 0.5kg load and under a
magnification under a x50 magnification for the measurement of the indent caused by the
diamond tip.
X-ray diffraction
To determine the amount of Martensite within the 304rhi sample, some XRD measurements
were carried out. XRD measurements were carried out D8 Discover w/copper radiation. Mea-
surements were made in Bragg Brantano software. Scans were conducted over a 2 Theta range
of 40 to 87 degree using a step size of 0.04 nm and a step time of 0.5s. Several scans were
performed as the sample had some texture. The sample was scanned along rolling direction at
32
==PAGE:39==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
angles of 0, 15, 30 and 45 degrees, the sample was rotated 90 degrees and scanned along the
transverse direction. Below shows a schematic of the set up to clarify the testing method.
Figure 7.1: Scan set up for XRD
The results of XRD scans were summed together. Then the resultant XRD results were fitted
with a Pseudo-voight mathemathical model using a Gauss Loventzian fit in order to calculate
the area under each of the peaks. This is needed due to the texture present which can be seen
on the α′[110] and γ[111] peak.
Due to the diffraction in the scans , a correction factor was needed to be used to get an accurate
measurement for the Austenite phase fraction of the material. The correction factor is given
by:
R = (hc
E )3 ∗V −2 ∗e−2m ∗F0(hkl) ∗M(hkl)
(7.3)
Where h= Plancks constant, c = speed of light, E= electron charge, V = volume of the unit
cell, e−2m is the absorption correction term, F0 is the structure factor and M is the multiplicity
factor. Following this the γ peaks area could be found and thus the Martensite percentage
found.
The Austenite phase fraction can be found using a modified form of:
γf =
γf
γf + α′
f
(7.4)
Taking into account the different planes and the diffraction constant his becomes.
33
==PAGE:40==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
γf =
0.33 ∗( γ111
Rγ111 +
γ200
Rγ200 +
γ220
Rγ220)
0.33 ∗( γ111
Rγ111 +
γ200
Rγ200 +
γ220
Rγ220) + 0.33 ∗( α′
111
Rα′111 +
α′
200
Rα′200 +
α′
220
Rα′220)
(7.5)
Sensitivity of this measurement is difficult to calculate due to the sample having texture and a
relatively number of peaks (6) to analyse. Due to these issues the accuracy of the measurement
could be wrong by up to 5%. However fine control over the Martensite content wasn’t the aim
of this research and this inaccuracy in measurement will not be considered or discussed further.
Magnetism measurements
Magnetism measurements were carried out Magnet-Physik EF 14 electronic fluxmeter with a JS
20 coil. The JS 20 coil has a measurement constant of 0.36cm, a resistance of 850Ωwith a flux
density of 150mT. Samples were weighed prior to a magnetism measurement to calculate their
volume. The measurement in the magnetic coil gives the magnetic dipole moment µV s ∗cm,
when divided by the volume, it gives the magnetic flux density:
J = µV s ∗cm
cm3
= µV s
cm2
(7.6)
This magnetic flux density is a measure of how magnetic, (phase volume fraction = ferrite)
a sample is per volume. it was used as an indirect way of calculating the Martensite content
within the deformed AISI 304 samples.
Considering the density of 304 stainless steel ranges from 7.85 −8.06g/cm−3[5] , there is some
errors in a calculation of a Martensitic content for the different conditions of the 304 materials.
The density is 7.955
+
−1.3%, whereas the magnetic fluxmeter can vary by 1% in its measurement.
The lower nickel content of batch 2, and the fact that nickel has the highest density of the
major alloying elements, means that the actual volume of the material is overestimated by a
small amount. Considering the Martensite content is known for a condition of batch 2, the
measurement for the Martensite content of 304 dhi in batch 2 may include some error and
would be lower than in the calibration calculation. However, fine control over the Martensite
content was not the aim in this project and does not have a significant input into results and
therefore will not be discussed. Considering the uncertainty in magnetic measurements is 1%
and density is 1.3% the uncertainty of measurement is:
%error,magnetism = (
√
0.0132 + 0.012) ∗100 = 1.6%
(7.7)
Hydrogen loading and Embrittlement Indexs
34
==PAGE:41==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Samples were loaded with hydrogen via cathodic charging. The alkaline bath consisted of water
with 50g/LNaOH, 15g/LNaCN, and 15g/LNaCO3. In an alkaline bath, water disassociates
in hydrogen and hydroxides, allowing hydrogen to absorb into the material. The DC power
was supplied by a Dynatronix power supply.
Considering that the amount of hydrogen that enters a material in cathodic charging is ac-
cording to the charging current density as per figure (6.3), the areas of the 5 samples were
measured and calculated in order to choose the charging current for each of the tests. Strain
also influences the severity of hydrogen embrittlement; therefore, cross head speed was adjusted
so that the strain rates were approximately equal.
Figure 7.2: Hydrogen bath set up
Below give an overview of the loading of the samples with Hydrogen.
Sample
Area
(cm^2)
Test
No.
Gauge
length
(mm)
Crosshead
speed
(mm/min)
Strain
rate
Total
S.A
(cm2)
Current
used
(A)
Current
density
(A/cm2)
Duration
(hrs)
304
79.4
1
144
5
0.0006
244.7
6.1
25
48
High
Manganesee
76.9
1
144
5
0.0006
High
Manganese
dhi
88.4
1
190
6.6
0.0006
304 def hi
86.6
2
193
6.6
0.0006
218.2
10.91
50
18
304 rhi
131.6
2
230
8
0.0006
For calculation of embrittlement indexes, elongation and tensile strength were taken from true
strain vs true stress graphs. The 0.2% yield stress was taken for the undeformed samples.
35
==PAGE:42==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Whereas, for the deformed samples 0.1% yield stress was taken as 0.2% yield stress represented
a significant part of the total elongation of the sample.
Embrittlement indexes are given by the following
E.Iδ = 1 −δcharged
δuncharged
(7.8)
E.Iσy = 1 −σy,charged
σy,uncharged
(7.9)
E.Iσt = 1 −σt,charged
σt,uncharged
(7.10)
Where δ, σyσt are the elongation to fracture, yield strength and tensile strength respectively.
Considering tensile stretches in appendix (A.6), the samples could have different properties
for reasons such as residual stresses from laser cutting, or slightly different sizes due to laser
cutting (speculated be the case as slightly higher stiffness observed), more uncertainty is added
to the 304, 304 dhi and 304rhi embrittlement index calculations, with relation to yield stress
and tensile strength. Considering the variation in yield strengths and max stress applied, some
uncertainty is added to the calculation of the embrittlement index. To calculate the uncertainty,
the average of the 3 stresses was calculated along with the variance.
σyield,average = 315 + 318 + 332
3
= 322MPa
(7.11)
V ariance = (315 −322)2 + (318 −322)2 + (332 −322)2
2
= 83
(7.12)
Standarddeviation =
√
83 ≈9
(7.13)
δ = 9MPa
(7.14)
Therefore there is an uncertainty of 9 MPa when it comes to measurement of yield strength of
measurement 304b1. Where we dont know if the variation in yield strength is caused by HE phe-
nomena or material unhomogeneity. Therefore, considering the instrument and measurement
uncertainty the total uncertainty for yield strength can be calculated.
δσys,304b1 =
p
(δinstrument)2 + (δmaterial)2 = (
r
0.0162 + ( 9
322)2) ∗100 = 3.2%
(7.15)
The same calculation was carried out for the yield strength of 304 dhi.
Where δ is uncertainty within the measurment.
36
==PAGE:43==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
σyield,average = 801 + 826 + 782
3
= MPa
(7.16)
V ariance = (801 −803)2 + (826 −803)2 + (803 −782)2
2
= 487
(7.17)
Standarddeviation =
√
487 ≈22
(7.18)
δ = 22MPa
(7.19)
Therefore, there is an uncertainty of 22 MPa for Ultimate tensile strength of 304b1. Though
not exactly precise as we don’t know what will happen over the last parts of the mechanical
testing, it should be a good indicator for uncertainty for UTS of 304b1. The yield strength
of 304dhi is therefore also the same considering the materials were pre stretched to this value
where the change in the stated mechanical properties change are due to material variation or
hydrogen embrittlement. The uncertainty calculation then becomes for each of there situations
becomes:
δσys,304dhi,UT S304b1 =
p
(δinstrument)2 + (δmaterial)2 = (
r
0.022 + ( 22
803)2) ∗100 = 3.4%
(7.20)
Calculation of uncertainty of the ultimate tensile strength of 304dhi is a difficult process which
requires extrapolation so will be ignored in this instance.
Considering the shape of the dogbone sample the appendix (A.7) it is apparent there is a
high level of residual stress within the material, which can affect the results, this level was not
measured and will be discussed but not calculated. Below shows an uncertainty matrix for the
measurements which will be used in embrittlement index calculations:
Table 7.3: uncertainty matrix
Uncertainty Matrix
Sample
Yield strength (+-%)
Ultimate tensile strength(+-%)
Elongation (+-%)
304b1
3.2
3.4
0.2
High Manganese
1.6
1.6
0.4
High Manganese dhi
2
2
0.5
304 dhi
3.4
3.4
0.5
304 rhi
1.6
1.6
0.4
Scanning Electron Microscope of Fractured Surfaces
Some of the fractured surfaces were investigated after tensile tests were performed. SEM images
were taken on Carl Zeiss Sigma 300 SEM (rhi) and Carl Zeiss Supra 35 SEM. The samples were
cleaned in acetone followed by immersion in an ultrasonic bath with ethanol and water before
SEM.
37
==PAGE:44==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Testing matrix
Below gives an overview of the tests conducted on each of the sample as mentioned per table
(7.2).
Name:
LOM
Hardness
Grain
Measurement
XRD
Magnetism
Hydrogen load
and tensile test
vs reference
SEM of
fractured
surface
304b1
304b2
304dhi
304rhi
High Manganese
SS
High Manganese
SS dhi
Additional
samples
304b1rhi
304 b1 token
304 b2 token
304b1dvhi
*Note green = test conducted, red = test not carried out.
38
==PAGE:45==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
8
Results
8.1
Light optical Microscopy hardness and grain measurment
304b1
The rolling direction shown on the graph and means the dogbones were cut in the transverse di-
rection to the rolling direction, the sample may not have their highest possible tensile strength
due to this factor, but considering the samples are all cut in the same orientation, and the
samples are compared against each other on mechanical properties, it will not have an effect
on the result. In the below micrograph, Austenite is observed, no preferred direction of grain is
obvious from the below micrographs. Some twins are highlighted on picture 2 which is typical
for Austenite.
304 batch 1 has a grain size of 38µm with a standard deviation of
+
−6µm see appendix (A.9)
for details. Hardness of the sample was 176HV
+
−2HV see appendix (A.8) for details
Figure 8.1: 304 batch 1 micrograph
304b2
With the first batch of 304, a small sample was bent to check to see if it became magnetic. The
simple test is using a small magnet to check to see if the deformed part becomes magnetic. This
test failed with the first batch, but in the second batch this was the case, this indicates a lower
Nickel content; and thus, less stable Austenite. The lower Nickel content facilitates an easier
Martensitic transformation at lower stress/strain level and allows nucleation in different areas
as per figure (6.31). This can be seen in micrograph 3 below where Martensite has nucleated
along grain boundaries and rolling deformation lines from the grinding process (note: this was
from a different run of polishing with a hand polishing step where an unmeasured force was
applied to the back of the embedding.)Again, many twins are observed which are highlighted
on micrograph 2 below.
The grain size of this material is 15µm with a standard deviation of
+
−3µm see appendix (A.11)
for details. The hardness was found to be 184HV
+
−3HV see appendix (A.10) for details.
39
==PAGE:46==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 8.2: 304 batch 2 micrograph
304dhi
This sample was strained to 93% of failure strain in order to facilitate a Martensitic transfor-
mation. This nucleation was proven difficult as the materials behaviour indicate a high nickel
content which can hinder Martensite nucleation. In this micrograph there is an increase density
of twins which are highlighted on picture 2. The material may have some internal twins in order
to accommodate the deformation caused by stretching as shown in picture 3. Picture 1 shows
Martensite preferentially etched as nodules and typically on the grain boundaries.
The grain size of this material is 7µm with a standard deviation of
+
−2µm see appendix (A.13)
for details. The hardness was found to be 316HV
+
−3HV see appendix (A.12) for details.
Figure 8.3: 304 dhi micrograph
304rhi
This sample was rolled to 60% of original thickness. Many twins are observed parallel to the
rolling direction. Martensite nucleation is not confined to just grain boundaries, which was pri-
marily the case with 304dhi. Martensite nucleated along slip lines as seen in picture 2; which
were caused by rolling. Picture 1 below shows, highlighted areas where Martensite nucleated
40
==PAGE:47==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
away from grain boundaries. This agrees with figure (6.31), where a lower Nickel content will
allow Martensite to nucleate, between intersections of shear bands and not just at their inter-
section. In picture 1, there is Martensite nucleated along slip lines due to rolling. In picture
2, there as some twins highlighted which are parallel to the rolling direction. In picture 3, the
topography is shown, which shows heavy deformation due to the rolling process. Picture 4
focuses on the preferentially etched Martensite within the sample. To the left of the picture the
grain shape change is shown, where there are elongated grains due to material gauge section
widening during deformation.
The grain size of this material is 14µm with a standard deviation of
+
−3µm parallel to the rolling
direction, With a width of 2µm
+
−1µm transverse to the rolling direction see appendix (A.15).
The hardness was found to be 419HV
+
−3HV see appendix (A.14) for details.
Figure 8.4: 304 rhi micrograph.
High manganese SS
This sample was provided on a lab scale, and hence wouldn’t have the exact same properties
as stock produced on the industrial scale.
Many twins can be observed, with some being
41
==PAGE:48==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
highlighted on Picture 2 below. Several nitrides are present and highlighted on picture 3, which
are undesirable and due to an improper quench, which allowed some nitrides to precipitate.
Also Ti2N was present which is an inclusion sometimes present on stainless steels (picture 2).
The grain size of this material is 32µm with a standard deviation of
+
−8µm see appendix (A.17)
for details. The hardness was found to be 219HV
+
−8HV see appendix (A.16) for details.
Figure 8.5: High Manganese SS
High manganese SS dhi
The sample was stretched to 93% of its failure strain. A token was cut from the centre of the
dogbone. Many twins can be seen within these micrographs, where it is speculated that internal
twinning is also present on picture 3 and 4. This is to accommodate deformation within the
material. The high manganese content within this steel may give it a TWIP effect (TWinining
Induced Plasticity), which is shown in the way of an increased density of twins and internal
twinning. This effect gives the material excellent work hardening abilities. In picture 3 and 4
there are perhaps internal twins, they are easier to observe as a different lens was fitted to the
camera. There are a large number of precipitates which are likely nitrides due to an improper
quench as mentioned previously.
The grain size of this material is 21µm with a standard deviation of
+
−6µm see appendix (A.17)
for details. The hardness was found to be 401HV
+
−7HV see appendix (A.16) for details.
42
==PAGE:49==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 8.6: High manganese SS dhi
43
==PAGE:50==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
8.2
XRD
The sample had texture due to the rolling of the material. In order to resolve this several
different scans were carried out at different tilts (0-45 degrees) and along different directions
(rolling and transverse). Results of these scans can be found in appendix (A.20) and (A.21) .
Below shows the summation of these curves.
Figure 8.7: XRD Sum and average
Using the pseudo voight mathematical with the using a Gauss Loventzian fit the areas under-
neath the peaks were calculated. Also R value were calculated as per equation 7.3 are also
shown below:
Phase
Plane
Area
R - Value
γ
111
1198
69.2
γ
200
1014
30.26
γ
220
2344
16.72
α′
110
13590
91.74
α′
200
2728
12.15
α′
212
5370
25.62
Considering the areas and r-value which represents diffraction of the x-ray as it enters the
material are now known. The formula as presented in methodology section, equation 7.5, can
be used to calculate the phase fraction of Austenite:
44
==PAGE:51==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
γf = (
0.33 ∗( γ111
Rγ111 +
γ200
Rγ200 +
γ220
Rγ220)
0.33 ∗( γ111
Rγ111 +
γ200
Rγ200 +
γ220
Rγ220) + 0.33 ∗( α′
111
Rα′111 +
α′
200
Rα′200 +
α′
220
Rα′220)
) ∗100 = 24.8%or25%
(8.1)
There should be a peak of ϵ considering what is known about ease of Martensitic transformation
for this batch of AISI 304 stainless steel after being rolled as per figure (6.31). However, this is
difficult to ascertain and will be ignored. This is acceptable considering between the Martensitic
samples their is a large difference in magnetism and thus Martensite. Also the creation of
Martensite is typically due to a different route, (twinning for high nickel content. stacking
faults for low nickel content) for a lower Nickel content sample such as 304dhi, see figure(6.30),
and thus would not be comparable. The phase fraction of α′ is taken to be 75%.
8.3
Magnetism measurements
Considering the amount of Martensite is now known for 304rhi, magnetism measurements can
be conducted to compare ease of Martensitic nucleation for samples and approximate levels of
Martensite therein. Phase fraction for ferrite (α′) is determined by the formula:
α′(%) = (Jsample
Jrhi
) ∗75
(8.2)
Taking this into consideration weights of the samples were measured and the magnetic dipole
moment were measured using the electronic fluxometer.
Sample
True
Strain
uVs.cm
Weight
(g)
Volume
(cm^3)
Tesla
(J)
Martensite
content (%)
304b1
0
0.054
2.32
0.29
0.18
0.2
304b1dvhi
0.34
0.397
0.55
0.07
5.73
7.0
304 dhi
0.285
0.95
2.07
0.26
3.63
4.5
304b1rhi
N/A
3.554
1.96
0.25
14.40
17.7
304b2
0
0.054
1.83
0.23
0.23
0.3
304rhi
0.47
1.96
0.25
0.03
61.10
75.0
High manganese SS
0
0.005
0.56
0.07
0.07
0.1
High manganese dhi SS
0.293
0.006
0.33
0.04
0.15
0.2
*Note: Uncertainty of measurements on magnetism were 1.3%, not included in table due too
many significant digits needed.
45
==PAGE:52==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
The results show that the high manganese sample is stable Austenitic and doesn’t exhibit a
Martensitic transformation during tensile loading. This is due to the Nitrogen present in the
material that helps to stabilise Austenite. However, 304 does exhibit a Martensitic transfor-
mation upon deformation which can be seen by an increase in magnetism as it is deformed.
How easy this transformation takes place is down to stacking fault energy, i.e. Nickel content
and to less on an extent grain size (intersection of shear band and apparent stacking fault
energy). From the magnetism measurements it is apparent that Nickel content plays more of
a significant role in this Martensitic transformation than grain size. Given that 304b1 sample
had a grain size of approx 38µm vs 304b2 with a grain size of 15µm, according to figure (6.33),
304b1 would have nucleated more Martensite upon deformation, but this isn’t the case. This
is evident by comparing the 304 samples which were rolled where the 304 rhi (rolled to 60%
of original thickness) which came from the low Nickel batch, has a magnetism measurment 4.2
times greater than the sample which was rolled to 50% of original thickness from the higher
Nickel batch (304b1rhi)
Considering the nodules of Martensite present on figure (??) picture 3, a simple test was carried
out to verify this was the case. A token was cut for both 304b1 and 304b2. Each face and edge
was gently polished by hand on each of its faces and edges on 1000 grit Al2O3 sandpaper for 20
seconds. Magnetism measurements were taken pre and post polishing and results are tabulated
below:
Sample
uVs/cm
Weight (g)
Volume (cmˆ3)
Tesla (J)
Martensite
content (%)
Change in a’ %
304b1
0.054
2.32
0.2927
0.18
0.2265
2.7
304 batch 1
post polish
0.055
2.3
0.2902
0.19
0.2327
304 b2
0.054
1.83
0.2305
0.23
0.2876
55.9
304 batch 2
post polish
0.083
1.8
0.2272
0.36
0.4484
As can be seen, the samples from batch 2 can easily nucleate Martensite even when gently
polished. This ease of nucleation of Martensite is of a concern considering when a Austenite
transforms into Martensite and inherits the Austenites hydrogen content.
46
==PAGE:53==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
8.4
Tensile tests and Embrittlement indexes
304 b1
The 304 stainless dogbone was tested and below shows the true stress vs true strain curve for
the control sample and the sample that was loaded with hydrogen. The sample was cathodically
charged for 48hrs at a current density of 25mA/cm2.
Figure 8.8: Tensile test for 304 stainless steel
Worth mentioning, is these samples were from batch 1, where it had a higher Nickel content
and wasn’t as susceptible to a Martensitic transformation which could have a significant effect
on results for the embrittlement index.
For this sample; there is little effect of the hydrogen present on the mechanical properties ma-
terial. A slight increase in tensile strength could be attributed to some possible dislocation
pinning within the material, which can also lead to a small decrease in ductility. Some dislo-
cation pinning could be occurring towards the end of the tensile loading which could mean a
decrease in in ductility. This could happen when the material does eventually form deformation
induced Martensite, and inherits the previous hydrogen content of the Austenite and pins, how-
ever considering how stable the Austenite was in this sample, it wasn’t particularly detrimental
to it’s mechanical properties. This could be perhaps a very minor case of HELP>HEDE as
discussed in section 6.4.6. Calculated embrittlement indexes are shown in table (8.1).
47
==PAGE:54==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
High manganese SS
High manganese sample was tested. This sample is stable austenintic owing to it’s approx
0.25% Nitrogen content. The sample was loaded with a current density of 25mA/cm2 for 48
hrs.
Figure 8.9: Tensile test for EN 1.4369
A small kink can be seen around the yield stress of the material, this is due to dislocations being
released from the Nitrogens Cottrell atmosphere before work hardening and plastic deformation
begins. This sample is exhibiting a similar performance as per 304 undeformed sample.
A lower elongation and lower tensile strength could be dislocation mobility being enhanced
within the presence of hydrogen. A loss of 8% of ductility is of significance. As the dislocation
mobility is enhanced the flow stress of material around a crack tip is decreased.This is described
in section 6.4.6 where just HELP is active.This local increase in plasticity can lead overall loss in
ductility. In contrast to 304b1, where a heightened tensile strength is observed, a drop in tensile
strength is seen. This is to be expected from a pure HELP mediatied failure. However, the
materials performance was still good in the presence of hydrogen. The calculated embrittlement
indexes are available in (8.1).
48
==PAGE:55==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
High manganese SS dhi
Post tensile stretching to 93% of failure strain (49mm stretch). One of the samples was loaded
in hydrogen over a period of 48 hours at a current density of 25mA/cm2. The starting true
strain for the sample, takes into account the strain already applied to the material via tensile
stretching. The starting strain is given by LN(1 + (49/144)) = 0.293 Below shows the results
from the tensile test for the control and hydrogen loaded sample.
Figure 8.10: Tensile test for High manganese SS dhi
The sample hasn’t work hardened a great deal in either case, this can be due to the extra
dislocations introduced into the material during stretching which makes it more difficult for the
material to deform plastically, this leads to a higher flow stress within the material which leads
to a more gradual increase in true stress of the material and hence a flatter plastic portion of
the curve.
Elongation has been severely effected by the presence of hydrogen, whereas both yield strength
and tensile strength were found to be same. Though this material is Austenitic the increase of
defects within the material due to strain would of allowed a higher concentration of hydrogen
within the material. Due to the presence of hydrogen within the material, dislocation mobility
has been increased, whereas dislocation interactions would have been hindered which allow
cracks to flow more easily, which means instability can become more likely. This sample seems
to be severely affected by extra dislocation mobility as per 6.16, also of note all of these HELP
mechanisms can be functioning at the same time such as AIDE and HESIV as per figures 6.18
49
==PAGE:56==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
and 6.17 . Calculated embrittlement indexes are shown in table (8.1).
304dhi
This sample was also stretched to 93% of its failure strain (46mm) in this case. This gives
a starting strain of Ln(1 + 46/144) = 0.277. One the samples was loaded with hydrogen via
cathodic charging at 50mA/cm2 for 18 hrs.
Figure 8.11: Tensile test for 304 def hi
More work hardening can be observed on the hydrogen charged sample in comparison to the
uncharged sample, also there is a severe loss of ductility for the hydrogen charged sample.
The fact that it is work hardening more in comparison to the control sample is perhaps due
to hydrogen sitting in the dislocation strain field enhancing the mobility of the dislocations
and decreasing their interactions allowing subgrains to form more easily in comparison to the
control sample. This allows the enhanced mobility dislocations to move past the pinned dislo-
cations more easy to create subgrains. There is a dramatic loss of ductility within the material
perhaps due to the hardening effect which can happen if the hydrogen within the material is
close to the critical hydrogen concentration, in this case the crack just propagates instead of
work hardening. Considering a large loss of ductility is observed and that for the first part of
the curve the dislocations might be allowing subgrains to form more easily and effectively work
hardening, following by dislocation pinning which could occur when the Austenite changes into
50
==PAGE:57==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Martensite and the Martensite inherits the high content of hydrogen due increased solubility
of hydrogen in Austenite. This could trigger dislocation pinning which could account for the
dramatic loss of ductility. This means that this sample could be HELP mediated HEDE, where
HEDE>HELP in this instance as discussed in section (6.4.6).
304 rhi
These samples were rolled to approx 60% of original thickness. It’s start strain was measured
using equivalent strain for the change of the middle part of the dogbone. The equivalent strain
was found to be 0.51 see figure A.22 in appendix. Also of note is the shape of the samples after
rolling, this effected the stress and strain curve as the samples weren’t as stiff as they should be
until the cross section becomes parallel wedge jaws of the tensile tester. See appendix A.7 for
details. In order to correct this and calculate more accurate embrittlment indexes the samples
highest stiffness was found the strain was shifted to line up with these values, raw data was
still included for clarity. The sample was loaded for 18hrs at a current density of 50mA/cm2.
Figure 8.12: 304rhi tensile test results
No work hardening or plasticity is observed within the hydrogen loaded material. A small
amount of plasticity can be seen in the control sample, with little work hardening, probably
due to the high number of defect within the material, which will hinder subgrain formation.
A higher yield stress is observed for H loaded samples, which is probably due to significant
dislocation pinning with the high concentration of hydrogen. Virtually no plasticity which is
probably due to the hardening effect of hydrogen when hydrogen is at a dislocation core and
51
==PAGE:58==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
dislocation pinning being prominent mechanism. Considering no work hardening is observed,
it indicates there was very little movement of dislocations post yielding, this indicate disloca-
tion pinning and little transport of hydrogen via dislocation to enrich a potential area that
is susceptible to decohesion, therefore it is believed that this failure is a HEDE dominanted
fracture as per section 6.4.6. Table (8.1) shows the calculated embrittlement indexes for the
304rhi sample. SOme errors may be present in the calculation of tensile and yield strength
due to the suspected residual stresses within the samples. Though 304rhi (419HV) was harder
than 304dhi (316HV), it had a lower tensile strength and yield strength as per table 8.1. How-
ever both sample we rolled under the sample parameters and therefore are comparable, though
some uncertainty as to the true tensile and yield strengths of the material in this condition are
unknown due to presumed residual stresses within the material.
Table 8.1: Embrittlement indexes
Sample
Hydrogen
Loaded
σy
σt
δ
E.I σy
E.I σt
E.I δ
304b1
25mA/cm^2
for 48 hrs
510
793
0.257
-0.05
(+-0.0015)
-0.02
(+-0.0006)
0.04
(+-0.0003)
304b1
N/a
485
775
0.268
High
manganese
SS
25mA/cm^2
for 48 hrs
457
1021
0.277
-0.04
(+-0.0006)
0.03
(+-0.0005)
0.08
(+-0.0006)
High
manganese
SS
N/a
439
1057
0.299
High
manganese
SS dhi
25mA/cm^2
for 48 hrs
1168
1246
0.32345
0.00
0.00
0.43
(+-0.003)
High
manganese
SS dhi
N/a
1168
1246
0.34645
304 dhi
50mA/cm^2
for 18hrs
1118
1192
0.27
-0.02
(+-0.0006)
-0.05
(+-0.0015)
0.69
(+-0.005)
304 dhi
N/a
1094
1130
0.30
304 rhi
50mA/cm^2
for 18hrs
989
1009
0.413075
-0.05
(+-0.0008)
0.00
0.95
(+-0.007)
304 rhi
N/a
943
1008
0.43
52
==PAGE:59==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
8.5
Scanning Electron Microscopy of Fractured Surfaces
Samples investigated via SEM were Hydrogen loaded 304 rhi, 304 dhi, High manganese SS dhi
and the non hydrogen loaded 304 rhi sample. At a macroscopic level whether the sample failed
brittle or ductile could be observed by the angle of the fractured surface. Where a straight
fracture indicate a brittle failure, and an angled one indicates a ductile fracture.
Figure 8.13: Fractured faces of 304 rhi, 304 def hi (@ 50mA for 18hrs) and EN 1.4369 hydrogen
loaded (25mA for 48 hrs) and ductile 304 rhi
Firstly SEM photos were taken fractured faces i.e. front of sample. Both sample 304 rhi and 304
def hi show similar morphologies where intergrannular decohesion are evident. More smearing
is present of high manganese sample and 304 rhi control sample which indicates they had more
plasticity during testing.
Figure 8.14: Fractured surfaces Under SEM x 500 mag
53
==PAGE:60==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
The fractured surfaces (cross-section) were then observed more closely, on each of the samples
loaded with hydrogen a brittle zone was observed at near the surface region and was particularly
pronounced around corners. This is a stress concentration and can clearly be seen on a stitched
photo. There is an absence of a brittle zone observed on the 304rhi control sample as this
sample wasn’t loaded with hydrogen.
Figure 8.15: Brittle zone over view
304rhi hydrogen loaded
The material with the highest embrittlement index was rhi, below a closer look is taken at the
transition from the brittle near surface zone to the ductile centre.
54
==PAGE:61==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 8.16: 304 rhi transition
At the near surface region, the failure is more brittle in nature, in the case of this sample,
microviod coalescence, microcracks, intergranular and transgranular features can be seen. As
the hydrogen concentration drops within the material, the failure mode transforms from brit-
tle to ductile; with a region of quasicleavage (QC) in between. A region of quasicleavage is
highlighted on the left side of figure (8.16).
A closer look was taken at the ductile zone (5) and brittle zone features (2-4) on each of the
samples:
Figure 8.17: 304 rhi features
In 8.17 picture 1 shows the transition from brittle to ductile failure mode be seen can be seen
55
==PAGE:62==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
with an area of QC in between. In figure (8.17) picture 5 show a typical dimple morphology
which is in line with a typical ductile fracture.
In pictures 2-4 which is the area highlighted on the rhs of figure (8.16) , brittle features asso-
ciated with hydrogen embrittlement can be observed. In picture 2 some intergranular, trans-
granular and microvoid coalascence features can be observed. One feature is measured at 16
microns is most likely intergranular as the grain size measures as per micrograph was 13.6
microns with a standard deviation of 2.4 microns.The aspect ratio of the oval shaped features
also indicate possible intergranular failure. Some microvoid coalescence can be seen which is a
feature of all types of hydrogen embrittlement. Microcracks can be seen in pictures 3 and 4.
Some transgranular features can be seen in picture 2 also. Considering all these morphologies,
and also the fact the this tensile test had a high embrittlment index this failure can be diag-
nosed as a HEDE dominated fracture as per guideline set out by Djukic et al in figure (6.2). It
can be said that the amount of hydrogen within the material was beyond the critical hydrogen
concentration when decohesion and dislocation pinning is dominated the failure mode versus
the HELP mediated mechanism. This failure would be in region S2 as per figure (6.20). In
this case hydrogen didn’t need to be transported in order to cause decohesion, cracks propa-
gated along areas of stress concentration that were saturated with hydrogen. This results in a
dramatic loss of ductility and no crack blunting is occurring. Considering this type of failure
it can be stipulated that hydrogen accumulated at the grain boundaries where the martensite
would was primarily formed. This is shown by the schematic below:
Figure 8.18: 304 rhi hydrogen dispersion, adapted from [47]
56
==PAGE:63==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
304dhi Hydrogen loaded
Below shows the brittle the ductile zone transition for 304dhi
Figure 8.19: 304 def hi ductile to brittle transition
Some more magnified images were taken in the areas highlight 1, 2 (brittle zone and 3 (duc-
tile/dimple zone) as per figure (8.19) and are shown below.
Figure 8.20: 304 def hi fracture features
From the images, primarily picture 1, a large amount of transgranular fractures can be seen,
the rough faces can be assumed to intergranular and look brittle in nature with a lack of
smearing and dimples. Also present is some microvoid coalescence, but is less prominent than
transgranular features. In the close up of the ductile zone we see a typical dimple fracture as
57
==PAGE:64==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
is the symptom of a ductile failure. Considering that transgranular is the dominant features as
apparent from picture 1 it can be said that this fracture is HEDE>HELP due to transgranular
features being much more present than Microvoid coalescence. Considering this the quantity
of hydrogen in the material would of been close to critical concentration of hydrogen where
decohesion and dislocation pinning becomes dominant over heightened dislocation mobility
and lessened interactions between the dislocation etc..
But, firstly in order to trigger this
pinning, hydrogen transport by dislocations is necessary. Once the hydrogen concentration
can become high enough due to transport by dislocations, decohesion and dislocation pinning
takes over. This would result in a dramatic reduction of impact strength as versus a material
with less hydrogen. This material has a hydrogen concentration of around S4 as per figure
(6.20). In this case the crack would of started maybe due to a HESIV or void etc, then grown
until it met an impingement occured. This impingement may cause a dislocation build up and
hydrogen accumulation, this can happen particularly across an interface within the grain such
as an internal twin, or particularly a Martensitic lath boundary, which is particularly prone to
decohesion. Below shows a schematic or where hydrogen may have accumulated during testing.
Figure 8.21: 304 rhi hydrogen dispersion adapted from [47]
58
==PAGE:65==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
High manganese SS dhi Hydrogen loaded
Of the fractures investigated this material had the lowest embrittlement index. Also of note is
that this material doesn’t exhibit a Martensitic transformation when deformed, which can be
detrimental to mechanical properties when the material is loaded with relatively large amount
of hydrogen.
Figure 8.22: High manganese SS dhi ductile to brittle transition area
It has a much smaller embrittled area in comparison to figures (8.20) and (8.20) , perhaps
due to the lower diffusion rate for Austenite, or perhaps due to the lower current density
used despite being loaded for x2.5 longer. We see quite a large quasicleavage (QC) zone, in
comparison to the more brittle transgranular zone. The more brittle Transgrannular zone is at
stress concentration which would be expected to have a higher hydrogen content.Below shows
a more magnified image in the brittle zone and quasi cleavage zone.
Images were taken of some of the brittle features and ductile features as per figure (8.22).Note
image 2 is from brittle zone on top left as per high manganese SS dhi hydrogen loaded as figure
(8.15)
59
==PAGE:66==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure 8.23: High manganese SS dhi Fracture features
If a closer look is taken at high manganese def hi fractured face a transition from transgranular
to intergranular can be seen.
Figure 8.24: Fractured Face of EN High manganese SS dhi
It can be seen that Quasi Cleavage, Transgranular and MVC dominate the brittle features in
this case. Considering both QC and transgranular and MVC can be seen in the brittle zones
it can be estimated that material is somewhere between S5 and S3 as per figure (6.20). In this
case the material would retain much of it’s impact strength. The failure is due to enhanced
60
==PAGE:67==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
dislocation mobility, which will allow material to flow more easily around a crack tip. This mi-
croscopic increase in plasticity will lead to an overall reduction in ductility as cracks grow more
easily due to lack of work hardening and dislocation interaction thus causing the material to fail.
304 rhi control
As can be seen in figure (8.15), no brittle region is apparent on the material. Even though
the material has been severely plastically deformed no evidence of a brittle morpholgy can be
observed on the fractured surface. In picture 1 the so called cup fracture can be observed, which
is typical of a ductile fracture. In picture 2 a full dimple zone across the fractured surface is
shown, also some microvoid coalescene is present which is also a feature on ductile samples,
however these voids are typically larger than those present on a hydrogen embrittled specimen
which are created by another mechanism.
Figure 8.25: 304 rhi transition
61
==PAGE:68==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
9
Conclusions
1. Both 304b1 and high manganese stainless steel show good resistance to hydrogen embrit-
tlement.
2. Considering 304dhi versus High manganese SS dhi with reference to embrittlement in-
dexs in table (8.1) and fracture morphology see figure (8.23) and figure (8.20), the high
manganeese steel performed much better overall in the hydrogen, even though it had a
higher strength.
3. The highest embrittlement index and most severely embrittled material was 304rhi sample
which had the highest Martensite content and cold working applied to it.
4. 304dhi showed fracture morphology (see figure 8.20) that indicated a HELP mediated
HEDE behaviour which indicates the concentration within the material was close to crit-
ical hydrogen concentration. It is in line with the speculated dislocation behaviour as in
section 8.4 (304 dhi).
5. High manganese SS dhi fracture morphology (see figure 8.23) showed HELP dominating
feature with a hydrogen content that is approaching the ductile to brittle transition area
as per figure (6.19). It is in line with dislocation behavious as discussed in section 8.4
(High manganese SS dhi)
6. 304rhi showed fracture morphology showed that the hydrogen concentration was beyond
the critical hydrogen concentration for the material, where HEDE dominates the fracture.
This is in line the dislocation behaviour as discussed in section 8.2 (304 rhi).
62
==PAGE:69==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
10
Discussion
This researches goal is to design a stainless steel with high strength (>1000MPa UTS) to be
used with handling of pure hydrogen. This is to ease remote set up of electrolysis in close prox-
imity renewable energy resources, which will help to avoid costs due to a costly power cable
etc. Stainless steels are a good candidate for this particular job as they can have high strength
and can handle the operation temperatures of the electrolysis technologies. With it’s operat-
ing temperature of approx 700C it would also mean suitability for operation with hydrogen
production technologies such as AEC (operating temperature 80 -200C) and SOEC (operating
temperature 700C), without the need for expensive heat exchangers in order to allow safe opera-
tion. Also, considering it works for across both technologys it simplifys setup somewhat versus a
low alloy steel or low carbon steel which operating temperatures are too low for use with SOEC.
304 stainless steel isn’t the starting point for this research, the ease of Martensitic transforma-
tion exhibited by 304b2 is too unsafe to use in conjunction hydrogen production. Considering
how easy it was to increase it’s magnetism with a simple polish. Consider the steel is used in
service and there is a surface crack on the material with hydrogen flowing through the pipe
which is the situation for the hydrogen embrittlement phenomena of AIDE see figure (6.18).
The stress due to the internal pressure of hydrogen could form Martensite ahead of the crack tip,
this fresh Martensite would inherit the hydrogen content of Austenite which may be beyond
the critical hydrogen content of the material, allowing HEDE to trigger , crack propagation
and failure of the pipe, potentially endangering lives. Considering how it was difficult to create
Martensite in 304b1, a material with this higher nickel content could be suitable for Austentic/-
Martensitic steel to be used in contact with gaseous hydrogen. Tighter control is needed over
the nickel content within the material to make the Martensitic transformation more difficult
and controllable. Further experiments could be carried out with a steel where the nickel con-
tent is approx 10%, and that will exhibit a less pronounced Martensitic transformation upon
deformation.
Also, perhaps worth considering is the performance of high manganese SS dhi versus the 304dhi.
304dhi showed characteristics of a high nickel content for the 304, and still performed poorly
within hydrogen, whereas the high manganese SS dhi had a lower embrittlement index (304 dhi
E.Iδ = 0.69 to High manganese SS dhi δ = 0.43). Also with relation to the fractured surface, it
had a much smaller embrittled zone, and safer failure mode where HELP mechanism dominates
of HEDE versus in 304dhi where HELP triggered HEDE behaviour. The larger embrittled zone
could be due to hydrogen using the Martensitic laths that were present in the 304 steel to diffuse
further into the material, which could help embrittlement issues to become more pronounced.
There is some uncertainty in these results as the charging current densities were different and
duration of exposure to cathodic charging varied, but the observations are perhaps true. This
opens the question is TWIP steel going to be a better choice than Austenitic/ Martensitic steel
for use with hydrogen. However, specimens should be heat treated before hydrogen testing is
carried out in order to reflect a real world scenario. Heat treatments could consider simple an-
nealing, or perhaps revert some Martensite back into Austenite at higher temperatures. TWIP
steels could also be considered for components to be used in contact with hydrogen, if not for
63
==PAGE:70==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
the pipe itself. This may allow parts to be more cheaply made as they can be formed, instead
of machined (as is the case with stainless steels in contact with hydrogen today). Also, the
replacement of Nickel with Manganese as an alloying in this instance opens up some potential
cost savings. But Nitrogen should be kept as an alloying element due to its strong stabilising
effect on Austenite.
Another interesting result that was observed was the low embrittlement index on tensile strength
of 304rhi samples. This is perhaps due to the relatively high strain rate use (0.0006s−1), had
the strain rate been lower, hydrogen transport to trap would have been more effect allowing
the HELP effect to be come more pronounced which would allow void growth, and thus allow
easier propagation of cracks and decrease the crack opening stress which would be required to
cause unstability and failure. At the higher strain rate HEDE dominates the the crack opening
stress could of stayed high due to dislocation pinning.
The failure mode of a material to operate in hydrogen should be HELP mediated failure which
is acceptable for use in hydrogen (all metallic materials are susceptible to HELP). Even the
two virgin samples (figure) exhibited some loss of elongation but would be considered safe for
use in hydrogen service. However any of the cold worked materials used, should never in hy-
drogen service due to increased solubility of hydrogen in this condition which can exacerbate
the hydrogen embrittlement phenomena.
Cathodic charging though it is a safe and relatively cheap way of loading materials with hydro-
gen, it is perhaps too severe for testing materials to be used in contact with gaseous hydrogen.
A way to combat this is to charge at lower current densities, add stirring to the mixture to
increase fugacity and don’t use a recombination poison. Also a calibration is needed using
thermal desorption spectroscopy where a sample is loaded in gaseous hydrogen which is slightly
more severe than the operating conditions as experienced by the hydrogen carrying pipe where
the concentration of hydrogen within the material is known, then adjust the settings on the
cathodic charging with an aim to match the CH within the gaseous charging condition. This
will enable a creation of a real world scenario.
Alternatively, a benchmark could be used where loading with gaseous hydrogen wouldn’t be
necessary. If the stainless steels that are tested are benchmarked against steels are approved to
be in contact with gaseous hydrogen such as A53, and they perform better as per embrittlement
index and fracture investigation, then perhaps they can be considered as safe for use in gaseous
hydrogen.
Behaviour of the material is well understood for a tensile test, where traps are loaded with
hydrogen which can allow HELP to trigger HEDE as discussed in section (6.20). Considering
this when it comes to HELP controlling HEDE and HEDE dominated HELP, how the hydrogen
got the the trap is ambiguous. Also consider figure (6.27), would this happen if the material
is loaded below yield strength, or does it take a significant amount of plasticity and hydrogen
transport by dislocations to make this occur? Considering steels used in ASME 31.12 use traps
such as interfaces and precipitates to catch hydrogen, is this sort of failure only relevant for
excessive hydrogen loading? Perhaps a fatigue test would be a better indicator of hydrogen
64
==PAGE:71==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
accumulation and failure mechanisms versus a tensile test where the materials yield strength
is not exceeded.
ASME B31.12 should also perhaps be revisited and broken up in order to accommodate some
future high strength steels that are safe for use in hydrogen. Stainless steels look to be the most
promising materials in order to achieve this and also can cope with the higher temperatures
that may be able to accomodate the high temperatures as per SOEC.
65
==PAGE:72==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
References
[1] Henrik Lund Fransen. Energy stroage and conversion, 2022. Electrolysis.
[2] William Thompson. Hydrogen and acids on iron and steel. Royal Society Publishing, 1875.
[3] Harshad Kumar Dharamshi Hansraj BHADESHIA. Prevention of hydrogen embrittlement
in steels. ISIJ International, 56, 2016.
[4] D.G Stalheim, Louis E.Haydenn. ASME B31.12 Hydrogen piping and Pipeline code design
rules with pipeline material concerns issues and research. Reserchgate, 2009.
[5] Ansys. Granta Edupack, March 2023.
[6] Manish Vishwakarma Sandeep Kumar Dwivedi. Hydrogen embrittlement in different ma-
terials: a review. International journal of hydrogen energy, 43, 2018.
[7] J.A. Fenske I.M Robertson, M.L Martin. 2012.
[8] Vera Sijacki Zeravic Alexander Sedmak Bratislav Rajicic Milo B.Djukic, Gordan M.Bakic.
The synergistic action and interplay of hydrogen embirttlment mechanisms in steels and
iron: Localised plasticity and decohesion. Engineering fracture mechanics, 216, 2020.
[9] Yoji Mine Yukitaka Murakami, Toshihiko Kanezaki. Hydrogen effect against hydrogen
embrittlement. Metallurgical and materials transactions A, 41A, October 2010.
[10] G.R. Caskey Jr. J.A. Dononvan Jr. D.E Rawl Jr. M.R, Louthan Jr. Hydrogen embrittlment
of metals. American Soceity for metals, 10, 1972.
[11] Milos.B Djukics. Hydrogen embrittlment and materials selection, October 2022.
[12] Jin Zhang Eiji Akiyama Yanfei Wang Xiaolong Song Xinfeng Li, Xianfeng Ma. Review
of hydrogen embrittlement in metals: Hydrogen diffusion, hydrogen embrittlement mech-
anism and prevention. Acta Metallurgica Sinica, 33, 2020.
[13] Michihiko Nagumo and Kenichi Takai. The predominant role of strain induced vacancies
in hydrogen embrittlment of steels: Overview. Acta Materialia, 2018.
[14] I.M Bernstein John K.Tien, Anthony W.Thompson and Rebecca J.Richards. Hydrogen
transport by dislocations. Metallurgical transactions, 1976.
[15] Kenichi Takai Michihiko Nagumo. The predominant role of strain induced vacancies in
hydrogen embrittlement of steels: Overview. Acta materialia, 165, 2019.
[16] K.Yokogawa M.Wen, S.Fukuyama. Atomistic simulations of effect of hydrogen on kink
pair energetics of screw dislocations in bcc iron. Acta materialia 51, 51, 2003.
[17] B.Tal D.Eliezer N.Eliaz, A.Shachar. Characteristics of hydrogen embrittlment, stress cor-
rosion cracking, tempered martensitic embrittlement in high strength steels. Engineering
failure analysis, 9, 2002.
Page I of XXI
==PAGE:73==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
[18] Ian M.Robertson. Hydrogen embrittlement understood. Metallurgical and materials trans-
actions A, 46, June 2015.
[19] P. Sofronis. Hydrogen enhanced localised plasticity- a mechanism for hydrogen related
fracture. Materials Sciences and Engineering A, 176A, 1994.
[20] B.A Kolachev. Hydrogen embrittlment of non ferrous metals, 1968.
[21] Macintyre R. Louthan Jr. Anton J.West. Dislocation transport and hydrogen embrittlment.
Metalurgical transactions A, 10A, November 1979.
[22] M.Puiggali E.Herms, J.M Olive.
Hydrogen embrittlement of 316l type stainless steel.
Materials science and engineering, 1999.
[23] Stan Lynch. Hydrogen embritltment phenomena and mechanisms. Corrosion Reviews, 30,
2012.
[24] Pedro E.J Rivera-Diaz-Del-Castillo B.A Szost. Unveiling the nature of hydrogen embrit-
tlment in bearing steels employing a new technique. Scripta materialia, 68, November
2012.
[25] Yuriy Yagodzinskyy-Tapio Saukkonen Hannu Hanninen Olga Madelen,
Ingrid To-
doshchenko. Role of non metallic inclusions in hydrogen embrittlement of high-strength
carbon steels with different microalloying.
Metallurgical and materials transactions A,
45A, 2014.
[26] Horst Vehoff Afrooz Barnoush. Recent developments in the study of hydrogen embrittle-
ment: Hydrogen effect on dislocation nucleation. Elsevier, 58, 2010.
[27] Cwiek Janusz. Hydrogen degradtion of high strength steels. Journal of achievement in
materials and manufacturing engineering, 37, December 2009.
[28] G.M Bakic-A.Sedmak B.Rajicic M>B Djukic, V.Sijacki Zeravcic. Hydrogen damage of
steels: A case study and hydrogen embrittlement model. Engineering failure analysis, 58,
2015.
[29] Xinfeng Li, Jin Zhang, Sicong shen,Yanfei wang, Xiaolong song.
Effect of tempering
temperature and inclusions on hydrogen-assisted fracture behaviors of a low alloy steel.
Materials Scinece and Engineering: A, 68, 2017.
[30] Motomichi koyama-Dirk Ponge Dierk Raabe Meimei Wang, C.Cem Tasan. Enhancing hy-
drogen embrittlment resistance of lath martensite by the introducing nano-films of interlath
austensite. Metallurgical and materials transactions A, 46A, September 2015.
[31] J.W Morris Jr. Y.H Kim, H.J Kim. The influence of preciptated austenite on hydrogen
emrittlement on 5.5 ni steel. Metallurgical trnasactions A, 17A, 1986.
[32] E.Sabantani B.Carmeli O.Beeri N.Eliaz S.Ifergane, R.Ben David. Hydrogen diffusivity and
trapping in custom 465 stainless steel. Journal of electrochemical society, 165, 2018.
Page II of XXI
==PAGE:74==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
[33] R.Morana H.K.B.H Bhadeshia T.I. Ramjaun, S.W. Ooi. Designing steel to resist hydrogen
embrittlement: Part 1 trapping capacity. Materials Science and technology, 2018.
[34] Young Jin Kwon Dong-Jun Mun Jang-Yong Yoo Junmo Lee, Taekyung Lee and Chong Soo
Lee. Metals and materials international Volume 22 No.3, 2015.
[35] Olga Todoshchenko Juho Talonen Heikki Pulkkinen, Suvi Paoula and Hannu Hanninen.
Effects of inclusions and precipitates on hydrogen embrittlement on mn-alloyed austenitic
stainless steels. www.steel-research.de, 2013.
[36] Jai-Young Lee and S.M Lee. Hydorgen trapping phenomena in metals with bcc and fcc
crystal structures by desorption thermal analysis technique. Surgface Coatings and tech-
nology, 28, 1986.
[37] M. Eberhart G.R Edwards I.Maroef, D.L Olson. Hydrogen trapping in ferritic steel weld
metal. International materials reviews, 47, 2002.
[38] Sicong Shen Yanfei Wang-Xiaolong Song Xinfeng Lee, Jin Zhang. Effect of tempering
temperature and inclusions on hydrogen-assisted fracture behaviours of a low alloy steel.
Materials Science and engineering A, 682, 2017.
[39] Dong-Woo Suh Eun Jun Song, H.K.D.H Bhadesia. Effect of hydrogen on the surface energy
of ferrite and austenite. Corrosion Science, 77, 2013.
[40] Adriana Estela Pontini and Jorge Daniel Hermida. X-ray diffraction measuremnet of stack-
ing fault energy reduction induced by hydrogen in an aisi 304 stainless steel. Materialia,
12, 2020.
[41] Tomohiko Omura and Jun Nakamura. Hydrogen embrittlment properties of stainless steel
and low alloy steels in high pressure gaseous hydrogen enviroment enviroment. ISIJ inter-
national, 52, 2012.
[42] Grethe Winther-Thomas L.Christansen-Marcel A.J Somers Bo Wang, Chuanshi Hong.
Deformation mechanisms in meta-stable and nitrogen stabilised austenitic stainless steels
during sever surface deformation. Materialia, 12, 2020.
[43] annika Borgenstan-Andrei V.Ruban Peter Hedstrom Ye Tian, Oleg I.Gorbatov. Deforma-
tion microstructure and deformation induced martensite in fe-cr-ni alloys depending on
stacking fault energy. Metallurgical and materials transactions A, 48A, 2017.
[44] Saeed sadeghpour Rexa Mahmudi Mohammad Javad Sohrabi, Hamad Mirzadeh. Grain
size dependant mechanical behaviour and trip effect of in a metastable austenitic stainless
steel. Internation Journal of plasticity, 160, 2023.
[45] Saurav Sunil and Rajeev Kapoor. Effect of strain rate on the formation of strain induced
martensite in AISI 304L Stainless Steel. Metallurgical and materials transactions A, 51A,
2020.
Page III of XXI
==PAGE:75==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
[46] Seishin Ueda Setsuo Takaki, Kouki Tomimura. Effect of pre-cold working on diffusional
reversion of deformation induced martensite in metastable austenitic stainless steel. ISIJ
International, 34, 1994.
[47] Caiyan Deng Yizhe Li Xiaogang Li, Baoming Gong. Failure mechanism transition of hy-
drogen embrittlment in aisi 304 k-tig weld metal under tensile loading. Corrosion Science,
130, 2018.
Page IV of XXI
==PAGE:76==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Dogbone drawing for 304, EN1.4369 and 304 def hi
Figure A.2: Dogbone drawing for EN 1.4369 def hi and 304 rhi: Note many deviations in geometry
present in rolled sample and not completely straight.
Page V of XXI
==PAGE:77==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.3: 304 tensile tests for batch 1 and batch 2
Figure A.4: EN 1.4369 tensile test
Page VI of XXI
==PAGE:78==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.5: Tensile stretches of EN1.4369
Figure A.6: 304 tensile stretches to 93% of failure strain
Page VII of XXI
==PAGE:79==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.7: DB shape
Page VIII of XXI
==PAGE:80==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.8: Hardness pictures for 304b1
Page IX of XXI
==PAGE:81==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.9: grain size measurement graph for 304b1
Page X of XXI
==PAGE:82==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.10: Hardness pictures for 304b2
Page XI of XXI
==PAGE:83==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.11: grain size measurement graph for 304b2
Page XII of XXI
==PAGE:84==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.12: Hardness pictures for 304dhi
Page XIII of XXI
==PAGE:85==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.13: grain size measurement graph for 304 def hi
Page XIV of XXI
==PAGE:86==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.14: Hardness pictures for 304rhi
Page XV of XXI
==PAGE:87==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.15: grain size measurement graph for 304rhi
Page XVI of XXI
==PAGE:88==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.16: Hardness pictures for High manganese SS
Page XVII of XXI
==PAGE:89==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.17: grain size measurement graph for EN 1.4369
Page XVIII of XXI
==PAGE:90==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.18: Hardness pictures for High manganese SS dhi
Page XIX of XXI
==PAGE:91==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.19: grain size measurement graph for EN 1.4369 dhi
Page XX of XXI
==PAGE:92==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.20: XRD result for no tilt and 15 degrees along transverse and rolling direction
Page XXI of XXI
==PAGE:93==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.21: XRD result for 30 and 45 degree tilt along transverse and rolling direction
Page XXII of XXI
==PAGE:94==
Hydrogen embrittlement of martensitic stainless steels
August 7, 2023
Figure A.22: Strain calc for rhi centre
Page XXIII of XXI
