==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Offshore green fuel production - feasibility 
study
Hasan Fayaz Suliankachi Mohamedmansur
DTU Wind-M-0714
August 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to my two esteemed supervisors, Mr Niels-Erik Clausen
and Mr Lasse Røngaard Clausen, for their invaluable guidance and mentorship throughout my research
journey.
Their expertise, unwavering support, and insightful feedback have been instrumental in
shaping the quality and direction of my work.
A special thanks to Mr Brian Horsburgh from Total Energies for his insights on the structure and
scale of offshore oil rigs. I also want to express my appreciation to my family, friends, and colleagues
for their encouragement, understanding, and belief in my capabilities. Their constant support has
been a source of motivation, enabling me to navigate the challenges and successes of this academic
endeavour.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Fighting climate change has become the top priority of governments, international organizations
and environmental activists worldwide. One of the major contributors to greenhouse gas emissions is
the transportation industry and this report aims to facilitate decarbonizing the shipping industry. The
maritime industry is moving towards sustainable fuel alternatives such as ammonia and methanol.
This report analyses the technical and economic feasibility of synthesizing ammonia on ailing
offshore rigs with the purpose of using them as green fuel synthesis hotspots for the maritime industry.
The electricity required for the synthesis of ammonia would be generated from offshore wind farms, the
nameplate capacity of which will be analysed in this project based on the desired ammonia production
volumes, Levelized Cost of Ammonia (LCOA) and the capacity factor of the whole system.
The
generated green electricity is then used to synthesise Hydrogen through electrolysers. The various
available technologies such as Alkaline Electrolysis Cells (AECs), Polymer Electrolyte Membrane
Electrolysis Cells (PEMECs), and Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOECs) have been analysed in this
project. The Hydrogen is then fed as an input to the Ammonia synthesis reactor along with Nitrogen
captured by Air Separation Unit (ASU) to generate Ammonia. The overall products of the chemical
synthesis reactions are Ammonia and Oxygen, both of which have significant value as a tradeable
commodity.
Each technological combination has its advantages and disadvantages, for example, SOEC could
use the waste heat generated in the Haber Bosch ammonia synthesis reaction thereby improving the
efficiency of Hydrogen generation. This project aims to generate a comprehensive report of the various
technological pathways available in the current market to decarbonise the shipping industry while
taking all the systems offshore, thereby building a self-sustaining green fuel synthesis environment on
the ocean. This report concludes with the findings that offshore ammonia synthesis can be a feasible
option in the current volatile global ammonia market as the levelized cost of ammonia production
calculated in this report (244.5 EUR/Ton) is well within the average selling price of ammonia observed
in the past 15 years (640 EUR/Ton).
ii
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
CO2 Carbon dioxide
H2 Hydrogen
O2 Oxygen
H2O Water
N2 Nitrogen
GHG Greenhouse Gases
SMR Steam Methane Reforming
AEC Alkaline Electrolysis Cell
PEMEC Proton Exchange Membrane
Electrolysis Cell
SOEC Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell
TRL Technological Readiness Level
KOH Potassium Hydroxide
RO Reverse Osmosis
MEA Membrane Electrode Assembly
YSZ Yttria Stabilized Zirconia
LSM Lanthanum Strontium Manganate
ASU Air Separation Unit
BOP Balance of Plant
MVC Mechanical Vapour Compression
MED Multi-Effect Distillation
MSF Multi-Stage Flash Distillation
EDI Electrodeionization
ED Electrodialysis
LCOA Levelized Cost of Ammonia
kWh Kilowatt-hour
MWh Megawatt-hour
CRF Capital Recovery Factor
WACC Weighted Average Cost of Capital
FP Fixed Production
FS Fixed Space
TPD Tons Per Day
MGC Medium Gas Carrier
LGC Large Gas Carrier
VLGC Very Large Gas Carrier
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
MCDA Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
CBA Cost Benefit Analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
List of Abbreviations
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective & Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Limitations and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
State of the Art
5
2.1
Electrolyser Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Alkaline Electrolysis Cells (AEC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Cell (PEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell (SOEC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Haber-Bosch Ammonia Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Auxiliary Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Desalination Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Air Separation Unit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
System Design & Calculations
21
3.1
Calculate maximum possible ammonia production based on space constraints
. . . . .
24
3.2
Reuse of waste heat from Haber-Bosch synthesis for steam generation in the case of SOEC 26
3.3
Calculation of energy consumption for individual systems involved in the synthesis of
Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Calculation for the CAPEX & OPEX of the major components in the system . . . . .
32
3.5
Capacity factor of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Deriving the optimal ratio between projected power requirement and the corresponding
wind farm rated capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.7
Calculation for the Levelised Cost of Ammonia (LCOA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.8
Sensitivity Analysis - Impact of various parameters on the LCOA . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.8.1
LCOA Vs daily production volumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.8.2
CAPEX and OPEX variation for SOEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.8.3
Tradeoff between LCOA and Capacity Factor of the System . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Potential solutions
50
4.1
Fuel synthesis on ageing rigs and transportation of fuel using pipes . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Fuel synthesis on ageing rigs and transportation of fuel using ships . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Fuel synthesis on ships and transportation of fuel using ships
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Discussion
55
5.1
LCOA estimation for 2050 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Current Ammonia Market Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3
Decoupling of Hydrogen and Ammonia Synthesis Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
5.4
Advantages and Disadvantages of Offshore Ammonia Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion
60
7
Future work
61
List of Tables
I
List of Figures
I
References
II
A Appendix
V
A.1 Energy consumption of individual system involved in the synthesis of ammonia
. . . .
V
A.2 Optimal ratio between projected power requirement and the cor- responding wind farm
nameplate capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
A.3 Levelised Cost of Ammonia (LCOA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
A.4 CAPEX and OPEX variation for SOEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
A.5 Tradeoff between LCOA and Capacity Factor of the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII
v
==PAGE:8==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The world is moving towards a sustainable way of life in order to preserve our environment for
generations to come. Among the various initiatives the world nations are working on, decarbonising
our energy demands is a challenging and very significant sector with a lot of room for innovation.
Decarbonization of energy demands simply translates to the act of gradually eliminating carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions corresponding to our energy production and consumption. The transportation sector
is responsible for a substantial portion of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, with CO2 being its primary
GHG emission. The transportation sector must be decarbonized in order to combat climate change.
The transportation sector needs a holistic strategic upliftment package which includes switching to
low- or zero-emission automobiles, extending public transportation networks, investing in clean energy
infrastructure, and promoting sustainable mobility behaviours. There has been significant progress
in decarbonising land-based transportation modes with the advancements in electric fuel cell and
hydrogen fuel cell technologies. On the contrary, aviation and shipping are rather challenging modes
of transportation from a decarbonisation perspective. As per the 2021 data, the shipping industry
alone was responsible for almost 4.1 % of global emissions [1] caused by human activities which is a
significantly massive share from the perspective of climate change mitigation.
The European Union in its agenda to phase out polluting fuels in the maritime industry, has
set new targets of gradually reducing the greenhouse gas intensity of shipping fuels and reaching a
reduction of 80 % by 2050[2]. In order to achieve that, a range of alternative fuels is being considered
by the shipping industry. The available options are Methanol, Ethanol, Hydrogen, Natural Gas and
Ammonia [3]. Out of the available options, Methanol and Ammonia are the major alternative fuels
being considered by the maritime industry due to various reasons such as storage capability, energy
content, emissions etc. This report focuses on the large-scale offshore synthesis of Ammonia with a
focus on the maritime industry. There are a wide range of challenges for this proposal which include
techno-commercial feasibility, environmental impacts, stakeholder management etc.
Although both ammonia and methanol can be synthesized at an offshore site, the input products,
technical requirements and differences in the logistics involved make ammonia a favourable option. The
synthesis of ammonia requires water, electricity and nitrogen as the only inputs, whereas the synthesis
of methanol requires carbon in the form of carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide. Hence, it would be
best to produce methanol on shore, next to polluting industries such as coal-fired power plants or steel
manufacturing plants for example, carbon emissions from which could be captured and reused in the
synthesis of methanol. Bringing methanol synthesis systems offshore would mean additional logisticS
to bring carbon dioxide from shore to the offshore production site on a regular basis which is not the
case for ammonia synthesis. Speaking from the perspective of environmental impact, both ammonia
Page 1 of 61
==PAGE:9==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
and methanol have their own downside. Combustion of methanol leads to water and CO2 which again
is a GHG. On the other hand, complete combustion of ammonia produces N2 and H2O which are
harmless products, but in the case of incomplete combustion of ammonia, it could lead to emission of
Nitrogen Oxide NOx which is a highly poisonous and reactive gas. Although a highly harmful gas,
NOx emissions could be managed by using methodologies such as Low-NOx Combustion Technologies,
catalytic conversion and ammonia oxidation etc.
In spite of these challenges, both ammonia and
methanol are being actively researched and evaluated as part of the maritime industry’s efforts to
transition toward more sustainable and environmentally friendly fuel options
This report focuses on the various technical and economic aspects revolving around the installation
of an offshore ammonia synthesis system.
A deep-dive analysis of different kinds of electrolysers
available in the market, their energy & volume requirements, optimal wind farm capacity for each
electrolyser, possible integration options with the ammonia synthesis system (Haber Bosch Process),
potential holistic solutions to house all the necessary components etc. have been analysed in this report.
Although this report doesn’t conclude on one best strategy for the offshore synthesis of ammonia, it
gives a clear cost-benefit analysis of the different possible technological integrations for the user to
make an informed decision.
1.2
Problem Statement
It has been established that we need to look into alternative fuels for the maritime industry.
Now let’s focus on ammonia which doesn’t emit CO2 during combustion.
However, the existing
methods of ammonia production involving Hydrogen production by Steam Methane Reforming (SMR)
are highly CO2 intensive and need to be replaced by greener alternatives such as water electrolysis
to produce hydrogen. Going further upstream, hydrogen production through electrolysis is a highly
energy-intensive process and needs a large-scale supply of green energy. The options available for such
remote large-scale green energy technologies are either wind energy or solar energy. Out of the two
options, wind energy is highly preferred due to various factors such as being relatively consistent in
power production, higher capacity factor and physical footprint etc. In order to meet the ammonia
demand for the shipping industry, huge capacity wind farms must be setup such that the energy source
is consistent and has minimal interference with the general public. This is achieved by opting for
offshore wind farms which also have the advantage of tapping higher wind speeds thereby reducing the
number of turbines required compared to an onshore farm.
Most cost-effective source of energy has been identified, the location of production has been
finalized to be offshore based on parameters such as
1. Cabling cost for transportation of electricity back to shore
2. Transmission losses
Page 2 of 61
==PAGE:10==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
3. Reducing possible exposure to harmful substances
This report analyses the proposal for offshore ammonia production based on various technical
and economic parameters, thereby providing a guideline on the favourable conditions for existing
technologies.
1.3
Objective & Research Questions
The objective of this report is to analyse the various options available and the challenges involved
in building an offshore ammonia synthesis system. The three existing electrolyser technologies namely,
Alkaline Electrolysis Cells (AEC) electrolyser, Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Cell (PEMEC
or PEM) and Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell (SOEC) are analysed in this report based on multiple
factors such as CAPEX & OPEX, space requirements, power requirements and possible integration
with Haber- Bosch ammonia synthesis process for reusing waste heat etc. This report will summarise
the conditions in which each technology is favourable and also provide three solutions for setting up
offshore ammonia synthesis. Some of the significant questions anserwed by this report are:
1. What are the circumstances under which offshore ammonia production could be a favourable
solution?
2. What are the technical and economical constraints faced by the technologies being deployed for
offshore ammonia production?
3. How to narrow down the range of optimal ratio between the electrolyser capacity and their
corresponding requirement of wind farm capacity?
1.4
Limitations and Assumptions
To restrict the boundaries of the analysis, the following limitations have been set:
• All the technical calculations performed in this report are limited to the data available in the
latest edition (2022) of the Technology Data for Renewable Fuels published by the Danish Energy
Agency. Although published in the year 2022, the data relevant to this report was last revised
in the year 2020.
• The cost of retrofitting an old oil rig or a vessel has not been added to the economic assessment
performed in this report as it is very specific to the constructor and is not available in the public
domain.
The following assumptions have been made in order to execute the feasibility assessment of the scenarios
considered in this report:
• The wind data from the year 2001 has been used to calculate the hourly power generated from
the wind farm which is then used to calculate the capacity factor of the electrolyser.
Page 3 of 61
==PAGE:11==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
• The efficiency of AEC and PEM electrolyser technologies have been assumed to be equal as it
has been observed in multiple literatures that they lie within the same efficiency window.
• The ratio of space allocation between electrolysers, the ammonia synthesis systems and additional
space for O&M requirement have been chosen arbitrarily.
1.5
Report Structure
Chapter 1 has served as an introduction to the research work being carried out in this report, the
upcoming sections discuss the objective and results in detail. The upcoming sections and their contents
are as follows:
Chapter 2 - State of the Art
This section talks about the current state of electrolysers, ammonia synthesis technologies and a few
important auxiliary systems required for building a self-sufficient ammonia synthesis system.
Chapter 3 - System Design & Calculations
Once the available technological options have been explained, this chapter carries on to talk about the
ammonia production potential based on different technologies, their corresponding energy, CAPEX
& OPEX requirements, capacity factor of the complete system and the levelized cost of ammonia
production based on all the economic and technical parameters.
Chapter 4 - Potential Solutions
This section talks about a few options to set up the ammonia synthesis systems offshore, the challenges
faced by such options, the factors to be considered while implementing either of those options etc.
Chapter 5 - Discussion
Once the economic calculations and the theoretical setup of the system are understood, this chapter
progresses to talk about the possible reduction in levelized cost with technological improvements in
the case of SOEC-based systems, the performance of green ammonia against the current ammonia
market trends and concludes by mentioning some of the advantages & disadvantages with regards to
the offshore synthesis of ammonia.
Chapter 6 & 7 - Conclusion & Future Work
These chapters conclude the report by summarising the answers to questions raised in the introduction
part of the report. It also talks about the degree to which the results obtained in this report fit the
current global ammonia market and about the possibility of SOEC raising to be the most preferred
technology in the future if technological advancements support the cause. "Future work" talks about
the exciting realm of uncharted possibilities that lie beyond the confines of this report.
Page 4 of 61
==PAGE:12==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
2
State of the Art
The majority of ammonia available on today’s market is produced by the conventional Haber-Bosch
NH3 synthesis process which combines H2 produced by Steam Methane Reforming (SMR) with N2
captured from atmospheric air. Ammonia synthesis by SMR process accounts for almost 500 million
tonnes of CO2 emissions per year which is roughly 1.8 % of global CO2 emission [4] and is also an
energy-intensive process as it caters to approximately 1 - 2 % of global annual energy consumption [5].
Roughly 80 % of the CO2 emitted in the synthesis of ammonia can be traced back to the SMR process
of Hydrogen production as it is observed that 3.01 kg of CO2 is emitted per kg of H2 produced.
In order to decarbonise the synthesis of ammonia, the whole system of Hydrogen generation by
SMR process must be replaced by a greener alternative of using electrolysers to produce Hydrogen. The
only byproduct of producing Hydrogen (H2) using electrolysers is Oxygen (O2) which is a tradable
product on its own.
There are three different kinds of electrolysers which could be used for the
synthesis of Hydrogen and they are as follows: Alkaline Electrolysis Cells (AEC) electrolyser, Proton
Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Cell (PEMEC or PEM) and Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell (SOEC).
The Technological Readiness Level (TRL), energy requirement, volumetric space requirement, economic
implications, integration options for efficient use of heat etc. with respect to the above-mentioned
electrolysis technologies are discussed in upcoming sections.
2.1
Electrolyser Technologies
On a general note, the operating principle of all three technologies is to split water using electricity
to form Hydrogen H2 and O2 as shown in Equation 1
2H2O →2H2 + O2
(1)
Out of the three technologies being discussed here, AEC is by far the oldest and the most mature
technology available as it has been on the market for the past century whereas PEM has been on
the market for little over a 50 years and SOEC is a relatively newer technology being utilised for
industrial-scale production of Hydrogen. Each technology differs in its
1. Power requirements
2. Space constraints
3. Operating conditions
4. Technological Readiness Level (TRL)
5. Output volumes
The above-mentioned aspects will be analysed in the upcoming sections.
Page 5 of 61
==PAGE:13==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
2.1.1
Alkaline Electrolysis Cells (AEC)
AEC is the most mature and most commonly available electrolyser technology on the market.
These are also considered to be the most economical electrolyser as the components are made up of
easily available materials and the stack life of the cells is by far the longest (100,000 hours) which
translates to fewer replacements over the period of its lifetime leading to a lower O&M expense as
well. The electrodes are typically made up of steel, nickel, or nickel-plated steel and the electrode
compartments are separated by a micro-porous diaphragm in order to prevent the mixing of generated
gases.
The electrodes are immersed in an electrolyte which is an aqueous solution of potassium
hydroxide (KOH) as shown in Figure 1.
The operating temperature range of AEC is between 65
- 90 ◦C whereas the operating pressure could be at either atmospheric pressure or could be pressurized
up to 35 bar according to the output requirements.
Figure 1: Working principle of Alkaline Electrolysis Cells [6]
As described in Figure 1, water is given as an input to the cathode side of the electrolyser which
upon electrolysis, releases OH−ions which in turn get transported across the porous membrane to form
the end products, Oxygen and Hydrogen. The reactions at the cathode and anode can be summarised
as shown in Equation 2 and Equation 3.
Reaction at Cathode:
2H2O + 2e−→H2 + 2OH−
(2)
Reaction at Anode:
2OH−→1
2O2 + H2O + 2e−
(3)
Input
The input for AEC is only electricity and water which is slightly different from SOEC as SOEC
also has the option to take steam as an input stream. However, the input water stream needs to
be very pure in other words, must have conductivity in the order of 5µS/cm. This can be achieved
through multiple stages of advanced desalination process such as the Reverse Osmosis (RO) process
Page 6 of 61
==PAGE:14==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
and other additional water treatments. Distillation is also another method used to purify seawater
which involves vapourisation of the seawater and condensing back the vapour to attain pure water as
the salts and other impurities are left behind in the vaporisation procedure. Both methodologies are
significantly energy-intensive processes and their respective energy requirements cannot be neglected
while estimating the energy requirements of the whole system.
Output
The output products from AEC are Hydrogen and Oxygen both of which are tradable products
with different kinds of demand on the market. The additional byproduct in this process is excess
heat which usually is redirected to district heating in the case of onshore synthesis systems. But in
the unique case of offshore Hydrogen synthesis electrolysers, the excess heat could be redirected to
other auxiliary systems such as the desalination of seawater or other heating purposes for operating
the system. Similar to the onshore systems, only a part of the generated waste heat can be utilised.
Energy Balance
The energy input for AEC is 100 % electricity and operates at a temperature range of 50 - 80 ◦C.
The electrical efficiency of existing AEC systems is in the range of 63 - 70% [7] and would improve
marginally in the upcoming years as AEC is a mature technology & its development is almost saturated.
Although AEC has been a prevalent technology in the field of electrolysis for a long time, it
has its own limitations. Current density, for example, is the least as compared to the other existing
industrial-scale technologies.
Current density in an electrolyzer refers to the amount of electrical
current flowing through a specific area of the electrode surface. It is typically expressed in units of
amperes per square centimetre (A/cm2) or amperes per square metre (A/m2). AEC has a current
density of 0.6 A/cm2 and the latest research work has shown signs of improving the current density up
to 1 A/cm2 which is still significantly lower as compared to its competing technology PEM which has
a current density of 2.2 A/cm2. Higher current density is preferred in electrolysers as it has several
benefits such as better space utilization, lower CAPEX cost etc. However, higher current density could
also lead to higher electrode degradation and higher heat generation.
Space Constraints
The space required to set up the electrolyser is a major constraint, especially offshore. The size
of the electrolyser cell stacks increases linearly with the production capacity of the plant or in other
words, the desired daily output of Hydrogen. It has been observed that the average footprint of AEC
systems is around 10 −15 m2/MW in terms of input electrical energy or 0.02 −0.03 m2/kg H2 [7]
produced per day and is a compact option as compared to PEM or SOEC. These values are based on
Page 7 of 61
==PAGE:15==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
the AEC unit produced by Green Hydrogen Systems.
CAPEX Requirements
There are 2 ways to compare the cost of the electrolyser systems, the first option is to analyse the
CAPEX based on the electricity consumed by the electrolyser and the second option is to analyse the
CAPEX based on the daily Hydrogen production capacity of the electrolyser. It has been observed that
AEC has a specific investment cost of 1352 EUR/kg of H2 produced per day which is also expressed
as 650 EUR/kW of input electricity[7]. These values are expected to decrease in the future as mass
production of electrolyser systems would become common in order to cater to the needs of green
hydrogen goals.
2.1.2
Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Cell (PEM)
PEM was developed between the early 1950s and late 1960s in order to overcome the drawbacks
posed by the existing technology of alkaline water electrolysis. This advanced technology has many
advantages over its competing technologies which include high proton conductivity (0.1 ± 0.02 Scm−1),
lower gas permeability, lower thickness (P 20 −300 µm) and high-pressure operations [8]. PEM being
a relatively newer technology as compared to AEC has room for development and isn’t saturated yet.
The major areas in which PEM could be improved are reducing the cost and maintaining high efficiency.
A significant contributor to the high cost of PEM technologies are the catalyst layers consisting of
platinum & its alloys for the cathode, and iridium oxide, ruthenium & their alloys for the anode which
are expensive due to the scarce availability of the materials which could also hamper the operation
of large scale PEM plants in the long run. The PEM electrolyser cell consists of two catalyst-coated
electrodes which are in contact with a proton exchange polymer electrolyte membrane. The most
commonly used membranes are perfluorosulfonic acid polymer membranes such as Nafion, Fumapem,
Flemion, and Aciplex [8]. The electrodes and the membrane form a Membrane Electrode Assembly
(MEA) as shown in Figure 2. The operating temperature range of AEC is between 60 - 80 ◦C whereas
the operating pressure is at atmospheric pressure [8].
Figure 2: Working principle of Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Cell [6]
Page 8 of 61
==PAGE:16==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
As described in Figure 2, water is given as an input to the anode side of the electrolyser contrary
to the AEC wherein water is fed to the cathode. This leads to the release of H+ ions upon electrolysis
which in turn get transported across the membrane to form the end products, namely, Oxygen at the
anode and Hydrogen at the cathode. The reactions at the anode and the cathode can be summarised
as shown in Equation 4 and Equation 5.
Reaction at Anode:
H2O →1
2O2 + 2e−+ 2H+
(4)
Reaction at Cathode:
2H+ + 2e−→H2
(5)
Input
Similar to AEC, the input for PEM is purely water and electricity. However, the purity of the
water to be fed to the electrolyser system and the amount of energy required to generate a ton of
Hydrogen per day is different in the case of PEM. The inlet water needs to be purer as compared to
AEC, requiring a maximum conductivity in the order of 0.2µS/cm which is the least conductivity of
the three technologies being compared in this report. The energy input would also practically change,
but for simplicity in the calculation, the efficiency values of both AEC and PEM have been considered
to be equal, i.e. the efficiency of both technologies have been set at 66.5 % for the year 2020 and
at 68.0 % for the year 2030 as both of them are observed to have similar efficiency range in multiple
pieces of literature[8][9]. But in real-life scenarios, the efficiency would be slightly different, resulting
in different energy demands.
Output
The output products are the same as that of AEC with the only difference being the amount of
heat released in the process and the amount of hydrogen produced which depends on the electrical
efficiency of the reaction. As mentioned earlier, the electrical efficiency has been assumed to be equal
to that of AEC for ease of calculations in this report.
Energy Balance
As mentioned earlier, the energy input to PEM is 100% electricity. The PEM systems are known
to operate in the temperature range of 50 - 80 ◦C [7]. The electrical efficiency of PEM systems has
been estimated to be in the range of 55-70 %. There is a lot of room for improvement as there is
research work being carried out to improve the efficiency of the electrolyser by focussing on areas such
as catalyst development, improving stack design, membrane advancements etc.
Page 9 of 61
==PAGE:17==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Space Constraints
Although PEM has a higher current density as compared to AEC, the space requirement for PEM
is higher as compared to AEC. It has been observed that the average footprint of PEM systems is
around 20m2/MW in terms of input electrical energy or approximately 0.05 m2/kg H2 [7] produced
per day. These values are based on the PEM unit produced by NEL Hydrogen Systems. The reason
for the larger footprint is due to various reasons such as the use of a thin polymer membrane as an
electrolyte which needs additional mechanical support, thicker electrodes, different water management
requirements etc.
CAPEX Requirements
PEM being a relatively new technology is more expensive than AEC due to various technical
reasons such as the use of specialized materials which include precious metal catalysts such as platinum
& iridium which are expensive, additional auxiliary systems for efficient water management, humidifiers
etc. The complexity of manufacturing and assembling the systems, assembly of thin membranes for
example, also has an additional cost as compared to AEC which is a rather simple technology. Another
significant cost factor would be the scale of production. AECs have been in use for a longer time and
have benefited from larger-scale production, resulting in economies of scale, whereas PEM electrolyzers
have a smaller market and limited production volumes, which can lead to higher unit costs. It has been
observed that PEM has a specific investment cost of 1932 EUR/kg of H2 produced per day which is
also expressed as 925 EUR/kW of input electricity[7]. It’s important to note that as PEM technology
advances and economies of scale are obtained, the cost gap between PEM and AEC technologies is
steadily closing. PEM electrolyzer prices are anticipated to compete with those of AECs as the market
develops and manufacturing quantities rise.
2.1.3
Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell (SOEC)
The foundation for SOEC technology was laid in the late 1930s with experiments being run on
solid electrolytes made of materials such as zirconium, yttrium, cerium, lanthanum, and tungsten.
There have been significant advancements since the late 1990s with regard to stack design, operating
conditions etc. as the investigation of reversal of solid oxide fuel cells to produce hydrogen intensified
in the 1980s. SOEC has various advantages as compared to the other technologies, the most significant
of these advantages is that SOEC has a significantly higher electrical efficiency (approximately 95 %)
which comes from the fact that SOEC can take heat as an input in addition to electrical energy. SOEC
works with a steam input of water, most of which is generated by electrical steam generators catering
to almost 75 - 85 % of the requirement and the rest can be provided by the heat generated in other
systems, the Haber-Bosch synthesis process in this case.
The overall structure of a SOEC typically involves stacking multiple individual cells to form
Page 10 of 61
==PAGE:18==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
a larger unit called a stack. Each cell consists of the electrolyte layer, cathode, and anode layers,
with interconnect layers and current collectors between them.
The cells are generally arranged in
a series configuration to optimize the overall performance and maximize hydrogen production. The
electrolyte in a SOEC is commonly made up of Yttria Stabilized Zirconia (YSZ) which is an oxide
ion conducting solid phase component. The cathode comprises of nickel combined with YSZ which
facilitates hydrogen generation, while the anode is made up of mixed ionic-electronic conductors such as
Lanthanum Strontium Manganate (LSM) with YSZ. The structure and working principle is represented
in Figure 3. SOEC can take in heat as input and operates in the temperature range of 700 - 850 ◦C [10]
which has multiple advantages such as lower electricity demand leading to higher electrical efficiency,
highly pure output stream of Hydrogen etc.
Figure 3: Working principle of Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell [6]
As shown in Figure 3, water in steam state is given as an input to the cathode which upon
electrolysis releases O2−ions which travel across the solid electrolyte to form Oxygen at the anode and
Hydrogen at the cathode. The reactions at the cathode and the anode can be summarised as shown
in Equation 6 and Equation 7.
Reaction at Cathode:
H2O + 2e−→H2 + O2−
(6)
Reaction at Anode:
2O2−→O2 + 4e−
(7)
Input
In contrast to AEC & PEM, the input for SOEC is steam and electricity. Steam could be generated
from the waste heat emitted by exothermic processes such as a nuclear power plant. This report would
discuss the possibility of coupling the SOEC system with the Haber-Bosch ammonia synthesis process
to use waste heat emitted in the ammonia synthesis process. Hence, heat is considered as an input for
the SOEC technology, which reduces the electrical demand for steam generation thereby giving a high
electrical efficiency. So the amount of energy required to generate a ton of Hydrogen per day and the
purity of the water to be fed to the electrolyser system is different in the case of SOEC. This reduces
Page 11 of 61
==PAGE:19==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
the required capacity of the wind farm which leads to a significant reduction in the CAPEX of the
project, but such reduction in CAPEX of the wind farm is counterbalanced by the high CAPEX of
SOEC and especially by the very high OPEX cost of SOEC technology, a detailed analysis of which
would be performed in upcoming sections. The inlet water purity requirement is relatively less as
compared to PEM, requiring a maximum conductivity in the order of 1.0 µS/cm.
Output
The output products are the same as that of AEC, Oxygen and Hydrogen, with the only difference
being the amount of heat released in the process and the amount of hydrogen produced which depends
on the electrical efficiency of the reaction. Since the operating temperature of SOEC is in the range
of 700 - 850 ◦C, the temperature of outlet hydrogen can be used to increase the temperature of inlet
steam for the SOEC.
Energy Balance
As mentioned earlier, the electrical efficiency is significantly higher than that of AEC and PEM.
The electrical efficiency is calculated to be approximately 97.5 % considering an input combination of
79.5 % electricity & 20.5 % heat gives out 77.5 % of hydrogen per 100 % of input energy, thereby the
electrical efficiency can be calculated as shown in Equation 8. The higher efficiency leads to a direct
fall in the CAPEX cost of the entire project as the electrical energy requirement for SOEC would
be significantly lower than that of other technologies which means fewer wind turbines needs to be
installed in order to cater to the electrical energy demand.
Electrical Efficiency = Hydrogen output as a % of total input energy
Input Electrical Energy
= 77.5 %
79.5 % = 97.5 %
(8)
The typical current density of SOEC lies in the range of 0.65A/cm2 [7] which is slightly higher than
AEC but significantly lower than PEC. However, research work in the field shows promising results
for improving the current density, in some cases up to 5.73A/cm2 [11] which is twice the current
density of PEM which currently has the highest current density. With higher current densities comes a
significantly higher risk of excessive stack degradation [12] and stack life isn’t a strong suit for SOEC as
of now with the current stack life being in the range of 20,000 hours [7] which directly leads to a higher
CAPEX and O&M cost. Although it might take a few years to reach such high current densities at an
industrial scale and operational duration, SOEC being the most recent technology, has a lot of room
for improvement and is said to be a promising candidate for the next generation of energy conversion
device due to their extremely high conversion efficiency.
Page 12 of 61
==PAGE:20==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Space Constraints
It has been observed that the average footprint of SOEC systems is around 35 m2/MW in terms of
input electrical energy or approximately 0.06 m2/kg H2 [7] produced per day. These values are based
on the SOEC unit produced in the modular systems by Sunfire. The reason for the larger footprint is
due to various reasons such as the use of a thicker electrolyte made up of solid oxide materials, higher
operating temperature which requires additional space for efficient thermal insulation, heat exchangers
to capitalize waste heat, complex gas management systems etc.
CAPEX Requirements
SOEC is significantly expensive compared to AEC or PEM. The various reason behind such high
CAPEX includes material cost, high operational temperature, balance of plant and scale of production.
High-temperature materials that can resist excessively harsh working conditions are required for
SOECs. Compared to PEMEC components like the proton exchange membrane and catalysts, the solid
oxide electrolyte and electrode materials utilised in SOECs are rather expensive. Thermal insulation,
heating elements, and sophisticated gas management systems are just a few examples of the additional
components and systems that SOEC systems frequently need to manage high-temperature operations.
These additional components and the balance of plant requirements can add to the overall cost of SOEC
systems. It has been observed that SOEC has a specific investment cost of 4491 EUR/kW of input
electricity which is also expressed as 8047 EUR/kg of H2 produced per day [7] which is significantly
higher than the competing technologies but the prices are expected to drop rapidly in upcoming years.
It’s important to note that as SOEC technology advances and economies of scale are obtained, the
cost gap between SOEC and PEM & AEC would reduce drastically. If the technological advancements
lead to a significant drop in CAPEX and OPEX prices of SOEC technology, there would be healthy
competition between the electrolyser technologies as any minor cost difference between SOEC and
the other technologies could be overcompensated by the very high electrical efficiency of SOEC. A
summarised comparison of all three electrolysers based on different criteria has been shown in Table 1.
Page 13 of 61
==PAGE:21==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Table 1: Comparative Analysis of Electrolysers
2.2
Haber-Bosch Ammonia Synthesis
The Haber-Bosch process, which combines elemental nitrogen and hydrogen using a catalyst
under high pressure and temperature, underlies practically all modern commercial ammonia synthesis.
Currently, the Hydrogen required for this process is mostly created by steam reforming of natural gas
(methane), which produces significant emissions of fossil CO2, whereas nitrogen can be recovered from
ambient air. Therefore, lowering CO2 emissions from the manufacturing of ammonia is closely related to
reducing emissions from the generation of hydrogen. This can be done by employing Carbon Capture
and Storage technologies or, alternatively, by switching to green hydrogen produced by electrolysis
using renewable energy sources.
While green ammonia has various uses such as feedstock for green fertilizers, good carrier for
hydrogen produced in electrolysis including the possibility of long-term energy storage etc., the most
popular application would be to serve as an alternative fuel for the maritime industry to decarbonise
the shipping sector which is also the agenda of this report. Green ammonia incorporates electrolysis
powered by renewable energy for hydrogen production instead of using the Steam Methane Reformation
(SMR) technique, while the rest of the procedure is similar to conventional ammonia synthesis using
the Haber-Bosch process wherein the other component Nitrogen, is directly captured from the air. The
Page 14 of 61
==PAGE:22==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
operating conditions of the Haber-Bosch synthesis are significantly high. The operating temperature
is in the range of 350 −550◦C whereas the operating pressure is in the range of 150 −250 barg
[7]. Ammonia synthesis being an exothermic reaction, higher temperature helps shift the equilibrium
towards ammonia formation, improving the overall conversion and yield of the reaction. On the other
hand, high pressure enhances mass transfer, improves catalyst performance, and increases the collision
frequency between reactant molecules, promoting efficient ammonia production.
Figure 4: Conventional ammonia synthesis loop [7]
A conventional ammonia synthesis loop is shown in Figure 4 retrieved from the latest edition
(2022) of the Technology Data for Renewable Fuels published by the Danish Energy Agency[7]. The
syngas, a combination of hydrogen and nitrogen in this case, is sent through multiple compressors
before reaching the synthesis reactor. The synthesised fuel and unreacted syngas are then cooled down
and separated into ammonia and unreacted syngas. The unreacted syngas is then sent into a recycle
loop so that it passes through the reactor multiple times until the desired level of ammonia production
is achieved.
Input
The Haber-Bosch process takes in Hydrogen gas, Nitrogen gas and electrical energy as input. The
Hydrogen is generated through the electrolysis of water whereas nitrogen is extracted from atmospheric
air using an Air Separation Unit (ASU), hence the overall input for the whole system would be water,
air and electrical energy.
Page 15 of 61
==PAGE:23==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Output
The output stream from the ammonia synthesis reactor consists of ammonia, water vapour,
hot water, unreacted syngas and tiny purge stream. The outlet stream from the reactor is in the
temperature range of 350 −550◦C which is cooled, chilled and condensed. The unreacted syngas is
separated from the ammonia product stream in a high-pressure vessel so that they can be recycled
& reintroduced into the reactor to improve process efficiency and reduce raw material consumption,
whereas the product ammonia is stored in a 20 −25 barg pressure vessel. The purge stream is usually
meant to remove any impurities present in the output stream and since the purge stream could contain
ammonia-based impurities, it must be flared off. In the case of electrolysis-based Hydrogen synthesis
and ASU-based Nitrogen capture, both the Hydrogen gas and the Nitrogen gas are of high purity,
almost a 100 % pure which makes the purge stream relatively insignificant. Hence the overall output
from Haber-Bosch synthesis would be Ammonia gas, steam, hot water, purge gas and Oxygen from
ASU. The high temperature of the outlet stream can be used to generate steam for the SOEC process
as mentioned earlier.
Energy Balance
The power consumption of a green ammonia plant is significantly different than a conventional
ammonia production plant as most of the power in a green ammonia plant is consumed by the
electrolyser to produce Hydrogen. For an ammonia synthesis plant operating at 150 bar, it has been
observed that 94.4 % of its power requirement is consumed by the electrolyser, whereas the remaining
5.6 % is split between the ASU (2.1 %), the synthesis loop containing compressors and pumps (2.9 %)
and the ammonia refrigeration unit (0.5 %)[7]. A similar share of power consumption has been applied
to the calculations performed in this report.
Space Constraints
A green ammonia synthesis unit occupies significantly lower space as compared to the conventional
ammonia synthesis systems as the electrolyser and ASU have a lower physical footprint than the
reformer, desulphurization, shift reactors and CO2 removal unit used in a conventional ammonia
synthesis system. Out of all the individual components from a conventional ammonia synthesis system,
only the synthesis reactor would be relevant for green ammonia synthesis systems.
The reactors
typically don’t have a huge footprint, but the major concern with the reactors is their height. It has
been observed that for a vertical 2 catalytic bed reactor with 23.8 % single-pass conversion and a 3 m
inside diameter vessel, the optimal design height would be 22.5 m [13]. The height of the reactor could
vary according to the daily production requirements which would be a significant factor to consider
while setting up these systems offshore.
Page 16 of 61
==PAGE:24==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
CAPEX Requirements
Based on analysis of the cost split data of a conventional ammonia synthesis plant, it can be
observed that the components relevant to green ammonia synthesis contribute to almost 54 % [7]
of the total cost incurred in a conventional ammonia synthesis plant. The relevant components are
namely, ammonia synthesis, storage and Balance of Plant (BOP) which include equipment for plant
startup & shutdown, minor storage facilities etc. This leads to an estimation of specific investment to
be around 350,000 EUR/TPD of ammonia output. In order to include the cost of ASU, the specific
investment is multiplied by a markup factor of 1.09 in the calculations[7]. The fixed O&M expense is
considered to be equal to 3% of the CAPEX whereas the variable OPEX which includes catalyst and
other consumables replacement is set at 0.1 EUR per Ton.
2.3
Auxiliary Systems
In the Haber-Bosch process, auxiliary systems are necessary to assist the primary synthesis reaction
and guarantee its effective functioning.
These supporting systems carry out crucial tasks such as
energy provision, reactant purification, heat control, and product separation. Similarly, electrolysis
also requires auxiliary systems to support the main electrolytic reaction while ensuring its efficient and
safe operation. These auxiliary systems serve various functions, including power supply, cooling, gas
handling, product separation, desalination and water purification.
2.3.1
Desalination Systems
It is evident from the previous sections that water purity is a critical requirement to be maintained
for achieving the desired inlet conditions of the respective electrolysers. One way to assess the purity
of water is by measuring its electrical conductivity. Conductivity is a measure of how well water can
carry an electric current, which is influenced by the presence of dissolved minerals and ions. Pure water
itself is a poor conductor of electricity because it has very few ions. However, as water comes into
contact with minerals and other dissolved substances, it becomes a better conductor. Therefore, high
levels of conductivity often indicate the presence of dissolved solids, which can include salts, metals,
and other contaminants. Conversely, low conductivity suggests that the water has fewer impurities.
Conductivity is typically measured in units of micro siemens per centimetre (µS/cm) or milli siemens
per centimetre (mS/cm). To put it in perspective, normal drinking water typically has a conductivity of
approximately 500 µS/cm and the norms regarding the conductivity of drinking water are different in
each country. On a wider range, the conductivity of potable water should lie in the range of 30 µS/cm
to 800 µS/cm[14].
The purity requirements of the electrolysers are 5.0 µS/cm, 0.2 µS/cm and 1.0 µS/cm for AEC,
PEM and SOEC technologies respectively.
In order to achieve such high purity, the desalination
procedures need to be supplemented with additional post-treatment techniques or enhance the existing
Page 17 of 61
==PAGE:25==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
desalination technologies for a purer product. Desalination methods can be categorized into 3 major
categories based on the underlying principles and processes used to separate salt and other impurities
from water. The 3 main categories of desalination are :
1. Reverse Osmosis (RO)
RO is a method for desalinating water that is suited for both potable and industrial usage since
it eliminates all mineral ions, other dissolved solids, bacteria, and viruses from the water. A
solvent (such as water) moves across a membrane naturally from a low-solute area to a high-solute
area in a process known as standard osmosis. By balancing the solute concentrations on each
side of the membrane, the flow of a pure solvent lowers the system’s free energy and creates
osmotic pressure. Reverse osmosis is the process of using external pressure to change a solvent’s
direction of natural flow.
Using this method, seawater is pressed up against one membrane
surface, forcing salt-depleted water to pass across the membrane and clean water to be released
from the low-pressure side.
Typically, RO can achieve conductivity levels in the range of 10 µS/cm to 100 µS/cm which
doesn’t satisfy the conductivity requirements of the electrolyser technologies being analysed in
this report. Hence, post-treatment techniques must be applied to the desalinated water in order
to achieve the desired low conductivity levels. A deionization resin bed can be used after the RO
process as it contains both cation and anion exchange resins that further remove any remaining
ions, achieving higher purity.
2. Thermal Desalination
The process of thermal desalination replicates the natural water cycle, which includes evaporation
from the ocean, atmospheric buildup, condensation as rain or snow, and collection. Thermal
desalination depends on heat, thus to utilise waste heat, the process is frequently connected to
power plants and refineries. Mechanical Vapour Compression (MVC), Multi-Effect Distillation
(MED), and Multi-Stage Flash Distillation (MSF) are the three primary techniques of thermal
desalination.
Typically, thermal desalination can achieve conductivity levels in the range of 5 µS/cm to
50 µS/cm which can barely satisfy the conductivity requirements of AEC electrolyser but doesn’t
meet the requirements of PEM and SOEC technologies. Hence, post-treatment techniques must
be applied to the desalinated water in order to achieve the desired low conductivity levels. Ion
Exchange Polishing can be applied after the thermal desalination process. The process involves
passing desalinated water through a column or vessel containing either cation or anion exchange
resin, depending on the desired removal. It’s intended to capture any remaining ions that might
not have been effectively removed by the primary treatment processes.
Electrodeionization
(EDI) is also a post treatment technique suitable to be combined with thermal desalination.
Page 18 of 61
==PAGE:26==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
EDI combines ion exchange resins with ion-selective membranes and an electric field to achieve
continuous ion removal thereby achieving higher purity.
3. Electrodialysis (ED) Electrodialysis utilizes ion-exchange membranes and an electrical potential
to remove ions from water. It separates ions based on their charge, selectively allowing cations or
anions to pass through while blocking the opposite charge. Typically, ED can achieve conductivity
levels in the range of 50 µS/cm to 200 µS/cm which doesn’t satisfy the conductivity requirements
of any of the electrolyser technologies being analysed in this report.
Hence, pre-treatment
techniques must be applied to the desalinated water in order to achieve a low conductivity
level. An Ion Exchange pre-treatment method could be applied to reduce the ion load. This
can enhance the efficiency of the electrodialysis process by reducing the load on the membranes
and electrodes. Pairing RO with electrodialysis can also help reduce the initial ion concentration
before subjecting the water to electrodialysis.
2.3.2
Air Separation Unit
The Air Separation Unit, as the name suggests is a device used to separate atmospheric air into its
primary components namely, nitrogen, oxygen, and sometimes inert gases such as argon. The process
of separating air in an ASU typically involves cryogenic distillation, which exploits the different boiling
points of the components in the air. The different stages involved in the cryogenic separation of air as
shown in Figure 5 are:
Compression: Atmospheric air is drawn into the ASU and compressed to higher pressures using
compressors. This compression increases the air’s temperature and pressure.
Pre-treatment: The compressed air undergoes pre-treatment to remove impurities, such as
moisture, carbon dioxide, and hydrocarbons. These impurities can have a negative impact on the
subsequent separation process.
Cooling: The pre-treated air is then cooled down to low temperatures, typically through a series
of heat exchangers. The cooling process is necessary to achieve cryogenic conditions for the subsequent
distillation.
Separation: The cooled air enters a cryogenic distillation column, also known as a fractionation
column or rectification column. Inside the column, the air is separated into its main components,
nitrogen and oxygen, based on the difference in their boiling points. Air normally at a temperature
that is just above the dew point is fed to the bottom of the cryogenic distillation column. Oxygen
which has a higher boiling point than nitrogen is collected at the bottom of the column whereas pure
nitrogen vapour is collected from the top of the column.
Page 19 of 61
==PAGE:27==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Heat absorption: The separated air products are then passed through the same heat exchanger
as the inlet air in order to absorb the heat from the inlet air and then undergo further expansion before
being sent as input for the Haber-Bosch ammonia synthesis process.
Figure 5: Schematic flow diagram of Air Seperation Unit for capturing Nitrogen [7]
Page 20 of 61
==PAGE:28==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
3
System Design & Calculations
The major components of the system are electrolyser, ammonia synthesis reactor, air separation
unit, heat exchangers, wind farm and other auxiliary systems including compressors, desalination units
etc. The major inputs of the complete integrated system are water, electricity and atmospheric air
which gives out output streams of oxygen from the electrolyser & ASU in addition to a stream of
ammonia from the reactor.
A detailed flowchart of the integrated system containing the ammonia synthesis systems, electrolyser
(AEC or PEM), Air Separation Unit (ASU) for capturing Nitrogen gas and the energy source (wind
farm) is shown in Figure 6. The flowchart is common for AEC and PEM technologies as they have
similar input & output streams, however, the flowchart would be slightly different for SOEC as it
can utilise the waste heat emitted by the exothermic reaction of ammonia synthesis. The AC power
generated by the wind farm is converted to a DC power signal before feeding it to the electrolysers as an
input in addition to the input stream of pure water. Electrolysis of water gives out hydrogen and oxygen
as major output streams along with some recoverable heat. Subsequently, hydrogen is sent to the next
phase for the ammonia synthesis process whereas oxygen is either released into the atmosphere or stored
in tanks for commercial sale. Hydrogen from electrolysis is sent to the Haber-Bosch ammonia synthesis
process as an input along with nitrogen retrieved from atmospheric air using an Air Separation Unit
(ASU). The syngas composition of hydrogen and nitrogen is sent to the ammonia synthesis reactor.
Ammonia synthesis involves multiple recycle loops of compression, heating, cooling & separation of
ammonia from the unreacted syngas in order to achieve efficient conversion of syngas to ammonia.
Each pass through the reactor allows for additional opportunities for the syngas to react and form
ammonia. The gas recycle loop continues until the desired level of ammonia production is achieved.
Ammonia synthesis being an exothermic reaction releases a lot of waste heat which can be converted
to steam for use in other auxiliary systems such as desalination units or compressors.
Page 21 of 61
==PAGE:29==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Figure 6: Flow diagram of the complete system for AEC and PEM electrolysers
In the case of using a SOEC electrolyser, the waste heat from the synthesised ammonia exiting the
ammonia synthesis reactor can be used to vaporise water to form steam which serves as an input to the
solid oxide electrolyzer cell. The inlet water stream to the heat exchanger next to the reactor is called
Boiler Feed Water, the steam generated from which in addition to a parallel stream of steam would
be sent to the cathode of the SOEC unit as an input for the electrolysis. The parallel stream of steam
is generated using an electric boiler in order to compensate for the shortage in the volume of steam.
Then the combined steam is sent through another heat exchanger wherein heat is absorbed from the
outlet stream of Hydrogen and oxygen from the electrolyser in order to increase the temperature of the
inlet stream to desired operating conditions. A detailed flowchart containing the ammonia synthesis
systems, SOEC and other auxiliary systems is shown in Figure 7.
Page 22 of 61
==PAGE:30==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Figure 7: Flow diagram of the complete system for SOEC electrolysers
In the following sections, different combinations of electrolysers and other systems would be
discussed. A combination of the AEC electrolysis unit with the rest of the system (ammonia synthesis
system, ASU, desalination unit etc.) would be referred to as AEC technological pathway. Similarly,
a system containing a PEM unit would be referred to as a system following the PEM technological
pathway and one having an SOEC electrolysis unit would be referred to as a system following the SOEC
technological pathway. In other words, different technological pathways consist of different electrolyser
technologies while maintaining the rest of the system constant (with the exception of an additional
steam generator in the case of the SOEC technological pathway) and are referred to as AEC / PEM
/ SOEC technological pathway on the basis of the electrolyser technology being used in the system.
The information used in this report is derived by elaborate calculation with the help of Microsoft
Excel designed to perform various economical analysis, the technology input data for which has been
exclusively derived from the latest edition (2022) of the Technology Data for Renewable Fuels published
by the Danish Energy Agency[7]. Snapshots of the Excel model and the results derived have been
Page 23 of 61
==PAGE:31==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
shown in the Appendix section. The calculations are mainly performed for the following two different
scenarios:
1. Scenario with fixed ammonia production volume of 300 Ton Per Day (TPD) for all technological
pathways
2. Scenario with fixed space availability (42 m x 14 m) for all technological pathways
The upcoming sections focus on the different steps involved in arriving at the Levelized Cost of
Ammonia (LCOA) for different technological combinations available on the market. The first step
involved in the process is to understand the size of the systems required for both scenarios based on
their production capacity. The ammonia production capacity is fixed at 300 TPD for the scenario with
fixed production whereas the maximum production capacity of all the technological pathways for the
scenario with fixed space availability is calculated in subsection 3.1. SOEC technological pathway might
require a steam generator to meet the steam volume requirements of SOEC in addition to the steam
generated from the waste heat emitted by the ammonia synthesis reactor, calculations related to which
are shown in subsection 3.2. Once the production volumes and additional (SOEC) steam requirement
for each scenario are known, the energy consumed for producing the said volumes of ammonia must be
calculated as shown in subsection 3.3. Consecutively, the expenses incurred throughout the lifecycle
of each scenario must be calculated in order to arrive at the LCOA values as shown in subsection 3.7.
The Capacity Factor of the system and its relationship with the ratio of excess power supplied to the
system have been discussed in subsection 3.5. This section concludes with sensitivity analysis plots of
the different technical & economic parameters involved in the operation of the system.
3.1
Calculate maximum possible ammonia production based on space constraints
The space available on a rig or a vessel is split between the electrolyser, ammonia synthesis reactor
and other auxiliary systems such as compressors, storage tanks, ASU, desalination unit etc. This report
analyzes the technicalities involved in extending the lifetime of an old oil rig with the dimensions of
42 m x 14 m giving a total floor area of 588 m2 on one level of the rig. The rig being considered
in this scenario has 3 major levels for installing equipment, out of which 2 levels would be used for
the electrolyser unit whereas the remaining 1 level would be used to house the auxiliary systems. The
ammonia synthesis reactor in the optimal case assessment[13] has a diameter of 3 m. Hence, considering
an additional buffer of 1 m, the area required for the reactor would be approximately 12.5 m2. The
major constraint with the ammonia synthesis reactor is its height which spans to approximately 22 m
in the referred report. Due to this fact, the platform must be modified in such a way that the reactor
is housed at the bottom level and spans vertically across all levels as per the height requirement of the
reactor.
The space required for the operation & maintenance of the electrolyzers and other systems must
be considered in this calculation. Based on a thumb rule, an area of approximately 20% of the available
Page 24 of 61
==PAGE:32==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
space must be allotted for the O&M activities.
Area available = Area of level −Foot area of reactor −O&M space requirement
= (558 −12.56) ∗(1 −0.2) = 460.35 m2
(9)
The area available on each level of the oil rig is shown in Equation 9. Based on the available area,
each electrolyser type will have a unique maximum installable capacity which can be calculated using
the data shown in the "Space requirements" row from Table 1. It is observed that in order to produce
1 kg of Ammonia, 0.18 kg of Hydrogen gas and 0.84 kg[7] of Nitrogen gas are required. Once the
production potential of Hydrogen is determined, the corresponding daily production of Ammonia can
be calculated using the ratio between the input and output products as mentioned above.
Table 2: Production capacities for a fixed space
Dimensions of platform
Technology
Hydrogen Production
Ammonia Production
Ton/day
Ton/day
42 m x 14 m
AEC
18.41
102.30
PEM
9.21
51.15
SOEC
7.67
42.63
The production values shown in Table 2 are very low and would lead to extremely high levelized
costs in the case of PEM and SOEC. The relation between levelized cost and production capacity
would be explained in the upcoming sections.
Figure 8: Weekly production capabilities of different electrolyser technologies based on space constraint
The weekly ammonia production capability of the system based on different electrolyser technologies
Page 25 of 61
==PAGE:33==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
under the same space constraint and weather conditions is shown in Figure 81. The offshore wind farm
to be set up for catering to the power requirements of the system is modelled on the wind conditions
observed at the Horns Rev 2 site in the year 2001, i.e. before the installation of the Horns Rev 2
wind farm. The upcoming calculations regarding the capacity factor of the system have been done
based on this weather pattern and its subsequent power production. A similar pattern is observed for
the scenario in which the daily production volume of hydrogen (and subsequently ammonia) is fixed
irrespective of the space constraint for all three electrolyser technologies. This scenario would be useful
in understanding the Levelised Cost of Ammonia (LCOA) under different electrolyser technologies with
the same ammonia production goals.
3.2
Reuse of waste heat from Haber-Bosch synthesis for steam generation in the
case of SOEC
SOEC when integrated with the Haber-Bosch synthesis process has the unique advantage of
utilizing the waste heat generated from the ammonia synthesis process. As mentioned earlier, the
Haber-Bosch ammonia synthesis process is an exothermic reaction thereby releasing a lot of waste heat
which can be utilised by extracting the heat using a heat exchanger as shown in Figure 7. The boiler
feed water fed into the heat exchanger is converted into steam which is fed into the SOEC cell as
an input stream. The temperature of the steam generated from the waste heat is further increased
to approximately 700 ◦C using a heat exchanger on the outlet stream of the electrolyser so that the
steam attains a temperature equal to the operating temperature of the SOEC electrolyser. However,
the steam generated from the waste heat may not be sufficient to fulfil the input needs of the electrolyser
in order to generate the desired amount of hydrogen. Hence, an additional boiler would be required to
compensate for the shortcomings in the volume of steam generated from the waste heat.
The steam input requirement for the SOEC varies according to the hydrogen production goals.
By comparing the molar ratio of hydrogen and steam (water) it is deduced that in order to produce
1 kg of hydrogen, an input of 9 kg of steam is required. This gives us the volume of water required
to generate the desired volume of hydrogen. Once the input volume of water is known, the total heat
required to vaporize the desired volume of water can be calculated as we know the vaporization heat
of the water to be 2260 kJ/kg. The total heat of vaporization value can be converted to the energy
unit of Watt-hour using the conversion factor between joules and watt-hour. It is known that 1 kWh
of energy is equal to 3600 kJ of heat energy. Using this conversion ratio, the daily requirement of
energy to vapourize water can be calculated which is then compared with the heat released from the
Haber-Bosch ammonia synthesis process to assess the power rating of the required additional boiler.
The heat released from the ammonia synthesis process can be calculated by multiplying the number
1The data for plotting the above curves are attached as a spreadsheet considering the number of columns involved.
Page 26 of 61
==PAGE:34==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
of moles of ammonia produced with the energy released in producing a mole of ammonia.
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇀
↽2NH3(g) + 92.4 kJ
(10)
The molar mass of ammonia is 17 g/mol, using which, the number of moles of ammonia produced
per day can be calculated by dividing the mass of ammonia produced per day with the molar mass
of ammonia as shown in Table 3.
Synthesis of 2 moles of releases 92.4 kJ of energy as shown in
Equation 10[15] which is used to calculate the total energy released for producing the desired volume
of ammonia. The heat energy in kJ is then converted to energy in terms of kWh as mentioned earlier.
The final energy released per day in the synthesis of ammonia is compared with the energy required
per day for producing the desired amount of steam to estimate the power rating of the additional boiler
as shown in Table 3 and Table 4. For simplicity in calculation, the losses related to the conversion
of electrical energy into heat energy haven’t been considered. In other words, the electrical efficiency
of the additional steam boiler is assumed to be 100 % in the upcoming calculation due to which the
electrical energy provided to the boiler is assumed to be exactly equal to the heat energy generated by
the boiler.
Scenario with fixed ammonia production volumes
In the case of fixed production scenario, the daily fuel production capability of the system has been
capped at 300 ton/day. Subsequently, the required hydrogen production would be 54 tons/day as we
know that 1 ton of ammonia requires 0.18 tons of hydrogen and 0.84 tons[7] of nitrogen for the synthesis
reaction. As mentioned earlier, the synthesis of 1kg of hydrogen requires 9 kg of water/steam. Hence
54 tons of hydrogen would require 486 tons of water. SOEC takes water as an input in the gaseous
form, i.e. as steam instead of its liquid state. Hence 486 tons of water needs to be vaporized to meet
the steam demands of SOEC. The heat energy required to vaporize 486 tons of water is calculated
to be 305.1 MWh(h) using the vaporization heat of water (2260 kJ/kg) and the joule-watt conversion
ratio (1 kWh = 3600 kJ) as described earlier. The heat energy released per day in the synthesis of
300 tons of ammonia is calculated to be 226.47 MWh(h) which can be used to vaporize water to meet
the steam requirements of SOEC. But it can be observed that the energy released from the ammonia
synthesis process is less than the energy required to vaporize the desired volume of water, 486 tons in
this case. Hence an additional boiler would be installed to meet the demands of SOEC, the energy
requirement of which is the difference between the energy required to vaporise 486 tons of water and
the energy released by the synthesis of 300 tons of ammonia. Hence, the excess heat energy required
to meet the steam demands of SOEC is calculated to be 78.62 MWh(h). As mentioned earlier, under
the assumption that the steam generator has an electrical efficiency of 100 %, the electrical energy
required to generate the desired heat would turn out to be 78.62 MWh(e). It can also be expressed in
terms of power rating as a boiler of 3.27 MW or 3276.22 kW of power rating.
Page 27 of 61
==PAGE:35==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Table 3: Power requirement for the additional boiler in a fixed production scenario
Scenario with fixed space availability
In the case of fixed space scenario, the daily fuel production capability of the system has been
capped at 85.25 ton/day based on the hydrogen production capability which in turn depends on the
space available for the electrolyser. The hydrogen production capability of SOEC unit for 2 levels of
a 42 m x 14 m platform is fixed at 15.34 ton after considering the space requirements for ammonia
synthesis and other O&M requirements as mentioned in earlier sections of the report. As mentioned
earlier, the synthesis of 1kg of hydrogen requires 9 kg of water/steam. Hence 15.34 tons of hydrogen
would require 138.105 tons of water. The heat energy required to vaporize 138.105 tons of water is
calculated to be 86.70 MWh(h) using calculation methodologies similar to the other scenario. The heat
energy released per day in the synthesis of 15.34 tons of ammonia is calculated to be 64.36 MWh(h)
which can be used to vaporize water to meet the steam requirements of SOEC. Similar to the previous
Page 28 of 61
==PAGE:36==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
scenario, the heat energy released from the ammonia synthesis process is less than the heat energy
required to vaporize the desired volume of water, 15.34 tons in this case. Hence an additional boiler
would be installed to meet the demands of SOEC, the energy requirement of which is the difference
between the energy required to vaporise 15.34 tons of water and the energy released by the synthesis
of 85.25 tons of ammonia. Hence, the excess energy required to meet the steam demands of SOEC is
calculated to be 22.34 MWh(h). Similar to the previous case, under the assumption that the steam
generator has an electrical efficiency of 100 %, the electrical energy required to generate the desired
heat would turn out to be 22.34 MWh(e). It can also be expressed in terms of power rating as a boiler
of 0.93 MW or 931.00 kW of power rating.
Table 4: Power requirement for the additional boiler in a fixed space scenario
Page 29 of 61
==PAGE:37==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
3.3
Calculation of energy consumption for individual systems involved in the
synthesis of Ammonia
The methodology applied to calculate the energy requirements of the major components in the
system has been explained in this section.
The corresponding calculations are shown in Table 17
and Table 18 in Appendix A.1. The energy consumption of individual units involved in the system
can be calculated by interpolating the values predicted for 2030 in the latest edition (2022) of the
Technology Data for Renewable Fuels published by the Danish Energy Agency [7]. The input power
is calculated based on the required hydrogen production by maintaining the same efficiency as the
values predicted for 2030. The required hydrogen production is estimated from earlier sections and has
been fed into Table 17 as an input. The yearly downtime or unavailability of the individual systems
has been considered which gives the yearly availability percentage of the systems as shown under the
column titled "Availability". The yearly production volume from each technology has been calculated
after considering the availability of the system.
It hence is not equal to the product of the daily
output with the number of days in a year. The power required per day is directly calculated as the
quotient attained after dividing the desired annual hydrogen production by the annual production per
MW of input power. This gives an hourly energy requirement after considering the downtime of the
electrolysers. The attained value of power requirements is used in upcoming calculations regarding the
required wind farm, corresponding CAPEX & OPEX requirements etc.
In the case of ammonia production, the corresponding energy requirement is calculated similarly,
the only difference being an addition of the power requirement of an Air Separation Unit (ASU). The
power consumed in the ammonia synthesis loop and the ASU loop for a system producing 376 tons of
ammonia per day is calculated to be 5.30 MW and 3.30 MW respectively[7]. These values are then
scaled to attain the energy consumption values of the required ammonia production for each technology.
Based on the above-mentioned methodology, the daily and annual energy requirements of the
major components involved in the synthesis of offshore green ammonia are calculated in Table 17.
The other major input for the system would be water. The quantity of water required to produce
the desired volume of hydrogen can be calculated by understanding the molar ratio of the products.
Hydrogen is produced from water as per the decomposition reaction shown in Equation 11.
2 H2O →2 H2 + O2
(11)
Hence, 2 moles of water (H2O) are required in order to produce 2 moles of hydrogen (H2), which can
be simplified as - 1 mole H2O produces 1 mole H2. The molar mass of water is 18 g and the molar
mass of hydrogen is 2 g. So, 18 g of H2O is required to produce 2 g of H2. It can be further simplified
to say that 9 g of H2O is required to produce 1 g of H2. This ratio is used to calculate the volume of
water required for electrolysis. Hydrogen, which is an output of electrolysis, would be considered as an
Page 30 of 61
==PAGE:38==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
input stream for the ammonia synthesis reaction along with Nitrogen gas captured from air using an
Air Separation Unit (ASU). The ammonia synthesis reaction consumes 0.84 ton of nitrogen for every
ton of ammonia produced[7], hence the volume of nitrogen required for the synthesis of the desired
volume of ammonia can be calculated.
Scenario with fixed ammonia production volumes
A summary of the energy & product streams entering and exiting the system is shown in Table 5 for
the different technological pathways having an equal production capacity of ammonia. As mentioned
earlier, AEC and PEM are considered to have equal electrical efficiency due to which the energy
requirement values are equal for AEC and PEM throughout Table 5. The heat outputs are calculated
based on the "Heat released per MWh of input energy" values mentioned in the latest edition (2022) of
the Technology Data for Renewable Fuels published by the Danish Energy Agency. It can be observed
that the technological pathway based on SOEC has no heat output. This is due to the effective use of
waste heat. The waste heat released from the ammonia synthesis reactor is used to generate steam for
SOEC while the heat released by the products of electrolysis (hydrogen and oxygen streams) is used to
increase the temperature of the steam up to the operating temperature of the electrolyser as discussed
earlier.
Table 5: Power requirement of different electrolyser technology for fixed production scenario
Given that the lower heating value of ammonia is 5.2 MWh/ton[16], ammonia production per
day in tons can be rewritten in terms of MWh as shown in Table 5. The overall efficiency of the
system, i.e. efficiency of conversion between electrical energy input and liquid ammonia output can be
calculated by dividing the output ammonia energy by the input electrical energy. The overall efficiency
of SOEC-based systems is significantly higher than the other two pathways due to the efficient reuse of
waste heat as discussed earlier. Hence, a reduction in CAPEX and OPEX of SOEC units could level
the playing field and improve the competition between electrolyser technologies.
Scenario with fixed space availability
Similarly, Table 6 gives a summary of the energy & product streams entering and exiting the system
for the different technological pathways under the fixed space option. The calculations corresponding
Page 31 of 61
==PAGE:39==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
to the results shown here are shown in Table 18 placed in Appendix A.1. It can be observed that AEC
& PEM have different production volumes and energy requirements in contrast to the previous table.
This is due to the different space requirements of each electrolyser technology which leads to different
production volumes of hydrogen and consecutively of ammonia as well.
Table 6: Power requirement of different electrolyser technology for fixed space scenario
The hourly power requirements calculated from both scenarios are then used to estimate the
capacity of the wind farm to be installed in order to cater to the power requirements of each system
configuration. Concepts such as the capacity factor of the system and its dependence on the ratio
between the power requirement of the system and the installed power generation capacity of the wind
farm would be discussed in upcoming sections.
3.4
Calculation for the CAPEX & OPEX of the major components in the system
The major components of the system considered in the economic assessment are electrolysis units,
ammonia synthesis units and wind farms.
All the calculations done in the economic analysis are
based on values predicted for the year 2030. The capital expenditure related to the installation of the
electrolysers can be calculated as per the relation shown in Table 1 which is derived from the data
published in Technology Data for Renewable Fuels (2022 edition)[7]. The CAPEX is expressed in 2
formats in Table 1, in terms of USD per kW of input energy and Euro per kg of Hydrogen output
per day. Given that we are comparing technologies with varying levels of electrical efficiency, it would
be fair to compare the technologies based on the expense for the daily output of ammonia instead of
the input electrical energy. The OPEX on the other hand, is considered as a fraction of the capital
expenditure for ease of calculation. The yearly OPEX values are hence fixed at 2% of CAPEX for
AEC, 4% of CAPEX for PEM and 12% of CAPEX for SOEC. The relatively huge contribution towards
O&M in the case of SOEC is due to the poor stack life of SOEC, in other words, the O&M expense
of SOEC covers the replacement cost of the stack which has a relatively low lifetime of 20,000 hours
as mentioned earlier, thereby needing rather frequent replacement and servicing as compared to AEC
and PEM.
In the case of the ammonia synthesis systems, it has been observed that the specific investment for
the construction year of 2030 is approximately 283,000 Euros for a ton of ammonia production per
Page 32 of 61
==PAGE:40==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
day whereas the O&M expense amounts to 3% of the specific investment, that is, approximately 8500
Euros[7] for a ton of ammonia produced per day. These values have been used to calculate the CAPEX
and OPEX of ammonia synthesis systems under various scenarios in this report.
In the case of the wind farm, the CAPEX and OPEX costs were estimated by studying the trend
of costs published in each edition of the National Renewable Energy Laboratory report between the
years 2020 and 2016[17][18][19][20][21]. The percentage difference of expenditure between consecutive
years were found out and the average value of this data has been taken as the reduction factor to be
applied for upcoming years. This way, the CAPEX value for 2030 was derived to be 1632 USD/kW and
OPEX values to be 38 USD/kW. These CAPEX costs include all capital expenses until the onshore
substation including the array cables, export cables, and offshore substation. Since the CAPEX value
includes all the costs involved in setting up an offshore wind farm for onshore electrification, the option
of laying cables for exporting electrical energy at times of high production can be considered as well.
On the other hand, if it is decided to not lay cables to the shore, then the calculations done in this
report can serve as a very conservative assessment, that is, the cost of setting up the wind farm would
be lower than the calculated value if all the power is consumed offshore and not sent back to shore at
times of peak production. This brings us to the discussion about what should the capacity of the wind
farm be with respect to the electrical power requirement of the whole system. This is discussed in
detail in upcoming sections with a sensitivity analysis of its impact on the levelized cost of ammonia.
Scenario with fixed ammonia production volumes
In the case of fixed production, which is nominated to be 300 metric tons per day in the upcoming
calculations, the space available is not considered a limiting factor. In other words, the calculations
are performed to produce the same volume of ammonia using all three electrolyser technological
routes while neglecting the space requirements of respective technologies. Due to the fixed production
parameter, the final CAPEX and OPEX costs of the technologies would increase from AEC towards
SOEC following the trend of the specific investment costs per kg of hydrogen produced by the respective
technologies.
The incremental trend in total CAPEX and OPEX values for routes based on each
technology ranging from AEC to SOEC can be observed in Table 7. The significantly larger yearly
OPEX contribution for SOEC is due to the fact that electrolyser technology has a yearly OPEX
equal to approximately 12 % of the specific investment as mentioned earlier. It is a relatively newer
technology in its nacelle state. However, the operational expenditure could reduce in the future with
technological advancements, the effect of which is analysed in upcoming sections involving sensitivity
analysis of various parameters involved in the system.
Page 33 of 61
==PAGE:41==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Table 7: CAPEX and OPEX of system components for fixed production scenario
Scenario with fixed space availability
The varying CAPEX and OPEX values of each technological route at a fixed ratio of 80% between
electrical power requirement and the wind farm capacity is shown in Table 8. The ammonia production
per day reduces from AEC towards SOEC due to the space constraints of the technology. The space
is fixed to be on a platform of dimensions 42 m x 14 m as discussed earlier, hence due to the higher
space requirements of PEM and SOEC, they have a lower production of ammonia for the same available
space. This consecutively leads to a lower CAPEX & OPEX as lower ammonia production translates to
lower hydrogen requirement which effectively means lower power requirement and hence fewer turbines.
It can be seen from Table 8 that the CAPEX and OPEX of the wind farm are the driving factors of the
total CAPEX and OPEX values as they are significantly higher than that of the electrolysis technology
or the ammonia synthesis technology values.
Table 8: CAPEX and OPEX of system components for fixed space scenario
3.5
Capacity factor of the system
The capacity factor in this case is the ratio between the actual load at which the system operates
over a given period of time and the theoretical maximum operable load over that period. In order to
assess the capacity factor of the system, the available potential for the production of electrical energy
must be understood. A year-long wind speed data observed at a meteorological mast installed on the
Horns Rev 2 site before the installation of the wind farm has been assessed in this report. Based on
Page 34 of 61
==PAGE:42==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
the wind speeds available on a 10-minute interval, the average hourly wind speed was calculated which
was then further used to calculate the hourly power production on-site based on Equation 12 wherein,
Cp represents the coefficient of performance of the turbine which has been set at 42 % in this case, ρ
represents the air density (1.225 kg/m3), R represents the radius of the turbine (118 m) and V denotes
the average wind speed in that hour. The turbine considered for this report is the V236-15.0 MW with
a rated power capacity of 15 MW and a rotor diameter of 236 m [22].
P = 1
2 Cp ρ π R2 V3
(12)
The maximum extractable power calculated through Equation 12 is then capped at the rated power
of 15 MW for wind speeds exceeding the rated wind speed.
A markup is applied to the hourly
power requirements of each technological route (including power requirement for electrolyser, ammonia
synthesis and other auxiliary systems) in order to cater for the variation in power production throughout
the year, this markup would be the ratio between projected power requirement and the corresponding
wind farm rated capacity.
The number of turbines to be installed is calculated by dividing the
marked-up power requirement by the rated capacity of the turbine (15 MW) and then rounding it
up to the next whole number.
Table 9: Capacity factor of the system calculated for 4 random hours of a year
For example, if AEC technological route has a power requirement of 117.16 MW and the ratio
between projected power requirement & the corresponding wind farm rated capacity is considered to
be 80%, then the wind farm should be of a higher capacity such that 80% of it could cater for the
power requirement of the system. This gives us a required wind farm capacity of 146.44 MW, based
on which we can calculate the required number of 15 MW wind turbines to be 10 units. Once we have
the number of turbines, it is then multiplied by the hourly power production which was calculated
earlier to obtain the hourly power production of the park without considering the shadow effect of the
turbines. The power production is set to 0 MW if the wind speed is less than the cut-in speed and a
minimum operable load for the fuel synthesis system is set at 20 for AEC and PEM pathways % such
that any power supply below the 20 % mark of the power requirement would not be enough to run the
system thereby giving an operating load of 0 % as shown in Table 9. Similarly, the minimum operable
load for a SOEC-based system is set at 10 % owing to the heavy investment of SOEC. This way, the
Page 35 of 61
==PAGE:43==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
hourly wind farm power production can be attained for the complete year (8760 hours). The hourly
power production is then compared with the hourly power requirement to ascertain if the system is
running at full load (when power production exceeds the power requirement) or partial load (when
power production is less than the power requirement). The load values are calculated and the yearly
average of these load values gives us the capacity factor of the system. The capacity factor of the
system of the case shown in Table 9 for 4 non-consecutive hours of a year is calculated to be 59 %
which serves as an example to understand the calculation.
3.6
Deriving the optimal ratio between projected power requirement and the
corresponding wind farm rated capacity
Once the electrical power requirements of all the components in the system are calculated, the
corresponding capacity of the wind farm required to supply electrical energy throughout the lifetime
of the synthesis system can be estimated. However, the wind farm capacity cannot be directly equal
to the power requirements of the system as the wind farm doesn’t always operate at full potential
thereby leading to a significantly large downtime for the ammonia synthesis system. In other words,
for a power requirement of say 100 MW, installing a wind farm of rated capacity of exactly 100 MW
may not be the correct decision as the wind farm doesn’t operate at full potential for most part of the
year thereby leading to inefficient use of the production capabilities of the system. Although installing
a wind farm of capacity exactly equal to the power requirements of the system would bring down the
CAPEX of the project significantly as the major component of the CAPEX is the wind farm cost, the
system will not be able to produce fuel for almost 40% of the year as shown in Figure 9 which is a
significant loss for investment of such huge scale. The optimal ratio of electrical power requirement
and the installed wind farm capacity must be deduced by analysing the capacity factor of the complete
system at various points as it is always desirable to have a higher capacity factor. A higher capacity
factor for the system can be attained by increasing the capacity of the installed wind farm but it comes
with a significantly higher CAPEX and OPEX thereby increasing the LCOA as shown in Figure 12
and Figure 11. Hence, it is crucial to choose an optimal range for the ratio of the electrical power
requirement and the installed wind farm capacity, which would be referred to as the capacity utilization
of the wind farm from hereon. In simpler words, it represents the percentage utilization of the rated
capacity of the wind farm.
Scenario with fixed ammonia production volumes
The green fuel synthesis capabilities are fixed at 300 tons/day for the upcoming analysis in order
to understand the influence of the "capacity utilization of the wind farm" on the capacity factor of the
complete system. The capacity factor of the system would reduce as the electrical energy demand &
supply ratio tends to become 100 %. The reason supporting the trend is that the wind farms would
not be able to supply the minimum required power to the system thereby leading to operation at lower
Page 36 of 61
==PAGE:44==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
loads and consecutively larger downtimes. A similar trend can be observed in Figure 9 (data for which
is shown in Table 19 of Appendix A.2) wherein the capacity factor of the system drops significantly
as the capacity utilization of the wind farm increases to reach 100 %. The values for PEM and AEC
overlap with each other due to the assumption of equal efficiency for both technologies in addition
to the assumption of equal production capabilities for all the electrolyser technologies. This leads to
an equal power requirement for AEC and PEM which directly translates to an equal number of wind
turbines and successively an equal capacity factor for the system at all stages for the 2 technological
routes. However, if the production capabilities are varied due to space constraints, the system capacity
factor values for AEC and PEM technology would not coincide with each other as different production
volumes require different wind farm capacities thereby leading to unequal capacity factors between the
two technologies except at a few points wherein an equal number of turbines are required as observed
in Figure 10.
Figure 9: CF Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed production scenario;
Source data - Table 19
Scenario with fixed space availability
In the case of fixed space, two floors of a platform with dimensions 42 m x 14 m are considered
for the calculations. It is understood from the space requirements of each technology as observed
in Table 1 that the space requirement per ton of hydrogen production increases from AEC towards
SOEC. In other words, AEC would produce the largest amount of Hydrogen, followed by PEM and
Page 37 of 61
==PAGE:45==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
SOEC in a decreasing order, which directly translates to corresponding ammonia production. This
also means that PEM and SOEC have a lower energy requirement and hence fewer turbines. This
explains the flat lines on the chart plotted in Figure 10 which increase from AEC to PEM and SOEC
as changing the capacity utilization of the wind farm has a lesser impact on PEM and SOEC due to
the relatively lower electrical power demand of these technologies as mentioned earlier. In other words,
since the production and corresponding power requirement are lower for PEM & SOEC, it would take
bigger differences in the capacity utilization of the wind farm for it to reflect a change in the number
of turbines required for the system which effectively changes the capacity factor of the system. As
SOEC has lower power demand than PEM which in turn has a lower power requirement than AEC,
the capacity factor of the system tends to stay constant for a longer period in SOEC. The variations in
the capacity utilization of the wind farm (for example 55 % to 75 %) can be satisfied without adding
or removing a turbine as the original power demand is significantly low. It can be understood by
analysing the results in Table 10 that technologies with lower power demand have a lower reaction to
the change in the capacity utilization of the wind farm.
Table 10: Number of 15 MW turbines required by the system for different capacity utilization of the
wind farm in a fixed space scenario
The capacity factor of the system for different capacity utilization of the wind farm in a fixed
space scenario is plotted in Figure 10 (data for which is shown in Table 20 of Appendix A.2). The flat
lines observed in the plot can be correlated with the constant number of turbines under the respective
capacity utilization of the wind farm as shown in Table 10. The capacity factors of the system are
strictly based on the power input of the farm which stays unchanged under certain periods of capacity
utilization of the wind farm leading to a flat curve under such ratios.
Page 38 of 61
==PAGE:46==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Figure 10: CF Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed space scenario; Source
data - Table 20
3.7
Calculation for the Levelised Cost of Ammonia (LCOA)
The Levelised Cost of Ammonia (LCOA), also known as the unit cost represents the average
lifetime cost over a project lifetime. LCOA is an economic indicator used to evaluate the economic
development of technology over time; offshore green fuel synthesis in our case. LCOA can be considered
to be the minimum selling price per unit of production in order to keep the project profitable in the
long run.
A simple LCOA is just the ratio of annual expenses to the annual energy production.
However, this report calculates annual CAPEX cost based on post-tax values and also introduces a
tax adjustment factor to account for the assumption. The annual CAPEX expense is equivalent to
the product of the Capital Recovery Factor (CRF) and the total CAPEX of the project. CRF is the
ratio of a constant annuity to the present value of receiving that annuity for a given length of time
and can be calculated using Equation 13. The tax adjustment factor can be calculated as shown in
Equation 14.
CRF = (1 + WACCaftertax)lifetime · WACCaftertax
(1 + WACCaftertax)lifetime −1
(13)
TaxAdj = 1 −Tax Rate · PVd
1 −Tax Rate
(14)
wherein, PVd is the Present Value of Depreciation, in other words, it is the total depreciation percentage
of the asset over the lifetime of its operation in present-day value estimated considering the discount
rate. Final LCOA can be calculated using Equation 15.
LCOA = CAPEX · CFR · TaxAdj + O&MCost
Annual Energy Production
(15)
Page 39 of 61
==PAGE:47==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
However, it must be noted that the LCOA calculated in this report does not consider costs such as :
1. Installation of new pipeline network or strengthening of existing network
2. Leasing of ships to transport synthesized ammonia back to shore
3. Renovations or modifications required for the offshore platform
4. Pressurized storage tank and other auxiliary systems such as desalination unit etc.
Scenario with fixed ammonia production volumes
In order to understand the economic trends of the three technological pathways, the production
capacity is fixed at an arbitrary value, say 300 tons/day of ammonia in this case. The calculations
are done with the capacity utilization of the wind farm set at 80 %. The number of wind turbines for
each technological route is shown in Table 11 in order to understand the power requirements and the
corresponding CAPEX & OPEX costs of each route. The split up of the CAPEX and OPEX costs is
shown in Table 7 wherein it can be observed that SOEC having a higher electrical efficiency than the
other 2 technologies, has lower power requirements and hence its CAPEX allocation for the wind farm
is lower. But the CAPEX and OPEX of the electrolyser technology are significantly higher in the case
of SOEC due to its technological limitations such as frequent stack replacement.
Table 11: Levelized Cost of Ammonia production for fixed volume production scenario
The LCOA for different capacity utilization of the wind farm in a fixed space scenario is plotted
in Figure 11(data for which is shown in Table 21 of Appendix A.3). Here, the change in LCOA is more
profound as compared to the fixed space scenario due to the higher fuel production and its respective
high power requirement which upon a change of say 10 % in the capacity utilization of the wind farm
would follow suit leading to an increase or a decrease in the capacity of the wind farm. LCOA is highly
sensitive to the size of the wind farm as CAPEX and OPEX costs of the wind farms are the major
contributors to the total cost and subsequent LCOA calculations. Similar to the previous scenario,
flat lines on the LCOA curve are caused by indifference in the installed capacity of the wind farm for
minor changes in the capacity utilization of the wind farm, for example, between the values of 70 %
and 75 % on the x-axis for the SOEC-based technological route.
Page 40 of 61
==PAGE:48==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Figure 11: LCOA Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed production scenario;
Source data - Table 21
Scenario with fixed space availability
The levelized cost of ammonia production on a platform of fixed space availability (2 floors of 42
m x 14 m) with capacity utilization of the wind farm being 80 % is shown in Table 12. As the space
is fixed, the green fuel production volume reduces from AEC to SOEC due to the space constraints
of the electrolyser technologies. Their respective requirement for wind turbines and the corresponding
CAPEX & OPEX values of the whole system is shown in Table 12. The LCOA is then calculated
using Equation 15 different capacity utilization of the wind farm and is plotted in Table 12.
Table 12: Levelized Cost of Ammonia production for fixed space scenario
The LCOA for different capacity utilization of the wind farm in a fixed space scenario is plotted
in Figure 12 (data for which is shown in Table 22 of Appendix A.3). The long flatline observed under
Page 41 of 61
==PAGE:49==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
SOEC in the plot is due to the lower fuel production and corresponding power requirement of the
SOEC technological route which stays unchanged for certain capacity utilization of the wind farm.
This wouldn’t be the case wherein the production is higher as shown in Figure 11.
Figure 12: LCOA Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed space scenario; Source
data - Table 22
The results obtained in the above-plotted graphs show the optimal LCOA for the complete system
to be at 100 % utilization of the wind farm. A reference article on a similar topic titled "Converting
offshore wind energy into green hydrogen on existing oil and gas platforms in the North Sea"[23] has
calculated the optimal Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH) of H2 to be the lowest at approximately
78.1 % utilization of the wind farm. Although the results are slightly contradicting, it could be due
to differences in assumptions such as the bulk ordering cost of wind farms, power shedding costs etc.
It should also be noted that the calculations performed in this report are for the complete integrated
system, the decoupling of which could lead to different results as it grants the freedom to optimize the
individual parts of the system. The effect of decoupling the synthesis systems (hydrogen synthesis and
ammonia synthesis) by introducing an intermediate storage system is discussed in upcoming sections.
To get a better understanding of the LCOA obtained in both cases, the scenario with fixed
ammonia production volumes and the scenario with fixed space availability, the LCOA results of both
scenarios obtained for different capacity utilization of the wind farm have been plotted in Figure 13
(data for which is shown in Table 23 of Appendix A.3). It can be observed that the trendline for
both scenarios under the AEC pathway is closer to each other as compared to the other technological
pathways. This is due to the fact that the production volumes in both scenarios are closer to each
Page 42 of 61
==PAGE:50==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
other for AEC as compared to the other technological pathways. AEC technological pathway produces
300 TPD in case of fixed production and 204.60 TPD in case of fixed space scenario, whereas SOEC
technological pathway also produces 300 TPD in case of fixed production but produces only 85.25 TPD
in case of fixed space scenario. The effect of the difference in production volumes on the LCOA of a
system can be clearly observed from the below-shown plot.
Figure 13: Comparative analysis of LCOA for both Fixed Production (FP) and Fixed Space (FS)
scenarios; Source data - Table 23
3.8
Sensitivity Analysis - Impact of various parameters on the LCOA
3.8.1
LCOA Vs daily production volumes
The levelized cost of ammonia is heavily dependent on the CAPEX and OPEX of the wind farm
to be set up for powering the complete system. The capacity of the wind farm to be installed depends
on the ammonia production goals of the system. The LCOA of the system tends to decrease with an
increase in the ammonia production capability of the system. The CAPEX calculation of the installed
wind farm does not consider the factor of bulk pricing, hence, the cost per turbine would be the same
irrespective of the number of turbines purchased at a time. Hence, LCOA would increase every time
a turbine is added which can be seen in Figure 142. It can be observed that the curve of LCOA peaks
2The data for plotting the relevant curves are attached as a spreadsheet considering the number of columns involved.
Page 43 of 61
==PAGE:51==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
for every increase of 30 tons per day in ammonia production in the case of AEC & PEM based systems
whereas a similar pattern is observed for every increase of 40 tons per day in ammonia production in
the case of SOEC based system.
Figure 14: LCOA Vs daily production volumes
However, the peak caused by the addition of a new turbine does not surpass the previous peak, i.e.
the peak caused by the addition of the previous turbine as the production volume increases significantly.
For example, in the case of SOEC based system, a peak at 459.18 EUR/ton can be observed for a
daily production volume of 190 tons whereas the successive peak at a daily production volume of 230
tons/day has a LCOA of 456.90 EUR/ton. This downward trend can be observed in subsequent peaks
as the production volume increases. The next peak occurs at 270 tons/day which has an LCOA of
455.33 EUR/ton and the following one occurs at 320 tons/day which has an LCOA of 450.30 EUR/ton.
Hence it can be observed that LCOA always reduces with an increase in the production volumes of
ammonia. However, the magnitude of LCOA for higher production volumes would be significantly
lower if bulk pricing of the turbines, electrolysers & other components are considered in the LCOA
calculations.
Page 44 of 61
==PAGE:52==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
3.8.2
CAPEX and OPEX variation for SOEC
The Technological Readiness Level (TRL) of SOEC is placed at 5 whereas the TRL of AEC and
PEM have been assessed to be at 9 and 8 respectively. This is due to the fact that AEC has been in
use for the longest time thereby having improved a lot over time and so has PEM. The technological
advancements in AEC have almost saturated whereas PEM has room for improvement in terms of
cost reduction and improving efficiency. SOEC on the other hand is a relatively new technology with
a lot of scope for technological advancements which could lead to a reduction in the CAPEX and
OPEX costs. The major reasons for its high CAPEX are high operating temperature which requires
materials which could resist harsh working conditions, the balance of plant as SOEC is a complicated
system requiring relatively higher supporting components as compared to AEC or PEM and the scale
of production. SOEC being a new and costly technology isn’t always the first choice as an electrolyser,
but a change in notion due to reasons such as high efficiency or reuse of waste heat when integrated
with exothermic systems such as a power plant for example could lead to bulk production orders which
could potentially reduce the CAPEX of SOEC units. The high OPEX costs are a result of frequent
stack replacement as mentioned earlier. The stack life of SOEC is approximately 20,000 hours which is
significantly lower than AEC and PEM thereby requiring replacement every 2.28 years whereas AEC
and PEM could run for 11.41 years and 5.70 years respectively without replacement.
CAPEX variations
LCOA calculated for any increase or decrease in the specific investment (EUR/TPD of H2) values
of SOEC units are plotted in Figure 15(data for which is shown in Table 24 of Appendix A.4). In
other words, this plot represents the effect of change in CAPEX values on the LCOA of the system
based on the SOEC technological pathway. The point corresponding to 0 % on the x-axis denotes the
specific investment equal to 2030 values. The points to the right of the 0 % mark denote the respective
reduction in specific investment cost w.r.t the 2030 values (i.e. reduction in specific investment by 5
%, 10 %, 15 % and so on) whereas the points on the left of the 0 % mark denote the corresponding
increase in specific investment cost with respect to the value for the year 2030.
Page 45 of 61
==PAGE:53==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Figure 15: LCOA of SOEC against change in CAPEX; Source data - Table 24
It can be observed from Figure 15 that LCOA reduces with a fall in the specific investment cost.
The fall in LCOA is almost linear as a change in specific investment does not affect other parameters
such as wind farm quantity or the size of the ammonia synthesis reactor for example. However, since
other expenses considered in the LCOA calculation remain unchanged, the change in LCOA will not
exactly follow the percentage of change in specific investment values. For example, LCOA at the 0 %
mark is 454.2 EUR/Ton whereas LCOA at the -20 % mark is 400.1 EUR/Ton, although the specific
investment has reduced by a factor of 20 % the LCOA has reduced only by a factor of 11.91 %.
Irrespective of this deviation, the general trend is that LCOA follows the change in CAPEX values.
OPEX variations
Yearly OPEX values are also a major deciding factor in calculating the LCOA as these are expenses
which incur every year throughout the lifetime of the project. The OPEX values are often mentioned
as a percentage of the CAPEX values and in the case of SOEC, due to its requirement of frequent
maintenance and stack replacement, the yearly O&M expense of SOEC has been estimated to be 12
% of the CAPEX value. A yearly O&M expenditure amounting to 12 % of the CAPEX cost is huge
and significantly higher as compared to its competitors, AEC with a yearly OPEX equivalent to 2 %
of its CAPEX and PEM with a yearly OPEX equivalent to 4 % of its CAPEX. Hence, reducing the
Page 46 of 61
==PAGE:54==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
yearly OPEX of SOEC could help it compete with other technologies in the near future.
Figure 16: LCOA of SOEC against change in OPEX; Source data - Table 25
It is important to understand the magnitude of the impact that changes in OPEX have on the
LCOA. The analysis performed in this section is about the change in LCOA for reductions in the yearly
OPEX values. Since the yearly OPEX values are mentioned as a percentage factor of the CAPEX of
the electrolyser, a sensitivity analysis on LCOA is performed by changing the percentage factor. The
LCOA for the project for yearly OPEX values ranging from 12 % of the CAPEX to 2 % of the CAPEX
has been analysed. The results of the sensitivity analysis have been plotted in Figure 17 (data for which
is shown in Table 25 of Appendix A.4) and it can be observed that LCOA reduces with a decrease
in the yearly OPEX values. It is interesting to note that the magnitude of the fall in LCOA values
for a reduction of 1 % in OPEX values is higher than the magnitude of the fall in LCOA values for
a reduction of 5 % in CAPEX values. This phenomenon can also be observed from the summarised
results table shown in Table 13. It can be seen that the magnitude of change in LCOA while moving one
cell on the y-axis (change in OPEX) is higher than that of the change observed while moving one cell
on the x-axis (change in CAPEX). This signifies the importance of OPEX values in LCOA calculations.
In order to make SOEC a competitive choice, the LCOA of SOEC must be brought down close
to its competitors. The table shown in Table 13 summarises the results of different combinations of
CAPEX and OPEX reductions for the fixed production (300 TPD of ammonia) scenario. It can be
Page 47 of 61
==PAGE:55==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
observed from Table 11 that the LCOA for the PEM technological route is calculated to be 271.30
EUR/Ton for the fixed production scenario.
The combinations of reduction in CAPEX & OPEX
leading to a competitive LCOA for SOEC technological pathway have been highlighted in Table 13.
For example, a 10 % reduction in CAPEX and a yearly OPEX equal to 2 % of the CAPEX gives an
LCOA of 282.2 EUR/Ton which creates healthy competition between SOEC and PEM. However, it
is not practical to reach such a low yearly OPEX value (2% of CAPEX) in the near future as SOEC
requires frequent maintenance due to its poor stack life.
Table 13: Effective LCOA for changes in CAPEX and OPEX values
PEM currently operates at a yearly OPEX equal to 4 % of CAPEX. If technological advancements
in SOEC can bring down the yearly OPEX costs to 4 % of CAPEX, then a reduction of 35 % in the
CAPEX values would give an LCOA of 275.8 EUR/Ton which is a competitive value compared to the
current PEM values. It must also be noted that in the meanwhile, technological advancements in PEM
technology would bring down the LCOA of PEM-based systems as well. Hence, the table shown in
Table 13 paints a picture regarding the required reduction in CAPEX and OPEX values in order to
make SOEC competitive with PEM and AEC in today’s market while keeping the other costs (costs
related to Haber-Bosch systems, wind farms and auxiliary systems) unchanged.
3.8.3
Tradeoff between LCOA and Capacity Factor of the System
As in the case of any project, the levelized cost of the product, ammonia in this case, is used to
assess the economic viability and competitiveness of an investment. On the other hand, the capacity
factor of a system provides valuable insights into the effectiveness, reliability, and economic viability of
the system. As both parameters are significant in aiding the decision-making process, a comparative
analysis between the values of LCOA and capacity factor of the system for the said capacity utilization
of a wind farm would give a definitive picture regarding the tradeoff to be considered for optimal results.
Page 48 of 61
==PAGE:56==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
A comparative analysis of LCOA and capacity factor of the system against the capacity utilization
of a wind farm for a fixed space scenario has been plotted in Figure 17 (data for which is shown in
Table 26 of Appendix A.5). The production volume of each technological pathway is different due to
the space requirements of each technological pathway as discussed earlier.
Figure 17: Effect of "Capacity utilization of Windfarm" on LCOA and Capacity Factor of the System
for ammonia production of 300 TPD; Source data - Table 26
It can be observed from Figure 17 that the most favourable LCOA value for any technological
pathway is arrived at 100 % capacity utilisation of the wind farm. In other words, LCOA is least
when the installed capacity of the wind farm is exactly equal to the power requirements of the system.
Although the LCOA is at its lowest for a 100 % capacity utilisation of the wind farm, it may not be
a wise decision as the capacity factor of the system is also at its lowest. Hence, a range of capacity
utilization of the wind farm must be decided based on the desired capacity factor of the complete
system while considering the corresponding rise in LCOA.
A Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) could help in deciding the optimal compromise between a higher
capacity factor and a lower LCOA. It would be an economic analysis of the gain attained in the
capacity factor of the system by choosing a lower value for the capacity utilization of the wind farm
which correspondingly rises the LCOA. Hence, a business entity could make a decision based on how
much more one is willing to pay in order to have a higher capacity factor for the system.
Page 49 of 61
==PAGE:57==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
4
Potential solutions
As the different combinations of technologies have been analysed and documented, we can move
towards implementing these combinations offshore.
The major sections to focus on in the case of
offshore production are space requirements for setting up the synthesis systems and methods to
transport the produced fuel back to shore. Hence, the three solutions proposed in this report are
as follows:
1. Fuel synthesis on ageing rigs and transportation of fuel using pipes
2. Fuel synthesis on ageing rigs and transportation of fuel using ships
3. Fuel synthesis on ships and transportation of fuel using ships
A brief discussion about the various technical and economic challenges faced by each of the above
mentioned solutions has been discussed in upcoming sections.
4.1
Fuel synthesis on ageing rigs and transportation of fuel using pipes
The first option discussed in this report is the possibility of reusing ageing oil rig platforms to
synthesize ammonia while using the existing pipeline infrastructure to export the synthesized liquid
ammonia back to shore. This option gives a life extension to existing ageing oil rigs which is seen as a
better alternative as compared to dismantling or scrapping the rig. Dismantling an old oil rig is very
expensive, and therefore, is often not preferred by the owners of the rig leading to the abandonment
of rigs. The reuse of oil rigs for the synthesis of ammonia gives them a life extension of approximately
30 years if the rigs are assessed to be strong enough to bear the loads for such long periods. There
are various factors to be considered in this option from the perspective of profitability, safety and
environmental impacts, some of which have been mentioned below:
1. Production capacity & related profit based on space constraint
2. Minimum production volumes required to use the pipeline system
3. Impact of offshore ammonia synthesis and storage on the marine ecosystem
4. Safety of the crew with regards to factors such as the transmission of electrical power to the
platform, storage and transportation of synthesized fuels etc.
As discussed earlier, each electrolyser technology has a unique space requirement which leads to
different production potentials for hydrogen and subsequently ammonia.
Given the oil rig has a
definite amount of space available for setting up the fuel synthesis systems, it would be apt to apply
the calculations performed for the fixed space option as shown in the earlier sections for this case.
The production capabilities of pathways based on different electrolyser technologies for a multi-storied
platform of the dimensions 42 m x 14 m is shown in Table 14.
Page 50 of 61
==PAGE:58==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Table 14: LCOA for systems based on different electrolyser technologies
As shown in the above-mentioned table, LCOA of different technological pathways differ depending
on the production capability which in turn is restricted by the space constraints of the electrolyser
technology. Hence, for the same space available, the AEC pathway would produce the highest volume
of hydrogen and successively the highest volume of ammonia followed by PEM and SOEC as shown in
Table 14. Once the volume of production per day and LCOA is calculated, it must be assessed if the
production volume is sufficient for transportation on a daily basis.
This brings us to the next important factor regarding the production volumes required to use
the pipeline system. This vastly depends on the dimensions of the existing pipeline network and the
velocity at which the product is sent through it. The production volumes must be sufficiently high and
the flow velocity should be maintained to keep the pipes packed and flowing. Liquid ammonia also has
certain flow conditions which have to be maintained in order to keep the ammonia in a liquid state.
At room temperature, a pressure of approximately 155 PSIA is required to maintain the liquid state of
ammonia. Hence, various factors such as design pressure & operating temperature of the pipelines, the
possibility of corrosion or leakage due to the transport of ammonia, the environmental impact of leakage
of ammonia, cost-benefit analysis of using existing pipelines or ships against the impact of installing
new pipeline network etc. must be analysed to understand the pros and cons of transporting ammonia
through pipelines. The pressure requirement varies according to the temperature of ammonia being
transported. To quote a few examples, for liquid ammonia of −15 ◦C the pressure must be maintained
at 2.36 bara, for liquid ammonia of 4.4 ◦C the pressure must be maintained at 5.05 bara and for liquid
ammonia of 15.6 ◦C the pressure must be maintained at 7.42 bara[24].
Under the assumption that liquid ammonia is being transported at a temperature of 8 ◦C with a
density of 627.6 kg/m3[25], the volume of ammonia being transported can be calculated. The volume
of ammonia attained in m3 can be expressed in the form of US gallons using the conversion ratio of
1 m3 = 264.17 US gallon liquid [26]. Gallons/day can be further expressed in terms of barrel/day using
the conversion factor 1 US barrel = 42 US gallon liquid or 1 US gallon liquid = 0.0238 US barrel. The
ammonia production volumes for a fixed space expressed in terms of barrel/day are as follows:
Page 51 of 61
==PAGE:59==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Table 15: Daily production volumes of ammonia (in barrel/day) through different processes
Technological
Mass Flow
Density = 627.6 kg/m3
1 m3 = 264.17 gallon
1 gallon = 0.238 barrel
pathway
Volume
US Gallons
US Barrel
kg/day
m3/day
gallon/day
barrel/day
AEC
204600
326.0
86120
2050.49
PEM
102300
163.00
43060
1025.24
SOEC
85250
135.83
35884
854.37
It is observed that an average oil rig sends approximately 5000 - 10000 barrel/day of oil through
the pipeline system, which again varies based on various parameters such as production capability, pipe
dimensions, operating conditions, flow velocity etc. Based on the calculations from Table 14, it can
be made out that for a platform of dimensions 42 m x 14 m, the maximum ammonia production per
day attained would be through the AEC technological pathway which is a production of 204.6 TPD of
ammonia. The production of 204.6 ton/day of ammonia can be expressed in terms of US barrel/day
as shown in Table 15 which turns out to be approximately 2015 barrel/day. So in order to use the
same pipelines as mentioned earlier, the flow velocity has to be reduced so that the pipeline is packed
and the desired pressure levels are maintained for safe transportation of ammonia in its liquid state.
The flow velocity could be increased while maintaining the pressure if multiple ammonia-producing
platforms are interlinked such that one major pipeline is used to send all the ammonia produced on
multiple platforms back to shore. Another option to send more volumes of ammonia per day through
the pipeline would be to use platforms with higher space availability such as gravity-based structures
which have a dimension of 183 m x 75 m. Such massive platforms can produce approximately 4,875
tons of ammonia per day using the AEC technological pathway which translates to 48,020 barrels of
ammonia per day. On the other hand, if a new network of pipelines is to be installed, the pipes could
be designed according to the production and storage capabilities of the system to be installed.
4.2
Fuel synthesis on ageing rigs and transportation of fuel using ships
The second option considered in this report is the possibility of keeping the ammonia synthesis
fixed to an oil rig platform while using ships to transport the synthesized liquid ammonia instead of
pipelines. The fuel synthesis section of this option would be pretty much the same as the previous
option. The only difference in this option compared to the previous option is the method of offtake. This
option depends on ships and similar vessels to transport the produced ammonia from the production
site (offshore rig) to the port on shore. The industrial scale marine transportation of ammonia uses
3 major categories of vessels, namely Large Gas Carriers (LGCs), Medium Gas Carriers (MGCs) and
Handysize vessels, which have capacities of around 60, 000 m3, 38, 000 m3 and 22, 500 m3, respectively.
As observed from Table 15, the ammonia production volumes of the oil rig being analysed in this
Page 52 of 61
==PAGE:60==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
report are very small as compared to the transportation capabilities of these modern vessels. Hence, an
efficient solution for this option would be to use smaller vessels which could house a pressurised liquid
container. The synthesized fuel could be transferred to secondary pressurised storage tanks which
could then be placed on the marine vessels for being transported to shore. There are some additional
factors to be considered before opting for this option which have not been analysed in this report, some
of which have been mentioned below:
1. Possibility of ammonia leakage while transferring it to mobile pressurised tanks for transportation
2. Possibility of delay or suspension of offtake due to weather conditions thereby requiring sufficient
storage tanks
3. Safety of the crew with regards to factors such as transmission of electrical power to the rig,
transfer of pressurized storage tanks from rig to vessel, managing offtake in harsh weather
conditions etc.
This could be a favourable solution in the absence of pipeline provisions to shore or if the existing
pipeline is unusable for ammonia transportation as the installation of a new pipeline network would be
a huge financial investment. The existing shipping network could be used to the best of its potential as
the shipping industry has years of expertise in the transportation of ammonia worldwide. Hence, the
transfer of pressurised storage tanks from rigs to ships does not pose a major challenge to the maritime
industry, nevertheless is a procedure to be carried out with utmost precaution. The other option is to
fill small tanks on the ships directly from the rig instead of a transferable intermediary tank, but it
opens up a whole new discussion about the costs incurred due to the waiting time experienced by the
ships, handling of flexible offtake pipes in harsh weather conditions etc.
4.3
Fuel synthesis on ships and transportation of fuel using ships
The third option being considered in this report is the production of ammonia on ships of the
classification Very Large Gas Carrier (VLGC) and transportation of the produced ammonia back to
shore using smaller vessels as discussed in the previous option. The proposal is to extend the lifetime
of VLGCs by retrofitting them to house all the equipment related to the synthesis of green ammonia
and park the vessel next to offshore wind farms such that the energy required for the synthesis of green
ammonia could be derived from the wind farms. The rated capacity of the wind farm required to cater
to the power needs of the ammonia synthesis system remains same. Although the option of ammonia
synthesis on a ship gives mobility as compared to the earlier-mentioned solutions, a new wind farm
needs to be set up to meet the energy requirements as the energy demands are huge and tapping into
an existing wind farm could starve the grid to which the wind farm was initially synchronised. It could
also be combined with the energy island proposal of Denmark wherein electrical energy from different
wind farms is collected before being distributed to neighbouring nations. In that case, it opens a whole
new option of setting up the synthesis systems on the energy island itself, the pros and cons of which
Page 53 of 61
==PAGE:61==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
must be assessed against those of installing it on a ship.
There are some additional factors to be considered before opting for the option of producing
ammonia on ships which have not been analysed in this report, for example:
1. Risks related to large-scale storage of Hydrogen (intermediate product) and Ammonia on a ship.
Hydrogen is a highly flammable gas and ammonia intrinsically is a hazardous substance leakage
of which could be dangerous to the crew and aquatic life.
2. Risky offtake methodology in case of ship-to-ship ammonia transfer. Industrial-scale mid-ocean
ammonia transfer hasn’t been done in the past, the maritime industry is looking into the option
as a part of the switch to ammonia-based engines.
3. Costs related to renovating an existing vessel or building a new vessel tailored to the requirements
of ammonia synthesis.
Ammonia synthesis on ships could be a favourable solution against building it on a rig as the space
available on a VLGC is huge compared to an average rig. Another factor in favour of the usage of ships
is the fact that renovation of a ship is much easier and economical as compared to the renovation and
remodelling of an offshore platform. Both offshore remodelling of the rig using sophisticated vessels
and onshore remodelling of the rig at a dry dock are expensive & complicated procedures.
Analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of each offshore ammonia synthesis solution provides
valuable insights for informed decision-making. Evaluating the benefits and drawbacks helps to identify
potential risks, opportunities, and trade-offs associated with each option.
By considering the full
spectrum of factors, a selection between the available offshore ammonia synthesis options can be made
that maximize benefits, mitigate challenges, and ultimately lead to more effective outcomes.
Page 54 of 61
==PAGE:62==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
5
Discussion
This section of the report is a discussion about the results obtained and observations made in
previous chapters. This chapter includes discussions on how the derived results fit in today’s market,
the impact of future developments, the advantages and disadvantages of offshore ammonia synthesis
etc.
5.1
LCOA estimation for 2050
In order to understand the impact of technological advancements on the proposed system, the
LCOA is calculated based on the estimated specific investment for the year 2050.
The estimated
specific investment for the electrolysers and the Haber-Bosch ammonia synthesis systems have been
derived from the latest edition (2022) of the Technology Data for Renewable Fuels published by the
Danish Energy Agency[7] whereas the specific investment cost for offshore wind energy is derived from
the report titled "Future of Wind" published by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
in the year 2019[27]. The updated CAPEX & OPEX costs for all the major components in the fixed
production (300 ton/day of ammonia) system for each technological pathway have been shown in Table
16. These CAPEX and OPEX values can be compared with the values predicted for the year 2030
in Table 7 to understand the magnitude of the drop in expenditure expected for the year 2050. The
CAPEX values for the AEC and PEM-based systems are expected to drop by a factor of 24 % whereas
the SOEC technology is expected to have higher technological advancements as the CAPEX values are
expected to drop by approximately 38 %.
Table 16: CAPEX, OPEX and LCOA predictions for the system in the year 2050
The derived results are highly promising as it can be seen that the LCOA values of all three
technological pathways have come a lot closer to each other as compared to the LCOA predicted for
the year 2030. Technological pathway based on SOEC has shown a significant improvement in terms
of reducing the LCOA as it can be observed that the LCOA has dropped from 454.2 EUR/Ton to
265.1 EUR/Ton in a span of 20 years which is a 41.6 % drop in LCOA. This significant improvement
in combination with other factors such as higher efficiency and efficient reuse of waste heat etc. can
make SOEC a favourable option in the years to come.
Page 55 of 61
==PAGE:63==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
5.2
Current Ammonia Market Statistics
The ammonia market has always been volatile as it is sensitive to various global parameters. The
volatility of the ammonia market is a multifaceted phenomenon driven by a complex interplay of factors
ranging from global economic trends to shifts in industrial demand and supply dynamics. The major
reasons for the severe surge in ammonia prices include covid pandemic, European policies to reduce
the dependency on fossil fuels, inflation and the Ukraine-Russia conflict. Ammonia, a vital chemical
compound used primarily in fertilizers and a variety of industrial applications, experiences fluctuations
in its market due to several key influences. The market behaviour could change severely once ammonia
starts to replace conventional shipping fuel as the demand for ammonia would increase drastically.
The past trend of anhydrous ammonia selling prices in Illinois, USA can be seen in Figure 18. It
can be observed that the selling price of ammonia has always been higher than 400 USD/Ton which is
approximately 365 EUR/Ton. This gives us an idea of how green ammonia fits into the picture.
Figure 18: Observed Selling Price Trend of anhydrous Ammonia in Illinois, USA (2008 - 2021)[28]
The levelized cost of ammonia for a production quantity of 300 tons/day turned out to be 245.5
EUR/Ton, 271.3 EUR/Ton and 454.2 EUR/Ton for AEC, PEM and SOEC technological pathways
respectively. Given that the ammonia market is very volatile, it is difficult to make a comparison
between the LCOA of green ammonia and the selling price of conventional ammonia. Also, it must
be remembered that the LCOA calculated in this report does not consider a few investments and
operations costs such as remodelling the platform or leasing ships for transportation etc. as mentioned
earlier.
The current ammonia price is so high that offshore green ammonia synthesis could be a
profitable business venture even after considering the costs of renovation, transportation etc., however,
Page 56 of 61
==PAGE:64==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
further detailed economic analysis is required to understand the exact economic feasibility of the
proposal. But in a broader perspective, with the past 15-year ammonia selling price average being
around 700 USD/Ton (˜640 EUR/Ton), green ammonia synthesis can be a lucrative solution for
decarbonising the shipping industry.
Given that the EU has set a target of an 80 % reduction in greenhouse gas intensity of the maritime
industry by 2050[2], ramping up green ammonia synthesis plants is the need of the hour. The major
obstacle faced by the green ammonia industry is the huge upfront costs and maintenance costs related
to electrolysers. The CAPEX of setting up a green energy source is also a significant hurdle, but there
have been rapid technological advancements in the sectors of wind energy and solar energy leading
to a reduction in CAPEX of these technologies in recent years. Similarly, the CAPEX and OPEX of
electrolysers will also reduce in the future as observed from the predictions for the years 2030 and 2050.
But we need to act now in order to achieve the 2050 decarbonisation goals. This requires government
support through favourable policies and other economic incentives. The green ammonia industry could
be incentivized with various schemes such as Feed-in-Tariffs, Ammonia Purchase Agreements, Green
Fuel Auctions, Low Interest Loans etc. similar to the support schemes enjoyed by the wind energy
industry.
5.3
Decoupling of Hydrogen and Ammonia Synthesis Units
The capacity factor of ammonia synthesis may be enhanced by decoupling the hydrogen and
ammonia synthesis processes. Decoupling is the separation of these two processes, enabling autonomous
operation, and optimising each process for its own needs. This strategy can result in a number of
advantages that raise capacity factors, including:
1. Flexibility in synthesis of individual products - By decoupling hydrogen synthesis from ammonia
synthesis, the two individual products, namely hydrogen and ammonia, can be produced continuously
and independently. Decoupling provides the freedom to optimize the synthesis conditions of each
unit separately. A consistent and reliable hydrogen supply for ammonia synthesis can be ensured,
thereby improving the capacity factor of the ammonia synthesis system.
2. Reduced downtime - If one of the two processes (hydrogen synthesis and ammonia synthesis) faces
a shutdown, the other process could still run in the case of decoupled systems. For example, if
ammonia synthesis systems need to be shut down for a maintenance check, correspondingly the
hydrogen synthesis would have to be halted as well in the absence of decoupling or storage
arrangements for the intermediate products.
Hence, decoupling the synthesis systems would
reduce downtime and maximize the overall production capacity.
3. Stable hydrogen supply - As ammonia synthesis is highly sensitive to the availability of hydrogen,
decoupling of these two systems ensures a consistent and continuous supply of hydrogen. This
Page 57 of 61
==PAGE:65==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
leads to stable ammonia production without any significant response to weather conditions. For
example, ammonia synthesis could be optimised to use the best of available stored hydrogen such
that it lasts through extended periods of poor power production.
However, decoupling the production systems also adds some technicality to the project.
The
decoupling demand additional infrastructure related to compression, storage, and smooth coordination
between systems which have both economic impacts on the project and require changes to the layout of
the systems in order to accommodate these additional systems. Operating two separate processes also
requires careful engineering and control systems to ensure both processes are optimized and integrated
efficiently.
5.4
Advantages and Disadvantages of Offshore Ammonia Synthesis
Now that the significance and viability of green ammonia synthesis have been established, the
potential benefits and challenges of moving it to an offshore site must be analysed. The investigation
of the advantages and disadvantages of such a complex technical project is essential for making informed
and balanced decisions. Some of the potential advantages and disadvantages of moving the ammonia
synthesis systems offshore are mentioned below.
Advantages of offshore green ammonia synthesis:
1. Renewable Energy Utilization - The abundant wind energy sources could be efficiently utilised
as ammonia synthesis is an energy-intensive process.
2. Reduced Land Use and Environmental Impact - As ammonia synthesis requires large land areas
for setting up the electrolysers and other equipment, moving it offshore minimizes land-use
conflicts and potential environmental impacts associated with large-scale ammonia synthesis &
storage.
3. Prevent Transmission Loss and cabling cost - The other alternative of producing ammonia on
shore with power from offshore wind farms incurs an approximate 4.5 % transmission loss[29]
and the cabling cost is in the range of 1.0 - 2.6 million USD/km[30] of submarine cable. These
losses and massive cabling costs can be avoided by moving the systems offshore given the existing
pipelines are used for the transfer of synthesized ammonia.
4. Marine Transport Infrastructure - Existing marine transport infrastructure can be leveraged for
ammonia offtake. Ammonia is a relatively stable compound that can be stored and transported
easily in pressurized storage tanks.
Disadvantages of offshore green ammonia synthesis:
1. Infrastructure Development and Maintenance - The renovation of ageing oil rigs or ships, installation
of equipment, and infrastructure can be a costly affair and require significant engineering expertise.
Page 58 of 61
==PAGE:66==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Maintenance of such systems under a saline environment with varying climate and tidal conditions
adds to the overall complexity.
2. Environmental Impact - While offshore production offsets any environmental impact on shore, it
introduces potential marine environmental concerns related to the synthesis, storage and transfer
of ammonia which intrinsically is a hazardous substance.
3. Logistical Challenges - While transporting ammonia through ships isn’t new for the maritime
industry, transporting ammonia through existing pipelines could be challenging as the pipes were
originally designed for transporting crude oil. Ammonia requires certain pressure requirements to
maintain its liquid state. Also, ammonia transportation by pipes could lead to internal corrosion
if proper pressure isn’t maintained in the pipes which could lead to the evaporation of ammonia
and consecutive corrosion of the pipes.
4. Operational Risks - The operational risks arise from a range of factors such as the transfer of
electrical energy from offshore wind farms to rigs or to ships, proper handling of offtake systems
during harsh weather conditions, storage and transfer of hazardous substance etc.
Offshore ammonia production presents a novel approach to sustainable ammonia synthesis, but it also
introduces a range of complexities and uncertainties. Further decision-making methodologies such as
Risk-Benefit analysis, Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA), Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) etc.
can be applied to make a well-informed decision about whether to pursue this concept, considering its
potential benefits and challenges.
Page 59 of 61
==PAGE:67==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
6
Conclusion
The primary objective of this chapter is to answer the research major research question stated in
subsection 1.3 of the report: What are the circumstances under which offshore ammonia production
could be a favourable solution?
An unprecedented rise in demand and price of ammonia has been observed in recent years. The
demand is set to further shoot up with the maritime industry opting to run its fleets on green ammonia,
thereby requiring a severe ramp-up in the installation of green ammonia synthesis systems. It has been
observed that the synthesis of green ammonia is an energy-intensive process requiring a large-scale
harvest of renewable energy. This presents the landscape for offshore ammonia production as there is a
vast and largely untapped wind energy potential in the world’s oceans. Offshore ammonia production
checks multiple boxes such as efficient renewable energy utilization, reduced land use, avoiding possible
exposure to harmful substances etc. The results attained from the economic feasibility assessment
performed in this report also support the case of offshore ammonia synthesis as the LCOA values
predicted for the year 2030 and the year 2050 are well within the price band of ammonia observed
in the past 15 years as shown in the "Discussion" chapter.
Despite the positive results obtained
in the economic analysis performed in this report, there are various other factors such as technical
challenges, environmental impacts and relevant support policies to be considered while making an
informed decision about the technological pathway to be implemented for offshore ammonia synthesis.
The major technological constraint of the electrolyzers limiting the expansion of offshore ammonia
synthesis is the space requirement of each electrolyser technology. It has been observed that in spite of
SOEC being the most electrically efficient technology, is limited by the space constraint and ends up
producing less than 50 % of AEC’s production potential for a situation wherein an equal amount of
space is available for both technologies. Although SOEC currently is the most expensive electrolyser
technology, it is in its nascent stage and has a lot of scope for improvement which is supported by
the predicted specific investment costs observed for SOEC in the year 2050. SOEC also provides an
efficient solution for the reuse of waste heat generated from the ammonia synthesis reactor. Hence,
SOEC pathway could be a game changer for offshore ammonia synthesis if its operating expenditure
and space requirements are brought down to compete with other technological pathways.
The other important question - "How to narrow down the range of optimal ratio between the
electrolyser capacity and their corresponding requirement of wind farm capacity?" has been answered
in subsection 3.6 wherein a methodology has been developed to deduce the optimal ratio between
electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity. The comparative analysis performed
in subsubsection 3.8.3 states that the optimal ratio must be derived based on a cost-benefit analysis
about how much increase in LCOA is one willing to accept for a higher capacity factor of the system.
Page 60 of 61
==PAGE:68==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
7
Future work
This section talks about the exciting pathways unexplored in this study, which could potentially
offer avenues for further investigation and development.
Some of the major ideas which could be
incorporated in future studies include:
1. Solutions to bring methanol synthesis offshore as well which would require transportation of
carbon dioxide to the platforms using ships or pipelines. The existing proposal of dumping CO2
in depleted oil wells in the North Sea could be modified to transfer the CO2 to our platforms
instead.
2. Detailed feasibility study including costs associated with refurbishing the platform/ship and
variable OPEX based on predicted production.
3. Technical assessment based on weight constraints of the synthesis systems, operational conditions
of existing pipelines.
4. WAsP models to predict the performance of wind turbines at the desired location which would
give a more realistic result.
5. Possibility of using the platforms as a refuelling dock for ships based on green fuels. The economics
and technicalities related to the refuelling of ships must be considered.
Page 61 of 61
==PAGE:69==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
List of Tables
1
Comparative Analysis of Electrolysers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Production capacities for a fixed space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Power requirement for the additional boiler in a fixed production scenario
. . . . . . .
28
4
Power requirement for the additional boiler in a fixed space scenario
. . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Power requirement of different electrolyser technology for fixed production scenario . .
31
6
Power requirement of different electrolyser technology for fixed space scenario . . . . .
32
7
CAPEX and OPEX of system components for fixed production scenario . . . . . . . .
34
8
CAPEX and OPEX of system components for fixed space scenario
. . . . . . . . . . .
34
9
Capacity factor of the system calculated for 4 random hours of a year . . . . . . . . . .
35
10
Number of 15 MW turbines required by the system for different capacity utilization of
the wind farm in a fixed space scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
11
Levelized Cost of Ammonia production for fixed volume production scenario . . . . . .
40
12
Levelized Cost of Ammonia production for fixed space scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
13
Effective LCOA for changes in CAPEX and OPEX values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
14
LCOA for systems based on different electrolyser technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
15
Daily production volumes of ammonia (in barrel/day) through different processes . . .
52
16
CAPEX, OPEX and LCOA predictions for the system in the year 2050 . . . . . . . . .
55
17
Energy requirements of different components in a fixed production calibration system .
V
18
Energy requirements of different components in a fixed space calibration system . . . .
VI
19
CF Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for
fixed production scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
20
CF Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for
fixed space scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
21
LCOA Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for
fixed production scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
22
LCOA Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for
fixed space scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
23
Comparative analysis of LCOA for both Fixed Production (FP) and Fixed Space (FS)
scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
24
LCOA of SOEC against change in CAPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
25
LCOA of SOEC against change in OPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII
26
LCOA and CF of the system for different against the electrical power demand-supply
ratio for ammonia production of 300 TPD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII
Page I of VIII
==PAGE:70==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
List of Figures
1
Working principle of Alkaline Electrolysis Cells [6]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Working principle of Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Cell [6] . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Working principle of Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell [6] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Conventional ammonia synthesis loop [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Schematic flow diagram of Air Seperation Unit for capturing Nitrogen [7] . . . . . . . .
20
6
Flow diagram of the complete system for AEC and PEM electrolysers
. . . . . . . . .
22
7
Flow diagram of the complete system for SOEC electrolysers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8
Weekly production capabilities of different electrolyser technologies based on space
constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
9
CF Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed production scenario;
Source data - Table 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
10
CF Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed space scenario; Source
data - Table 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
11
LCOA Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed production scenario;
Source data - Table 21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
12
LCOA Vs Percentage utilization of wind farm rated capacity for fixed space scenario;
Source data - Table 22 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
13
Comparative analysis of LCOA for both Fixed Production (FP) and Fixed Space (FS)
scenarios; Source data - Table 23 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
14
LCOA Vs daily production volumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
15
LCOA of SOEC against change in CAPEX; Source data - Table 24 . . . . . . . . . . .
46
16
LCOA of SOEC against change in OPEX; Source data - Table 25 . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
17
Effect of "Capacity utilization of Windfarm" on LCOA and Capacity Factor of the
System for ammonia production of 300 TPD; Source data - Table 26 . . . . . . . . . .
49
18
Observed Selling Price Trend of anhydrous Ammonia in Illinois, USA (2008 - 2021)[28]
56
Page I of VIII
==PAGE:71==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
References
[1] M. W. Bockmann, “Shipping emissions rise 4.9% in 2021 :: Lloyd’s list.” https://lloydslist.
maritimeintelligence.informa.com/LL1139627/Shipping-emissions-rise-49-in-2021,
2021. Webpage, Date accessed - 02/04/2023.
[2] “Reducing emissions from the shipping sector.” https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/
transport-emissions/reducing-emissions-shipping-sector_en,
2023.
Webpage,
Date
accessed - 05/04/2023.
[3] “Alternative fuels in the shipping industry and why we need them.” https://sinay.ai/en/
alternative-fuels-in-the-shipping-industry-and-why-we-need-them/, 2022.
Webpage,
Date accessed - 05/04/2023.
[4] “Ammonia:
zero-carbon fertiliser, fuel and energy store policy briefing,”
2020.
ISBN -
978-1-78252-448-9.
[5] B. Lee, L. R. Winter, H. Lee, D. Lim, H. Lim, and M. Elimelech, “Pathways to a green ammonia
future,” ACS Energy Letters, pp. 3032–3038, 2022.
[6] E. Karatairi and S. Sartori, “Reviving hydrogen as an energy carrier,” 2020.
[7] F. Gamborg, “Technology data for renewable fuels,” pp. 94–118 and 272–298, 2022.
[8] S. S. Kumar and V. Himabindu, “Hydrogen production by pem water electrolysis â a review,”
Materials Science for Energy Technologies, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 442–454, 2019.
[9] B. Lee, L. R. Winter, H. Lee, D. Lim, H. Lim, and M. Elimelech, “Pathways to a green ammonia
future,” ACS Energy Letters, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 3032–3038, 2022.
[10] T. I. R. E. Agency, “Green hydrogen cost reduction scaling up electrolysers to meet the 1.5◦c
climate goal h 2 o 2,” 2020.
[11] J. Cao, Y. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Qin, G. Geng, and B. Yu, “A novel solid oxide
electrolysis cell with micro-/nano channel anode for electrolysis at ultra-high current density over
5 a cmâ2,” Advanced Energy Materials, vol. 12, p. 2200899, 7 2022.
[12] R. Knibbe, M. L. Traulsen, A. Hauch, S. D. Ebbesen, and M. Mogensen, “Solid oxide electrolysis
cells: Degradation at high current densities,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 157,
p. B1209, 6 2010.
[13] M. B. K. Suhan, M. N. R. Hemal, M. S. Choudhury, M. A. A. Mazumder, and M. Islam, “Optimal
design of ammonia synthesis reactor for a process industry,” Journal of King Saud University -
Engineering Sciences, vol. 34, pp. 23–30, Januray 2022.
Page II of VIII
==PAGE:72==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
[14] “Water quality.” https://www.eurowater.com/en/water-quality.
Webpage, Date accessed -
18/06/2023.
[15] “Haber process for ammonia production chemistry tutorial.” https://www.ausetute.com.au/
haberpro.html. Webpage, Date accessed - 18/06/2023.
[16] “A roadmap to the ammonia economy,” Joule, vol. 4, pp. 1186–1205, 6 2020. Article.
[17] T. Stehly and P. Duffy, “2020 cost of wind energy review,” 2020.
[18] T. Stehly, P. Beiter, and P. Duffy, “2019 cost of wind energy review,” 2019.
[19] T. Stehly and P. Beiter, “2018 cost of wind energy review,” 2018.
[20] T. Stehly, P. Beiter, D. Heimiller, and G. Scott, “2017 cost of wind energy review,” 2017.
[21] T. Stehly, D. Heimiller, and G. Scott, “2016 cost of wind energy review,” 2016.
[22] “V236-15.0 mwâ˘.” https://www.vestas.com/en/products/offshore/V236-15MW.
Webpage,
Date accessed - 12/06/2023.
[23] P. Catrinus and J. Jepma, “On the economics of offshore energy conversion: smart combinations
converting offshore wind energy into green hydrogen on existing oil and gas platforms in the north
sea,” 2017.
[24] “Ammonia - vapour pressure at gas-liquid equilibrium.” https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/
ammonia-pressure-temperature-d_361.html. Webpage, Date accessed - 11/07/2023.
[25] “Volume
correction
factors-anhydrous
ammonia
(nh3).”
https://
ised-isde.canada.ca/site/measurement-canada/en/laws-and-requirements/
volume-correction-factors-anhydrous-ammonia-nh3,
2017.
Webpage,
Date accessed -
12/07/2023.
[26] “Cubic meters to us gallons (liquid) conversion.”
https://www.metric-conversions.org/
volume/cubic-meters-to-us-liquid-gallons.htm. Webpage, Date accessed - 01/08/2023.
[27] “Future of wind,” IRENA - International Renewable Energy Agency, 2019. Page 47.
[28] G. Schnitkey, N. Paulson, C. Zulauf, K. Swanson, J. Colussi, , and J. Baltz, “Nitrogen fertilizer
prices and supply in light of the ukraine-russia conflict,” farmdoc daily, vol. 12, 4 2022.
[29] E. Apostolaki-Iosifidou, R. Mccormack, W. Kempton, P. M. Ieee, L. Member, and D. Ozkan,
“Transmission design and analysis for large-scale offshore wind energy development,” IEEE Power
and Energy Technology Systems Journal, vol. 6, March 2019.
Page III of VIII
==PAGE:73==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
[30] X. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Wu, J. Xiao, J. Hou, J. Gao, and L. Zhong, “Technical and economic
demands of hvdc submarine cable technology for global energy interconnection,” Global Energy
Interconnection, vol. 3, pp. 120–127, 4 2020.
Page IV of VIII
==PAGE:74==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
A
Appendix
A.1
Energy consumption of individual system involved in the synthesis of ammonia
Table 17: Energy requirements of different components in a fixed production calibration system
Page V of VIII
==PAGE:75==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Table 18: Energy requirements of different components in a fixed space calibration system
A.2
Optimal ratio between projected power requirement and the cor- responding
wind farm nameplate capacity
Table 19: CF Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for fixed
production scenario
Table 20: CF Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for fixed
space scenario
Page VI of VIII
==PAGE:76==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
A.3
Levelised Cost of Ammonia (LCOA)
Table 21: LCOA Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for fixed
production scenario
Table 22: LCOA Vs ratio of electrical power requirement and the installed wind farm capacity for fixed
space scenario
Table 23: Comparative analysis of LCOA for both Fixed Production (FP) and Fixed Space (FS)
scenarios
A.4
CAPEX and OPEX variation for SOEC
Table 24: LCOA of SOEC against change in CAPEX
Page VII of VIII
==PAGE:77==
Offshore Green Fuel Production
Table 25: LCOA of SOEC against change in OPEX
A.5
Tradeoff between LCOA and Capacity Factor of the System
Table 26: LCOA and CF of the system for different against the electrical power demand-supply ratio
for ammonia production of 300 TPD
Page VIII of VIII
