==PAGE:1==
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice
Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service
Mesh
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Isaac Irani
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months in the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment of the
Master of Science degree (MSc) in Computer Science and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Isaac Irani ­ s175187
Signature
Date
ii
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
27 August 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In today’s fast­paced digital landscape, the agility and resilience of IT infrastructures have
become paramount.
The migration from monolithic architectures to more flexible mi­
croservices is a testament to this evolution. This thesis undertakes an in­depth explo­
ration of Boozt’s migration journey to a microservices architecture using Kubernetes and
Istio, shedding light on the challenges and intricacies involved.
This research provides insight into the technical complexities encountered when adopting
tools like Kubernetes and Istio. While Kubernetes offers unparalleled advantages in con­
tainer orchestration and scalability, its intricate nature demands a steep learning curve.
Istio, promising enhanced service­to­service communication and robust traffic manage­
ment, introduces its own set of challenges due to its comprehensive feature set.
Organizationally, the transformation led to a pressing need for upskilling and cultivating
a DevOps­centric culture. The increased reliance on tools like Helm, FluxCD, and the
emergence of service meshes underscores the ever­evolving landscape of IT solutions
that organizations must grapple with.
Our findings suggest that successful navigation through such complex migrations requires
more than just tool adoption. Strategic planning, continuous training, and embracing a
culture of adaptability are paramount. The research also underscores the importance of
phased migration approaches, emphasizing a balance between technological advance­
ments and organizational readiness. Future research avenues include hands­on com­
parisons of service meshes, addressing the nuances and challenges of tools like Istio.
This thesis, thus, serves as a comprehensive guide for organizations looking to under­
take similar technological transitions, emphasizing the importance of tool mastery amidst
increasing complexity.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Gastón Rial Saibene, Site Reliability Engineer & Team Lead, Boozt
Peter Lind, Staff Engineer & Team Lead, Boozt
Leonard Palmer, Platform Engineer, Boozt
Andra Norvaiša, Product Manager, Boozt
Sebastian Sindlev Andersen, Lead Security Engineer, SimCorp
I am deeply grateful to all the individuals who have provided me with their invaluable
knowledge and guidance. Above all, I am immensely thankful to my mother, Matin Alami,
for her unwavering support and to whom this thesis is dedicated.
iv
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose Of Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Foundations
3
2.1
Containers and Containerization: A Paradigm Shift from VM Architecture
.
3
2.2
Kubernetes: Orchestrating the Dance of Containers
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Service Mesh: Architecting for Microservices Communication . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Monolithic, Traditional Load Balancers, and Serverless . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Design
14
3.1
Rationale for Migrating Boozt Infrastructure to Microservices and Kubernetes 14
3.2
Rationale for Introducing Service Mesh to Kubernetes . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Rationale for Selecting Istio as the Service Mesh Solution . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Istio Unpacked: Exploring Service Mesh Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Monitoring and Observability with Istio: Prometheus, Grafana, Kiali, and
Jaeger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.6
Helm: The Kubernetes Package Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.7
GitOps, ArgoCD vs. FluxCD: An Exploration and Selection at Boozt
. . . . 23
4
Implementation
25
4.1
Migration Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Cluster Architecture and Design Choices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Containerizing Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Gitlab Pipeline Templating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Helm Templating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.6
FluxCD Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.7
Istio Rollout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Evaluation & Discussion
50
5.1
Methodology Recap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2
Research Question 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.3
Research Question 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.4
Research Question 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.5
Research Question 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.6
Research Question 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6
Conclusion
58
6.1
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Bibliography
61
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
v
==PAGE:7==
A Grafana Istio Dashboard
63
B Prometheus Dashboard
64
C Jaeger Dashboard
65
D Locust Dashboard
66
vi
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The field of software engineering is constantly changing and the search for scalable, re­
silient, and efficient systems is ongoing. E­commerce presents its own set of infrastruc­
ture issues due to varying user needs, the need for near­perfect uptime, and strict security
protocols. Microservices have emerged as an alternative to traditional monolithic archi­
tectures, offering flexibility, scalability, and improved resource utilization. However, this
comes with its own complexities in terms of orchestration, management, and networking.
Kubernetes, an open source system for container orchestration, and Istio, a service mesh
that provides a framework for connecting, managing, and securing microservices, have
been developed to address these issues.
The main aim of this study is to explore the incorporation of cutting­edge technologies and
their effect on the Boozt e­commerce system. Boozt, like many progressive companies, is
attempting to maximize its operations, uphold stringent security protocols, and guarantee
the highest level of dependability. This leads to the following queries: Does transitioning
to a Kubernetes­based Microservice Architecture managed with Istio really improve the
security and reliability of an e­commerce platform? What are the tangible advantages and
potential issues? How does this modern approach compare to the traditional ones?
This thesis offers an in­depth examination of the theory behind Microservices, Kuber­
netes, and Istio. It outlines the rationale for the design behind the migration, recounts
the practical steps taken during the implementation phase, and critically evaluates the
results against the defined parameters. In the process, the research aims to provide ac­
tionable insights, not only for Boozt, but for any e­commerce entity evaluating a similar
digital transformation.
This exploration begins with the expectation of uncovering both the advantages and draw­
backs of combining Kubernetes and Istio in the complex choreography of microservices.
The results of this research are likely to be very useful for companies that are at a critical
juncture in terms of their architectural decisions, making sure that their choices are based
on data, knowledge, and prepared for the future.
1.2
Purpose Of Study
The main goals of this project are to strengthen security and reliability within the Boozt
infrastructure. Presently, services operate within a few Virtual Private Networks (VPCs)
on Google Cloud. This arrangement, while functional, has glaring vulnerabilities: ser­
vices within the same VPC have unchecked access to each other, there is an absence
of monitoring to discern inter­service communication patterns, and the networking lacks
both granularity and encryption.
To rectify these concerns, it is the aim of this thesis to implement a Service Mesh. This
advanced networking layer will enforce a Zero­Trust policy among onboarded services.
The key features of this implementation include Mutual TLS (mTLS) for secure commu­
nication, enhanced network monitoring, and rigorous identification and authorization of
services. Moreover, it provides tight control over service ingress and egress. Beyond
security, both Kubernetes and Service Mesh will amplify system reliability using resiliency
features such as self­healing, circuit breaking and latency­aware load balancing.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
1
==PAGE:9==
However, it is crucial to weigh these benefits against the potential drawbacks. Integrat­
ing a Service Mesh inevitably requires resource allocation and may introduce network
overhead. To navigate this trade­off, metrics will be harnessed to quantify the enhanced
reliability and compare it against the added operational costs of the Service Mesh inte­
gration.
1.3
Research Questions
This research seeks to understand the complexities of a Kubernetes­based Microservice
Architecture managed with Istio. It will explore certain queries to assess the potential
benefits, difficulties, and overall impact of such a transition, particularly in the context of an
ecommerce platform such as Boozt. The main research questions that will be investigated
are:
1. R1) What impact does the migration to a Microservice Architecture using Kubernetes
and Istio have on the security and reliability of Boozt’s ecommerce infrastructure?
2. R2) To what extent do the benefits of using a Service Mesh, such as improved
service discovery, mTLS, circuit breaking, and load balancing, outweigh the addi­
tional costs and complexity of implementing and maintaining such a framework in
an ecommerce setting?
3. R3) How does the experience of Boozt’s development and operations teams change
as a result of the migration to a Microservice Architecture using Kubernetes and Istio,
and what factors contribute to these changes?
4. R4) How do the performance and security benefits of migrating to a Microservice
Architecture using Kubernetes and Istio compare to other approaches to improving
ecommerce infrastructure, such as monolithic architecture with a traditional load
balancer and proxy or a serverless architecture?
5. R5) What are the most significant technical and organizational challenges faced
by Boozt during the migration to a Microservice Architecture using Kubernetes and
Istio, and how were these challenges addressed or overcome?
2
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:10==
2
Foundations
2.1
Containers and Containerization: A Paradigm Shift from
VM Architecture
2.1.1
Origins of Containers and Containerization
Before diving deep into the intricate world of Kubernetes, a system built for orchestrat­
ing containers, it is important to understand the foundational concept of containerization.
Containerization was created as a solution to the persistent problem of inconsistent per­
formance between different computing systems. Developers wanted a guarantee that ”If
it works on my machine, it will work everywhere.” This gave rise to the development of
container technology and containerization.
Containerization allows applications to be packaged with their related dependencies, li­
braries, and binaries into a single ’container’. This uniform package ensures that the
application behaves the same way in any environment. Containers provide an isolated
environment similar to virtual machines (VMs), but are much lighter and more agile.
2.1.2
VMs Versus Containers: Contrasting the Titans
The distinction between virtual machines (VMs) and containers is essential to understand
the appeal of containerization, particularly in the context of Kubernetes. VMs are complete
operating systems, while containers are simply application components[1].
• Architecture: Virtual Machines (VMs) create multiple virtual server environments
on a single server by replicating physical hardware and hosting a full­blown Operat­
ing System (OS). This makes VMs more resource intensive than containers, which
rely on a host OS, usually Linux, and share its kernel while still providing isolation.
This model gives containers their lightweight characteristics.
• Size: Virtual Machines (VMs) tend to be quite large due to the need for a full op­
erating system, which can make them several gigabytes in size. Containers, which
do not require a full OS and can take advantage of shared components, are much
smaller, usually only a few megabytes.
• Isolation: Virtual Machines (VMs) and containers promote isolation, though they
do so in different ways. VMs use a hypervisor, while containers take advantage of
Linux cgroups and namespaces, which are built into the Linux kernel.
• Performance: Containers are small in size, leading to almost immediate start times,
resulting in greater dependability and robustness for applications.
• Portability: The use of containers to enclose dependencies increases their mobility,
making it easier to move between local, testing, and production settings.
2.1.3
Why Containers Matter for Kubernetes
The capability of containers to ensure consistent application performance spurred their
rapid acceptance. As the move towards microservices increased, containers, with their
inherent capacity to separate, became the go­to option for deploying distinct services.
Each service, encased in a container, could be created, enlarged, and improved inde­
pendently.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
3
==PAGE:11==
Businesses identified the twofold benefits of containers: Their lightweight structure re­
sulted in cost savings in infrastructure and increased system utilization. This led to the
development of a system to manage these containers, which is known as Kubernetes.
To make the most of Kubernetes, it is essential to understand its interdependence with
containers. As we move on to discussing Kubernetes, it is important to keep in mind that
it is based on and intricately linked to the concept of containerization. Having this basic
knowledge will help us to gain a thorough understanding of Kubernetes and its capacity
for orchestration.
2.2
Kubernetes: Orchestrating the Dance of Containers
2.2.1
Introduction to Kubernetes
Kubernetes, often abbreviated as K8s, is an open­source container orchestration platform.
Birthed by Google and donated to the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF), Ku­
bernetes has become the de facto standard for container management. While containers
revolutionized the way applications are packaged and deployed, Kubernetes transformed
how these containers are orchestrated, scaled, and managed in clusters.
2.2.2
Why Kubernetes?
Containers, while powerful, present challenges when deployed at scale. Consider sce­
narios where hundreds or even thousands of containers need to interact, restart upon
failures, communicate, or be updated. Managing these intricacies manually requires an
unreasonably high amount of resources in time and manpower. Kubernetes offers solu­
tions to these challenges[2]:
• Scalability: Need more instances of your application to handle increased traffic?
Kubernetes can automatically scale the number of containers based on demand.
• Self­Healing: Containers might crash, but Kubernetes ensures resilience by restart­
ing failed containers or replacing them.
• Load Balancing: Kubernetes can distribute network traffic to ensure stable appli­
cation performance.
• Rollouts and Rollbacks: Safely deploy application updates and, if something goes
wrong, roll back to a previous stable version.
• Storage Orchestration: Attach storage resources, be they local storage or cloud
providers, to run stateful applications.
• Secret and Configuration Management: Manage sensitive information, such as
authentication tokens, without exposing them in container configurations.
4
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:12==
2.2.3
Diving Deeper: Control Plane and Worker Nodes
To truly understand the robustness of Kubernetes, it is pivotal to grasp the intricacies of
its architecture. The system revolves around two primary components: the Control Plane
and the Worker Nodes.
Figure 2.1: Kubernetes Components.
Image credit: Components of Kubernetes, Kubernetes documentation,
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/
Control Plane (Master Node)
The Control Plane ensures that the desired state of the cluster is maintained. It makes
global decisions about the cluster,such as scheduling, and detects and responds to clus­
ter events (e.g., starting a new pod because the replica field of a deployment is not satis­
fied)[3].
Key Components of the Control Plane:
1. API Server: Serving as the gateway to the Kubernetes control plane, the API Server
is a key component that processes REST operations, validates them, and executes
the corresponding backend operations. All communications between Kubernetes
components go through the API server.
2. etcd: A lightweight, distributed key­value store, used to persistently store the cluster
configuration. It is the ”source of truth” for the cluster, storing configuration data and
the overall state of the system.
3. Controller Manager: This component oversees controllers that regulate the state
of the system. For instance, the Replication Controller ensures that the number of
replicas defined for a service matches the current state in the system.
4. Scheduler: The scheduler selects the most suitable node for unscheduled pods
based on resource requirements, quality­of­service specifications, and other con­
straints. In a sense, it is like a traffic director, guiding pods to appropriate nodes for
optimal performance.
Worker Nodes
Worker nodes house the containers that run applications. They are the machinery of the
Kubernetes cluster, providing the runtime environments (in the form of pods) for these
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
5
==PAGE:13==
containers.
Key Components of Worker Nodes:
1. Kubelet: An essential agent that runs on each node, it ensures the containers are
running in a pod and performs tasks like starting, stopping, and maintaining appli­
cation containers as directed by the control plane.
2. Kube Proxy: This is a network proxy running on each node, maintaining the network
rules that allow for pod­to­pod, pod­to­service, and external­to­service communica­
tions.
3. Container Runtime: The underlying software responsible for running containers.
Docker is a popular choice, but Kubernetes also supports others like containerd and
CRI­O.
4. Pod: Central to the Kubernetes model, a pod can encapsulate one or multiple con­
tainers. It is the smallest and simplest unit in the Kubernetes object model.
Together, the Control Plane and Worker Nodes provide the muscle and intelligence for
Kubernetes’ operations. They interact seamlessly to ensure that applications, whether
monolithic or microservice­based, run smoothly, resiliently, and efficiently in any environ­
ment. The modularity and clarity of roles within this architecture enable the extensibility
and scalability that Kubernetes has become known for.
2.2.4
Manifests: Declaring Infrastructure as Code
In Kubernetes, the desired state of system components, such as pods, services, deploy­
ments, and other resources, is usually expressed in a manifest. This manifest is a declar­
ative configuration file, usually written in YAML, that outlines the desired state of an object
in the cluster. This is in contrast to imperative methods, which provide explicit instructions
on how to reach a goal. With the declarative approach, Kubernetes’ control plane con­
tinuously verifies that the existing state of resources is in line with the desired state, and
resolves any discrepancies that arise[2].
Manifests, due to their text­based nature, are ideal for storage in version control systems
such as Git, which enables a process known as ”GitOps.” This combination of version con­
trol and operations allows teams to manage infrastructure configurations with the same
versioning, auditing, and collaborative techniques used for software development.
For complex scenarios, templating tools like Helm1 can be used to generate manifest
files based on specified parameters. This is extremely useful when deploying the same
application across different environments, such as staging and production, each with its
own configuration needs.
Investigating the structure of a regular manifest, one can find fields such as ”apiVersion”,
which indicates the version of the Kubernetes API used; ”kind”, which specifies the type of
resource (e.g., Pod, Service, Deployment); ”metadata” for providing resource­related in­
formation; and ”spec” for describing the desired resource characteristics. To apply these
manifests to a Kubernetes cluster, the ”kubectl” command­line tool is used. With com­
mands like ”kubectl apply ­f <filename>.yaml”, users can easily create or modify resources
in the cluster. Manifests enable Kubernetes to adopt the Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
model by packaging complex configurations into standardized, readable, and version­
controlled documents. This makes it much simpler to deploy and manage cluster re­
sources.
1https://helm.sh/
6
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:14==
2.2.5
Pods: The Smallest Unit in Kubernetes
Pods are the basic components for running applications on Kubernetes. They can be
thought of as containers for your containers. A workload in Kubernetes is an application,
which can be a single container in a single Pod, multiple containers in a single Pod, or
even multiple Pods[3]. Pods are the smallest and simplest units in the Kubernetes API.
In Kubernetes, the terms ”application” and ”workload” are synonymous and will be used
interchangeably in this document.
Definition and Characteristics
A Pod represents one or more containers that should be controlled as a single application.
Containers within a pod:
• Share the same IP address.
• Share the same port space.
• Can communicate with each other using localhost .
• Can share storage, if specified.
Given this arrangement, containers within the same pod are typically tightly coupled ap­
plications that need to operate together. For example, a main application and a helper
that pushes logs or data elsewhere, or a networking proxy.
Why Not Just Containers?
Kubernetes is designed to manage a large number of containers and to be able to scale
up or down as needed. You may be curious as to why Kubernetes does not simply de­
ploy containers. The response is due to the scalability and adaptability of the system.
Kubernetes is intended to manage a great many containers and to be able to increase or
decrease in size as required.
1. Co­locating Containerized Processes: By allowing multiple containers in a single
pod, Kubernetes gives the ability to co­locate related processes and have them
easily communicate with each other.
2. Shared Storage: Containers within a pod can specify shared storage volumes,
facilitating data access across containers.
3. Networking Model: The shared network space (with a single IP) simplifies network
configurations and inter­container communication.
Lifecycle of a Pod
Pods go through various states:
Pending: The pod has been accepted by the Kubernetes system, but one or more con­
tainer images are not created and started.
Running: The pod has been bound to a node and all the containers have been created.
Succeeded: All containers in the pod have been terminated successfully and will not be
restarted.
Failed: One or more containers in the pod have terminated in failure.
Interacting with Pods
Though pods are fundamental, Pods are rarely deployed by themselves, but rather in the
context of ”workload controllers” such as Deployments, DaemonSets and StatefulSets.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
7
==PAGE:15==
Kubernetes generally expects users to interact with higher­level abstracted workload con­
trollers for most common use cases. These abstractions ensure that the desired state of
the system is maintained.
2.2.6
Deployments: Managing the Desired State
Kubernetes Deployments offer a higher­level abstraction for the desired state of your ap­
plication. They utilize ReplicaSets under the hood to ensure the desired number of pod
replicas are maintained. This means if a pod crashes, the Deployment will automatically
create a new pod as a replacement, ensuring self­healing. Deployments support rolling
updates to your application, which allows updates to the pods’ container images or con­
figurations in a controlled manner. Rolling back to a previous version of your application
is also facilitated by the deployment’s revision history. In essence, using Deployments
abstracts away many of the complexities of manually managing the lifecycle and avail­
ability of Pods, allowing developers and operators to focus on defining the desired state
and letting Kubernetes handle the rest.
Figure 2.2: Deployment Manifest Example
1
apiVersion: apps/v1
2
kind: Deployments
3
metadata:
4
name: sender-1
5
namespace: istio-test
6
spec:
7
selector:
8
matchLabels:
9
app: sender-1
10
template:
11
metadata:
12
labels:
13
app: sender-1
14
spec:
15
containers:
16
- name: sender-1
17
image: isriboozt/locust:latest
18
ports:
19
- containerPort: 8090
20
...
2.2.7
Services: Ensuring Stable Communication
In the dynamic environment of Kubernetes, where pods can be routinely created or termi­
nated, maintaining a stable communication endpoint becomes paramount. That’s where
Kubernetes Services come into play. A Service is an abstraction that defines a set of
Pods and a policy to access them, typically using a selector. The main benefit of using
a Service is that it provides a consistent IP address and DNS name, ensuring that the
network communication remains stable even if the underlying pods are replaced.
8
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:16==
2.2.8
Service Fundamentals: Types, Discovery, and Durability
• Service Types: Depending on your needs, there are several types of services avail­
able:
– ClusterIP: By default, this type exposes the service on a cluster­internal IP,
making it reachable only within the cluster.
– NodePort: This type exposes the service on a port on each node of the cluster,
making the service accessible from outside the cluster using ‘<NodeIP>:<NodePort>‘.
– LoadBalancer: Commonly used in cloud environments, this type of service
provisions an external IP to act as a load balancer for your application, routing
external traffic to the appropriate pods.
– ExternalName: Instead of using IP addresses, this service type allows the
service to be represented using an arbitrary name (defined by ‘externalName‘),
which clients can resolve using external DNS.
• Service Discovery: Within the Kubernetes ecosystem, once a service is defined, its
details can be discovered through the built­in DNS server or environment variables,
enabling seamless communication between different parts of an application.
• Endpoints and Selectors: Services route traffic to pods using selectors, which
match the set of pods based on their labels. If a pod meets the selection criteria,
traffic will be forwarded to it. The collection of pods that receive traffic from a partic­
ular service is called the service’s endpoints.
• Service Durability: One significant advantage of Kubernetes services is their dura­
bility. While pods may come and go, the service remains, ensuring that network
traffic continues to flow as intended.
Figure 2.3: Service Manifest Example
1
apiVersion: v1
2
kind: Service
3
metadata:
4
name: sender-1-service
5
namespace: istio-test
6
spec:
7
selector:
8
app: sender-1
9
ports:
10
- protocol: TCP
11
port: 80
12
targetPort: 8090
With Services, Kubernetes provides a resilient networking model, ensuring that applica­
tions remain reachable and operational, irrespective of the lifecycle of individual pods.
2.2.9
Namespaces: Logical Partitioning in Kubernetes
Namespaces in Kubernetes provide a mechanism for partitioning cluster resources among
multiple users, applications, or environments. Essentially, they offer a way to divide a sin­
gle physical cluster into multiple virtual clusters, allowing efficient resource isolation and
management.
Several key points underline the utility and application of namespaces:
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
9
==PAGE:17==
• Resource Separation: Namespaces allow different teams or projects to share a
Kubernetes cluster without interfering with each other’s resources. For example,
both the development and production environments can co­exist in the same cluster
but within different namespaces.
• Access Control: Using namespaces, administrators can define granular access
rights to specific parts of the cluster. This ensures that users or applications only
have permissions to resources within their designated namespaces.
• Resource Allocation and Quotas: Administrators can enforce resource quotas on
a per­namespace basis, ensuring that no single team or application consumes an
inordinate amount of cluster resources.
• Name Isolation: Resources like Pods, Services, and Deployments can have the
same name as long as they reside in different namespaces. This can simplify nam­
ing conventions and reduce conflicts.
Figure 2.4: Namespace Manifest Example
1
apiVersion: v1
2
kind: Namespace
3
metadata:
4
name: istio-test
Taken from the test service used during implementation.
Default Behavior and Limitations of Namespaces
If no namespace is specified, the manifest will be applied to the default namespace. While
namespaces play a pivotal role in organizing and managing a Kubernetes cluster, it is cru­
cial to note that they are not meant to provide strong isolation between different resources.
For instance, Pods in different namespaces on the same node can still communicate with
each other, unless network policies are applied to restrict such communication.
Overall, namespaces represent an integral tool within Kubernetes’ arsenal, allowing for
logical segmentation of resources and facilitating efficient multi­tenancy in the cluster.
2.2.10
ConfigMaps: Decoupling Configuration from Application Logic
ConfigMaps are a Kubernetes feature that enables developers to separate configuration
details from the actual application code. This separation ensures a more flexible deploy­
ment and scaling process, especially in diverse environments with differing requirements.
Overview
• Purpose: ConfigMaps allow for the externalization of configuration data from ap­
plication logic. This ensures that configuration can be changed without needing to
rebuild container images or modify application code.
• Usage: They can be used to store individual properties, files, or JSON/YAML con­
figurations.
• Integration: ConfigMaps can be consumed by pods as environment variables,
command­line arguments, or as files in a volume.
10
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: ConfigMap Manifest Example
1
apiVersion: v1
2
kind: ConfigMap
3
metadata:
4
name: sample-configmap
5
data:
6
example.property.1: "value1"
7
example.property.2: "value2"
Considerations
It is important to note that ConfigMaps are not suitable for sensitive data. In Kubernetes, a
different object called ”Secret” is used for storing sensitive information, such as passwords
or API keys.
2.2.11
Secrets: Managing Sensitive Information
In Kubernetes, Secrets are a special type of object that store sensitive data, such as
passwords, OAuth tokens, and SSH keys. Unlike ConfigMaps which are designed for
nonsensitive configuration data, Secrets provide mechanisms to ensure sensitive data is
kept confidential and used securely by your applications.
Overview
• Purpose: Secrets aim to safeguard sensitive information, ensuring it is neither
stored in application code nor in standard container images.
• Usage: They can be used by pods in similar ways as ConfigMaps, such as being
exposed as environment variables or mounted as files.
• Protection: While Secrets are more secure than plaintext configuration, they are
only base64 encoded in Kubernetes, so using additional encryption­at­rest solutions
within the cluster is recommended.
Creating a Secret
There are several ways to create a secret; one of the common methods is using kubectl :
1
echo -n 'my-password' | base64
2
# Outputs: bXktcGFzc3dvcmQ=
3
4
# Use the encoded value in your secret definition
5
kubectl create secret generic my-secret --from-literal=password=bXktcGFzc3dvcmQ=
Considerations
• Secrets are only encoded in base64, which is not encryption. For this reason, it is
crucial to limit access to Secrets and consider employing additional layers of secu­
rity.
• Secrets should not be checked into version control in plaintext.
• Use Kubernetes Role Based Access Control2 (RBAC) to restrict which users and
parts of your application can access different secrets.
2https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access­authn­authz/rbac/
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
11
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Service Mesh: Architecting for Microservices
Communication
A service mesh is an architectural pattern that encapsulates the complexities associated
with service­to­service communication in microservices architectures. As microservices
applications grow and evolve, managing inter­service communications can become in­
creasingly complex. The service mesh emerged as a solution to this challenge, offering
various functionalities that ease this complexity and enhance the stability, security, and
observability of microservices.
2.3.1
Fundamentals of Service Mesh
At its core, a service mesh is a dedicated infrastructure layer designed to handle service­
to­service communication. It ensures that data moves reliably between services, regard­
less of where those services are deployed. The mesh is comprised of a set of lightweight
network proxies, usually deployed alongside services, and a control plane that manages
these proxies.[4]
Data Plane vs. Control Plane
• Data Plane: This is where the actual work of handling requests between services
occurs. Proxies like Envoy3 or Linkerd2­Proxy4, deployed alongside each service
instance, intercept and route service traffic, ensuring resilience, security, and ob­
servability.
• Control Plane: It provides an abstract interface to configure and manage the prox­
ies in the data plane. Solutions like Istio or Consul come with a control plane that
dictates the behavior of proxies, offering features like traffic routing, policy enforce­
ment, and telemetry collection.
2.3.2
Key Benefits of Service Mesh
• Observability: A service mesh enhances visibility into the application, offering met­
rics, logs, and traces that give insights into service interactions, dependencies, and
performance bottlenecks.
• Traffic Management: Features like traffic splitting, fault injection, and request rout­
ing can be managed centrally, enabling scenarios like canary deployments and A/B
testing.
• Security: The service mesh can enforce policies like mutual TLS (mTLS) for en­
crypted and authenticated service­to­service communication, ensuring data in tran­
sit remains confidential and comes from a verified source.
• Resilience: Built­in features like circuit breaking, retries, and timeouts improve the
system’s robustness, ensuring services remain operational under varying condi­
tions.
2.3.3
Common Patterns and Practices
• Sidecar Proxy Pattern: One of the most common ways to implement a service
mesh is using the sidecar proxy pattern, where each service instance is paired with
a lightweight proxy that intercepts and manages its network communication.
• Ingress and Egress Control: While most of the service mesh’s value is in east­
west traffic (service­to­service), controlling the traffic coming into (ingress) and leav­
ing (egress) the mesh is also vital for a holistic approach.
3https://www.envoyproxy.io/
4https://github.com/linkerd/linkerd2­proxy
12
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:20==
• Policy Enforcement: Centralized policy management allows setting rules and pro­
tocols that every service in the mesh must adhere to, ensuring a consistent and
compliant inter­service communication.
In essence, a service mesh offers a holistic solution to the challenges of microservices
communication. By decoupling communication concerns from application logic, it enables
developers to focus on business functionality, while the mesh ensures the services interact
securely, efficiently, and reliably.
2.4
Monolithic, Traditional Load Balancers, and Serverless
In the realm of software development and deployment, architecture determines how com­
ponents communicate and cooperate. While our main focus lies in exploring Kubernetes­
based microservices managed with a service mesh, it’s crucial to place this within the
larger context by briefly understanding other prevalent architectures.
2.4.1
Monolithic Architecture
[5] At the very foundation of software development lies the monolithic architecture. Pic­
ture a single­tiered software system where both the user interface and data access code
are meshed together, running from a single platform. This design simplifies initial devel­
opment, testing, and deployment, as everything is unified. However, with time, as the
application grows, the simplicity fades. Scaling becomes challenging since you can’t just
scale one part of your application independently; any minor change requires redeploying
the entire system. Also, if one component fails, it often leads to the failure of the entire sys­
tem. For many enterprises, these limitations have been a motivation to explore modular
architectures like microservices, seeking better scalability, resilience, and development
speed.
2.4.2
Traditional Load Balancers
Before delving into the sophistication of service meshes, let’s turn our attention to tradi­
tional load balancers. Their primary role is straightforward: distribute incoming network
traffic uniformly across multiple servers to ensure no single server is overwhelmed. While
there are types, such as Application Load Balancers (ALB) and Network Load Balancers
(NLB), their fundamental purpose remains consistent. These systems improve redun­
dancy, scalability, and ensure efficient traffic distribution. However, they aren’t without
shortcomings. They might introduce latency, especially if not appropriately scaled. More­
over, they typically lack the deep application­aware capabilities that service meshes offer.
A service mesh like Istio extends the benefits of traditional load balancing by integrating
more refined traffic controls, failover strategies, and telemetry.
2.4.3
Serverless Architecture
[6] Then there’s the serverless paradigm, a transformative shift in how infrastructure is
perceived. In serverless computing, developers focus solely on the code, leaving infras­
tructure concerns to cloud providers. Prominent examples include Functions as a Service
(FaaS) platforms like AWS Lambda. The beauty of serverless lies in its promise: no in­
frastructure to manage, automatic scalability, and cost efficiency, given its pay­as­you­go
model. The deployment is quick and iterations can be frequent. However, it’s not with­
out its peculiarities. Cold starts can affect performance. Functions have execution time
constraints. The inherent statelessness requires new approaches for state management,
and there is always the looming shadow of potential vendor lock­in. While serverless can
represent microservice implementations, they diverge in lifecycle management, scalability
controls, and infrastructure management.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
13
==PAGE:21==
3
Design
3.1
Rationale for Migrating Boozt Infrastructure to
Microservices and Kubernetes
It is essential to emphasize that the transition to Microservices and Kubernetes neces­
sitates a substantial investment in learning and restructuring. Netflix was the first ma­
jor company to successfully implement a Microservice architecture [7], but Prime Video
recently published a blog post describing its data­driven move from Microservices to a
monolith [8]. Before discussing the rationale for Boozt’s migration to Microservices and
Kubernetes, we will first outline the general reasons for this transition, followed by the
Boozt­specific use cases.
General Reasons for Migrating to Kubernetes
The current e­commerce environment is ever­changing, with businesses attempting to
give their customers fast, dependable, and expandable services. With the difficulties of
managing more intricate systems and the necessity for flexibility, Kubernetes has become
a desirable solution. Here is a list of reasons why an e­commerce company may choose
to move their traditional virtual machine (VM) setup to Kubernetes:
1. Scalability: E­commerce platforms experience fluctuating traffic, with spikes during
sales events, holiday seasons, or product launches. Kubernetes can automatically
scale applications, both up and down, based on demand, ensuring optimal resource
utilization and responsiveness. Cloud providers such as Google Cloud Platform
(GCP) provide autoscaling features to Managed Instance Groups (MIG) that can be
configured to be triggered by memory and cpu thresholds, in order to bring scaling
capabilities as close to Kubernetes as possible. However, they are still fully fledged
VMs and therefore take longer and require more resources to scale.
2. High Availability: Downtime can lead to a significant revenue loss for e­commerce
platforms. Kubernetes provides built­in mechanisms to ensure application avail­
ability, including replication, self­healing (restarting failed containers), and rolling
updates.
3. Cost­Efficiency: By optimizing resource utilization and enabling more granular
scaling (at the container level as opposed to the VM level), Kubernetes can lead
to significant cost savings in infrastructure expenses.
4. Continuous Deployment & Integration (CD/CI): Kubernetes integrates well with
modern CI/CD tools, streamlining the process of deploying, updating, and rolling
back applications (e.g. FluxCD). This ensures faster time­to­market for new features
or fixes.
5. Unified Environment: Kubernetes provides a consistent environment across de­
velopment, staging, and production, minimizing the ”works on my machine” problem
and ensuring consistency.
6. Ecosystem & Integrations: The Kubernetes ecosystem offers a wealth of tools
and extensions, from monitoring (e.g., Prometheus 1) to service mesh solutions
1https://prometheus.io/
14
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:22==
(e.g., Istio2), both of which are used in this study, among others. These tools can
further enhance the capabilities of e­commerce platforms.
7. Vendor and Cloud Agnosticism: Kubernetes ensures that e­commerce platforms
aren’t locked into a particular cloud provider. This freedom provides flexibility in
choosing vendors based on pricing, performance, or other criteria without extensive
migration efforts.
8. Security Enhancements: While Kubernetes has a learning curve in terms of se­
curity, once set up correctly, features such as RBAC, network policies, and service
meshes can provide enhanced security for e­commerce applications.
9. Community and Support: Being an open­source project with widespread indus­
try adoption, Kubernetes has a strong community and commercial support. This
ensures continuous improvement, timely updates, and access to expertise when
needed. This reduces an organizations need for essentially repeating the same
work as other organizations, and focus on their individual value offering.
3.1.1
What drove Boozt to move to Kubernetes?
Boozt’s migration from VMs to Kubernetes was influenced by both industry­standard mo­
tivations and specific challenges inherent to their operations. Their key drivers were as
follows.
1. Legacy System Overhead: Boozt has accumulated several legacy systems over
the years, leading to operational inefficiencies. Among these legacy systems are
Rundeck, which is used to run scheduled jobs on VMs, and Chef, which is used
for the configuration management of VMs. Boozt is using outdated versions of both
tools, which creates vulnerabilities and forces other systems not to be updated. One
such example is almost all VMs are CentOS 7 based machines, whilst CentOS 7
is scheduled to be discontinued from June 2024. Replacing CentOS with another
base VM image would require updating the legacy systems running on them to be
compatible with newer Linux distributions3. Migrating to Kubernetes provides an
opportunity to modernize the tech stack, shedding cumbersome legacy components
such as these.
2. Cost Optimiziation: The cost fluctuations with VM­based infrastructures were af­
fecting Boozt’s financial forecasting. Cloud costs grew exponentially during 2021,
2022, and look to continue so in 2023, compared to the previous 10 years. Kuber­
netes, with its efficient resource utilization, offered more predictable and optimized
operating costs.
3. Simplification: With the growing number of systems at Boozt, there are many
moving pieces related to the deployment and management of systems. Moving
to Kubernetes will allow boozt to shed many systems it is currently using such as
Rundeck, Chef, Jenkins, Packer, Capistrano and others. Kubernetes provides ab­
stractions to the underlying infrastructure. Rather than managing individual servers
or VMs, developers interact with these higher­level constructs that represent clus­
tered resources. This abstract approach minimizes the need to handle node­specific
details or intricate network configurations. By defining desired states and letting Ku­
bernetes handle orchestration, the system ensures consistent and reliable deploy­
ments across diverse environments.
2https://istio.io/
3https://www.redhat.com/en/events/webinar/centos­linux­reaching­its­end­life­now­what
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
15
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Rationale for Introducing Service Mesh to Kubernetes
As Kubernetes continues to be the de­facto orchestrator for containerized applications,
it is essential to recognize its intrinsic nature, which focuses primarily on orchestration
and not the subtleties of inter­service communication. As microservices architectures
deployed on Kubernetes scale, certain challenges become more pronounced.
3.2.1
Challenges in a Kubernetes­only Landscape
• Complex Service­to­Service Communication: As the number of microservices
grow, orchestrating their communications can become a monumental task.
• Security Gaps: Kubernetes does not provide out­of­the­box service­to­service en­
cryption using mTLS and Zero­Trust networking policies, leaving potential security
vulnerabilities.
• Inadequate Observability: Native Kubernetes tools might not offer the depth of
observability required for large­scale applications.
• Traffic Management: Implementing advanced traffic strategies like canary releases
or blue­green deployments is not straightforward.
3.2.2
Benefits of Introducing Service Mesh
Given these challenges, the introduction of a service mesh to a Kubernetes environment
is motivated by the following:
• Advanced Traffic Management: A Service Mesh brings tools for granular traffic
control, enabling advanced deployment strategies and ensuring high availability.
• Enhanced Security: Automatic encryption of inter­service communication, com­
bined with robust authentication mechanisms, elevates the security posture.
• In­depth Observability: Gain deeper insights into your application’s behavior with
sophisticated monitoring, logging, and tracing tools.
• Operational Efficiency: By offloading certain operational aspects to the service
mesh, teams can maintain a clearer focus on the application logic and business
features.
Incorporating a service mesh within a Kubernetes environment not only addresses inher­
ent challenges but also augments its capabilities, ensuring that applications are secure,
observable, and resilient.
16
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Rationale for Selecting Istio as the Service Mesh Solution
As a larger organization, one of the primary requirements at Boozt for adding new entries
to its technology stack is a certain level of community adoption, in order to reduce risk
of the technology going stale or being abandoned all together. Therefore, only a shortlist
of more mature solutions were considered as the Service Mesh solution for Boozt, which
are Linkerd4, Istio, Consul5, and Kuma6.
Table 3.1: Service Mesh Comparison
Feature
Linkerd
Istio
Consul
Kuma
Features
Traffic manage­
ment
Traffic manage­
ment, security,
observability
Traffic manage­
ment and ob­
servability
Traffic manage­
ment, security,
observability
Complexity
Simple
Complex
Simple
Simple
Deployment
Kubernetes
Kubernetes,
VMs, and other
platforms
Kubernetes
and VMs
Kubernetes,
VMs, and other
platforms
Ease of use
Easy
Difficult
Easy
Easy
Linkerd is a lightweight Service Mesh that is simple to install and manage. It is suitable
for microservice architectures that do not need many complex features, due to its good
performance and low overhead. Unfortunately, it was not chosen as the Service Mesh
solution for Boozt because it does not have enough security features, limited metrics, and
is not compatible with virtual machines. Boozt wanted to keep the option of using a hybrid
infrastructure of VMs and Kubernetes for certain applications that would be better suited
to remain on VMs.
Consul is renowned for its remarkable service discovery capabilities and its capacity to
generate comprehensive metrics. However, its features related to traffic management
are not as comprehensive as those of Istio and Kuma, which offer ready­made weighted
traffic splitting, request shadowing, and circuit breakers to better support their blue­green
and canary deployment approaches.
Kuma is a newer entry and uses that to its advantage by learning from the problems
that others have had. Compared to Istio, it is very close in terms of features and tries to
simplify configuration and operation at the same time. One advantage of Kuma is that it
does not dictate the Ingress controller, it works with any solution put in front of it, whereas
Istio wants its own controller or solution based on the Kubernetes Gateway API.
Istio is the most comprehensive Service Mesh available, with Kuma coming in a close
second. It provides a wide variety of features for security, observability, and traffic man­
agement. It is highly extensible and widely used, which is also why it integrates well
with many other tools, such as Prometheus, Grafana7, Jaeger8, Datadog9, Open Policy
4https://linkerd.io/
5https://www.consul.io/
6https://kuma.io/
7https://grafana.com/
8https://www.jaegertracing.io/
9https://www.datadoghq.com/
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
17
==PAGE:25==
Agent10, cert­manager11, and more. However, the complexity of Istio can be a major
drawback, and it requires a significant amount of education and practice to become an
adept user.
A small proof of concept (PoC) of installing Kuma and Istio on clusters on a local ma­
chine, showed that latency overhead and resource usage was smaller for Kuma. Based
on these parameters and because of its smaller complexity impact, Kuma was the recom­
mendation to Boozt. However, after discussions with members of the engineering branch
at Boozt, it became the consensus to move forward with Istio because of its much larger
user community, rapid development cycle and broader set of features.
3.4
Istio Unpacked: Exploring Service Mesh Features
[9]Istio is an open­source service mesh that offers mechanisms to connect, secure, con­
trol, and observe services. Built on the sidecar proxy model, it leverages Envoy as its
default data plane to intercept all inbound and outbound traffic for services within the
mesh.
3.4.1
Core Concepts
1. Control Plane vs. Data Plane: Istio’s architecture separates the control plane
from the data plane. The control plane, mainly composed of the istiod component,
is responsible for configuring and setting up the proxies to manage traffic routing.
The data plane, mainly made up of Envoy proxies, is in charge of handling network
traffic between microservices.
2. Sidecar Proxy: Each pod within Istio’s service mesh is paired with an Envoy proxy
that runs alongside it. This proxy intercepts all network communication, executing
the routing rules and policies that have been set up in the control plane.
3. Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs): Istio utilizes custom Kubernetes resources
to simplify its setup. Examples of these are VirtualService for routing rules, Destina­
tionRule for post­routing settings, and Gateway for controlling ingress and egress
traffic.
4. Traffic Management: Istio, through its CRDs, enables advanced traffic routing ca­
pabilities. This includes requests for timeouts, retries, circuit breakers, fault injec­
tion, and more.
5. Security: Istio champions end­to­end authentication and encryption via mutual TLS
(mTLS). Utilizing its PeerAuthentication and RequestAuthentication CRDs, Istio en­
forces rigorous security protocols for inter­service and end­user authentication.
6. Observability: Istio’s capabilities extend to telemetry, tracing, and monitoring, of­
fering intricate insights into service behavior. It seamlessly integrates with industry­
known tools such as Prometheus, Grafana, and Jaeger to provide extensive service­
related metrics, visualizations, and traces.
7. Extensions and Customizability: With a Wasm­based12 extension system, Istio
gives developers the freedom to embed custom filters into the proxy. This is crucial
for custom tasks such as data manipulation, specialized metrics, or tailored access
controls.
10https://www.openpolicyagent.org/
11https://cert­manager.io/
12https://github.com/layer5io/wasm­filters
18
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:26==
3.5
Monitoring and Observability with Istio: Prometheus,
Grafana, Kiali, and Jaeger
3.5.1
Prometheus: Metrics Collection and Alerting
Prometheus is a reliable and scalable open­source monitoring and alerting toolkit, initially
developed by SoundCloud. It is designed to tackle the difficulties of monitoring highly
dynamic containerized environments, such as Kubernetes.
• Data Retrieval: Prometheus primarily uses a pull model, scraping metrics from
instrumented jobs. These metrics are stored in its time­series database.
• Alerting: Based on the collected metrics, Prometheus can trigger alerts according
to user­defined rules.
• Multiple Modes of Visualization: While Prometheus has its own basic expression
browser, it also integrates seamlessly with visualization tools like Grafana for more
elaborate dashboards.
3.5.2
Grafana: Metrics Visualization
Grafana is an open­source platform for monitoring and observability, providing you with
the means to visualize, explore, and alert on your metrics, no matter where they are
stored.
• Data Sources: Grafana supports a wide variety of databases, including Prometheus,
Elasticsearch, Graphite, and many others.
• Dashboard Templating: Grafana provides numerous pre­built dashboards shared
by the community, and also offers the flexibility to customize or create your own.
• Alerting: While Prometheus has its own alerting mechanism, Grafana also provides
a comprehensive alerting feature set, giving you the choice to use either or both.
3.5.3
Integration with Istio
Istio comes with built­in support to integrate with Prometheus and Grafana. Here’s how
you can utilize them together:
• Metrics Collection: Istio proxies (based on Envoy) generate metrics for all incom­
ing and outgoing traffic. Prometheus, when integrated with Istio, can scrape these
metrics from each proxy, giving you deep insights into your mesh’s performance and
behavior.
• Pre­configured Dashboards: When Istio is set up with Grafana, it provides a set
of default dashboards that present these metrics in a comprehensive and organized
manner. These dashboards are specifically tailored for the kind of telemetry data
Istio produces, simplifying the monitoring process.
• Distributed Tracing: Along with metrics, Istio also provides distributed tracing ca­
pabilities. Integrating tools like Jaeger or Zipkin with Grafana can further enrich the
observability experience, allowing you to trace individual requests as they traverse
through your mesh.
• Custom Queries: Since the data is stored in Prometheus, you can use PromQL
(Prometheus Query Language) to create custom queries, aggregations, and alerts.
These can be visualized directly in Grafana.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
19
==PAGE:27==
3.5.4
Kiali: Service Mesh Observability and Configuration
Kiali functions as the service mesh observability tool, providing a detailed visual repre­
sentation of your mesh architecture.
• Topology Views: Kiali shows how microservices in the service mesh are intercon­
nected, making it easier to understand and monitor network flow.
• Configuration Validation: Kiali can analyze and validate Istio configuration files,
ensuring that the service mesh is working as expected.
3.5.5
Jaeger: Distributed Tracing
Jaeger specializes in end­to­end distributed tracing, enabling users to monitor the journey
of requests as they propagate through various microservices.
• Trace Visualization: Jaeger’s UI offers a clean, intuitive way to visualize traces,
allowing operators to understand the flow and latency between microservices.
• Performance Insights: By studying the trace data, operators can identify perfor­
mance bottlenecks and latencies in the system, providing actionable insights for
optimization.
3.5.6
Istio’s Integration with Monitoring Tools
Istio, in its architecture, seamlessly integrates with Prometheus, Grafana, Kiali, and Jaeger.
• Metrics Collection: Istio’s Envoy proxies generate detailed metrics for all service
interactions. Prometheus, when connected to Istio, can fetch these metrics, thereby
enriching mesh insights.
• Observability Dashboards: Grafana, bundled with Istio, offers pre­configured dash­
boards tailor­made for Istio’s telemetry data. Additionally, Kiali provides a visual
representation of the mesh, complementing Grafana’s metrics visualization.
• Tracing: Jaeger, when integrated with Istio, enables detailed tracing of requests,
offering insights into the lifecycle of requests through the mesh. This distributed
tracing is visualized in Jaeger’s UI.
• Custom Queries: With metrics stored in Prometheus, users can leverage PromQL
for custom queries and aggregations, visualized directly in Grafana.
The combination of Prometheus and Grafana with Istio offers a powerful, out­of­the­box
solution for monitoring and observability the behavior and performance of your service
mesh. By tapping into the rich telemetry data produced by Istio and visualizing them using
Grafana, you can gain critical insights into the health and efficiency of your applications
and infrastructure. However, Boozt has historically entrusted the entirety of its observ­
ability to Datadog, a robust and comprehensive monitoring platform. While Datadog has
served as a consistent and effective solution for the diverse needs of Boozt, the transition
into an Istio­based service mesh architecture introduces a different set of considerations.
Istio’s natural integration with Prometheus and Grafana provides a guaranteed and seam­
less monitoring solution, as they are packaged together. This ensures that, right out of
the box, these tools function at their utmost capability without the need for extensive cus­
tomization or integration efforts. Given their intrinsic compatibility with Istio, Prometheus
and Grafana present themselves as fail­safe tools that we can rely upon for immediate
and accurate observability.
20
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:28==
On the other hand, while Datadog’s capabilities are vast, and its utility within Boozt’s
ecosystem is undeniable, its integration with the new Istio­based architecture has yet
to be fully vetted. As Boozt is committed to ensuring a smooth transition with minimal
disruptions to its monitoring and observability workflows, we have opted to retain both
Prometheus and Grafana alongside Datadog. This approach guarantees that while we
validate and fine­tune the Datadog integration, we can remain confident in the consistent,
native observability provided by Prometheus and Grafana.
3.6
Helm: The Kubernetes Package Manager
Helm is often referred to as the ”package manager for Kubernetes.” While package man­
agers like apt for Debian or yum for CentOS manage software packages and depen­
dencies on individual machines, Helm manages Kubernetes applications through Helm
charts. These charts are a collection of pre­configured Kubernetes resources, streamlin­
ing the process of defining, storing, and managing applications on Kubernetes.
3.6.1
How Helm Works
A Helm chart is a bundle of information necessary to create an instance of a Kubernetes
application. It contains:
• A description of the package ( Chart.yaml ).
• One or more templates, which contain Kubernetes manifest files.
• Default values ( values.yaml ) for these templates, which can be overridden during
installation time.
When deploying an application with Helm, the Helm client sends the chart to the Helm
Tiller server (in Helm v2) or directly interacts with the Kubernetes API (in Helm v3, where
Tiller was removed for security and simplicity). The server processes the chart with the
provided values, generating the Kubernetes manifest files and deploying the application.
The implementation of this thesis has been with Helm v3.
A Helm chart is typically structured as:
mychart/
Chart.yaml
values.yaml
charts/
templates/
NOTES.txt
deployment.yaml
service.yaml
.helmignore
• Chart.yaml : A YAML file that contains information about the chart version, name,
and description.
• values.yaml : The default configuration values for this chart.
• charts/ : A directory containing any charts upon which this chart depends.
• templates/ : A directory of templates that, when combined with values, will gen­
erate valid Kubernetes manifest files.
– NOTES.txt : A plain text file with short usage notes.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
21
==PAGE:29==
– Template files like deployment.yaml , service.yaml , etc., which will gener­
ate the Kubernetes manifest files.
• .helmignore : A file that specifies patterns to ignore when packaging the chart.
This structure allows Helm to package the chart’s contents into deployable units, while
customization during deployment is possible via the ‘values.yaml‘ file.
3.6.2
Pains from Kubernetes and The Emergence of Helm
Managing applications on Kubernetes comes with its set of challenges:
1. Complex Configuration: Kubernetes manifest files, written in YAML or JSON, can
be intricate and verbose. For sizable applications, the number of configurations can
become overwhelming.
2. Version Management: Without a system in place, tracking versions of applications
and their configurations can be problematic.
3. Consistency: Ensuring consistent deployments across different environments (de­
velopment, staging, production) requires careful orchestration.
4. Rollbacks: Rolling back to a previous version of an application in case of a deploy­
ment failure can be cumbersome.
Helm was developed to address these challenges:
• By templating manifest files, Helm simplifies and reduces the verbosity of Kuber­
netes configurations.
• Helm charts are versioned, ensuring that teams can track changes and install spe­
cific versions of an application.
• Charts can be easily shared through Helm repositories, promoting consistency across
environments.
• Helm supports easy rollbacks to previous releases, enhancing deployment reliability.
In essence, Helm emerged as a response to the complexities of handling Kubernetes ap­
plications. By introducing a higher level of abstraction and offering tools to manage the
application lifecycle, Helm has become an indispensable tool in the Kubernetes ecosys­
tem.
At Boozt, Helm plays a pivotal role in engineering operations, acting as a scaffold upon
which they define a structured framework. This allows developers to configure their de­
ployments without being overwhelmed by intricate details. The engineering team metic­
ulously sets up the required configurations, manages secret injections from external ser­
vices like Vault for token generation to access databases and other services, oversees
the definition of ingress, and establishes service accounts. They also implement cron
jobs to manage background tasks, among other technical intricacies. What Helm charts
bring to the table are predefined templates, streamlined by our engineering team. Con­
sequently, developer teams are spared the complexity, they simply need to populate the
values.yaml file with relevant information, focusing solely on the fields that are needed
with their specific workload.
22
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:30==
3.7
GitOps, ArgoCD vs. FluxCD: An Exploration and
Selection at Boozt
3.7.1
Introduction to GitOps
GitOps is a paradigm or a set of practices that empowers developers to perform tasks
which traditionally fell into the hands of the operations team. It uses tools developers
are already familiar with, namely Git, and automates infrastructure and deployment man­
agement. Git serves as the single source of truth, making deployments reproducible,
reversible, and auditable.
3.7.2
ArgoCD and FluxCD: The Leading Lights in GitOps
ArgoCD
13ArgoCD is a declarative, GitOps continuous delivery tool for Kubernetes. It leverages
Git repositories as a source of truth for Kubernetes resources and applications.
Key Features:
• SSO Integration.
• Multi­cluster deployment.
• Web UI with real­time view of application activity.
• Automated or manual syncing of applications to their desired state.
FluxCD
FluxCD is a tool that ensures the state of a cluster matches the config in Git. It uses an
operator in the cluster to trigger deployments inside Kubernetes, which means you don’t
need a separate continuous delivery tool.
Key Features:
• Automated deployments.
• Integrates with Helm.
• Supports multi­tenancy with several config repositories.
• Simple, YAML­based configurations.
3.7.3
Boozt’s Journey: From ArgoCD to FluxCD
Boozt initially set out on its GitOps journey with ArgoCD. Several factors influenced this
choice:
• ArgoCD’s Web UI provided a clear visualization of the deployment process and
resource health.
• Its multi­cluster deployment support, given Boozt’s infrastructure complexity, ap­
peared beneficial.
• The Single Sign­On integration promised smoother user management across the
board.
However, over time, certain challenges emerged:
13https://argoproj.github.io/cd/
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
23
==PAGE:31==
• Complexity: Boozt’s engineering team found that ArgoCD, despite its extensive
features, introduced a steep learning curve. The team had to spend considerable
time understanding and troubleshooting ArgoCD’s nuances.
• Configuration Overhead: For simpler applications and deployments, ArgoCD felt
overwhelming, leading to increased setup times.
• Integration Issues: While ArgoCD promised seamless integration with multiple
tools and provides a Command Line Interface (CLI), it is highly dependent on its user
interface, where FluxCD is CLI­first and optionally allows adding a user interface.
This means it is easier to incorporate it into automated workflows in combination
with other tools, which is a desirable feature for Boozt.
Taking these challenges into account, Boozt decided to explore FluxCD. FluxCD’s sim­
pler, more streamlined approach to GitOps seemed more aligned with Boozt’s operational
model. Some of the reasons for the transition included:
• Straightforward Setup: FluxCD’s YAML­based configurations were simpler to un­
derstand and implement.
• Helm Integration: As Boozt heavily uses Helm for package management, FluxCD’s
native Helm integration was a significant advantage.
• Automated Deployments: FluxCD’s automated deployment feature reduced toil,
ensuring more consistent and error­free releases.
• Automated Rollbacks: If FluxCD detects a configuration drift or an unintended
change, it rolls back to the state defined in the Git repository.
3.7.4
Conclusion
While both ArgoCD and FluxCD offer powerful solutions for implementing GitOps in Ku­
bernetes environments, the choice largely depends on an organization’s specific needs,
existing tech stack, and operational complexity. For Boozt, FluxCD proved to be the more
efficient and effective tool, aligning seamlessly with its deployment strategies and infras­
tructure model.
24
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:32==
4
Implementation
Prior to delving into the implementation section, it is important to establish certain points.
Whilst it has been decided to migrate infrastructure to Kubernetes, the Service Mesh
addition is still under evaluation and therefore only rolled out to the staging cluster in this
implementation. This has an effect on certain design decisions, such as Kong Ingress 1
being used as the standard ingress for all clusters, even though Istio comes pre­packaged
with its own Ingress Controller. However, this was not expected to cause any problems,
as Kong utilizes the Kubernetes Gateway API, and Istio is compatible with any ingress
controller that uses the Gateway API.
4.1
Migration Strategy
Migration of applications to kubernetes can be split into several smaller milestones. On the
basis of planning and considerations discussed with members of the engineering branch
at Boozt, the following milestones and steps were chosen.
4.1.1
Milestone 1: Assessment and Planning
1. Assess Current Architecture: Review the current application’s architecture, de­
pendencies, data storage requirements, and networking needs.
2. Define Kubernetes Strategy: Decide on single or multi­cluster strategy, names­
paces organization, and node management (e.g., node pools, taints, and tolera­
tions).
3. Plan for Observability: Determine monitoring, logging, and tracing tools to be in­
tegrated with the Kubernetes setup.
4.1.2
Milestone 2: Containerization
4. Dockerize Applications: Write Dockerfiles for each service or component of the
application.
5. Local Testing: Test containers locally using tools like Minikube or kind to ensure
applications run correctly inside containers.
6. Set up a Container Registry: Choose a container registry (e.g., Docker Hub,
Google Container Registry, or Harbor) and push the application images.
4.1.3
Milestone 3: Helm Setup
7. Develop Helm Charts: For each application or service, create a Helm chart that
defines how it should be deployed and run on Kubernetes.
8. Test Helm Charts: Deploy applications in a development or staging Kubernetes
environment using Helm to ensure correctness.
9. Version Control for Helm Charts: Store and version Helm charts in a version
control system (e.g., Git).
1https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes­ingress­controller
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
25
==PAGE:33==
4.1.4
Milestone 4: Set Up FluxCD
10. Install FluxCD in Cluster: Deploy the FluxCD operator to the Kubernetes cluster.
11. Connect FluxCD to Git Repo: Link FluxCD to the Git repository where Kubernetes
manifests or Helm charts are stored.
12. Test GitOps Workflow: Make changes to the repository (e.g., update image tags)
and observe FluxCD automatically deploying these changes to the cluster.
4.1.5
Milestone 5: Exploratory Service Mesh Deployment
13. Understand Service Mesh Implications: Research the potential advantages and
challenges of integrating a service mesh.
14. Pilot Service Mesh Deployment: Install a service mesh control plane, such as
Istio, in a test or staging environment and integrate sidecar proxies with a subset of
application services.
15. Evaluate Service Mesh Features: Engage in a comprehensive assessment of fea­
tures such as traffic routing, load balancing, security (mTLS), and observability en­
hancements. The goal is to determine if the service mesh meets the organization’s
needs and is worth full­scale implementation.
4.1.6
Milestone 6: Application Deployment via GitOps
16. Migrate Applications in Phases: Depending on the complexity, start migrating
applications one at a time or in small batches.
17. Monitor Deployments: Continuously monitor deployments, ensuring services are
running and stable.
18. Iterate Based on Feedback: Make necessary adjustments based on feedback from
application teams, performance metrics, or unforeseen challenges.
4.1.7
Milestone 7: Post­Migration Optimization
19. Performance Tuning: Based on monitoring data, optimize resource requests and
limits, node allocations, and other performance­related configurations.
20. Enhance Observability: Refine and expand monitoring, logging, and tracing as
needed.
21. Document Processes: Write detailed documentation on deployment processes,
rollback strategies, and best practices.
4.1.8
Milestone 8: Continual Learning and Evolution
22. Review GitOps Workflow: Periodically review and refine the GitOps workflow to
adapt to changing requirements or to incorporate improvements.
23. Stay Updated: Kubernetes, Helm, and FluxCD are all actively developed projects.
Stay updated with their releases, and iteratively improve the infrastructure.
Note on Milestone Implementation
It is essential to note that while the milestones outlined in this document represent a com­
prehensive strategy for migrating applications to Kubernetes using Helm and FluxCD, it
is neither practical nor efficient for a single individual to implement every step in isolation.
This project requires a combination of specialized skills, teamwork, and specific objec­
tives. Knowing that it would be impossible to become an expert in all aspects of migration
26
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:34==
in the allotted time, certain milestones and tasks were delegated to teams with the nec­
essary experience and understanding. This division of labor not only guarantees a more
efficient and successful implementation, but also encourages interdisciplinary cooperation
that is essential for the success of complex projects such as this one.
For the purpose of this thesis, while some steps were performed independently by the
author, others were conducted in collaboration with experts from other teams. These
collaborations provided invaluable learning experiences and are referenced accordingly
throughout the document.
4.2
Cluster Architecture and Design Choices
In the early stages, Boozt operated solely with a production and a sandbox cluster, de­
ploying all services therein. However, it quickly became clear that this approach was not
sustainable. The absence of adequate monitoring, coupled with the constant need for
personnel oversight, rendered this approach resource­intensive and inefficient. As the
need to deploy additional services grew, leading to the introduction of dedicated clusters
for each, the imperative to devise a strategic Kubernetes infrastructure blueprint became
evident. This strategy was crucial in preventing future complexities that could be chal­
lenging to rectify. It was decided that the clusters should be divided according to their
respective concerns, so that the teams can work independently within their own clusters
without interfering with the teams working on unrelated issues. The first step was to iden­
tify that all critical workloads in production could be divided into two groups, stateless and
stateful, meaning that there needs to be a cluster for each.
Figure 4.1
Production clusters are external clusters that contain workloads that are either consumer
facing or used by consumer facing application running in production, such as the web­
shops, databases, payment services etc.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2
Engineering clusters are internal clusters that contain workloads that are important for
development processes at Boozt, such as Gitlab pipelines, development environments,
automation tools etc. Gitlab runners are currenly present in both dev­euw1 and tooling­
euw1, as it was deployed on dev­euw1 before the decision to create a tooling cluster was
made, and is now being migrated to tooling­euw1.
In this implementation the focus is primarily on the dev­euw1 cluster, this is where all new
initiatives are tested, before being rolled out to production clusters, such as Kong Ingress,
FluxCD and Istio.
4.3
Containerizing Applications
The first step to achieve the containerization milestone was realizing that standardizing
the base image is essential for containerization, as it provides a consistent starting point
across the deployment lifecycle. This ensures that the differences between the develop­
ment, testing, and production environments are minimized. This uniform beginning signif­
icantly decreases the likelihood of developers encountering the ”it works on my machine”
issue.
The second point to consider is the importance of security. By having a standardized
base image, organizations can focus their security efforts on just one image or a smaller
family of images. This means that all applications benefit from a foundation that has been
thoroughly checked and secured. Furthermore, the regular updating of these base images
ensures that applications are protected from any vulnerabilities that could be present in
older versions.
The advantages of standardization also extend to optimization. By stripping away un­
necessary components and refining the image, a standardized image can be tailored to
provide an environment that is optimized for performance from the start. This guaran­
tees that applications will not only run efficiently, but also automatically adopt the best
practices.
Standardization of base images can help reduce overhead. Without a standard, teams
can use a variety of base images, which can increase storage needs and bandwidth usage
when pulling images. On the other hand, with a standardized base, caching mechanisms
are more effective, resulting in faster build and deployment times.
This is currently the case at Boozt. There is a combination of applications, some of which
are containerized and some not, that have been developed separately by the application
teams without being checked for security risks and efficiency.
28
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:36==
Lastly, the ease of maintenance cannot be overlooked. Should there be any need for
updates, changes, or patches, they can be implemented across the board by updating the
single standardized base image. This centralized approach ensures that all applications
assimilate the latest updates without individual teams having to revamp their containers.
And this is exactly what the engineering teams have tried to achieve by creating a family of
base images to be used during this migration process and henceforth organization wide.
Figure 4.3: Snapshot of base­images repository. Taken 24­08­2023
Although engineering teams are capable of performing application containerization, the
actual containerization of each application is assigned to each development team for two
reasons. First, developers know their applications best and are more suited for deter­
mining what is necessary to include in the application container images. Second, it is
also a goal for Boozt during this migration project to involve developers more in the build
and deployment processes of their applications, in order to shift ownership of applications
further towards the developers, so teams can be more self­sufficient. This would allow
engineering teams to focus their efforts on initiatives such as introducing base­images
and container image scanning, which improve the overall security and reliability of Boozt
systems.
In combination with setting up base images, container image vulnerability scanning was
also added through base CI/CD pipeline templates, which will be covered further in <IN­
SERT SECTION LINK>. Additionally, Google Artifact Registry2 was chosen as the image
repository for all Boozt container images, to keep the resources together on Google Cloud
Platform.
4.4
Gitlab Pipeline Templating
In Boozt there has been a tendency to duplicate efforts, where a project, or even many
projects within a branch, independently develops CI flows that overlap, sometimes to a
2https://cloud.google.com/artifact­registry
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
29
==PAGE:37==
significant extent, with operations already implemented in other projects. Templates are
useful in reducing differences and promoting the spread of improvements for the following
reasons.
1. Standardization: Templates provide a consistent format or structure for a particular
type of task, document, or project. Adherence to the same template consistently
promotes unity and reduces variations in the outcome.
2. Best Practices: Templates provide access to the most successful practices and
approaches tested. They contain the collective knowledge and experience of peo­
ple, allowing teams to benefit from tried­and­true methods that have already been
successful.
3. Reusability: Templates offer the benefit of being reusable. Their frequent utiliza­
tion not only saves time but also promotes the sharing of knowledge. When im­
provements or updates are made to a template, they can be applied to different
situations where the template is used. This method encourages the wider distribu­
tion of improvements and learning from experience, reducing discrepancies, and
encouraging a culture of continuous improvement.
4. Training and Onboarding: Templates are extremely useful when training and in­
troducing new employees. Providing novices with templates helps them get used to
their new role quickly and ensures that they are following the established standards.
Templates act as a guide, helping people understand the expectations and require­
ments of their job, reducing inconsistencies and ensuring consistency throughout
the team.
Therefore the decision was made to move towards a more unified CI experience.
4.4.1
Structure and How To Use
Table 4.1: Gitlab CI Templates Repository
Sub­directory
Template type
‘/*‘ (root)
General templates.
‘/pages/*‘
Sample templates for using Static site generators with GitLab Pages.
‘/security/*‘
Templates related to Security scanners.
‘/terraform/*‘
Templates related to infrastructure as Code (Terraform).
‘/containers/*‘
Templates related to Docker containers linting, buildings and deployments.
‘/verify/*‘
Templates related to Testing features.
‘/workflows/*‘
Sample templates for using the ‘workflow:‘ keyword.
In addition to image builder templates In /containers , Boozt provides security­focused
templates. With a few adjustments to the CI definition, a scan stage can be integrated
into the CI. This stage can identify vulnerabilities, misconfigurations, and exposed secrets,
enhancing the security of a project.. The templates use Trivy, an open­source vulnerability
scanner that detects vulnerabilities in OS packages (like Debian, Ubuntu, and Alpine) and
application dependencies (NPM, pip, etc.). It is known for its simplicity and high accuracy3.
In Figure 4.4 the GitLab CI template configures a job that uses Trivy to scan the project’s
file system for high and critical vulnerabilities. The scan excludes specified directories
and is designed to run under certain conditions, like on merge requests, commits to the
default branch, or when new tags are added.
3https://github.com/aquasecurity/trivy
30
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.4: File System Scanning with Trivy Template
1
# filepath: gitlab-ci-templates/security/fs-scan.gitlab-ci.yml
2
variables:
3
TRIVY_EXIT_CODE: 1
4
TRIVY_SEVERITY_LEVEL: HIGH,CRITICAL
5
TRIVY_SKIP_DIRS: "node_modules,vendor"
6
# NOTE: deprecated. Use TRIVY_SCANNERS
7
TRIVY_SECURITY_CHECKS: vuln,secret,config
8
TRIVY_SCANNERS: $TRIVY_SECURITY_CHECKS
9
10
# Scan a local project including language-specific files.
11
# https://aquasecurity.github.io/trivy/v0.35/docs/vulnerability/scanning/filesystem/
12
.fs-scan:
13
image: "$CI_TEMPLATE_REGISTRY_HOST/boozt/engineering/infrastructure/
docker-images/docker-tools/stable:latest"
!→
14
stage: test
15
allow_failure: true
16
script:
17
- trivy fs --scanners $TRIVY_SCANNERS --exit-code $TRIVY_EXIT_CODE --severity
$TRIVY_SEVERITY_LEVEL --skip-dirs "${TRIVY_SKIP_DIRS}" ./
!→
18
rules:
19
- if: $CI_PIPELINE_SOURCE == "merge_request_event"
20
- if: $CI_COMMIT_BRANCH == $CI_DEFAULT_BRANCH
21
- if: $CI_COMMIT_TAG
Gitlab templates require using the keywords include and extend . The step inside
/containers/fs-scan.gitlab-ci.yml in Figure 4.4 is a “hidden job”. It starts with ’.’,
’.fs­scan’. This means that it will not run automatically when you include it, but instead
you have to use extends to reuse the configuration in a designated step as seen in
Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Using Gitlab CI Templates
1
# filepath: aggregator/.gitlab-ci.yml
2
include:
3
- project: boozt/engineering/gitlab-ci-templates
4
file: '/security/fs-scan.gitlab-ci.yml'
5
...
6
scan:
7
extends: .fs-scan
8
stage: check
9
needs: []
10
rules:
11
- if: $CI_PIPELINE_SOURCE == "merge_request_event"
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
31
==PAGE:39==
4.5
Helm Templating
It is one of the goals of this migration to use Helm to package workloads and their re­
lated configuration requirements into reusable charts that will provide consistency and
reproducibility when deployed across testing, staging, and development environments.
In order to ensure successful application deployment in Kubernetes, it is essential to on­
board developers to use Helm. However, this process is complex and requires a deep
understanding of both Kubernetes and Helm’s syntax and best practices. As developers
are already experts in creating robust applications, expecting them to acquire additional
Helm knowledge on top of their existing duties is not feasible. This can lead to a steep
learning curve, potential misconfigurations, and distraction from core development tasks.
Therefore, it is important to provide developers with the necessary support in their Helm
journey. Offering pre­configured Helm templates or comprehensive guides can bridge
this knowledge gap, ensuring that applications are deployed in a consistent, secure, and
efficient manner without overburdening the developers.
Therefore, it was decided to create Helm starter templates that act as a foundation upon
which developers can build. Instead of starting from scratch, developers can rely on a
standardized template that encapsulates best practices, adheres to organizational stan­
dards, and provides a familiar structure.
The Helm starter template is located in the helm­charts repository along with all other
helm charts, in the /starter-template directory.
Figure 4.6: Snapshot of helm­charts repository at ’/starter­template/templates’. Taken
25­08­2023
The helm starter template contains configurations for deploying the given application,
kong ingress, database proxy settings, kubernetes scaling rules for the deployment, ser­
vice account, secret injection, and background jobs, among other things. All these things
are abstracted away in the template and made available to the developer through the
’values.yaml’ file to simply configure by filling out relevant fields.
32
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.7: Helm Starter Template values.yaml excerpt
17
...
18
############################################
19
# Service account for deployment, crons, etc
20
############################################
21
22
serviceAccount:
23
# Specifies whether a service account should be created
24
create: true
25
workloadIdentity:
26
enable: true
27
# Override this in the deployment values file if needed
28
accountOverride: ""
29
# Annotations to add to the service account
30
annotations: {}
31
# The name of the service account to use.
32
# If not set and create is true, a name is generated using the fullname template
33
name: ""
34
35
##################################
36
# Services exposing the deployment
37
##################################
38
39
entrypoints:
40
externalLoadBalancer:
41
type: "ExternalIngress"
42
enabled: false
43
host: ""
44
allowHttp: false
45
staticIpName: ""
46
disablePreSharedCert: false
47
preSharedCert: ""
48
servicePort: 80
49
healthCheckRequestPath: /health
50
paths:
51
- path: /*
52
internalLoadBalancer:
53
type: "InternalIngress"
54
enabled: false
55
host: ""
56
allowHttp: false
57
disablePreSharedCert: false
58
preSharedCert: ""
59
paths: []
60
...
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
33
==PAGE:41==
4.6
FluxCD Configuration
FluxCD is technically a collection of GitOps projects that consists of a number of microser­
vices that together allows you to continuously deploy to Kubernetes from Git.
The various components of Flux work together to deploy from various sources and with
various customizable configurations. They all work in isolation from each other to create a
nice separation and instead communicate with Kubernetes Custom Resource Definitions
(CRD) and the notification­controller.
4.6.1
Flux Components
source­controller
The source­controller is responsible for keeping track of the configured sources, such
as Git repositories, OCI/Docker registries, and cloud storage (S3, Google Cloud Buckets
etc.). When used with Git, it will detect any new commits and retrieve the new changes.
The source­controller does not take any action on the various sources it collects, but rather
makes them available for other controllers to use.
kustomize­controller
The kustomize­controller is responsible for applying kustomizations and plain YAML files
to Kubernetes. Although Boozt is not currently using Kustomize4, the controller is able
to process both. It can be thought of as a controller that handles both kustomize and
YAML, as a Kustomize apply without configuration is equivalent to a plain YAML apply.
The kustomize­controller does not retrieve any of the manifests itself, but instead obtains
them from the source­controller.
helm­controller
The helm­controller is responsible for managing the life­cycle of Helm Chart installations.
It works with a few custom resources in Kubernetes, including keeping tabs on the helm
charts available (supplied by the source­controller), the desired Helm installations, and
values.
notification­controller The notification­controller serves as a liaison for the other compo­
nents. It is responsible for notifying controllers of events that take place in other con­
trollers, such as informing the kustomize­controller that the source­controller has just ob­
tained some new changes from a source, for example, a Git commit. Additionally, it man­
ages external notifications, like sending updates to a Slack channel. This can be very
beneficial when one wishes to post in a deployer channel that a new version of a helm
chart has been successfully deployed. It can also be useful when a deployment fails and
one needs to know the error message.
image­reflector­controller & image­automation­controller
These two controllers are responsible for scanning Docker image repositories and updat­
ing the manifests in Git. This task is divided into two controllers to differentiate between
tracking an external Docker registry and committing to Git. This makes the implementa­
tion more organized and easier to troubleshoot. However, Boozt does not use these two
controllers as Flux is only configured to work with Git repositories and not OCI registries.
4.6.2
Workflow
To comprehend the different Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) and which controller
is responsible for what, consider the following example of deploying a Helm release from
the beginning, which was implemented as a verification test before rolling out Flux to
development and production environments.
4https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage­kubernetes­objects/kustomization/
34
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:42==
The graph below accompanies the walk­through.
Figure 4.8: Flux Deployment Workflow
Reading from Git
With the repository structure that Boozt has chosen to organize its clusters and Helm
charts, each Flux configuration must access at least two repositories. The cluster reposi­
tory, which defines the state of the cluster that flux will enforce, and the helm­chart repos­
itory, which contains the charts for various Boozt applications. The source­controller is
configured to read from the repositories using the GitRepository CRD.
Figure 4.9: GitRepository CRD for cluster­repo repository
1
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
2
kind: GitRepository
3
metadata:
4
name: cluster-repo
5
namespace: flux-system
6
spec:
7
interval: 5m0s
8
url: https://gitlab.com/boozt/sandbox/cluster-repo.git
9
ref:
10
branch: main
11
secretRef:
12
name: flux-cluster-repo # This is the secret that has the Gitlab access token
The source­controller will access the URL and, using the flux­cluster­repo secret, it will
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
35
==PAGE:43==
obtain the most recent git commit from the ”main” branch. This will be stored locally as a
tar file for other controllers to use.
The same is done for the helm­chart repository.
Figure 4.10: GitRepository CRD for helm­charts repository
1
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
2
kind: GitRepository
3
metadata:
4
name: helm-charts
5
namespace: flux-system
6
spec:
7
interval: 1m
8
url: https://gitlab.com/boozt/sandbox/helm-charts.git
9
secretRef:
10
name: flux-helm-charts
11
ref:
12
branch: master
13
ignore: |
14
# exclude all
15
/*
16
# include charts directory
17
!/charts/
The additional configuration element here is the ignore field. It is a ”git ignore” style defini­
tion that allows one to keep certain files from being included in the tar file. In this example,
all Helm charts will be located in the /charts directory. This is all that the source­controller
does for now.
Applying from Git
Next, the kustomize­controller will apply the files from the cluster­repo that were fetched
by the source­controller. The main cluster­repo Kustomization CRD can be seen in figure
(link to figure)
Figure 4.11: GitRepository CRD for helm­charts repository
1
apiVersion: kustomize.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
2
kind: Kustomization
3
metadata:
4
name: cluster-repo
5
namespace: flux-system
6
spec:
7
interval: 5m
8
sourceRef:
9
kind: GitRepository
10
name: cluster-repo
11
namespace: flux-system
12
path: "./"
13
prune: false
This CRD tells the kustomize­controller to go and grab the HelmReleases cluster­repo in
the flux­system namespace and apply everything at path ./ . This will recursively apply
36
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:44==
everything in the cluster­repo Git repository. It is also possible to be more specific or
utilize the ignore configuration from above to limit this.
At this point, everything source related has been applied, however, there are no applica­
tions running on the cluster, because no helm charts have been defined in the cluster­repo
respository.
HelmRelease
In order for Flux to deploy an application helm chart to the cluster, it is necessary to add
a HelmRelease CRD in the cluster­repo repository, as a git commit to the main branch.
Figure 4.12: GitRepository CRD for helm­charts repository
1
apiVersion: helm.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v2beta1
2
kind: HelmRelease
3
metadata:
4
name: http-echo
5
namespace: html-services
6
spec:
7
interval: 5m
8
releaseName: http-echo
9
chart:
10
spec:
11
chart: ./charts/http-echo
12
sourceRef:
13
kind: GitRepository
14
name: helm-charts
15
namespace: flux-system
16
values:
17
replicaCount: 2
18
image.tag: "v1.0"
This HelmRelease describes the deployment of the ”http­echo” service in the html­services
namespace. The spec.values section of this CRD allows for the configuration of the
Helm Chart values in spec.values , while the spec.chart section specifies the location
of the Helm Chart. In this case, the source of the chart is a git repository, as indicated by
the sourceRef . The referenced HelmReleases is managed by the source­controller.
Updating Deployments
To deploy a new version of HelmRelease, a change can be committed to the git file,
typically updating the helm chart version to the latest. This action triggers the source­
controller to retrieve the new commit, package it, and then send a notification to the
kustomize­controller through the notification­controller.
Subsequently, the kustomize­controller applies the changes using the kubectl apply com­
mand on the updated HelmReleases CRD, which now incorporates the new HelmRe­
lease.
Simultaneously, the helm­controller, which monitors HelmReleases in the Kubernetes
API, executes a helm upgrade upon detecting this modification.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
37
==PAGE:45==
4.7
Istio Rollout
Istio provides a Command Line Interface (CLI) tool called istioctl, which offers a range of
functionality, including installation. However, at the time of the Istio rollout in the dev­euw1
cluster, FluxCD has been implemented on all clusters as the primary and intended deploy­
ment method, and several smaller workloads successfully used the previously described
steps and deployed Helm charts to dev­euw1 as their staging environment. Therefore,
Istio is deployed through what is now the proper way to deploy anything to clusters at
boozt, Helm charts.
4.7.1
Installing Istio with FluxCD
As described earlier, deploying anything with FluxCD requires two things. First, A GitRepos­
itory CRD that refers to the source where the Helm chart is located. Second, a HelmRe­
lease CRD, which tells FluxCD to deploy the referenced Helm chart using the provided
configurations and values, ensuring that the desired state in the repository matches the
actual state within the Kubernetes cluster.
Figure 4.13: GitRepository for Istio repository
1
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
2
kind: HelmRepository
3
metadata:
4
name: istio
5
namespace: istio-system
6
spec:
7
interval: 5m
8
url: https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts
Figure 4.14: HelmRelease for Istio Custom Resource Definitions
1
apiVersion: helm.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v2beta1
2
kind: HelmRelease
3
metadata:
4
name: istio-base
5
namespace: istio-system
6
spec:
7
interval: 5m
8
chart:
9
spec:
10
chart: base
11
sourceRef:
12
kind: HelmRepository
13
name: istio
14
namespace: istio-system
15
interval: 1m
Notice how the deployment of istio is separated into two Helm charts. In Figure 4.14 the
chart ”base” is referenced. This chart contains the base resources that are needed for the
rest of Istio’s charts. It sets up the necessary Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) and
other foundational elements. The separation of the Helm charts is to ensure the correct
deployment order.
38
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.15: HelmRelease for istiod Service
1
apiVersion: helm.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v2beta1
2
kind: HelmRelease
3
metadata:
4
name: istiod
5
namespace: istio-system
6
spec:
7
interval: 5m
8
dependsOn:
9
- name: istio-base
10
namespace: istio-system
11
chart:
12
spec:
13
chart: istiod
14
sourceRef:
15
kind: HelmRepository
16
name: istio
17
interval: 1m
18
values:
19
...
The chart in Figure 4.15 displays the main control plane element of Istio, istiod. The istiod
workload consolidates various Istio control plane functionalities. This encompasses Pilot
(for traffic control and smart routing), Citadel (for issuing and rotating certificates), Galley
(for configuration validation), and Sidecar Injector (for injecting the Envoy sidecar). By
bringing these components into a single binary, Istio reduces its operational complexity.
Once Istio is successfully deployed, the next step is to improve service mesh observabil­
ity by deploying Prometheus, Grafana, and Jaeger. These components do not require
any special configurations, but only GitRepository and HelmRelease resources. Envoy
exposes metrics at ’/stats/prometheus’ on port 15090, which Prometheus is configured to
scrape by default.
Figure 4.16: Istiod HelmRelease Jeager Configuration
1
...
2
values:
3
meshConfig:
4
enableTracing: true
5
defaultConfig:
6
tracing:
7
sampling: 100.0
8
zipkin:
9
address: jaeger-server-collector.istio-system.svc.cluster.local:9411
10
accessLogEncoding: JSON
11
...
After these deployments, Kiali is integrated with the necessary configurations for Prometheus,
Grafana, and Jaeger included in the HelmReleases for Istiod and Kiali.
The Kiali deployment first requires a HelmRelease to install the Kiali Operator, which will
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
39
==PAGE:47==
then allow configuring kiali with a kiali CRD as seen in Figure 4.17. Prometheus And
Jaeger data is directly accessible to Kiali with the Prometheus and Jeager services and
Grafana can be accessed with the credentials generated and stored in a secret by the
Grafana Helm chart at installation.
Figure 4.17: Kiali Custom Resource Definition
1
apiVersion: kiali.io/v1alpha1
2
kind: Kiali
3
metadata:
4
name: kiali
5
namespace: istio-system
6
spec:
7
auth:
8
strategy: anonymous
9
external_services:
10
prometheus:
11
url: "http://prometheus-server.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
12
grafana:
13
enabled: true
14
url: "http://grafana.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
15
in_cluster_url: "http://grafana.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
16
auth:
17
type: "basic"
18
use_kubernetes_secret: true
19
secret_name: grafana
20
tracing:
21
in_cluster_url:
"http://jaeger-server-query.istio-system.svc.cluster.local:16685/jaeger"
!→
22
use_grpc: true
In order to enable tracing, Istiod HelmRelease requires a configuration update, as demon­
strated in Figure 4.18. This will activate tracing, capture 100% of the request traces, and
specify the destination of the trace data. Although tracing is set to 100% in the staging
cluster, this is not a viable option for Boozt’s production environment due to the large
amount of resources needed to handle their high request volume (in the 100 millions).
Figure 4.18: Istiod HelmRelease Jeager Configuration
1
values:
2
meshConfig:
3
enableTracing: true
4
defaultConfig:
5
tracing:
6
sampling: 100.0
7
zipkin:
8
address: jaeger-server-collector.istio-system.svc.cluster.local:9411
As seen in Figure 4.19, there is no graph of services because no applications have been
integrated in the service mesh yet.
40
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.19: Snapshot of Kiali Dashboard.
4.7.2
Integrating Services into the Mesh
Integrating services into the mesh essentially means attaching envoy proxy sidecars to
pods. There are multiple ways to do this, but using the label istio-injection=enabled
on the namespace level is the standard recommended way, as seen in Figure 4.20
Figure 4.20: Kong Ingress Namespace Definition
1
apiVersion: v1
2
kind: Namespace
3
metadata:
4
name: kong-pub
5
labels:
6
istio-injection: enabled
The istio-injection label, when used in the context of Istio and Kubernetes, deter­
mines whether or not the Envoy sidecar proxy should be automatically injected into a
pod. When a pod is created in a namespace with sidecar injection enabled, the Istio
sidecar injector will intercept the request to create the pod. Depending on the value of
the istio-injection label, the injector will modify the pod to include the Envoy sidecar
proxy or leave the pod unchanged.
If the inject label is set to ”enabled” or ”true”, the sidecar injector will add the Envoy sidecar
to the pod, allowing it to be managed by the Istio service mesh. On the other hand, if the
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
41
==PAGE:49==
label is set to ”disabled” or ”false”, the pod will be created without the sidecar, meaning it
will not be a part of the service mesh.
In order to trigger the injection immediately, the deployment can be restarted manually with
the command kubectl rollout restart deployment kong-pub-kong -n kong-pub .
Figure 4.21: Snapshot of Kiali Dashboard.
Now it can be seen in Figure 4.21 that the kong­pub namespace and the kong­pub­kong
workload can be seen on the Kiali Dashboard. However, because there are no other
services on the cluster in the mesh, therefore traffic going out from Kong is shown as
going to either ”PassthroughCluster”, for requests leaving the cluster, and ”kubernetes”,
for requests going into other services in the cluster.
Following this, it was attempted to integrate two deployments into the service mesh, gitlab­
runners and stock­service, however both encountered problems with Istio that will be
elaborated on further in the Evaluation chapter. The problems encountered could not
be resolved within a reasonable time period and therefore were abandoned. Moreover,
since the workloads in the staging cluster lack internal cluster communication, it is not an
optimal environment for integrating with Istio or for experimentation with features such as
mTLS and traffic management. As a result, it was decided to deploy mock services with
which Istio could be tested.
42
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:50==
Enforcing mTLS
Enforcing mTLS communication between services is one of the features of Istio that Boozt
is most interested in. Istio has three peer authentication settings that determine the mTLS
mode 5.
1. PERMISSIVE: Workloads can handle both mutual TLS and standard unencrypted
traffic. This setting is especially handy when transitioning, as workloads without a
sidecar cannot utilize mutual TLS. This is the default setting.
2. STRICT: Workloads only accept mutual TLS traffic.
3. DISABLE: Mutual TLS is turned off.
At first, the mesh was kept in a permissive mode while mock services were deployed. For
testing, a mock environment was created with one webserver that echoed all incoming
requests, called echo­server, and two instances of Locust as sender­1 and sender­2.
Locust is an open­source load testing tool that allows users to simulate virtual users to
evaluate and monitor the performance of web applications6. It was chosen for clients
because it has a user­friendly interface that provides an overview and graphs of requests,
which can be found in the Appendix.
Figure 4.22: Snapshot of Kiali Dashboard.
Figure 4.22 illustrates the flow of traffic after the deployment of the mock environment.
Interestingly, there is a disconnect between the Kong ingress pod and the mock environ­
ment, even though the locust clients are accessed through the ingress.
After some investigation, the reason for the disconnect was identified by auditing the con­
tainer logs of the Kong ingress pod, seen in Figure 4.23. Requests are not being handled
5https://istio.io/latest/docs/concepts/security/#authentication­policies
6https://locust.io/
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.23: Excerpt of Kong Ingress Pod Log.
by the Envoy proxy, but by Kong’s own proxy container, which means that because the
request is not going through Envoy, it is being registered as an unknown service outside
of the mesh. This is especially challenging to understand considering the fact that Kong
is supposed to be compatible with Istio out of the box and the implementation followed
the instructions given by the Kong documentation7. No additional time was allocated to
solve this problem after it was discovered, as it was anticipated that it would be fixed when
STRICT mTLS was implemented, enforcing all communication go through Envoy.
The ’PeerAuthentication’ CRD provided by Istio can be used to manage the peer authen­
tication settings for mTLS. It can be applied either on a namespace basis or across the
entire mesh, depending on the namespace it is applied to. If it is applied to the istio­system
namespace, the policy will be applied to the entire mesh.
Figure 4.24: PeerAuthentication Custom Resource Definition
1
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
2
kind: PeerAuthentication
3
metadata:
4
name: "default"
5
namespace: "istio-system"
6
spec:
7
mtls:
8
mode: STRICT
After applying the manifest in Figure 4.24, the cluster became inaccessible. It was be­
lieved that allowing PERMISSIVE mode on the kong­pub namespace would resolve the
issue, however, applying a PERMISSIVE ’PeerAuthentication’ to the kong­pub names­
pace had no effect and no amount of investigation into neither Istio, Kong nor Envoy
documentation. Finally, the solution to the issue was found in a blog post8 that identi­
fied two annotations that needed to be applied to the ingress entry and the service entry,
respectively.
7https://docs.konghq.com/kubernetes­ingress­controller/latest/guides/getting­started­istio/
8https://tech.aufomm.com/how­to­use­istio­with­kong­ingress­controller/
44
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:52==
1
kubectl -n <NAMESPACE> annotate service <SERVICE_NAME>
ingress.kubernetes.io/service-upstream=true
!→
2
kubectl -n <NAMESPACE> annotate ingress <INGRESS_NAME> konghq.com/preserve-host=false
Examining the purpose of the annotation, the following results were obtained. The an­
notation ingress.kubernetes.io/service-upstream=true informs the Kong Ingress
Controller to not handle the distribution of traffic to Pods itself, but instead send it to the
Service IP. This annotation enables the Envoy proxy to intercept the traffic9. Addition­
ally, konghq.com/preserve-host=false allows the Kong Ingress to not keep the HOST
header, and thus it can be substituted by the Envoy sidecar proxy10.
Some additional experiments also showed that adding
ingress.kubernetes.io/service-upstream=true annotation without STRICT mTLS,
resolved the disconnect issue mentioned earlier, which was related to requests being
handled by the Kong proxy rather than Envoy. Figure 4.25 shows the request flow as
intended and with mTLS from start to end.
Figure 4.25: Snapshot of Kiali Dashboard.
4.7.3
Testing Istio Resiliency Features
Istio utilizes specialized resources such as VirtualService, Gateway, ServiceEntry, and
DestinationRule to manage traffic. VirtualService is responsible for directing the flow of
traffic between services, while Gateway is used to control the entry and exit points of
mesh traffic. In this case, we are not using Istio’s Gateway as Kong is taking care of the
ingress tasks. ServiceEntry allows external services to be integrated into the mesh, and
DestinationRule is used to adjust traffic policies after routing.
9https://docs.konghq.com/kubernetes­ingress­controller/2.0.x/references/annotations/#ingresskubernetesioservice­
upstream
10https://docs.konghq.com/kubernetes­ingress­controller/2.0.x/references/annotations/#konghqcompreserve­
host
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
45
==PAGE:53==
4.7.4
External Mesh Dependency with ServiceEntry
When mTLS is enabled strictly, workloads are still by default able to reach external re­
sources, as this setting is controlled by meshConfig.outboundTrafficPolicy.mode which
has the default value of ALLOW_ANY . accessible to them. Figure 4.26 shows sender­1
not being configured to send requests to gitlab.com, which is going through ’Passthrough­
Cluster’. The ’PassthroughCluster’ in Istio is a default virtual cluster that sends traffic to
its original destination without any changes when no particular routing setup is available.
Figure 4.26: Snapshot of Kiali Dashboard.
Permitting all outbound traffic can be a major security hazard, as it can provide path­
ways for unauthorized data to be exposed. Furthermore, unrestricted outbound access
makes the system susceptible to external threats and can inadvertently permit compro­
mised workloads to communicate with malicious servers, thus intensifying the potential
harm. However, naturally there will be workloads that have external dependencies. Con­
sequently, from a security point of view, it is wise to limit outbound traffic to only necessary
and reliable endpoints. As an example, some Boozt workloads require access to certain
repositories in Gitlab, therefore gitlab.com must be accessible. Istio allows users to config­
ure these using ServiceEntry, when meshConfig.outboundTrafficPolicy.mode=REGISTRY_ONLY .
Figure 4.27: ServiceEntry for Gitlab.com
1
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
2
kind: ServiceEntry
3
metadata:
4
name: gitlab.com-external-svc-https
5
spec:
6
hosts:
7
- gitlab.com
8
location: MESH_EXTERNAL
9
ports:
10
- number: 443
11
name: https
12
protocol: TLS
13
resolution: DNS
46
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:54==
The ServiceEntry in Figure 4.30 allows workloads within the mesh to access gitlab.com
over HTTPS. Figure 4.28 illustrates the requests from sender­1 before and after imple­
menting the Gitlab ServiceEntry. Before its application, requests were unsuccessful, but
upon its deployment, they promptly began to succeed.
Figure 4.28: Snapshot of Locust Dashboard Before and After gitlab.com ServiceEntry.
Additionally, ServiceEntries are visualized in Kiali as seen in Figure 4.29
Figure 4.29: Snapshot of Kiali Dashboard After gitlab.com ServiceEntry.
In an intriguing observation, access to the Kiali dashboard through Kong Ingress was com­
promised after setting meshConfig.outboundTrafficPolicy.mode=REGISTRY_ONLY , yield­
ing a 502 Bad Gateway http error. Upon experimenting with various configurations, the
root of the problem was traced: restricting outbound traffic inadvertently also limited ac­
cess to workloads within the cluster but external to the mesh. It is worth noting that Kiali
is deployed in the istio­system namespace, which is advisedly kept outside of the mesh
as per installation guidelines. Addressing the problem involved implementing the same
service and ingress annotations mentioned earlier, though the exact reasons for this so­
lution’s effectiveness remain unclear.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
47
==PAGE:55==
4.7.5
Zero­Trust Policy
On top of enforcing mTLS between workloads within the cluster, Istio also allows to con­
figure a Zero­Trust policy by implementing access control with the AuthorizationPolicy
resource. AuthoriationPolicy supports 3 types of actions, CUSTOM, DENY and ALLOW.
CUSTOM action is evaluated first, then the DENY action, and finally the ALLOW action.
The evaluation is determined by the following rules11:
1. If any CUSTOM policies that match the request exist, evaluate them. Deny the re­
quest if the evaluation result is deny .
2. If any DENY policies that match the request exist, deny the request.
3. If no ALLOW policies for the workload exist, allow the request.
4. If any of the ALLOW policies match the request, allow the request.
5. Deny the request.
If AutorizationPolicy is not used, all evaluations end on step 3, and all requests are allowed
by default. It allows settings policies on multiple level.
1. Namespace Level: Apply an AuthorizationPolicy to selected workloads within
a namespace. When such a policy is applied to a namespace, it affects all services
and pods therein unless explicitly overridden by a policy with greater specificity.
2. Workload Level: Apply the policy straight to a specific workload, as identified by its
labels. This level is advantageous when requiring fine­grained control over access
to specific services or pods.
3. User Level: Formulate policies rooted in the identity of the end user i.e. the Kuber­
netes RBAC service account. Istio employs the request.auth.principal attribute
to determine the user’s identity.
4. IP Level: Define policies based on the origin or destination IP addresses.
As sender­1 and sender­2 do not currently use dedicated service accounts, they must first
be configured in order to apply an AuthorizationPolicy. First, a service account is created
with the command:
1
kubectl create serviceaccount sender-1-sa -n istio-test
Then it is added to the sender­1 deployment manifest.
1
spec:
2
template:
3
spec:
4
serviceAccountName: sender-1-sa
11https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/authorization­policy/
48
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.30: ServiceEntry for Gitlab.com
1
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
2
kind: AuthorizationPolicy
3
metadata:
4
name: allow-sender-1-to-echo-server
5
namespace: istio-test
6
spec:
7
selector:
8
matchLabels:
9
app.kubernetes.io/name: echo-server
10
rules:
11
- from:
12
- source:
13
principals: ["cluster.local/ns/istio-test/sa/sender-1-sa"]
Finally, the AuthorizationPolicy is applied, that specifies the echo­server only allows re­
quests from the service account sender­1­sa in the istio­test namespace. As seen in
Figure 4.31, only requests from sender­1 are being accepted by the echo­server service.
It is important to note that the red arrow from echo­server does not indicate that requests
are not going through, but rather than there is a high error rate and the service might be
degraded.
Figure 4.31: Snapshot of Kiali Dashboard After AuthorizationPolicy.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
49
==PAGE:57==
5
Evaluation & Discussion
The evolving nature of software engineering has consistently led industries like e­commerce
to seek solutions that ensure seamless user experiences, maximum uptime, and strong
security. Microservices, supported by platforms such as Kubernetes and Istio, have pre­
sented themselves as potential solutions.
In this evaluation chapter, the nuances of Boozt’s transition to employing Kubernetes and
Istio within its e­commerce infrastructure are explored. The focus is on a methodical
assessment of the changes, the realized benefits, and the challenges encountered during
the process.
Throughout this chapter, the predefined research questions will be addressed, aiming
to provide a comprehensive understanding of Boozt’s journey with a Kubernetes­based
Microservice Architecture enhanced by Istio. Conclusions will be based on real­world
challenges, outcomes, and the broader narrative of the migration.
5.1
Methodology Recap
5.1.1
Research Design
The chosen research approach was a blend of qualitative and quantitative methodologies,
focusing on an in­depth case study of Boozt’s infrastructure migration. The intention was
to draw conclusions based on both tangible metrics and qualitative feedback. However,
the progress of the project did not yield enough data for a thorough quantitative analysis.
Consequently, this evaluation is predominantly rooted in qualitative findings, feedback
from Boozt’s team, and observations from the executed stages of the migration.
5.1.2
Data Collection
Data was primarily accumulated through a milestone­based method, rooted in consulta­
tions with the Boozt engineering team. These milestones served as significant indicators
of the migration’s progression. Additionally, employee feedback was obtained after com­
pletion of each milestone, providing information on the immediate impact and implications
of each phase.
5.1.3
Data Analysis
Given the nature of the case study and the hands­on approach to the migration, traditional
data analysis techniques were not paramount. Instead, the study focused on real­world
application, with results derived from on­the­ground experiences, challenges faced, and
solutions implemented.
5.1.4
Validation & Verification
An initial attempt to roll out Kubernetes without a structured plan underscored the com­
plexity of the task. This real­world pilot highlighted the need for a more detailed and
strategic approach. Consequently, a more refined plan was drafted detailing the archi­
tectural approach and tools to be used. This iterative approach, although not a traditional
validation method, provided essential course corrections to ensure the feasibility and ef­
fectiveness of the migration strategy.
50
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:58==
5.1.5
Limitations
Several challenges emerged during the migration. The initial six­month projection for the
completion of the migration proved to be overly optimistic, as the magnitude and intrica­
cies of the project extended the timeline. While the established methodology has been
showing promise, the time constraints exacerbated by the steep learning curve, neces­
sitating the acquisition of new skills and familiarization with tools like Kubernetes, Helm,
Flux, containerization best practices, GitLab pipelines, and Istio, undoubtedly influenced
the project’s progression.
5.2
Research Question 1
What impact does the migration to a Microservice Architecture using Kubernetes and Istio
have on the security and reliability of Boozt’s ecommerce infrastructure?
Migrating to a Microservice Architecture with Kubernetes has been a transformative step
for the Boozt ecommerce infrastructure. A pivotal advantage stems from the fact that Ku­
bernetes provides an encapsulated environment for developers. This container­centric
environment removes the hassle of managing individual system dependencies and con­
figurations. As a result, it offers a stable platform that remains consistent, whether it is in a
developer’s local environment, a staging setup, or the production realm, thus eliminating
discrepancies in behavior and performance across different deployment stages.
The operations team also benefits significantly from this shift. Kubernetes offers features
like auto­scaling, self­healing, and service discovery, which considerably reduce manual
overhead when compared to traditional VM setups. Moreover, Kubernetes’ modular na­
ture ensures that containers can be efficiently updated or replaced, leading to frictionless
updates and rollbacks.
The inclusion of tools like Helm and FluxCD has further enhanced the deployment pipeline.
Helm offers a unified approach to deploying applications, making configurations more con­
sistent and reducing human errors. FluxCD’s GitOps approach guarantees that the state
of the infrastructure always mirrors the configurations stored in Git repositories, introduc­
ing a transparent and auditable method for infrastructure changes.
With the integration of GitLab pipeline templates and the provision of prepared container
base images, Boozt’s developers are now equipped with a robust framework. This stream­
lines the CI/CD process and ensures applications are built using a consistent and opti­
mized foundation.
The main benefit of this architectural shift is its ability to reduce complexity. Before this
transition, developers and operations teams had to deal with complex configurations, in­
consistent environments, and unexpected deployment issues. By using Kubernetes and
its related tools, these complexities have been removed. This consistent environment not
only helps development, but also leads to improved reliability in production. Every time
developers use containerization, rely on the consistency provided by Helm, or depend on
the predictability of FluxCD and GitLab pipelines, they are contributing to a more reliable
system. By eliminating the variables that often cause system instability, the production
environment becomes more resilient and reliable.
The integration of Istio is still being evaluated, and its implementation is currently lim­
ited to the staging cluster, preventing a full assessment of its potential and effect on the
production environment.
One of the immediate challenges faced during this transition is navigating the intricate
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
51
==PAGE:59==
landscape of ingress controllers. Typically, Istio comes equipped with its own Ingress
Controller, tailored to work seamlessly within its ecosystem. However, given Boozt’s cur­
rent infrastructural state and the tentative stance on fully adopting Istio, the Kong Ingress
serves as the universal ingress across all clusters. This design decision comes from a
strategic point of view. Kong, by leveraging the Kubernetes Gateway API, is meant to
ensure harmonious interplay with a wide array of tools, including Istio. Istio’s compat­
ibility with ingress controllers that use the Gateway API made this decision even more
favorable, indicating that this combination should be able to be implemented without any
issues.
One of the significant theoretical advancements brought about by Istio’s potential full­
scale implementation is the incorporation of mTLS and the Zero Trust model. mTLS, a
two­way authentication method, ensures both the client and the server validate each other.
This is an enhancement over traditional TLS, where only the server is authenticated. By
enforcing mutual authentication, mTLS fortifies the security of data in transit, ensuring that
only legitimate and trusted entities can communicate within the infrastructure.
Complementing mTLS is the Zero Trust architecture, an approach that operates on the
principle of ”never trust, always verify.” By discarding the conventional notion of inherent
trust within the network, the Zero Trust model mandates rigorous validation for every ac­
cess request, irrespective of its origin. This architectural choice, in theory, diminishes the
attack surface, reducing the potential for security breaches from both external and internal
threats.
Combined, mTLS and the Zero Trust model offer a potent security cocktail. They repre­
sent a paradigm shift from conventional security mechanisms, emphasizing continuous
verification, robust encryption, and minimizing trust. For Boozt’s ecommerce platform,
where the sanctity of data and system availability are paramount, these methodologies
promise significant improvements in data integrity and system security.
However, while the theoretical benefits of mTLS and Zero Trust are profound, their practi­
cal implications in Boozt’s specific context will be more discernible once Istio is fully oper­
ationalized beyond the staging cluster. The true value and potential challenges of these
security enhancements will be clearer in the crucible of a live production environment.
In summary, the transition to Kubernetes, complemented by the auxiliary tools and best
practices, has notably reduced complexities and challenges for Boozt’s developers and
operations teams. This move has not only fortified the security and reliability of the ecom­
merce infrastructure but also paved the way for a more streamlined and collaborative
development and deployment process.
In summary, Boozt’s transition to Kubernetes, combined with the integration of additional
tools, has resulted in a decrease in complexity, improved security, and increased relia­
bility. This shift has enabled a powerful and efficient ecommerce infrastructure, which
is able to adapt to future challenges and grow with increasing demands. The emphasis
on consistent configurations, simplified processes, and stringent security protocols shows
Boozt’s commitment to providing an optimal user experience while creating a collaborative
and productive development environment.
52
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Research Question 2
To what extent do the benefits of using a Service Mesh, such as improved mTLS, circuit
breaking, and load balancing, outweigh the additional costs and complexity of implement­
ing and maintaining such a framework in an ecommerce setting?
Implementing a Service Mesh, especially one as robust as Istio, in an ecommerce setting
like Boozt has revealed a multi­faceted landscape of benefits and challenges.
Firstly, the complexity of Istio cannot be overlooked. Its learning curve is steep, even for
experienced developers and operations professionals. The initial setup and daily oper­
ations demand a significant amount of human resources. This investment in time and
energy can become a deterrent, especially for smaller infrastructures or startups. The
overhead required to set up, understand, and maintain Istio can often outweigh its bene­
fits in smaller setups.
For Boozt, given its current scale, it is in consensus among the engineering branch that
this move is on the brink of being justifiable. One could argue that the resources consumed
to implement Istio might be better allocated elsewhere, especially given the immediate
and pressing needs of the platform. However, a deeper dive into Boozt’s strategic vision
provides clarity.
While Istio might feel like an oversized solution for Boozt’s present needs, it is a forward­
looking move. Boozt anticipates significant growth in the near future. As the platform
scales, there is a clear understanding that challenges related to scalability, security, and
reliability will multiply. By exploring Istio now, Boozt aims to preemptively address these
future challenges. Istio’s advanced features, such as improved service discovery, mTLS
for enhanced security, circuit breaking for increased resilience, and sophisticated load
balancing, could be invaluable assets as Boozt expands.
In essence, while the immediate ”return on investment” for implementing Istio may seem
disproportionate given its complexity and resource demands, Boozt’s foresight is focused
on future­proofing its infrastructure.
The intent is clear: be prepared for exponential
growth and ensure that when scalability and security challenges arise, the infrastructure
is already primed to handle them effectively.
5.4
Research Question 3
How does the experience of Boozt’s development and operations teams change as a
result of the migration to a Microservice Architecture using Kubernetes and Istio, and
what factors contribute to these changes?
Boozt’s transition to a Microservice Architecture with Kubernetes and Istio has had a major
impact on the way the development and operations teams work. This transformation was
driven by a combination of technological, procedural, and cultural factors.
For the development team, the shift to microservices has been largely liberating. How­
ever, the transition is still in progress and some of the largest applications still either re­
quire to be split, migrated or both. The architecture has decentralized the application,
allowing developers to focus on individual components, leading to quicker iteration and
simultaneous development. Additionally, Kubernetes provides a standardized environ­
ment that is compatible with GitLab pipeline templates and container base images, elim­
inating the differences between local and production configurations. This simplification
guarantees that code works the same across different stages, significantly decreasing
deployment issues.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
53
==PAGE:61==
However, this decentralization also comes with its challenges. The microservice structure
mandates developers to be more vigilant about service interactions, the integrity of data
flowing between services, and potential vulnerabilities in a widely distributed setup. This
is something that Istio could help simplify, if implemented, by packaging Istio networking
configurations into the Helm templates.
For the operations team, Kubernetes presents both a blessing and a challenge. Its auto­
scaling and self­healing capabilities automate many of the routine infrastructure mainte­
nance tasks, reducing the need for manual interventions. Learning Kubernetes is no sim­
ple task. It involves a deep comprehension of its intricacies and complexities. Although it
is relatively straightforward to set up, it can be difficult to use correctly. Kubernetes offers
reliability and security, but users must become proficient in order to take advantage of
these features.
The introduction of Istio further intensifies this complexity. While Istio’s capabilities, such
as advanced service discovery, mTLS, and circuit breaking, promise enhanced security
and reliability, they also introduce a new layer of operational depth. The integration of
tools such as Helm and FluxCD into the deployment pipeline has exacerbated the sit­
uation, making it more difficult. These tools are designed to simplify deployments and
ensure consistency in the infrastructure, but the operations team must become familiar
with another layer of complexity in order to use them effectively.
The transition to this architecture has led to a significant shift in culture. The traditional
boundaries between development and operations have begun to fade, allowing for a more
unified DevOps approach. Thanks to the availability of GitLab pipeline templates and
base container images, the CI/CD process is more integrated, which creates a smooth
experience when all parts work as intended, but can require frequent communication,
collaboration, and synchronization between teams.
In conclusion, Boozt’s transition to a Microservice Architecture with Kubernetes and Istio
has been a journey of growth and difficulty. It is not just about utilizing new tools and tech­
niques; it is about adjusting to a new way of thinking, working together, and providing re­
sults. The combination of the tools available, standardized pipelines, and a strengthened
collaborative attitude are creating a novel, more effective, yet challenging experience for
Boozt’s teams.
5.5
Research Question 4
How do the performance and security benefits of migrating to a Microservice Architecture
using Kubernetes and Istio compare to other approaches to improving ecommerce infras­
tructure, such as monolithic architecture with a traditional load balancer and proxy or a
serverless architecture?
In the fiercely competitive e­commerce landscape, the ability to adapt to different user
needs is a key factor in the success of an ecommerce website. Therefore, the architec­
ture and deployment methods that form the basis of an ecommerce infrastructure must
be able to flexibly meet the ever­changing demands of users. In this regard, the microser­
vices architecture is a viable solution that meets these requirements. It is clear that the
microservice architecture provides a level of flexibility that is difficult to achieve with a
monolithic architecture, while also offering certain advantages over a serverless architec­
ture.
In a monolithic architecture, scaling can be challenging since the entire application is
treated as a single unit. While load balancers and proxies distribute incoming traffic, they
54
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:62==
lack the nuanced control that microservices offer. This approach might lead to uneven
distribution of load and potential inefficiencies during periods of high demand. Scaling the
entire monolith might require over­provisioning resources, which can lead to increased
costs and suboptimal performance. This has been the case at Boozt and it is one of the
time consuming tasks of the engineering teams to periodically check all VM’s for resource
usage and utilization.
Instead, the microservices architecture using Kubernetes and Istio offers a compelling
solution for scalability and performance. Granular scaling of individual microservices with
the help of Kubernetes based on demand, ensures efficient utilization of resources, pre­
venting over­provisioning or under­utilization. Additionally, Istio’s service mesh capabili­
ties provide advanced traffic management, load balancing, and routing features. These
features reduce latency by directing requests to the closest and least­loaded instances,
resulting in improved application responsiveness and a better user experience.
Serverless architectures on the other hand, are primarily designed to handle event­driven
workloads with automatic scaling. Their benefit are especially seen in scenarios where the
load is intermittent and bursty, but they are not as well­suited for applications with consis­
tent, low­latency performance requirements[6]. From a deployment viewpoint, serverless
platforms abstract the underlying infrastructure, which can limit the ability to fine­tune per­
formance. Furthermore, while serverless architectures automatically scale functions, this
scaling might not be as instantaneous as microservices in a Kubernetes cluster.
Microservices offer superior flexibility in deployment. Kubernetes’ container orchestration
allows independent deployment of each microservice, enabling seamless updates without
affecting the entire application. Istio enhances deployment strategies through features like
canary releases, enabling gradual rollout of updates. This approach minimizes downtime,
as failed updates can be rolled back without impacting the entire application’s availability.
On the other hand, updating a monolithic application can be challenging since updates
typically require taking the entire application offline. This approach increases the risk of
service interruptions, impacting user experience. The lack of independent deployment for
services can also lead to longer release cycles, making it difficult to deliver new features
quickly.
From a developer productivity point of view, the serverless architecture abstracts much
of the deployment complexity, making it easier to focus on code. However, while this
is a benefit, it comes with the trade­off that there is limited control over the deployment
strategy. Although updates might be simpler, the lack of control over the underlying infras­
tructure may restrict the ability to optimize deployment processes for specific use cases.
Microservices architecture offers several security benefits due to its inherent design prin­
ciples. Isolation and segregation are one of these benefits. Since each microservice is
designed to be isolated from each other, each microservice can have its own separate
database, runtime environment, and communication mechanisms. This isolation helps
contain security breaches. If one microservice is compromised, the attacker’s access is
limited to that specific service and does not automatically give them access to the entire
system. The microservice architecture also tends to have a more limited attack surface. It
is a result of the fact that each microservice focuses on a specific functionality, making the
attack surface smaller compared to a monolithic application where a single vulnerability
could potentially expose the entire application. This makes it easier to manage and miti­
gate security risks. From an architectural design point of view, microservice architecture
encourages the breaking down of a system into smaller components, making it easier to
identify potential security threats and vulnerabilities for each individual service. This fa­
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
55
==PAGE:63==
cilitates more effective threat modeling and risk assessment during the development pro­
cess. In a microservice architecture, each service can be updated independently. This
is beneficial for security patching because security updates can be deployed to specific
services without affecting the entire application. This agility allows for vulnerabilities to be
addressed more quickly. A microservice architecture also enables fine­grained access
control. Especially via Kubernetes RBAC, where it is possible to define access controls
at the service level, limiting what actions different users or roles can perform on each
service. This is particularly useful for enforcing the principle of least privilege. In terms
of resilience and recovery, a microservice architecture promotes the use of redundancy
and failover mechanisms. If one service becomes unavailable due to a security incident
or other problems, the rest of the services can continue to function, reducing the impact of
downtime. Implementing a service mesh, such as Istio, into the microservice architecture,
also introduces additional security benefits. Most notable, Istio’s mTLS ensures secure
communication between services, reducing the risk of unauthorized access or intercep­
tion of sensitive data, even if a malicious user has been able to establish a foothold inside
the Kubernetes cluster.
Due to the fact that an application component in a monolithic architecture is not segregated
and isolated, security vulnerabilities can have far­reaching consequences. A breach in
one part of the application could compromise the entire system, exposing sensitive data,
and impacting the overall integrity of the application.
Serverless architectures also often provide better security than monolithic architectures,
as they come with built­in security features based on best security practices. However,
the responsibility for securing application logic within functions rests with the developer.
As a result, even though the platform takes care of certain aspects, developers must still
ensure that their code is secure and follows best practices.
Microservices with Kubernetes and Istio introduce some complexity. As it results in hav­
ing to manage a larger number of services, container orchestration, and configuring Istio’s
service mesh is demanding. Teams need to develop expertise in these technologies to
ensure smooth operation and optimization. Managing a monolithic architecture is often
simpler compared to microservices, but challenges arise when it comes to efficient scaling
and updates. The lack of granularity can make it difficult to isolate and address perfor­
mance bottlenecks. Serverless architectures abstract much of the operational complex­
ity, making them appealing for teams looking to focus on code rather than infrastructure
management. However, this simplicity might come at the cost of fine­grained control and
optimization.
5.6
Research Question 5
What are the most significant technical and organizational challenges faced by Boozt
during the migration to a Microservice Architecture using Kubernetes and Istio, and how
were these challenges addressed or overcome?
Boozt’s journey towards embracing a Microservice Architecture with Kubernetes was a
transformative expedition, characterized by multifaceted challenges, both technically and
organizationally, marking a profound departure from their previous monolithic framework.
From a technical perspective, the introduction and testing of Istio in the development clus­
ter presented its own set of complexities. Although Istio promises improved service­to­
service communication and robust traffic management, the initial stages of its integration
were complex. Furthermore, Kubernetes, despite its potential advantages, brought about
its own set of intricacies. The team at Boozt found themselves navigating the technicalities
56
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:64==
of container orchestration, understanding high availability, and acclimatizing to the itera­
tive deployment processes tied to Kubernetes. This change demanded a sharp learning
curve and continuous adaptability.
On the organizational front, the move presented a variety of challenges. The need for
upskilling became crucial, with developers and operational teams required to delve into
containerization and the rhythm of deploying microservices. This not only implied techni­
cal upskilling, but also a cultural shift towards a DevOps­centric approach, harmonizing
the roles of development and operations more than ever before. The implementation of
tools like Helm and FluxCD streamlined Boozt’s deployment processes.
The operations team at Boozt had a major role to play in recognizing the magnitude of
the alterations and the potential problems they could pose. They incorporated a variety
of tools and templates to protect developers from the intricacies of the new architecture.
This foresight allowed developers to remain focused on coding and improving features,
even with the considerable infrastructure changes, and make the transition as smooth as
possible.
To confront and counter these challenges, Boozt laid emphasis on developing as much
automation and abstraction tools from the operations side and combining it wiht com­
prehensive training, encompassing workshops and hands­on sessions, for developers.
By fostering cross­functional teams, they embedded the essence of DevOps, facilitat­
ing seamless inter­departmental collaborations. This process has been done and i still
in progress iteratively, meaning that the operations teams work with single teams on at a
time. Boozt’s decision to adopt a phased migration approach as this, rather than an abrupt
transition, was strategic, reducing risks and fostering an environment conducive to itera­
tive learning. This would allow teams that have been through the training and migration
steps, to help in onboarding other teams. Considering all these points, Boozt exhibited
agility and resilience in their architectural shift.
Examining Boozt’s journey, it is clear that their accomplishment in transitioning to a mod­
ern Microservice Architecture with Kubernetes and experimenting with Istio is due to their
capacity to adjust, collaborative team dynamics, and careful preparation.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
57
==PAGE:65==
6
Conclusion
Boozt’s journey from a traditional monolithic architecture to a Microservice Architecture
powered by Kubernetes and Istio is emblematic of the evolution and challenges that
many organizations face in the modern technological landscape. This migration not only
promises scalability, flexibility, and enhanced security but also brings forth new complex­
ities and the need for a profound shift in organizational culture.
From a technical standpoint, while microservices provide Boozt with the agility to develop
and deploy in a more decentralized and efficient manner, they also demand meticulous
attention to service interactions and the data integrity across distributed setups. Kuber­
netes, with its robust container orchestration capabilities, offers distinct advantages in
terms of granular scaling and resource optimization. Yet, its intricacies require deep un­
derstanding and expertise. Integrating Istio further augments the capabilities with en­
hanced traffic management, mTLS, and advanced security features, but it also layers on
additional complexity.
On the flip side, when juxtaposed against other architectural strategies, Boozt’s chosen
path offers clear advantages. While monolithic architectures can become cumbersome,
particularly during scaling, and serverless architectures might lack the fine­grained control
many enterprises desire, the microservice approach, despite its initial hurdles, emerges as
a balanced, scalable, and adaptable choice for a rapidly evolving e­commerce landscape.
Organizationally, this migration necessitated a seismic shift towards a more integrated
DevOps approach. The lines between development and operations blurred, demanding
increased collaboration and mutual understanding. Training, continuous learning, and
fostering a culture of adaptability became paramount. Boozt’s approach of phased migra­
tion, combined with thorough training and an emphasis on cross­functional collaboration,
ensured that the transition, while complex, was methodical and minimized potential dis­
ruptions.
In summation, Boozt’s migration journey underscores the paradigm that while transitions
to newer, more efficient technologies are imperative for growth and staying competitive,
they are seldom without their challenges. Success in such endeavors hinges on a com­
bination of technical preparedness, organizational adaptability, and a proactive approach
to embracing change. Boozt’s experience serves as a valuable case study for any enter­
prise looking to navigate the intricate waters of architectural transformation in the age of
cloud­native applications.
6.1
Recommendations
For organizations contemplating a transition to a Microservice Architecture using Kuber­
netes and Istio, drawing insights from Boozt’s experience can be invaluable. Below are
key recommendations based on the successes and challenges faced during this migra­
tion:
1. Conduct a Comprehensive Evaluation
Start with a thorough evaluation of the existing system, and understand the specific re­
quirements, constraints, and expected benefits of migrating to microservices. Establish­
ing clear objectives early on can provide direction throughout the migration journey.
58
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:66==
2. Adopt a Phased Migration Approach
Transitioning the entire infrastructure abruptly can pose significant risks. Instead, consider
adopting a phased migration strategy. Begin with non­critical services, learn from each
phase, and progressively migrate more complex components. This iterative approach
reduces disruptions and allows the organization to refine its processes with each phase.
3. Prioritize Training and Upskilling
The successful adoption of new technologies requires a skilled workforce. Provide regular
training sessions, workshops, and hands­on experiences to bridge the knowledge gap.
Sharing knowledge and best practices across teams is invaluable.
4. Foster a Collaborative Culture
Moving to a microservices model demands a more collaborative working environment.
Foster a culture where development and operations teams can work closely, reinforcing
the importance of cross­functional teams and integrated workflows. This will be crucial in
effectively managing and deploying microservices.
5. Automate Wherever Possible
To counteract the increased complexities of managing microservices and container or­
chestration, leverage automation tools. Tools like Helm, FluxCD, and CI/CD pipelines
can simplify deployment processes, enhance consistency, and reduce human error.
6. Monitor and Iterate
Post­migration, it’s vital to have monitoring and logging systems in place, such as Prometheus
or ELK stack. These tools provide insights into the performance, health, and interactions
of your microservices, allowing for informed decisions and timely interventions.
7. Embrace Service Mesh Gradually
While service meshes like Istio offer valuable features, they also introduce complexity.
It’s recommended to understand the base functionalities of Kubernetes thoroughly before
integrating a service mesh. When ready, integrate Istio or any service mesh progressively,
starting with basic traffic management before diving into advanced features.
8. Ensure Robust Security Practices
Given the distributed nature of microservices, it’s crucial to have a comprehensive security
strategy. Implement tools and practices that cater to the unique challenges of microser­
vices, from network policies in Kubernetes to mTLS in Istio.
9. Maintain Open Communication
Ensure transparent communication across all departments about the progress, challenges,
and successes of the migration. This keeps everyone informed, fosters a sense of col­
lective ownership, and ensures that issues are promptly addressed.
10. Evaluate Vendor Lock­in
When choosing tooling and platforms, be aware of vendor lock­in. While some propri­
etary tools may offer unique features, they can limit flexibility in the long run. Whenever
possible, opt for open­source or widely adopted solutions that ensure interoperability and
provide more control.
6.2
Future Work
Our study of Boozt’s migration to a Microservice Architecture using Kubernetes and Is­
tio has provided a deep understanding of the advantages, challenges, and intricacies
involved in such a transformation. Several areas of interest have emerged during this
research that warrant further exploration in subsequent studies:
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
59
==PAGE:67==
1. Evaluating Alternatives to Istio
While Istio offers a comprehensive set of service mesh features, its complexity can some­
times be overwhelming, as observed in Boozt’s integration endeavors. It would be worth­
while to explore alternative tools or combinations thereof that offer the same functionali­
ties as Istio but with reduced intricacy. While it was briefly compared to Linkerd, Consul
Connect, and Kuma, this comparison was strictly on paper. A future study should entail
deploying and managing different service meshes like Istio, Linkerd, Consul Connect, and
Kuma in a real­world environment. Such a hands­on approach would not only validate the
theoretical findings but also uncover nuances that can only be identified in practical de­
ployments. Investigating these options might provide organizations with simpler or more
modular solutions tailored to their specific needs.
2. Performance Implications of Service Mesh
The use of service mesh technologies such as Istio can lead to an increase in latency and
resource utilization due to the extra layers of processing. Examining the performance
effects of different service meshes in comparison to native Kubernetes services can give
us an understanding of the trade­offs involved.
3. The Evolution of Developer Workflows
As organizations shift from monolithic to microservice architectures, the day­to­day work­
flows of developers evolve. An exploration into how these workflows change, and the
tools and practices that can streamline them, would be valuable for teams undergoing or
contemplating similar transitions.
4. Organizational Challenges in Microservice Adoptions
This research has explored some of the organizational difficulties that can arise, however,
a more comprehensive investigation that focuses solely on the cultural, communication,
and structural issues that come up during a migration could provide organizations with
more effective strategies to prepare.
5. The Economics of Microservice Migrations
Migrating to microservices may require an initial investment in terms of training, tools, and
potential service interruptions. A cost­benefit analysis that looks at the long­term savings
in terms of scalability, maintainability, and decreased downtime in comparison to the initial
costs could provide a more precise financial outlook for such migrations.
6. The Role of Open Standards and Interoperability
The cloud­native environment is expanding, making open standards and interoperability
increasingly essential. Investigating the development of these standards and how they af­
fect the choice of tools, vendor relations, and the long­term sustainability of infrastructure
would be both timely and pertinent.
7. Addressing Security in Distributed Systems
Security considerations become increasingly complex when using microservices. Re­
search into the security issues, solutions, and optimal practices for distributed architec­
tures would be beneficial for organizations that want to strengthen their security in a mi­
croservices environment.
60
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1]
Miona Aleksic. Containerization vs. Virtualization : understand the differences. 2023.
URL: https://ubuntu.com/blog/containerization-vs-virtualization.
[2]
Nigel Poulton. The Kubernetes Book. nigelpoulton.com, 2023.
[3]
Kubernetes Authors. Kubernetes Documentation. Accessed: 2023­08­14. 2023. URL:
https://kubernetes.io/docs/.
[4]
Ramaswamy Chandramouli and Zack Butcher. Building Secure Microservices­based
Applications Using Service­Mesh Architecture. en. 2020­05­27 2020. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-204A.
[5]
Chris Richardson. Microservices Patterns. Manning, 2018.
[6]
Datadog. Serverless Architecture: What It Is How It Works | Datadog — datadoghq.com.
https://www.datadoghq.com/knowledge-center/serverless-architecture/. [Accessed 27­
08­2023].
[7]
Adrian Cockcroft. Microservices Retrospective – What We Learned (and Didn’t Learn)
from Netflix. Accessed: 2023­08­14. 2023. URL: https://www.infoq.com/presentations/
microservices-netflix-industry/.
[8]
Marcin Kolny. Scaling up the Prime Video Audio/Video Monitoring Service and Re­
ducing Costs by 90%. 2023. URL: https://www.primevideotech.com/video-streaming/
scaling-up-the-prime-video-audio-video-monitoring-service-and-reducing-costs-by-90.
[9]
Tamas Szebeni and Matt Stine. Istio in Action. Manning Publications Co., 2022. ISBN:
9781617297804.
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
61
==PAGE:69==
62
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:70==
A
Grafana Istio Dashboard
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
63
==PAGE:71==
B
Prometheus Dashboard
64
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:72==
C
Jaeger Dashboard
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
65
==PAGE:73==
D
Locust Dashboard
66
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
==PAGE:74==
Migration to a Kubernetes based Microservice Architecture managed with a Service Mesh
67
==PAGE:75==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
