==PAGE:1==
Transformer-based Bird’s-Eye-View Mapping
For Unstructured Environments
Master Thesis
Colin Hoffmann
s212711
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Declaration
Hereby, I declare that I have written this work independently and without any unauthorised
assistance, that I have not used any sources other than those indicated, and that I have marked
as such any passages taken literally or in substance from the sources used.
Copenhagen, 11 August 2023
==PAGE:4==
II
Declaration
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
AI has advanced ADAS and AD in public traffic over many years, where especially environment
perception benefits from these technologies. In research and development, due to their benefits
over other sensor types, cameras and CV gain more importance for perception tasks.
One
way to represent vehicle environments is the BEV, as it describes the surrounding semantics in
a simple and clear way, and so supports further driving objectives. Even though the current
research focuses on public traffic, other industries, like the construction sector, hold the potential
to benefit from these technologies. But environments differ fundamentally, as there is less or
no structure, and objects have characteristics.
This creates a need to adapt the latest AI
technologies to new domains.
This thesis approaches a domain shift from public traffic to construction. The basis is a state-
of-the-art transformer model for mapping monocular images into Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV). Two
exemplary datasets in the form of synthetic and real-world data were created in the target
domain. Simplifications and adjustments were made to leverage the domain shift. Investigating
the model training showed that a severe class imbalance in the data caused model training issues.
Countermeasures for specifically addressing the problem did not show a helping effect, resulting
in the model being unable to learn the intended behaviour. It was shown that with the given
circumstances, Domain Adaption (DA) requires in-depth considerations for the task, as the data
and the model can not be seen independently.
Keywords
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Deep Learning (DL), Transformers, Computer
Vision (CV), Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV), Data Collection, Synthetic Data, Domain Adaption (DA),
Transfer Learning (TL), Construction
==PAGE:6==
IV
Abstract
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was written for the completion of my Master’s degree in Autonomous Systems at
the Technical University of Denmark.
First, I would like to thank my first supervisor, Lazaros Nalpantidis, for his guidance and support
throughout my thesis. He always had helpful advice for technical questions and gave valuable
feedback for improvements.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Jochen Teizer for taking the role of the second supervisor.
He made many things possible for my thesis and always supported me on practical matters.
Also, a thank you goes to the PhD students Karsten Winther Johansen, Kepeng Hong and
Kilian Speiser for their help in my experiments.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and my friends for all their personal support during my
thesis as well as throughout my studies.
==PAGE:8==
VI
Preface
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Bird’s-Eye-View representation from camera images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Visual environment perception for construction vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
7
3.1
Image to Bird’s-Eye-View Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Sequence-to-Sequence Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Transformer for Mapping Images into BEVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Data Collection in Computer Vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
3D Unity Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
Real-World Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Domain Adaption and Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Experiments and Results
19
4.1
Dataset Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Synthetic Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Real-World Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Training Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Model Configuration and Training Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Discussion
39
6
Conclusion
43
References
45
List of Abbreviations
49
List of Figures
51
A GitHub and SharePoint
53
==PAGE:10==
VIII
Contents
B NuScenes Dataset
55
C BEV of Virtual Construction Site
57
D Synthetic Dataset
59
E Real-World Data Collection Test Setup
61
F Logitech C920e data sheet
63
G Camera Setup Templates
65
H Annotation Instructions for Real-World Dataset
67
I
Real-World Dataset
69
J
Gradient Plots
71
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years, Advanced Driver-Assistance Systemss (ADASs) have made significant progress in
public traffic due to new Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies. In combination with intelligent
software, state-of-the-art sensors can monitor the vehicle’s environment constantly and predict
future events in time. Therefore, its perception is one of the critical tasks, as it creates the
essential basis for further decision-making and acting.
The field of Computer Vision (CV) in combination with AI has proven to be the technical state-
of-the-art for perception tasks, as cameras as sensors are cheap, robust, and capture a lot of
visual information and context. AI algorithms can process camera images in a human-like way,
resulting in superiority to conventional methods and distance sensors like LiDAR.
The latest research within perception mainly focuses on the public traffic domain due to its
impact on Autonomous Driving (AD). However, other industries like the construction sector
also offer immense potential for ADAS and AD, as efficiency and safety can be significantly
increased.
On a technical level, the spatial structure of a construction site differs fundamentally from the
public traffic domain. Instead of predefined roads and lanes, with cars, bikes, and pedestrians
following their designated paths most of the time, construction sites are unstructured. This
irregularity creates a different kind of complexity. Workers collaborating at close distances with
machines increase this even more, creating a need for quicker reactions.
A high-level representation of the whole environment lets vehicles benefit immensely. Objects can
be tracked, trajectories can be predicted, and dangerous situations can be avoided in advance.
One of these is the so-called Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV), which represents the environment in a
two-dimensional way from above. It is commonly used in the public traffic domain, as it offers a
good trade-off between information content and simplicity since actions mainly happen on the
ground plane.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
Research Question
The given state of the research in BEV mapping from monocular images
in the public traffic domain and the need for technologies like this in the construction domain
open the possibility to perform a domain shift from one to another. In technical terms, a domain
shift occurs when the data in the target domain differs from the source domain. In this case,
the model trained on data from the public traffic domain may not perform well when applied to
the construction domain because the features and patterns are different. Therefore, to fill this
gap, the following research question arises:
How can such a domain shift be approached?
Outline
This thesis follows the typical structure of a research paper. First, recent works in
relevant research will be presented, analyzed, and evaluated to identify potential gaps. After
that, methods, models, and techniques are described to create the necessary theoretical founda-
tion for technical understanding. Then, experiments and results are shown and analyzed, and
a discussion of the results evaluates the insight. Finally, a conclusion reviews the thesis and
previews future work.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Related Work
This chapter gives an overview of the current research on the underlying technology methods and
their application in the construction sector. Therefore, the first section explores and compares
current methods for bringing monocular images into BEVs from the public traffic domain. Then,
the second section presents the latest state of the overall CV research in the construction domain,
showing which technologies are already brought into.
2.1
Bird’s-Eye-View representation from camera images
A wide range of works approached the problem of translating on-board camera images into a BEV
representation. Whereas some present an end-to-end approach, others use preprocessing steps,
i.e., image segmentation or object detection, before learning correspondences between them and
the BEV. This also benefits model training since tasks can be decoupled, and simulation data
can be used for training without influencing real-world performance. Moreover, different kinds
of map representation techniques appear in works accompanied by other methods to frame the
problem for learning, which results in various model architectures.
As shown in [1], a baseline approach is Inverse Perspective Mapping (IPM), which uses homo-
graphies to warp the image into the ground plane. This works well for roads and lanes on the
ground plane but fails for three-dimensional objects, like vehicles and pedestrians. Its most
significant advantage is its simplicity, but its results are inferior to other approaches since it is
restricted to the ground plane. In addition, no information about the covered dimensions of
objects is included in the BEV.
Using object detection as the preliminary step for camera input processing, [2] follows an ap-
proach based on bounding boxes and their positions within the image. An encoder learns the
relationship between the bounding box image, its coordinates, and its location in the BEV.
While this approach demonstrates decent results compared to baseline models, its application
is determined to vehicles only, which limits its usage in the field of AD significantly.
==PAGE:14==
4
Related Work
The approach in [3] uses image segmentation as a preprocessing step.
A backbone network
extracts features from the segmented image and reduces its dimensions. By doing so, models
handle images more efficiently and focus on essential information or elements in an image. This
is also done in [4, 5, 6]. Once features are extracted, a U-Net [7] architecture combines and trans-
lates the surround-view camera images into a cohesive BEV representation. The architecture
effectively combines the segmented camera images and transforms them into a BEV, resulting
in good performance compared to other works.
The works [4, 8] introduce an approach based on transformer models. These are commonly used
in Natural Language Processing (NLP), and the so-called attention mechanism allows them to
focus on specific parts of the input [9]. Both works use this mechanism to combine spatial and
temporal information. Spatial features in images are extracted by so-called BEV queries, which
focus on temporal information from previous timesteps. The extracted BEV features are used
to create a BEV by map segmentation. Both models end up reaching valuable results.
The methods in [5, 6] are based on occupancy grids for map representation.
By putting a
grid in the ground plane, each grid location gets a probability for the presence of an object or
class. Both utilize a backbone to extract features from the image and a feature pyramid [10] to
provide context at different scales. Transformers then translate these scaled features into the
BEV plane, where a top-down network [11] finally predicts the probabilities for the occupancy
grid. In contrast to [5], [6] frames the translation of the image into the BEV plane as a sequence-
to-sequence problem. Each pixel column in the image is assumed to correspond to a ray in the
resulting BEV. Using a transformer-based approach to tackle this, spatial relationships and
contextual information along the pixel column can be included in the mapping with the help
of the attention mechanism. A segmentation network finally predicts the probabilities for the
semantic occupancy grid. [6] reaches slightly better results than [5] but also outperforms other
recent approaches, making it one of the state-of-the-art methods in this task.
In [12], an approach using a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is presented to transform
the camera image into a BEV image. The image perspective is warped to the BEV perspective
with the help of a homography to reduce the gap between the two views. A GAN then learns
the cross-view translation of these perspectives to generate an image from the BEV perspective.
In contrast to the methods above, the BEV representation corresponds to an image instead of
a higher-level representation.
In summary, most recent works utilize backbones to extract key features from the image. Even
though approaches with different models achieve good results, it can be seen that the best-
performing approaches follow a transformer-based method. Focusing on relevant parts due to
their attention mechanism is effective for processing image information and transforming it into
a BEV representation.
==PAGE:15==
Related Work
5
2.2
Visual environment perception for construction vehicles
With AI and autonomous vehicles entering the construction sector, several works present ap-
proaches for visual environment perception for vehicles operating on construction sites. Most
utilize visual object detection to increase safety by identifying and tracking objects, workers,
and vehicles. Moreover, the distinction between structured and unstructured environments is
present in several works that discuss the consequences of automated or autonomous driving or
operating tasks, including perception.
The works in [13, 14, 15] show approaches for detecting and classifying construction objects and
vehicles in images. They are based on state-of-the-art object detection models like YOLO [16]
or Fast R-CNN [17]. The core of their studies is to gather new data to adapt to the construction
domain and compare different models, training strategies, and hyperparameters.
But these
approaches do not create any high-level representation of the environment.
In [18], the distinction between structured and unstructured environments is defined as "depend
entirely on [...] structure being present in their surroundings" and "ignore any structure that
may exist", respectively. Even though the paper refers to monocular cameras as sensors, it does
not elaborate on perception tasks. [19] also works out that monocular cameras are about to
replace sensors like laser scanners, as CV can extract high-level information from camera images
and estimate depth, but does not mention any approaches for perception algorithms.
As one of the latest works, [20] elaborates on Machine Learning (ML) in the perception of
construction machinery. It states that the typical multi-modal sensor setup for this kind of
machinery consists of a 3D LiDAR scanner and a passive camera system, and both subsystems
complement each other. The work also divides the perception task into low, mid, and high levels.
Low-level perception refers to the calibration of the setup; mid-level means depth estimation
from the stereo camera setup and data fusion with the LiDAR data; and top-level means the
3D segmentation of the data to represent the environment. Due to the representation in a 3D
environment and the multi-modal sensor setup, this approach is relatively complex compared to
state-of-the-art methods in the public traffic domain. In addition, the paper predicts that data
acquisition for this domain will be important in the future.
Even though the construction sector adopts recent technologies in artificial intelligence, includ-
ing those for visual perception tasks and approaches from the automotive domain, the degree
of integration and implementation is far behind. Existing solutions hardly enable reasoning and
decision-making regarding safety and autonomous behaviour, as they require high-level represen-
tation. In summary, the key takeaways are that there is an awareness of the difference between
structured and unstructured environments, but especially in the application of ML approaches,
there is a lack of high-quality training data and adapted methods.
==PAGE:16==
6
Related Work
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Methods
Approaching a domain shift from public traffic to construction requires careful consideration of
the disparities. The definition of the underlying model plays an important role, as it needs to
meet the data characteristics of the new domain. Besides, collecting and annotating data from
the construction domain is an essential step as this data needs to represent the environmental
characteristics. In the last step, the model must adapt to the new data. This is typically done
by so-called Transfer Learning (TL). This chapter covers the mentioned topics to understand
the technological and methodological background required for Domain Adaption (DA) with the
given conditions.
3.1
Image to Bird’s-Eye-View Mapping
3.1.1
Sequence-to-Sequence Translation
Transformers were presented by [9] as a novel Neural Network (NN) architecture within the field
of NLP. They introduced a new way of solving Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2seq) problems, like
in machine translation or text completion. Transformers have immense capabilities for solving
these kinds of problems, especially in comparison to previous models like Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs). In general, they enable novel possibilities not only in NLP but also in CV.
Transformer Architecture
The overall transformer architecture consists of an encoder and
a decoder, each of which can have multiple layers stacked.
The encoder converts an input
sequence x ∈Rn into a continuous representation z ∈Rn, and the decoder uses this to predict
the output sequence y ∈Rm. In the following, n and m are equal and referred to dmodel. The
architecture of a transformer is shown in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:18==
8
Methods
Multi-Head
Attention
Add & Norm
Feed
Forward
Add & Norm
Masked
Multi-Head
Attention
Add & Norm
Feed
Forward
Add & Norm
Multi-Head
Attention
Add & Norm
Linear
Softmax
Input incl.
Position Encoding
Output (shifted right)
incl. Position Encoding
Output
Figure 3.1: Transformer architecture according to [9]
==PAGE:19==
Methods
9
Two kinds of modules give transformers their main functionality: Multi-head attention and
feed-forward NN. Additionally, there are add/norm modules to support the training process.
The encoder comprises one multi-head attention module and one feed-forward NN in series,
combined with add/norm modules. Figure 3.2 shows the block diagram of a so-called attention
head.
MatMul
Scale
Mask (opt.)
Softmax
MatMul
Concatenate
Linear
Linear
Linear
Linear
Q
K
V
Figure 3.2: Muli-head attention according to [9]
It takes three vectors as input: the query Q, the key K and the value V . These are linear
input vector x projections, where the projection matrices W Q, W K and W V are learned during
training.
Q = xWQ,
K = xWK,
V = xWV
(3.1)
==PAGE:20==
10
Methods
This concept can be understood as calculating a weighted sum of values for the input sequence,
where the queries and the keys compute the weights. [9] The graph in Figure 3.2 results in the
following equation:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
 
QKT
√dk
!
V
(3.2)
The attention scores (or weights, as mentioned above) are calculated by matrix multiplication
of Q and K. To ensure stable gradients during training, these are divided by √dk, where dk
is the length of the input vector. This is called scale in Figure 3.2. Optional masking follows
and will be explained later in terms of the decoder. Applying a softmax function produces the
attention weights in the form of probabilities between 0 and 1, which specify to which part of
the sequence the most attention needs to be paid. In other words, which parts refer to which
other parts in the input sequence itself, which is why this is also called self-attention. Finally,
the attention weights are multiplied by V .
This kind of attention is called soft attention, as it produces a soft alignment between parts
in the input and output sequence by using a probabilistic and continuous representation for
weights.
In contrast, there is also hard attention, where one single element from the input
sequence is assigned to the output sequence, which also means that context from other parts
of the sequence is neglected.
Monotonic Attention (MA) was initially proposed in [21] for
simultaneous translation, where the whole input sequence is not available at the time. Therefore,
it makes a hard assignment to the input sequence, but only for parts from the beginning to the
current position in the sequence.
An extension of this is Monotonic Attention with Infinite
Look-back (MAIL) [22]. It resulted from the fact that the hard assignment in MA neglects
context from the sequence. It combines the features of MA with a soft-attention mechanism
that can look back to the beginning of the source.
Several of these attention heads are used in one module and processed in parallel, which is why
it is called multi-head attention. For doing this, the Q, K and V vectors are split up into n equal
parts, where n refers to the number of heads. Each part goes through an individual attention
head, resulting in each head acquiring an individual behaviour. The outputs of each head are
concatenated again before a linear transformation is applied. These matrices are also learned in
training.
The following feed-forward NN module consists of two linear NN layers with a ReLU activation
function in between. The multi-head attention output is mapped to the continuous representa-
tion z.
In addition, residual connections enclose all modules, meaning that the input and output are
added together. This supports training by enhancing gradient flow through the network. After
adding, it is normalized using layer normalization. Here, the normalization is done along the
layer dimension, not the batch dimension, as in batch normalization.
==PAGE:21==
Methods
11
The decoder consists of two multi-head attention modules and one feed-forward NN. The first
multi-head attention module takes the previous output of the decoder itself for calculating Q,
K and V . Here, the earlier-mentioned masking is applied. Equation 3.3 illustrates how masking
prevents accessing previous parts in the sequence.
softmax









0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25


+


0
−inf
−inf
−inf
0
0
−inf
−inf
0
0
0
−inf
0
0
0
0









=


1
0
0
0
0.5
0.5
0
0
0.33
0.33
0.33
0
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25


(3.3)
It can be seen that an attention score of −inf results in an attention weight of 0 due to the softmax
function. This, in combination with a one-step backshift of the output sequence, ensures that
the model can only refer to previous parts of the sequence. Q and K for the second multi-head
attention module in the decoder layer are calculated by the latent representations from the
encoder since they contain the information from x. But V is calculated by the first multi-head
attention module. By doing this, the output sequence is generated auto-regressively since the
information from previous outputs is also included for the next output. The second multi-head
attention module follows a feed-forward NN. After the last decoder, a final linear transformation
produces the final output sequence y in the desired output dimension. A softmax function can
then map the outputs to probabilities.
Positional Encoding
In contrast to RNNs, there is no recurrence in the transformer archi-
tecture. Therefore, the relative positions of parts in the input sequence need to be specified.
This is done by so-called positional encoding, where a vector PE ∈Rdmodel is added to the input
sequence. There are different kinds of positional encodings. The most common one is using sin
and cos functions, as can be seen in the following equations:
PE(pos,2i) = sin

pos
100002i/dmodel

(3.4)
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos

pos
100002i/dmodel

(3.5)
Here, pos refers to the position of the input in the sequence. Then, i is the index position in
the input vector, and dmodel is its length. The periodic sine and cosine characteristics decrease
positional context for the following parts in the sequence, and different frequencies make them
unique for different positions in the sequence.
==PAGE:22==
12
Methods
3.1.2
Transformer for Mapping Images into BEVs
The translation of images into BEVs can be framed as a sequence-to-sequence problem in the
way it is presented in [6]. This concept underlies the principle that, due to camera geometry and
the given set-up, every column in the image plane corresponds to a polar ray in the BEV-plane.
A column can then be translated into a polar ray column, as shown in Figure 3.3a and 3.3b.
Image plane
BEV plane
Camera position
Height
Range
(a) Side view
Image plane
Width
Camera position
BEV plane
Field of View
(b) Top view
Figure 3.3: Principle of image plane to BEV plane tranformation
Attention
In general, it can be said that the depth within images of driving environments
increases with the height within the image. In addition, the information below a point in a
picture is more important than that above it. This behaviour can be enforced by MAIL. Only
parts below the image are included for translating the current sequence, but it can refer to other
previous image columns.
Occupancy Grids
Occupancy grids [23] are an environment representation method mainly
used in robotics, especially for mobile robots and autonomous vehicles. The main idea is to divide
the environment into a discretized grid and assign a probability to each grid cell. Continuous
values between 0 and 1 specify the probability of an object being present in a specific grid cell.
There is one occupancy grid for every class that can occur in the environment.
==PAGE:23==
Methods
13
To allow the model to process images from different cameras, the BEV occupancy grid is nor-
malized with respect to the camera intrinsics. This ensures that the dimensions in the BEV
plane are equal across different datasets.
3.1.3
Model Architecture
The overall model consists of three main parts: a front end, a transformer, and a segmentation
network. Its structure is shown in Figure 3.4. First, the backbone uses a ResNet [24] to process
the raw input image by extracting features and reducing the dimensions.
Then, a feature
pyramid [10] creates feature maps at four scales. Doing this enforces the detection of small
objects, which might be neglected by using only one scale.
ResNet
Image
4 Encoders
4 Decoders
Grid Sampling
Top-Down
Network
Occupancy Grid
Frontend
Transformer
Segmentation
Feature Pyramid
4 Scales
Figure 3.4: Model architecture according to [6]
==PAGE:24==
14
Methods
Then, the transformer translates feature columns into a polar ray feature column. All this is
done at four different scales. Here, features are brought from the image plane into the BEV
plane. Grid sampling is needed as the features are still in a polar coordinate system, and the
occupancy grid is rectilinear.
Finally, a top-down network [11] in the form of an encoder-decoder structure segments the
features. It brings the rectilinear-shaped features into a rectilinear occupancy grid with several
classes. Again, this is done at four different scales, so the model outputs four occupancy grids
at four different scales, where the largest one contains the grid with the highest resolution.
3.2
Data Collection in Computer Vision
For creating a CV dataset, it is important to consider the quantity, quality, diversity, and balance
of the data. These factors can significantly impact the performance and generalization of ML
models.
• Quantity refers to the amount of data in the dataset.
Generally, more data leads to
better model performance, providing a wider range of samples for the model to learn from.
However, collecting and processing large amounts of data can be time-consuming and
resource-intensive, so a balance between the amount of data collected and the available
resources must be found.
• Quality refers to the accuracy, reliability, and consistency of the data. Low-quality data
can lead to biased or inaccurate models. Therefore, ensuring that the data is free from
errors and outliers is essential.
• Diversity refers to the variety of examples in the dataset. A diverse dataset captures the
full range of variations in the real world, allowing the model to generalize better.
• Balance is the distribution of examples across different classes or categories. It is essential
to ensure that the dataset is balanced across other classes in classification tasks. Imbal-
anced datasets can lead to biased models, where the model is more likely to predict the
majority class.
3.2.1
3D Unity Environments
Unity is a graphics engine widely used for developing video games but also used in other in-
dustries like automotive or construction. A Unity 3D virtual environment offers a platform for
creating realistic virtual worlds. Rendering can then be used to create visual scenes that resem-
ble real environments. Unity also includes the possibilities to simulate real-world characteristics,
such as lighting conditions and complex interactions between objects, enhancing more represen-
tations and resulting in better performance of CV models trained with synthetic datasets.
==PAGE:25==
Methods
15
A key advantage of virtual environments is their customizability.
It allows data generation
for different specific needs. Dataset diversity can be ensured by configuring numerous factors
according to requirements.
Parameters like object placement, camera viewpoints, and envi-
ronmental conditions can be modified easily. This level of control enhances the exploration of
different scenarios and the evaluation of model performance under various conditions. The fast
and automated generation of large-scale datasets also enhances quantity.
Scripting API
Unity contains a scripting API that allows to create interactive and dynamic
elements in a virtual environment. It is based on the programming language C#, which enables
the execution of scripts to automatize various processes in and around the environment. A wide
range of functions and classes are provided, which enable developers to manipulate the envi-
ronment according to their requirements. Properties of objects, such as position, rotation, and
scale, can be accessed. Furthermore, the position of cameras can be adjusted, and a rendering
scheme can be implemented.
Rendering and Target Generation
In virtual environments, a fixed coordinate system
defines the position, rotation, and scale of all objects in the scene. 3D Objects are usually 3D
meshes, a collection of small vertices, edges, and faces that define the shape and structure of the
object as a geometric body. Additionally, there is a bounding box for every object in the scene.
The bounding box is defined by the maximum extent of the object’s mesh in 3D. They aim to
detect intersections/collisions of objects and determine if objects are rendered from a particular
perspective.
Cameras are also defined within the coordinate system to render realistic samples. The extrinsics
describe the position and orientation of the camera in the coordinate system, and the intrinsics
describe how the scene is projected onto a virtual image plane. For detailed information about
computer vision geometry, including homogeneous coordinates and camera models, see [25].
3.2.2
Real-World Data
Collecting real-world data for CV datasets is an elaborate and time-consuming process that
requires significant effort and resources. The process involves several steps, including selecting
the appropriate hardware, identifying the scenes and target objectives, and capturing and anno-
tating the data. Each of these steps requires planning and execution to ensure that the collected
data meets the requirements for a high-quality dataset.
An essential factor in the data collection process is the availability of resources. Besides the
availability of equipment and hardware, the availability of personnel to operate and other per-
missions need to be considered. Additionally, external factors such as weather conditions can
also impact the data collection.
==PAGE:26==
16
Methods
To ensure data quality, it is important to use a high-quality hardware setup. Cameras with
high resolutions are essential for capturing detailed images. In addition to the resolution, other
factors such as frame rate, dynamic range, and colour accuracy may also be considered. The
hardware must also be mounted correctly and appropriately calibrated to ensure consistency
during the collection process. Camera mounting is critical in the automotive domain, where
cameras may be subject to vibrations and other disturbances.
Camera Drones
Drones have recently become increasingly popular for research purposes.
Equipped with cameras, they enable to capture aerial images cost-effectively and efficiently. It
is a simple solution to get a BEV of a scene from above, with being restricted to any camera
fixation.
3.3
Domain Adaption and Transfer Learning
DA refers to the process of adapting a ML model trained on one domain to perform well on a
different domain. In the context of CV, a domain refers to a specific set of images or videos
with certain characteristics. The need for domain adaptation arises when a model trained on
one visual domain fails to generalize well to other domains. This can happen due to differences
in the data distribution between the source and target domain. DA aims to bridge this gap by
leveraging the knowledge gained from the source domain to improve performance on the target
domain.
According to [26], DA is classified based on several factors. In a homogeneous DA, the feature
space of the source domain and the target domain are the same. In a so-called one-step DA,
knowledge can be directly transferred from one domain to another. Depending on data avail-
ability, a distinction is made in un-, semi-, ord supervised DA techniques. Supervised DA is
used if sufficient labelled data from the target domain is available, but this amount is insuffi-
cient to train a model from scratch. If no labelled data exists but sufficient unlabelled bata,
then unsupervised DA techniques are used. Last, if a low amount of detailed and redundant
unlabelled data is available, it is named semi-supervised DA.
TL is a ML technique where a ML model that was trained on one task is re-purposed on a
second related task. It involves reusing a pre-trained model as the starting point for the model
training, which shortens the training process or improves model performance on the new task.
TL is particularly useful in Deep Learning (DL), where a NN can be trained with comparatively
little data by using trained parameters as the starting point. TL is often used when the training
would take considerable resources. There are two main strategies in TL, feature extraction and
fine-tuning, which method is suitable for a task depends on the model and the data. [27]
==PAGE:27==
Methods
17
Feature Extraction
In the feature extraction strategy, a pre-trained model is used as a
fixed feature extractor. The idea is to leverage the learned representations from the pre-trained
model’s layers, which have been trained on a large dataset. This behaviour can then be applied
to a new task-specific dataset to process the model input. The benefit of this strategy is that the
pre-trained layers have already learned meaningful and generalizable features in lower dimensions
from the original dataset. Usually, in this strategy, the final layers of a pre-trained model are
removed. In general, these represent the more task-specific behaviour of a model, whereas layers
at the beginning of a model represent a more general and abstract behaviour. The removed
layers are then replaced. All kept layers are frozen during training, and only the new ones are
trained. By freezing these layers, it can be focused on training the new layers on the new specific
task, even with limited data. This approach is beneficial when the new dataset is small and
similar to the original dataset.
Fine-Tuning
In the fine-tuning strategy, no layers are frozen, and all parameters in the layers
are updated during training on the new dataset.
This approach is effective when the new
dataset is larger and more diverse, enabling the model to learn more specific features related
to the new task. When fine-tuning a pre-trained model, it is essential to choose appropriate
hyperparameters, such as the learning rate, to maintain the general behaviour learned by the
original data, i.e. by decreasing the learning rate.
Layer Freezing
Layer freezing is a technique used in TL to prevent the weights of pre-trained
layers from being updated during training. For frozen layers, gradients of weights and biases
are not computed during training. Therefore, these parameters are not updated during training
and maintain their behaviour for the model.
==PAGE:28==
18
Methods
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Experiments and Results
This chapter explains the steps to perform a domain shift from public traffic to construction for
a transformer-based image-to-BEV model. First, the procedure for creating a synthetic dataset
as well as a real-world dataset is elaborated. After, the model configuration and training process
is described in detail, and results are shown and evaluated.
4.1
Dataset Creation
The source domain for the shift is the public traffic domain. Due to the research focus on AD
and its significant impact on society, many datasets are available for research and development
in this domain. Common examples of large-scale datasets are KITTI [28], NuScenes [29] and
Argoverse [30]. In contrast, at the current state, there exists no corresponding dataset for the
construction domain.
Initially, public traffic datasets do not include any BEV and, therefore, no targets for training a
model as described in Section 3.1. But, the NuScenes dataset includes annotated 3D bounding
boxes and city map labels, which can be used to generate a BEVs. [5] provides a way for doing
this. These maps can then be used for training, as also done in [6].
As a multi-class classification task using occupancy grids, both approaches classify the sur-
rounding area into 14 classes provided by the NuScenes dataset. In the scope of this thesis, this
assumption is simplified. Instead of classifying into 14 different classes, probabilities for four
classes are predicted. The exact grouping is shown in Figure 4.1.
Similar objects are reduced and grouped as a trade-off between information value in the BEV
representation and simplicity for model training and DA. By introducing the background, only
objective classes in the surrounding are detected. If classified as background, it concludes that
none of the other classes are present. This principle can be seen as similar to Fast R-CNN
[17] classifying region proposals as background. Moreover, this reduction creates a common
intersection between the source and the target domain. Classes which are present in public traffic
==PAGE:30==
20
Experiments and Results
Background
Vehicle
Object/Other
Person
Drivable Area
Pedestrian Crossing
Walkway
Carpark Area
Bus
Bicycle
Motorcycle
Car
Trailer
Pedestrian
Traffic Cone
Barrier
Truck
Construction Vehicle
Figure 4.1: Grouping of NuScenes classes
are not necessarily present on construction sides. Therefore, by grouping classes fundamentally,
knowledge can be transferred in a direct way between the source and target domain without
potentially losing valuable information. But, this grouping also increases data imbalance in the
dataset, as the background class summarises the classes with the largest shares in the distribution.
Another adjustment is not annotating a single grid cell twice or more. For instance, in targets
generated according to [5], where, i.e. a car is placed on the road, the corresponding grid cell
has probability values of 1 for the class drivable area and the class car. In theory, this is correct.
However, with the introduction of the background class as described above, this is no longer
applicable and would cause confusion in the model training.
From the given image-target correspondence from [5] and [6], the following requirements for a
dataset arise:
• The onboard camera images have a resolution of 1600×900 pixels. A later down-sampling
is possible.
• An exact correspondence between the onboard camera image and the target BEV map is
required. In other words, both need to be obtained at the same moment.
• Each target covers an area of 50 × 50 meters.
• The target has a resolution of 100 × 100 grid cells, so there is a resolution of 2 grid cells
per meter. The camera’s position is in the middle of the bottom edge of the target. The
vehicle, on which the camera is mounted, is named ego-vehicle in the further course of the
work.
• There is one occupancy grid for every predicted class.
If a class is present, it gets a
probability of 1; if not, it gets 0. There can only be one class present in each grid cell.
Examples
Examples of the NuScenes dataset with reduced targets are shown in Appendix B.
==PAGE:31==
Experiments and Results
21
4.1.1
Synthetic Dataset
The basis for creating a synthetic dataset, which meets the requirements listed above, is a 3D
Unity virtual environment of a construction site. This was initially created in a research project
about digital twins in construction. It consists of a wide range of typical objects on construction
sites, including vehicles, and workers.
One virtual construction site is hardly sufficient for a diverse dataset. But, creating several
realistic environments in Unity is highly time-consuming and automatizing it takes immense
time and effort. Therefore, in the scope of this thesis, various subordinate scenarios within the
environment are created to increase diversity.
Appendix C shows an overview of the virtual construction site. It is divided into two main
parts. One is a railway track site, and one is a general site/field without a specific construction
object. For sampling different scenarios, the latter one is more suitable, as it has more general
characteristics in terms of ground conditions, high-level structure and already existing object
placements. Furthermore, there is a sufficiently large area for vehicles and workers to be placed
and operate. In contrast, the railway track part has more specific objects, and its structure is
narrower, making it hard to place new objects and move an ego-vehicle.
To increase the dataset’s quantity and sample many different images in one scenario, the ego-
vehicle follows a trajectory through the scenario. This allows to sample new images at every
position on the trajectory. Then, images are sampled at a specific frame rate. Additionally, the
amount of virtual cameras on the ego-vehicle is set to four, each directing to different directions
(front, left, right, back).
Even though creating scenarios following an automated and random approach is possible, they
must still include rationality to resemble real construction sites. Therefore, a combination of
manual input and randomness is chosen. Object placement in the above-mentioned selected
site section is done manually, i.e. to group vehicles or workers at some point and place them
at reasonable distances from each other. Then, the orientation of each object is determined
randomly. Also, the ego-vehicle’s trajectory is defined manually.
The latest state of the virtual environment with its vehicles, workers, and objects is used as a
base for further scenario generation. This is not changed over the data generation process. Only
environment objects as part of the respective scenario change. Such a scenario is described by
a list of objects with the information listed in the following. This is derived from how Unity
describes objects in virtual environments.
• Object name
• Position in X, Y and Z coordinates
• Rotation around the X, Y, and Z axes
• Dimensions of the bounding box
==PAGE:32==
22
Experiments and Results
• Ego-vehicle only: Position of the trajectory endpoint
• Ego-vehicle only: Duration for the trajectory
Image Sampling
Sampling and rendering images of the virtual cameras mounted on top of
the ego-vehicle is done the Scripting API of Unity. Each scenario is recreated from the data
structure. The first four images are rendered with the ego-vehicle in its starting position. It
then moves, and with a specific frame rate, the next four images are sampled. This process
repeats for all steps of the trajectory. A unique token is used to identify each trajectory step in
the sampling process.
Target Generation
The underlying global coordinate system, in combination with the bound-
ing boxes for each object, is used to create the corresponding targets for each rendered image.
Every object’s position and its orientation in the 3D space as well as its bounding box dimensions
are described in Unity’s coordinate system. By projecting the bounding box into the ground
plane, a BEV with rectangular object shapes is generated. In terms of data quality, this cre-
ates minor inaccuracies for non-rectangular objects. But since this deviation is minimal and no
information about the position of the object is discarded, this can be neglected.
The process of the target generation for a scenario is illustrated in Figure 4.2. Since the state
of the base virtual construction site is unchanging, one large base occupancy grid is created in
the global coordinate system. Pixels are used for visualizing the occupancy grid. Therefore, one
pixel corresponds to one grid cell, which results in an image. The generation is done using the
position, orientation and bounding boxes of all objects in the virtual construction site. Then,
for each scenario, the base occupancy grid is extended by the new objects of the scenario. The
ego-vehicle is not excluded, as it holds the virtual cameras and therefore is not seen as an object
to detect.
By shifting the global coordinate system’s origin into the ego-vehicle position and rotating it by
the orientation, it gets transformed into an ego-vehicle coordinate system. This now lines up
with the longitudinal axis of the ego-vehicle. This is the orientation of the front camera. For all
three remaining cameras, the coordinate system needs to be rotated by 90° more, respectively.
As the cameras are mounted closely together on the roof of the ego-vehicle, and its description
point approximately lies there as well, both points are assumed to be identical in the ground
plane. Then, for each camera orientation, the occupancy grid is cut so it has the desired shape
of 50 × 50 meters.
Here, the scale of the coordinate system to the real-world needs to be
considered. As a final step, the cut occupancy grid is down-sampled, so it has the resolution
of two grid cells per meter, or in terms of image representation, 100 × 100 pixels. Each map
gets the corresponding token from its trajectory step in the sampling process with the camera
orientation added in the file name.
==PAGE:33==
Experiments and Results
23
Global occupancy grid in world 
coordinate system
Global occupancy grid in
ego-vehicle coordinate system
Shift ego-vehicle position to origin
and rotate coordinate system
by ego-vehicle orientation
Rotate coordinate system by camera angle 
Global occupancy grid in
camera coordinate system
Cut occupancy grid and reshape it
Target occupancy grid in 
camera coordinate system
Redo for all camera angles
Move ego-vehicle to next position
Redo for all ego-vehicle positions
Figure 4.2: Target generation process
==PAGE:34==
24
Experiments and Results
Implementation and Scalability
A software stack of Python and Unity is used to implement
the above-explained concept. Its structure is visualized in Figure 4.3. A combination of a user
interface and scripts in Python uses the environment’s geometric object data and generates
different scenarios. The earlier-mentioned lists of scenario objects are stored in a JSON file, a
standard format for data exchange. This makes information available for the Unity Scripting
API, which is used to render the images in the virtual environment. For generating the targets,
python scripts process the environment’s geometric object data, and in combination with the
generated scenarios, the final targets are created.
Python
Unity
Images
Dataset
Targets
Environment
object data
Scripting API
Scenario data
create
Objects
generate
render
JSON
Figure 4.3: Implementation architecture for the synthetic dataset
This implementation allows the concept to be scaled up as required. It applies to any virtual
environment of this kind, which in theory, enables the creation of fundamentally different virtual
construction sites and environments in other domains with any kind and amount of objects.
Examples
Examples of the synthetic dataset are shown in Appendix D.
4.1.2
Real-World Dataset
As described in Section 3.2.2, collecting data for a real-world dataset requires considered plan-
ning, as various influences can affect the quality of the dataset. For capturing images data on a
construction site, the following questions need to be considered:
• Is there a suitable construction site available?
• Is it possible to get permission to access it?
• Are vehicles and workers available during the data collection period?
==PAGE:35==
Experiments and Results
25
• Is the necessary hardware available? Is it in good condition?
• Are there any laws or restrictions that impact the data collection?
• Is the safety of all participants guaranteed?
• Are there any other factors that influence the data collection?
Four cameras for capturing video footage are mounted on the roof of a construction vehicle,
the ego-vehicle. This will be discussed in more detail later in this subsection. The ego-vehicle
drives on a path around a construction site so that the cameras can capture the environment.
In addition, workers walk around the site, so the cameras also capture them. Other objects and
vehicles stay to represent a realistic environment. Meanwhile, a camera drone flies above the
construction site with the ego-vehicle in focus. Thereby, the whole surrounding gets captured.
This is also explained later in this subsection. The test setup plan is shown in Appendix E,
additionally giving an alternative solution if no construction vehicle is available.
Hardware setup
As hardware, an inexpensive but sufficient and developer-friendly setup is
used. It comprises a laptop and four Logitech C920 webcams (see Appendix F). The camera has
an adequate resolution, frame rate, and Field-of-View (FOV). In addition, there are Universal
Serial Bus (USB) hubs and extension cables for connection. The laptop needs to be able to
connect and capture all four cameras at the same time. Therefore, the amount of USB connec-
tors, as well as the bandwidth of each port, needs to be sufficient. The extension cables allow
connecting the laptop, even if the cameras are mounted on the ego-vehicle’s roof.
A physical module is prepared for mounting the cameras on top of the ego-vehicle. Its base is
a metal sheet, giving enough space for all cameras, which are held in place by magnets. The
metal plate can also be fixed with magnets on the vehicle’s roof. To adjust each camera to the
correct angle, a template is created, which shows the exact orientation of each camera on the
module. For this thesis, the four cameras are placed so they cover a FOV of 180° in front of the
vehicle with their FOV overlapping equally. Additionally, there is a template for six cameras to
cover a FOV of 360° surround view. These templates can be seen in Appendix G.
To implement video capture software, a Python script in combination with the open-source
library OpenCV is used. The capturing and saving process requires non-negligible computational
resources, which is why a frame rate of 30 fps with four connected cameras cannot be realized.
This means that the amount of collected images decreases.
To tackle this issue, a Python
multiprocessing approach is implemented, resulting in a frame rate of 5 fps for each of the four
cameras. Additionally, the timestamps of each frame are saved. This allows the synchronization
and mapping of the camera image to the drone image later.
==PAGE:36==
26
Experiments and Results
Target Preparation
Obtaining BEV targets for a real-world dataset is a complex task, re-
quiring capturing the semantics in the ground plane around the ego-vehicle. Using a camera
drone equipped allows to look perpendicular on the ground and so also at the scene. Segmenta-
tion of drone images then enables the target generation.
Capturing the onboard camera and the drone camera without synchronizing both devices causes
a missing correspondence between the onboard footage and the drone footage frames. As this
is essential to generate corresponding targets to each onboard camera image, synchronization
afterwards is required.
In total, there are about 9 minutes of onboard camera and about 7.5 minutes of drone footage.
The onboard camera footages start before and end after the drone footage. In conclusion, no
targets can be generated for all camera footage outside of the drone footage period. Also, the
onboard camera footage has a frame rate of about 5 fps, whereas the drone footage has a frame
rate of 30 fps. This fact creates a need for mapping onboard camera images to the temporally
closest drone image. The excess of drone images concludes that not all of them may not be
required to generate the targets, as not all of them may be mapped to an onboard camera
image.
The first step is to synchronize the onboard camera and drone footage, which is why an onboard
camera image and a drone image corresponding to each other need to be found. This can be
seen as analogous to a film clapperboard, which is used for synchronizing video and audio data.
In this case, one characteristic point, like the position of a vehicle at a specific point, is taken.
The corresponding timestamps are then used for synchronisation. Onboard camera timestamps
are saved while recording, whereas drone timestamps are calculated using the framerate and
the length of the footage. Now, by shifting the timestamp of the corresponding synchronization
frame in each footage towards 0, both are synchronized at this point.
Consider two vectors c ∈Rn and d ∈Rm with cisync = djsync = 0, where each vector corresponds
to the time stamps of the onboard camera footage and the drone footage respectively, and isync
and jsync are the time stamps where both footages are synchronized. Every timestamp ci in c is
mapped to a timestamp in d. It is searched in increasing order for the first element in d, greater
than ci. By comparing the absolute differences between the found element dj and the previous
element dj−1, it can be mapped to the one with the least difference to all drone timestamps. As
mentioned, onboard camera images captured outside the drone capturing period are discarded.
Annotation
Every mapped drone image must be semantically annotated to create a target.
In the scope of this thesis, a manual approach using the open-source labelling tool Label Studio
is used. Annotations are based on polygons, which can be drawn by clicking and setting corner
points. Detailed instructions on how to annotate drone images are listed in Appendix H. The
annotations can then be exported to generate the targets in the final step.
==PAGE:37==
Experiments and Results
27
It has to be mentioned that this approach is highly time-consuming and is not an efficient solution
for annotating the whole dataset. AI-based solutions like segmentation networks can significantly
shorten the effort but also require time to develop, which is why this is not considered in the
scope of this thesis.
Target Generation
The first step is to recreate the segmentation masks contained in the
annotation data. Therefore, the annotated polygons are drawn into the image coordinate system
and converted into a binary mask with the same resolution. This is done for all polygons in
the corresponding class and across all classes except background. In the last step, all remaining
unobtained occupancy grid cells make the binary mask for the background class. This serves as
a base for further target generation.
Three pieces of information from a drone image are required to generate the final target BEV
maps: Camera position, camera orientation and the image-to-real-world scale. The latter can
be determined by identifying an object, i.e. a specific car. The pixel-to-meter correspondence
can be calculated by taking its pixel dimensions in the drone image and its real dimensions.
The camera position and the orientation of each camera are extracted by implementing an
additional annotation step in the annotation procedure. The camera mount is visible in every
image, as it is on top of the vehicle. This class is not part of the dataset. Since the camera
mount is rectangular, it would not be possible to identify the orientation of the cameras. To
tackle this problem, the signal light on the vehicle’s roof is taken to help. It is placed behind
the camera mount, which is why it indicates the side facing away from the cameras. Now, a
pentagon is created by marking the four edge points and the centre point of the signal light. The
camera position and orientation can then be calculated, given the geometrics of the annotation.
Figure 4.4 illustrates this. Here, similar to the synthetic dataset, the camera position for all four
cameras is assumed to be the same. In this case, it is the intersection of the four camera axes.
A
B
C
D
E
M
O
φ
Figure 4.4: Gemetrics of camera mount annotation
==PAGE:38==
28
Experiments and Results
The five points A, B, C, D, E in the image coordinate system are the camera mount’s edge points
and the signal light’s centre. Now, the point, which has the two longest vectors to other points,
necessarily indicates the position of the signal light.
In this case, it is C with the vectors
CA and CE. Then, A and C need to be the camera mount edge points facing in the camera
direction. By computing the middle point between A and E, we get the point M, and the vector
CM is the vehicle’s longitudinal axes. With the abovementioned assumption, the approximate
camera origin O lies on this axis. So, O in the image coordinate system can be determined with
O = M + 0.25 · MC.
The orientation of the vehicle’s longitudinal axis to the x-axis of the image coordinate system ϕ
can be computed by the arctan2 function and the vector MC. Now, for getting the respective
camera orientation, the angle for each camera needs to be added (see Appendix G).
With this information, the final targets in the form of occupancy grids can be computed. For
each class, a binary mask using the annotations is created in the image coordinate system. The
origin is set to the camera origin O, and then the coordinate system is rotated by −ϕ. Depending
on the scale of the BEV image, a 50×50 meters area is cut, followed by down-scaling the image,
so it has a resolution of 100 × 100 pixels (1 Gird cell per 0.5 meters). After doing this for all
classes, the occupancy grids are stacked.
Implementation and Pipeline
To implement this target generation pipeline, first, python
scripts generate the metadata to map each onboard camera image to a drone image. After the
desired drone image is annotated according to Appendix H, the annotation file is put into the
provided folder. Using tokens, a Python script creates and assigns the targets to the correspond-
ing onboard camera footage frames.
Examples
Examples of the real-world dataset are shown in Appendix I.
4.2
Model Training
Python is the state-of-the-art programming language for implementing ML models and algo-
rithms. This is mainly due to its simplicity, readability and usability, as well as the fact that
it includes various libraries and frameworks. The open-source ML framework Pytorch allows to
build and train DL models. It also supports CUDA, a parallel computing platform and program-
ming model developed by NVIDIA for general computing on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).
Using PyTorch with multiple GPUs can significantly speed up the training of DL models.
Computational Reproducability
Computational reproducibility refers to obtaining consis-
tent and identical results using the same data, computational methods, and analysis conditions.
It is an essential aspect of scientific research and ensures that findings can be independently
reproduced, verified and validated.
==PAGE:39==
Experiments and Results
29
Several mechanisms ensure reproducibility in Python and PyTorch. Random seeds are used to
initialize the random number generator, which is essential for obtaining reproducible results when
working with random processes. These need to be set across all used libraries. Furthermore,
some processes in specific libraries are non-deterministic by nature. Replacing these processes
with deterministic ones ensures that the output is always identical.
For instance, initially,
processes like convolutional NN layers are non-deterministic in PyTorch.
Complete reproducibility cannot always be guaranteed across different software releases. Also,
working with CUDA across several GPUs can cause reproducibility issues. Non-deterministic
operations try to improve performance with several simultaneous processes on the same device,
which may affect results.
Dataset Size and Training Duration
Complex DL models require an immense amount of
data to learn the intended behaviour and be able to generalize. The adapted NuScenes dataset
is about 40GB, and the synthetic dataset is about 20GB of image data. The real-world dataset
is also about 20GB if fully annotated. This means that it takes a corresponding amount of time
to train and is one factor that characterizes the necessary training time. Another factor is the
complexity of the model and the amount of computations happening. The number of trainable
parameters in the model is a common measure to express its complexity. The model described
in Section 3.1 has, depending on the configuration, about 50 trainable million parameters. By
testing, it could be seen that training the implemented PyTroch model on the adapted NuScenes
dataset on one GPU with 32GB RAM for one epoch takes approximately 12 hours. This is not
an efficient way to train the model and creates a strong need to reduce the training time.
4.2.1
Training Architecture
The PyTorch Distributed package enables efficient training of DL models across multiple GPUs,
even multiple machines. It allows them to scale their models and accelerate training times. In
addition, it provides robust fault tolerance and recovery mechanisms. It handles device and
network issues automatically, ensuring the training continues despite failures.
Regarding scalability, there are two axes along which the training architecture can be scaled.
First, it can be trained on one or multiple GPUs (also called devices in this context) on one
machine. Then, this can be extended to multiple machines. Several machines connected to a
group are named a cluster. In this context, machines are also called nodes, and therefore training
on multiple GPUs and machines are named multi-node training. Theoretically, clusters allow
the training to be scaled up as much as required.
Distributed training is based on data parallelism. Here, a model is replicated across multiple
devices, where each device processes a different subset of the training data.
Then, devices
continuously communicate with each other and synchronize the updated parameters. To enable
data parallelism, it requires the following steps in the software:
==PAGE:40==
30
Experiments and Results
1. Initialize a process group, which allows different processes to communicate during dis-
tributed training. A process in this context refers to a single instance of a program running
on a machine. Usually, there is one process per GPU.
2. Initialize a distributed data sampler so that all processes get not overlapping input batches.
3. Wrap the model into the distributed module to enable gradient communication and syn-
chronization during training.
4. Moving the model and the data to the corresponding GPU. The architecture is explained
in the following.
5. Train the model.
6. Close the process group.
In a distributed training setup, each process gets assigned a unique identifier, the so-called rank,
starting with index 0 in ascending order. The total number of processes in the process group is
denoted as world size. Thereby, it is distinguished between local rank and global rank. The local
rank refers to the processes running on one machine. The global rank refers to all processes in the
process group, also across multiple machines. The distributed training architecture exemplary
for two nodes with two GPUs each is visualized in Figure 4.5.
Node 1
GPU
1
GPU
2
0/0
Node 2
GPU
1
GPU
2
Training Script
torchrun
1/1
0/2
1/3
Local rank/
Global rank
Process
group
Figure 4.5: Multi-node training architecture for two nodes
The model is trained on a cluster with IBM Spectrum LSF workload manager for high-performance
computing. The cluster contains various nodes with different numbers and kinds of GPUs. Train-
ing on the cluster requires submitting a training job into a queue, also called batch jobs. A job
script specifies which resources and configurations are required for the execution. Then, the job
is scheduled based on the requirements and previously submitted jobs in the queue.
==PAGE:41==
Experiments and Results
31
By scaling up the training to three nodes with two GPUs (32GB RAM) each (max. limit of
GPUs per user), one epoch can be trained in about two hours. Compared to single-GPU training,
this is six times fast. It has to be mentioned that other factors also influence the training speed,
like GPU utilization or bandwidth for communication between devices and nodes.
4.2.2
Model Configuration and Training Hyperparameters
The model configuration specifies the exact architecture and other important parameters which
directly affect the performance and behaviour of the model during training and inference. For the
model introduced in Subsection 3.1.3, the configuration is defined by the following characteristics:
• Backbone: As described in Section 3.1.3, the model’s front end uses a pre-trained ResNet
as a backbone. It can be selected between a ResNet18, ResNet34 and ResNet50. Here,
the number indicates the number of layers, and the higher the number, the more complex
the model is. Usually, backbone layers are frozen, as it is used as a pre-trained feature
extractor. Nevertheless, if required, layers can be learned during training.
• Seq2seq Translation: The number of encoder and decoder layers in the transformer can be
increased to cope with higher complexity in the Seq2seq translation. Also, physical range
intervals in which the objects are predicted in the BEV need to be specified. The target
sequence gets scaled differently depending on the ranges, directly affecting the Seq2seq
translation.
• Segmentation Network: The number of channels in the top-down network (see Subsection
3.1.3) increases complexity and, therefore, the potential segmentation capability. Addi-
tionally, two normalization methods are possible. Batch normalization normalizes across
the batch dimension, whereas group normalization divides the channels into groups and
normalizes within the group [31].
Moreover, the loss function measures the discrepancy between the model’s predicted output and
the target. It quantifies the error and provides a numerical value for the model to update its
parameters during training. The choice of loss function depends on the task and the data, as it
needs to address the specific characteristics of the problem.
Training hyperparameters control the training process. They, in principle, do not influence the
model’s performance but, i.e. affect the training’s speed and quality. The following parameters
need to be set before the training:
• Number of Epochs: In one epoch, every training sample is passed through the model once
to optimize its parameters.
The number of necessary epochs differs depending on the
model and the data.
• Batch size: The batch size is the number of training used in one training step at once. A
larger batch size leads to faster training but requires more memory on the GPU. Therefore,
the batch size needs to be adjusted with respect to the GPU memory.
==PAGE:42==
32
Experiments and Results
• Initial learning rate: The learning rate defines the step size used in the gradient descent in
every iteration. Too small learning rates result in slow training, whereas too large learning
rates can prevent the convergence of the model and can lead to instability.
• Learning rate decay: A learning rate scheduler adjusts the learning rate from epoch to
epoch. The goal is to start with a high learning rate at the beginning of the training
and decrease it. In the beginning, the model approaches the minimum faster with larger
learning rates. Later, the model converges better with small learning rates. The decay
defines how much the learning rate decreases over the epochs. An exponential decay is
calculated by l = l0γe, where l is the learning rate in the current epoch e, l0 is the initial
learning rate, and γ is the decay, so the factor the multiplier for every epoch.
The optimizer algorithm also impacts training time and model accuracy. Adam [32] is a compu-
tationally efficient optimization algorithm that uses adaptive moment estimation for parameter
updates. This makes it a popular choice in DL applications.
Initial Configuration
The initial model training is based on a model configuration and hy-
perparameters following [6]. It uses a ResNet50 as a backbone, with the first four layers unfrozen.
The transformer has two encoder and decoder layers each, and predictions are made up to 51m
from the camera. The segmentation network has 128 channels at the top level, and group nor-
malization is used during training. A multi-scale Dice loss introduced in [33] and based on [34]
is the loss function.
The training loss and the validation loss for the initial implementation are plotted in Figure 4.6a
and Figure 4.6b. It can be seen that the training loss decreases more in the beginning and then
falls gradually. The validation loss also drops in the beginning but starts to stagnate at epoch
5. An investigation of the model predicitons for the validation samples shows that all classes
are classified as background class.
Logits, Gradients and Learning Rate
First, by looking at the gradients for each layer, it
can be seen that during training, the maximum gradients, as well as the average for the non-
frozen backbone layers, are very high in comparison to other layers in the model (see Figure J.1
in Appendix J). Therefore, all backbone layers are frozen from this point on.
By training the model again, it can be seen that the gradients in the whole model are higher
after this adjustment (Figure J.2 in Appendix J). But, later in the epoch, the average gradients
decreased significantly in comparison to earlier in the epoch. This can be seen in Figure J.3 in
Appendix J.
==PAGE:43==
Experiments and Results
33
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0.358
0.360
0.362
0.364
Loss
(a) Training loss
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0.358
0.360
0.362
0.364
Loss
(b) Validation loss
Figure 4.6: Losses for the initial configuration
==PAGE:44==
34
Experiments and Results
By investigating the logits at this point, it can be seen that they have high positive values for
the background class predictions. In contrast, the predictions for the remaining classes have
high negative values. Before the loss calculation, the logits are processed by a sigmoid function,
which maps values from -inf to inf to values between 0 and 1. The function is plotted in Figure
4.7. The sigmoid function approaches the value 1 or 0 for very high or low values. This also
means that the outputs do not change noticeably for changes in the logits outside of the effective
range of the sigmoid function. In other words, the gradients are small and are close to 0. The
derivative of the sigmoid function is also plotted in Figure 4.7. Backpropagating very small
gradients through the network causes the so-called vanishing gradient problem, as the gradients
vanish during the training and make the model unable to learn.
−10.0
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
x
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
sigmoid(x)
f(x)
f ′(x)
Figure 4.7: Sigmoid function
Class Imbalance and Loss Functions for Segmentation
The data distribution of the
adapted NuScenes dataset underlies severe class imbalance, as seen in Table 4.1. With a per-
centage of 96%, the background class is by far the major class in the data distribution. As the
model classifies all classes as this one, it strongly points out that it can not handle the severe
class imbalance. This leads to an investigation of the loss function.
Class
Background
Vehicle
Person
Object/Other
Percentage
96.8%
2.7%
0.1%
0.2%
Table 4.1: Class distribution of reduced NuScenes dataset
The model is trained using the Dice loss [34], based on the Intersection over Union (IoU),
a common metric to evaluate the accuracy of image segmentation.
It quantifies the degree
of overlap between the predicted segmentation mask and the ground truth mask. Figure 4.8
visualizes the overlapping of two masks.
==PAGE:45==
Experiments and Results
35
TP
FP
FN
Prediction
Ground Truth
Figure 4.8: Overlapping masks for calculating the Dice coefficient
The Dice coefficient is calculated by dividing the area of intersection between the two masks by
the area of their union. This can also be expressed for the confusion matrix:
Dice =
2TP
2TP + FN + FP
(4.1)
As the Dice coefficient increases for more overlapping, the loss is calculated by:
LDice = 1 −Dice
(4.2)
In theory, the Dice loss tackles class imbalance in image segmentation, as the size of the masks
does not influence the loss. It is a simple solution, especially for general cases, as it does not
need any parameter specification. But this also means it does not allow control over the balance
between false positives and false negatives.
The problem with the Dice loss is that in the beginning, the dice coefficient is close to zero,
which results in a high gradient and, therefore, in large parameter updates. This is a potential
reason why the model logits get out of the sigmoid function’s effective range early in training,
which results in vanishing gradients after the first epochs.
To tackle this issue, the Tversky loss [35] adds weight to the false positives and false negatives,
which allows to focus more on the minor classes. The Tversky Index is calculated by Equation
4.3. Here the coefficient α determines how strongly the classes in the minority are weighted.
Equivalent to the Dice loss, the Tversky loss is calculated by Equation 4.4.
Tversky =
TP
TP + αFN + (1 −α)FP
(4.3)
LTversky = 1 −Tversky
(4.4)
==PAGE:46==
36
Experiments and Results
Analogous to how the Focal loss [36] tackles class imbalance with the binary cross entropy loss
[37], the Focal Tversky loss is a generalization of the Tversky loss.
It allows adjusting the
behaviour of the loss and its gradient at different values by introducing the coefficient γ for
controlling the non-linearity.
LFocalTversky = (1 −Tversky)γ
(4.5)
The relationship between the Focal Tversky loss and the Tversky coefficient is shown in Figure
4.9. It can be seen that as γ increases, the loss gradient also increases. On the other hand, as γ
approaches 0, the gradient also approaches 0. This means that for γ values greater than 1, the
loss is higher for lower Tversky indices. It follows that the gradient is also higher, which leads
to better learning for the small classes.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Tversky Index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Focal Tversky Loss
γ = 1
γ = 0.5
γ = 2
Figure 4.9: Relation between Tversky index and Focal Tversky loss
Based on the insights gained above, the model was trained using the Focal Tversky loss to tackle
the severe class imbalance issue. The training loss is plotted in Figure 4.10 and decreases after
the first epoch but remains over the following epochs. Validation intervals are implemented to
further speed up the training, which is why no validation curve is available.
Also, taking a look at the gradients show that early in the first epoch, the maximum and average
gradients are higher than later in the epoch. This can be seen by comparing Figure J.4 and J.5
in Appendix J.
==PAGE:47==
Experiments and Results
37
2
4
6
8
10
Epoch
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
Loss
Figure 4.10: Training loss for improved configuration
In order to prevent the model logits from leaving the effective range of the sigmoid function
early in training, the learning rate was decreased from 5.0 · 10−5 to 1.0 · 10−7.
Figure J.6
shows the gradients early in the first epoch, whereas Figure J.7 shows them late in the epoch.
A comparison shows that the gradients decrease more slowly at lower learning rates, but the
problem of vanishing gradients cannot be avoided.
==PAGE:48==
38
Experiments and Results
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In the previous chapters of this work, a domain shift for the task of mapping monocular images
into BEV maps from public traffic as the source domain to construction as the target domain
was approached. The results and insights are analyzed and discussed in the following.
Since a large amount of image data from the source domain is required for DA, two
novel datasets based on different approaches were created.
Synthetic datasets can be created with relatively low effort, as samples and targets can be gen-
erated automatically (see Section 4.1.1). However, depending on the rendering quality, images
differ noticeably from real ones. The images in the synthetic dataset of this thesis are relatively
low-quality renderings that show a big difference from real images. A certain diversity can be
easily reached in synthetic datasets by including randomness in the data generation. In the-
ory, infinite unique random samples can be generated within one environment. However, this
diversity originates only in one specific environment, so the dataset does not gain diversity as a
whole. Creating a high-quality and diverse dataset goes beyond random scenarios within virtual
environments, as was done in this thesis. The environments themselves need to be diverse. It
requires considerate modelling of real-world construction site characteristics, so the underlying
environments combine the necessary realism for quality and the necessary randomness for diver-
sity. The images in the synthetic dataset in this thesis only have these properties to a limited
extent. But, creating virtual environments with high-quality renderings and scenarios with a
variety of realism and randomness has a high potential due to low effort.
Real-world datasets may lead to better model performance, but several factors make them
complex to realize. Depending on the task, it requires intensive and considerate planning and
execution. Diversity can only be achieved with high effort, also with regard to manual anno-
tations. The target generation may also need separate steps, as it was the case in this thesis
with the camera drone. In general, the whole data collection process tends to be error-prone,
as minor details can significantly affect the data quality. For instance, this is how it came to
be that the missing synchronization of the drone camera and the onboard camera has the effect
==PAGE:50==
40
Discussion
of no exact correspondence of sample to target. Especially with moving objects, this can have
a noticeable impact. Furthermore, hardware also plays an important role. The influence of an
inexpensive and developer-friendly setup on the data quality can be seen, i.e. by vibrations
causing distortions in the images. Professional hardware, like it was used to create, i.e. the
NuScenes or KITTI dataset, can significantly increase and ensure data quality.
Conclusively, the quality and diversity of both datasets created in this thesis must be seen
critically. Even though there is variety in the datasets, they are not diverse on a higher level,
as both are based on a single environment each. A combination of assumptions enhanced data
inaccuracies and, especially in the real-world dataset, suffered from many external factors. They
exemplify how to approach such a dataset creation but require extensions if scaled up to be
comparable to the standard of datasets like KITTI or NuScenes.
In general, a supervised DA approach might not be an efficient way to perform a domain shift
under the given circumstances of this thesis. Instead, unsupervised DA using unlabeled data,
which can be collected on a large scale with relatively low effort, might be a more effective way,
as it removes the component of the BEV target generation.
Within the scope of this work, the domain shift could not be completed, as a com-
bination of several factors is affecting each other and thereby harming the learning
process of the model.
The severe class imbalance (96% share for the majority class) causes the model to classify all
classes in the dataset as background, as it is not able to focus on the minor classes during training.
This results in vanishing gradients due to the sigmoid function and its gradient, as the logits
for all background predictions are developing to high positive respectively negative values. In
theory, the class balance issue can be countered by using the Focal Tversky loss, which precisely
addresses the hard-to-learn samples in the imbalanced data and enhances the gradients for these
classes. In practice, the class imbalance is too severe. Lower learning rates can only slow the
gradient vanishing but can still not avoid it. This interplay of class imbalance and gradients
make the model unable to learn.
As the origin of the model’s inability to learn lies in the severe class imbalance, a com-
plete implementation of a domain shift for the given conditions requires considered
data engineering and model selection.
In-depth consideration of the problem and the corresponding data is essential for a DA in the
given task. At the beginning of this work, NuScenes dataset classes were reduced to simplify
the circumstances. Classes like Drivable Ground, Sidewalk or Car Park Area were summarized
to the background class, also to reduce the complexity for the implementation in this work.
In Practice, this caused a severe class imbalance. Nevertheless, the class reduction created a
common intersection between the two domains to transfer knowledge directly.
Keeping the
initial classes in the public traffic domain complicates not only the AD process but also the
dataset creation many times over. Therefore, the initial decision for this class reduction and
==PAGE:51==
Discussion
41
grouping needs to be considered critically. It reduced the complexity for the DA but resulted in
the model being unable to learn, which makes a domain adaptation obsolete.
Therefore, the problem with the given circumstances may be approached differently to learn
positional and semantic uncertainties. Finding a workaround for the class imbalance by consid-
ering only objective classes and no background can avoid the classification issue but does not
allow the translation of an image, as done in this thesis.
There is also a problem-specific factor that needs to be considered and may have effects on the
model and data. In the public traffic domain, things happen fast and in long ranges. A large
covered area in front of vehicles creates more value, as actions can be detected earlier, which gives
more time to react. But, on construction sites, these characteristics are different. Vehicles and
workers operate closer distances and generally move slower and closer to other objects. Predicted
BEV maps with a smaller covered area but with higher resolution would let the construction
domain benefit more, which is why it requires research about how to leverage knowledge from the
public traffic domain to the construction domain before bringing technologies from one domain
into the other.
==PAGE:52==
42
Discussion
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis by summarising the carried out steps as well as the key findings
with regard to the research question stated in Chapter 1. Furthermore, the limitations of this
thesis are reviewed and an outlook for future research is given.
In Chapter 2, the recent research in BEV mapping techniques for monocular cameras, as well
as the recent environments perception research in construction, is reviewed and proves the need
for bringing AI technologies into this domain. Chapter 3 creates the methodological background
for a DA in general, as well as the underlying model and the data collection process. In the first
Section in Chapter 4, two approaches for building and creating large-scale datasets were task-
specifically designed. Thereby, a common intersection of both domains was introduced to reduce
complexity and simplify the domain shift. By doing so, a synthetic dataset based on a 3D Unity
environment and a real-world dataset collected on a construction site was realised. In the second
section, the underlying transformer model and the training on the public traffic dataset were
implemented. The results showed that the model was not able to learn the intended behaviour,
as it predicts all classes as background. Due to a severe class imbalance in the dataset, the model
logits cause vanishing gradients during training. Reviewing and improving the loss function in
order to counter the class imbalance as well as adjusting the learning rate still did not prevent
the model to end up with vanishing gradients during training. Finally, chapter 5 points out
that a domain shift requires intensive considerations for the problem itself, as the data and the
model cannot be considered independently of each other. Domain-specific requirements need to
be evaluated and framed, showing that a domain shift within the given circumstances of this
thesis goes beyond collecting data and training a model with it.
Limitations
The dataset creation process in both cases was subject to strong time and re-
source limitations, which is why this thesis can only be seen as exemplary. The synthetic dataset
was created by only one specific virtual environment, limiting diversity in the dataset signifi-
cantly. The same is the case for real-world data from one construction, as the availability of
all required resources is dependent on various factors. Furthermore, the data quality in both
==PAGE:54==
44
Conclusion
cases needs to be considered as limited.
The underlying virtual environment does not offer
high-quality renderings, leaving a realism gap in comparison to real-world images. The real-
world dataset underlies a number of inaccuracies coming from the implementation in practice.
Moreover, the reduction of the classes limits the expressiveness of the predictions, making them
only limitedly suitable for potential implementation in production.
Finally, the research in this thesis is exclusively subject to the underlying model. This restricts
the overall task of bringing monocular images into a BEV map, as others may frame the problem
in different ways and so enable capabilities outside the scope of this model.
Future Research
An essential requirement for bringing the latest AI technologies into the
construction domain is the availability of datasets. It requires counterparts to i.e. the NuScenes
or the KITTI dataset to advance the research in a well-founded way, analogous to the public
traffic domain. Therefore, further research can deal with the systematic creation of high-quality
datasets containing high diversity.
Furthermore, different DA approaches, such as unsupervised DA, can be further investigated,
enabling the possibilities to simplify the data collection process.
Moreover, fundamental research on AI models that create higher-level environment representa-
tions such as BEVs directly in the construction domain can lead to technologies that are made
for their individual requirements, and not just adapted.
==PAGE:55==
References
[1] A. Abbas and A. Zisserman, “A Geometric Approach to Obtain a Bird’s Eye View from an
Image,” 2020.
[2] A. Palazzi, G. Borghi, D. Abati, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara, “Learning to Map Vehicles
into Bird’s Eye View,” 2017.
[3] L. Reiher, B. Lampe, and L. Eckstein, “A Sim2Real Deep Learning Approach for the Trans-
formation of Images from Multiple Vehicle-Mounted Cameras to a Semantically Segmented
Image in Bird’s Eye View,” 2020.
[4] Z. Li, W. Wang, H. Li, E. Xie, C. Sima, T. Lu, Q. Yu, and J. Dai, “BEVFormer: Learning
Bird’s-Eye-View Representation from Multi-Camera Images via Spatiotemporal Transform-
ers,” 2022.
[5] T. Roddick and R. Cipolla, “Predicting Semantic Map Representations from Images using
Pyramid Occupancy Networks,” 2020.
[6] A. Saha, O. M. Maldonado, C. Russell, and R. Bowden, “Translating Images into Maps,”
2022.
[7] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical
Image Segmentation,” 2015.
[8] L. Peng, Z. Chen, Z. Fu, P. Liang, and E. Cheng, “BEVSegFormer: Bird’s Eye View
Semantic Segmentation From Arbitrary Camera Rigs,” 2022.
[9] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and
I. Polosukhin, “Attention Is All You Need,” 2017.
[10] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie, “Feature Pyramid
Networks for Object Detection,” 2017.
[11] F. Yu, D. Wang, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Deep Layer Aggregation,” 2019.
[12] X. Zhu, Z. Yin, J. Shi, H. Li, and D. Lin, “Generative Adversarial Frontal View to Bird
View Synthesis,” 2019.
==PAGE:56==
46
References
[13] S. Arabi, A. Haghighat, and A. Sharma, “A Deep Learning based Solution for Construction
Equipment Detection: From Development to Deployment,” 2019.
[14] C.-H. Liu and B. Yaman, “Object Detection for Autonomous Dozers,” 2022.
[15] N. D. Nath and A. H. Behzadan, “Deep Convolutional Networks for Construction Object
Detection Under Different Visual Conditions,” Frontiers in Built Environment, vol. 6, 2020.
[16] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-
Time Object Detection,” 2016.
[17] R. Girshick, “Fast R-CNN,” 2015.
[18] S. Kolski, D. Ferguson, M. Bellino, and R. Siegwart, “Autonomous Driving in Structured
and Unstructured Environments,” in 2006 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, pp. 558–
563, 2006.
[19] D. C. Guastella and G. Muscato, “Learning-Based Methods of Perception and Navigation
for Ground Vehicles in Unstructured Environments: A Review,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 1,
2021.
[20] N. F. Heide and J. Petereit, “Machine Learning for the Perception of Autonomous Con-
struction Machinery,” at - Automatisierungstechnik, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 219–232, 2023.
[21] C. Raffel, M.-T. Luong, P. J. Liu, R. J. Weiss, and D. Eck, “Online and Linear-Time
Attention by Enforcing Monotonic Alignments,” 2017.
[22] N. Arivazhagan, C. Cherry, W. Macherey, C.-C. Chiu, S. Yavuz, R. Pang, W. Li, and
C. Raffel, “Monotonic Infinite Lookback Attention for Simultaneous Machine Translation,”
2019.
[23] A. Elfes, “Using Occupancy Grids for Mobile Robot Perception and Navigation,” Computer,
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 46–57, 1989.
[24] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition,”
2015.
[25] R. Hartley and A. Zisserman, Camera Geometry and Single View Geometry, p. 151–152.
Cambridge University Press, 2 ed., 2004.
[26] M. Wang and W. Deng, “Deep Visual Domain Adaptation: A survey,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 312, pp. 135–153, oct 2018.
[27] A. Brodzicki, M. Piekarski, D. Kucharski, J. Jaworek-Korjakowska, and M. Gorgon, “Trans-
fer Learning Methods as a New Approach in Computer Vision Tasks with Small Datasets,”
Foundations of Computing and Decision Sciences, 2020.
==PAGE:57==
References
47
[28] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets Robotics:
The KITTI
Dataset,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, pp. 1231–1237, Aug.
2013.
[29] H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, V. E. Liong, Q. Xu, A. Krishnan, Y. Pan,
G. Baldan, and O. Beijbom, “nuScenes: A Multimodal Dataset for Autonomous Driving,”
2020.
[30] M.-F. Chang, J. Lambert, P. Sangkloy, J. Singh, S. Bak, A. Hartnett, D. Wang, P. Carr,
S. Lucey, D. Ramanan, and J. Hays, “Argoverse: 3D Tracking and Forecasting with Rich
Maps,” 2019.
[31] Y. Wu and K. He, “Group Normalization,” 2018.
[32] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,” 2017.
[33] A. Saha, O. Mendez, C. Russell, and R. Bowden, “Enabling spatio-temporal aggregation in
Birds-Eye-View Vehicle Estimation,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5133–5139, 2021.
[34] C. H. Sudre, W. Li, T. Vercauteren, S. Ourselin, and M. J. Cardoso, “Generalised Dice
overlap as a deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced segmentations,” pp. 240–248,
Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[35] S. S. M. Salehi, D. Erdogmus, and A. Gholipour, “Tversky loss function for image segmen-
tation using 3D fully convolutional deep networks,” 2017.
[36] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal Loss for Dense Object
Detection,” 2018.
[37] A. Mao, M. Mohri, and Y. Zhong, “Cross-Entropy Loss Functions: Theoretical Analysis
and Applications,” 2023.
==PAGE:58==
48
References
==PAGE:59==
List of Abbreviations
AD
Autonomous Driving
ADAS
Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems
AI
Artificial Intelligence
BEV
Bird’s-Eye-View
CV
Computer Vision
DA
Domain Adaption
DL
Deep Learning
FOV
Field-of-View
GAN
Generative Adversarial Network
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
IoU
Intersection over Union
IPM
Inverse Perspective Mapping
MA
Monotonic Attention
MAIL
Monotonic Attention with Infinite Look-back
ML
Machine Learning
NLP
Natural Language Processing
NN
Neural Network
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
Seq2seq
Sequence-to-Sequence
TL
Transfer Learning
USB
Universal Serial Bus
==PAGE:60==
50
List of Abbreviations
==PAGE:61==
List of Figures
3.1
Transformer architecture according to [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Muli-head attention according to [9]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Principle of image plane to BEV plane tranformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Model architecture according to [6] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1
Grouping of NuScenes classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Target generation process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Implementation architecture for the synthetic dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Gemetrics of camera mount annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Multi-node training architecture for two nodes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Losses for the initial configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
Sigmoid function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.8
Overlapping masks for calculating the Dice coefficient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.9
Relation between Tversky index and Focal Tversky loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.10 Training loss for improved configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B.1
NuScenes dataset example 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B.2
NuScenes dataset example 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B.3
NuScenes dataset example 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C.1 BEV of the virtual construction site in the Unity environment . . . . . . . . . . .
57
D.1 Synthetic dataset example 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
D.2 Synthetic dataset example 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
D.3 Synthetic dataset example 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
H.1 Annotated camera mount
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
H.2 Annotation example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
I.1
Real-world dataset example 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
I.2
Real-world dataset example 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
I.3
Real-world dataset example 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
J.1
Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with initial
configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:62==
52
List of Figures
J.2
Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with all
backbone layers frozen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
J.3
Model gradients after a batch late in the first epoch of model training with all
backbone layers frozen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
J.4
Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
J.5
Model gradients after a batch late in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
J.6
Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss and low learning rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
J.7
Model gradients after a batch late in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss and low learning rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A
GitHub and SharePoint
GitHub
The code for this thesis is available on GitHub.
https://github.com/hoffmannc/top-view-mapping.git
SharePoint
The data for this thesis is available on SharePoint.
https://dtudk-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/r/personal/s212711_dtu_dk/Documents/Thesis
==PAGE:64==
54
GitHub and SharePoint
==PAGE:65==
Appendix B
NuScenes Dataset
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure B.1: NuScenes dataset example 1
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure B.2: NuScenes dataset example 2
==PAGE:66==
56
NuScenes Dataset
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure B.3: NuScenes dataset example 3
==PAGE:67==
Appendix C
BEV of Virtual Construction Site
Figure C.1: BEV of the virtual construction site in the Unity environment
==PAGE:68==
58
BEV of Virtual Construction Site
==PAGE:69==
Appendix D
Synthetic Dataset
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure D.1: Synthetic dataset example 1
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure D.2: Synthetic dataset example 2
==PAGE:70==
60
Synthetic Dataset
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure D.3: Synthetic dataset example 3
==PAGE:71==
Test Setup 
 
Objective 
The Objective is to collect real-world data on construction sites in form of images of a 
camera mounted on a vehicle (Input) and the corresponding Birds Eye View (BEV) map 
from above (Target). See appendix A as for an example. 
 
Target Generation 
To get a corresponding BEV for every image, a camera drone ﬂies above the scenario. 
To reduce complexity for the target generation, all objects should be static, except the 
vehicle on which the camera is mounted. The corresponding map labels for the whole 
scenario can be created based on the drone image afterwards, as well as processed 
and cropped for every sample. 
 
It is essential to have a one-to-one correspondence between every camera image and 
the corresponding BEV image from the camera. In other words, every image needs to 
be assigned to the correct BEV image so that the position of the vehicle or tripod is 
the same in both images. This can be realized with timestamps. 
 
The BEV image then underlies a coordinate system that allows an exact position 
description of objects. 
 
Hardware Setup 
The hardware setup consists of several cameras connected to a Laptop via USB. They 
should be arranged so that they cover the surrounding area of the vehicle on which 
they are mounted to get a contiguous map of the surrounding environment. Cameras 
can be mounted and adjusted with magnets. 
 
The number of cameras depends on the Field of View (FOV) of each camera. In theory, 
six cameras with a 60° FOV are enough to cover the whole area. In practice, they 
should overlap a bit. 
 
The given Logitech cameras have a POV of 72°. So, six cameras in total should be 
enough to realize a surround view, but there might be hardware limitations (Ports, 
computing power, etc.). Therefore, for demonstration purposes, the use of four 
cameras is recommended, which cover 180° of the surrounding area. 
 
The cameras and their angles need to be adjusted with high accuracy to generate the 
corresponding targets. They need to be assigned to an X-position, Y-position, and 
Angle in the BEV coordinate system. 
 
The surrounding view and a contiguous map are not essential for model evaluation 
purposes. It is a nice-to-have feature to demonstrate functionality in the future. 
 
Option 1 
The cameras are mounted on a vehicle, as can be seen in yellow in the image in 
Appendix B. A layout example with four of the above-mentioned cameras can be seen 
in Appendix C. The vehicle drives on a path on the construction sites, and images are 
taken at consistent time intervals, like a video with a low frame rate. 
 
Option 2 
Instead, a tripod or similar with a plateau or similar can be used to simulate the 
mounting of a vehicle at height. This increases the ﬂexibility and independence of 
vehicles, drivers, and paths but also reduces the amount of data, as the tripod needs 
to be moved between every sample. Also, getting an accurate orientation of the 
cameras might be diﬃcult. A digital compass might be required. An example can be 
seen in Appendix D. 
 
 
 
Appendix E
Real-World Data Collection Test
Setup
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A 
 
 
Figure 1: Sample image 
 
 
Figure 2: Corresponding map 
 
 
Camera 
Vehicle 
Person 
Object 
Appendix B 
 
 
Figure 3: Construction vehicles for camera mounting 
 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
Dumper 
Cabin Roof 
Camera 
 
 
36
36
18
18
Figure 4: Camera mounting on dumper 
Appendix D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
≈3m 
Figure 5: Experimental setup from the side 
36° 
36° 
18° 
18° 
Figure 6: Experimental setup from the top 
Camera 
Tripod 
Plateau 
Laptop 
Cable 
Camera 
Plateau 
62
Real-World Data Collection Test Setup
==PAGE:73==
DATASHEET
C920E HD WEBCAM 
The 78° diagonal field of view displays individual users in a well-
balanced visual frame while two integrated omnidirectional mics1 can 
be enabled to capture audio clearly from up to one meter away.
Built-in HD autofocus ensures you’re seen clearly when on camera, 
while a detachable privacy screen flips up and down to cover or expose 
the lens.
C920e is certified for Microsoft Teams® and Zoom™ and compatible 
with other popular applications include BlueJeans, Cisco Webex®, Fuze, 
Google Meet™, GoToMeeting™ and Microsoft DirectShow.
HD Video. Incredible Price. 
C920e is a work-from-anywhere 
webcam that delivers HD video 
meetings that look and sound 
better than most laptop built-
ins at a price point that’s ideal 
for mass deployment.
KEY FEATURES AND PRODUCT SPECIFICATIONS
Video
Supports multiple resolutions, including 1080p (Full HD) @30 fps, and 720p (HD) @ 30fps to best support the quality 
offered by your application and monitor
78° diagonal fixed field of view (dFOV)
1x digital zoom (Full HD) available 
Built-in HD autofocus ensures you’re seen clearly throughout video calls
RightLight 2 auto light correction for clear image in various lighting environments ranging from low light to direct sunlight
Audio
Dual omni-directional mics, optimized to capture audio clearly from up to one meter away, can be enabled via the Logi 
Tune app
Connectivity
Easily connects via USB-A;  cable length of 5 ft (1.5 m) 
Privacy Shutter
Switch to privacy mode in an instant with the attachable privacy shade
Mounting Options 
Universal clip and 1/4” thread for tripod mounting2
Logi Tune Support
Download Logi Tune at www.logitech.com/tune to activate mics plus control zoom, adjust color, set manual focus and 
easily update firmware
Certification
Certified for Microsoft Teams® and Zoom™
Compatibility
Works with other popular applications such as BlueJeans, Cisco Webex®, Fuze, Google Meet™, GoToMeeting™ and 
Microsoft DirectShow to ensure compatibility and seamless integration in the workplace
General
Part number
960-001360
Dimensions & weight
Including clip:
Height x Width x Depth:
1.70 in (43.3 mm) x 3.70 in (94 mm) x 2.80 in (71 mm)
Weight: 5.71 oz (162 g)
Cable Length: 5 ft (1.5 m)
What’s in the box
Webcam with attached 5 ft (1.5 m) USB-A cable
Privacy shutter
User documentation
Warranty
3 years
Ideal dFOV for individual users: A 78° diagonal field of view along with the built-in 
HD autofocus and automatic light correction ensures clarity throughout video calls.
Dual mics: Two integrated omnidirectional microphones, optimized to capture your 
audio from up to one meter away, can be enabled via the Logi Tune app.
Privacy at your fingertips: An attachable privacy screen that flips up and down 
to cover or expose the lens. A simple glance at the cover confirms your space is 
not seen.
1
1
2
2
3
3
1 Download Logi Tune at www.logitech.com/tune to activate mics
2 Tripod not included
© 2021 Logitech. Logitech, the Logitech logo and other Logitech marks are owned 
by Logitech and may be registered. All other trademarks are the properties 
of their respective owners. Logitech assumes no responsibility for any errors 
that may appear in this publication. Product, pricing and feature information 
contained herein is subject to change without notice.
Published October 2021
Contact your reseller  
or contact us at  
www.logitech.com/vcsales
www.logitech.com/C920e
Logitech Americas
7700 Gateway Blvd.
Newark, CA 94560 USA
Logitech Europe S.A.
EPFL - Quartier de l’Innovation
Daniel Borel Innovation Center
CH - 1015 Lausanne
Logitech Asia Pacific Ltd.
Tel : 852-2821-5900
Fax : 852-2520-2230
Appendix F
Logitech C920e data sheet
==PAGE:74==
36°
Camera Specifications
Name: Logitech C920e
Resolution: 1920 x 1080
FPS: 30 Hz
Diagonal FOV: 78°
60°
Camera Specifications
Name: Logitech C920e
Resolution: 1920 x 1080
FPS: 30 Hz
Diagonal FOV: 78°
64
Logitech C920e data sheet
==PAGE:75==
Appendix G
Camera Setup Templates
==PAGE:76==
66
Camera Setup Templates
==PAGE:77==
Appendix H
Annotation Instructions for
Real-World Dataset
Installation
1. Create a Python environment.
2. Clone the GitHub repository.
3. Place the data/ folder from SharePoint in the root of the repository.
4. Install the requirements using requirements.txt.
Annotation
1. Launch Label Studio and sign in/register.
2. Create a new project and define the name and description as desired.
3. In the tab Data Import, upload all frames to be annotated. The folder data/real/drone/frames/
contains all frames available for annotation.
4. In the tab Labeling Setup, select Semantic Segmentation with Polygons.
5. Create the 4 following labels. Capitalisation matters.
• Camera mount
• Vehicle
• Person
• Object
6. Save the project.
7. Click on a frame in the list to start annotating.
==PAGE:78==
68
Annotation Instructions for Real-World Dataset
8. Start with the class Camera mount. Select it and zoom in on the ego-vehicle, so that
the camera mount (white rectangle) and the signal light (orange circle) on the roof of the
ego-vehicle are clearly visible. Now, annotate the camera mount including the signal light
in a pentagon (see Figure H.1) by setting the corner points and also the centre point of
the signal light. The polygon can be closed by clicking the first corner point again.
Figure H.1: Annotated camera mount
9. Continue with the actual classes. Annotate all objects with polygons of their corresponding
class. It is recommended to zoom in to increase the accuracy. Ensure that there are no
overlappings in the annotations. In theory and in the scope of this thesis, annotations in
front of the ego-vehicle are sufficient, as there are no cameras directed to the back of the
ego-vehicle. However, is recommended to also annotate objects, which are on the rear left
and rear right side of the ego-vehicle. An example of annotations is shown in Figure H.2.
(a) Frame without annotations
(b) Frame with annotations
Figure H.2: Annotation example
10. If all necessary objects are annotated, repeat the process by starting with step 7 on the
next frame.
11. If all frames are annotated, export the project annotations as a JSON file.
12. Place this JSON file in the folder data/real/drone/annotation_projects/.
13. Run the script src/data/create_real_labels.py to automatically generate targets for
the annotated frames. They appear in the data/real/targets/ folder.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix I
Real-World Dataset
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure I.1: Real-world dataset example 1
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure I.2: Real-world dataset example 2
==PAGE:80==
70
Real-World Dataset
(a) Camera image
(b) BEV occupancy grid
Figure I.3: Real-world dataset example 3
==PAGE:81==
Appendix J
Gradient Plots
Selected gradient plots are shown in the following. Each plot displays the average (green) and
the maximum gradient (blue) for each trainable layer in the model. Plots were made in constant
batch intervals during the training. Therefore, plots across one epoch cannot necessarily be
compared exactly to each other, but still show tendencies in the model gradients.
==PAGE:82==
72
Gradient Plots
Figure J.1: Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with initial
configuration
==PAGE:83==
Gradient Plots
73
Figure J.2: Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with all
backbone layers frozen
==PAGE:84==
74
Gradient Plots
Figure J.3: Model gradients after a batch late in the first epoch of model training with all
backbone layers frozen
==PAGE:85==
Gradient Plots
75
Figure J.4: Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss
==PAGE:86==
76
Gradient Plots
Figure J.5: Model gradients after a batch late in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss
==PAGE:87==
Gradient Plots
77
Figure J.6: Model gradients after a batch early in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss and low learning rate
==PAGE:88==
78
Gradient Plots
Figure J.7: Model gradients after a batch late in the first epoch of model training with Focal
Tversky Loss and low learning rate
==PAGE:89==
Technical
University
of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Bygning 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby
electro.dtu.dk
