==PAGE:1==
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and
contamination detection
Julie Kragmose Jensen
s171220
Master’s Thesis in Bioinformatics
DTU Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
10-08-2023
Supervisors:
Marta Maria Ciucani
Gabriel Renaud
Statens Serum Institut
Technical University of Denmark
National Influenza Center
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Objectives: Influenza is constantly evolving at a fast pace, making it difficult for scien-
tists to predict its evolution. This thesis aims to investigate the diversity of Danish H3N2
influenza strains, both over multiple seasons and intra-host over a month-long infec-
tion period. Additionally, we aim to develop a script for detecting contamination and
co-infection for use in IRMA-based influenza pipelines.
Methods: Raw sequence data from a single patient was assembled using IRMA, and
the quasispecies was analyzed for high-frequency minority variants, resistance-related
mutations, and reassortment of segments. Additionally, a data set of Danish H3N2 se-
quences from 2015-2022 was analyzed with Sweep Dynamics for identifying seasonal
changes in the variants.
Results: 47 minority variants were identified over the month-long illness of the patient,
and 5 large deletions (7-92 nucleotides) were identified at ≥10%. No resistance-related
mutations as reported by WHO were found in the consensus or minority variants, as
well as no signs of reassortment. The developed script for contamination analysis suc-
cessfully flagged samples with signs of contamination. The 2015-2022 H3N2 data set
of Danish sequences, suffered from a lack of sequences available for the HA and NA
segments, respectively, which resulted in inconclusive output from Sweep Dynamics.
Conclusions: We found no signs of resistance or reassortment in the patient, and there-
fore found no answers to the prolonged nature of the illness. The presence of large
high-frequency deletions was identified in the PA segment, which could be an interest-
ing subject for further studies. The seasonal variant evolution analysis was inconclusive
due to insufficient data, while the script for contamination detection works as intended,
however, still needs further improvement.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This thesis was written in collaboration with the National Influenza Center at Statens
Serum Institute, Denmark. I’m extremely grateful to my supervisor Marta, for giving me
the opportunity to do this project and supporting me through all my worries. I’d also
like to thank Marta’s mother for making the best tiramisu in history. I am thankful to
everyone in the influenza team at Statens Serum Institute for making me feel welcome
and included, and not putting me on the cake list.
I am also deeply indebted to my network at the Technical University of Denmark, par-
ticularly my supervisor Gabriel for taking on this project even when I had no idea what it
was about. A very special thanks to my academic support teacher Rune, without whose
patience and listening to my complaints I would not have made it through the past six
months.
I would like to give a very special acknowledgment to my brother Kristian for choosing
to break his leg at the most inconvenient time possible and to my dog Björk for aiding
him in the endeavor. You provided me with the ultimate distraction and made the last
two weeks of the writing period very... interesting.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Quasispecies theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
The importance of genetic variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.4
Clinical implications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.5
Objectives and scope of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.6
Methodological approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2
Methods
18
2.1
Quasispecies analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2
Contamination report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.3
Seasonal variant evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3
Results
32
3.1
Quasispecies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.2
Contamination analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.3
Seasonal variant evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4
Discussion
65
4.1
Quasispecies analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.2
Contamination analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
4.3
Seasonal variant evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5
Conclusion
75
Bibliography
76
Appendices
85
Appendix A Segments
86
A.1 Segment and protein data table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.2 Coding regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
v
==PAGE:6==
Appendix B GISAID search criteria - Re-infection analysis
88
Appendix C EMBOSS Seqret paramaters
89
Appendix D GIASID search criteria - Seasonal variant data
90
Appendix E
Minority variants - relative frequency plots
91
Appendix F
Minority variants - Table
97
Appendix G In-phase variants / Minority strains
99
Appendix H Deletions
101
Appendix I
Pairwise distance between consensus sequences
102
I.2
Count of dissimilar sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
Appendix J
Molecular clock
110
Appendix K Sample contamination reports
114
K.1 Day1_1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
K.2 Day1_2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
K.3 Day14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
K.4 Day17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
K.5 Day21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
Appendix L
Coverage plots
120
L.1
Day1_1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
L.2
Day1_2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
L.3
Day3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
L.4
Day8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
L.5
Day14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
L.6
Day17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
L.7
Day21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
L.8
Cont1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
L.9
Cont2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
Appendix M Read percentages
165
vi
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background information
1.1.1
Influenza epidemiology
You know the feeling; fever, dry coughing, headaches, joint pain, malaise, sore throat,
and a runny nose. It’s influenza season and we are all invited! As one of the most
well-known illnesses suffered by people worldwide, it is considered by most of us as
a relatively harmless disease lasting no longer than a week, with no need for medical
attention. Unfortunately, the reality is not that simple for everyone. People belonging
to risk groups such as young children, the elderly, pregnant women, and people with
chronic medical- or immunosuppressive conditions, are at higher risk of experiencing
severe disease or complications which in the worst cases can lead to death[96]. Es-
timating the global burden of Influenza is difficult as most cases are unreported and
developing countries have limited resources for surveillance. However, World Health
Organization (WHO) estimated as of 2017, that 290,000 - 650,000 deaths are linked to
seasonal flu each year [66, 62, 100]
Not just humans but also numerous animal species can be infected by influenza. Par-
ticularly swine and wild birds are common natural reservoirs[46, pp. 175, 190–191].
Influenza is a zoonosis, meaning it can be transmitted to humans from animals. This fur-
ther complicates the process of tracking the virus strains as they can spread undetected
and evolve through animals. Pigs have been described as ”mixing vessels” as they
can be infected by multiple variants and potentially create novel influenza viruses[25].
Since pigs are domesticated there is an increased risk of humans being infected by a
pig-derived strain, which could possibly cause severe disease[77].
Influenza A in Denmark
In Denmark, the seasonal flu appears every year over the winter months (December -
March), typically in waves. A few times every decade an actual epidemic breaks out,
usually outside the normal flu season [93], while pandemics occur a few times every cen-
tury[88]. Historically, the most devastating influenza A pandemic was The Spanish Flu,
caused by a novel H1N1 subtype[93] (NB: The concept of subtypes will be explained in
section 1.1.3). It ravaged the world during 1917-18, killing about 50 million people[82]. In
Denmark, over 900,000 people were infected, killing 1 out of 50[24]. In recent times, the
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
1
==PAGE:8==
less severe pandemic of 2009 also put its mark on the world when a newly emerged vari-
ant of influenza A subtype H1N1 spread from swine to people[93]. This subtype, named
H1N1pdm09, had genomes mixed from three different pig-circulating viruses[31]. In the
course of a year, H1N1pdm09 had caused between 151,700 and 575,400 deaths world-
wide[41], while 32 people were killed in Denmark[83]. Although H1N1 viruses were al-
ready circulating in humans, this new composition of genes made H1N1pdm09 different
enough for the seasonal flu vaccine to offer little protection. This resulted in younger
people (below 60/65 years old) being more susceptible to severe infections, caused by
their lack of existing immunity from previous exposure to older variants. This situation
of flu pandemics favoring younger people is quite opposite from what we are used to
with seasonal flu, which primarily affects people older than 65 years[85]. H1N1pdm09 is
now endemic in Denmark alongside the H3N2 subtype[93]. H3N2 first appeared in hu-
mans in Hong Kong in 1968 causing a global pandemic resulting in more than a million
deaths[55]. Since then it has kept evolving to evade vaccine-derived immunity and is
still circulating globally[51]. Although influenza is now considered a relatively harmless
disease it can affect people aged 65 and older more seriously. Therefore, influenza
vaccination for this age group is offered yearly free of charge in Denmark[60].
The Danish influenza season differs from year to year. Figure 1.1 shows three consecu-
tive seasons in Denmark from 2019 to 2023. The 2020-2021 season is absent as there
were practically no confirmed cases of influenza due to the COVID-19 lockdown[89].
In 2019-2020 (Figure 1.1a) we see H3N2 dominating the season, but still a substantial
presence of H1N1pdm09 and a few cases of influenza B. The 2021-2022 season (Fig-
ure 1.1b), following the COVID-19 lockdown, shows a stark difference, as practically
only H3N2 was present. The following season of 2022-2023 then shows the return of
both influenza B and H1N1pdm09 and a decrease in H3N2 cases compared to the pre-
vious seasons. The unpredictable nature of the influenza season makes preparedness
difficult and surveillance necessary.
2
==PAGE:9==
(a) 2019-2020 season
(b) 2021-2022 season
(c) 2022-2023 season
Figure 1.1: Influenza A subtypes and influenza B distribution in samples received by
SSI, during seasons from 2019 to 2023. Plots are from the SSI Lexicon of Diseases
(Sygdomsleksikon)[92, 90, 91]
3
==PAGE:10==
1.1.2
Influenza virology
This acute respiratory infection is caused by viruses belonging to the family Orthomyx-
oviridae. Four different influenza genera belong to this family, each containing one
species of influenza virus type; Influenza A, B C, and D, where A and B are the only
viruses that cause epidemics and even pandemics by influenza A[96]. Influenza A is the
species belonging to the genus Alphainfluenzavirus and is the main cause of influenza
infections in humans, however, it can infect a wide range of host species. Influenza B
and C also infect humans, although less common, while influenza D is primarily found
in cattle and not known to infect humans[96, 65]. Figure 1.2 shows how the different
genera of influenza viruses can be transmitted between a multitude of host species,
and visualizes just how tracking influenza transmission between hosts is anything but
simple.
Figure 1.2: Host species infected by the different influenza genera. Influenza A infects
humans as well as a cohort of animal hosts depending on its subtype (explained in
section 1.1.3), while influenza B, C, and D each have a narrower range of host species.
Figure from Long et. al 2019[65]
4
==PAGE:11==
Structure and genome
Influenza A is a single-stranded negative-sense RNA virus. The genome is segmented,
meaning it is divided into several individual parts, a bit like chromosomes. The full
genome is 13.588 nucleotides (nt) long, divided into eight segments (Figure 1.3A). Each
segment has the same conserved 13 nucleotides at the 5’ end and 12 at the 3’ end.
These conserved regions are partially complementary, allowing the viral RNA (vRNA)
to form a partially double-stranded panhandle structure[46, p. 59]. The whole genome
encodes a total of 12 proteins, with each segment encoding one main protein while four
of them encode an additional protein [46, p. 58]. A table detailing the proteins and their
coding regions of each segment can be found in appendix A.1, and a figure showing the
placements of coding regions in appendix A.2.
Figure 1.3: (A) The eight segments of the influenza A genome with their size in nu-
cleotides. Colors denote the type of proteins the segment encodes: polymerase pro-
teins (yellow), surface proteins (red), matrix proteins (green), and nucleoprotein and
nonstructural proteins (blue) (B) Structure of the influenza A virion (top) and RNP (ri-
bonucleoprotein) (bottom) formed by vRNA and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRp).
5
==PAGE:12==
Surface proteins
The hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) proteins, encoded by the segments
of the same name, cover the surface of the influenza virion. HA is the most abundant
(∼80%) of the envelope proteins. It is responsible for the virion’s entry into the host cell,
while its epitopes can be detected by the host’s immune system to initiate an immune
response[4]. NA is the second most abundant envelope protein (∼17%). It is responsi-
ble for releasing newly assembled progeny virions from the host cell, by removing the
sialic acid from the cell surface [2][46, p. 39].
Trans-membrane- and matrix proteins
The MP segment encodes two proteins: matrix protein 1 (M1) and matrix protein 2 (M2).
The M2 protein is a trans-membrane ion channel, with a major role in releasing viral
particles from the infected cell. The M1 protein is part of the matrix layer underneath
the viral membrane, serving a multitude of roles during virus replication, including the
nuclear import and export of RNP (explained in next section) [46, p. 39]).
Polymerase proteins
The segments PB2, PB1, and PA encode the three viral protein subunits; polymerase
basic protein 2 (PB2), polymerase basic protein 1 (PB1), and polymerase acidic protein
(PA). These three proteins make up the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) [46,
p. 40]. Each of the eight segment’s viral RNA (vRNA) forms a complex with the RdRp
(Figure 1.3B), called the ribonucleoprotein (RNP). Additionally, the PB1 segment also
encodes the multifunction PB1-F2 protein with anti-interferon activity[46, p. 140]. The
PA segment also additionally encodes the PA-X protein which is involved in dampening
the immune response by shutting off host protein synthesis[52].
Nucleoprotein and nonstructural proteins
The NP segment encodes the nucleoprotein (NP) which forms a scaffold for the vRNA to
be wrapped around in the formation of RNP [46, pp. 39, 59]. The NS segment encodes
two proteins: Nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) and nonstructural protein 2 (NS2). NS1 is
involved in preventing host antiviral response, while NS2 is responsible for the export
of RNPs from the nucleus[46, p. 57].
Life cycle
Influenza A viruses transcribe and replicate their genomes within the infected host cell[46,
p. 59]. The first step of the infection is HA binding to sialic acid on the surface of the
host cell, enabling the virus to be internalized through endocytosis[44]. The M2 pro-
tein initiates release of viral RNPs from the viral matrix into the cytoplasm of the host
cell, and subsequently into the host nucleus[22, 6]. Here, negative-sense viral RNA
6
==PAGE:13==
is transcribed into positive-sense mRNA by the RdRp which is then exported out of the
nucleus. Using the host ribosomes, the mRNA is translated into proteins used to assem-
ble new virions[57]. The new virions are then released through the host cell membrane,
and simultaneously acquire their envelope through this process. NA cleaves sialic acid
residues from the cell surface, to prevent the newly formed virions from aggregating at
the surface[22].
1.1.3
Subtyping
Influenza A is the only influenza species divided into subtypes depending on the two
surface proteins HA and NA. Currently, there are 18 known HA subtypes and 11 NA
subtypes, and over 130 combinations of these have been identified in nature[86]. The
virus subtypes are named according to their HA and NA types. For example, H3N2 has
HA subtype 3 and NA subtype 2, while H1N1 has HA subtype 1 and NA subtype 1.
1.2
Quasispecies theory
When we think of viral infections we tend to think of a person being infected with one
single ”master” virus. This notion is further enhanced by the use of consensus se-
quences for genome analysis, which can be misleading. The consensus sequence can
be thought of as the surface of a lake; visible from where we stand on the shore, but
there is a whole world hiding below that we don’t see. If we want to know what’s going
on below the surface we need to go deeper. In more scientific terms, the consensus
sequence usually doesn’t show a single ”master” virus of the infection but represents
the majority of a diverse viral community within one person (Figure 1.4).
But what exactly is a quasispecies? Let’s look at a simplified example: Imagine a person
being infected with a single influenza A virus particle. A virus’ only goal is to reproduce,
so it will hijack a host cell and start producing progeny. Since influenza A has a high
mutation rate and no proofreading mechanism, it’s very unlikely that every offspring will
be a perfect clone of the parent (ie. have exactly the same sequence). The parent virus
along with its direct offspring will then form a population with sequences differing by a
few positions (Fig.1.5). The offspring will then proceed to replicate themselves, creating
progeny that is even more different from the initial parent virus.
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.4: A consensus sequence can be thought of as a lakeshore; we only see the
surface of the water, but not what’s underneath. The consensus sequence shows the
majority of the viral population, not representing minority variants (red, green, and blue),
even though they are present at relatively high frequencies (20-40%)
Figure 1.5: How a quasispecies is formed by mutations during replication of virus
genomes.
8
==PAGE:15==
This divergence from the initial virus can be represented as a multidimensional space,
called sequence space, centered around the initial virus particle. The space has as
many dimensions as the length of the sequence, making it impossible to visualize above
a sequence length of three. For the purpose of understanding, a 3D visualization can
be seen in Figure 1.6. The space represents all the possible combinations of mutations
a sequence can theoretically acquire[80]. If the virus replicates perfectly with no muta-
tions, the progeny will stay in the proximity of the parent(Fig.1.6a). In reality, we know
replication errors happen and the progeny will therefore differ from the parent which in
the sequence space will show them moving away from the center (Fig.1.6b). From the
initial virus, the progeny will move along the axes of the sequence space, depending on
the mutations it acquires. With time the quasispecies will form a cloud shape within the
sequence space(Fig. 1.6c). It will not be perfectly symmetric but have protrusions in
some directions as some mutations give higher survival rates, and therefore more off-
spring is produced in these directions[8]. There is a distinction between the theoretical
region of the sequence space and the practical region. If the sequence has mutated so
much that it has reached a far corner of the sequence space, it will most likely no longer
be a functioning virus[11, 1]. The quasispecies cloud will therefore not move into the
outer regions of the sequence space but stay within the practical space[80].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.6: (a) The sequence space is centered around the infecting virus strain. (b)
As the virus replicates, errors cause variant strains to arise. These are placed at a dis-
tance from the center of the sequence space, representing their mutated sequences. (c)
Eventually, the viral population forms a ”cloud” filling the practical area of the sequence
space. Figure from Singh 2023[80]
9
==PAGE:16==
1.2.1
The benefit of quasispecies
Though a quasispecies is formed by replication errors and random reassortment of seg-
ments, it is not without biological relevance. Studies show that there is a benefit to vari-
ants within the viral population living and evolving as a community instead of having
one dominating variant. An inferior mutant surrounded by a cohort of closely related,
yet slightly better adapted, mutants can outgrow a fitter mutant surrounded by some-
what worse adapted mutants[20, pp. 1–31, 51–82, 33–50]. Furthermore, it has been
proven that selection does not happen on individual variant strains but on quasispecies
as a whole[19], further confirming that a community of slightly diverse virus strains will
increase the survival rate. Additionally, quasispecies can aid the survival of the virus by
providing a ”memory”, as previously dominant variant strains may still be present as a
minority strain in the viral population. This phenomenon has been shown experimen-
tally with Foot-and-mouth disease virus[10, 13] and HIV-1[14]. The memory is believed
to serve the virus for quicker adaption when encountering a previously known environ-
ment[15, p. 146].
Resistance development
A virus does not become resistant to an inhibitor drug from one second to the next. A
variant strain with amino acid changes causing resistance can stay as a minority strain
and ”hide” until needed. When an antiviral inhibitor drug is used on the population, the
susceptible dominant strains will be killed and clear the way for the resistant minority
strain to replicate and dominate[20, p. 60]. This phenomenon has been observed in
HIV-1 inhibitor drug resistance[20, pp. 179–181]
1.3
The importance of genetic variability
When a genome is replicated, mistakes are bound to happen, and replication of in-
fluenza A is no exception. In fact, the RdRp of influenza has a relatively high error rate
of ≈1 spontaneous mutation per replication cycle and has no proofreading mechanism
to correct it[7]. These randomly arising variants accumulate over time, increasing the
genetic variability in the viral population (Figure 1.7A). When these variants accumulate
over time in the surface protein segments, HA and NA, it is called antigenic drift[12].
HA and NA are antigens recognized by the host’s antibodies and trigger an immune
response, meaning any changes in these proteins could potentially improve the virus’
ability to evade detection[46, p. 291]).
10
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.7: (A) Antigenic drift: Mutations are accumulated over time due to replication
errors made by the RdRp (B) Antigenic shift: Reassortment of segments during repli-
cation when a cell is infected by two different influenza viruses.
Besides antigenic drift, viruses have another evolutionary mechanism to rapidly increase
their diversity, called antigenic shift. While drift denotes a slow and gradual change in
genetic variability, shift denotes a major and rapid change in the genetic makeup of a
virus. Antigenic shifts are facilitated by the segmented nature of the virus, as it makes
it possible for two different influenza viruses to exchange whole segments and thereby
potentially create a novel subtype[47]. This phenomenon can occur when a host cell is
co-infected by two different influenza viruses. During the viral replication process, there
is a risk that the segments could be exchanged, creating progeny with novel segment
compositions[47] (Figure 1.7B). The two currently circulating subtypes H1N1pdm09 and
H3N2 are both results of reassortment events[27, 3] causing global pandemics and
subsequently becoming endemic.
Using consensus sequences for analysis of antigenic drift and shift will give the broad
strokes of viral evolution, but won’t show the underlying variants which can also play a
major role in the survival ability of viruses. Analyzing quasispecies instead of just the
consensus allows us to see the ”history” of how the consensus came to be and also
11
==PAGE:18==
makes it possible to explore intra-host diversity.
1.4
Clinical implications
Antigenic drift, specifically in the HA and NA proteins, is a big part of the reason why
influenza is capable of evading the human immune system and we are infected over
and over again. As previously discussed, the quasispecies can ”hide” resistant variants
which can then flourish once the susceptible variants are killed by antiviral treatment[20,
p. 60].
1.4.1
Antivirals and resistance
Not many antiviral drugs are available for influenza treatment, especially since resis-
tance to M2 inhibitors has become so widespread they are no longer recommended by
WHO for treatment of influenza[48, 97]. Currently, the most commonly used antiviral
drug is the neuraminidase inhibitor (NAI) Oseltamivir[46, p. 400][74]. Resistance or re-
duced susceptibility to NAIs is not an uncommon occurrence but the global frequency of
resistant virus variants remains low and is therefore not an immediate threat. However,
a sudden and drastic increase in Oseltamivir resistance in influenza A subtype H1N1
did occur between 2007 and 2009[29, 28]. This Oseltamivir-resistant variant was luck-
ily displaced by the Swine Flu pandemic subtype, H1N1pdm09, but the event is still a
reminder that surveillance of resistance emergence should not be neglected.
A newer and less commonly used drug is the polymerase acidic inhibitor (PAI) Baloxavir.
Currently, the global frequency of viruses with resistance or reduced susceptibility to
Baloxavir is low (0.1-0.5%)[74], but susceptibility-reducing amino acid substitutions have
been reported by WHO [99]. Baloxavir is currently not being used in Denmark[79], but
resistant strains can still appear as the virus can develop resistance in countries using
the drug before returning for the Danish influenza season.
1.4.2
Vaccines and pandemics
The aim of an influenza vaccine is to induce immunity to the HA proteins and to some
degree the NA proteins, found on the surface of the virion. Due to the fast-evolving na-
ture of influenza, especially antigenic drift in the HA and NA proteins, the antibodies will
quickly become unable to recognize the surface protein and initiate an immune reac-
tion. Therefore, updated versions of the vaccine are regularly developed, by predicting
what the forthcoming circulating strain(s) will look like[46, p. 313]. For this purpose, it is
important to do constant surveillance and know which regions, sites, and substitutions
of HA and NA play the biggest role in antigenic drift. The vaccines used in Denmark
12
==PAGE:19==
contain HA and NA proteins from inactivated influenza A and B strains[94]. After im-
munization, the HA antibodies will be the primary mediator of protection against future
influenza infections[46, p. 315].
The reassortment of segments (antigenic shift) can create novel variants of influenza.
As the population will not be protected against a novel variant either by vaccination or
previous infections, it can spread quickly and cause a pandemic[18]. The latest example
of such an event was the Swine Flu pandemic in 2009, caused by a triple-reassortant
influenza A variant (H1N1pdm09)[31]
1.5
Objectives and scope of the study
The aim of this thesis is to provide fundamental research on the diversity of human
influenza A variant H3N2. We wish to explore the evolution of viral variants both intra-
host over a relatively long infection time and for the whole of Denmark over multiple
seasons. Additionally, we will attempt to simplify the workflow at Statens Serum Institut
(SSI) by addressing the issue of contaminated or co-infected samples currently being
difficult to detect and distinguish. The thesis can generally be divided into three main
parts:
1. Initial investigation of the evolution of minority variants through a quasispecies
analysis
2. Build on the pre-existing influenza analysis pipeline by developing a script for de-
tection of potential contamination and/or co-infection of influenza samples
3. Analysis of the seasonal changes of variant frequencies in Danish H3N2 sequences
from 2015 to 2022
For the quasispecies analysis, we will be using samples from a single patient with a long-
term infection of H3N2 to investigate the evolution of minority variants during illness.
We also aim to look for answers as to why this person was so seriously affected by the
seasonal flu. Specifically, we will try to investigate whether the viral quasispecies shows
signs of resistance and if the long-lasting infection was due to reinfections with different
viruses.
For the seasonal analysis, we wish to explore the evolution of the H3N2 influenza virus
circulating in Denmark from 2015 to 2022. Specifically, we wish to investigate which
13
==PAGE:20==
variants rose quickly into dominance.
1.6
Methodological approach
The quasispecies analysis was performed by using NGS influenza data assembled by
IRMA[58, 84], followed by analyses of minority variant frequencies, indels, and identifi-
cation of minority strains with in-phase variants. Additionally, we investigated whether
the patient had a long-term infection by a single virus or if a re-infection had occurred.
The seasonal variation analysis was performed using all available Danish H3N2 se-
quences from 2015-2022, and applying the software Sweep Dynamics[64] for analyzing
swiftly changing variant frequencies and detection of variants being fixed in the popula-
tion.
1.6.1
IRMA
IRMA is a tool developed by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention[81], for as-
sembling highly variable RNA viruses, and offers the module FLU specifically designed
for influenza. Besides assembly, IRMA also provides subsequent analysis in the form
of detecting and phasing minority variants. IRMA combines existing tools with custom
components to better handle the variability of virus genomes[58].
Commonly used reference-based NGS assembly tools have been developed for non-
segmented genomes with slow mutation rates compared to RNA viruses. These tools
will discard reads that have too many mismatches against a given reference sequence;
an ill-fitting method for highly variable influenza genomes. A large number of perfectly
valid reads containing variants will be discarded, resulting in a misleading assembly not
showing the variations and thereby the real evolution of the genome. Particularly, in a
quasispecies analysis, including these variants in the assembly is paramount. IRMA in-
corporates an iterative assembly approach, that accounts for high diversity by iteratively
updating the reference sequences based on the gathered reads. The IRMA pipeline can
be divided into two parts: (1) read gathering, (2) assembly and analysis.
Part 1
IRMA starts by quality filtering, de-duplicating reads into read patterns, and iteratively
gathering usable reads from the FASTQ files. This is done by matching each read to
the reference sequences, next sorting them into their best gene match, and thereby
also sorting into segments, then aligning these reads to the gene references. These
alignments are used to edit the reference sequences. These steps, apart from quality
control, are repeated until there are no more reads to match or 5 iterations have been
14
==PAGE:21==
reached. During part 1 of the pipeline low-quality, chimeric, and non-flu-like reads are
discarded, while the remaining set of reads, along with a consensus sequence of these
reads, are passed on to part 2 of the pipeline. (Figure 1.8)
Figure 1.8: Part 1 of the IRMA pipeline, called the read gathering stage. Raw reads
are iteratively filtered out if they are chimeric or non-flu-like (they don’t match any of
the segment references). Part 1 outputs the gathered reads and the current segment
consensus sequences
Part 2
In part 2 of the pipeline the final assembly is performed iteratively using the consensus
sequence from part 1 as the reference. The iterative assembly is performed by repeat-
edly assembling the reads using the consensus sequence as the reference and then
updating the reference based on the assembly. This process is continued until there is
no improvement in the total assembly score or 5 iterations are reached. This results in
the final consensus sequence for each segment. Variant calling is then performed to
identify minority variants. Linked variants are then identified by performing phasing on
the minority variants with two different methods: Qualitatively by producing a heat map
and quantitatively by assigning the minority variants to phase groups. (Figure 1.9)
Figure 1.9: Part 2 of the IRMA pipeline. Gathered reads are iteratively assembled into
individual segment consensuses. Variant calling and phasing is performed by IRMA.
15
==PAGE:22==
Output
IRMA outputs a plethora of data files that can be utilized for analysis purposes. Besides
the assembled segments in FASTA format, the files we’ll be using for this analysis can
be seen in table 1.1.
Output file name (Suffix)
Description
-allAlleles.txt
Data of all variants found (one file per segment)
-variants.txt
Data of minority variants identified using IRMA’s
default thresholds (one file per segment)
-insertions.txt
Data of all insertions identified (one file per
segment)
-deletions.txt
Data of all deletions identified (one file per
segment)
READ_COUNTS.txt
Counts of reads and read patterns for the different
steps of the pipeline, including primary and
secondary data
-coverageDiagram.pdf
Bar plot showing read depth at each position in
the segment, as well as highlighting where minority variants
were found (one file per segment)
READ_PERCENTAGES.pdf
Pie plots showing proportion of read patterns passing
filters and their distribution between segment assemblies
Table 1.1: IRMA output files used for further analyses
1.6.2
Sweep Dynamics
For analyzing seasonal variation in H3N2 viruses from 2015 to 2022, we apply the
software Sweep Dynamics available through Docker [49] (image: tklingenbifolab/sd-
plots:beta). This tool, specially developed for fast-evolving influenza viruses, creates
Sweep Dynamics (SD) plots visualizing the rapid changes in frequencies for individual
amino acid changes, making it possible to identify which variants are fixed from one
season to the next. The process of variants drastically rising in frequency within the
viral population, due to advantageous amino acid changes, is called selective sweep.
Sweep Dynamics calculate the change in variant frequencies between influenza sea-
sons. Globally there are two influenza seasons: The northern hemisphere season (N)
and the southern hemisphere season (S) (Table 1.2)
16
==PAGE:23==
Season
Geographical area
Start date - end date
N
Northern hemisphere
October 1st - March 31st
S
Southern hemisphere
April 1st - September 30th
Table 1.2: The two global influenza seasons, N and S
This means that sequences from October, November, and December 2022 belong to
the 2023 N season. Sweep Dynamics uses phylogeny to perform frequency correction,
as the same mutation can happen more than once at the same site. Say an S1T variant
appears in season 1. In season 2 a T1S mutation appears followed by a second S1T
mutation in season 3 (S→T→S→T at position 1). The first and second S1T mutations
should have their frequencies calculated separately as they are not a result of the same
event. Once independent amino acid changes have been identified, Fisher’s exact test
is performed on each variant count to identify whether there is a significant increase.
There are three criteria that need to be fulfilled before a variant is classified as a result
of a selective sweep:
1. Significant increase in frequency relative to the previous season (p <=0.05),
2. variant is predominant in the current season (frequency >=50%)
3. variant has not been predominant in a previous season
An SD plot is then created with the significant variants showing their change in frequency
over seasons.
17
==PAGE:24==
2
Methods
2.1
Quasispecies analysis
All custom scripts used in the analyses can be found at https://github.com/JulieKragmose/
Masters-thesis
2.1.1
Data collection at SSI
Influenza samples are regularly obtained by SSI, for surveillance purposes, from hospi-
tals and general practitioners through a sentinel program. The sample material is sent to
the National Influenza Center at Statens Serum Institut (SSI), Copenhagen, Denmark.
Here the samples are analyzed by in-house real-time RT-PCR detecting the matrix- and
HA-gene segments. A proportion of samples testing positive for influenza are then pre-
pared for sequencing. RNA is extracted with Magnapure 96 DNA and Viral NA Small
Volume Kit, followed by genomic amplification to create cDNA, based on the methods
described in Zhou et al. 2009[30]. The cDNA is fragmented to create a library using
the Nextera XT DNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina) following the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. The library is then sequenced on the MiSeq platform (Illumina), yielding paired-
end reads of about 250bp.
2.1.2
Data set for analysis
In SSI’s BioNumerics database we identified a patient with an infection lasting for over
a month with 9 registered swab samples. Of those nine samples, the first seven had
sequencing data available for use in this analysis. The samples were named according
to their date and the number of days since the first sample was taken (Figure 2.1).
Note that since two samples were taken on the first day, they were named Day1_1 and
Day1_2. All samples were obtained by swabbing of the throat.
18
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.1: Timeline of when the seven samples were obtained from the patient
2.1.3
Assembly using IRMA
IRMA[84] (v1.0.2) was used to assemble the raw reads for each sample. Additionally,
minority variants were called and in-phase variants were identified by IRMA.
IRMA FLU sample1_R1.fastq.gz sample1_R2.fastq.gz Day1_1
Default settings were used. The most relevant settings and their default values are
shown in table 2.1
Variable
Description
Value
QUAL_THRESHOLD
Minimum median quality of reads
30
MIN_LEN
Minimum read length
125
MIN_CONS_SUPPORT
Minimum depth for calling consensus
50
MIN_AMBIG
Minimum called SNV frequency for calling
ambiguous base in amended consensus
0.20
MIN_F
Minimum frequency for single nucleotide variants
0.008
MIN_C
Minimum count for variants
2
MIN_AQ
Minimum average variant quality
25
MIN_TCC
Minimum depth for calling variant
100
Table 2.1: A selection of default settings used for the IRMA assembly
2.1.4
Minority variant analysis
Minority variants were identified and analyzed for all segments.
19
==PAGE:26==
Consensus sequence
IRMA outputs two different consensus sequences for each segment. The main con-
sensus sequence and the amended consensus. The main consensus sequence does
not take depth and quality into account and calls a base at each position, as long as at
least one read is present. The amended consensus does take depth and quality into
account and calls an N at positions not fulfilling these criteria but it also uses ambigu-
ous bases for positions with minority variants with frequency >20%. For our purpose
neither low-depth, low quality nor ambiguous bases were wanted, hence none of these
consensus sequences were usable. We, therefore, created a separate consensus se-
quence with a custom Python[32] script (consensusFromAllAlles.py). IRMA outputs, for
each segment, a file with statistics for every position and variant in the assembly (suffix
-allAlleles.txt). The custom script uses this file to find the majority variant for each po-
sition, to avoid ambiguous bases. Bases at positions with depth below 50 and quality
below 30 were replaced by N. A consensus sequence was created in this way for each
segment and used for the rest of the analysis.
Minority variant frequency
Variant data for all segments was gathered into one file with a custom Python script
(allSamplesToDataFrame.py). All consensus nucleotides were included, while minority
variants with depth <100 and/or frequency <2.5% (note that we forgot to filter by quality
at this step) were filtered out. The frequency of each minority variant and their corre-
sponding consensus nucleotide were plotted for each sample as relative bar plots, using
a custom script (Quasi_barplot_consensusChange.R) in R[75] (v4.2.1). Only variants
that appeared at a frequency ≥2.5% in at least one sample were included in the final
visualization.
Phased variants
In the IRMA output directory called tables are files with suffix -variants.txt, containing
minority variants found in each segment (one file per segment). The last column of
this file is named Phase and denotes the phase group to which each variant has been
assigned. If two or more variants in a segment have been assigned to the same phase
group, it means that IRMA found them to be in-phase, ie. from the same strain in the
viral population. Sequences with phased variants were created using a custom Python
script (phasesToFasta.py). This script takes the consensus sequence of the segment
in question and simply replaces the major nucleotide at positions with a minority variant
with the minor variant. Only minority variants with depth ≥50, count ≥15, frequency
≥2.5%, and quality ≥30 were inserted, while the rest were ignored. An example of how
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.2: Example of how phased variant sequences are created for segment HA. Of
the four variants found in HA_H3-variants.txt, only the first three fulfill the criteria to be
considered valid minority variants. The fourth variant has too low a count and frequency
and is therefore ignored.
the phased variant sequences were created can be seen in Figure 2.2. The resulting
FASTA file(s) were placed in a new folder called minority.
Non-synonymous mutations
Further filtering of minority variants and detection of non-synonymous mutations was
done using a custom Python script (H3N2_mutationFinder.py). This script takes the
variants from the -variants.txt file and extracts those with frequency ≥2.5%, quality
≥30, depth ≥100, and count ≥15.
It then detects for each variant whether or not
it causes a non-synonymous mutation.
The output is written to a file named sam-
ple_mutations_segment.txt.
Indels
IRMA outputs in the tables directory, for each segment, two files with suffixes -insertions.txt
and -deletions.txt. These files contain information on indels detected by IRMA. These
indels were further filtered with a custom Python script (indelSummary.py), only includ-
ing those with depth ≥100, frequency ≥2.5%, count ≥15 and quality ≥30 (quality only
applicable for insertions). The results were written to indelSummary.txt. BAM files were
21
==PAGE:28==
visually inspected using IGV[38] (v2.16.1) to validate the deletions.
Sequences with deletions were reconstructed using a custom Python script (indelCon-
sensusConstruction.py). This script reads the deletions in indelSummary.txt and re-
moves the specified positions from the consensus sequence. The reconstructed dele-
tion sequences were aligned with their respective consensus sequence using MAFFT’s
web tool[45, 95] and visualized with Jalview[34].
Resistance
Variants potentially linked to antiviral drug resistance were identified by manually com-
paring with WHO’s list of mutations causing resistance to NA inhibitors[98] and PA in-
hibitors[99]. These lists can also be found on https://github.com/JulieKragmose/Masters-thesis/
tree/main/QuasispeciesAnalysis/Resistance.
2.1.5
Reinfection analysis
Pairwise genetic distance
The pairwise genetic distance analysis was performed on all segments.
Pairwise genetic distances between the consensus sequences of each sample day were
calculated and visualized with a custom R script (pairwise.R). The script works like so:
For a given segment it reads the FASTA files with consensus sequences for every sam-
ple day. The genetic distance is calculated pairwise between each sample day, both as
the number of dissimilar sites and the percentage of dissimilarity, creating two separate
distance matrices. The distance matrices are then plotted in two separate heat maps.
Phylogenetic tree
The phylogenetic tree analysis was only carried out on the HA and NA segments.
Data preparation: A set of H3N2 genomes, from the year the patient got sick, were
downloaded from GISAID[59] (EpiFlu →Search & browse) using the search criteria
shown in appendix B. This yielded a FASTA file with 579 HA sequences and 578 NA
sequences.
GISAID output one FASTA file with all chosen segments; the HA and NA segments
sequences were therefore divided into two separate FASTA files using a custom Python
script (divideSegmentsInFasta.py). This script also removed duplicate sequences and
sequences with N at more than half the positions. We only wanted sequences from
about four months before until four months after the patient’s illness (August 1st, 2022 -
March 31st, 2023). Sequences from outside this period were filtered out using a custom
22
==PAGE:29==
Python script (find2022sequences.py). After this filtering, we were left with 125 HA
sequences and 117 NA sequences.
Since the patient’s data had previously been uploaded to GISAID, these sequences
would be present in the downloaded data set. To remove the patient data from the
set the EPI ISL numbers were needed to identify the sequences, however, these were
unobtainable at the time. Instead, we removed all sequences with the same dates as the
patient samples, leaving us with 118 HA sequences and 113 NA segments. Sequences
with identity ≥0.995 were clustered using CD-HIT[21, 42], giving us 13 HA clusters and
12 NA clusters.
cd-hit -i HA_22-23_filtered.fasta -o HA_22-23_clustered.fasta -c
0.995
Segments from a Danish H3N2 influenza virus from 2020 were downloaded from GI-
SAID (EPI_ISL_407959) and used as outgroup sequences. Clustered GISAID sequences,
outgroup sequences and patient sequences were then collected into one FASTA file for
HA and NA individually.
Phylogeny: A multiple sequence alignment was created using MAFFT[76, 45] (v7.407)
mafft --auto HA_22-23.fasta > HA_22-23_aligned.fasta
The aligned FASTA file was converted to NEXUS format using the web tool EMBOSS
Seqret[76, 87]. The parameters used can be seen in appendix C. jModelTest[16, 40]
(v2.1.10) was used to find the substitution model best describing the evolution of the
sequences.
java -jar jmodeltest-2.1.10/jModelTest.jar -d HA_22-23_aln.nexus -o
HA_22-23_jmodeltest.output -AIC -s 11 -t fixed -w -f -i -g 4
23
==PAGE:30==
-AIC
Calculate the Akaike Information Criterion
-s 11
Test all models available in jModelTest (11 models)
-t fixed
Use fixed BIONJ for base tree
-w
Print out PAUP block
-f
Include models with unequal base frequencies
-i
Include models with a proportion invariable sites
-g 4
Include models with rate variation among sites and use 4 categories
From the jModelTest output file, the PAUP block containing the Lset command with
model parameters was copied and used to create an input file for PAUP[17] (v4.0a168).
We used a maximum likelihood criterion for finding the tree with the highest probability
through a heuristic search. A maximum of 10,000 trees were created during the search,
using a neighbor-joining tree as a base and tree bisection and re-connection (TBR) as
the search method. An example of a PAUP input file and how to run it with PAUP can
be seen below:
begin paup;
execute HA_22-23_aln-.nexus;
set criterion=likelihood;
set maxtrees=10000;
Lset base=(0.3458 0.1923 0.2224 ) nst=6 rmat=(1.3513 6.4777
1.1069 0.1112 6.4777) rates=gamma shape=0.1490 ncat=4 pinvar=0;
outgroup HA_A_Denmark_2020;
set root=outgroup outroot=monophyl;
hsearch start=nj swap=tbr;
savetrees format=nexus brlens=yes fil=HA_22-23.nexus from=1
to=1;
end;
./paup4a168_ubuntu64 --noninteractive HA_22-23_paupInput.txt
The resulting tree file in NEXUS format was visualized using web tool iTOL[70] (v6.8)
Molecular clock analysis
The molecular clock analysis was performed on all segments.
24
==PAGE:31==
Phylogenetic trees were created as described in the previous section, excluding the
sequences downloaded from GISAID. A molecular clock analysis was then performed
using a custom R script (molecularClock.R), computing the root-to-tip distances in the
trees and plotting them as a function of days between sampling.
2.2
Contamination report
There were generally three areas we wanted the script to address. The first was to look
at the minority variants; whether there was an excessive number and if they had high
frequencies. The second was to look at the secondary data and whether there was an
excessive number of secondary read patterns compared to the number of primary read
patterns. The third was to look at whether any assemblies of segments from secondary
subtypes had been made by IRMA. From these areas, five criteria were defined for the
program to be built around (Table 2.2).
Minority variants
1
Excessive number of minority variants
2
At least one minority variant with frequency ≥2.5%
3
Proportion of high variant minority variants ≥50%
Secondary data size
4
Total count of secondary read patterns ≥10% of primary read pattern count
Secondary segments
5
Presence of secondary assembly in output
Table 2.2: The five criteria used by the contamination analysis of IRMA output
The general idea of the program is to go through criteria 1 through 5 and for each criterion
either raise a flag (if the criterion is fulfilled) or not (Figure 2.3). In the code, these criteria
are defined as variables called FlagX, For example, criterion 1 is Flag1. This variable
can either be true or false, denoting whether the flag was raised or not. A total of 5 flags
can potentially be raised for each sample.
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.3: Flowchart showing how contaminationAnalysis.py checks the five different
criteria and raises flags if they are fulfilled
Minority variants
Flag1 - Excessive number of variants: The presence of a secondary subtype should be
detected by IRMA for the HA and NA segments and the reads will not be included in
the assembly. However, for the remaining segments, with no secondary reference, the
reads are included in the assembly and the differences between the subtypes will show
up as minority variants. We, therefore, check for the presence of an excessive number
of minority variants as a sign of contamination and/or co-infection. The threshold of what
constitutes ”too many” minority variants for a segment, was calculated on the basis that
we’d expect up to 10 minority variants in the PA segment. We then calculated how
big a proportion of the segment we’d expect to have variants, by dividing the expected
number of variants by the length of the segments (2233nt):
10nt
2233nt = 0.00447828
This means that for the PA segment, we’d expect up to 0.45% of the positions to have
minority variants. Assuming that all segments have the same mutation rate, the pro-
26
==PAGE:33==
gram uses this measure to calculate the threshold of the number of mutations ”allowed”
in each segment. For example, for the HA segment (length 1778nt) the threshold is
calculated as:
0.0045 × 1778 = ⌊8.001⌋= 8
This means we ”allow” the HA segment to have a maximum of 8 minority variants. If the
variant count goes above, Flag1 will be set to true, meaning criterion 1 was fulfilled and
the first flag was raised.
Flag2 - The presence of variants ≥2.5% can cause issues for further analysis if they
are a product of contamination. The script will go through the variants and if at least
one has frequency ≥2.5%, the second flag is raised (Flag2 = True), and the script will
proceed to investigate further.
Flag3 - If a sample shows an excessive number of minority variants and a large propor-
tion of those are of high frequency (≥2.5%), it can be a sign of high-level contamination
and/or co-infection. The script calculates the proportion by dividing the number of high-
frequency variants by the total number of variants in the segment. For example, if a
segment with a total of 17 minority variants has 9 high-frequency variants:
9
17 = 0.5294
In this case, the third flag would be raised (Flag3 = True), as the proportion is above
50%. Note that 50% was chosen arbitrarily and should potentially be adjusted in the
future.
Secondary data size
Flag4 - A large proportion (≥10%) of secondary data indicates the presence of a sec-
ondary subtype in the sample. The script will sum the number of read patterns found
for both primary and secondary data and calculate the size of the secondary data com-
pared to the primary. Say we have 110,000 primary read patterns and 50 secondary
read patterns:
50
110, 000 = 0.00045455
27
==PAGE:34==
The fourth flag would not be raised (Flag4 = False) in this case, as the secondary data is
only 0.045% of the size of the primary data. Note that the threshold of 10% was chosen
arbitrarily and potentially needs to be adjusted in the future.
Secondary segments
Flag5 - The presence of a secondary assembly by IRMA shows extreme levels of con-
tamination and/or co-infection, as there would have been secondary data enough to
trigger an assembly. The script will look for the presence of the folder ’secondary_as-
sembly’ in the IRMA output. If the folder is not present, the fifth flag will not be raised
(Flag5 = False).
Running contamination analysis
To run the analysis, you simply call the script (contaminationAnalysis.py) from the di-
rectory where all the sample folders output by IRMA are placed.
python3 contaminationAnalysis.py
An output file summarising flags raised for each sample (contaminationReport.txt) is
placed in the working directory. If a sample had at least two out of the five flags raised,
the sample will be flagged as potentially contaminated, which can also be seen in this
file. Additionally, in every sample folder is placed an individual report (sample_contam-
inationReport.txt) with details of the analysis for that particular sample.
2.3
Seasonal variant evolution
The seasonal variant analysis was only carried out on the HA and NA segments.
2.3.1
Data collection
A set of Danish H3N2 sequences from November 2015 to May 2022 were downloaded
from GISAID. The search criteria can be seen in appendix D. The set contained 1112 HA
sequences and 998 NA sequences, which were then ”cleaned” using a custom Python
script (correctFastaFormat.py). This script divided the HA and NA segments into sepa-
rate FASTA files while filtering out entries with duplicate headers, duplicate sequences,
or Ns at more than 50% of the positions. We were then left with 563 HA sequences and
411 NA sequences.
2.3.2
Running Sweep Dynamics software
As our data set contained only Danish sequences, we had almost no sequences from
the southern hemisphere (S) season. We, therefore, decided to perform the analysis
28
==PAGE:35==
on a year-to-year basis instead of season-to-season. For this purpose we created a
small program to run a second analysis on the Sweep Dynamics intermediate output
files, changing it from seasons to years(Figure 2.4).
Figure 2.4: Flowchart of how the year-to-year analysis is run for Sweep Dynamics
For the second analysis, the intermediate files from the first analysis were needed but
these files were deleted by the Sweep Dynamics software. It was not possible to easily
prevent this from happening, as the software was run through Docker[49] and the source
code was not directly accessible. We, therefore, downloaded the source code from the
Docker image tklingenbifolab/sdplots:beta, like so:
# Create temporary image from existing Docker image
docker create --name="tmp_$$" tklingenbifolab/sdplots:beta
# Export temporary image to tarball
docker export tmp_$$ > image.tar
# Remove temporary image
docker rm tmp_$$
# Extract tarball
tar -xvf image.tar
# Location of source code
cd app/SDplotsPipeline
The only change made to the original source code for the first part of the analysis was
commenting out lines deleting temporary files at the end of SDplot_pipeline.sh. Sweep
Dynamics had a sampling feature to extract the same number of sequences per season,
but as we wished to base our analysis on a year-to-year principle we needed to make
sure an equal number of samples were extracted for each year. We, therefore, per-
formed our own sampling using a custom Python script (sampling.py) to create FASTA
files with an equal number of sequences for each year. The sampling number was set
as the number of sequences present in the year with the fewest entries. The script ex-
29
==PAGE:36==
tracted the given number of random sequences for each year and created a new FASTA
file. Additionally, it created a bash script with the command for running the first part of
the analysis, using the correct root sequence, ie. the oldest sequence in the sampled
set. The following command was used for running the first part of the analysis, with the
original slightly edited source code:
bash /app/SDplotsPipeline/SDplot_pipeline.sh -l true -g false -i
HA_15-22_sampled -o HA_15-22_sampledRun -r "A/Denmark/49/2016" -n
16 -p "png"
-l
Translate nucleotide sequences to protein (true)
-g
Sample sequences (false)
-i
Input file prefix
-o
Output folder name
-r
Root sequence isolate name
-n
Number of amino acids in the signal peptide (16 for H3N2)
-p
Format of plot (png)
Note, that sequence sampling (-g) is set to false, as we have already sampled manually.
The second part of the analysis consisted of running a small custom program on the
output of the first part. This custom program simply consisted of edited versions of rele-
vant scripts from the source code (can be found in the season2year folder on GitHub).
The second part of the analysis was run like so:
# Navigate to output folder
cd HA_15-22_sampledRun
# Run year-to-year analysis
/season2year/SDplot_perYear_pipeline.sh HA_15-22_sampled
The bash script moved the needed intermediate file from the first part of the analysis
to a new folder yearOutput. It then ran an edited version of Fisher’s exact test in R
(fishertest.R). This script started by reading the intermediate files from the first analysis,
containing mutation counts per season and the number of isolates per season, creat-
ing two data frames mutations and numIsolates. To change the analysis from doing
season-to-season calculation to doing year-to-year calculations, the columns of these
30
==PAGE:37==
data frames were merged by year (Figure 2.5)
Figure 2.5: The data frames ’mutations’, containing mutation counts per season, and
’numIsolates’, containing the number of sequences per season. The columns belonging
to the same year are merged, summing the counts
Now that season counts had been merged into year counts, the calculation of p-values
by Fisher’s exact test could proceed as before, using the updated data frames. The
output was used to make a year-to-year plot of variants with significant increases using
Sweep Dynamics R scripts (buildAD_sign.R, buildAD_sign_fun.R).
31
==PAGE:38==
3
Results
3.1
Quasispecies
3.1.1
Assembly by IRMA
IRMA was used for the assembly of the raw read data. The output consists of, amongst
others, a coverage plot, a consensus sequence, and information on minority variants
for every segment. IRMA successfully assembled all segments for each sample, except
PB1 for sample Day8 due to a lack of reads. A summary of the average quality for every
sample and segment assembly can be seen in table 3.1. All samples have an average
quality score of around 36-37, and no segment assembly quality score goes below 35.
This shows there is no issue with low quality in our data. A summary of the average
depth for every sample and segment can be seen in table 3.2. Sample Day1_1 has the
highest average depth of 8112.27253, while sample Day8 has the lowest average depth
of 598.35291. When looking at the individual segments in sample Day8, we see that
PA, HA, and NP all have an average depth <100, while PB1 was not sequenced, as
previously mentioned. The PB1 segment shows low coverage (16-65) for all samples,
which means it will not be possible to include any of its minority variants in the analysis,
as we need depth ≥100.
Segment
Average quality of assembly
Day1_1
Day1_2
Day3
Day8
Day14
Day17
Day21
PB2
37.82666
37.28633
37.52752
37.14564
36.00663
36.92872
36.60265
PB1
37.63821
37.36815
37.75429
NA
35.87962
37.30791
36.83606
PA
37.90766
37.45872
37.54855
37.12615
36.14491
37.08365
36.77980
HA
37.85216
37.26528
37.50549
36.53830
36.08398
37.09600
36.77720
NP
37.81187
37.25669
37.36352
36.40854
35.87862
36.90126
36.62500
NA
37.93942
37.31634
37.62315
37.23075
36.26773
37.18070
36.84949
MP
37.97475
37.64968
37.67907
37.33439
36.38007
37.32430
37.04215
NS
37.95669
37.51625
37.54617
37.81980
36.45640
37.36779
37.11332
Sample avg.
37.86343
37.38968
37.56847
37.08622
36.13725
37.14879
36.82821
Table 3.1: Average quality of segment assembly in each sample, including the average
of the whole sample.
32
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:39==
Segment
Average depth of assembly
Day1_1
Day1_2
Day3
Day8
Day14
Day17
Day21
PB2
1184.73158
892.5167
885.48816
266.96579
179.34518
659.48596
311.82193
PB1
65.61214
55.9657
50.88918
NA
16.15479
43.11258
62.76077
PA
942.52394
788.6588
502.98373
74.69160
137.74523
469.19014
192.55927
HA
3801.10170
1244.1705
1043.46032
35.50970
569.07995
1251.54733
436.22222
NP
4168.75351
2079.0708
2305.75351
70.41817
827.67669
2086.56112
1442.79960
NA
5109.69858
1641.5475
2176.60496
140.94610
1044.91135
2223.78085
2269.96241
MP
30772.39104
15155.4430
10571.57637
835.83401
4744.80244
10004.05193
9970.10489
NS
18853.36635
11048.6587
6233.78759
2764.10501
3505.54415
7196.81504
7194.92363
Sample avg.
8112.27235
4113.2540
2971.31798
598.35291
1378.15747
2991.81812
2735.14434
Table 3.2: Average depth of segments in each sample, including the average of the
whole sample.
The coverage plots show the depth at every position for each segment, as well as identi-
fied minority variants and their observed frequencies. When looking through these plots
it becomes clear that the polymerase segments (PB2, PB1 and PA) show a peculiar
pattern; they generally have much higher depth near the beginning and end of the seg-
ment and low depth in between. For example, in sample Day1_1 all three polymerase
segments show this pattern, as can be seen in appendix L figure L.1a, L.1b, and L.1c.
This phenomenon is well-known to the staff at SSI, however, it is unknown exactly what
is the cause. It is assumed to be due to unsuitable methods used for RNA extraction.
As a consequence, minority variants identified by IRMA in the polymerase segments
are likely to go undetected as a minimum depth of 100 is needed to call a variant.
IRMA outputs pie plots showing the read distribution of reads assembled and discarded
and the distribution between segments (Appendix M). These along with the coverage
plots can give an idea of how well the assembly went. Sample Day8 jumps out when
looking at the read percentages, as the majority of reads were discarded during the read
gathering phase (Appendix M figure M.1d).Adding to this that most segments in sample
Day8 have low coverage (Appendix L.4) it becomes clear that sample Day8 was not
successfully sequenced. MP and NS (and partly NA) are the only segments in sample
Day8 with good coverage, however, MP has an excessive number of minority variants
(Appendix 3.1b). This is a sign of contamination from a different influenza subtype,
further confirming that something has gone wrong while processing the sample.
An excessive number of minority variants is also seen in the HA segment for sample
Day3 (Figure 3.1a). Minority variants would not show up in the HA or NA segments
33
==PAGE:40==
if they were caused by a secondary subtype, indicating the contamination stems from
another H3N2 virus.
0
500
1000
1500
200
400
600
800
1200
A_HA_H3 position (Day3)
Coverage depth
C
A
T
C
T
A
A
A
C
G
A
G
G
C
T
A
exp. err
C2T
A2C
G2A
G2T
T2C
C2T
G2A
G2A
G2A
T2C
A2G
G2A
A2G
T2G
T2C
C2T
T2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
270
316
359
395
633
726
833
847
875
879
944
1083
1251
1323
1359
1363
1455
(a) Day3 HA
0
200
400
600
800
1000
200
400
600
800
1000
120
A_MP position (Day8)
Coverage depth
A
ACA
A C TATCTAAC
CGGAGTGAGA GAAATAATACTGCAGCGAGGACAAC CA
G
G
exp. err
T2G
G2A
G2A
C2A
G2A
T2C
G2A
C2A
T2C
G2T
G2A
G2T
A2C
A2T
G2A
C2A
A2C
A2C
A2G
A2G
G2A
T2G
C2T
A2G
G2A
A2G
G2A
A2G
G2A
C2A
G2A
C2T
G2A
G2A
C2T
G2A
T2C
C2T
A2G
T2C
G2A
A2G
T2C
A2G
G2A
A2G
A2G
G2A
T2C
C2A
G2A
T2C
T2C
C2A
A2G
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
189216238
252
297309315
375
399
426438441
447
450
456
471
478519521522
528540546555570
585591
613
620
622
625627
639
652654660
672678
679
696
711
715720
726735
747750756
762
775
778781800
815
860
892
(b) Day8 MP
Figure 3.1: Coverage plots of HA in sample Day3 and MP in sample Day8. These
segments show signs of contamination with a high number of minority variants identified
by IRMA
34
==PAGE:41==
All coverage plots can be seen in appendix L. Generally, the assembly of the segments
by IRMA was successful, apart from PB1 which shows low average depth and couldn’t
be assembled for sample Day8.
3.1.2
Minority variant analysis
IRMA identified 165 minority variants in total, which were subsequently filtered in order to
exclude sequencing errors. We proceeded with variants with frequency ≥2.5%, average
quality ≥30, depth ≥100, and count ≥15. 47 minority variants were left after filtering,
which can be seen from table 3.3. Of these 26 were non-synonymous (Appendix F).
The maximum number of minority variants found is four in the PA segment in sample
Day1_1. PA is also the only segment showing minority variants in every sample and is,
therefore, the segment showing the most diversity in our data. The PB1 segment has
no minority variants which was expected as it has poor coverage in all samples. The
remaining segments all fluctuate between 0-3 variants per sample.
Segment
Sample
Day1_1
Day1_2
Day3
Day8
Day14
Day17
Day21
Total
PB2
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
3
PB1
0
0
0
NA
0
0
0
0
PA
4
2
3
2
2
1
1
15
HA
1
1
2
0
2
1
2
9
NP
0
3
2
0
1
1
0
7
NA
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
4
MP
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
2
NS
0
0
1
3
1
1
1
7
Total
5
9
9
6
7
5
6
47
Table 3.3: Number of minority variants left after filtering, in each segment and sample.
NB: sequencing of PB1 for sample Day8 failed.
Minority variant frequency
We were interested in seeing if any minority variants increased in frequency and possibly
became the consensus in the patient during the time of illness. The variants in at least
one sample that appear at a frequency ≥2.5% were used to plot their frequency for each
sample along with the consensus nucleotide frequency at the same position. We are
highlighting the most interesting variants here, while all relative frequency plots can be
found in appendix E.
Due to the previously explained lack of data in sample Day8, a number of frequency
35
==PAGE:42==
plots show 100% N for this sample. Note that the height of the bars shows the rela-
tive frequency, while the percentage labels show the observed frequency. Meaning,
the height of colored portions shows how big a proportion a variant has out of just the
data we’ve included at that position. If a site has a consensus, a minority variant at
≥2.5%, and a second minority variant at <2.5%, the second variant will be excluded
from the plotting data. This is done since we are only interested in the evolution of pro-
portions of the high-frequency variants and the consensus and for comparison of the
proportions, it is easier to exclude the low-frequency variant. The observed frequen-
cies shown as labels on the bars, show the non-relative frequency. Non-relative plots
can be found on GitHub (https://github.com/JulieKragmose/Masters-thesis/tree/main/
QuasispeciesAnalysis/MinorityFrequencies/Non-relative).
Some plots show an almost complete change of consensus base in sample Day8. For
example, PA position 184: All samples clearly have G as consensus, but in sample Day8
the consensus is A at 99.32% frequency and changes back to G on day 14 (Appendix
E.1b). We assume this confusing signal is again due to the lack of data for sample Day8.
In the HA protein, the T1359C mutation is present in the first three samples (Day1_1,
Day1_2, Day3) but then disappears (Figure 3.2a). We cannot say anything about its
frequency in sample Day8 due to missing data. This could be an example of a variant
’co-existing’ with the consensus nucleotide, however, not a very striking one as it is only
for three days. Also in the HA protein is a sudden emergence of the G927A variant at
a high enough frequency (58.3%) to become the consensus at this position. Unfortu-
nately, as this variant emerges in the last sample, we cannot say if this variant becomes
fixed as the consensus in the population or not. Both mutations are synonymous and
the protein sequence remains unchanged.
The NA protein has another example of a consensus change at position 277, where a
G is replaced by C first on day 14 at 36.49% and three days later (sample Day17) it
has risen to 83.81%, becoming the consensus (Figure 3.2c. However, four days later
(sample Day21) the frequency has fallen drastically to 19.12%. The mutation is non-
synonymous, changing a glycine (G) for serine (S). S is an amino acid with a polar
uncharged side chain while G is a ”special case” amino acid, meaning this mutation
could potentially have an effect on the protein structure or function.
36
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: Frequencies of the (a)T1343C and (b)G927A mutations in the HA protein,
and G277A in the NA protein, as well as the corresponding consensus nucleotides.
The polymerase proteins show a varied number of unique variants through all the sam-
ples. PB2 has three, PA has seven, PA-X has three, while PB1 and PB1-F2 have none
due to low coverage (Appendix F). PB2 shows no clear signal of variants being fixed
in the population, although in sample Day21 there is a G→A mutation at position 1189
appearing at a frequency of 13.88% (Appendix E.1a). Unfortunately, as sample Day21
is the last sample, we cannot say more about this variant. PA has no variants moving
toward being fixed either, however, in this protein we see the only occurrence of a mi-
nority variant ’co-existing’ with the majority nucleotide throughout the whole period of
illness (Figure 3.3). Although the variant never becomes the consensus, it still persists
at high frequencies in most of the samples. Data for sample Day8 is missing due to low
coverage. This mutation is non-synonymous, causing an alanine (A) to be replaced by
valine (V). Both amino acids have hydrophobic side chains, and therefore belong to the
same functional group.
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.3: Frequencies of C1343T mutation in the PA protein, as well as the corre-
sponding consensus nucleotide.
Of the remaining proteins, only NS1 has a mutation worth highlighting: G193A. The fre-
quencies of this variant follow the same pattern as G277A did in NA. It appears in sam-
ple Day14 (8.95%), becomes the consensus in sample Day17 (72.87%), and thereafter
drastically decreases in sample Day21 (9.04%). This is a non-synonymous mutation
changing a valine (V) to isoleucine (I), both amino acids with hydrophobic side chains.
Figure 3.4: Frequencies of G193A mutation in the NS1 protein, as well as the corre-
sponding consensus nucleotide.
38
==PAGE:45==
All in all, there is no overwhelming signal of minority variants evolving and rising in fre-
quency in the viral population. We do see a few consensus changes, although they are
quickly reversed back to the original consensus. We also see a few variants persisting
for some days, particularly PA 1343 which is present in all samples.
In-phase variants/minority strains
To get a better picture of the viral population present in the patient, we made use of
the phasing data provided by IRMA, as in-phase variants stem from sub-populations.
From this data, the aim was to create a FASTA file essentially representing each viral
segment strain present in the population.
IRMA provides both qualitative and quantitative phasing of variants. The qualitative
phasing is in the form of heat maps created from pairwise distance matrices. These can
be used to transitively infer in-phase variants which are not placed on the same read
or read-pair. Ie. mutation A is linked to B, mutation B is linked to C, hence mutation
A is linked to C. As our results showed no need for transitive inference, the heat maps
are not used for further analysis, but can be found on https://github.com/JulieKragmose/
Masters-thesis/tree/main/QuasispeciesAnalysis/Phasing/HeatMaps. The quantitative phas-
ing provided by IRMA gives more directly applicable information on in-phase variants,
as minority variants are divided into phase groups. These phase groups can be seen as
representing the different segment strains present in the population. In-phase variants
used to reconstruct minority strain sequences can be seen in appendix G. Note that a
FASTA file for a strain is also created even if there is only one minority variant belonging
to the phase group. This just means the minority strain has one nucleotide difference
from the consensus.
The reconstruction resulted in 2-6 minority strains for each sample. The minority strain
with the highest number of variants is the HA segment in sample Day3, with three vari-
ants. The remaining strains have 1-2 variants. None of the segments exceed a minority
strain count of three, with the majority having one minority strain. The HA and PA seg-
ments have at least one minority strain in each sample, while NA has a minority strain
in five of the seven samples.
We can conclude from our attempt to map the subpopulation by reconstructing minority
strains, that not a lot of diversity is found in the subpopulation. The most diverse strain
has three variant sites compared to the consensus sequence, while the majority of the
strains have only one.
39
==PAGE:46==
Indels
Besides single point mutations, IRMA also provides information on indels found in the
assembled segments. No insertions fulfilling the criteria of depth ≥100, average quality
≥30, frequency ≥2.5%, and count ≥15 were found in the patient data. A number of
deletions fulfilling the same criteria (except average quality, as deletions have no quality)
were identified. We will focus on deletions with frequency ≥10%, but all deletions can
be seen in appendix H. Deletions found with a frequency ≥10% were only found in the
PA segment at five different nucleotide positions (Table 3.4). The sequences containing
these deletions were reconstructed to show the effect on the protein sequence (Figure
3.5). All the deletions cause frameshift mutations.
Segment
Position
(first nucleotide
in deletion)
Length(nt)
Present in
sample(s)...
Frequency
Effect
PA
163
20
Day1_1
Day1_2
Day3
32.73%
31%
14.80%
Frameshift
PA
1892
59
Day1_1
Day1_2
Day3
54.46%
23.75%
3.20%
Frameshift
PA
1903
92
Day3
19.20%
Frameshift
PA
1940
7
Day3
11.23%
Frameshift
PA
1863
22
Day8
48.21%
Frameshift
Table 3.4: Deletions identified by IRMA with frequency ≥10%
Most of the deletions are relatively long and reach surprisingly high frequencies. For ex-
ample, the deletion starting at nucleotide position 1892 in PA (del1892): 59 nucleotides
are deleted, resulting in 19 lost amino acids and a frameshift mutation (Figure 3.5b).
This seems like a considerable loss for a virus with a short genome and yet in sample
Day1_1, it reaches a frequency of 54.45%. However, it is not represented in the con-
sensus sequence as IRMA demands a frequency above 60% before including a deletion
in the consensus. Over the following three days it then drops to 3.20% and then disap-
pears from the population. It is not surprising that viruses carrying del1892 disappear
from the population as it very likely has a damaging effect. On the other hand, it would be
40
==PAGE:47==
interesting to determine how a frequency of 54.45% was achieved in the first place. The
deletion begins at position 1892, while the PA protein is encoded by positions 25-2175
in the PA segment. This means the deletion appears close to the end of the protein,
which possibly is less detrimental to the protein, even though the frameshift mutation
creates multiple premature stop codons. Del1892 does not affect the PA-X protein.
The deletion starting at position 163 in PA (del163) is shorter than del1892, removing 20
nucleotides (6 amino acids). However, this deletion still causes a frameshift mutation
(Figure 3.5a) and appears near the beginning of the segment, affecting both the PA
and PA-X proteins. The deletion causes multiple premature stop codons, the first one
appearing at amino acid position 59, reducing the protein from 716 amino acids to 58.
We can only assume this will be detrimental to the protein, but it still reaches a frequency
of 32.73% in sample Day1_1. During the following three days, it decreases in frequency
and then disappears from the population, most likely because of its deleterious effect.
Also, del1863 in sample Day8 reaches a very high frequency of 48.21%. This deletion
removes 22 nucleotides (7 amino acids) and causes a frameshift mutation near the end
of the protein (Figure 3.5e. Del1903 deletes 92 nucleotides (30 amino acids), making it
the longest deletion identified. It only appears once in sample Day3 at 19.20%, causing
a frameshift mutation (Figure 3.5c). Del1940 in sample Day3 also appears just once at
11.23%, causing a frameshift mutation (Figure 3.5d).
All in all, we see some long deletions at surprisingly high frequencies occurring in the
PA segment. These deletions occur mostly within the first three days of the sampling
period and thereafter disappear. A further look should be taken into the effect of these
deletions and how they reached such frequencies.
Resistance
In order to detect potential resistance to antiviral drugs, we consulted the WHO’s data
on resistance-causing mutations. WHO regularly updates its list of amino acids substi-
tutions associated with resistance or reduced susceptibility to the antiviral drugs neu-
raminidase inhibitor (NAI)[98] and Baloxavir[99] (can also be found on GitHub: https://
github.com/JulieKragmose/Masters-thesis/tree/main/QuasispeciesAnalysis/Resistance). We
found no resistance-related mutations among the minority variants, however, a few mu-
tations of interest were found in the consensus sequences.
WHO reports that the mutation N329K can cause resistance to NAIs[54, 69]. At position
329 in the NA consensus sequences, we do not see a K but an S (Figure 3.6). Further
41
==PAGE:48==
(a) PA 163 deletion
(b) PA 1892 deletion
(c) PA 1903 deletion
(d) PA 1940 deletion
(e) PA 1863 deletion
Figure 3.5: Reconstructed strains with the deletions aligned with their respective con-
sensus sequences. Visualized with Jalview[34] at the beginning of the deletion.
42
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.6: Alignment of NA segment consensus sequences from all samples. Position
329 is highlighted.
studies are needed to say if this would have a significant effect on the protein function
or could cause resistance.
Two mutations have been found to cause resistance to NAIs in the influenza A(H3N2)v
virus[98]: S245N and S247P. This virus normally circulates in pigs but has been known
to occasionally infect humans[56, 71]. In every sample’s consensus sequence of the
NA segment, we see an N at position 245 matching the amino acid causing resistance in
A(H3N2)v (Figure 3.7). At position 247 we see a T in all sample consensus sequences,
which does not match the recorded mutation, but is different from the pre-mutation amino
acid. However, as our data is from an H3N2 virus and these mutations have been
recorded as causing resistance in A(H3N2)v virus, further studies would be needed to
tell if it is a significant result.
Figure 3.7: Alignment of NA segment consensus sequences from all samples. Posi-
tions 245 and 247 are highlighted.
We ran the Day1_1 NA nucleotide consensus sequence with the BLAST[5] web tool, to
43
==PAGE:50==
ensure our strain is indeed H3N2 and not A(H3N2)v. A CSV file with the top 50 hits can
be found at https://github.com/JulieKragmose/Masters-thesis/blob/main/QuasispeciesAnalysis/
BlastResults/Day1_1/NA_Blast_top50.csv. The sequence matched perfectly to H3N2
strains and no A(H3N2)v strains were among the results.
In conclusion, we found no signs of resistance within the minority variants or consensus
sequences. However, a few sites in the consensus sequence of the NA segment stood
out; One site (245N) matches a mutation (S245N) causing resistance in A(H3N2)v, but
more research into this question is needed in order to determine its significance.
3.1.3
Reinfection analysis
To confirm that our data set is a result of one long-term influenza infection and not re-
infections by other strains, we performed three analyses to ensure the segments were
from the same ancestor; Pairwise genetic distance, phylogenetic tree, and molecular
clock.
Pairwise genetic distance
First, pairwise genetic distance was found between the consensus sequences of each
segment to detect changes in the consensus sequences over the period of illness. Any
sudden change in distance can indicate the introduction of a new virus. The distance
is visualized as heatmaps both with counts and percentage of dissimilar sites between
consensus sequences. This analysis was done for all segments, however, only the
heat maps showing the percentage of dissimilarity for HA and NA segments will be
highlighted here, while the remaining segments can be seen in appendix I. Heat maps
showing distance by the count of dissimilar sites can be seen in appendix I.2.
44
==PAGE:51==
(a) HA
(b) NA
Figure 3.8: Percentage of dissimilarity between consensus sequences of the HA and
NA segment.
45
==PAGE:52==
The consensus sequences of the HA segment clearly show that sample Day8 is ex-
tremely dissimilar to all other samples(∼90%)(Figure 3.8a). However, this is caused
by very low coverage of the HA segment in sample Day8 (Appendix L.4c), meaning no
bases could be called for the majority of positions and the consensus consists mainly
of Ns. The remaining samples have either almost or completely identical consensus
sequences. The NA segments show a similar pattern of sample Day8 having a higher
dissimilarity than the rest (∼10%), while the remaining samples are either almost of
completely identical (Figure 3.8b).
The remaining segments (Appendix I) show mostly the same pattern. The MP con-
sensus is completely identical in every sample, while the NS and PB2 segments have
almost the same consensus sequences over the period of illness. Segments NP and PA
both have sample Day8 stand out as having higher dissimilarity, while all other samples
are practically identical. This can again be attributed to low coverage of the NP and PA
segments on day 8, giving a high number of Ns in the consensus sequences (Appendix
L.4b and L.4d). The PB1 segment looks slightly different from the other sequences as
there is more diversity shown between the samples. Note that the sequencing of PB1
for sample Day8 was unsuccessful, hence why sample Day8 is missing from the heat
map. The increased inter-sample diversity can be explained by the fact that PB1 has
poor coverage in all samples and all consensus sequences contain long stretches of
Ns.
This first part of the re-infection analysis showed no signs of re-infection as most con-
sensus sequences were almost identical over the period of illness, and the diversity
observed is explained by poor coverage. This analysis also shows that even though
influenza is a fast-evolving virus, not much diversity is acquired over just a few weeks.
Phylogenetic tree
Second, we gathered a set of all available H3N2 sequences in Denmark from about four
months before and after the patient fell ill (August 1st 2022 to March 31st 2023). This set,
along with the patient data (both consensus sequences and minority strain sequences),
was used to create a phylogenetic tree in order to detect whether any patient sequences
clustered with other strains, indicating a re-infection. As we have already confirmed that
the consensus sequences of all segments are practically identical, we decided to only
make phylogenetic trees for the HA and NA segments.
Clustering of sequences with identity ≥0.995 was applied due to the extremely simi-
46
==PAGE:53==
lar nature of the sequences in the data set, making it difficult to resolve the trees. On
the trees a tip label named, for example, ”23 02 16 194 NA DK” will look like it’s one
sequence from February 2nd 2023, but it is actually a cluster of potentially multiple se-
quences clustered with the ”23 02 16 194 NA DK” sequence. When the sequence clus-
ters are formed by CD-HIT they are named by the first sequence placed in the cluster. It
is tempting to say that a cluster named ”22 09 20 3058 NA DK” contains only sequences
from just around September 20th 2022, however, that is not necessarily the case. Due
to the short time span and the small geographical area used in the data set, the se-
quences are very similar and they become difficult to cluster. Therefore, the names of
the sequence clusters should not be used as a definite representative of the dates of
the sequences included. The summary files of sequences belonging to each cluster
provided by CD-HIT can be found at https://github.com/JulieKragmose/Masters-thesis/
tree/main/QuasispeciesAnalysis/Phylogenetics/ClusterInfo.
Minority strains were included in this analysis, in order to represent as much of the
diversity in the patient as possible. As can be seen from figure 3.9a the HA segment
sequences from the patient form a monophyletic group, with none of the strains from
around this time period. If a re-infection had occurred, we would expect to see some of
the sample sequences outside of the monophyletic group, as they possibly have a higher
identity to other strains circulating at the time. The NA segment sequences also form
a separate monophyletic group (Figure 3.9b), although with one cluster of non-patient
data included. As the tree doesn’t show any clear signs of re-infection, this non-patient
sequence cluster is presumed to be caused by generally high identity sequences making
it difficult to resolve the tree.
The phylogenetic trees do not give any indication of a re-infection having occurred in the
HA and NA segments, further supporting the theory that the patient had one long-term
infection.
47
==PAGE:54==
(a) HA
(b) NA
Figure 3.9: Phylogenetic tree of HA and NA sequences both from patient and strains
circulating from August 2022 to March 2023. Green denotes 2022 sequences, while red
denotes 2023 sequences. Patient sequences are highlighted in yellow.
48
==PAGE:55==
Molecular clock
The third part of the re-infection analysis is to see if the viral population evolves with
molecular clock-like behavior, meaning constantly over time. If there are any drastic
shifts away from the constant rate, it could indicate the introduction of another virus. The
results for the HA and NA segments are highlighted here, while the remaining segment’s
molecular clocks can be seen in appendix J.
Since there is very little variation in the sample sequences, it gave almost completely
horizontal regression lines showing very little evidence of molecular clock behavior, ie.
a constant rate of evolution. We’ve visualized the data with the y-axis range around
the data points, in order to see more details. However, it should be noted that the
y-axis range is very short and any diversity observed in the data points is minuscule.
The molecular clock plots for HA and NA will be presented here, while the remaining
segments can be found in appendix J.
(a) HA
Figure 3.10: Root-to-tip distances in the HA and NA segments plotted as a function of
sampling days. A regression line and confidence interval (grey area) are added. Blue
points are consensus sequences, while orange points are minority strain sequences
49
==PAGE:56==
(b) NA
Figure 3.10: Continued: Root-to-tip distances in the HA and NA segments plotted as
a function of sampling days. A regression line and confidence interval (grey area) are
added. Blue points are consensus sequences, while orange points are minority strain
sequences.
The molecular clock analysis for the HA segment (Figure 3.10a) show there is little
variation between samples, as we had already observed from the pairwise distance
analysis (section 3.1.3). We included the minority strains in this analysis, but it didn’t
add much in terms of diversity. This was also not a surprise as we know each minority
strain only has about 1-3 nucleotides different from the consensus (Appendix G). The NA
segment’s molecular clock (Figure 3.10b) shows the same pattern of almost no variation
between the samples.
R2 and confidence interval (grey area) are added on the plots. The R2 value represents
the percentage of variance in the root-to-tip distance that can be explained by the sam-
pling day. The regression lines for all segments have very low R2 values (<0.1), but
this is not necessarily a problem. Although the regression lines don’t perfectly fit the
data points, they follow the trends quite well when looking at the plot. The low R2 could
possibly be caused by outliers in the data points. The grey area shows the confidence
50
==PAGE:57==
interval, describing the variance around the regression line. At first glance it can seem
like the confidence intervals are very large, indicating uncertainty. But this is due to the
very short y-axis range, and the confidence intervals are in reality quite small.
The results of this third part of the re-infection analysis show no signs of re-infection as
the regression lines follow a clear trend, despite the low R2 values. Again, we see a
lack of diversity between samples, probably due to the short time period. If the period of
illness had been much longer, we would expect to have seen a more constant evolution,
ie. molecular clock behavior, of the segments.
All together, these three analyses showed no signs of a different virus having been
introduced during the period of illness. We can therefore conclude that no re-infection
had occurred and the illness was indeed due to one long-term infection.
3.2
Contamination analysis
As previously described, during the read-gathering phase of the IRMA pipeline, unus-
able reads are removed, including non-flu-like reads. In theory, this means the reads
used for assembly should be free from contamination. However, as influenza A has
multiple subtypes, it is still possible for reads from a different subtype to be passed on
to the assembly. Other subtypes can be introduced in a sample by contamination dur-
ing processing in the lab. IRMA does not directly address potential contamination, but
different parts of its output can give indications of contamination. This poses an issue
for influenza surveillance pipelines based on IRMA to assemble a multitude of influenza
genomes every week, as it is not feasible to manually check every sample for contami-
nation. We’ve, therefore, developed a script for summarizing the output, making it quick
and straightforward for the user to detect contaminated samples. The current version
of the script is meant as a starting point for further development. We tested on the
same patient data used for the quasispecies analysis (Section 2.1.2). Additionally, we
also tested on two influenza samples supplied by SSI, previously showing clear signs
of contamination.
3.2.1
Patient data
The script was run on the IRMA output folders for the seven patient samples. The
content of contaminationReport.txt, summarizing results for all samples can be seen in
Figure 3.11.
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.11: Content of output file, contaminationReport.txt, summarizing results for all
seven samples
The contamination analysis flagged samples Day3 and Day8 as being potentially con-
taminated. This corresponds to what we observed previously; Day3 and Day8 each
have a segment with an excessive number of minority variants (Figure 3.1). We can
see from the contamination report, that samples Day3 and Day8 were flagged due to an
excessive number of minority variants and at least one has a frequency ≥2.5%. It will
be up to the user to look further into the output and decide whether the sample is in fact
contaminated. The flow of how samples Day3 and Day8 were processed by the script
can be seen in figure 3.12
Figure 3.12: Flow of how samples Day3 and Day8 were processed by IRMA to detect
potential contamination. The path is shown with black arrows. Flag1 and Flag2 are
raised (green), while the last three flags remain unraised (red)
52
==PAGE:59==
An output file containing more details on the analysis is created for each sample. The
content of this file for sample Day8 can be seen in figure 3.13, where we can see that the
MP segment has been marked with *, meaning a flag has been raised for this segment.
We also see that the MP segment is ”allowed” to have a maximum of 4 minority variants,
but 56 have been found in sample Day8. That raises Flag1. Next, we see that 4 minority
variants have a frequency ≥2.5% and this raises Flag2. Since the proportion of high-
frequency variants is below 50%, Flag3 is not raised. The number of secondary read
patterns is <1% of the primary read patterns, and Flag4 is therefore not raised. No
assembly of secondary segments was found, and Flag5 is therefore not raised either.
The report shows the presence of some reads assigned to H1N1. These reads could
just be misclassified by IRMA or could be from low-level contamination. The presence
of a PB1 segment with 7 reads among the secondary data is curious, as PB1 only has
one reference and secondary reads should be put in as minority variants. The reason is
that PB1 was unsuccessfully sequenced for sample Day8 giving only 7 reads, which is
not enough for assembling the segment. The reads have therefore been placed with the
secondary data by IRMA. A few read patterns are also assigned to influenza B, which
could indicate low-level contamination by influenza B samples in the lab.
The detailed contamination report for sample Day3 shows that flags were raised for the
HA segment due to having 17 minority variants (Figure 3.14). When excessive minority
variants show up in the HA or NA segment, it is likely due to contamination or co-infection
by a different H3N2 virus. We also see a presence of H1N1 read patterns, indicating
some additional contamination by a secondary subtype. Influenza B also seems to be
present, as five of its segments are represented though only by 1-2 read patterns.
The output files of the remaining samples can be found in appendix K.
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 3.13:
Content of detailed contamination analysis file for sample Day8
(Day8_contaminationReport.txt)
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure 3.14:
Content of detailed contamination analysis file for sample Day3
(Day3_contaminationReport.txt)
55
==PAGE:62==
3.2.2
Contaminated samples
For testing the script on data we know to be contaminated, SSI provided two influenza
samples (named Cont1 and Cont2) which previously showed clear signs of contami-
nation. Cont1 shows an excessive number of minority variants, in several segments
(Appendix L.8), while Cont2 generally suffers from low coverage, but shows an exces-
sive number of variants in one segment (AppendixL.9).
The raw data of the two contaminated samples were assembled using IRMA as de-
scribed in section 2.1.3, and contaminationAnalysis.py was subsequently run on the
output. As can be seen from figure 3.15 the first three flags were raised for both sam-
ples, hence both samples are flagged as potentially contaminated. It is worth noting that,
once again, only flags pertaining to minority variants were raised, while flags related to
secondary data remain unraised. This suggests the need for adjusting the criteria and/or
thresholds of Flag4 and Flag5, as we would like the contamination report to reflect the
severity of concerning data in a sample such as Cont1.
Figure 3.15: Content of output file, contaminationReport.txt, summarizing results for
the two contaminated samples
The detailed contamination report for Cont1 shows almost the exact pattern we’d ex-
pect to see for a contaminated sample (Figure 3.16). Segments PB2, PA, MP, and NS
have an excessive number of minority variants, while NP has the maximum number
allowed and PB1 has too poor coverage for any variants to be called (Appendix L.8b).
These are the segment with no reference for their subtypes, meaning contamination
from secondary subtypes will appear as minority variants and not as secondary data.
Meanwhile, we see there are read patterns present from H1, H5, and N1, indicating a
H1N1 and/or H5N1 virus is the source of contamination.
56
==PAGE:63==
Figure 3.16: Content of detailed contamination report for contaminated sample Cont1
57
==PAGE:64==
From the tests performed on samples showing different degrees of contamination, we
can conclude that the script performs as desired since it has flagged every sample we
suspected to be contaminated. There is however room for further improvement, as with
the current setup it seems unlikely that Flag4 and Flag5 will ever be raised.
3.3
Seasonal variant evolution
In order to investigate the seasonal evolution of amino acid changes, we applied the
Sweep Dynamics software developed specifically for fast-evolving viruses. The aim was
to identify amino acid changes rising rapidly in frequency and potentially becoming fixed
in the population, as well as variants being out-competed. We performed the analysis on
the HA and NA segments, using all publicly available H3N2 sequences from November
2015 to May 2022. However, no sequences are available from the last three months of
2015. Additionally, all sequences with a date from 2016 are from the last three months
of the year, hence those sequences belong to 2017. Therefore, the years 2015 and
2016 are not represented in the following.
Due to Sweep Dynamics being developed for finding selective sweeps between seasons
(N and S), we ran into an issue as our data set consists purely of Danish sequences.
Denmark is in the northern hemisphere (N season) which means we had practically no
S season sequences in our dataset. This resulted in Sweep Dynamics runs with no
significant results, as half the count table had no data, which affected the calculation of
p-values.
We decided to manually change the source code to do calculations based on years
instead of seasons, with an influenza year starting on October 1st, however, this pre-
sented us with a new set of challenges. First, Sweep Dynamics’ sampling function was
developed for sampling seasons and not years, so we opted to do our own sampling
before running the analysis. This presented us with our second challenge: The number
of sequences we are able to sample per year is limited by the year with the fewest se-
quences. As can be seen from table 3.5, we generally have a low number of sequences
for each year (HA:9-73, NA:7-36), apart from 2022 (HA:532, NA:383). 2021 has the
lowest number of sequences for both HA and NA, which meant the sampling size for
HA was set to 9 and NA to 7.
58
==PAGE:65==
Year
# HA
sequences
# NA
sequences
2017
36
9
2018
31
26
2019
73
27
2020
34
36
2021
9
7
2022
349
278
Total
532
383
Table 3.5: Number of sequences belonging to each year in the dataset of 2015-2022
Danish HA and NA segments.
We performed five runs on the HA and NA segments separately, and as can be seen
from figure 3.17 and figure 3.18 they yielded very inconsistent results. Note, that SD
plots show variant labels of the significant amino acid changes above the upper x-
axis. Due to the high number of significant variants for some years, it has been nec-
essary to cut a big portion from the plots shown here, while for some years you cannot
see the variant labels at all, for the same reason. The uncut plots showing all vari-
ant labels can be found at https://github.com/JulieKragmose/Masters-thesis/tree/main/
SweepDynamics/Plots.
Year
# Significant frequency changes
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Run 4
Run 5
2017
0
0
0
0
0
2018
0
0
0
0
0
2019
0
2
2
204
0
2020
0
0
0
0
0
2021
221
232
208
213
228
2022
17
16
16
21
11
Table 3.6: Number of significant variant frequency increases identified in the HA seg-
ment by five separate Sweep Dynamics runs. The sampling size is 9 sequences per
year.
59
==PAGE:66==
(a) HA - Run 1
(b) HA - Run 2
(c) HA - Run 3
(d) HA - Run 4
(e) HA - Run 5
Figure 3.17: SD plots for five separate Sweep Dynamics run of the HA segment with
sample size 9. Asterisk (*) denotes the first year a variant is marked as having a signif-
icant frequency increase. Note, the labels above the plots show amino acid changes in
the year they had a significant increase in frequency. The majority of these labels have
been cropped from the figure due to lack of space.
60
==PAGE:67==
As can be seen from table 3.6 none of the analyses found any variants with significant
frequency changes in the HA segment for years 2017, 2018, and 2020. All runs found
roughly the same number of significant changes for years 2021 (213-232 significant
changes) and 2022 (11-21 significant changes). However, the runs gave quite incon-
sistent results for 2019 (0-204 significant changes). The only clear result is that the five
runs each found the most significant increases in 2021.
SD plots for the NA segment also show inconsistent patterns for each run (Figure 3.18).
The analyses for the NA segment show even less consistency, apart from no runs finding
any significant changes for the years 2017, 2019, and 2020 (Table 3.7). The remain-
ing years show a larger spread in counts, especially 2018 (0-220 significant changes)
and 2021 (0-209 significant changes), while 2022 has a smaller spread (0-5 significant
changes).
Year
# Significant frequency changes
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Run 4
Run 5
2017
0
0
0
0
0
2018
0
0
2
5
220
2019
0
0
0
0
0
2020
0
0
0
0
0
2021
0
0
209
179
37
2022
0
0
5
3
3
Table 3.7: Number of significant variant frequency increases identified in the NA seg-
ment by five separate Sweep Dynamics runs. The sampling size is 7 sequences per
year.
The developers of Sweep Dynamics do not explain why some lines are colored and why
others are gray. In a predecessor tool to Sweep Dynamics introducing allele dynamics
(AD) plots[39], they explain: ”Alleles that reach a prevalence of more than 95% and are
subsequently fixed are shown in color; all other alleles are shown in gray”[39, p. 6]. We
assume the same applies to SD plots.
From this analysis of seasonal variation, we did not obtain any results from which we
can make conclusions about the seasonal change in variant frequencies. This issue
was caused by a generally low number of samples per year (apart from 2022), and with
61
==PAGE:68==
(a) NA - Run 1
(b) NA - Run 2
(c) NA - Run 3
(d) NA - Run 4
(e) NA - Run 5
Figure 3.18: SD plots for five separate Sweep Dynamics run of the NA segment with
sample size 7. Asterisk (*) denotes the first year a variant is marked as having a signif-
icant frequency increase. Note, the labels above the plots show amino acid changes in
the year they had a significant increase in frequency. The majority of these labels have
been cropped from the figure due to lack of space.
62
==PAGE:69==
2021 only having 9 and 7 sequences for HA and NA, respectively, it was impossible to
apply a sample size large enough to produce any kind of meaningful results as too much
information was discarded. The developers of Sweep Dynamics used the sampling
sizes of 250 for H3N2 and 300 for H1N1. The only conclusion we can draw is that we
need a lot more samples (200-300 per year). We can also say that Sweep Dynamics in
its original form is best applied to a global data set or at least a data set containing an
acceptable number of S season sequences.
63
==PAGE:70==
64
==PAGE:71==
4
Discussion
4.1
Quasispecies analysis
4.1.1
Cause of patient’s prolonged illness
One of the questions we sought to answer with the quasispecies analysis, was why
the patient was so heavily affected by a common seasonal H3N2 infection. Normally,
an infection lasts 4-5 days[93], but we know this patient tested positive for influenza A
seven times during November 2022 and twice during the beginning of December (not
sequenced). The staff at SSI had detected no changes in the consensus sequences
to raise concern, and therefore we looked beyond the consensus and into the minority
variants for possible answers.
The change in minority variant frequencies over the period of illness did not show much
signal of variants changing in the sub-population, instead showing a relatively static viral
population. However, a non-synonymous mutation at position 1343 (A→V) in the PA
segment was present at substantial proportions in all samples with sufficient data (Figure
3.3). This could potentially be an example of the previously described phenomenon of
variants not needing to dominate the population in order to serve a purpose and survive.
Resistance
Although we have no information on how the patient was treated, it is not far-fetched
to presume they were administered antiviral drugs due to the prolonged nature of the
illness. Therefore, it was relevant to look for resistance to the most commonly used
drugs; NAIs and PAIs. We found no alleles associated with resistance to these drugs in
H3N2 according to WHO’s data[98, 99] in the consensus sequences nor in the minority
variants. Note, we did not look at the consensus sequence of spliced genes. However,
we found a few variants at positions recorded as being related to resistance, however,
not the same amino acid changes (N329K and S247T in figure 3.6 and 3.7). We also
found the S245N mutation which has been proven to cause resistance in the influenza
A(H3N2)v virus[50]. Further studies are needed to detect whether these mutations could
have altered the protein and potentially caused resistance. In future analysis, it would
be interesting to look at the literature for any mutations not yet recorded by WHO.
If the patient had been vaccinated against influenza, it is possible this vaccine was
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
65
==PAGE:72==
ineffective against the infecting strain. It would be interesting to explore this question
further and compare the H3N2 vaccine strain used in 2022 with the patient’s strain.
Differences between the strains could potentially enable the infecting strain to evade
the immune protection provided by the vaccine.
Reassortment
A possible cause of ineffective antiviral treatment or ineffective vaccine protection could
be reassortment in the infecting virus. Reassortment with a secondary subtype, for
example, H1N1pdm09, would have shown up in the IRMA output. Our contamination
analysis showed a few reads assigned to H1N1pdm09 in most samples, and a larger
number in samples Day3 and Day8 (Figure 3.14 and 3.13). This is most likely due
to contamination, and there are therefore no signs of reassortment with a secondary
subtype.
Reassortment with another H3N2 virus would have been detected in the phylogenetic
trees from the re-infection analysis (Figure 3.9a and 3.9b). Segments from the same
sample will cluster with different virus strains, indicating they are closer related to an-
other circulating virus. The trees show no signs of reassortment in the HA and NA
segments, however, we do not have trees for the remaining segments to confirm they
are not reassortant as well. Instead, we look at the pairwise genetic distance heatmaps
(appendix I), which show no sudden increase in dissimilarity and therefore indicate that
no reassortment occurred during the period of illness.
Swabbing bias
It should be addressed that the swabbing could have had an influence on our results. All
samples are acquired by throat swabbing, but it should be looked further into whether
bias can still be introduced. An indication in our results that swabbing from the same
area might not ”catch” the same population every time can be seen from samples Day1_1
and Day1_2. When comparing the coverage plots, also showing minority variants, of
these two samples (Appendix L.1 and L.2) we see a difference in the minority variants
identified by IRMA. Particularly in the NA, NP, HA, PA, and PB2 segments. We would
not expect to see these differences in two samples taken from the same location on the
same day.
It is curious that the two samples, Day1_1 and Day1_2, have been taken on the same
day in the first place, and we do not know the reason for this. The two samples were also
registered at exactly the same time of day, which could indicate that one of the samples
was taken at a previous time, maybe even a previous day, and registered late. If that is
66
==PAGE:73==
the case, the differences in minority variants could just be a result of time passed and
not swabbing bias.
4.1.2
Challenges of doing quasispecies analysis on influenza virus
The challenge with influenza is that it is so common, you’d assume there’d be droves of
sequenced genomes available, however, only a small number of patients are tested and
have samples sent to SSI for analysis. This results in a severe under-representation of
the circulating strains and limited data to use for analysis.
This limitation presented itself when we were to choose data for our quasispecies analy-
sis. As we were performing an intra-host analysis we needed one patient who had been
sampled multiple times. Since influenza is a short-termed disease and rarely tested
for, this is very difficult to obtain. The patient used in our analysis had been sampled
nine times over a month (only seven were successfully sequenced), which is uncom-
monly many samples for one period of illness. And yet, in our quasispecies analysis,
we concluded that more data over a longer period of time is needed to properly ob-
serve changes in the viral population. This could be seen by the consensus sequences
showing very little change from the first to the last sample (Figure 3.8a, 3.8b and Ap-
pendix I). This presents a new obstacle when investigating quasispecies in influenza,
as an infection persisting long enough to provide the needed amount of data is very
improbable.
4.1.3
Mapping the sub-population
IRMA’s ability to detect in-phase minor variants is a distinguishing feature but still presents
some limitations. MiSeq reads are 250 base pairs, which limits the distance between
variants before uncertainty is introduced. If two mutations are not placed on the same
read or read pair, we cannot say with certainty they are in phase. IRMA provides heat
maps that can be utilized for this purpose. The heat maps show clusters of in-phase
variants and can be used to do transitive inference of far-apart in-phase variants. Ie.
mutation A is linked to B, mutation B is linked to C, hence mutation A is linked to C.
In an attempt to map the different strains present in the viral population, we reconstructed
minority strains by introducing in-phase variants into the consensus sequences. How-
ever, this reconstruction has a few shortcomings. First, IRMA does not provide phasing
information on indels, meaning these are not represented in the minority strains. Sec-
ond, we currently have no way of knowing how the segments themselves are phased,
ie. what the true composition of the reconstructed segments is (Figure 4.1). This makes
67
==PAGE:74==
us unable to say how many viral strains are within the population, although we do have
an indication of the population of variant segments in the samples.
PB2
PB1
PA
HA
NP
NA
MP
NS
Sequencing
+
Assembly
Strain 1
Strain 2
PB2
PB1
PA
HA
NP
NA
MP
NS
Consensus
Reconstruct minority strains 
with in-phase variants
PB2
HA
MP
PB2
PB1
PA
HA
NP
NA
MP
NS
Consensus + minority segments
PB2
PB1
PA
HA
NP
NA
MP
NS
What does the viral population 
look like?
?
?
?
Figure 4.1: A sample includes multiple virus strains. When consensuses are assembled
and minority strains reconstructed, we cannot know their original composition.
68
==PAGE:75==
4.1.4
Minority variant frequency threshold
We used a frequency threshold of 2.5% for filtering minority variants, ensuring we did
not include sequencing errors in the analyses. The minority variant count went from
165 to 47 after filtering, and we did not see much diversity in the quasispecies analysis.
It should be considered for future studies whether a lower threshold should be used
in order to include more variants. Other studies of minority variants have used lower
frequency thresholds of 0.5-2%[68, 72, 61, 43]. Lowering the frequency threshold will
increase the amount of minority data in the analysis, however, it would be at the cost of
including potential errors.
4.1.5
Deletions in PA
One of our most curious findings was the presence of long deletions, causing frame-
shift mutations, at high frequencies (Table 3.4). All deletions detected appeared in the
polymerase segments PB2 and PA (Appendix H), with the majority being in PA. The
PA protein mainly plays a role during transcription, when it binds to PB1 and utilizes
its endonucleolytic activity which is essential for transcription[46]. We would suspect
deletions of this size and frequency to affect the virus’ ability to replicate. However, time
did not allow us to look further into this question. In the future, it would be interesting to
explore the placements of PA’s functional regions and whether they coincide with any
of the deletions. A possibility would also be to look into literature about the polymerase
segments and see if anyone has recorded deletions of the same size and frequency. A
final option is to fold the reconstructed sequences with deletions to see the effect on the
protein structure.
4.1.6
Conclusion and future perspectives
All in all, we found no answers to why the patient’s infection lasted for so long. A possi-
bility is that they were suffering from other illnesses and was possibly immunocompro-
mised. Patients with a compromised immune system have a bigger risk of experiencing
long-term infections and complications[36]. However, we can only speculate on this as
we do not have access to the patient’s medical history.
For future analyses, it is clear that more data over a longer period is needed. It would
also be preferable to make consensus sequences for every protein in the segments,
enabling the detection of resistance-related mutation in the spliced genes as well. Future
analyses could also look into whether any mutations appear in the non-coding regions
of the segments since these have been shown to affect the replication ability of the
virus[33]. However, this will create a new challenge, as IRMA only assembles coding
69
==PAGE:76==
regions of the segments. Protein sequences with minority variants or deletion could be
folded to predict what is the consequence in regards to the protein structure and perhaps
also the function.
4.2
Contamination analysis
4.2.1
Contamination or co-infection?
Co-infection by two influenza subtypes is a rarely detected phenomenon but has been
proven to occur in several cases[53, 23, 35, 37]. One of the segmented viruses’ greatest
weapons is reassortment, which enables the virus to quickly ”outgrow” the population’s
acquired immune protection. Reassortment can only happen during a co-infection, mak-
ing it important to include in regular surveillance, and should ideally be addressed to
some degree by our script. Unfortunately, we can’t tell the difference between contami-
nation and co-infection of two influenza subtypes from the IRMA output. Therefore, the
current version of the script was developed with mostly contamination detection in mind,
but the output could just as well be a reflection of co-infection, as we can’t tell the dif-
ference. One theory that could be applied for further development is that a co-infecting
virus would possibly be more substantially present in the sample than a contaminating
virus (except at high-level contamination). If there is a lot of secondary data it could
indicate co-infection by a different influenza subtype, while less, but still considerate,
amounts of secondary data might indicate contamination. Co-infection by other respi-
ratory viruses than influenza is possible [67], but we’d assume these reads would be
filtered out during IRMA’s read-gathering phase. However, if some reads from an alien
virus were to pass the filtering, they would be placed in unmatched_read_patterns.tar.gz
in the secondary directory of the IRMA output, and therefore should not interfere with
the analysis.
4.2.2
Shortcomings and improvements
Criteria and threshold issues
Subsequent to developing the script, we discovered a serious issue with the criteria for
Flag4; secondary data size exceeding 10% of primary data size. The issue is that even if
we have extremely high-level contamination or co-infection, it will still not be possible for
the secondary read pattern count to reach 10% of the primary read pattern count. Since
IRMA cannot distinguish between subtypes for the PB2, PB1, PA, NP, MP, and NS
segments their reads are used for the primary assembly, hence their reads are included
in the primary read count. Let’s look at a simplified example: A patient is co-infected with
70
==PAGE:77==
equal levels of H3N2 and H1N1 (Figure 4.2). For the sake of argument let’s say H3N2 is
the primary, although in reality there would be no primary in this case. The truth, which
is hidden from us, is that the two viruses have exactly the same read pattern counts,
ie. the size of the secondary data is 100% of the primary data. However, when we run
the sample through IRMA and look at the document READ_COUNTS.txt for information
on the secondary data the read pattern counts of the six non-surface protein segments
have been added to the primary data counts. The size of the secondary data is then:
200
2, 800 = 0.07143
Making us believe the secondary data size is only ∼7.14%. This issue makes Flag4 ob-
solete in its current state, as the percentage will never reach above 10%, and therefore
should be revised in the future.
Figure 4.2: The problem with using the secondary read pattern counts for detecting
contamination. For this example, we have a hypothetical patient co-infected equally
with H3N2 and H1N1. H3N2 is the primary for the sake of argument. (A) Table showing
the true distribution of read pattern counts. (B) Table showing the read pattern counts
output by IRMA.
71
==PAGE:78==
Besides this issue with Flag4, the criteria of a segment having at least one variant with
frequency ≥2.5% (Flag2) is also essentially obsolete. Whether a segment has a high-
frequency variant is not important, only the proportion is. Therefore, the second criterion
could be removed from the analysis.
Flagging of problematic samples
A sample needs 2 of 5 flags to be raised in order to be flagged as potentially contami-
nated in the output file contaminationAnalysis.txt. This means if a sample has, for ex-
ample, more than 100 minority variants in multiple segments, but all have a frequency
<2.5%, Flag1 will be raised while Flag2 and Flag3 remain unraised. Say Flag4 and
Flag5 are also unraised; the sample has 1 out of 5 flags, meaning it will not be marked
as problematic in the output. This is misleading as 100 minority variants in multiple
segments is a clear sign, something is going on that should be looked into.
Improvements
One of IRMA’s advantages is that it provides phasing information on minority variants.
This information could be utilized for the detection of contamination and/or co-infection.
Variants from a secondary influenza subtype should be assigned to the same phase
groups, which could assist in the process of distinguishing between real variants and
contamination.
Currently, the script is focused on analyzing influenza A viruses, but in the future, it
should be expanded to also handle other influenza genera. Particularly, it should be
able to analyze influenza B as it regularly causes infection in humans. Besides handling
secondary genera, the script should also write the proportion of high-frequency variants
to the detailed output file no matter if it exceeds 50% or not.
4.3
Seasonal variant evolution
The analysis of seasonal variant evolution resulted in inconclusive answers, as we were
faced with multiple challenges. Sweep Dynamics is developed for data sets containing
both N and S season sequences and is, therefore, better suited for global analyses.
Sweep Dynamics has previously been used in published scientific research[73] [78],
while some report similar issues to ours, with no significant output[78].
4.3.1
Sampling size
Our main challenge when analyzing seasonal variant evolution, was the lack of samples
for the year 2021, forcing the sampling size to be set to 9 and 7 sequences for HA and
NA, respectively. As previously explained, 2021 had practically no influenza season
72
==PAGE:79==
due to the COVID-19 lockdown, and therefore almost no available samples from this
year. We ran the analysis five times on both HA and NA, giving five SD plots for each
segment differing from each other when ideally they should have been similar. The
issue arises when the sampling sizes, controlled by the low-data years, seriously down-
size the amount of data we otherwise had available from the other years. 2022 has a
respectable number of sequences (HA:532, NA:383), but with the sampling applied we
reduce the data by ∼98% for both HA and NA. As a simplified example illustrated in
figure 4.3, imagine we have a data set of 10 sequences and a sampling size of 4. We
are interested in which variants are found at position 3, which contains 50% S, 30% T,
and 20% A (using all 10 sequences). For every run, 4 random sequences are extracted
and amino acid frequencies are calculated from this data. The frequencies are heavily
dictated by which random samples are chosen, as we see the frequencies between the
runs vary greatly.
Figure 4.3: The issue with down-sizing the data when setting a low sampling number.
The data set has 10 sequences and the sampling size is set to 4. Amino acid frequencies
are calculated from 4 randomly extracted samples for each run.
The solution to this issue is simply to acquire more data for the years 2015-2021. Un-
fortunately, as previously discussed, patients are rarely tested for influenza infections
73
==PAGE:80==
and the available data is therefore limited. We collected our data from GISAID which
contains all available influenza sequences, and it is therefore not possible to redo this
analysis with more data. However, testing for respiratory viruses has intensified after the
COVID-19 pandemic (2020), which is also reflected in the sequence numbers of 2022.
Assuming the levels of testing don’t drop over the next years, this will make it possible
to do a successful analysis of influenza variant evolution within the foreseeable future.
4.3.2
Application and future perspectives
Surveillance of the seasonal changes in influenza viruses is essential as the antigenic
drift enables the viruses to keep evading people’s immune systems, hence new vaccines
need to be developed every year. To provide protection for the following season means
developing a vaccine based on a virus strain recommended by WHO which is believed to
become dominant next season[26, 9]. Tools developed for the prediction of forthcoming
dominant strains can aid this process in the future. Sweep Dynamics has shown promise
in its ability to detect newly emerging strains before their predominance[64, 63], making
it a candidate tool for future strain selection.
74
==PAGE:81==
5
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to explore the diversity in Danish influenza, both the quasis-
pecies within one host and the evolution in the whole population over multiple seasons.
The quasispecies analysis was carried out on data from a patient who fell sick in Novem-
ber 2022 and remained sick for a whole month; an unusually long time for a seasonal
influenza infection. The quasispecies analysis showed only a relatively small number
of minority variants in the viral population and among those only one persisted through
all samples; C1343T in the PA segment. The minority variants showed no signs of
resistance to antiviral drugs and no signs of reassortment in the genome were found,
indicating that the answer to the serious nature of the disease does not lie within the
viral population. We did however find some large deletions at high frequencies which
should be investigated further. We also carried out a reinfection analysis confirming that
the long-term infection was not caused by re-infection by other viruses.
We cannot conclude anything about the evolution of variants over the 2015-2022 Dan-
ish influenza seasons. This is caused by a lack of sequence data in general, particularly
for the year 2021 due to the COVID-19 lockdown. The resulting SD plots were inconclu-
sive since the data was extremely downsized. For the analysis, we developed a small
program called season2year which converts the Sweep Dynamics output from season-
to-season to year-to-year calculations, which allowed us to make SD plots without global
data.
Finally, we developed a script (contaminationAnalysis.py) for flagging samples with po-
tential contamination or co-infection. This script analyses the relevant IRMA output data
and summarises the findings in a single file, easily accessible to the user. Further de-
tails on the analysis are placed in individual files for every sample. This script will help
simplify the detection of contamination in influenza pipelines based on IRMA.
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
75
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1]
J Swetina and P Schuster. Self-replication with Errors - A Model for Polynu-
cleotide Replication. 1982, pp. 329–345.
[2]
Gillian M. Air and W. Graeme Laver. The neuraminidase of influenza virus. 1989.
DOI: 10.1002/prot.340060402.
[3]
Yoshihiro Kawaoka, Scott Krauss, and Robert G Webster. “Avian-to-Human Trans-
mission of the PB1 Gene of Influenza A Viruses in the 1957 and 1968 Pan-
demics”. In: JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY 63 (11 1989), pp. 4603–4608. URL:
https://journals.asm.org/journal/jvi.
[4]
J J Skehel1 et al. “Immune recognition of influenza virus haemagglutinin”. In:
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 323 (1989), pp. 479–485. URL: https://royalsocietypublishing.
org/.
[5]
Altschul SF et al. “Basic local alignment search tool”. In: J Mol Biol 215 (3 1990).
DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2.
[6]
K. Martin and A. Helenius. “Transport of incoming influenza virus nucleocap-
sids into the nucleus”. In: Trends in Cell Biology 2 (1 Jan. 1992), p. 8. ISSN:
09628924. DOI: 10.1016/0962-8924(92)90130-f.
[7]
John W Drake. “Rates of spontaneous mutation among RNA viruses”. In: Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90 (1993), pp. 4171–4175.
[8]
Manfred Eigen. “Viral Quasispecies”. In: 269 (1 1993), pp. 42–49. DOI: 10.2307/
24941546.
[9]
NJ Cox, TL Brammer, and HL Regnery. “Influenza: Global surveillance for epi-
demic and pandemic variants”. In: European Journal of Epidemiology 10 (4 1994),
pp. 467–470.
[10]
Carmen M Ruiz-Jarabo et al. “Memory in Viral Quasispecies”. In: JOURNAL OF
VIROLOGY 74 (8 2000), pp. 3543–3547. URL: https://journals.asm.org/journal/
jvi.
[11]
Manfred Eigen. Error catastrophe and antiviral strategy. 2002, pp. 13374–13376.
URL: www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.212514799.
[12]
Alan W Hampson. “Influenza Virus Antigens and ’Antigenic Drift”’. In: Perspec-
tives in Medical Virology 7 (2002), pp. 49–85.
76
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:83==
[13]
Carmen M. Ruiz-Jarabo et al. “Duration and fitness dependence of quasispecies
memory”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 315 (3 2002), pp. 285–296. ISSN:
00222836. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.5232.
[14]
Carlos Briones, Esteban Domingo, and Carmen Molina-Paris. “Memory in retro-
viral quasispecies: Experimental evidence and theoretical model for human im-
munodeficiency virus”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 331 (1 Aug. 2003), pp. 213–
229. ISSN: 00222836. DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(03)00661-2.
[15]
E. Domingo. “Quasispecies and the development of new antiviral strategies”. In:
Progress in Drug Research 60 (2003), pp. 133–158.
[16]
Stéphane Guindon and Olivier Gascuel. “A Simple, Fast, and Accurate Algorithm
to Estimate Large Phylogenies by Maximum Likelihood”. In: Systematic Biology
52 (5 Oct. 2003), pp. 696–704. ISSN: 10635157. DOI: 10.1080/10635150390235520.
[17]
D.L. Swofford. PAUP*.Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other Meth-
ods). Vol. 4. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts, 2003.
[18]
Stephen E. Lindstrom, Nancy J. Cox, and Alexander Klimov. “Genetic analysis of
human H2N2 and early H3N2 influenza viruses, 1957-1972: Evidence for genetic
divergence and multiple reassortment events”. In: Virology 328 (1 Oct. 2004),
pp. 101–119. ISSN: 00426822. DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2004.06.009.
[19]
Celia Perales et al. “Monitoring sequence space as a test for the target of selec-
tion in viruses”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 345 (3 Jan. 2005), pp. 451–459.
ISSN: 00222836. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.066.
[20]
E. Domingo et al. “Quasispecies Concepts and Implication for Virology”. In: Qua-
sispecies Concepts and Implication for Virology 299 (2006).
[21]
Weizhong Li and Adam Godzik. “Cd-hit: A fast program for clustering and com-
paring large sets of protein or nucleotide sequences”. In: Bioinformatics 22 (13
July 2006), pp. 1658–1659. ISSN: 13674803. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics /
btl158.
[22]
Nicole M. Bouvier and Peter Palese. “The biology of influenza viruses”. In: Vac-
cine 26 (SUPPL. 4 Sept. 2008). ISSN: 0264410X. DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.
07.039.
[23]
A. Falchi et al. “Dual infections by influenza A/H3N2 and B viruses and by in-
fluenza A/H3N2 and A/H1N1 viruses during winter 2007, Corsica Island, France”.
In: Journal of Clinical Virology 41 (2 Feb. 2008), pp. 148–151. ISSN: 13866532.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2007.11.003.
77
==PAGE:84==
[24]
Ida Viktoria Kolte et al. “The Spanish flu in Denmark”. In: Scandinavian Journal
of Infectious Diseases 40 (6-7 2008), pp. 538–546. ISSN: 00365548. DOI: 10.
1080/00365540701870903.
[25]
Wenjun Ma, Robert E Kahn, and Juergen A Richt. “The pig as a mixing vessel for
influenza viruses: Human and veterinary implications”. In: Journal of Molecular
and Genetic Medicine 3 (1 2008), pp. 158–166. URL: www.google.org.
[26]
Colin A. Russell et al. “Influenza vaccine strain selection and recent studies on
the global migration of seasonal influenza viruses”. In: Vaccine 26 (SUPPL. 4
Sept. 2008). ISSN: 0264410X. DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.07.078.
[27]
Rebecca J Garten et al. “Antigenic and Genetic Characteristics of Swine-Origin
2009 A(H1N1) Influenza Viruses Circulating in Humans”. In: Science 325 (5937
2009), pp. 197–201. URL: https://www.science.org.
[28]
Aeron C. Hurt et al. “Emergence and spread of oseltamivir-resistant A(H1N1)
influenza viruses in Oceania, South East Asia and South Africa”. In: Antiviral
Research 83 (1 July 2009), pp. 90–93. ISSN: 01663542. DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.
2009.03.003.
[29]
Dharan N et al. “Infections with Oseltamivir-Resistant Influenza A(H1N1) Virus
in the United States”. In: JAMA (2009).
[30]
“Single-Reaction Genomic Amplification Accelerates Sequencing and Vaccine
Production for Classical and Swine Origin Human Influenza A Viruses”. In: Jour-
nal of Virology 83 (19 Oct. 2009), pp. 10309–10313. ISSN: 0022-538X. DOI:
10.1128/jvi.01109-09.
[31]
Shinde V et al. “Triple-Reassortant Swine Influenza A (H1) in Humans in the
United States, 2005-2009”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 360 (25 2009).
[32]
Guido Van Rossum and Fred L. Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. Scotts Val-
ley, CA: CreateSpace, 2009. ISBN: 1441412697.
[33]
Leyi Wang and Chang Won Lee. “Sequencing and mutational analysis of the
non-coding regions of influenza A virus”. In: Veterinary Microbiology 135 (3-4
2009), pp. 239–247.
[34]
Andrew M. Waterhouse et al. “Jalview Version 2-A multiple sequence alignment
editor and analysis workbench”. In: Bioinformatics 25 (9 2009), pp. 1189–1191.
ISSN: 13674803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp033.
[35]
Wei Liu et al. “Mixed infections of pandemic H1N1 and seasonal H3N2 viruses in
1 outbreak”. In: Clinical Infectious Diseases 50 (10 May 2010), pp. 1359–1365.
ISSN: 10584838. DOI: 10.1086/652143.
78
==PAGE:85==
[36]
Su-Mi Choi et al. “Differences in clinical outcomes after 2009 influenza A/H1N1
and seasonal influenza among hematopoietic cell transplant recipients”. In: Blood
117 (19 2011), pp. 5050–5056. DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010.
[37]
Christopher A. Myers et al. “Short report: Dual infection of novel influenza viruses
A/H1N1 and A/H3N2 in a cluster of Cambodian patients”. In: American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 85 (5 Nov. 2011), pp. 961–963. ISSN: 00029637.
DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-0098.
[38]
James T Robinson et al. “Integrative genomics viewer”. In: Nature Publishing
Group (2011). DOI: 10.1038/nbt0111-24. URL: http://maq.sourceforge.net/.
[39]
Lars Steinbrück and Alice Carolyn McHardy. “Allele dynamics plots for the study
of evolutionary dynamics in viral populations”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 39 (1
Jan. 2011). ISSN: 13624962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq909.
[40]
Diego Darriba et al. “JModelTest 2: More models, new heuristics and parallel
computing”. In: Nature Methods 9 (8 Aug. 2012), p. 772. ISSN: 15487091. DOI:
10.1038/nmeth.2109.
[41]
“Estimated global mortality associated with the first 12 months of 2009 pandemic
influenza A H1N1 virus circulation: A modelling study”. In: The Lancet Infectious
Diseases 12 (9 Sept. 2012), pp. 687–695. ISSN: 14733099. DOI: 10.1016/S1473-
3099(12)70121-4.
[42]
Limin Fu et al. “CD-HIT: Accelerated for clustering the next-generation sequenc-
ing data”. In: Bioinformatics 28 (23 Dec. 2012), pp. 3150–3152. ISSN: 13674803.
DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts565.
[43]
Elodie Ghedin et al. “Presence of oseltamivir-resistant pandemic A/H1N1 mi-
nor variants before drug therapy with subsequent selection and transmission”.
In: Journal of Infectious Diseases 206 (10 Nov. 2012), pp. 1504–1511. ISSN:
00221899. DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis571.
[44]
Xueyong Zhu et al. “Influenza Virus Neuraminidases with Reduced Enzymatic
Activity That Avidly Bind Sialic Acid Receptors”. In: Journal of Virology 86 (24
Dec. 2012), pp. 13371–13383. ISSN: 0022-538X. DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01426-12.
[45]
Kazutaka Katoh and Daron M. Standley. “MAFFT multiple sequence alignment
software version 7: Improvements in performance and usability”. In: Molecular
Biology and Evolution 30 (4 Apr. 2013), pp. 772–780. ISSN: 07374038. DOI:
10.1093/molbev/mst010.
[46]
Robert G. Webster et al. Textbook of Influenza. 2nd. Wiley Blackwell, 2013.
79
==PAGE:86==
[47]
Richard W Compans and Michael B A Oldstone Editors. Influenza A Virus Reas-
sortment. Vol. 385. 2014, pp. 377–401. URL: http://www.springer.com/series/82.
[48]
Aeron C. Hurt. “The epidemiology and spread of drug resistant human influenza
viruses”. In: Current Opinion in Virology 8 (2014), pp. 22–29. ISSN: 18796265.
DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2014.04.009.
[49]
D. Merkel. “Docker: lightweight linux containers for consistent development and
deployment”. In: Linux Journal 239 (2 2014).
[50]
K. Sleeman et al. “Antiviral susceptibility of variant influenza A(H3N2)v viruses
isolated in the United States from 2011 to 2013”. In: Antimicrobial Agents and
Chemotherapy 58 (4 2014), pp. 2045–2051. ISSN: 10986596. DOI: 10.1128/
AAC.02556-13.
[51]
Kim B. Westgeest et al. “Genomewide Analysis of Reassortment and Evolution
of Human Influenza A(H3N2) Viruses Circulating between 1968 and 2011”. In:
Journal of Virology 88 (5 Mar. 2014), pp. 2844–2857. ISSN: 0022-538X. DOI:
10.1128/jvi.02163-13.
[52]
Tsuyoshi Hayashi, Leslie A. MacDonald, and Toru Takimoto. “Influenza A Virus
Protein PA-X Contributes to Viral Growth and Suppression of the Host Antiviral
and Immune Responses”. In: Journal of Virology 89 (12 June 2015), pp. 6442–
6452. ISSN: 0022-538X. DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00319-15.
[53]
Sareth Rith et al. “Natural co-infection of influenza A/H3N2 and A/H1N1pdm09
viruses resulting in a reassortant A/H3N2 virus”. In: Journal of Clinical Virology
73 (Dec. 2015), pp. 108–111. ISSN: 18735967. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2015.11.008.
[54]
Emi Takashita et al. “Global update on the susceptibility of human influenza
viruses to neuraminidase inhibitors, 2013-2014”. In: Antiviral Research 117 (2015),
pp. 27–38. ISSN: 18729096. DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.02.003.
[55]
Irina V. Alymova et al. “Glycosylation changes in the globular head of H3N2
influenza hemagglutinin modulate receptor binding without affecting virus viru-
lence”. In: Scientific Reports 6 (Oct. 2016). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10 . 1038 /
srep36216.
[56]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza A (H3N2) Variant Virus.
2016. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/swineflu/variant/h3n2v-cases.htm (visited
on 08/06/2023).
[57]
Seema S. Lakdawala, Ervin Fodor, and Kanta Subbarao. “Moving on Out: Trans-
port and Packaging of Influenza Viral RNA into Virions”. In: Annual Review of
80
==PAGE:87==
Virology 3 (1 Sept. 2016), pp. 411–427. ISSN: 23270578. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-
virology-110615-042345.
[58]
Samuel S. Shepard et al. “Viral deep sequencing needs an adaptive approach:
IRMA, the iterative refinement meta-assembler”. In: BMC Genomics 17 (1 Sept.
2016). ISSN: 14712164. DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-3030-6.
[59]
Yuelong Shu and John McCauley. “GISAID: Global initiative on sharing all in-
fluenza data â€“ from vision to reality”. In: Eurosurveillance 22 (13 Mar. 2017).
ISSN: 15607917. DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2017.22.13.30494.
[60]
Ramona Trebbien et al. “Changes in genetically drifted H3N2 influenza A viruses
and vaccine effectiveness in adults 65 years and older during the 2016/17 sea-
son in Denmark”. In: Journal of Clinical Virology 94 (Sept. 2017), pp. 1–7. ISSN:
18735967. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2017.06.007.
[61]
Cyril Barbezange et al. “Seasonal Genetic Drift of Human Influenza A Virus Qua-
sispecies Revealed by Deep Sequencing”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 9 (Octo-
ber 2018), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 1664302X. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02596.
[62]
A. Danielle Iuliano. “Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respira-
tory mortality: a modelling study”. In: Lancet 391 (10127 2018), pp. 1285–1300.
[63]
Thorsten R. Klingen et al. “In Silico Vaccine Strain Prediction for Human In-
fluenza Viruses”. In: Trends in Microbiology 26 (2 Feb. 2018), pp. 119–131.
ISSN: 18784380. DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2017.09.001.
[64]
Thorsten R. Klingen et al. “Sweep Dynamics (SD) plots: Computational identifi-
cation of selective sweeps to monitor the adaptation of influenza A viruses”. In:
Scientific Reports 8 (1 Dec. 2018). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-
18791-z.
[65]
Jason S Long et al. “Host and viral determinants of influenza A virus species
specificity”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 17 (2019), pp. 67–81. DOI: 10.1038/
s41579-018-0115-z. URL: www.nature.com/nrmicro.
[66]
John Paget et al. “Global mortality associated with seasonal influenza epidemics:
New burden estimates and predictors from the GLaMOR Project”. In: Journal of
Global Health 9 (2 2019). ISSN: 20472986. DOI: 10.7189/jogh.09.020421.
[67]
Edward M. Castillo et al. “Rates of coinfection with other respiratory pathogens
in patients positive for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)”. In: Journal of the
American College of Emergency Physicians Open 1 (4 Aug. 2020), pp. 592–596.
ISSN: 26881152. DOI: 10.1002/emp2.12172.
81
==PAGE:88==
[68]
Aude Jary et al. “Evolution of viral quasispecies during SARS-CoV-2 infection”.
In: Clinical Microbiology and Infection 26 (11 Nov. 2020), 1560.e1–1560.e4.
ISSN: 14690691. DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.07.032.
[69]
Saira Hussain et al. “Reduced sialidase activity of influenza A(H3N2) neuraminidase
associated with positively charged amino acid substitutions”. In: Journal of Gen-
eral Virology 102 (10 2021). ISSN: 14652099. DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001648.
[70]
Ivica Letunic and Peer Bork. “Interactive tree of life (iTOL) v5: An online tool for
phylogenetic tree display and annotation”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 49 (W1
July 2021), W293–W296. ISSN: 13624962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab301.
[71]
World Health Organization. Influenza A (H3N2) - United States of America. 2021.
URL: https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2021-
DON309 (visited on 08/06/2023).
[72]
Juliana D. Siqueira et al. “Distinguishing SARS-CoV-2 bonafide re-infection from
pre-existing minor variant reactivation”. In: Infection, Genetics and Evolution 90
(June 2021). ISSN: 15677257. DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.104772.
[73]
Michael A. Zeller et al. “Spatial and temporal coevolution of N2 neuraminidase
and H1 and H3 hemagglutinin genes of influenza A virus in US swine”. In: Virus
Evolution 7 (2 2021). ISSN: 20571577. DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab090.
[74]
“Global update on the susceptibilities of human influenza viruses to neuraminidase
inhibitors and the cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor baloxavir, 2018-2020”.
In: Antiviral Research 200 (Apr. 2022). ISSN: 18729096. DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.
2022.105281.
[75]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria, 2022. URL: https://www.
R-project.org/.
[76]
“Search and sequence analysis tools services from EMBL-EBI in 2022”. In: Nu-
cleic Acids Research 50 (W1 July 2022). MAFFT, W276–W279. ISSN: 13624962.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac240.
[77]
“Severe Human Case of Zoonotic Infection with Swine-Origin Influenza A Virus,
Denmark, 2021”. In: Emerging Infectious Diseases 28 (12 Dec. 2022), pp. 2561–
2564. ISSN: 10806059. DOI: 10.3201/eid2812.220935.
[78]
Sungsu Youk et al. “Evolution of the North American Lineage H7 Avian Influenza
Viruses in Association with H7 Virusâ€™s Introduction to Poultry”. In: Journal of
Virology 96 (14 2022). ISSN: 0022-538X. DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00278-22.
82
==PAGE:89==
[79]
Jan Gerstoft and Ann-Brit Eg Hansel. Antivirale midler mod influenzavirus. 2023.
URL: https://pro.medicin.dk/Laegemiddelgrupper/Grupper/315732 (visited on
08/08/2023).
[80]
Kiran Singh. “Quasispecies Nature of RNA Viruses : Lessons from the Past”. In:
Vaccines (2023).
[81]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/ (visited
on 08/08/2023).
[82]
Jordan D. The Deadliest Flu: The Complete Story of the Discovery and Recon-
struction of the 1918 Pandemic Virus. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-
resources/reconstruction-1918-virus.html (visited on 08/10/2023).
[83]
Den Store Danske. Svineinfluenza. URL: https://denstoredanske.lex.dk/svineinfluenza
(visited on 05/03/2023).
[84]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. IRMA. URL: https://wonder.cdc.
gov/amd/flu/irma/ (visited on 06/09/2023).
[85]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The 2009 H1N1 Pandemic: A New
Flu Virus Emerges. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/2009-
h1n1-pandemic.html (visited on 05/03/2023).
[86]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Types of Influenza Viruses. URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/viruses/types.htm (visited on 05/30/2023).
[87]
EMBOSS Seqret. URL: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/sfc/emboss_seqret/ (visited
on 07/12/2023).
[88]
Statens Serum Institut. Influenza pandemien 2009-2010. URL: https://www.
ssi.dk/sygdomme-beredskab-og-forskning/sygdomsudbrud/arkiv/2009-pandemien
(visited on 05/03/2023).
[89]
Statens Serum Institut. InfluenzasÃ¦sonen - opgÃ¸relse over sygdomsforekomst
2020/21. URL: https://www.ssi.dk/sygdomme-beredskab-og-forskning/sygdomsovervaagning/
i/influenzasaesonen---opgoerelse-over-sygdomsforekomst-2020-21 (visited on 08/07/2023).
[90]
Statens Serum Institut. InfluenzasÃ¦sonen - opgÃ¸relse over sygdomsforekomst
2021/22. URL: https://www.ssi.dk/sygdomme-beredskab-og-forskning/sygdomsovervaagning/
i/influenzasaesonen---opgoerelse-over-sygdomsforekomst-2021-22 (visited on 08/07/2023).
[91]
Statens Serum Institut. InfluenzasÃ¦sonen - opgÃ¸relse over sygdomsforekomst
2022/23. URL: https://www.ssi.dk/sygdomme-beredskab-og-forskning/sygdomsovervaagning/
i/influenzasaesonen---opgoerelse-over-sygdomsforekomst-2022-23 (visited on 08/07/2023).
83
==PAGE:90==
[92]
Statens Serum Institut. Influenzasæsonen - opgørelse over sygdomsforekomst
2019/20. URL: https://www.ssi.dk/sygdomme-beredskab-og-forskning/sygdomsovervaagning/
i/influenzasaesonen---opgoerelse-over-sygdomsforekomst-2019-20 (visited on 08/07/2023).
[93]
Statens Serum Institut. SSI sygdomsleksikon: Influenza. URL: https://www.ssi.
dk/sygdomme-beredskab-og-forskning/sygdomsleksikon/i/influenza (visited on
04/26/2023).
[94]
Carsten Schade Larsen. Influenza (vaccination). URL: https://pro.medicin.dk/
Sygdomme/Sygdom/318661 (visited on 07/26/2023).
[95]
MAFFT. URL: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/mafft/ (visited on 08/09/2023).
[96]
WHO. Influenza (seasonal) fact sheet. URL: https://www.who.int/news-room/
fact-sheets/detail/influenza-(seasonal) (visited on 05/30/2023).
[97]
WHO. Laboratory methodologies for testing the antiviral susceptibility of influenza
viruses. URL: https://www.who.int/teams/global-influenza-programme/laboratory-
network/quality-assurance/antiviral-susceptibility-influenza (visited on 07/27/2023).
[98]
WHO. Summary of neuraminidase (NA) amino acid substitutions associated with
reduced inhibition by neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs). URL: https://www.who.
int/publications/m/item/summary-of-neuraminidase-(na)-amino-acid-substitutions-
associated-with-reduced-inhibition-by-neuraminidase-inhibitors-(nais) (visited on
07/13/2023).
[99]
WHO. Summary of polymerase acidic (PA) protein amino acid substitutions anal-
ysed for their effects on baloxavir susceptibility. URL: https://www.who.int/
publications/m/item/summary-of-polymerase-acidic-(pa)-protein-amino-acid-
substitutions - analysed - for - their - effects - on - baloxavir - susceptibility (visited on
07/13/2023).
[100]
WHO. Up to 650 000 people die of respiratory diseases linked to seasonal flu
each year. URL: https://www.who.int/news/item/13-12-2017-up-to-650-
000-people-die-of-respiratory-diseases-linked-to-seasonal-flu-each-year (visited on
05/31/2023).
84
==PAGE:91==
Appendices
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
85
==PAGE:92==
A
Segments
A.1
Segment and protein data table
Seg. no.
Seg. name
Seg. size (nt)
Proteins encoded
Coding positions(nt)
Protein size
nt
aa
1
PB2
2341
PB2
28-2307
2280
759
2
PB1
2341
PB1
PB1-F2
25-2298
119-391
2274
273
757
90
3
PA
2233
PA
PA-X*
25-2175
25-597 + 599-784
2151
759
716
252
4
HA
1778
HA
30-1730
1701
566
5
NP
1565
NP
46-1542
1497
498
6
NA
1413
NA
20-1429
1410
469
7
M
1027
M1
M2*
26-784
26-51 + 740-1007
759
294
252
97
8
NS
890
NS1
NS2*
27-719
27-56 + 529-864
693
366
230
121
Table A.1: Data on influenza A segments and the protein(s) they encode. Proteins
marked with * are encoded by spliced coding regions. NB: ”Segment” shortened to
”seg”.
86
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:93==
A.2
Coding regions
Figure A.1: Influenza A segments with coding regions shown in faded colors. Additional
proteins are shown below the segments they are encoded by. Note that the sizes shown
in nucleotides are for the coding regions.
87
==PAGE:94==
B
GISAID search criteria - Re-infection
analysis
Basic filters
Search in
Released files
Search patterns
Type
A
H
3
N
2
Host
Human
Location
Europe, Denmark
Additional filters
Collection date
From: 2022-04-01
To: 2022-05-31
Required segments
HA
NA
Table B.1: Search criteria used for gathering data set of H3N2 virus sequences from
GISAID for quasispecies analysis
88
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:95==
C
EMBOSS Seqret paramaters
STEP 1 - Enter your input sequence
Enter or paste a set of
RNA
STEP 2 - Select Parameters
Input Format
FASTA format including NCBI-style IDs
Output Format
Nexus/Paup interleaved format
Table C.1: Parameters used in EMBOSS Seqret to convert FASTA to NEXUS format
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
89
==PAGE:96==
D
GIASID search criteria - Seasonal
variant data
Basic filters
Search in
Released files
Search patterns
Type
A
H
3
N
2
Host
Human
Location
Europe, Denmark
Additional filters
Collection date
From: 2015-11-01
To: 2022-05-31
Required Segments
HA
NA
Table D.1: Search criteria used for gathering data set of H3N2 virus sequences from
GISAID for Sweep Dynamics analysis
90
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:97==
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
91
==PAGE:98==
E
Minority variants - relative frequency
plots
(a) PB2
(b) PA
Figure E.1: Relative frequency for each variant found appearing at ≥2.5% in at least
one sample. Both frequencies of minority and majority alleles are shown
92
==PAGE:99==
(c) PA-X
(d) HA
Figure E.1: Relative frequency for each variant found appearing at ≥2.5% in at least
one sample. Both frequencies of minority and majority alleles are shown
93
==PAGE:100==
(e) NP
(f) NA
Figure E.1: Relative frequency for each variant found appearing at ≥2.5% in at least
one sample. Both frequencies of minority and majority alleles are shown
94
==PAGE:101==
(g) M1
(h) NS1
Figure E.1: Relative frequency for each variant found appearing at ≥2.5% in at least
one sample. Both frequencies of minority and majority alleles are shown
95
==PAGE:102==
(i) NS2
Figure E.1: Relative frequency for each variant found appearing at ≥2.5% in at least
one sample. Both frequencies of minority and majority alleles are shown
96
==PAGE:103==
F
Minority variants - Table
Protein
Sample
nc pos
aa pos
nc change
codon change
aa change
PB2
Day1_2
215
72
A→G
GAA→GGA
E→G*
PB2
Day1_2
1837
613
G→T
GCC→TCC
A→S*
PB2
Day21
1189
397
G→A
GCA→ACA
A→T*
PA
Day1_1
184
62
G→A
GTA→ATA
V→I*
PA
Day1_1
1190
397
A→G
GAA→GGA
E→G*
PA
Day1_1
1343
448
C→T
GCA→GTA
A→V*
PA-X
Day1_1
184
62
G→A
GTA→ATA
V→I
PA
Day1_2
1145
382
A→G
GAA→GGA
E→G*
PA
Day1_2
1343
448
C→T
GCA→GTA
A→V
PA
Day3
129
43
G→A
GAG→GAA
E→E
PA
Day3
1343
448
C→T
GCA→GTA
A→V
PA-X
Day3
129
43
G→A
GAG→GAA
E→E
PA
Day8
40
14
G→A
GTC→ATC
V→I*
PA-X
Day8
40
14
G→A
GTC→ATC
V→I
PA
Day14
1343
448
C→T
GCA→GTA
A→V
PA
Day14
1939
647
A→C
AAT→CAT
N→H*
PA
Day17
1939
647
A→C
AAT→CAT
N→H
PA
Day21
1343
448
C→T
GCA→GTA
A→V
HA
Day1_1
1359
453
T→C
ATT→ATC
I→I
HA
Day1_2
1359
453
T→C
ATT→ATC
I→I
HA
Day3
395
132
G→T
GGC→GTC
G→V*
HA
Day3
1359
453
T→C
ATT→ATC
I→I
HA
Day14
650
217
G→A
AGA→AAA
R→K*
HA
Day14
801
267
A→G
CTA→CTG
L→L
HA
Day17
1089
363
G→T
GTG→GTT
V→V
HA
Day21
650
217
G→A
AGA→AAA
R→K
HA
Day21
927
309
A→G
CCA→CCG
P→P
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
97
==PAGE:104==
NP
Day1_2
215
72
A→C
GAT→GCT
D→A*
NP
Day1_2
866
289
A→C
TAC→TCC
Y→S*
NP
Day1_2
869
290
A→G
GAC→GGC
D→G*
NP
Day3
866
289
A→C
TAC→TCC
T→S
NP
Day3
869
290
A→G
GAC→GGC
D→G
NP
Day14
524
175
G→A
AGG→AAG
R→K*
NP
Day17
524
175
G→A
AGG→AAG
R→K
NA
Day1_2
783
261
A→T
AAA→AAT
K→N*
NA
Day14
277
93
G→A
GGC→AGC
G→S*
NA
Day17
277
93
A→G
AGC→GGC
S→G*
NA
Day21
277
93
G→A
GGC→AGC
G→S
M1
Day3
73
25
G→A
GCG→ACG
A→T*
M1
Day8
652
218
G→A
GCC→ACC
A→T*
NS1
Day3
358
120
G→A
GAC→AAC
D→N*
NS1
Day8
172
218
A→G
ACC→GCC
T→A*
NS2
Day8
764
255
A→G
ACA→GCA
T→A*
NS2
Day8
807
269
A→G
GAG→GGG
E→G*
NS1
Day14
193
65
G→A
GTA→ATA
V→I*
NS1
Day17
193
65
A→G
ATA→GTA
I→V*
NS1
Day21
193
65
G→A
GTA→ATA
V→I
Table F.1: Minority variants fulfilling the criteria: frequency ≥2.5%, quality ≥30, depth
≥100, count ≥15. Unique non-synonymous mutations are marked with * at their first
appearance.
98
==PAGE:105==
G
In-phase variants / Minority strains
Sample
Segment
# Minority
strains
In-phase variants
(one strain per line)
Day1_1
HA
1
T1359C
Day1_1
PA
3
G184A
A1190G
C1343
Day1_2
HA
1
T1359C
Day1_2
NA
1
A783T
Day1_2
NP
2
A866C + A869G
A215C
Day1_2
PA
2
A1145G
C1343T
Day1_2
PB2
2
A215G
G1837T
Day3
HA
3
G847A + G875A + T1455A
G395T
T1359C
Day3
MP
1
G73A
Day3
NA
1
A783T
Day3
NP
1
A866C + A869G
Day3
NS
1
G358A
Day3
PA
2
G129A
C1343T
Day8
MP
1
G652A
Day8
NS
2
A172G + A764G
A807G
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
99
==PAGE:106==
Day8
PA
1
G40A
Day14
HA
2
G650A
A801G
Day14
NA
1
G277A
Day14
NP
1
G524A
Day14
NS
1
G193A
Day14
PA
2
C1343T + A1939C
Day17
HA
1
G1089T
Day17
NA
1
A277G
Day17
NP
1
G524A
Day17
NS
1
A193G
Day17
PA
1
A1939C
Day21
HA
2
G650A
A927G
Day21
NA
1
G277A
Day21
NS
1
G193A
Day21
PA
1
C1343T
Day21
PB2
1
G1189A
Table G.1: In-phase variants found for every segment in every sample, used to recon-
struct segment strains in FASTA format
100
==PAGE:107==
H
Deletions
Sample
Segment
Position
Length(nc)
Count
Depth
Frequency
Day1_1
PB2
2024
33
57
2076
2.75%
Day1_1
PA
163
20
217
663
32.73%
Day1_1
PA
1892
59
476
874
54.46%
Day1_2
PB2
2024
33
99
1357
7.30%
Day1_2
PA
163
20
270
871
31%
Day1_2
PA
1892
59
186
783
23.75%
Day3
PB2
2024
33
49
1321
3.71%
Day3
PB2
2088
2
44
1660
2.65%
Day3
PB2
2173
4
52
1470
3.54%
Day3
PA
71
47
30
818
3.67%
Day3
PA
119
1
44
773
5.69%
Day3
PA
163
20
136
919
14.80%
Day3
PA
183
8
81
895
9.05%
Day3
PA
1892
59
24
750
3.20%
Day3
PA
1903
92
130
677
19.20%
Day3
PA
1940
7
119
1060
11.23%
Day8
PA
1863
22
54
112
48.21%
Day14
PA
2036
5
22
419
5.25%
Day17
PA
1944
4
36
1289
2.80%
Day17
PA
2036
5
47
1647
2.80%
Day17
PA
2102
7
45
1233
3.65%
Table H.1: Deletions identified by IRMA with depth ≥50, frequency ≥2.5% and count
≥15
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
101
==PAGE:108==
I
Pairwise distance between consensus
sequences
Percentage of dissimilarity
(a) PB2
(b) PB1
Figure I.1: Percentage of dissimilarity between consensus sequence for each sample
102
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:109==
(c) PA
(d) NP
Figure I.1: Percentage of dissimilarity between consensus sequence for each sample
103
==PAGE:110==
(e) MP
(f) NS
Figure I.1: Percentage of dissimilarity between consensus sequence for each sample
104
==PAGE:111==
105
==PAGE:112==
I.2
Count of dissimilar sites
(a) PB2
(b) PB1
Figure I.2: Count of dissimilar sites between consensus sequence for each sample
106
==PAGE:113==
(c) PA
(d) HA
Figure I.2: Count of dissimilar sites between consensus sequence for each sample
107
==PAGE:114==
(e) NP
(f) NA
Figure I.2: Count of dissimilar sites between consensus sequence for each sample
108
==PAGE:115==
(g) MP
(h) NS
Figure I.2: Count of dissimilar sites between consensus sequence for each sample
109
==PAGE:116==
110
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:117==
J
Molecular clock
(a) PB2
(b) PB1
Figure J.1: Root-to-tip distance plotted as a function of sampling day. Blue points are
consensus sequences and orange points are minority strain sequences.
111
==PAGE:118==
(a) PA
(b) NP
Figure J.2: Root-to-tip distance plotted as a function of sampling day. Blue points are
consensus sequences and orange points are minority strain sequences.
112
==PAGE:119==
(a) MP
(b) NS
Figure J.3: Root-to-tip distance plotted as a function of sampling day. Blue points are
consensus sequences and orange points are minority strain sequences.
113
==PAGE:120==
114
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:121==
K
Sample contamination reports
K.1
Day1_1
Figure K.1: Content of Day1_1_contaminationReport.txt
115
==PAGE:122==
K.2
Day1_2
Figure K.2: Content of Day1_2_contaminationReport.txt
116
==PAGE:123==
K.3
Day14
Figure K.3: Content of Day14_contaminationReport.txt
117
==PAGE:124==
K.4
Day17
Figure K.4: Content of Day17_contaminationReport.txt
118
==PAGE:125==
K.5
Day21
Figure K.5: Content of Day21_contaminationReport.txt
119
==PAGE:126==
120
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
==PAGE:127==
L
Coverage plots
L.1
Day1_1
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1000
1500
2000
2500
A_PB2 position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
(a) Day1_1 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
50
100
150
200
250
A_PB1 position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
(b) Day1_1 PB1
Figure L.1: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_1. Output by IRMA.
121
==PAGE:128==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
600
A_PA position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
T
A
G
G
T
C
A
G
exp. err
C2T
G2A
A2G
A2G
C2T
T2C
C2A
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
121
184
412
1190
1343
2001
2022
2024
(c) Day1_1 PA
0
500
1000
1500
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
A_HA_H3 position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
C
exp. err
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
1359
(d) Day1_1 HA
Figure L.1: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_1. Output by IRMA.
122
==PAGE:129==
0
500
1000
1500
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
A_NP position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
C
G
exp. err
A2C
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
866
869
(e) Day1_1 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1000
3000
5000
7000
A_NA_N2 position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
T
exp. err
C2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
372
(f) Day1_1 NA
Figure L.1: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_1. Output by IRMA.
123
==PAGE:130==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
A_MP position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
(g) Day1_1 MP
0
200
400
600
800
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
A_NS position (Day1_1)
Coverage depth
(h) Day1_1 NS
Figure L.1: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_1. Output by IRMA.
124
==PAGE:131==
125
==PAGE:132==
L.2
Day1_2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
500
1000
1500
A_PB2 position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
G
A
T
exp. err
A2G
T2A
G2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
215
1262
1837
(a) Day1_2 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
A_PB1 position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
(b) Day1_2 PB1
Figure L.2: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_2. Output by IRMA.
126
==PAGE:133==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1000
2000
3000
4000
A_PA position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
A
G
T
exp. err
G2A
A2G
C2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
184
1145
1343
(c) Day1_2 PA
0
500
1000
1500
500
1000
1500
A_HA_H3 position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
C
T
G
A
C
exp. err
A2C
G2T
C2G
G2A
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
278
395
431
1003
1359
(d) Day1_2 HA
Figure L.2: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_2. Output by IRMA.
127
==PAGE:134==
0
500
1000
1500
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
300
A_NP position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
C
C
G
C
G
exp. err
A2C
T2C
C2G
A2C
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
215
331
669
866
869
(e) Day1_2 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
A_NA_N2 position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
G
T
A
exp. err
A2G
A2T
T2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
180
783
892
(f) Day1_2 NA
Figure L.2: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_2. Output by IRMA.
128
==PAGE:135==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
5000
10000
15000
20000
A_MP position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
(g) Day1_2 MP
0
200
400
600
800
2000
6000
10000
14000
A_NS position (Day1_2)
Coverage depth
A
T
G
exp. err
G2A
C2T
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
358
646
795
(h) Day1_2 NS
Figure L.2: Read coverage of segments for sample Day1_2. Output by IRMA.
129
==PAGE:136==
130
==PAGE:137==
L.3
Day3
0
500
1000
1500
2000
600
800
1000
1400
A_PB2 position (Day3)
Coverage depth
C
A
T
exp. err
A2C
T2C
T2A
G2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
689
692
1636
1837
(a) Day3 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
50
100
150
A_PB1 position (Day3)
Coverage depth
C
exp. err
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
1821
(b) Day3 PB1
Figure L.3: Read coverage of segments for sample Day3. Output by IRMA.
131
==PAGE:138==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
500
1000
1500
2000
A_PA position (Day3)
Coverage depth
A
A
C
T
C
C
exp. err
G2A
G2A
A2C
C2T
T2C
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
129
184
384
1343
1514
1752
(c) Day3 PA
0
500
1000
1500
200
400
600
800
1200
A_HA_H3 position (Day3)
Coverage depth
C
A
T
C
T
A
A
A
C
G
A
G
G
C
T
A
exp. err
C2T
A2C
G2A
G2T
T2C
C2T
G2A
G2A
G2A
T2C
A2G
G2A
A2G
T2G
T2C
C2T
T2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
270
316
359
395
633
726
833
847
875
879
944
1083
1251
1323
1359
1363
1455
(d) Day3 HA
Figure L.3: Read coverage of segments for sample Day3. Output by IRMA.
132
==PAGE:139==
0
500
1000
1500
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
A_NP position (Day3)
Coverage depth
C
C
G
T
exp. err
T2C
A2C
A2G
C2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
331
866
869
1014
(e) Day3 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
500
1000
2000
3000
A_NA_N2 position (Day3)
Coverage depth
T
exp. err
A2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
783
(f) Day3 NA
Figure L.3: Read coverage of segments for sample Day3. Output by IRMA.
133
==PAGE:140==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
2000
6000
10000
14000
A_MP position (Day3)
Coverage depth
A
G
exp. err
G2A
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
73
264
(g) Day3 MP
0
200
400
600
800
2000
4000
6000
8000
A_NS position (Day3)
Coverage depth
A
T
exp. err
G2A
C2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
358
646
(h) Day3 NS
Figure L.3: Read coverage of segments for sample Day3. Output by IRMA.
134
==PAGE:141==
135
==PAGE:142==
L.4
Day8
0
500
1000
1500
2000
200
400
600
800
1000
A_PB2 position (Day8)
Coverage depth
(a) Day8 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
100
200
300
400
A_PA position (Day8)
Coverage depth
A
exp. err
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
40
(b) Day8 PA
Figure L.4: Read coverage of segments for sample Day8. Output by IRMA.
136
==PAGE:143==
0
500
1000
1500
10
20
30
40
50
A_HA_H3 position (Day8)
Coverage depth
(c) Day8 HA
0
500
1000
1500
20
40
60
80
100
A_NP position (Day8)
Coverage depth
A
exp. err
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
960
(d) Day8 NP
Figure L.4: Read coverage of segments for sample Day8. Output by IRMA.
137
==PAGE:144==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
50
100
150
200
A_NA_N2 position (Day8)
Coverage depth
C
T
C
exp. err
T2C
C2T
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
274
584
1227
(e) Day8 NA
0
200
400
600
800
1000
200
400
600
800
1000
120
A_MP position (Day8)
Coverage depth
A
ACA
A C TATCTAAC
CGGAGTGAGA GAAATAATACTGCAGCGAGGACAAC CA
G
G
exp. err
T2G
G2A
G2A
C2A
G2A
T2C
G2A
C2A
T2C
G2T
G2A
G2T
A2C
A2T
G2A
C2A
A2C
A2C
A2G
A2G
G2A
T2G
C2T
A2G
G2A
A2G
G2A
A2G
G2A
C2A
G2A
C2T
G2A
G2A
C2T
G2A
T2C
C2T
A2G
T2C
G2A
A2G
T2C
A2G
G2A
A2G
A2G
G2A
T2C
C2A
G2A
T2C
T2C
C2A
A2G
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
189216238
252
297309315
375
399
426438441
447
450
456
471
478519521522
528540546555570
585591
613
620
622
625627
639
652654660
672678
679
696
711
715720
726735
747750756
762
775
778781800
815
860
892
(f) Day8 MP
Figure L.4: Read coverage of segments for sample Day8. Output by IRMA.
138
==PAGE:145==
0
200
400
600
800
500
1000
2000
3000
A_NS position (Day8)
Coverage depth
G
A
G
G
exp. err
A2G
C2A
A2G
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
172
592
764
807
(g) Day8 NS
Figure L.4: Read coverage of segments for sample Day8. Output by IRMA.
139
==PAGE:146==
140
==PAGE:147==
L.5
Day14
0
500
1000
1500
2000
100
150
200
250
300
A_PB2 position (Day14)
Coverage depth
(a) Day14 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
10
20
30
40
A_PB1 position (Day14)
Coverage depth
(b) Day14 PB1
Figure L.5: Read coverage of segments for sample Day14. Output by IRMA.
141
==PAGE:148==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
100
200
300
400
A_PA position (Day14)
Coverage depth
T
C
exp. err
C2T
A2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
1343
1939
(c) Day14 PA
0
500
1000
1500
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
A_HA_H3 position (Day14)
Coverage depth
A
G
exp. err
G2A
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
650
801
(d) Day14 HA
Figure L.5: Read coverage of segments for sample Day14. Output by IRMA.
142
==PAGE:149==
0
500
1000
1500
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
A_NP position (Day14)
Coverage depth
A
exp. err
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
524
(e) Day14 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
500
1000
1500
A_NA_N2 position (Day14)
Coverage depth
A
exp. err
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
277
(f) Day14 NA
Figure L.5: Read coverage of segments for sample Day14. Output by IRMA.
143
==PAGE:150==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
A_MP position (Day14)
Coverage depth
(g) Day14 MP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
A_NS position (Day14)
Coverage depth
A
exp. err
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
193
(h) Day14 NS
Figure L.5: Read coverage of segments for sample Day14. Output by IRMA.
144
==PAGE:151==
145
==PAGE:152==
L.6
Day17
0
500
1000
1500
2000
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
A_PB2 position (Day17)
Coverage depth
(a) Day17 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
50
100
150
A_PB1 position (Day17)
Coverage depth
(b) Day17 PB1
Figure L.6: Read coverage of segments for sample Day17. Output by IRMA.
146
==PAGE:153==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
500
1000
1500
A_PA position (Day17)
Coverage depth
T
C
exp. err
C2T
A2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
1343
1939
(c) Day17 PA
0
500
1000
1500
400
600
800
1200
1600
A_HA_H3 position (Day17)
Coverage depth
T
exp. err
G2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
1089
(d) Day17 HA
Figure L.6: Read coverage of segments for sample Day17. Output by IRMA.
147
==PAGE:154==
0
500
1000
1500
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
A_NP position (Day17)
Coverage depth
C
A
C
G
exp. err
A2C
G2A
A2C
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
215
524
866
869
(e) Day17 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
A_NA_N2 position (Day17)
Coverage depth
C
G
exp. err
T2C
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
185
277
(f) Day17 NA
Figure L.6: Read coverage of segments for sample Day17. Output by IRMA.
148
==PAGE:155==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
A_MP position (Day17)
Coverage depth
(g) Day17 MP
0
200
400
600
800
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
A_NS position (Day17)
Coverage depth
G
exp. err
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
193
(h) Day17 NS
Figure L.6: Read coverage of segments for sample Day17. Output by IRMA..
149
==PAGE:156==
150
==PAGE:157==
L.7
Day21
0
500
1000
1500
2000
100
200
300
400
500
A_PB2 position (Day21)
Coverage depth
A
exp. err
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
1189
(a) Day21 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
50
100
150
A_PB1 position (Day21)
Coverage depth
(b) Day21 PB1
Figure L.7: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
151
==PAGE:158==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
A_PA position (Day21)
Coverage depth
T
exp. err
C2T
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
1343
(c) Day21 PA
0
500
1000
1500
100
200
300
400
500
600
A_HA_H3 position (Day21)
Coverage depth
A
G
exp. err
G2A
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
650
927
(d) Day21 HA
Figure L.7: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
152
==PAGE:159==
0
500
1000
1500
500
1000
1500
2000
A_NP position (Day21)
Coverage depth
C
exp. err
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
205
(e) Day21 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
500
1000
2000
3000
A_NA_N2 position (Day21)
Coverage depth
A
A
G
A
exp. err
G2A
G2A
A2G
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
198
277
616
731
(f) Day21 NA
Figure L.7: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
153
==PAGE:160==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
A_MP position (Day21)
Coverage depth
(g) Day21 MP
0
200
400
600
800
2000
4000
6000
8000
1000
A_NS position (Day21)
Coverage depth
A
A
A
exp. err
G2A
G2A
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
193
416
536
(h) Day21 NS
Figure L.7: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
154
==PAGE:161==
155
==PAGE:162==
L.8
Cont1
0
500
1000
1500
2000
40
60
80
100
120
A_PB2 position (cont1)
Coverage depth
TCATGAGCCCAGATAAACTAAGCCCACGAACAGGCAATGGGCCGAATCCGGGATGCTTGTGTAAGTGCAATGAGTGATAAAAAAATGTACATGACGGAGTGTATGCTATATACAAAGTCGCTA
exp. err
A2G
G2C
T2C
G2A
A2C
T2C
T2C
A2C
T2C
G2A
G2A
C2A
C2A
A2C
A2G
C2A
T2C
G2A
G2C
T2C
G2A
C2G
G2A
A2G
T2C
G2A
T2C
C2G
C2T
A2T
C2T
C2A
C2T
T2A
A2G
C2T
A2T
G2A
G2A
A2G
T2C
A2G
A2G
T2G
C2T
C2G
G2A
A2T
G2A
A2G
A2G
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
966
978
1191
1194
1197
1200
1203
1209
1212
1215
1221
1228
1236
1239
1243
1248
1263
1275
1281
1282
1287
1320
1326
1423
1431
1443
1448
1458
1473
1479
1485
1488
1490
1491
1503
1513
1518
1521
1522
1524
1534
1536
1537
1572
1575
1577
1579
1584
1590
1602
1617
1623
1629
1632
1635
1636
1638
1644
1647
1650
1653
1659
1665
1668
1675
1680
1699
1704
1705
1713
1719
1722
1734
1737
1740
1747
1752
1758
1761
1762
1764
1765
1768
1788
1791
1794
1800
1803
1810
1812
1815
1818
1819
1821
1833
1839
1842
1854
1855
1857
1860
1869
1872
1878
1879
1881
1884
1887
1890
1896
1905
1908
1914
1920
1923
1926
1932
1945
1977
1981
1982
1983
1986
2016
2019
2020
2022
2027
2043
2044
2046
2050
2052
2055
2064
2067
2067
2070
2071
2073
2079
2082
2085
2089
2094
2094
2097
2101
2105
2106
2112
2115
2124
2142
2145
2157
(a) Cont1 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
5
10
15
20
A_PB1 position (cont1)
Coverage depth
(b) Cont1 PB1
Figure L.8: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
156
==PAGE:163==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
50
100
200
300
A_PA position (cont1)
Coverage depth
ATAATGGCTGAGTGTGTCGTCTATAGGTGA
CAGCATTAATTCTCAACAATACGCCTATTCGTATTACCGA
T
exp. err
A2T
G2A
A2G
T2C
A2G
A2G
A2G
A2G
T2C
C2T
C2T
C2T
A2G
A2T
T2A
G2A
T2C
A2T
G2A
C2T
T2C
T2C
G2A
G2A
C2T
T2C
T2C
C2T
A2T
T2C
A2T
C2T
T2A
A2C
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
78108
120
129
132143147156
162
163
169
170
174181
186
189193
194
197198213
237
243
249
261270
278
279
315
319
1782
1788
1794
1797
1809
1812
1815
1818
1821
1824
1830
1836
1851
1854
1878
1887
1890
1900
1920
1923
1932
1941
1956
1959
1965
1966
1974
1980
2004
2011
2019
2028
2031
2041
2046
2061
2070
2073
2076
2085
2154
(c) Cont1 PA
0
500
1000
1500
200
400
600
800
1000
140
A_HA_H3 position (cont1)
Coverage depth
C
exp. err
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
963
(d) Cont1 HA
Figure L.8: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
157
==PAGE:164==
0
500
1000
1500
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
A_NP position (cont1)
Coverage depth
G
G
G
G
C
G
G
exp. err
A2G
A2G
A2G
A2G
A2C
A2G
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
51
101
174
219
702
728
801
(e) Cont1 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
A_NA_N2 position (cont1)
Coverage depth
A
A
G
G
A
A
exp. err
G2A
G2A
A2G
A2G
C2A
G2A
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
661
736
747
1073
1203
1247
(f) Cont1 NA
Figure L.8: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
158
==PAGE:165==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
5000
15000
25000
A_MP position (cont1)
Coverage depth
A
A
G
C
G
G
exp. err
G2A
C2A
A2G
T2C
A2G
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
64
250
695
830
885
973
(g) Cont1 MP
0
200
400
600
800
500
1000
1500
2000
A_NS position (cont1)
Coverage depth
C
G
C
A
G
G
C
G
C
G
exp. err
T2C
A2G
G2C
T2A
A2G
A2G
T2C
A2G
T2C
A2G
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
41
86
106
269
322
397
411
423
496
696
(h) Cont1 NS
Figure L.8: Read coverage of segments for sample Day21. Output by IRMA.
159
==PAGE:166==
160
==PAGE:167==
L.9
Cont2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
5
10
15
20
25
A_PB2 position (cont2)
Coverage depth
(a) Cont2 PB2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2
4
6
8
10
A_PB1 position (cont2)
Coverage depth
(b) Cont2 PB1
Figure L.9: Coverage plotted for contaminated influenza A segments. Output by IRMA.
161
==PAGE:168==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
5
10
15
20
25
A_PA position (cont2)
Coverage depth
(c) Cont2 PA
0
500
1000
1500
2
4
6
8
10
A_HA_H3 position (cont2)
Coverage depth
(d) Cont2 HA
Figure L.9: Coverage plotted for contaminated influenza A segments. Output by IRMA.
162
==PAGE:169==
0
500
1000
1500
0
10
20
30
40
A_NP position (cont2)
Coverage depth
(e) Cont2 NP
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
5
10
15
20
A_NA_N2 position (cont2)
Coverage depth
(f) Cont2 NA
Figure L.9: Coverage plotted for contaminated influenza A segments. Output by IRMA.
163
==PAGE:170==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
A_MP position (cont2)
Coverage depth
AGGCTGACAGCAAATTAG
CAAAGACTTTAACTAGATCACAACTACTCCCCGGCAGCATAGAAGAGGCAGGCACATAATAATCACTGCTGACTAGCGAAGGTTCCACAACCG
exp. err
A2G
T2C
A2G
T2C
A2G
G2A
G2A
C2T
A2G
G2A
T2A
T2A
G2T
C2T
G2A
A2T
A2G
C2T
G2A
G2A
T2C
G2A
A2T
T2C
A2C
A2G
G2A
T2C
C2T
A2G
G2A
C2A
A2G
G2A
A2G
G2A
G2A
G2A
G2T
C2A
T2C
T2C
A2G
C2T
G2A
C2T
A2G
A2G
G2A
A2G
G2T
T2C
T2C
G2A
T2C
minor variants
Observed frequency
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
252
264
270
273
282
284
297
300
302
306
309
312
315
318
327
330
333
339
399
408
409
411
414
420
425
426
429
435
438
441
447
450
456
459
471
477
478
480
486
489
492
497
498
499
501
501
504
510
514
519
521
522
525
528
540
541
543
546
552
555
558
570
573
582
582
585
588
591
594
613
618
620
621
625
627
630
639
642
652
654
654
657
663
672
678
679
681
685
687
689
696
699
711
715
720
726
735
744
747
758
760
763
766
769
770
772
775
778
781
800
808
(g) Cont2 MP
0
200
400
600
800
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
A_NS position (cont2)
Coverage depth
(h) Cont2 NS
Figure L.9: Coverage plotted for contaminated influenza A segments. Output by IRMA.
164
==PAGE:171==
Exploring Danish influenza diversity:
Quasispecies, seasonal variants and contamination detection
165
==PAGE:172==
M
Read percentages
96.8% (582.9k)
1.9% (11.6k)
1.2% (7.4k)
1. Percentages of total reads (R1 + R2)
Assembled
QC filtered
Other
98.1% (305.1k)
0.0% (11)
1.5% (4.6k)
0.4% (1.2k)
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC
Assembled
Unusable
Chimeric
No match
8.6% (25.6k)
A_HA_H3
43.3% (128.7k)
A_MP
10.0% (29.7k)
A_NA_N2
8.5% (25.2k)
A_NP
21.9% (65.0k)
A_NS
3.6% (10.8k)
A_PA
A_PB1
3.9% (11.6k)
A_PB2
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair reads
SAMPLE "Day1_1"
READ PROPORTIONS.
1. Percentages of total read counts (R1 & R2)
    − ASSEMBLED: influenza reads in final assemblies.
    − QC FILTERED: didn't pass length/median quality thresholds.
    − OTHER: non−flu and contaminant/poor flu signal.
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC process
   − Patterns are clustered or non−redundant reads.
   − ASSEMBLED: excellent influenza read patterns.
   − UNUSABLE: poor or contaminant flu patterns.
   − CHIMERIC: flu patterns matching both strands.
   − NO MATCH: non−flu read patterns.
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair read counts
   − Shows the proportion of gene segments to the genome.
   − Paired−end reads have been merged into a single count
     unless not applicable: single−end reads have been used.
(a) Day1_1
82.9% (266.9k)
3.8% (12.3k)
13.3% (42.9k)
1. Percentages of total reads (R1 + R2)
Assembled
QC filtered
Other
86.4% (162.2k)
0.0% (1)
12.1% (22.7k)
1.5% (2.8k)
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC
Assembled
Unusable
Chimeric
No match
5.7% (8.1k)
A_HA_H3
41.9% (60.1k)
A_MP
6.4% (9.1k)
A_NA_N2
8.7% (12.5k)
A_NP
25.0% (35.9k)
A_NS
5.9% (8.5k)
A_PA
A_PB1
6.0% (8.6k)
A_PB2
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair reads
SAMPLE "Day1_2"
READ PROPORTIONS.
1. Percentages of total read counts (R1 & R2)
    − ASSEMBLED: influenza reads in final assemblies.
    − QC FILTERED: didn't pass length/median quality thresholds.
    − OTHER: non−flu and contaminant/poor flu signal.
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC process
   − Patterns are clustered or non−redundant reads.
   − ASSEMBLED: excellent influenza read patterns.
   − UNUSABLE: poor or contaminant flu patterns.
   − CHIMERIC: flu patterns matching both strands.
   − NO MATCH: non−flu read patterns.
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair read counts
   − Shows the proportion of gene segments to the genome.
   − Paired−end reads have been merged into a single count
     unless not applicable: single−end reads have been used.
(b) Day1_2
Figure M.1: Distribution of reads. Top left: Reads passing quality and length control.
Top right: Reads passing read gathering phase (non-chimeric and matching influenza
segments). Bottom left: Assembled reads distribution between segments
166
==PAGE:173==
59.2% (194.6k)
26.8% (88.2k)
14.0% (46.1k)
1. Percentages of total reads (R1 + R2)
Assembled
QC filtered
Other
78.2% (135.1k)
0.1% (177)
12.9% (22.3k)
8.8% (15.2k)
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC
Assembled
Unusable
Chimeric
No match
6.3% (6.5k)
A_HA_H3
38.0% (39.5k)
A_MP
11.2% (11.6k)
A_NA_N2
12.1% (12.6k)
A_NP
18.9% (19.7k)
A_NS
5.1% (5.3k)
A_PA
A_PB1
7.9% (8.2k)
A_PB2
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair reads
SAMPLE "Day3"
READ PROPORTIONS.
1. Percentages of total read counts (R1 & R2)
    − ASSEMBLED: influenza reads in final assemblies.
    − QC FILTERED: didn't pass length/median quality thresholds.
    − OTHER: non−flu and contaminant/poor flu signal.
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC process
   − Patterns are clustered or non−redundant reads.
   − ASSEMBLED: excellent influenza read patterns.
   − UNUSABLE: poor or contaminant flu patterns.
   − CHIMERIC: flu patterns matching both strands.
   − NO MATCH: non−flu read patterns.
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair read counts
   − Shows the proportion of gene segments to the genome.
   − Paired−end reads have been merged into a single count
     unless not applicable: single−end reads have been used.
(c) Day3
8.7% (31.5k)
16.5% (59.8k)
74.8% (270.8k)
1. Percentages of total reads (R1 + R2)
Assembled
QC filtered
Other
9.5% (24.5k)
0.0% (98)
0.1% (357)
90.3% (233.1k)
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC
Assembled
Unusable
Chimeric
No match
A_HA_H3
19.2% (3.1k)
A_MP
4.5% (731)
A_NA_N2
2.6% (432)
A_NP
51.5% (8.4k)
A_NS
4.8% (786)
A_PA
15.9% (2.6k)
A_PB2
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair reads
SAMPLE "Day8"
READ PROPORTIONS.
1. Percentages of total read counts (R1 & R2)
    − ASSEMBLED: influenza reads in final assemblies.
    − QC FILTERED: didn't pass length/median quality thresholds.
    − OTHER: non−flu and contaminant/poor flu signal.
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC process
   − Patterns are clustered or non−redundant reads.
   − ASSEMBLED: excellent influenza read patterns.
   − UNUSABLE: poor or contaminant flu patterns.
   − CHIMERIC: flu patterns matching both strands.
   − NO MATCH: non−flu read patterns.
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair read counts
   − Shows the proportion of gene segments to the genome.
   − Paired−end reads have been merged into a single count
     unless not applicable: single−end reads have been used.
(d) Day8
Figure M.1: Distribution of reads. Top left: Reads passing quality and length control.
Top right: Reads passing read gathering phase (non-chimeric and matching influenza
segments). Bottom left: Assembled reads distribution between segments
167
==PAGE:174==
59.2% (86.4k)
15.5% (22.6k)
25.3% (36.9k)
1. Percentages of total reads (R1 + R2)
Assembled
QC filtered
Other
66.0% (69.1k)
0.0% (4)
0.3% (292)
33.7% (35.3k)
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC
Assembled
Unusable
Chimeric
No match
7.8% (3.5k)
A_HA_H3
39.3% (17.9k)
A_MP
12.2% (5.5k)
A_NA_N2
10.0% (4.5k)
A_NP
24.4% (11.1k)
A_NS
2.6% (1.2k)
A_PA
A_PB1
3.5% (1.6k)
A_PB2
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair reads
SAMPLE "Day14"
READ PROPORTIONS.
1. Percentages of total read counts (R1 & R2)
    − ASSEMBLED: influenza reads in final assemblies.
    − QC FILTERED: didn't pass length/median quality thresholds.
    − OTHER: non−flu and contaminant/poor flu signal.
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC process
   − Patterns are clustered or non−redundant reads.
   − ASSEMBLED: excellent influenza read patterns.
   − UNUSABLE: poor or contaminant flu patterns.
   − CHIMERIC: flu patterns matching both strands.
   − NO MATCH: non−flu read patterns.
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair read counts
   − Shows the proportion of gene segments to the genome.
   − Paired−end reads have been merged into a single count
     unless not applicable: single−end reads have been used.
(e) Day14
85.1% (210.3k)
3.6% (8.9k)
11.3% (28.0k)
1. Percentages of total reads (R1 + R2)
Assembled
QC filtered
Other
87.4% (156.1k)
0.0% (1)
1.9% (3.4k)
10.7% (19.2k)
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC
Assembled
Unusable
Chimeric
No match
7.6% (8.2k)
A_HA_H3
36.9% (39.9k)
A_MP
11.4% (12.4k)
A_NA_N2
11.2% (12.1k)
A_NP
22.5% (24.3k)
A_NS
4.1% (4.5k)
A_PA
A_PB1
5.9% (6.4k)
A_PB2
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair reads
SAMPLE "Day17"
READ PROPORTIONS.
1. Percentages of total read counts (R1 & R2)
    − ASSEMBLED: influenza reads in final assemblies.
    − QC FILTERED: didn't pass length/median quality thresholds.
    − OTHER: non−flu and contaminant/poor flu signal.
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC process
   − Patterns are clustered or non−redundant reads.
   − ASSEMBLED: excellent influenza read patterns.
   − UNUSABLE: poor or contaminant flu patterns.
   − CHIMERIC: flu patterns matching both strands.
   − NO MATCH: non−flu read patterns.
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair read counts
   − Shows the proportion of gene segments to the genome.
   − Paired−end reads have been merged into a single count
     unless not applicable: single−end reads have been used.
(f) Day17
Figure M.1: Distribution of reads. Top left: Reads passing quality and length control.
Top right: Reads passing read gathering phase (non-chimeric and matching influenza
segments). Bottom left: Assembled reads distribution between segments
168
==PAGE:175==
77.0% (167.3k)
3.8% (8.3k)
19.2% (41.8k)
1. Percentages of total reads (R1 + R2)
Assembled
QC filtered
Other
75.7% (123.0k)
0.0% (1)
0.1% (175)
24.2% (39.3k)
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC
Assembled
Unusable
Chimeric
No match
3.0% (2.6k)
A_HA_H3
42.8% (36.9k)
A_MP
13.5% (11.6k)
A_NA_N2
8.9% (7.7k)
A_NP
26.4% (22.8k)
A_NS
A_PA
A_PB1
2.9% (2.5k)
A_PB2
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair reads
SAMPLE "Day21"
READ PROPORTIONS.
1. Percentages of total read counts (R1 & R2)
    − ASSEMBLED: influenza reads in final assemblies.
    − QC FILTERED: didn't pass length/median quality thresholds.
    − OTHER: non−flu and contaminant/poor flu signal.
2. Percentages of all read patterns passing QC process
   − Patterns are clustered or non−redundant reads.
   − ASSEMBLED: excellent influenza read patterns.
   − UNUSABLE: poor or contaminant flu patterns.
   − CHIMERIC: flu patterns matching both strands.
   − NO MATCH: non−flu read patterns.
3. Percentages of assembled, merged−pair read counts
   − Shows the proportion of gene segments to the genome.
   − Paired−end reads have been merged into a single count
     unless not applicable: single−end reads have been used.
(g) Day21
Figure M.1: Distribution of reads. Top left: Reads passing quality and length control.
Top right: Reads passing read gathering phase (non-chimeric and matching influenza
segments). Bottom left: Assembled reads distribution between segments
169
