==PAGE:1==
Detecting and removing unwanted signals
in satellite-based sea level height anomaly
data
Casper Tygesen Bang-Hansen
& Mathias Jensen
2023 - Master’s thesis in Earth and Space Physics and Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Detecting and removing unwanted signals in satellite-based sea level
height anomaly data
Authors:
Casper Tygesen Bang-Hansen & Mathias Jensen
Student ID:
s183827 & s176531
Supervisor:
Prof. Ole Baltazar Andersen
Co-supervisors:
Mads Ehrhorn & Carsten Bjerre Ludwigsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Encyclopædia Britannica [1]
Published by:
DTU Space, Elektrovej, Building 328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
DTU Space
Department of Geodesy and Earth Observation
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Building 328
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
An important parameter used for investigating changes to the sea level globally is the
Sea Level Anomaly (SLA). Several public providers supply gridded SLA data prod-
ucts, interpolated using satellite-based altimeter data. However, in order to cover
data gaps and mitigate data errors, these products are created using large temporal
windows during interpolation, as well as spatial- and temporal filtering. This project
has multiple purposes. First, to investigate the feasibility of reducing the size of the
temporal window during interpolation of the gridded SLA data product, as well as
not applying any filters throughout the process. Furthermore, additional variables
Sea Surface Temperature (SST), Significant Wave Height (SWH) and Wind Speed
are included in the gridded product. More high-frequency features, as well as some
noise and satellite tracks, are found in the data product. Overall, the products need
additional work to remove unwanted signals, however, results are promising for an
SLA grid product containing more well-resolved features in time. Next, an autoen-
coder is applied to the data after gridding, in an attempt to create a smart filter for
removing satellite tracks and non-physical noise. Preliminary results are propitious,
as satellite tracks are successfully removed from the data without influencing the
underlying features. Finally, the data are used to forecast near-future values of the
SLA grid using an Encoder-Decoder Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory with
Attention (EDAConvLSTM) architecture. The prediction power of the model is very
dependent on the smoothness of the data. Forecasts using the Copernicus Marine En-
vironment Monitoring Service (CMEMS) SLA data set are reliable for about 30-40
days, while the reliability is reduced to 7-10 days when using the SLA data product
produced in this project. Thus, for CMEMS the product could be extended to almost
real-time using the forecast. For the SLA grid product produced in this report, how-
ever, the forecast may be used to extend the grid product slightly beyond real-time,
such that a few future days are included.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Geodesy and Earth
Observation of the National Space Institute, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of mathematics, geo-
physics, statistics and machine learning.
Casper Tygesen Bang-Hansen
Mathias Jensen
Dated: 20th August 2023
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our deepest gratitudes to each other, for being really
awesome partners throughout a trying project. We are also extremely grateful for
our supervisors Professor Ole Baltazar Andersen, Carsten Bjerre Ludwigsen & Mads
Ehrhorn for providing a very interesting subject for our Master’s thesis as well as
constructive feedback during our weekly meetings.
We would also like to thank Stine Kildegaard Rose for providing polar data,
enabling an extended version of the grid product. Thanks should also go to
Christian Solgaard, Martin Rasmus Kolster & Benjamin Büll Elsholm for proof
reading the thesis.
Finally, we would be remiss in not mentioning our families and friends, and for
Mathias, my partner and her family. Their belief in me has kept my spirits and
motivation high during this process.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
RADS
Radar Altimeter Database System
CMEMS
Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring Service
SLA
Sea Level Anomaly
SST
Sea Surface Temperature
SWH
Significant Wave Height
MSS
Mean Sea Surface
SAR
Synthetic Aperture Radar
RBF
Radial Basis Function
HPC
High Performance Computing
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
MEaSUREs
Making Earth System Data Records for Use in Research
Environments
NaN
Not a Number
ESA
European Space Agency
JPL
Jet Propulsion Lab
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
PODAAC
Physical Oceanography Distributed Active Archive Center
NoD
Number of Days
AOI
Area Of Interest
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
ConvLSTM
Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviations
BiConvLSTM
Bidirectional Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
EDAConvLSTM
Encoder-Decoder Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
with Attention
E2D2AConvLSTM Encoder2-Decoder2 Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
with Attention
FFNN
Feed Forward Neural Network
MLP
Multi-Layer Perceptron
MSE
Mean Squared Error
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
RMSE
Root Mean Squared Error
GDL
Gradient Difference Loss
PINN
Physics Informed Neural Networks
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Approval
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
I
Grid interpolation
3
2
Data origin
5
2.1
Sea Level Anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Radar Altimeter Database System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Processed polar data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Theory and implementation
7
3.1
Block-averaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Haversine distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Radial basis function interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Ball tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Time distance weighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Processing pipeline
11
4.1
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
RADS data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Interpolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
The data product
17
5.1
Presenting the data product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Choice of parameters and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
II
Removing unwanted signals & Forecasting
29
6
Motivation
31
7
Data selection and augmentation
33
7.1
Polar data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.2
Trend and seasonality correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.3
Impact of spatial resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.4
Data splits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8
Theoretical concepts
39
8.1
Seasonal linear regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.2
Feature scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.3
Artificial Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8.4
Neural network functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
9
Neural network modules
43
9.1
Convolutional LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
9.2
Bidirectional Convolutional LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
9.3
Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
9.4
Autoencoder Basic blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
10 Neural network architectures
49
10.1 Encoder-Decoder Convolutional LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
10.2 Encoder-Decoder Convolutional LSTM with Attention . . . . . . . . .
50
10.3 Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
10.4 Encoder2-Decoder2 Convolutional LSTM with Attention . . . . . . . .
53
11 Results
55
11.1 Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
11.2 Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
12 Discussion
85
12.1 Smoothness of the grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
12.2 Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
12.3 Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
12.4 Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
13 Future work
95
13.1 Gridding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
13.2 Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
14 Conclusion
97
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
A Grid interpolation
105
A.1 Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.2 Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A.3 Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
B Forecasting
113
B.1
Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
An important tool for monitoring changes in both global and regional climate is
measurements of the sea level. The introduction of satellite altimetry has massively
improved the amount of data available. Public entities, such as National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) and European Space Agency (ESA) provide grid
interpolated SLA data products [2, 3] based on satellite altimetry data. These prod-
ucts are provided with both daily and monthly resolutions. However, the temporal
window in the daily products is very extensive.
The Making Earth System Data
Records for Use in Research Environments (MEaSUREs) data product contains un-
wanted signals, and the way to remove these in the CMEMS product is by overly
smoothing the data. The purpose of the first part of this project is to provide a grid
interpolated SLA data product with a daily resolution using a smaller temporal win-
dow. In the second part of the project, efforts are made to remove unwanted signals
from this product, using an alternative method to smoothing, after which it is used for
forecasting near-future changes in the SLA using Artificial Neural Network (ANN)s.
As implied, this project is made in two parts. In the first part, the grid interpolated
SLA data product is produced and presented. The spatial resolution of the daily
product presented in Part I is 1◦×1◦, which spans the years 1993-2023. Additionally,
the SST, SWH and Wind Speed are grid interpolated in the same period and reso-
lution. The data originate from Radar Altimeter Database System (RADS), but are
processed further before being grid interpolated and presented as a global, daily prod-
uct. Moreover, data over the polar regions which have been processed further, are
utilized in the interpolation for increased information in these areas. The potential
issue with similar products is that in order to cover data gaps and ensure suﬀicient
coverage at all times, a large temporal window is used for interpolating each grid.
ForCMEMS and MEaSUREs, this window is 6 weeks and 30 days respectively. Thus,
the data product is always delayed by at least the size of the temporal window when
published. In Part I, a temporal window of just 5 days is used in an attempt to
reduce the influence of temporally distant data in the product, as well as improve the
recency of data when published. The current product from CMEMS utilizes heavy
filtering throughout the pipeline, in order to create both spatially and temporally
smooth data. In this project no filtering is applied, and the product solely relies
on data corrections. However, a novel method of removing unwanted signals from a
gridded SLA data product is introduced in the second part of this project.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
The second part of the project is dedicated to two main purposes. The first purpose is
to investigate the use of an autoencoder for removing unwanted signals from the grid
interpolated SLA data product created in Part I. The second purpose is to forecast
the SLA grid on shorter timescales of up to 90 days.
For the first purpose, the global grid from Part I is used. The pipeline allows for
creating grids of arbitrarily high resolution, so an SLA grid product in a local Area
Of Interest (AOI) near South Africa has been created in a 1/6◦× 1/6◦resolution for
testing the autoencoder in a higher resolution as well.
For the second purpose, the global SLA and South African data products have been
used. Data from CMEMS are used to test the impact of smoothness in the data
product on forecasting. The CMEMS data are restricted to the same AOI near South
Africa, as well as another less volatile area in the South China Sea. Thus, the influ-
ence of volatility on the prediction power of the models may be investigated. Using
both the data products created using the pipeline from Part I and CMEMS data
allows for extended scrutiny and comparison of data quality. The forecasting ANN
used in Part II has an EDAConvLSTM architecture. The results are compared to a
baseline as well as results from similar work.
==PAGE:17==
Part I
Grid interpolation
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Data origin
The following is a description of the sources of data for the grid interpolation, as well
as a brief explanation of the SLA.
2.1
Sea Level Anomaly
The SLA is the height of the sea surface relative to a long-term average. In RADS,
the DTU15 Mean Sea Surface (MSS) is used as the long-term mean of the sea surface
[4]. For this project, all SLA data have been corrected to use the DTU21 MSS as the
reference sea level [5]. The DTU21 MSS is computed over the 1993-2012 period using
multiple satellites.
2.2
Radar Altimeter Database System
The main source of data for the grid interpolation is RADS [6], made available through
the Maxwell and Kepler clusters at the National Space Institute at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU).
2.2.1
Satellite coverage
This database contains satellite altimetry data from 1985 until today, although be-
tween the end of Geosat in September 1989 and the start of ERS-1 in August 1991
there is a gap in the data. Therefore, all data before the initialization of ERS-1 are
excluded. Table A.2 in appendix A.2 shows the altimetry satellites in RADS. This
table is also colour-coded to indicate which satellites are included in the grid inter-
polation. Light blue indicates the satellites which are included, while pink indicates
those which are not. The satellites included in the grid interpolation provide a con-
tinuous flow of data from August 1991 until today for the grid interpolation, mostly
with multiple satellites at the same time. Some days, however, do not have coverage
of a single satellite and are therefore missing from the data set.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Data origin
2.2.2
Derivative products in RADS
In RADS, data with different levels of pre-processing may be extracted. Anything
from the raw altimeter readings to heavily processed products, such as the SLA,
may be found in the database. All parameters extracted for grid interpolation in this
project are products derived from the raw altimeter measurements, using models such
as atmospheric and global mean sea level models. The main derivative product used
in the gridding, as well as the forecasting in the second part of this project, is the SLA.
Other derivative products included in the grid interpolation are the SST, SWH and
Wind Speed, where the SWH is the mean wave height of the highest one-third of the
ocean waves. Details of the derivation of these parameters for the RADS database
may be found in the documentation [6].
2.3
Processed polar data
Usually, satellite altimetry data do not reach the polar regions, and the sparse data
that do exist are often prone to error. A few satellites do venture into the very high
and very low latitudes however. In order to increase the available data in the polar
regions, a researcher at DTU Space has processed some of these data in the Arctic
and Antarctic regions using Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data and SAR Inter-
ferometry [7, 8]. The result is a data set several orders of magnitude larger than the
raw data alone. Unfortunately, only the SLA parameter has been included in this
computation, meaning the extent of the remaining parameters in the grid interpola-
tion cannot be extended reliably into the polar regions. Figure A.3 in section A.1
shows an example month of CryoSat data coverage from the Arctic and Antarctic,
both including and excluding the polar data. The light blue, purple and green colours
indicate which processing method/instrument has been used, while the pink data near
the boundaries indicate data from RADS. As the figure shows, the data coverage is
increased significantly in the polar regions. CryoSat has by far the best coverage of
the three polar satellites used.
The polar data include data from the satellites ERS-2, Envisat and CryoSat in chrono-
logical order. The data have been processed individually by satellite, and are thus
separated into 3 individual data sets. ERS-2 was launched in 1995, and thus no addi-
tional polar data are included before this point. The polar data sets from ERS-2 and
Envisat have been produced using a different reference frame than CryoSat, which
has used the same reference frame used in RADS. Therefore, ERS-2 and Envisat
polar data have been corrected to fit the reference frame used in the other data.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Theory and
implementation
The following chapter introduces and briefly explains the theoretical concepts behind
grid interpolation, as well as the implementation of these.
3.1
Block-averaging
Given a set of positions X = {x1, x2, . . . , xN} and targets T = {t1, t2, . . . , tN} in RM
and RF respectively, a block-averaging algorithm can be performed by knowing the
number of blocks and the resolutions of a block in RM. The block-averaging algorithm
then takes the average of all targets which lies within each block. In section A.3,
Algorithm 1 the pseudocode for the block-averaging implementation optimized for
memory usage can be found.
3.2
Haversine distance
The Haversine distance formula is used to calculate the great-circle distance between
two points on a sphere. In this project, this formula is used as an approximation for
computing the distance between two points on Earth.
Haversine (ϕ1, λ1, ϕ2, λ2, r) =
2r arcsin
(√
sin2
(ϕ2 −ϕ1
2
)
+ cos (ϕ1) cos (ϕ2) sin2
(λ2 −λ1
2
))
(3.1)
where (ϕ1, λ1) is the (latitude, longitude) for the first point and (ϕ2, λ2) is the (lati-
tude, longitude) for the second point. r is the radius of the sphere.
==PAGE:22==
8
3 Theory and implementation
3.3
Radial basis function interpolation
3.3.1
Theoretical background
Given a set of N unique data points in RM defined as X = {x1, x2, . . . , xN} and their
target values {t1, t2, . . . , tN}, the goal is to find a smooth function f (x) that fits every
target value at exactly x.
In this project, the purpose is to interpolate using latitude, longitude and time. Thus,
xi can be defined as xi = {x(ϕ,i), x(λ,i), x(time,i)} for 1 ≤i ≤N. The equation for the
Radial Basis Function (RBF) interpolation can be defined as equation 3.2 using [9].
f (x)
=
N
∑
j=1
wjϕ (d (x, xj)) ,
wj ∈R,
1 ≤j ≤N
(3.2)
where d : RM ×RM −→R typically is the Euclidean metric, but in this case, the Haver-
sine distance weighted against time will be used, restricting the distance function to
be of type d : R3 × R3 −→R.
d (x, y)
=
√
Haversine (xϕ, xλ, yϕ, yλ, r)2 + (xtime −ytime)2
(3.3)
Where r ∈R+ is the radius of Earth. Equation 3.2 can be written in terms of a linear
system if f (xi) is forced to evaluate to ti at xi. To find an estimate of w the errors
have been assumed Gaussian distributed and i.i.d, and thus w can be estimated using
Equation 3.5.
Aw
=
t
(3.4)
ˆw
=
(AT A)−1AT t
(3.5)
Where w ∈RN is the weight vector, t ∈RN is the target vector defined as {t1, t2, . . . , tN}
and A ∈RN×N is defined in Equation 3.6.
Aij
=
ϕ (d (xi, xj))
1 ≤j ≤N
∧
1 ≤j ≤N
(3.6)
The function ϕ [0, ∞[ −→R is the RBF. Different RBFs exist [9], but only the linear
basis function ϕ (r) = r will be utilized in this project.
As long as Aij is non-singular a unique interpolation exists.
3.3.2
Implementation for grid interpolation
The RBF (RBF) interpolation used in this project is a modified version of SciPy’s
RBFInterpolator [10]. The functions used by the RBFInterpolator class have been
changed to now support the Haversine distance metric using a linear RBF. The RBF
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Ball tree
9
interpolator (SciPy) is implemented as an approximation to Equation 3.2. The ap-
proximation is to only use N points to find f (x). For large data sets, the matrix A in
Equation 3.4 becomes too large to contain in memory, as the required memory for A
increases quadratically with the number of data points. The SciPy RBF interpolator
also implements smoothing, a shape parameter and a way to add polynomials for the
stability of the solution, which is needed for particular RBFs [10]. These implemen-
tations have not been used during this project, and will thus not be explained in this
thesis.
3.4
Ball tree
Ball trees are a space-partitioning data structures, which makes it faster to find
multidimensional data than using brute force [11]. A ball tree is a binary tree where
each node has an associated ball. The ball is constructed such that it is as small as
possible, while still containing the child nodes in the binary tree. The binary tree is
constructed such that the data set starts by being inside one ball. Then, the ball/data
set is split into two. These two balls are then the balls of the two child nodes. In the
naïve approach, this process keeps on going until only one data point is within each
ball. This means when performing a query for finding the closest point to a query
point the tree just needs to be traversed.
One implementation of such a tree is the ball tree implementation done by SciKit-
learn [12]. This implementation has been used during this project to find all points
within some distance from a query point. The distance metric used by the ball tree is
the Haversine distance metric (see Equation 3.1). The ball tree was used extensively
to find the N points used for the RBF interpolation method.
3.5
Time distance weighting
When computing a distance between two points containing latitude, longitude and
time features, the diﬀiculty lies in properly balancing the weight between the spatial
and temporal elements. The difference in magnitudes of the temporal feature and the
spatial features complicates this. One way of solving this problem is to feature scale
the temporal feature to match the scaling of the distance for spatial features, which
is the method utilized in this project.
First a set of N data points in R3 are defined as X = {x1, x2, . . . , xN} where xi =
{x(ϕ,i), x(λ,i), x(time,i)} for 1 ≤i ≤N. Secondly, a point to interpolate to is defined
as µ = {µϕ, µλ, µtime}. Thirdly, the maximum spatial distance between µ and xi has
to be computed using Equation 3.1.
maxDistance
=
max (Haversine (xϕ,i, xλ,i, µϕ, µλ, r)
1 ≤i ≤N)
(3.7)
==PAGE:24==
10
3 Theory and implementation
The temporal feature can now be feature scaled using the min-max normalization.
x′
=
a + ((x −min(x)) (b −a)
max(x) −min(x)
(3.8)
Where x is vector containing x(time,i), a is 0, and b is the maximum distance com-
puted in Equation 3.7. Using the maximum distance makes the temporal and spatial
features weigh equally in Equation 3.3, which is not always desirable.
Thus, if a
different weighting between these two features is wanted, b can be multiplied by a
time-to-distance weight.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Processing pipeline
In this chapter, an explanation of the framework for this part of the project is pro-
vided, followed by a description of the processing pipeline used for producing the
grid-interpolated data product.
4.1
Framework
A brief overview of the hardware and software used for creating the grid product.
4.1.1
Computational framework
Processing of the RADS data has been executed on CPU’s in the Maxwell and Kepler
clusters at DTU Space.
These are old and not suited for heavy computing, but
suﬀiced for the relatively light processing steps necessary for preparing the data for
grid interpolation.
Initial testing and implementation of early versions of the grid interpolation were
executed locally on laptop CPU’s, which quickly proved insuﬀicient for the heavy
processing load. Therefore, the High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster at DTU
has been utilized [13]. Specifically, several Intel Xeon Gold 6226R (16 core, 2.90GHz)
CPU’s have been used in parallel for a tremendous speed-up in processing time.
4.1.2
Programming framework
RADS data acquisition has been performed almost exclusively using RADS functions
in batch scripts, with a few helping functions in Python. The preparation processing
steps before the grid interpolation are mostly Python code, though with some built-in
RADS functionality being utilized in batch scripts.
The grid interpolation is written in Python, with some functions being compiled using
the Pythran module for speed-up of the code. Multiple Python scripts were executed
in parallel on the HPC using LSF jobs [14].
==PAGE:26==
12
4 Processing pipeline
4.2
RADS data processing
Figure 4.1. A diagram of the processing pipeline that corrects the RADS data and turns
it into a structured format. The polar data processing step has been performed in [7, 8].
A visual overview of the RADS data processing pipeline is shown in Figure 4.1.
The first step is extracting the data described in section 2.2 from the database in
cycles by utilizing the RADS function rads2nc. The acquired data are then grouped
by satellites and dates, and combined with the polar data presented in section 2.3, by
removing the original data in the latitudes containing the more processed polar data.
Since the polar data has a much higher sampling frequency it has been downsampled
to 1Hz, which is approximately the same sampling frequency the RADS data have.
The polar data use a different reference system, and thus a correction has to be
applied. The correction consists of first computing the mean of a designated area
from the original satellite data and a mean, in the same area, of the polar data for
each satellite. Then, the difference has been subtracted from the polar data, resulting
in a common reference frame. After applying the reference frame correction on the
polar data, these are inserted to directly continue the RADS data for satellites ERS-2,
Envisat and Cryosat.
As the data are slightly offset between the satellites, another correction is necessary.
For this, the TOPEX and Jason series satellites are assumed stable and used as
reference satellites. The correction is then made by finding the points where satellites
paths cross each other, calculating the offset between the start and end points for each
satellite, and realigning the other satellites to match the references. The crossover
correction has only been applied to the SLA feature, as the other features do not
require correction. In overlapping years, later satellites are corrected to match the
earlier ones. For example, Jason-1 data are corrected to match TOPEX data. After
==PAGE:27==
4.3 Interpolation
13
the data has been crossover corrected, outlier detection is applied and the outliers
are removed. Finally, the data for each satellite are combined by date, such that the
data entering the grid interpolation contains information from all satellites available
at each date.
In Figure 4.2, an example of the data is shown after the pipeline in Figure 4.1. This
is the input for the grid interpolation algorithm explained in the next section. This
figure also provides an idea of the general structure of satellite tracks, as in the final
data product some biases are formed along the satellite tracks.
Figure 4.2. Example of the data after processing, but before grid interpolation on 2005-
10-01. In these data, the DTU15 MSS is used.
4.3
Interpolation
The grid interpolation pipeline is shown in Figure 4.3.
This pipeline provides an
overview of how the scattered data produced by the pipeline presented in section 4.2
have been processed both before and during the interpolation. In this section, each
process in the interpolation pipeline will be explained. Before the interpolation, a
number defining the size of a moving temporal window has to be chosen. This number
represents the Number of Days (NoD) before and after the current date being used in
the interpolation. Using multiple days ensures global data coverage. When the NoD
is chosen, the interpolation pipeline may be initialized.
The first step in the interpolation pipeline is to perform block averaging on the data
set. The block averaging has been implemented in accordance with the description in
section 3.1, where the blocks are defined in R3 and consist of a latitude, longitude and
time component. The latitude and longitude resolution are the same and are defined
in degrees, whereas the time resolution is defined in hours (see Table 4.1 for the exact
==PAGE:28==
14
4 Processing pipeline
Figure 4.3.
Diagram of the interpolation pipeline that converts scattered data into a
structured grid format.
values). The number of blocks is chosen so all data points can be inserted into a
block, which in the worst-case scenario leads to N blocks, where N is the number of
data points.
In step two, assume the points interpolated to grid point µ are known. Then, the cor-
responding data points X used in interpolating each grid point may be found. These
points are found by first finding all the data points that lie within some distance of
each grid point using a balltree. Within the pre-defined balltree distance, a minimum
and maximum number of points, W and Q respectively, are defined. If less than W
data points are present within the distance, the grid point is discarded. Grid points
with more than Q data points within the distance only use the nearest Q points.
The lower part of Figure 4.3 shows the construction of interpolation points. In the
first part of this process, a grid with the resolution of the output grid is created. For
this, a latitude and longitude resolution has to be provided (see Table 4.1 for the
exact values). After the grid is constructed, an ocean mask is loaded and applied
to the grid.
The mask removes grid points on land, which are irrelevant for this
interpolation. The ocean mask used in this project is provided by GMT [15] and is
available in different resolutions. The resolution of the ocean mask is the same as the
grid resolution, which may be found in table Table 4.1. After the interpolation points
have been found, they are used in both the ”Choose data points” and the ”Radial
basis function interpolation” processes, seen in Figure 4.3.
The relative weighting between spatial and temporal features in each interpolation
point is described in section 3.5. The value of the weight can be found in Table 4.1.
Data points selected in accordance with the ”Choose data points” process are used
for RBF interpolation described in section 3.3. Thus, between W and Q data points
are used in the interpolation of each grid point. The output grid then contains a mesh
of all the interpolated values. As some potential interpolation points are discarded
throughout the pipeline due to either ocean masking or the criteria described earlier
not being satisfied, these points contain Not a Number (NaN) values.
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Interpolation
15
4.3.1
Pipeline Parameters
Table 4.1 shows the values of the different parameters chosen for the data product.
Table 4.1. Parameters used during the RADS and interpolation pipelines.
Parameter
Value
Number of days (NoD)
5 days
Grid resolution
1◦
Block average spatial resolution
1/6◦
Block average temporal resolution
3h
Distance to time scaling
0.028125, 11.25
Max data points Q
1000
Max distance
1000km
Minimum data points W
50
The values in Table 4.1 have been chosen based on certain criteria and by processes of
narrowing down. The processes and criteria are reviewed and discussed in section 5.2.
==PAGE:30==
16
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5
The data product
This chapter contains a presentation of the data product created using the pipeline
described in chapter 4, containing the parameters SLA, SST, SWH and Wind Speed
in the years 1993-2023. Moreover, the product is compared with similar data products
CMEMS and MEaSUREs, and the specifics of the pipeline and chosen parameters
are briefly discussed.
Figure 5.1. Example of the gridded 1◦× 1◦SLA data product on 2019-01-02 produced
using a time-to-distance weighting of 0.028125. The satellites used to produce this grid were
Jason-2, Cryosat-2, SARAL, Jason-3, and both Sentinel-3A and 3B.
5.1
Presenting the data product
The final data product consists of a 1◦× 1◦resolution grid containing the main
parameter SLA, and the three additional parameters SST, SWH and Wind Speed.
Figure 5.1 shows the gridded SLA on 2019-01-02 using a time-to-distance weighting
of 0.028125. In general, the SLA on this date is around ±10 cm in most areas, but
in some areas blobs are visible with magnitudes of around ±50 cm.
These blobs
change size, shape and position over time, but are mostly constrained to the same
geographic locations, which are near Japan, the east coast of Canada, Argentina
==PAGE:32==
18
5 The data product
and South Africa. The blobs of high magnitude are caused by Eddy currents. The
major drivers of the rotating eddy currents in the ocean are barotropic and baroclinic
instability which convert energy from the mean flow of ocean currents into Eddy
kinetic energy. [16]. Supplementary factors to the formation of Eddies are bathymetry
and wind. For gridding this particular date, the satellites Jason-2, Cryosat-2, SARAL,
Jason-3, and both Sentinel-3A and 3B were used. The areas containing white pixels
have NaN-values, which is either due to a landmask being applied or not enough
data points being present to get a reliable result.
The grid interpolation of the
Figure 5.2. Example of the gridded 1◦× 1◦SST data product on 2019-01-02 produced
using a time-to-distance weighting of 11.25 with the same satellites as used in Figure 5.1.
three supporting features has been performed using mostly the same parameters,
although a different time-to-distance weighting has been used. The SLA uses a time-
to-distance weighting of 0.028125 while all the other grids use a time-to-distance
weighting of 11.25. Figure 5.2 shows the gridded SST. The figure shows that the
temperature is much higher near the equator than at the poles.
The SST varies
both locally and globally.
The large-scale variations are mainly explained by the
seasons.
In Figure 5.3, the gridded SWH is shown.
This parameter varies a lot
both spatially and temporally. The short-term temporal changes are observed when
comparing consecutive days, whereas long-term changes are not clearly visible when
comparing dates further apart.
This is most likely due to the long-term features
being obscured by the volatile, high-magnitude short-term features.
Furthermore,
Figure 5.3 contains more striping than Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2, which may be
explained by the SWH being more volatile. As the SWH and Wind Speed vary in
order of minutes, information in parallel satellite tracks is very different, which are
then not resolved properly in this product. Figure 5.4 shows the wind speed. Similarly
to the SWH, the wind speed is also spatially and temporally volatile. The spatial
variance may be even higher for the wind speed compared to the SWH. The SWH
==PAGE:33==
5.1 Presenting the data product
19
Figure 5.3. Example of the gridded 1◦× 1◦SWH data product on 2019-01-02 generated
using the same parameters as Figure 5.2
Figure 5.4.
Example of the gridded 1◦× 1◦wind speed data product on 2019-01-02
generated using the same parameters as Figure 5.2
and wind speed are very correlated, as seen in Figure A.2 in section A.1. Figure 5.1,
5.3 and 5.4 all have one flaw in common. The spatial features have a tendency to be
stretched in the latitude direction, which is likely due to the satellite orbits and the
gridding processes not taking care of this bias in the data collection.
==PAGE:34==
20
5 The data product
5.1.1
Comparison with CMEMS
The Earth observation department Copernicus at ESA has produced a similar SLA
product as a part of the CMEMS marine data programme [17, 18]. Therefore, the SLA
product created in this project is compared to, and validated against the CMEMS
product in the following section, and similarities and differences between the two are
explored. A similar comparison is made in subsection 5.1.2 using the MEaSUREs
product. In order to compare the CMEMS product with the product of this project,
the CMEMS product has been down-sampled by averaging 4 x 4 blocks in the grid
to get a 1◦× 1◦resolution, as the CMEMS product has a 1/4◦× 1/4◦resolution.
Furthermore, a reference correction has been made to convert the MSS from CNES/-
CLS15 to DTU21.
Figure 5.5 shows the mean difference in each grid cell over the entire time series of
SLA. The mean differences are near-constant in the latitudes [−60◦; 60◦]. The mean
of the mean differences in this area is −3.07 cm. This offset is likely either due to the
processing pipeline of the SLA or in the underlying physical models used to compute
the SLA. In general, the value of the SLA is higher in the CMEMS product, as the
figure shows the CMEMS product subtracted from the product made in this project,
which is generally negative.
Figure 5.5. Mean difference between this product and the CMEMS product for each grid
cell. The offset in the ∆SLA is −3.07 cm between the latitudes [−60◦; 60◦]. The CMEMS
product has been downsampled to the same resolution as this product.
In order to investigate the difference further, the standard deviation of the difference
between the CMEMS SLA product and the corresponding product produced in this
thesis is shown in Figure 5.6. Here, it is obvious that the difference does not vary much
in general. The deviation is mostly below 5 cm, except for a few select spots and at
the poles. The variation near the poles in Figure 5.5 and 5.6 may be explained by how
the data products have been processed over sea ice. Since very different processing
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Presenting the data product
21
pipelines have been utilized between products, it is hard to verify the SLA in these
areas. Notably, the satellite tracks are visible in both Figure 5.5 and 5.6. These tracks
are mainly due to tracks in the product produced in this project, since CMEMS apply
smoothing on the grids, which removes satellite tracks. The prevalence of the tracks
largely depends on the time-to-distance weighting, which if set to a lower value will
have fewer visible satellite tracks, but would make the grids less continuous in time.
Figure 5.6. Standard deviation of the difference between this product and the CMEMS
product. The figure shows the largest standard deviation is near the poles and especially
where sea ice is present. Furthermore, in the more volatile areas, a higher standard deviation
is also seen. Satellite tracks can also be seen in the figure, which has a slightly higher standard
deviation.
5.1.2
Comparison with MEaSUREs
In the same way the SLA product was compared to the corresponding product from
CMEMS in subsection 5.1.1, it is compared to the MEaSUREs SLA product by
the Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL) from the Physical Oceanography Distributed Active
Archive Center (PODAAC) at the NASA [2, 19]. The original spatial resolution of
the MEaSUREs data product is 1/6◦× 1/6◦, but has been downsampled to 1◦× 1◦,
like CMEMS for comparison.
Figure 5.7 shows the mean differences for each grid cell between the SLA product
produced in this project and the MEaSUREs SLA product. The mean differences are
near-constant between latitudes [−60; 60]. This indicates that a small bias between
the two data products exists. The mean of the mean difference is −0.79 cm in this
region. Furthermore, the mean absolute difference is much lower here compared to
CMEMS. The differences in the processing pipelines and the models used are most
likely slightly smaller than for CMEMS. The resemblance between the SLA product
produced in this project and the MEaSUREs product is high. This is also the case
==PAGE:36==
22
5 The data product
for the CMEMS product. Figure 5.7 also shows satellite tracks very clearly. However,
comparing the difference between this product and CMEMS to the difference between
CMEMS and MEaSUREs (Figure A.5 in section A.1), it is clear both the MEaSUREs
product and this product include satellite tracks.
The standard deviation of the
difference shown in Figure 5.8 has a very high resemblance with that of CMEMS
shown in Figure 5.6, but the standard deviation is a bit higher for the MEaSUREs
product in and around the Eddy currents. The additional smoothing in the CMEMS
product may explain this difference, as the Eddies are less likely to be interpolated
very differently when smoothing is applied.
Figure 5.7. Mean difference between the SLA data product grid interpolated here and the
MEaSUREs SLA product downsampled to 1◦× 1◦. The difference in magnitude in SLA is
much higher near the poles than anywhere else.
Figure 5.5, Figure 5.7 and Table 5.1 show there is a difference between this product,
and the CMEMS and MEaSUREs products. This is to be expected, due to the differ-
ent interpolation methods and pipelines used for producing each of the three products.
Figure A.5 in section A.1 shows the difference between the CMEMS and MEaSUREs
products, where the mean difference has been subtracted. The mean of the mean
differences between these two products can be found in Table 5.1. When compar-
ing summary statistics for the three data products, it is clear that the MEaSUREs
product and the product created in this project are very similar, while the CMEMS
product is slightly less similar. All three of the products include different processing
choices which explain the differences. This also means none of the products are in-
valid. The variations between the products and the way they are produced result in
pros and cons for different use-cases. For example, the product made in this project
has a very small temporal interpolation window compared to the two other products,
which is potentially better for spotting short-term variations. The CMEMS product
is very smooth, which may be an advantage when studying long-term changes to
the SLA. Furthermore, the CMEMS product has daily grids, while the MEaSUREs
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Choice of parameters and methods
23
Figure 5.8. Standard deviation of the SLA data product grid interpolated here and the
MEaSUREs SLA product downsampled to 1◦× 1◦. This figure is very similar to Figure 5.6.
product only provides grids for every 5th day.
Table 5.1. Mean and Standard deviation of the difference in SLA between this project’s
product, the CMEMS product and the MEaSUREs product.
Mean [cm]
Std. dev. [cm]
SLA
[−90◦, 90◦]
[−60◦, 60◦]
[−90◦, 90◦]
[−60◦, 60◦]
Product - CMEMS
-2.48
-3.07
6.40
4.10
Product - MEaSUREs
-0.13
-0.79
5.78
4.13
CMEMS - MEaSUREs
2.57
2.8545
2.51
2.19
5.2
Choice of parameters and methods
Here, the interpolation method chosen for the grid interpolation, as well as the pa-
rameters in the model and general choices regarding data selection are discussed.
Furthermore, these parameters and choices are compared to those used for similar
products CMEMS [18] and MEaSUREs [19].
5.2.1
Data selection
As explained in section 2.2, data are available from 1985 and continuous data are
available from 1991 and forward. The choice to not use data before 1993 was made
due to the very poor quality and coverage of these data. Figure 5.9 shows the daily
average value of the SLA after the data processing pipeline described in section 4.2.
==PAGE:38==
24
5 The data product
The SLA has been adjusted for the linear trend in time. The unadjusted data are
shown in Figure A.1 in section A.1. The vertical purple line in the figure indicates the
grid interpolation start date 1993-01-01. Before this date, it may be observed that the
variance is much higher in the data, which is also shown in Table 5.2. Furthermore,
the amount of missing satellite passes before this date is high, which is an especially
large issue when only 2 altimeter satellite missions were active in the period. In order
to produce valid grids in this period, the temporal interpolation window must be
increased to be able to have a good enough coverage to produce daily grids. However,
this will either change the temporal interpolation window for all the years or two
different temporal window sizes have to be used. If two window sizes are used, the
quality and properties of the data set will be different based on the different sizes. If a
larger temporal interpolation window size is used instead for the entire interpolation
process, the publishing delay of each grid will increase.
Furthermore, during the
interpolation process in the gridding, the temporal component of the original data is
lost. In an extreme case for an arbitrary day, if data points only exist on the edge
of the temporal interpolation window, this information is lost after the interpolation
process. Thus, knowledge about the influence of temporally distant data points on
the gridded day will decrease.
Figure 5.9.
Daily latitude weighted global average of the SLA after initial processing
adjusted for the linear trend in time. The vertical purple line indicates the chosen start date
of grid interpolation of 1993-01-01, due to the much higher data noise before this date. In
these data, the DTU15 MSS is used.
The products from CMEMS and MEaSUREs use data from 1993-01-01 and 1992-10-
01 respectively as well. Thus, a direct comparison is possible with a similar start date
of the product produced in this project.
Table 5.2. Standard deviation of the SLA adjusted for linear trend in time before and after
1993-01-01. In these data, the DTU15 MSS is used.
Adjusted SLA
Before 1993-01-01
After 1993-01-01
Standard deviation [cm]
1.81
0.90
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Choice of parameters and methods
25
Initial analysis has shown that the models, i.e. the ionospheric corrections, wet tro-
pospheric correction etc., used in RADS to derive data products, such as the SLA,
periodically produce inaccurate derivative data products. While many of these in-
accuracies have been corrected using the cross-over correction and outlier detection
explained in section 4.2, a more rigorous method would be to correct the models used
in RADS for producing the data. The purpose of this project is not, however, to
improve the quality of the available data, but to provide a means of correcting the
inaccuracies present in the available data. Therefore, and due to limited time, this
possibility has not been explored further. Future efforts to improve these models
would, however, be beneficial for the quality of the data product.
Corresponding derivative data products in CMEMS have been produced in-house
from raw data [3], meaning they may have used other models than those used in
RADS. For MEaSUREs, data from RADS have also been used, but these have been
partially corrected using alternative models [19].
5.2.2
Interpolation method
Here, the gridding pipeline described in section 4.3 is reviewed, discussed and com-
pared to methods used in CMEMS and MEaSUREs.
5.2.2.1
Block averaging
The reasoning behind block averaging of the data is to increase stability and reduce
processing time. Tracks may contain very different values in close proximity both
spatially as well as temporally. As the interpolation provides an exact fit in data
points, this may lead to high gradients in the output grid should the original points
be used without block averaging. The grid resolution of 1/6◦×1/6◦×3 h in the block
averaging has been chosen, as this resolution should at least be higher than that of
the grid interpolation, but not large enough that averaging becomes irrelevant due
to a too-small number of data points within each block. When the grid resolution
approaches zero, no averaging is performed. If the resolution of the grid interpolation
is increased, so should the resolution of the block average.
For the CMEMS data, along-track subsampling to half the original number of data
points is used [3]. Before gridding the MEaSUREs data, it has been filtered and fun-
damental computing steps have been reevaluated after extraction from the database
[19]. These steps contribute in some regard to achieving the same stability and speed
optimizations of the block average implemented in this project.
5.2.2.2
RBF interpolator
Initially, several interpolation methods were considered.
The obvious choice for
geospatial interpolation is Kriging, but the method proved too slow and time-consuming
to be feasible in this project. Using RBF interpolation is much faster than Kriging
==PAGE:40==
26
5 The data product
and has produced comparable results in this project. For the MEaSUREs data prod-
uct, Ordinary Kriging [20] has been used [19], while for CMEMS, a simpler approach
of Optimal Interpolation [21] has been used [3].
5.2.3
Parameters
A discussion of parameters used in the grid interpolation.
5.2.3.1
Grid resolution
The processing time increases quadratically with increased grid resolution. Due to
time constraints, the interpolation grid resolution has therefore been set to 1◦× 1◦
for the global product. Large features are resolved fairly well at this resolution, but
smaller features are not necessarily.
Ideally, the resolution of the grid should be
higher, i.e. 1/4◦× 1/4◦like CMEMS or 1/6◦× 1/6◦like MEaSUREs, which have
been downsampled for comparison with the data product produced in this project.
5.2.3.2
Temporal interpolation window
The NoD used for the temporal interpolation window in this project was determined
based on when the data had global coverage with only 2 active satellites. The reason
for choosing that 2 satellites should have global coverage, is that in the 1990s only
TOPEX and ERS-1/ERS-2 conveyed measurements, which is the minimal number of
active satellites in the entire period the data product spans. Figure A.4 shows the
data after the RADS data processing using 4, 5 and 6 NoD (9, 11 and 13 days in
total). This figure shows global coverage is obtained when using 5 NoD. Furthermore,
since the reference satellites have cycles of 10 days (See Table A.1 in section A.1),
better global coverage can not be obtained than when using more than 5 NoD, as the
passes are repeated after each cycle.
Comparing the NoD chosen in this project with CMEMS and MEaSUREs, far fewer
have been used in this project.
The CMEMS data product uses 42 days while
MEaSUREs uses 30 days. In this project, the much smaller window is used, as a
large NoD in the temporal window contributes to over-interpolation and therefore
smoothing, especially if the time-to-distance weight is low. Moreover, a small NoD
in the window will result in a shorter delay between observing a data point and pub-
lication of the grid for that day, as the latency is equal to the NoD plus one. Thus,
the data product of this project has a publication delay of only 6 days.
5.2.3.3
Number of data points
As explained in subsection 3.3.2, the memory required increases quadratically when
the number of data points included in the interpolation of each grid point is increased.
However, a lower number of points could decrease the overall quality of the final
data product. Thus, a higher number of points is desired. This number should not
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Choice of parameters and methods
27
necessarily become too high at all locations, however, as some geographical areas
may affect others in an unexpected or unwanted way. Deciding on a set number of
nearby points to use is, therefore, a complex matter. An alternative, which has been
explored briefly, is to use all points within a set radius around the current point. This
proved infeasible, however, as the number explodes near the polar regions where the
point density is much higher. Random sampling has also been attempted when the
number of points in a set radius rose above some set number. This yielded unexpected
behaviour, however, with non-physical noise appearing in areas near the polar regions.
The final decision was to use the nearest 1000 points within a radius of 1000 km, as
the behaviour was as expected and the processing time was within the bounds of the
project.
5.2.3.4
Time-to-distance weighting
The time-to-distance weighting constant used to produce the data product, presented
in section 5.1, were chosen based on experimentation of the weighting value and
observations based on the data set. This resulted in two different values of time-
to-distance weighting.
One for the SLA and one for the other features.
For the
SLA a time-to-distance weighting of 0.028125 were chosen. This was due to the SLA
changing slowly over time and thus a small weighting can be used to diminish the
importance of the time feature. For the SWH and the wind speed, a time-to-distance
weighting of 11.25 were chosen. The high value was chosen, as these features change
much faster in time. Therefore, the importance of time should be greater than that
of spatial distance. For the temperature feature, the choice of the time-to-distance
weighting parameter does not change the resulting grid significantly, at least in the
span 0.01-15. Thus, for optimization purposes, the temperature is interpolated with
the same parameters as the SWH and the wind speed. The interpolation can then
be computed simultaneously for these three features.
During the inspection, the
resolution of the grid was weighted against how visible satellite tracks were in the
grid. The values presented in Table 4.1 provided a satisfying result for the 1◦× 1◦
global grids.
==PAGE:42==
28
==PAGE:43==
Part II
Removing unwanted
signals & Forecasting
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Motivation
In Part I, a daily grid product containing the global SLA, SST, SWH and Wind Speed
in a 1◦× 1◦spatial resolution spanning the years 1993-2023 has been presented. In
the second part of the project, the SLA from this product is used in an attempt
to forecast near-future values. Furthermore, efforts are made to remove unwanted
signals from the data product.
Investigations of the grids produced in Part I show visible satellite tracks in the grids
as well as non-physical noise. In Part II, methods for removing satellite tracks and
other noise sources are investigated to produce a less noisy data product, which still
includes physical high-frequency changes in the SLA. Noise in other data products,
such as the CMEMS and MEaSUREs, is mitigated by the use of heavy filtering both
before and after the gridding process. These filters have a tendency to over-smooth
the physical features when noise such as satellite tracks are removed.
Thus, the
techniques explored in Part II aim to only remove the noise and not smooth the
actual data. For this purpose, autoencoders are tested as a means to remove the
non-physical noise from the SLA data products created using the pipeline in Part I.
Several regional forecasts exist, i.e. the northern and equatorial Pacific [22], the South
China Sea [23] or the Caspian sea [24]. Likewise, forecasts have been produced both
globally [25] and locally using tide gauge data, such as in the North Sea [26] or the
Grand Isle, Louisiana [27]. Some services exist to provide SLA forecasts, however,
these either only show the trend locally at tide gauge positions [28], or only provide
monthly forecasts for the Pacific [29]. The last model utilizes an ensemble method
of different models using tide gauge data. The resulting forecast is, however, very
smooth and only shows the general movements, not the high-frequency changes.
To the authors’ knowledge, forecasting SLA globally using satellite altimeter data
has not been attempted successfully. Even the local predictions are prone to error
at relatively short time scales, when satellite altimeter data are used. The forecasts
made using tide gauges are usually more accurate, however spatially restricted to
the position of the tide gauges as interpolation is rarely used for these. The second
part of this project is therefore dedicated to utilizing the SLA data product from
Part I for a daily forecast on both local and global grids up to 90 days into the future.
For comparing the forecasting power of the methods used in the second part of this
project local grids will be forecasted and compared to [23]. Furthermore, the local
grids are investigated to check the feasibility of a global forecasting product. The
==PAGE:46==
32
6 Motivation
proposed method for forecasting SLA in the second part of this project is to utilize
ANNs, in particular EDAConvLSTM based architectures.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 7
Data selection and
augmentation
For forecasting the SLA, the grid data product produced in Part I is used. Further-
more, the CMEMS SLA data product has also been used for training and forecasting.
Inspecting the Part I data product reveals several issues in regards to forecasting. In
the following, these issues are reviewed and discussed, and the subsequent augmenta-
tions made to the data product as a consequence are presented and explained. Addi-
tionally, the gridding pipeline has also been used to create a new data product in more
narrow geographic area using a higher spatial resolution. These products are also in-
troduced in the chapter below. Additionally, similarities and differences between the
SLA products produced using the pipeline described in Part I and the CMEMS prod-
uct are reviewed for comparability. The data produced using the pipeline in Part I
use the DTU21 MSS, while the CMEMS product used for forecasting utilizes the
CNES/CLS15 MSS [30].
Figure 7.1. Example of the SLA product produced in part 1, on 1997-03-10 showing non-
physical properties near the Antarctic. For the purpose of forecasting, the data product has
therefore been limited to latitudes (−65◦, 64◦).
==PAGE:48==
34
7 Data selection and augmentation
7.1
Polar data
Although polar data are included in the global 1◦× 1◦SLA data product in the first
part of this project, it seems there are inherent errors in the current version of the
polar data described in section 2.3. Figure 7.1 shows an example day of the data
product produced in the first part of this project.
Especially near the Antarctic,
large anomalies may be observed.
Although the errors this day are severe, polar
irregularities exist throughout the entire data set. These anomalies end at exactly the
boundary between RADS data and polar data. The anomalies are therefore deemed
non-physical and exist due to processing and interpolation errors. The anomalies are
most frequent and severe in the early years of the product. With the introduction
of CryoSat in July 2010, the errors are almost non-existent, especially after the end
of the ERS-2 mission in June 2011. However, limiting the data set for forecasting to
after June 2011 would result in insuﬀicient data. Therefore, the polar data have been
removed from the global data product, for the forecasting part of this project simply
due to instability. The resulting latitudinal boundaries are (−65◦, 64◦).
7.2
Trend and seasonality correction
Before using the data as input for the forecasting model, the linear trend and yearly
seasonality are removed using the kernel described in section 8.1.
The pixelwise
corrected, globally averaged SLA data product time series is shown in Figure 7.2b,
while the uncorrected time series is shown in Figure 7.2a. Due to the near-spherical
nature of the data, the grids have been weighted with the cosine of the latitude to
attain a proper and accurate distribution before fitting and averaging.
7.2.1
Stability over time
Temporal forecasting with neural networks theoretically requires the distribution of
the data set to be invariant in time. In order to investigate whether this holds true,
Figure 7.2b can be used. From the figure, it may be observed that until approximately
late 2005 the signal is jagged compared to the signal after. This indicates a higher level
of noise in the underlying data distribution in the early data compared to later. For
this reason, only data from 2006-01-01 and onward have been used for the forecasting
in order for the data to have approximately the same distribution throughout the
entire period. The change in distribution coincides fairly well with the end of the
TOPEX mission, see Table A.2.
The seemingly large negative spike around 2011
originates from the transition between Envisat and CryoSat, as also seen in Figure 5.9.
The phenomenon is also observed and briefly discussed in [31].
==PAGE:49==
7.3 Impact of spatial resolution
35
(a) SLA grid and linear+Fourier fit.
(b) Pixelwise fit corrected SLA.
Figure 7.2. In Figure 7.2a, the global average of the cosine weighted latitude SLA data
product with the corresponding globally averaged pixelwise linear and Fourier regression. In
Figure 7.2b, the fit subtracted from the SLA grid in each pixel, also averaged globally. The
data distribution before and after late 2005 are very different. The dip in magnitude around
2011 is due to the transition between Envisat and CryoSat [31].
7.3
Impact of spatial resolution
Compared to corresponding data products CMEMS and MEaSUREs, the SLA data
product produced in Part I has a poor spatial resolution.
This poses a potential
problem, as the resolution may be too low to properly resolve some spatial features.
Especially the Eddy currents in the highly volatile areas may be hard for a model to
learn if the grid resolution is too low. In order to visualize this, an outcrop of the
global grid in an AOI near South Africa is shown in Figure 7.3a, which shows how
poorly resolved the aforementioned features are. In order to investigate the impact of
spatial resolution on the predicting power of the forecasting model produced in this
part of the project, the gridding pipeline in Part I has been used to create a 1/6◦×1/6◦
data product within the same area, with a 10 times higher time-to-distance weight
of 0.28125. The result is shown in Figure 7.3b, which shows the features in the area
==PAGE:50==
36
7 Data selection and augmentation
are resolved much better. For validation of the model, CMEMS data from the same
area are also used.
A visualization of these data may be found in Figure B.1 in
section B.1. Furthermore, in order to test the performance of the model in a less
volatile area, the outcrop of the South China Sea used in [23] is also used here. This
also allows for a direct comparison with the results in their work. Unfortunately, due
to time constraints, a higher resolution product using the pipeline in the first part of
this project has not been produced in the South China Sea. Therefore, the model has
been tested using only CMEMS data in this area in order to achieve a high spatial
resolution here as well. The CMEMS outcrop in the South China Sea is shown in
Figure 7.4.
(a) 1◦× 1◦resolution.
(b) 1/6◦× 1/6◦resolution.
Figure 7.3. Example day of the area of high volatility near South Africa in 1◦× 1◦and
1/6◦×1/6◦spatial resolution. The physical features in Figure 7.3b are resolved much better
than in Figure 7.3a.
Figure 7.4.
Outcrop in
the South China Sea from
the
CMEMS
SLA
data
product. This area is used
to test the performance of
the
forecasting
model
in
a less volatile area than
the AOI near South Africa
shown in Figure 7.3. It also
enables a direct comparison
with the results from [23] in
the same area. .
.
==PAGE:51==
7.4 Data splits
37
7.4
Data splits
When any form of ANN is used for learning patterns in a data set, the data has to
be split into at least training and test sets. Usually, a validation split is also created
in order to monitor the performance of the models during training. The validation
set may also be used as an indicator of when an ANN overfits to the training data
set. The test set is only used for forecasting once the model has finished training
completely, often in order to compare different models or simply evaluate the results.
For time series data, the splits are always made in time, as the data are temporally
correlated and therefore not independent.
For the autoencoder and forecasting models in this project, the splits are as follows.
Naturally, the training set for the data produced in Part I starts on 2006-01-01, as the
data before this date have been removed from the data set. The training set ends on
2016-01-01 when the validation set starts. The validation set then ends on 2018-01-
01, where the test set starts. For comparability, the CMEMS training-validation-test
splits have been constructed in precisely the same way.
The CMEMS test set is
smaller, as the data set ends with 2018. An overview of the split dates is provided in
Table 7.1.
Table 7.1.
Training, validation and test split for the Part I and the CMEMS data sets
used in the forecasting models. The CMEMS test split is shorter, due to the data set ending
earlier.
Data
Split
Training
Validation
Test
Part I
2006-01-01 →2016-01-01
→2018-01-01
→2023-02-06
CMEMS
2006-01-01 →2016-01-01
→2018-01-01
→2018-12-31
==PAGE:52==
38
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 8
Theoretical concepts
8.1
Seasonal linear regression
The linear trend and yearly seasonality of a time series are easy to fit with a linear
regression and a Fourier fit respectively.
By doing so, the number of parameters
required in the actual forecasting model is reduced, which makes it easier for the
model to fit the data and reduces the time required to train the model.
The forward problem is defined as:
d(t) = X(t)m
(8.1)
Where d(t) is the data, X(t) is the system matrix and m are the model parameters.
The estimated parameters ˆm are determined by:
ˆm
=
(X(t)T X(t))−1X(t)T d(t)
(8.2)
And finally, the fit ˆd(t) is computed using ˆm in Equation 8.1.
For the regression used here, the linear (first-order polynomial) and first-order Fourier
fit is computed for each pixel in the SLA grid and subtracted from it. The system
matrix X(t) for the fit of each pixel is thus:
X(t)
=


1
t1
cos(2πt1)
sin(2πt1)
1
t2
cos(2πt2)
sin(2πt2)
...
...
...
...
1
tN−1
cos(2πtN−1)
sin(2πtN−1)
1
tN
cos(2πtN)
sin(2πtN)


(8.3)
8.2
Feature scaling
Feature scaling in ANN is important, since activation functions are used, which map
the data to a smaller space than the original input (see subsection 8.4.2). Depending
on which activation function is used, different types of feature scaling can be used.
Here, the same type of feature scaling is used as defined in Equation 3.8 in section 3.5,
==PAGE:54==
40
8 Theoretical concepts
where a is the minimum value in x′ after the feature scaling has been performed at
b is the maximum value in x′. Throughout the autoencoder and forecasting, a = −1
and b = 1.
8.3
Artificial Neural Network
An ANN is a non linear function f (·) that takes a set of input parameters {xi}, which
results in a set of output variables {yj} using a set of weights {wk}.
The simplest form of a ANN is a Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN) [32, Chap-
ter 5.1], which contains an input layer, an output layer and one or multiple hidden
layers of nodes. Each node is connected to all the nodes in the previous layer, and
a weight is assigned to each connection between the previous and current layers of
nodes. Furthermore, a bias is added to all the nodes in the current layer.
The input layer contains the set of input parameters {xi}, where 1 ≤i ≤M (1) and
M (1) is the size of the input parameter set. Mathematically, the value at each node
in the first layer can be computed as:
z(1)
j
=
h(1)


M (1)
∑
i=0
w(1)
ji xi


(8.4)
Where xi is the input parameter in the input node i, w(1)
ji is the weight between the
input node i and the j’th node in the first layer. The bias is added by setting x0 = 1.
h(1)(·) is the activation function used in the first layer. z(1)
j
is the value of node j in
the first layer.
If a FFNN uses L hidden layers, Equation 8.4 has to be computed first, followed by
the general equation for the other hidden layers being computed recursively using
Equation 8.5. Lastly, the output is given by Equation 8.6.
zl
j
=
h(l)


M (l)
∑
i=0
w(l)
ji z(l−1)
i


∀
2 ≤l ≤L
(8.5)
ˆyj
=
h(L+1)


M (L+1)
∑
i=0
w(L+1)
ji
z(L)
i


(8.6)
Given N i.i.d. data points X, matching target values Y and a set of weights W, a loss
between the output of the ANN and the targets can be computed using Equation 8.7.
L (W, X, Y)
=
N
∑
n=1
Li (W, xn, yn)
(8.7)
To minimize the loss L(·) using gradient descent optimization, the loss has to be
differentiated with respect to the weights. Li(·) is an arbitrary loss function. Since
==PAGE:55==
8.4 Neural network functions
41
the loss function is nonlinear, the weights have to be optimized iteratively weighted
by a learning rate η.
∇L(W)
=
∂L(W, X, Y)
∂W
(8.8)
Wnew
=
W −η∇L(W)
(8.9)
One naive approach is to evaluate ∇L(W) using the entire data set and then updating
the weight recursively. This has however shown to be a suboptimal approach [32,
Chapter 5.2.4]. Other methods such as Stochastic gradient descent [32, Chapter 5.2.4]
have shown to have much more potential. One eﬀicient way of computing ∇L(W) is
using backpropagation [32, Chapter 5.3].
8.4
Neural network functions
Here, some of the most important functions necessary for computing weights in neural
networks are introduced.
8.4.1
Loss function
In order to optimize the weights of an ANN a loss function has to be chosen, such that
the weights may be updated using Equation 8.9. For this project, several loss func-
tions are utilized and combined. A very commonly used loss function for regression
problems is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss function. In this project, the MSE
loss function is used, as next-frame predictions are a regression problem. The MSE
loss between a ground truth image and an estimated image is given by Equation 8.10
LMSE
(
Y, ˆY
)
=
H
∑
h=1
W
∑
w=1
(Yh,w −ˆYh,w)2
H · W
(8.10)
where H is the height of each image, W is the width of each image, Y is the ground
truth image, and ˆY is the model estimation of the image.
The L1 error metric (Mean Absolute Error (MAE)) has also been used in this project
as defined by Equation 8.11
LMAE
(
Y, ˆY
)
=
H
∑
h=1
W
∑
w=1
|Yh,w −ˆYh,w|
H · W
(8.11)
Where | · | denotes the absolute value.
For computing the loss of a time series containing images, Equation 8.12 can be used.
In this equation, any loss function that can compute the loss between two images can
==PAGE:56==
42
8 Theoretical concepts
be used.
LT imeseries
(
Y, ˆY, LImage
)
=
P T
∑
t=1
LImage
(
Yt, ˆYt
)
· α(t)
PT
(8.12)
where PT is the number of predicted timesteps and α(t) is a weighting function in
time. Y is the ground truth image time series, and ˆY is the model estimation of the
image time series.
The third loss function utilized is the Gradient Difference Loss (GDL). This loss
penalizes the gradients across the image [33]. The GDL loss between ground truth
image time series Y and the predicted frame ˆY is given by Equation 8.15.
LV ert
(
Y, ˆY
)
=
H
∑
h=2
W
∑
w=1
||Yh,w −Yh−1,w| −| ˆYh,w −ˆYh−1,w||
(8.13)
LHor
(
Y, ˆY
)
=
H
∑
h=1
W
∑
w=2
||Yh,w −Yh,w−1| −| ˆYh,w −ˆYh,w−1||
(8.14)
LGDL
(
Y, ˆY
)
=
P T
∑
t=1
LV ert
(
Yt, ˆYt
)αt
+ LHor
(
Yt, ˆYt
)α(t)
(8.15)
where αt is greater than or equal to 1 and determines a weighting in time, while | · |
denotes the absolute value function.
The last loss function utilized in this project is the gradient between images in the
time series, which is given by Equation 8.16. This loss function penalizes the gradient
in time for each pixel.
LGradientT ime
(
Y, ˆY, LImage
)
=
T P
∑
t=2
LImage
((
Yt−1 −Yt
)
,
(
ˆYt−1 −ˆYt
))
TP −1
(8.16)
8.4.2
Activation functions
In ANN different activation functions are used. The activation functions used in this
project can be found in Table 8.1, with the boundaries of the functions.
Table 8.1. Activation functions and their corresponding interval of output values.
Activation functions
Function
Interval
ReLU (x)
max (0, x)
[0, ∞[
Tanh (x)
exp(x)−exp(−x)
exp(x)+exp(−x)
]−1, 1[
Sigmoid (x)
1
1+exp(−x)
]0, 1[
Softmax (xi)
exp(xi)
∑
j exp(xj)
]0, 1]
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 9
Neural network
modules
This chapter explains the theoretical concepts of some important modules used in the
model architecture.
9.1
Convolutional LSTM
One of the most essential blocks in the ANN architectures introduced in chapter 10 is
the Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory (ConvLSTM) block. These blocks are
based on the peephole-Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) block introduced in [34],
but are modified to work better on images [35]. The ConvLSTM block is defined by
the following equation, where ◦is the Hadamard product and ∗denotes a convolution.
it = σ (Wxi ∗xt + Whi ∗Ht−1 + Wci ◦Ct−1 + bi)
ft = σ (Wxf ∗xt + Whf ∗Ht−1 + Wcf ◦Ct−1 + bf)
Ct = ft ◦Ct−1 + it ◦tanh (Wxc ∗xt + Whc ∗Ht−1 + bc)
ot = σ (Wxo ∗xt + Who ∗Ht−1 + Wco ◦Ct + bo)
Ht = ot ◦tanh (Ct)
(9.1)
Where xt is the input image, it is the input gate, ft is the forget gate, ot is the output
gate, Ct−1 and Ht−1 is the cell state and hidden state of the previous ConvLSTM
block, and Ct and Ht is the cell state and hidden state of the current block. The σ(·)
denotes the sigmoid function. All the W’s are learned shared weights between all the
ConvLSTM blocks in the same layer. All the weights are matrices which are either
convolved with Ht−1, xt or multiplied using the Hadamard product with Ct. A visual
representation of Equation 9.1 is shown in Figure 9.1, where some implementation
tricks have been applied, i.e all the Wx and Wh convolutions with xt and ht can
be combined into two convolutions by setting four channels in each of the weight
matrices.
==PAGE:58==
44
9 Neural network modules
Figure 9.1. Architecture of a ConvLSTM block, which are based on Equation 9.1
Figure 9.2.
Architecture of a Bidirectional Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
(BiConvLSTM) block
9.2
Bidirectional Convolutional LSTM
BiConvLSTM is a block which contains multiple ConvLSTM blocks. In its smallest
form, the BiConvLSTM block consists of two ConvLSTM blocks, where the first
block is defined as Figure 9.1 and the other is defined as Figure 9.1 flipped around its
vertical axis. Both blocks take xt as input. The output of the BiConvLSTM block is
the stacked output of two ConvLSTM blocks. If multiple BiConvLSTM are combined
in a sequence, which takes xt as an input, where t ∈{1..T}, the hidden state and cell
input is parsed from left to right for one of the ConvLSTM block sequences and from
right to left for the other. Both initial ConvLSTM blocks take zero matrices as an
==PAGE:59==
9.3 Attention
45
initial hidden state and cell input.
9.3
Attention
An underlying assumption in sequence modelling neural networks, is that the current
state holds all information from the entire input and previous states of the network
[36]. In traditional sequence modelling networks, information is passed sequentially
from one state to the next. Combining this with the forget mechanisms of sequential
networks, this assumption does not hold and information from previous states is
lost, especially for long sequences. Originally introduced for machine translation [37],
the attention mechanism for sequence modelling allows neural networks to access
information beyond the previous state. The general computation scheme of attention
Figure 9.3. Architecture of the attention block as explained in Table 9.1.
is shown in Table 9.1 below [38]:
Table 9.1. The computation scheme of the attention mechanism.
(1) Attention input:
All source tokens s1, s2, ..., sm and one query qt
(2) Attention scores:
score(qt, sk), k ∈{1..m}
(3) Attention weights:
a(t)
k
=
exp(score(qt,sk))
∑m
i=1 exp(score(qt,si)), k ∈{1..m}
(4) Attention output:
c(t) = ∑m
k=1 a(t)
k sk
Attention is commonly used with encoder-decoder architectures, in which case the
queries are the decoder states and the source tokens are the encoder states. Thus, for
each query qt at query step t ∈1..T where T is the number of queries, the attention
mechanism receives that query and all source tokens sk, k ∈{1..m}, and attention
==PAGE:60==
46
9 Neural network modules
scores are calculated. The attention score describes the relevance of each source token
for the current query. Then, a softmax function is applied to the scores, resulting in
attention weights a(t)
k
for each source token. Finally, a weighted sum of the source
tokens is computed with the attention weights to achieve the source context c(t) for
the current query qt.
The attention score may principally be computed using any function, however, usually
some relatively simple functions are used.
Below, the commonly used Bahdanau
(Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)) attention score [37] is shown:
scoreBahdanau(qt, sk) = w2
T tanh
(
W1[qT
t , sk]
)
(9.2)
where w2 and W1 are weights updated using a simple MLP FFNN architecture.
9.4
Autoencoder Basic blocks
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9.4. Architectures of the base encoder and decoder blocks, as well as the ResNe-
tEncoder block.
The following three basic building blocks are used through the autoencoder, which is
described in section 10.3. The BaseEncoder block visualized in Figure 9.4a is used to
downscale an image in (x, y) and can upscale the image in the number of channels.
==PAGE:61==
9.4 Autoencoder Basic blocks
47
This is done using a convolution in 2d and a batch normalization in 2d. The opposite
block is the BaseDecoder, which increases the image size while decreasing the number
of channels. This is achieved using a transpose convolution in 2d instead of a 2d
convolution. The ResNetEncoder block is inspired by a ResNet block [39]. ResNet is
characterized by utilizing residual connections, which propagate information around
blocks, i.e. o = o + x. These connections help ensure that information is not lost
throughout deep neural networks. Thus, the accuracy of the network is increased and
the training is eased. In general, residual connections allow the use of significantly
deeper networks on complex data.
This also means the input and output shapes
of the ResNetEncoder block have to be the same. To achieve this, padding is used
multiple times throughout the block.
==PAGE:62==
48
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 10
Neural network
architectures
In the chapter below, the modules explained in chapter 9 are combined to form the
neural network architectures used for removing unwanted signals as well as forecast-
ing.
10.1
Encoder-Decoder Convolutional LSTM
Figure 10.1. Encoder-Decoder Convolutional LSTM architecture.
The ConvLSTM blocks were inspired by [22], but have been used in an encoder-
decoder architecture inspired by [40], which results in the encoder-decoder ConvLSTM
architecture shown in Figure 10.1. This architecture takes T input images, which are
then passed through an input network (the yellow box in Figure 10.1). After the
images have been through the input network, they are passed to the encoder, which
consists of one layer of ConvLSTM blocks. The resulting hidden state and cell state
are used as latent space. The latent space is then decoded using another layer of
==PAGE:64==
50
10 Neural network architectures
ConvLSTM blocks, where the input is the last input image or each predicted image.
The encoder and decoder are the orange box in Figure 10.1, while the green boxes
are the hidden state and cell vector.
The output of each of the ConvLSTM blocks in the decoder is passed to an output
network, which makes the prediction. The output network is marked by a red box
in Figure 10.1. Since this architecture consists of ConvLSTM blocks PT (predicted
time steps) amount of predictions can be made.
10.2
Encoder-Decoder Convolutional LSTM with
Attention
Figure 10.2. EDAConvLSTM architecture.
The EDAConvLSTM architecture is an expansion of the Encoder-Decoder ConvLSTM
architecture, since this architecture adds the Attention block described in section 9.3
to the previous architecture and uses BiConvLSTM blocks as an encoder instead of
ConvLSTM blocks.
The attention block is used to keep the information from the input images through-
out the decoder. The input to the attention block (source tokens) are the output
images at each time step produced by the BiConvLSTM blocks. The query used in
the attention block is the hidden state at each time step in the decoder. The output
==PAGE:65==
10.3 Autoencoder
51
of the attention block is then used together with the output of the input network in
the decoder as an input to each ConvLSTM block. Furthermore, the output of the
attention, the output of the input network, and the output of the ConvLSTM block
are combined and used by the output network. The output network then makes a
prediction, which is used as the next input in the input network.
10.3
Autoencoder
(a) Encoder
(b) Decoder
Figure 10.3. Encoder and decoder architectures of the autoencoder.
The autoencoder is a network which maps the input to a latent space Rn −→Rp(encoder)
and reconstructs the input based on the latent space Rp −→Rn(decoder) [41]. In this
project, the autoencoder has two main purposes. The first purpose is to reconstruct
the images with less noise and the second is to speed up other forecasting models,
which can then operate in the latent space of the autoencoder. To fulfill the first
purpose, the latent space has to be small enough that the noise will not be possible
for the decoder to reconstruct, while still being large enough that the desired features
will be reconstructed. To speed up the forecasting models using the autoencoder, the
autoencoder has to reconstruct the input as well as possible, while still having as
==PAGE:66==
52
10 Neural network architectures
small latent space as possible. Otherwise, the forecasting model could try to fit the
flaws in the decoder, since the loss is computed after the decoder is used. When using
an autoencoder, the network should be trained separately and then be inserted into
another architecture.
The autoencoder used in this project has been implemented as shown in Figure 10.3.
The encoder in Figure 10.3a takes the input data, which yields an encoded result.
The result is then passed to the decoder, resulting in the autoencoded data. The
autoencoder shown in Figure 10.3 uses the basic blocks defined in section 9.4. The
first BaseEncoder block is used to change the number of channels from the initial
number of channels to 64. N-Downsamples in Figure 10.3 is the number of times
the input should be downsampled. For each downsampling the (x, y) size is halved
and the number of channels is doubled. For the decoder, the opposite is true, i.e.
the (x, y) size is doubled and the number of channels is halved. The last Conv2d is
used for decreasing the 64 channels down to the initial amount of channels. Since
the autoencoder uses tanh as the activation function (see Table 8.1), the output is
restricted to the interval [−1, 1], which means the input is also required to be in this
range. Thus, in order to use this autoencoder either all the data have to be within
these limits or the data must be feature scaled (see section 8.2).
Figure 10.4. Shows the Encoder2-Decoder2 Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory with
Attention (E2D2AConvLSTM) architecture, which consists of a pre-trained autoencoder and
the EDAConvLSTM architecture.
==PAGE:67==
10.4 Encoder2-Decoder2 Convolutional LSTM with Attention
53
10.4
Encoder2-Decoder2 Convolutional LSTM with
Attention
E2D2AConvLSTM architecture consists of an autoencoder, which is wrapped around
the EDAConvLSTM architecture. The encoder and decoder in E2D2AConvLSTM
consists of the autoencoder described in section 10.3. In the E2D2AConvLSTM ar-
chitecture, the autoencoder is used to make the image size smaller in the latent space.
Furthermore, the autoencoder increases the image channels in the latent space to
make sure the reconstruction has as few errors as possible. Since the image size is
smaller, the number of weights needed in the ConvLSTM with Attention decreases,
which results in a faster training time and lower memory usage. The decoder then
takes the output of the EDAConvLSTM and reconstructs it into the predictions.
In the optimal case, since the autoencoder should be able to reproduce the input
(x = Decoder(Encoder(x))), no information is lost in the encoding and decoding.
Thus, the information available as input for the EDAConvLSTM should be the same
as if the autoencoder was not used. In the case where the autoencoder is too small,
however, information may be lost and the prediction power of the E2D2AConvLSTM
model may diminish.
==PAGE:68==
54
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 11
Results
In the following sections, the results from the models described in chapter 10, using
data described in chapter 7, theory from chapter 8 and modules from chapter 9 used
in the architectures from chapter 10 are presented. In the first section, the results
from the autoencoder are presented in light of the different applications introduced in
section 10.3. In the second section, the forecasting results are shown and explained.
11.1
Autoencoder
When the autoencoder is trained, it may be used for several purposes. In the context
of this project two are relevant: reducing noise levels and outliers in the data, and
reducing the size of the data and therefore the computational complexity, resulting
in an increased training speed for the subsequent forecasting models. The size of
the latent space required to properly resolve the features in the data is unknown.
Therefore, the autoencoder has been trained using a selection of channels in the
latent space in order to investigate how well they perform for each task. The loss
function used for training the autoencoder models, is a combination of the MSE and
GDL losses introduced in subsection 8.4.1.
11.1.1
Global 1◦× 1◦autoencoder
Table 11.1 shows the total loss for the autoencoder when trained on the global 1◦×1◦
data set. The autoencoder for the global data set has been constructed using 32 and
128 channels in the latent space. Expectedly, the validation and test losses exceed
the training loss.
Table 11.1. Show the loss of the investigated autoencoders, which have been trained on
the global data set with a resolution of 1◦× 1◦
Global autoencoders (1◦× 1◦)
Channels
Training loss
Validation loss
Test loss
128
0.0036775
0.0052359
0.0065243
32
0.016209
0.019339
0.021580
==PAGE:70==
56
11 Results
The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) between the input data and the output, for
both the global 1◦× 1◦models in the years 2019-2023 are shown in Figure 11.1.
(a) 128 Channels
(b) 32 Channels
Figure 11.1. Shows the mean difference in each pixel between the input and reconstructed
images for the global models. Figure 11.1a and 11.1b use the 128 and 32 channels respectively
for the number of channels the autoencoder uses in the latent space. Using 32 channels in
the model is insuﬀicient for global data, while 128 channels are enough almost everywhere.
In Figure 11.1a, the 128 channel model displays a very low RMSE at near 0 cm
almost everywhere. Thus, the global autoencoder model with 128 channels in the
latent space can, on average, accurately recreate the input data. Notice, however,
the highly volatile areas have a higher RMSE on average than the rest of the world.
These are therefore evidently harder in general for the model to recreate. Further-
more, the eastern- and northernmost borders of the figure show higher RMSE than
the rest of the figure. These larger errors near the edge are caused by the autoencoder
architecture and will be discussed in subsection 12.4.1. The 32-channel model shown
in Figure 11.1b has a much higher RMSE compared to the 128-channel model. Addi-
tionally, the 32-channel model shows some kernel residuals seen in the square-shaped
==PAGE:71==
11.1 Autoencoder
57
artefacts. Notice the maximum on the colour bar in both figures is 10 cm, making dis-
tinguishing sub-centimeter errors near impossible. Sub-centimetre RMSE is irrelevant
for the 32-channel model, but for the 128-channel model, they may reveal interesting
structures. In order to enhance these errors, figure Figure B.2 in section B.1 shows
the same as Figure 11.1a, but with a 1 cm max RMSE. In this figure, errors near
especially the eastern- and northernmost borders are even more clear, as well as the
volatile areas. Interestingly, some weak kernel-like structures appear at this scale,
similar to those seen in Figure 11.1b. The 32-channel model has been trained for 11
times more epochs than the 128-channel model. This may suggest that a 32-channel
latent space is insuﬀicient at reconstructing the 1◦× 1◦global data.
(a) 128 Channels
(b) 32 Channels
Figure 11.2.
Shows an example of the difference between the input and reconstructed
images using the global models on the date 2020-05-15.
Figure 11.2a uses 128 channel
model while Figure 11.2b uses the 32 channel model. Here, the insuﬀiciency of 32 channels
is also apparent compared to 128 channels.
In order to investigate temporally local behaviour, Figure 11.2 shows the difference
between the global data and the output from both models for an example date at 2020-
05-15. For this particular day, the 128-channel model is evidently also much better
==PAGE:72==
58
11 Results
at reconstructing the input than the 32-channel model. No clear patterns emerge in
either model for the global 1◦×1◦data, which are not visible in the temporal averages
shown in Figure 11.1. In Figure 11.2a, the volatile areas are also of higher magnitude
than the rest, while in Figure 11.2b the general shapes are similar to those seen in
Figure 11.3b, albeit with more noise such that the kernel residuals are not clearly
visible.
11.1.2
South Africa 1/6◦× 1/6◦autoencoder
Now the results of the autoencoder being trained on the 1/6◦× 1/6◦AOI data set
described in section 7.3 are investigated, as the improved resolution is assumed to
better resolve features and movement. For this model, 8, 32 and 128 channels have
been used for the latent space, Table 11.2 shows the loss for the AOI models, in the
same way as Table 11.1 shows the loss for the global models. For the South African
models, the training losses increase fairly evenly with an increase in the number
of channels. For the validation loss, the relative difference between the 8- and 32-
channel models is smaller compared to the 128-channel model. For the test loss, the
8- and 32-channel model losses are nearly identical at about double the level of the
128 channels model.
The observed tendency in the training loss was expected to
extend to the validation and test losses, as more channels should be able to learn and
reconstruct more of the features in the data. The discrepancy is explored further in
the following.
Table 11.2. Show the loss of the investigated autoencoders, which have been trained on
the AOI with a resolution of 1/6◦× 1/6◦.
AOI autoencoders (1/6◦× 1/6◦)
Channels
Training loss
Validation loss
Test loss
128
0.0024533
0.0034033
0.0044008
32
0.0037306
0.0053569
0.0075175
8
0.0045847
0.0062942
0.0078806
The RMSE for the three local 1/6◦×1/6◦autoencoder models is shown in Figure 11.3.
As expected, the 128-channel model has the lowest RMSE in general. Interestingly
though, the RMSE appears lower for the 8-channel model than the 32-channel model.
This effect may be seen in neural networks and is caused by the pseudo-random ini-
tialization of weights, as well as which minimum is found by the optimizer in the
model space. Furthermore, the single blob of high RMSE in the 128 channel model
by (30◦, −40◦) is almost invisible for the 8 channel model. The general background
RMSE appears to decrease with a higher number of channels, although the 32 channel
model has much larger areas of high magnitude RMSE. The observations here corre-
spond well with those in the losses in Table 11.2. The edge effect seen in Figure 11.1
and 11.2 is also seen here for the same reasons as mentioned in subsection 11.1.1.
==PAGE:73==
11.1 Autoencoder
59
(a) 128 Channels
(b) 32 Channels
(c) 8 channels
Figure 11.3. Shows the mean difference in each pixel between the input and reconstructed
images for the AOI models. Figure 11.3a, 11.3b and 11.3c uses the 128, 32 and 8 channels
respectively for the number of channels the autoencoder uses in the latent space.
All 3
models reconstruct the high-resolution data well, with each increase in channels making the
model slightly better overall. The spot of higher RMSE in the 32-channel model is due to a
poor initialization.
==PAGE:74==
60
11 Results
(a) 128 Channels
(b) 32 Channels
(c) 8 channels
Figure 11.4.
Shows an example of the difference between the input and reconstructed
images using the AOI model.
Figure 11.4a uses 128 channel model, Figure 11.4b uses
32 channel model while Figure 11.4c uses the 8 channel model. For individual days, the
satellite tracks are clearly visible. Thus, the data errors from these may be removed using
an autoencoder.
==PAGE:75==
11.1 Autoencoder
61
Example dates of the difference between the ground truth and the three local 1/6◦×
1/6◦autoencoder models are shown in Figure 11.4, using the same date as for the
global model in Figure 11.2. Incidentally, the 32-channel model does not have large er-
rors for this particular date, however, when inspecting other dates the large errors are
apparent. It is therefore not outliers producing the high RMSE seen in Figure 11.3b,
but a generally higher discrepancy between the input data and the model output.
Interestingly, when a high spatial resolution is used in the autoencoder it seems that
it may be used for detecting satellite tracks in the gridded data. This is apparent,
(a) Jason-1
(b) Jason-2
Figure 11.5.
Visualization of reference satellite track artefacts as seen in the RMSE
between the ground truth and output of the 8 channel autoencoder model before and after
the initialization of the Jason-2 satellite on 2008-07-12.
as the tracks are clearly visible in all three differences. The figures also show, that
with an increase in the number of channels the background field is more well-resolved,
==PAGE:76==
62
11 Results
and thus the tracks protrude more clearly from the background. However, at a very
high number of channels the model apparently starts to learn the tracks as well, such
that it may no longer be used to find these accurately. Disregarding other differences
between the autoencoder output and the ground truth, it is apparent that the num-
ber of channels in the latent space is important for how well the tracks are resolved,
and therefore the applicability of the autoencoder as a tool for track removal in the
gridded data.
Finally, an interesting observation may be made in the RMSE, especially when looking
at sub-centimeter errors. Figure 11.5 shows the RMSE of the 128 channel AOI model
in the periods 2006-01-01 to 2008-07-12 (Figure 11.5a) and 2008-07-12 to 2014-01-01
(Figure 11.5b). The split date of 2008-07-12 is chosen, as it is the day when the Jason-
2 satellite is first initialized. In both figures, the satellite tracks are clearly visible,
however, they are different in the two time periods. This may be explained by Jason-2
taking over the Jason-1 track upon initialization, but Jason-1 being continuously used
as a reference satellite for the gridding until the end of the Jason-1 mission in Part I of
this project. Other tracks are also slightly visible, especially in Figure 11.5a, however
with a much lower magnitude. These results indicate that the grid interpolation does
not accurately represent the RADS data, as even the most accurate autoencoder
cannot accurately reconstruct the data such that the tracks match the interpolated
values.
11.1.2.1
Investigation of the latent space
One method for characterizing the behaviour of the autoencoder, and the subsequent
consequences in the forecasting models is by inspecting the latent space. As the latent
space is created solely using convolutions, it may be interpreted using the spatial
features from the actual data. Figure 11.6 shows the median and 95% quantile across
all channels and the entire training set in the latent space for the 8-channel model in
the AOI. The latent space has been displayed using the training set, as it is the most
accurate representation of the weights in the autoencoder. However, Figure B.3 and
Figure B.4 in section B.1 show the same metrics for the validation and test sets. For
the 8-channel autoencoder latent space, the difference between training, validation
and test sets is small, indicating that the model has mainly learned general features.
The median in Figure 11.6a shows that the values are similar in most areas at a
value of approximately 0.8. Exceptions to this, are the lowest row of pixels and the
landmass being 0, the edge of the landmass having mostly higher values including
the highest median value of almost 2, and the most volatile area in the current with
slightly higher values than the surrounding areas.
Thus, the values in the latent
space are generally higher than in the data, in which the median in the same area is
approximately ±0.15 m for the training set. The 95% quantile values are distributed
in a similar way as the median values, however, the magnitudes are much higher with
approximately 9 as the highest value. This is 10 times higher than the corresponding
quantile in the training data set. In general, if the values in the encoded latent space
==PAGE:77==
11.1 Autoencoder
63
are too great or have a large spread, it may be diﬀicult for the forecasting model to
properly learn the behaviour.
(a) Median
(b) 95% quantile
Figure 11.6. Median and 95% quantile for latent space in the training set of the 8-channel
model in the South African AOI. The magnitude of the latent space is clearly much higher
than the magnitude of the SLA data, which can impede the performance of the subsequent
forecasting model.
==PAGE:78==
64
11 Results
11.2
Forecasting
In the following section, the results produced by the different types of ANN described
in chapter 10 used on the data introduced in chapter 7 are presented, described
and compared. All the results are shown with the linear and first-order Fourier fit
subtracted (see section 8.1).
The ANN models shown here have all been trained
using the 30 previous days of SLA as input features. Since all the models are built
on ConvLSTM blocks, they can forecast an arbitrary number of days into the future.
For exploring, validating and comparing the models, 90 sequential days are forecasted
by each model in this section. A varying number of these are shown in each figure,
depending on the purpose. Furthermore, a baseline has been established to evaluate
the forecasting power of each model. The baseline simply takes the last input day
given to the ANN model and uses this day as the forecast for all 90 days. Thus, the
baseline forecast is constant throughout the 90-day period. In order to produce the
forecasts below, the loss function utilized in the models is the sum of the MAE loss
(Equation 8.12) and the gradient MAE loss in time (Equation 8.16), which have all
used a constant loss weight of α(t) = 1. Furthermore, the different models for each
area and data set have used a different number of channels in the ConvLSTM layer,
which are listed in Table 11.3. For the global and South China Sea forecasting, only
the EDAConvLSTM architecture has been applied, while for the South African AOI,
both this and the E2D2AConvLSTM were used. Generally, the number of channels
used in each model is relatively low. The EDAConvLSTM models were tested using
1, 4, 6 and 8 channels where 1 channel was insuﬀicient, but using more channels
mostly led to overfitting. The E2D2AConvLSTM models were tested using an array
of different numbers of channels in the Encoder-Decoder, of which only the 6-channel
model is shown, as it was the only model to not immediately overfit.
Table 11.3. An overview of how many channels were used in the ConvLSTM layer for each
area and data set. In general, a low number of channels was optimal.
Area
Data set
ConvLSTM
Channels
Global
This project (1◦× 1◦)
4
South China Sea
CMEMS (1/4◦× 1/4◦)
4
South Africa
CMEMS (1/4◦× 1/4◦)
6
South Africa
This project (1/6◦× 1/6◦)
4
South Africa
This project (1/6◦× 1/6◦)
(32 channel autoencoder)
6
11.2.1
Global data set
The first ANN presented is the EDAConvLSTM trained on the 1◦×1◦global data set
with the poles removed. Figure 11.7 shows the spatial mean of the RMSE for each
==PAGE:79==
11.2 Forecasting
65
consecutive predicted day. The figure shows the RMSE for the baseline model for
the train, validation and test data set and their corresponding ANN model forecasts
RMSE. Figure 11.7 clearly shows the RMSE increases over the number of forecasted
days, for both the ANN model forecast and the baseline forecast. Furthermore, the
rate of change in the RMSE for all the data splits produced by the ANN model
is largest for the first 8-10 days, while afterwards the rate decreases and becomes
near-constant after day 15. The same is true for the baseline model, which performs
worse than the ANN models forecast on all the data splits for all the forecasted days.
The difference between the forecasted baseline RMSE and the ANN model forecasted
RMSE for all the data splits increases for the first 40-50 days, after which it starts to
decrease.
Figure 11.7. RMSE for each of the 90 days on the global 1◦× 1◦resolution data set. The
model outperforms the baseline for all days, but the difference in RMSE between the model
and the baseline stops increasing after 40-50 days. After this point, it starts to decrease.
The rate of increase in RMSE is higher in the first 10 days, after which it decreases for both
models.
Figure 11.8 shows the spatial RMSE for the 30 day forecast. This figure shows that
the RMSE is much smaller in the areas where Eddy currents are not present. In the
areas where the Eddy currents are present the RMSE is very high (up to 120 cm).
These are of interest, as they constitute the main areas where the model has diﬀiculty
forecasting. In these areas, the RMSE exceeds 15 cm already after a few days. In
the areas where no Eddy currents are present, the RMSE is roughly below 4 cm for
all the forecasted days, which indicates either a good ANN model or a relatively low
change of values in the SLA. As also seen in Figure 11.7, the rate of increase in the
RMSE is higher for the first few days, after which it slows down.
Figure 11.9 shows snapshots of one forecasted time series, where the last input day is
2018-01-30. The figure shows the forecasted magnitude in SLA moves towards zero
over time, while the target SLA maintains a relatively stable magnitude over time.
==PAGE:80==
66
11 Results
Figure 11.8. RMSE for the forecast of the first 30 sequential days on the global data set.
In general, the areas of high volatility have a high RMSE, while it is low everywhere else.
The RMSE increases quickly for the first few days, after which the rate of increases slows
down, as also seen in Figure 11.7.
==PAGE:81==
11.2 Forecasting
67
Figure 11.9. 36 days of example predictions with a 7 day interval, where the last input
day is 2018-01-30, as well as the target days for each forecast. The global forecast model is
unable to accurately predict motion in the SLA, and simply tends towards zero over long
forecast periods.
Only small amounts of movement between the first forecasted day and the last fore-
casted day are present, while for the targets more movement is present. Thus, the
global forecasting model cannot accurately predict movement in the SLA over time.
As stated in section 7.3, the low spatial resolution was expected to impact the predict-
==PAGE:82==
68
11 Results
ing power of the model due to the underlying physical processes not being properly
resolved in each pixel.
Figure 11.7, 11.8 and 11.9 show this phenomenon, as the
model is unable to predict much movement in the SLA. The remaining results in this
section are therefore created using the higher resolution AOI in the South China Sea
and near South Africa introduced in section 7.3. The forecasting model is applied
in the South African AOI using both the 1/6◦× 1/6◦data set produced using the
pipeline in chapter 4 and the CMEMS data set. In the South China Sea, however,
only the CMEMS data have been used in the model.
11.2.2
South China Sea
The first high-resolution local AOI investigated is the South China Sea. The RMSE
of the forecasting for each of the 90 days in CMEMS data set in the South China Sea
using an EDAConvLSTM neural network are shown in Figure 11.10. The figure also
includes the baseline, which as explained previously is the data from the last input
day kept constant for the next 90 days. The figure shows the RMSE increases as a
function of the number of days predicted into the future, which indicates a lack of
prediction power many days into the future.
Figure 11.10. RMSE for each of the 90 forecasted days on the South China Sea CMEMS
data set. This model also outperforms the baseline for all days except for the very first
day. Here, the difference in RMSE between the model and the baseline stops increasing
after 30-40 days, after which it starts to decrease. The rate of increase in RMSE decreases
steadily over the forecasting period.
The highest RMSE for both the baseline and the forecasting model is the one from
the validation set. Interestingly, the training and test sets have very similar RMSE
throughout the 90-day period. This may indicate that the two data set splits contain
comparable features or that the test set varies significantly less than the validation
set. The difference between each baseline and the corresponding data set increases
==PAGE:83==
11.2 Forecasting
69
until approximately the 30th - 40th prediction day, which implies a loss of prediction
power after this point. Compared to the RMSE for the global model in Figure 11.7,
the rate of increase is slowing down more steadily in Figure 11.10 throughout the 90
days of forecasting.
Figure 11.11. RMSE for the forecast of the first 30 sequential days on the South China
Sea CMEMS data set. In general, the northern part of the area is harder to predict than
the south. A particularly error-prone area is located at (12◦, 112◦). The rate of increase in
the RMSE throughout the 30 days is fairly steady.
Figure 11.11 shows the RMSE in the South China Sea for each of the 30 days pro-
duced using the CMEMS data set. This figure shows the same as Figure 11.10 but
==PAGE:84==
70
11 Results
keeps the spatial dependencies.
In general, the figure shows that the RMSE has a
Figure 11.12. Example time series in 5 random locations in the South China Sea, showing
the 30th day forecast for each input day in the CMEMS test set, as well as the target data.
The accuracy of the forecast depends heavily on the volatility of the data, which in turn is
location dependent.
Figure 11.13. 90 day example forecasts in the same locations as shown in Figure 11.12,
where the last input day is 2018-03-16. The accuracy of the forecast is higher during the
first 30-40 days, and depends on the volatility of the data in the location.
spatial dependency, such that areas with a higher RMSE on a given prediction day
are also higher on all the other days. For example, the feature around (Latitude,
Longitude) = (12◦, 112◦), which in general has a higher RMSE compared to the rest
of the area for each predicted day. Figure 11.11 also shows the northern part of the
South China Sea is harder to predict than the southern part for longer forecasts. The
maximum RMSE in the South China Sea is 11.2 cm.
==PAGE:85==
11.2 Forecasting
71
To investigate the prediction power of the neural network further, 5 different positions
have been chosen at random for displaying predicted time series. These time series
show the 30th forecasted day for each input day in the CMEMS test set. The map
shown in the right side of Figure 11.12 shows the 5 locations in the South China Sea.
These locations are marked with different colours, which correspond to each of the
SLA time series shown on the left side of Figure 11.12 (dashed lines). The solid cyan
line in all the time series is the predicted SLA 30 days into the future. The behaviour
of each time series is very different depending on the position. The time series at
(12.9◦, 112.4◦) (purple) contain peaks of much larger amplitude in SLA, and is more
volatile compared to the other time series. Comparing this time series to the spatial
RMSE in Figure 11.11, it coincides with the high RMSE area. To ensure the model
Figure 11.14. 29 days of example predictions for the South China Sea CMEMS model on
the test set with a 7-day interval, as well as the target days for each forecast. The last input
day is 2018-01-30. The CMEMS test set in the South China Sea is relatively stable over
this period, so the forecast is fairly accurate even without much movement in the predicted
SLA.
output is not constant in time for each forecast, examples of forecasts in the same
positions as in Figure 11.12 are shown in Figure 11.13. This figure shows the target
SLA marked by dashed lines, the 30 input days for the model are marked by the solid
olive line, and the 90 forecasted days are marked by the cyan line. Each vertical line
tick on the cyan forecasting line is a 10-day increment in predictions. Evidently, the
model predicts different values and different trends in the first 30-40 days and then
predicts a near-constant value afterwards. The exactness of the forecast depending
==PAGE:86==
72
11 Results
on the volatility of the location is also evident here, as the model is not able to predict
sudden large jumps in the SLA. Especially after 30-40 days.
Figure 11.15. Same as Figure 11.14, but using the validation set due to the higher spatial
variation in SLA over time. The last input day is 2016-01-30. Here, some movement may be
observed in the forecast. The magnitude is higher than for the global model in Figure 11.9,
but still decreases slowly over longer forecasting periods smearing high-frequency changes.
Displaying the prediction power of the model on the test set for some specific position
is insuﬀicient for validating the model, as it should also understand spatial changes.
Figure 11.14 shows an example forecast for an example day on 2018-01-31.
The
figure shows how the predicted and target SLA changes over 29 days. The target
and predicted SLA are relatively unchanging over the 29 days. This is also the case
for almost all the other days in the test set, proposing a reason for why the RMSE
of the test set is as low as for the training set as seen in Figure 11.10. It may be
due to movements being much harder to predict than a constant value in SLA. To
emphasize this, Figure 11.15 shows an example forecast for one particular day in the
validation set for comparison. The SLA in this forecast and target set changes more
compared to Figure 11.14. The change of target SLA in the validation set over time
has been observed to be greater than the SLA of the test set.
The forecast also
changes over time which indicates that the model understands movement in the SLA.
This supports the proposition that more movement over time is the reason the RMSE
is much higher for the validation set than the test set in Figure 11.10. Both figures
show the magnitude of the predicted SLA is decreasing over time, while the target
==PAGE:87==
11.2 Forecasting
73
SLA does not decrease over time. This indicates that over more extended forecasting
periods the high-frequency variations are smeared in the forecasted SLA. The large
features are maintained with a decreasing magnitude.
11.2.3
South Africa
Creating an accurate high-resolution global model using the EDAConvLSTM archi-
tecture is infeasible if the volatile areas are not possible to forecast. Therefore, the
area south of South Africa is investigated using the model to gauge the potential of
the model. For this analysis, the CMEMS data set is used first in the area, followed
by an examination of the model created using the 1/6◦×1/6◦South Africa data made
using the pipeline in chapter 4.
11.2.3.1
CMEMS data
Figure 11.16. Mean RMSE for each of the 90 days forecasted on the SA CMEMS data
set. Here, the forecasting model outperforms the baseline by a lot. The difference in RMSE
between the model and the baseline also stops increasing after 30-40 days, after which it
starts decreasing. The forecast is much better than the baseline throughout the entire 90
day period.
Similarly to the South China Sea, the RMSE as a function of predicted days is shown
in Figure 11.16. The figure shows the South African area has a much higher RMSE
compared to the South China Sea. The RMSE in Figure 11.16 is lower than 5cm for
the first 6 days where it then increases to around 15cm for the validation- and test-set
around 23 days, while for the training-set it is 30 days. For this area, the training
set has a lower RMSE than the validation and test sets, which are very similar.
The relative difference between the RMSE for the baseline and the output of the
EDAConvLSTM architecture model is larger in the South African area, compared to
==PAGE:88==
74
11 Results
the model in the South China Sea seen in Figure 11.10. Thus, although the magnitude
Figure 11.17.
Spatial RMSE for a 30 day prediction period using the South African
AOI CMEMS forecasting model. Note the scale of the colourbar is 5 times higher than
previous similar figures. The areas with Eddy currents have a much higher RMSE than
the surrounding areas. The RMSE in the first few days is low, and the pace for which it
increases is relatively steady throughout the 30 days. Generally, the RMSE is much higher
in SA than the South China Sea.
of the RMSE is high in South Africa, the relative difference in RMSE between the
model and the baseline is greater compared to the South China Sea. This is due
==PAGE:89==
11.2 Forecasting
75
to the baseline performance being much worse compared to the South China Sea.
The RMSE for each data set forecasted by the model in Figure 11.16 is better
Figure 11.18.
Example time series in 5 random locations in the South African AOI,
showing the 30th day forecast for each input day in the CMEMS test set, as well as the
target data. Here, the dependency on volatility in the data is even more pronounced than
in Figure 11.12. The first 2 time series’ are relatively steady and the forecasts are fairly
accurate, while the remaining three are more volatile and the corresponding forecasts are
less accurate.
than the corresponding baseline, for every forecasted day. Similarly to Figure 11.10,
the difference between the baseline and the ANN model forecast for each data set
increases until about day 30-40, after which it slowly decreases. Thus, this model
also has a limited temporal window of prediction power.
Figure 11.17 shows the
spatial RMSE for the 30 days forecasting in the South African area. Here, the RMSE
increases more rapidly during the first 14 days, especially where the SLA fluctuates
the most, after which the rate of increase slows down. This result is also reflected in
Figure 11.16 for model RMSE on the test set. The RMSE is much higher in the high
fluctuation area than everywhere else throughout the entire forecasting period. Note
that the scale of the RMSE in Figure 11.17 is 5 times higher than in Figure 11.11,
as the general RMSE level is much higher in the South African area. In a similar
style to Figure 11.12, Figure 11.18 shows 5 example positions in the South African
region. The map on the right shows the 5 positions and the corresponding time series
are seen on the left. The cyan colour still specifies the 30th day SLA forecast. The
magnitude of the SLA times series is much higher here compared to Figure 11.12,
considering the doubled size of the y-axis. Furthermore, very different dynamics may
be observed in the change of SLA over time for the 5 different example positions.
The green and light blue positions are changing much more over time compared to
the rest of the time series. Comparing this figure to Figure 11.17, the volatile green
and light blue time series correspond to the high RMSE area. The 30th-day forecast
==PAGE:90==
76
11 Results
Figure 11.19. 90 day example forecasts in the same locations as shown in Figure 11.18,
where the last input day is 2018-03-16.
Here, the dependency on data volatility is also
evident, as the two top time series’ with low volatility show high accuracy forecasts and vice
versa for the bottom three. The time span for which the forecasts are accurate is also very
area dependent, but overall the general trend is predicted fairly well for the first 20-30 days.
also varies considerably between the 5 positions and displays different underlying
mechanisms between the more volatile region and more still regions. Figure 11.19
shows a 90-day example forecast for one particular day for the 5 positions introduced
in Figure 11.18 in a similar style as Figure 11.13. The dashed coloured lines are the
true SLA matching the colours on the map in Figure 11.18, while the olive solid line
is the input days the model gets and the cyan line is the forecast. Each vertical line
on the forecast line is a 10-day increment. In general, the forecasts perform relatively
well for the first 20-30 days, after which they no longer accurately predict the target.
For the pink and purple targets in the two top time series’, the forecasts are almost
constant values, probably due to the small variation in the data at these locations. For
the green and magenta time series in the middle- and bottom-left, the trend is slightly
under- and overestimated, but follows the general trend fairly well for the first 20-30
days forecast. After this, the trend in the forecast does not match the target SLA.
Rather, it continues to follow the initial trend of the forecast. For the light blue time
series at (−37.4◦, 22.6◦), a large change in the target SLA is seen in Apr-Jun. This
very large change seems unreasonable for the model to be able to forecast. Especially
since the change in the SLA is not seen in the other time series. Outside the period of
this massive change, the forecast is reasonable. Figure 11.20 shows example forecasts
for 6 different days and the corresponding target days SLA. The figure shows how
the forecasting and target SLA change over time and how the features move spatially.
The targets in Figure 11.20 have much more movement compared to Figure 11.14,
which indicates that the South African area is much harder to predict compared to
the South China Sea. Furthermore, the forecasting in Figure 11.20 shows that the
magnitude of the predictions decreases over time, while the targets keep the same
==PAGE:91==
11.2 Forecasting
77
Figure 11.20. 36 days of example predictions for the South African AOI CMEMS model
on the test set with a 7-day interval, as well as the target days for each forecast. The last
input day is 2018-01-30. The forecast is fairly accurate for approximately the first week, even
within the area with Eddy currents. From somewhere between the 8th and 15th prediction
day, the magnitude of the forecast starts to decrease.
magnitude over time. The forecasts appear to move in accordance with the target
for the first 7 days, after which the movement stops. Then, only the large features
remain and the magnitude decreases for the rest of the forecast.
11.2.3.2
Regridded 1/6◦× 1/6◦data
Finally, the results for the South African area using the Part I data are explored
in the following. The results here are directly compared to the CMEMS results for
the same area. In Figure 11.21 the spatially averaged RMSE is shown. Compared to
Figure 11.16, the RMSE is higher here for both the baseline and the ANN model. The
forecasting graphs also curve off significantly earlier here compared to the CMEMS
RMSE at about 10 days. Furthermore, the difference between the model forecast error
and the baseline error is smaller here compared to those in Figure 11.16. Likewise, the
difference between the validation and test RMSE is bigger here. Remember, however,
==PAGE:92==
78
11 Results
that the test set is much larger for the Part I data than the CMEMS data.
Figure 11.21. Spatially averaged RMSE for each of the 90 days on the South African AOI
Part I data set. The difference between the forecasting model and the baseline is smaller
here than for the corresponding CMEMS model. Here, the RMSE is also higher throughout
the period for the forecasting model.
The spatially dependent RMSE is shown in Figure 11.22. Akin to Figure 11.17, the
RMSE increases over time in the highly volatile area. Here, the area has a slightly dif-
ferent shape and the RMSE increases substantially faster than for the CMEMS data.
This resembles the temporal development seen in Figure 11.21. In Figure 11.22, the
satellite track patterns are visible as the grid-like striped pattern of higher RMSE.
The tracks are visible for all the predicted days.
In Figure 11.23, the same 5 positions as in Figure 11.18 are selected enabling a direct
comparison for the 30th day prediction. Although the scale of the y-axis is the same
in the two figures, the magnitude of the target SLA contains much higher peaks in
these data. Furthermore, the data are noisier here, however the general large move-
ments in the time series’ are the same here as for CMEMS. In the low-magnitude
pink and light blue time series’, the forecasts are fairly accurate. In the purple time
series, there is a clear lag in the forecast, indicating that the 30th-day forecast may
simply be the last input day the model has been given. The magenta time series
in the bottom of the figure is more volatile, however, the general predictions fit the
target well but with a lower magnitude. In the very volatile green time series in the
3rd plot, the model does not fit well to most of the data.
Figure 11.24 accentuates the increased noise in these data compared to CMEMS, by
showing the same type of 90-day example forecast as previously. Once more, the large
scale variations are the same, but there are much more small scale variations in the
Part I data. The model forecasts are fairly similar to those seen in Figure 11.19, al-
though slightly more constant in general. This may be due to the higher variability of
these data compared to CMEMS, which is discussed in section 12.3.
In Figure 11.25,
==PAGE:93==
11.2 Forecasting
79
Figure 11.22. Spatial RMSE for each of the 30 days on the Part I data set in the South
African AOI.
The spatial evolution of the RMSE over 30 days is similar to that of the
CMEMS model in Figure 11.17, although it increases faster. The general RMSE level is also
higher here.
the weekly interval forecast from the same example day as previously is shown. For
this model, the first-day prediction is accurate, but there is no movement between the
first frame and a week later. The magnitude of the forecast just decreases throughout
the period. This contrasts the CMEMS model shown in Figure 11.20, where some
movement was observed, especially in the first frames of the forecast. In the target
==PAGE:94==
80
11 Results
Figure 11.23.
Example time series in 5 random locations in the South African AOI,
showing the 30th day forecast for each input day in the Part I test set, as well as the target
data. The magnitude of the data is much higher than for CMEMS in the same area and it
varies much quicker. This helps explain the generally higher RMSE for this data set, as well
as why it is harder to forecast.
Figure 11.24. 90 day forecasts on 2018-03-16 in the same locations as Figure 11.23, using
the model for the South African AOI Part I data set, as well as the target data. These
forecasts are generally more constant than for the corresponding CMEMS model. Here, the
higher frequency changes seen in Figure 11.23 compared to Figure 11.18 are also clearly
visible.
data, the satellite tracks are still visible as line discontinuities through the Eddy cur-
rents. In the first prediction day, these lines have been forecast. For the remainder
of the predictions the satellite tracks have not been forecast, however. This substan-
tiates the observation that the forecasting model fits more general features for longer
==PAGE:95==
11.2 Forecasting
81
time series predictions.
Figure 11.25. Example forecasts until the 36th day with a 7 day interval using the Part I
data set forecasting model in the South African AOI. Here, the predictions do not forecast
movement in the SLA. The forecasts following the first one seem to simply be lower magni-
tude replications.
11.2.4
Forecasting with the E2D2AConvLSTM model
The following results have been created using the E2D2AConvLSTM architecture de-
scribed in chapter 10, which facilitates a comparison between the EDAConvLSTM
architecture with and without using the autoencoder. The autoencoder used for the
results shown in the following uses a 32-channel latent space and has been presented
in subsection 11.1.2. The ConvLSTM layer uses 6 channels in the encoder-decoder.
The results shown here are all from the single model which did not overfit. However,
all other attempts at using the architecture with different hyperparameter choices led
to overfitting.
Figure 11.26 shows the spatially averaged RMSE, which looks very similar to Fig-
ure 11.21. In general, the RMSE for the E2D2AConvLSTM model here is lower by
about 0.5 cm for each day. However, for the first week the RMSE is much higher
==PAGE:96==
82
11 Results
than in Figure 11.21. For the first few days, it is also higher than for the baseline.
In general, the RMSE results for the E2D2AConvLSTM architecture are very similar
to the EDAConvLSTM architecture.
The spatially dependent RMSE is shown in
Figure B.5 in section B.1 and looks very similar to Figure 11.22, but a kernel struc-
ture in the RMSE can be seen for the first 2 days. The 30 days forecast and the
time series example forecast, are shown in Figure B.6 and Figure B.7 in section B.1
respectively. These two figures also look very similar to the presented results in sub-
subsection 11.2.3.2. Figure 11.27 shows an example forecast over 36 days with the
Figure 11.26. Spatially averaged RMSE for each of the 90 days on the South African AOI
Part I data set. The forecast has been produced using the E2D2AConvLSTM architecture.
The RMSE is very similar to Figure 11.21, but is 0.5 cm lower for all the forecasted days
after the first week, in which it is higher. The baseline is lower than the forecast produced
by the E2D2AConvLSTM architecture for the first 3 days.
corresponding target days, with a one-week interval between frames. The forecast is
very inaccurate for the first day since a kernel structure is present in the forecast. The
underlying kernel structure is decreased over the next week and keeps on decreasing
over the entire time series. A lot of movement in the SLA is seen in these forecasts
compared to the other models. However, it does not resemble the movement of the
corresponding targets. Furthermore, the magnitude of the predictions is somewhat
higher in the long forecasts here compared to the other models. This may explain
the slightly lower RMSE for forecasted days further away from the input1.
1A folder of videos showing similar sequences to those shown in this chapter, as well as the product
chapter in Part I has been handed in separately. For more information see Appendix A and B.
==PAGE:97==
11.2 Forecasting
83
Figure 11.27. Example forecasts until the 36th day with a 7 day interval using the Part I
data set in the South African AOI. The E2D2AConvLSTM architecture was used as the
forecasting model. The model has learned movement in the SLA, which unfortunately is
inaccurate.
Furthermore, the magnitude decreases over time, however less than for the
other models. The first forecasted day looks very non-physical based on the kernel structure
present in the forecast.
==PAGE:98==
84
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 12
Discussion
The following chapter contains a complete review and discussion of the methodology
and results throughout this project, including both the grid product produced in
Part I, and the autoencoder and forecasting results in Part II.
12.1
Smoothness of the grid
During initial testing of the time-to-distance weighting in Part I, only the 1◦× 1◦
global grid was used.
Naturally, the spatial grid resolution determines how well
physical features and noise are represented in the grid. For the global grid, the noise
levels from satellite tracks were not visible at the selected time-to-distance weight of
0.028125 for the SLA data product. When the 1/6◦× 1/6◦South Africa product
was introduced in Part II for investigation of the impact on the forecasting power,
however, the importance of carefully selecting the time-to-distance weight was made
clear. Using a low weight, such as the one in the global grid of 0.028125 would result in
temporally continuous features. However, as data further away in time influences the
gridding process more, satellite tracks become more visible and the spatial features
therefore become less smooth. On the contrary, a higher value of the weight results in
the gridding process being influenced less by data further away in time. This results
in spatially smooth features with less visible tracks. Here, however, the temporal
continuity of the grid is poor and the variation between each day is much larger,
such that the general underlying motion is less visible. Therefore, without further
filtering the time-to-distance weighting is effectively choosing between smooth spatial
features, with a less visible underlying motion between days, and temporal continuity
with more visible satellite tracks. The time-to-distance weight in the high resolution
AOI near South Africa of 0.28125 was deemed an appropriate value at the time of
re-gridding. Further experimentation of using a lower weight to increase temporal
continutity, and then removing unwanted signals with the autoencoder could prove
beneficial.
12.1.1
Number of satellites in orbit
The trade-off between spatial and temporal continuity may be amended by increasing
the number of altimetry satellites orbiting the Earth at all times, such that the
==PAGE:100==
86
Discussion
density of the data available to produce a grid increases. The impact of the number
of satellites in orbit at one time, and the resulting grid product at that time has
proven significant. Especially before February 2002, when the maximum number of
satellites orbiting simultaneously was predominantly 2 and at most 3 (see Table A.2),
and the grid quality was very poor.
With the exception of 2014 and 2015, there
have been at least 4 satellites orbiting simultaneously since 2008.
The fact that
there were only three satellites operating simultaneously in 2014 and 2015 had an
impact on the train-validation-test split for the forecasting model. In early versions
of the forecasting pipelines, the validation data split started in 2014, rather than
2016. Including these in the validation set, rather than extending the training set
until 2016 decreased the forecasting power of the model during testing beyond what
was expected from just a decrease in the temporal length of the training data. Thus,
the training split was extended in an attempt to feed the models more information
and learn more general patterns. In general, the number of satellites in orbit has
increased in later years, meaning that the quality of future data and the resulting
grid products should improve. This is especially true if the trend continues, such
that the amount of simultaneously orbiting altimetry satellites remains high or even
increases.
12.1.2
Noise reduction in the grid
For other products such as CMEMS and MEaSUREs, several methods have been
used to reduce noise in the data. Most prominently, the unwanted signals consist
of data errors resulting in e.g. visible satellite tracks or non-physical high-frequency
noise. For removing noise, a large temporal window for gridding, along-track noise
removal, Gaussian smoothing and low pass filtering in the grid etc. were applied.
For the data product produced in Part I, none of these methods were utilized as the
goal has been to create a SLA grid data product as close to real-time as possible
while maintaining not only the low-frequency temporal movement but also physical
phenomena with higher frequencies. Although challenging, with high quantities of
noise in the SLA grid product, a method for improving the data product may have
been found in Part II. Initial results show that it may be possible to remove satellite
tracks, as well as possibly other high-frequency noise sources from the grid product by
using an autoencoder. This may function as an alternative or complementary method
to the other filters used on the grid. Further experimentation with the architecture of
the autoencoder is necessary, however, as the investigations performed in this project
have only explored a limited amount of configurations.
12.1.3
Overall quality of the grid
In subsection 5.1.1 and subsection 5.1.2, the global 1◦× 1◦SLA data product was
compared to corresponding products from CMEMS and MEaSUREs. However, for a
direct comparison, these two products were downsampled to the same resolution. In
==PAGE:101==
12.1 Smoothness of the grid
87
subsubsection 11.2.3.1, the full 1/4◦×1/4◦CMEMS SLA data product is shown in the
AOI near South Africa. This may be compared directly to the 1/6◦× 1/6◦version
of the Part I data product in the South African area created for the forecasting.
The time series for each data set shows that the CMEMS data is much smoother
temporally, although many of the same general features are visible. Thus, should
enough filtering and smoothing be applied to the Part I data, the time series would
end up near-identical. The goal of Part I was, to investigate the feasibility of using
a much smaller temporal window for gridding, compared to those used in CMEMS
and MEaSUREs. Thus, although these observations indicate it may be possible, the
level of smoothing required would also eradicate the improved temporal resolution of
high-frequency features provided by the smaller window. Further testing is required
to determine the appropriate level of smoothing for resolving these high-frequency
features and distinguishing them from data noise. Furthermore, at least the larger
physical features are resolved well temporally in CMEMS, as daily movement is visible
in the data. This indicates that a rather high weighting of the current day in their
temporal window has been used. However, it is still assumed that the large temporal
window acts as a smoothing of very high-frequency features, which may be visible
if a shorter temporal window is applied correctly. The CMEMS data were chosen
over MEaSUREs in section 11.2 due to the daily temporal resolution in CMEMS,
compared to a 5-day temporal interval between grids in MEaSUREs.
12.1.4
Pre-gridding processing and corrections
The SLA data extracted from the RADS database is a derivative product made using
several models, as briefly described in subsection 2.2.2. Some of these models are
sensitive and prone to errors ranging from the order of centimetres to meters, e.g.
the ionospheric, dry and wet tropospheric corrections. Optimizing these models, or
applying corrections post-creation to the SLA would improve the quality of the grid
product tremendously. Likely, thoroughly examining the data from RADS could be
advantageous in enhancing the grid product’s quality. Many errors seen in the grid are
a direct result of faulty data, resulting in very visible satellite tracks of completely
different values than those surrounding them.
Further scrutiny of the data from
RADS may assist in alleviating this issue.
In the TOPEX-Jason series used as reference, the satellites continue to function until
the end of a mission, rather than being switched at the start of a new mission. For
example, the Jason-1 satellite is used as a reference from the end of the TOPEX
mission on 2005-10-04 until the end of the Jason-1 mission on 2013-06-18. The old
satellite is moved to a different track when a new mission is launched, and the new
mission continues on the track of the old mission. Thus, for a continuous reference,
the reference satellite should be changed at the start of each new mission in the series
instead of at the end. Especially in the period of transition between TOPEX and
Jason-1, this change to the processing chain may alleviate some errors, due to the
especially high noise level in the TOPEX period. This may even extend the years of
==PAGE:102==
88
Discussion
usable data for forecasting from starting in 2006 to starting in 2002.
12.2
Autoencoder
For the autoencoder, the main topic of discussion is the impact of parameter choices
made throughout section 11.1.
12.2.1
Impact of parameter choices
The amount of information retained by the model depends directly on the number of
channels and thereby the size of the latent space. For the global autoencoder models,
it is evident that 32 channels do not constitute a suﬀiciently large model space in
the current version of the autoencoder. This is most likely due to a combination
of complex data and the choice of model architecture. The architecture is mainly
discussed in subsection 12.4.1.
The 128-channel model generally reconstructs the
data well, apart from the areas with Eddy currents. This suggests that the model is
capable of properly learning the intricacies of the data, with a large enough latent
space.
For the South African AOI, it is apparent that far fewer channels are necessary in
order to reconstruct the data. Due to the limited size of the area, the autoencoder
is required to learn fewer underlying processes, which in turn are resolved better due
to the high spatial resolution. With the increased resolution, data errors also become
visible as the model is unable to recreate the apparently random features. This is
especially true for the satellite tracks, which are visible in all 3 models.
At this
resolution, the autoencoder may therefore be used as a tool for finding and removing
noise such as tracks from the grid. It is apparent in subsection 11.1.2, that the ability
to filter noise depends on the size of the latent space. However, the model is not
capable of separating physical features from data errors. Thus, just as when using
other types of filters, such as Gaussian filters, there is a trade-off between how much
noise is kept and how many desired features are removed using the autoencoder.
12.3
Forecasting
The following section contains a discussion of the results from the forecasting part of
this project. Additionally, the impact of physical phenomena, potential of including
additional parameters in the model, and feasibility of forecasting globally are also
subjects discussed below.
==PAGE:103==
12.3 Forecasting
89
12.3.1
Assumptions
Before the SLA data was used in any of the forecasting models, the linear and first-
order Fourier fits were subtracted. For this purpose, a linear system of equations
had to be solved. The assumptions used in this project for solving the linear system
of equations are Gaussian distributed residuals and i.i.d data. Further analysis has
shown that this assumption was violated for some of the time series, as the residuals
were not Gaussian distributed. This is however not an issue, as the fit is subtracted
from the data to make forecasting easier and then added again to achieve the correct
SLA forecast.
In chapter 7, data before 2006 were discarded based on a weighted global mean
times series of the global data set produced in the chapter 4. This assumes that
the distribution for each region is the same as the weighted global mean times series
distribution. The assumption has not been investigated further, as the amount of
data in this period was deemed suﬀicient for training a forecasting model.
12.3.2
Data set dependency
Based on the forecasting results, one could get the impression the forecasting model
produced on the South African CMEMS data vastly outperforms the model produced
using this projects 1/6◦× 1/6◦resolution data set in South Africa. However, the
RMSE’s for the two data sets are not comparable since the magnitude of the SLA in
CMEMS is lower compared to the data product produced in this project (the mean
difference is 2 cm). Thus, the RMSE will be lower for the CMEMS data set compared
to this project’s data set. Furthermore, the volatility levels of the two data sets are
very different, as discussed in subsection 12.1.3. Therefore, the overall performance
of the models is also different. The CMEMS model has to fit much less variation in
the data, while the model using this project’s data is more prone to overfitting to the
volatility. This can also be seen in the example forecasts in section 11.2 where the
CMEMS data set forecast changes over time, while for this project’s data set its almost
constant. This happens because the model has not learned movement in SLA before
overfitting occurs. Thus, the apparent model performance is highly correlated with
the smoothness of the data. The phenomenon is also seen clearly when comparing
the forecasting model between the South China Sea and the South African area. The
South China Sea CMEMS model has more prediction power compared to the South
African CMEMS model, which is likely due to the lower variability in the South China
Sea and the lower magnitude of the SLA.
12.3.3
Prediction power
Based on the forecasting results in section 11.2, the prediction power is mostly seen
in the RMSE as a function of predicted days figures. The investigated models dis-
play that lower variability regions have a high er prediction power, while the regions
==PAGE:104==
90
Discussion
with higher variability have lower prediction power. The South China Sea model
can reliably forecast roughly 30-40 days into the future, while for the South African
model on the CMEMS data set, it is 20-30 days. For the CMEMS product, a 42
days forecast or more is very interesting, since in the production of each grid 42 days
before and after the gridded day is used. Thus, a forecast of 42 days means whenever
a new grid is published a forecast from the last gridded day until the published day
can be made. For this project’s data set in the South African area, the model can
only forecast dependably 7-10 days into the future. In this case, it is likely that the
forecast is only valid for the first week because the model overfits much earlier than
for the CMEMS data set, due to the higher variability. The 7-10 days forecast is also
the estimate for this project’s global data model forecast. Here, however, the model
forecasts in the higher volatile areas are only reliable 3-5 days into the future. This
either indicates that the model needs more information or that a different approach
is needed. One way of adding additional information is by using global grids in higher
resolution. For all grids produces in this project a moving window of 5 days on either
side of the gridded day is used to produce each grid. This means a reliable forecast
longer than 5 days is interesting, since then the forecast goes beyond the publishing
day of the product.
In [23], the forecasts in the South China Sea were only conducted for the next 21
days, compared to the 90 days in this project. Therefore, the comparison can only
be made for these. The CMEMS data product has been used for all models in their
work, allowing a direct comparison of RMSE. The average RMSE at predicted day 1,
for the best model in their work is approximately 3 mm. For the forecasting model
presented in subsection 11.2.2, the RMSE for the test set on the first day is approx-
imately 5 mm. Thus, their model outperforms the one in this project for the very
early predictions. On the 21st day, the RMSE for their best model is 5 cm, compared
to 4.5 cm in this project. The forecast in this project outperforms their model from
the 8th predicted day and onwards, with a very small discrepancy in the order of mm
before this.
12.3.4
Implications of physical phenomena
For all the data sets and models which include areas with Eddy currents, it is clear that
these influence the model performance negatively. These Eddies are often generated
by ocean currents. The ocean currents in [42], coincide very well with the areas of
high spatial RMSE for the models in the South African area. This indicates that
the models struggle with predicting rapid change in the SLA. Furthermore, when
comparing the global spatial RMSE to the global current system, it is observed that
not all the current systems are visible in the spatial RMSE figure. However, those
which produce Eddy currents are.
==PAGE:105==
12.4 Architecture
91
12.3.5
Supplementary parameters
When the forecasting models were initially investigated, one assumption based on the
gridding product was that the SWH and Wind speed features changed with a too-high
frequency compared to the SLA feature. After the final results have been produced,
it could be of interest to investigate these features more. Especially since the major
problem in the models is forecasting the volatile SLA at Eddy currents. Since the
volatility of the SLA and Eddy currents are highly correlated, additional information
about the ocean currents could be added to the models. For this purpose, a physics-
based type of loss could be applied, i.e. Physics Informed Neural Networks (PINN).
During preliminary testing, the forecasting model was also trained and tested on the
South African data set in 1◦× 1◦resolution. These results indicated that not enough
information was present to forecast anything meaningful.
Thus the 1/6◦× 1/6◦
data product was made, which the forecasting model performed much better on.
Expanding on this, even more information about physical features and processes
could be made available through a higher resolution, which in turn could yield better
results.
12.3.6
Feasibility of forecasting on a global scale
Using the EDAConvLSTM model to forecast the 1◦× 1◦global SLA data set has
shown that in most of the world, the SLA is relatively stable and therefore easy to
predict. In these areas, the forecasting error is very low. However, in areas where
ocean currents produce Eddy currents, the discrepancy between the data and the
model output is very large.
The 1/6◦× 1/6◦resolution SLA grid from the AOI
near South Africa has been used in the forecasting model, in order to investigate the
feasibility of improving the global forecasting if the resolution of the grid is improved.
The results are auspicious, with forecasting reliability in the AOI extending beyond
the 5-day temporal window used for gridding. Increasing the resolution of the global
data set may improve the model by adding information about physical processes
surrounding the highly volatile areas. However, the model may be overwhelmed by
the amount of additional information in the data.
12.4
Architecture
Here, the architecture choices are discussed for both the autoencoder and the fore-
casting models.
12.4.1
Autoencoder
The autoencoder architecture introduced in section 10.3 produces reasonable recon-
structions of the data sets made in this project as shown in section 11.1. Although
==PAGE:106==
92
Discussion
the outcome is satisfactory, a common flaw in all the autoencoders’ reconstructions
is the poor reconstruction of the 2-3 pixel border. This is due to the design of the
architecture itself. To be precise, it is because the last 2D convolution layer has to
map 64 channels down to 1 channel and the last padding layer uses a padding of 3.
For the 2D convolution, the problem is this layer acts like a bottleneck of information
since this layer has to up the density of information by a factor of 64, while also
moving the information out to the edges of the image. This may be amended by
reducing the number of channels in the outermost layers of the autoencoder, as well
as possibly adding more layers with a gradual increase/decrease in channels.
The example forecast and target time series in an example position shown in sec-
tion 11.2, show the volatility of the data set produced in this project. The volatility
in the time series is thought to both include actual high-frequency changes in SLA,
but also noise. Thus, the autoencoder could potentially also be used to remove the
noise in time instead of only removing the noise which comes from the satellite tracks.
This will, however, require either a change in the architecture of the autoencoder or
inserting multiple days of data as channels into the autoencoder with modifications
to the loss function.
12.4.2
ConvLSTM based architectures
One inherent flaw in the encoder-decoder ConvLSTM based architectures, is that the
information has to propagate through multiple ConvLSTM blocks before being used
in the decoder. This means after each timestep the initial information has a tendency
to get weighted less and is thus lost over time. One approach used in this project to
fix this inherent issue, is to use attention to better propagate information over time.
Another flaw was found during preliminary testing with many different ConvLSTM
based architectures. The number of channels for the hidden state and cell state is
highly correlated with how fast the models overfit. The biggest problem with over-
fitting, especially at a low amount of epochs, is that only the general features are
forecasted. Then, the model has not had enough time to learn how features move
and change over time.
The autoencoder-based ConvLSTM architecture has shown a large speed improve-
ment over the ConvLSTM based architectures since the ConvLSTM layers operate in
the latent space of the autoencoder. Thus, the size of the hidden state and cell state is
decreased by 2(N-Downsamples). Furthermore, the results show the model understands
movement in the SLA spatial features much faster than other architectures. However,
this type of model is even more prone to overfitting, as the latent space distribution
and magnitude are very different between the train, validation and test splits. During
testing of the model architecture, a large number of different parameters, channels
and settings were used. However, aside from the single model producing the results
shown in subsection 11.2.4, all the attempts resulted in very early overfitting. This
indicates the architecture has potential, but further investigation of regularization
of the latent space is needed. Adding regularization to the latent space would force
==PAGE:107==
12.4 Architecture
93
the magnitude of the different splits to be similar. Thus, the ConvLSTM based ar-
chitectures have the potential to not overfit as easily. One way of regularizing the
latent space is to use a loss for the latent space, which punishes the magnitude of the
encoded features.
==PAGE:108==
94
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 13
Future work
Below, suggestions are made for a continuation of the project, as well as potential
improvements to the methodology in both Part I and Part II.
13.1
Gridding
One of the main parameters to be investigated further in regards to gridding, is the
time-to-distance weighting. Either efforts to find an optimal weight should be pur-
sued, or a different approach entirely on how to weigh the data temporally compared
to spatially should be found. Alternatively, different filters could be used to achieve
the best possible grid product after choosing a time-to-distance weighting, i.e. to at-
tain both spatial continuity and temporal continuity. One approach briefly explored
in this project is using autoencoders instead of using simple Gaussian filters. Fur-
ther investigation into removing non-physical noise from the data should be explored.
This could be removing satellite tracks and some of the underlying high-frequency
noise which is present between gridded days. Different changes to the loss function of
the autoencoder, which will provoke the model to not fit specific kinds of underlying
data noise distributions also have to be investigated. This could be weighting the
loss produced by the satellite tracks much lower. Other types of ”smart” filters can
also be utilized to remove the noise, while still retaining the physical higher frequency
features. Already before the data is gridded, more outlier detection should be per-
formed to further remove data errors from the grid. Another approach is to remove
the along-track noise using e.g. an autoencoder instead of using a low pass filter as
done for CMEMS. One of the biggest causes of errors in the gridding product is de-
viations in the RADS processing chain. Thus, more analysis of the processing chain
should be performed to improve the processing steps in RADS. Another approach is
to investigate the uncertainty of the data and models used in RADS, propagate the
uncertainty to the gridding process and weigh the data according to the inverse of
the uncertainty. Furthermore, the produced grids tend to have features stretched in
the latitude direction, which is likely due to the track following this direction, which
results in a bias. Thus, it should be investigated if a weighting in latitude is needed to
remove the bias in this direction. Adding information from tide gauges could increase
stability in the data product, especially near the coasts where most tide gauges are
positioned.
==PAGE:110==
96
Future work
The most important change to make in the next iteration of the gridding product
produced in this project, is to change when a satellite is replaced as the reference
satellite in the TOPEX-Jason series.
Currently, the reference is changed when a
satellite mission ends. However, the reference should change when a new satellite
takes over the orbit of the last satellite. This change will likely improve the crossover
correction made in the processing pipeline and thus improve the grids slightly.
13.2
Forecasting
Based on the forecasting results produced on the CMEMS data sets, the architecture
used in this project seems reasonable. Rather, it appears that data volatility is the
problem for this architecture. One approach to consider to amend this, is to grid
the data in 1/4◦× 1/4◦resolution and train the model on the CMEMS data sets,
and then do transfer learning to make forecasts on the data set used in this project.
Alternatively, a more smooth version of the grid produced in this project could be
made to train on first, before making the switch.
To improve the forecasting power of the investigated model, including additional
features in the model should be tested. These features include, but are not limited
to the SST, SWH, wind speed, the number of satellites used to produce the grid,
an ENSO parameter, and the grid uncertainty, either a value per day or per grid
cell. The grid uncertainty can likely only be obtained by either propagating the data
uncertainty from RADS, or by using a different algorithm for the gridding process,
i.e.
kriging (Gaussian processes), which provide an error estimate.
Adding these
features could help the model to better estimate the SLA where the Eddy currents are
present. If multiple features are used, changes to the Encoder-Decoder ConvLSTM
based architecture are necessary. Either all the features have to be forecasted along
the SLA, which will likely make the model more uncertain about its forecast, or one
layer has to be added between the encoder and decoder, which translates the cell and
hidden state. The translation is necessary because the encoder will use the additional
features, while the decoder will only use the SLA feature. A combination of these
two approaches can also be used, or other models which forecast one of the features
very well can be integrated into the decoder’s input.
An alternative architecture to investigate in regards to forecasting is the Transformer.
In text prediction, the results from models of this type are very good compared to
LSTM based architectures, when tested on the same data sets. Other slightly less
relevant architectures include but are not limited to: spherical convolutions, PINN
and Graph Neural Networks.
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 14
Conclusion
This project was made in two parts. In Part I, a pipeline using data from RADS to
construct a global gridded product containing SLA, SST, SWH and wind speed was
created. The purpose has been to investigate the feasibility of using a smaller tempo-
ral window for interpolation than similar products, such as CMEMS and MEaSUREs.
In this project, a window of ±5 days has been used, compared to 6 weeks in CMEMS
and 30 days in MEaSUREs. Furthermore, the other products use heavy filtering in
order to remove noise such as track residuals in the grid products. For this product,
some processing has been applied to the data after extraction from RADS, but no
further processing has been applied to the grids after interpolation.
The resulting product of the grid interpolation using the pipeline in chapter 4 shows
the same general features as seen in CMEMS and MEaSUREs. However, more high-
frequency variations are seen in the product from this project compared to the other
products. These are assumed to be a combination of actual physical features, which
are filtered out of CMEMS and MEaSUREs, and data errors propagated from the
data in RADS or created during the gridding process. Comparing the SLA grid pro-
duced in this project to MEaSUREs based on summary statistics, reveals a very small
deviation between the two data sets, especially in the non-polar regions. For CMEMS,
the discrepancies are slightly larger, but still within a reasonable margin. Thus, the
pipeline used in Part I is deemed a valid method for creating a grid interpolated SLA
data product.
In Part II, two major results have been produced. First, an autoencoder was imple-
mented followed by a forecasting model for the SLA data product. For this part of
the project, the global SLA grid product produced in Part I has been used. Further-
more, an AOI near South Africa was regridded using the pipeline in chapter 4 and
used in the autoencoder. Initially, the autoencoder was implemented in an effort to
use the trained latent space in the forecasting model for a speedup. However, the
autoencoder may also function as a filter for removing unwanted signals and noise in
the data. Using the autoencoder for speedup in the forecasting model was successful.
However, due to inconsistencies in the model architectures and a lack of restriction on
the magnitude of the autoencoder latent space, the models using the autoencoder for
speedup were very prone to overfitting. Preliminary testing of using the autoencoder
for removing unwanted signals has proved very promising. Thus, the autoencoder
may be used as a smart filter for the data errors in the data product from Part I,
rather than resorting to smoothing methods such as Gaussian filters.
==PAGE:112==
98
Conclusion
The forecasting model produced in Part II consists of an EDAConvLSTM architecture.
For the forecasting, CMEMS data from the AOI near South Africa and an additional
AOI in the South China Sea were both used to train models in order to test the data
dependency. In general, the model performance was similar for the two data sets in
South Africa, although the RMSE is lower for the model trained on CMEMS data
due to the lower magnitude and variation of the data. The model performance is
significantly worse in the South African area than in the South China Sea, due to the
complexity of predicting ocean currents and Eddy currents. Comparing the results
from the South China Sea to those in the same area in [23] reveals that the forecasting
model produced in this project performs better overall. The RMSE is lower on all pre-
dicted days, especially for longer forecasts. For the CMEMS SLA data product, the
forecasting power is reliable for approximately 30-40 days. Thus, extending the prod-
uct by the size of the temporal window in the gridding process of 6 weeks is almost
possible. Furthermore, for the SLA data products from this project, the prediction
power is reliable for about 7-10 days. This allows for a continuation of the data prod-
uct beyond the temporal window used of 5 days, thus extending the product a few
days beyond the current date if continually updated. Wrapping the EDAConvLSTM
model in the autoencoder, creating the E2D2AConvLSTM architecture, made the
model very prone to overfitting.
Results from the one model successfully trained
without immediate overfitting have shown that using this architecture is feasible, as
they were comparable in error to the results of the EDAConvLSTM without the au-
toencoded data.
In conclusion, creating a data product containing SLA, SST, SWH and wind speed
using a small temporal window in the interpolation is feasible. The current implemen-
tation is not optimal, however with the suggestions from section 13.1 it may be an
improvement from currently existing ways of creating products, in regards to includ-
ing higher frequency features. Using the autoencoder for speeding up the processing
of the forecasting model has been proven possible. The issues of overfitting may be re-
solved if the architecture is altered and the latent space is constrained. Furthermore,
the autoencoder shows great promise as a smart filter for removing unwanted signals.
Forecasting using the EDAConvLSTM allows for a decently reliable extension of the
SLA data products to the current date, such that they are no longer behind due to
the temporal windows of interpolation. The model may be improved but outperforms
similar models from other work. Using the model for global forecasting with a high-
resolution version of the SLA grid product is deemed feasible, although issues may
arise with the added information.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1]
E. Britannica, CryoSat-2. [Online]. Available: https://www.britannica.com/
topic/CryoSat#/media/1/1675197/147317 (visited on 08/14/2023).
[2]
NASA JPL, MEaSUREs | PO.DAAC. [Online]. Available: https://podaac.
jpl.nasa.gov/MEaSUREs (visited on 05/07/2023).
[3]
Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S), “CMEMS documentation,” Tech.
Rep., 2018. doi: 10 . 24381 / cds . 4c328c78. [Online]. Available: https : / /
cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/satellite-sea-level-
global?tab=doc (visited on 05/07/2023).
[4]
O. Andersen, L. Stenseng, G. Piccioni, and P. Knudsen, “The DTU15 MSS
(Mean Sea Surface) and DTU15LAT (Lowest Astronomical Tide) reference sur-
face,” English, ESA Living Planet Symposium 2016 ; Conference date: 09-05-
2016 Through 13-05-2016, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://lps16.esa.int/.
[5]
O. B. Andersen, “DTU21 Mean Sea Surface,” Jul. 2022. doi: 10.11583/DTU.
19383221.v1. [Online]. Available: https://data.dtu.dk/articles/dataset/
DTU21_Mean_Sea_Surface/19383221.
[6]
R. Scharroo, E. W. Leuliette, J. L. Lillibridge, M. C. N. D. Byrne, and G. T.
Mitchum, “RADS: Consistent multi-mission products, in Proc. of the Sympo-
sium on 20 Years of Progress in Radar Altimetry,” vol. ESA SP-710, p. 4, Sep.
2012. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/remkos/rads.
[7]
M. Passaro et al., “ALES+: Adapting a homogenous ocean retracker for satel-
lite altimetry to sea ice leads, coastal and inland waters,” Remote Sensing
of Environment, vol. 211, pp. 456–471, Jun. 2018, issn: 0034-4257. doi: 10.
1016/J.RSE.2018.02.074. [Online]. Available: https://orbit.dtu.dk/
en/publications/ales-adapting-a-homogenous-ocean-retracker-for-
satellite-altimetr.
[8]
P. Goryl. “REAPER - Earth Online.” (2014), [Online]. Available: https://
earth.esa.int/eogateway/activities/reaper.
[9]
S. Hubbert, “Radial basis function interpolation on the sphere,” p. 15, Jan.
2002.
==PAGE:114==
100
Bibliography
[10]
SciPy. “scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator - SciPy v1.10.1 Manual.” (Jan. 2023),
[Online]. Available: https : / / docs . scipy . org / doc / scipy / reference /
generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html#scipy.interpolate.
RBFInterpolator (visited on 04/27/2023).
[11]
S. M. Omohundro, “Five Balltree Construction Algorithms,” 1989. [Online].
Available: http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/ftp/global/pub/techreports/
1989/tr-89-063.pdf (visited on 05/04/2023).
[12]
SciKit-learn. “sklearn.neighbors.BallTree - scikit-learn 1.2.2 documentation.”
(Mar. 2023), [Online]. Available: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.neighbors.BallTree.html#sklearn.neighbors.BallTree
(visited on 04/27/2023).
[13]
DTU Compute, DCC Computing Centre, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
www.hpc.dtu.dk/.
[14]
IBM, LSF10. [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/spectrum-
lsf/10.1.0.
[15]
Generic Mapping Tools. “GSHHG Global Earth Mask.” (Jan. 2023), [Online].
Available: https://www.generic-mapping-tools.org/remote-datasets/
earth-mask.html.
[16]
N. Beech, T. Rackow, T. Semmler, S. Danilov, Q. Wang, and T. Jung, “Long-
term evolution of ocean eddy activity in a warming world,” Nature Climate
Change, vol. 12, pp. 910–917, 2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-
022-01478-3.
[17]
ESA Copernicus, CMEMS. [Online]. Available: https://marine.copernicus.
eu/ (visited on 05/07/2023).
[18]
Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S), Sea level gridded data from satellite
observations for the global ocean from 1993 to present, 2018. doi: 10.24381/
cds.4c328c78. [Online]. Available: https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/
cdsapp#!/dataset/satellite-sea-level-global?tab=overview.
[19]
MEaSUREs, MEaSUREs Gridded Sea Surface Height Anomalies Version 2205,
2022. doi: 10.5067/SLREF-CDRV3. [Online]. Available: https://podaac.jpl.
nasa.gov/dataset/SEA_SURFACE_HEIGHT_ALT_GRIDS_L4_2SATS_5DAY_
6THDEG_V_JPL2205.
[20]
H. Wackernagel, “Ordinary kriging,” in Multivariate Geostatistics: An Intro-
duction with Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1995,
pp. 74–81, isbn: 978-3-662-03098-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-03098-1_11.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-03098-1_11.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
101
[21]
N. Ducet, P. Y. Le Traon, and G. Reverdin, “Global high-resolution mapping
of ocean circulation from TOPEX/Poseidon and ERS-1 and -2,” Journal of
Geophysical Research: Oceans, vol. 105, no. C8, pp. 19 477–19 498, 2000. doi:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1029 / 2000JC900063. eprint: https : / / agupubs .
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2000JC900063. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2000JC900063.
[22]
A. Braakmann-Folgmann, R. Roscher, S. Wenzel, B. Uebbing, and J. Kusche,
“Sea level anomaly prediction using recurrent neural networks,” Oct. 2017. [On-
line]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.07099v1.
[23]
Y. Zhou, C. Lu, K. Chen, and X. Li, “Sea surface height anomaly prediction
based on artificial intelligence,” Artificial Intelligence Oceanography, pp. 63–82,
2023. doi: 10.1007/978-981-19-6375-9_3/FIGURES/14. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-19-6375-9_3.
[24]
M. Imani, R. J. You, and C. Y. Kuo, “Caspian sea level prediction using satellite
altimetry by artificial neural networks,” International Journal of Environmental
Science and Technology, vol. 11, pp. 1035–1042, 4 Apr. 2014, issn: 17352630.
doi: 10.1007/S13762- 013- 0287- Z/TABLES/6. [Online]. Available: https:
//link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13762-013-0287-z.
[25]
N. Bruneau, J. Polton, J. Williams, and J. Holt, “Estimation of global coastal
sea level extremes using neural networks,” Environmental Research Letters,
vol. 15, p. 074 030, 7 Jul. 2020, issn: 1748-9326. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/
AB89D6. [Online]. Available: https: / / iopscience .iop . org / article /10 .
1088/1748- 9326/ab89d6%20https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.
1088/1748-9326/ab89d6/meta.
[26]
K. Wahle, E. V. Stanev, and J. Staneva, “Detecting anomalous sea-level states
in north sea tide gauge data using an autoassociative neural network,” Natural
Hazards and Earth System Sciences, vol. 23, pp. 415–428, 2 Feb. 2023, issn:
16849981. doi: 10.5194/NHESS-23-415-2023.
[27]
Y. N. Chi, “Time series modeling and forecasting of monthly mean sea level
(1978 – 2020): Sarima and multilayer perceptron neural network,” International
Journal of Data Science, vol. 3, pp. 45–61, 1 Jun. 2022, issn: 2722-2039. doi:
10.18517/IJODS.3.1.45-61.2022. [Online]. Available: https://ijods.org/
index.php/ds/article/view/37.
[28]
NOAA Tides & Currents. “Sea level trends.” (2023), [Online]. Available: https:
//tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/sltrends/anomalymapmonth.html.
[29]
University of Hawaii Sea Level Center (UHSLC). “Sea level forecasts.” (Jun.
2023), [Online]. Available: https://uhslc.soest.hawaii.edu/sea-level-
forecasts/.
==PAGE:116==
102
Bibliography
[30]
P. Schaeffer, I. Pujol, Y. Faugere, A. Guillot, and N. Picot, “The CNES CLS
2015 Global Mean Sea surface.” [Online]. Available: https://meetings.aviso.
altimetry.fr/fileadmin/user_upload/tx_ausyclsseminar/files/GEO_
03_Pres_OSTST2016_MSS_CNES_CLS2015_V1_16h55.pdf.
[31]
T. Veng and O. B. Andersen, “Consolidating sea level acceleration estimates
from satellite altimetry,” Advances in Space Research, vol. 68, pp. 496–503, 2
Jul. 2021, issn: 0273-1177. doi: 10.1016/J.ASR.2020.01.016.
[32]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science
and Statistics). Springer, 2006, isbn: 978-0387-31073-2.
[33]
M. Mathieu, C. Couprie, and Y. LeCun, “Deep multi-scale video prediction
beyond mean square error,” 4th International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, ICLR 2016 - Conference Track Proceedings, Nov. 2015. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05440v6.
[34]
F. Gers and J. Schmidhuber, “Recurrent nets that time and count,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE-INNS-ENNS International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks. IJCNN 2000. Neural Computing: New Challenges and Perspectives
for the New Millennium, vol. 3, 2000, 189–194 vol.3. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2000.
861302.
[35]
X. Shi, Z. Chen, H. Wang, D. Yeung, W. Wong, and W. Woo, “Convolutional
LSTM network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1506.04214, 2015. arXiv: 1506.04214. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1506.04214.
[36]
S. Yadav. “Understanding attention mechanism.” (2019), [Online]. Available:
https://shashank7-iitd.medium.com/understanding-attention-mechanism-
35ff53fc328e.
[37]
D. Bahdanau, K. H. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate,” 3rd International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings, Sep. 2014. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0473v7.
[38]
L. Voita. “Seq2seq and attention.” (2023), [Online]. Available: https://lena-
voita.github.io/nlp_course/seq2seq_and_attention.html.
[39]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition,” Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 2016-December, pp. 770–778, Dec. 2015,
issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. [Online]. Available: https://
arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385v1.
[40]
I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, Sequence to sequence learning with neural
networks, 2014. arXiv: 1409.3215 [cs.CL].
[41]
D. Bank, N. Koenigstein, and R. Giryes, Autoencoders, 2021. doi: https://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2003.05991. arXiv: 2003.05991 [cs.LG].
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
103
[42]
T. Morris et al., “The importance of monitoring the greater agulhas current and
its inter-ocean exchanges using large mooring arrays,” South African Journal of
Science, vol. 113, no. 7/8, p. 7, Jul. 2017. doi: 10.17159/sajs.2017/20160330.
[Online]. Available: https://sajs.co.za/article/view/3988.
==PAGE:118==
104
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX A
Grid interpolation
Aside from what is contained within this appendix, a separate folder contains several
videos of 90 day sequences starting on 2018-03-01. Included in the folder are the
SLA, SST, SWH and Wind Speed for the global gridding product. It also contains
similar videos of the SLA product produced by the pipeline shown in chapter 4 in the
South African AOI in a 1/6◦× 1/6◦resolution, as well as the 1/4◦× 1/4◦CMEMS
SLA product in the South African area and the South China Sea. Problems may be
experienced using the Windows media player, so the VLC player is recommended.
A.1
Figures
Figure A.1. Unadjusted version of SLA from RADS data shown in figure 5.9. Data before
the vertical purple line are not included in the final product. In these data, the DTU15 MSS
is used.
==PAGE:120==
106
A Grid interpolation
Figure A.2.
Temporal correlation between all parameters pairwise. The correlation be-
tween the SWH and Wind Speed is much higher than for any of the other pairs. The SLA
and SST also have a noticeable correlation. However, for all other pairs, the correlation is
near-zero in almost all areas.
==PAGE:121==
A.1 Figures
107
Figure A.3.
Example distribution of data in the polar regions in November 2010. The
two left-most figures include polar data, while the two on the right only include data from
RADS. The colours indicate which type of processing is used. Light blue indicates LRM,
purple indicates SAR and green indicates SAR Interferometry. The data coloured in pink
are taken directly from RADS.
==PAGE:122==
108
A Grid interpolation
(a) 3 NoD
(b) 4 NoD
(c) 5 NoD
Figure A.4. Visualization of data after the RADS data processing pipeline (section 4.2).
Each figure is created using a different NoD. When the NoD increases, more data is used.
In these data, the DTU15 MSS is used.
==PAGE:123==
A.1 Figures
109
Figure A.5. Mean difference between CMEMS and MEaSUREs, where the mean of the
mean difference is subtracted as a reference correction.
Figure A.6. Standard deviation of the difference between CMEMS and MEaSUREs, where
the mean of the mean difference is subtracted as a reference correction.
==PAGE:124==
110
A Grid interpolation
A.2
Tables
Table A.1. Cycle time in days for each satellite.
Satellite
Cycle time [Days]
ERS-1
Phase A
3
Phase B
3
Phase R
35
Phase C
35
Phase D
3
Phase E
168
Phase F
168
Phase G
35
TOPEX
10
ERS-2
35
Jason-1
10
Envisat
35
Jason-2
10
CryoSat-2
369
SARAL
35
Jason-3
10
Sentinel-3A
27
Sentinel-3B
27
Sentinel-6A
10
==PAGE:125==
A.3 Algorithms
111
Table A.2. Satellites in RADS with the first and last dates the satellites provide data. The
light blue rows indicate satellites utilized in the grid interpolation, while pink rows indicate
those not.
Altimeter
Start
End
Geosat
1985-04-13T06:57:07.006995
1989-09-22T02:12:19.862818
ERS-1
1991-08-01T21:39:41.824919
1996-04-28T22:10:03.290139
TOPEX
1992-10-03T01:36:44.793114
2005-10-04T15:55:38.642622
Poseidon
1992-10-22T21:40:02.599753
2002-07-02T18:48:57.966717
ERS-2
1995-05-15T22:09:34.416278
2011-06-20T19:07:58.440273
GFO
2000-01-07T17:28:19.663586
2008-09-13T04:02:48.313504
Jason-1
2002-02-04T01:07:53.616477
2013-06-18T03:10:11.034732
Envisat
2002-06-17T22:23:15.526135
2012-03-20T21:39:34.115389
Jason-2
2008-07-12T01:20:05.057530
2019-09-21T07:18:43.123169
CryoSat-2
2010-07-31T23:53:49.283286
2023-01-24T17:53:47.047577
SARAL
2013-03-14T05:39:27.811666
2022-07-18T21:12:41.744768
Jason-3
2016-02-17T10:28:45.235877
2022-04-07T08:55:38.614449
Sentinel-3A
2016-03-12T21:37:22.000000
2023-01-26T21:37:38.000000
Sentinel-3B
2018-05-31T21:36:28.000000
2023-01-09T21:39:33.000000
Sentinel-6A
2020-12-11T11:54:06.000000
2023-01-29T20:11:53.000000
A.3
Algorithms
Algorithm 1: Block-averaging algorithm where memory usage has been optimized.
N is the size of the positions set X. M is the size of the dimension of each position (xi),
while F is the size of the dimension of each target (ti). ”constructVectors” constructs
the orthogonal vectors that define the block average space. ”where” finds the index
of where x lies in the block average space, i.e. an integer. ”assignBlock” assigns or
adds t to a block.
1: procedure blockaverage(X, T, blockSize, resolution)
2:
orthogonalVectors ←constructVectors(blockSize, resolution)
3:
blocks ←Allocate(N, M + F + 1)
4:
counter ←0
5:
lookup ←Hashmap[int, int]
6:
for x, t in X, T do
7:
gridIndex, block ←where(orthogonalVectors, x)
8:
assignBlock(blocks, gridIndex, counter, loopkup, block, t)
9:
end for
10:
Del blocks[:counter]
11:
blocks[:, M + 1:] = blocks[:, M + 1:]/blocks[:, 0]
12:
return blocks
13: end procedure
==PAGE:126==
112
A Grid interpolation
Algorithm 2
1: procedure assignBlock(blocks, gridIndex, counter, loopkup, block, t)
2:
M ←size(block)
3:
if gridIndex in lookup then
4:
tmpIndex ←lookup[gridIndex]
5:
blocks[tmpIndex, 0]++
6:
blocks[tmpIndex, M + 1:] += t
7:
else
8:
loopkup[gridIndex] = counter
9:
blocks[counter, 0] = 1
10:
blocks[counter, 1:] = block
11:
blocks[counter, M + 1:] = t
12:
counter++
13:
end if
14: end procedure
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX B
Forecasting
Aside from what is contained within this appendix, a separate folder contains several
videos of 90 day sequences starting on 2018-03-01. Included in the folder are the
outputs of the autoencoder, as well as the difference between the inputs and outputs
in the sequence. These are shown for the global data set with 32 and 128 channels,
and for the South African AOI with 8, 32 and 128 channels. In the folder, several fore-
casting videos may also be found. These include example forecasts and RMSE for the
90 days. The models for which these sequences are shown are: the EDAConvLSTM
model for the global 1◦×1◦SLA product, the 1/6◦×1/6◦South Africa SLA product,
and the 1/4◦× 1/4◦CMEMS SLA product in South Africa and the South China Sea.
Additionally, the 90 day sequences are also shown for the E2D2AConvLSTM model
for the 1/6◦× 1/6◦South Africa SLA product. Problems may be experienced using
the Windows media player, so the VLC player is recommended.
B.1
Figures
Figure B.1. 1/4◦×1/4◦resolution CMEMS data covering the South Africa AOI described
in section 7.3 on 2014-09-28.
==PAGE:128==
114
B Forecasting
Figure B.2. Shows the same result as Figure 11.1a but with the colour-scale restricted to
1 cm in order to enhance sub-centimeter errors.
==PAGE:129==
B.1 Figures
115
(a) Median
(b) 95% quantile
Figure B.3. Median and 95% quantile for latent space in validation set.
==PAGE:130==
116
B Forecasting
(a) Median
(b) 95% quantile
Figure B.4. Median and 95% quantile for the latent space in the test set.
==PAGE:131==
B.1 Figures
117
Figure B.5. Spatial RMSE for each of the 30 days on the Part I data set in the South
African AOI. A kernel structure in the RMSE for the first few days can be seen in the figure.
==PAGE:132==
118
B Forecasting
Figure B.6. Example time series in 5 random locations in the South African AOI, showing
the 30th-day forecast for each input day in the Part I test set, as well as the target data.
Figure B.7. 90 day forecasts on 2018-03-16 in the same locations as Figure B.6, using the
E2D2AConvLSTM model for the South African AOI Part I data set, as well as the target
data.
==PAGE:133==
==PAGE:134==
