==PAGE:1==
Identification of allergen proteins in the
gut microbiome
Done under the supervision of Carolina Barra Quaglia
Varun Shankar - s212934
September 4, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Objective
1
3
Introduction
1
3.1
Development of bioinformatic tools and furthering our understanding of aller-
genicity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.2
Relationship between gut microbiota and allergic diseases . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Materials & Methods
7
4.1
Database selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Pipeline Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Annotations and Egg-NOG mapper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
Allignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.5
NetAllergen and it’s prerequisited modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5.1
NetAllergen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5.2
NetSurfp3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5.3
NetMHCiipan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.6
Prediction Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.7
Comparison with Algpred2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Results
14
5.1
Allignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Preliminary NetAllergen Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Phylum & Class diversities in the NetAllergen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3.1
Evaluation of Bacili composition amongst predicted proteins
20
5.3.2
Evaluation of Bacteroidetes composition amongst predicted
proteins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3.3
Evaluation of Clostridia composition amongst predicted pro-
teins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4
Evaluation of distribution of data in the bins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4.1
Evaluation of the distribution of protein families in samples
. . . . .
27
5.5
Evaluation of feeding type on bacterial abundance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.6
Comparison between AlgPred2 and NetAllergen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Discussions
31
7
Conclusion and Final Remarks
33
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
II
i
==PAGE:3==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Nomenclature
III
References
IV
ii
==PAGE:4==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
1
Abstract
The hygiene hypothesis suggests that exposure to complex microbial environment along
with bacterial infections teaches the body to differentiate harmless substances from the
harmful substances that trigger asthma. In theory, exposure to certain germs teaches the
immune system not to overreact. However, on the contrary colonization and infection by
certain bacterial species have been associated with an increased risk of allergy development as
well as with exacerbations of allergic symptoms. This thesis aims to design a bioinformatic
pipeline, that is able to process metagenomic data from various sources, performing the
necessary preprocessing and annotation, necessary to predict the presence of allergen proteins
in various datasets. Additionally this thesis will analyze the results of the allergen protein
prediction and quantify the presence of the same by studying the impact these allergen
proteins have on the gut microbiome.
2
Objective
To analyze the gut microbiome and create a bioinformatic pipeline that is able to process
protein data and subsequently predict, which proteins are allergens or not. This data could
then be further studied to potentially predict if individuals can be susceptible to allergens.
3
Introduction
Allergies as a widespread health concern have been on the rise globally, affecting millions
of individuals and are generally observed to first be prevalent in children and continue to
be a lifelong ailment for those affected [1]. These reactions are due to the results of an
irregularity in the immune response characterized by the immune system identifying benign
substances (allergens) as potentially harmful and triggering an immune response, causing
symptoms ranging from mild discomfort and inflammation to life-threatening anaphylaxis.
The primary immunoglobulin involved in allergic reactions is Immunoglobulin E (IgE), which
binds to specific allergens and triggers the release of inflammatory mediators, including
histamine, leukotrienes, and cytokines. These mediators orchestrate the typical symptoms
observed in allergies, such as sneezing, itching, wheezing, and skin rashes.
These allergic reactions are classified into four types based on their pathophysiological
types by Coombs and Gell [2]. The first three types are considered immediate hypersensi-
tivity reactions because they occur within 24 hours. The fourth type is considered a delayed
hypersensitivity reaction because it usually occurs more than 12 hours after exposure to the
allergen, with a maximal reaction time between 48 and 72 hours.
Page 1 of 33
==PAGE:5==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
The four types of hypersensitivity reactions can be classified as follows:
• Type I: reaction mediated by IgE antibodies
• Type II: cytotoxic reaction mediated by IgG or IgM antibodies
• Type III: reaction mediated by immune complexes
• Type IV: delayed reaction mediated by cellular response
Figure 1: Type of Hypersensitivity Reactions
A Type IV hypersensitivity reaction is mediated by T cells that provoke an inflammatory
reaction against exogenous or endogenous antigens. In certain situations, other cells, such
as monocytes, eosinophils, and neutrophils, can be involved. After antigen exposure, an
initial local immune and inflammatory response occurs that attracts leukocytes. The antigen
engulfed by the macrophages and monocytes is presented to T cells, which then become
sensitized and activated.
These cells then release cytokines and chemokines, which can
cause tissue damage and may result in illnesses. Examples of illnesses resulting from type
IV hypersensitivity reactions include contact dermatitis and drug hypersensitivity. Type IV
reactions are further subdivided into type IVa, IVb, IVc, and IVd based on the type of T cell
(CD4 T-helper type 1 and type 2 cells) involved and the cytokines/chemokines produced.
[2]
Treatment for allergies has developed a lot over the years, with treatments ranging from
the use of antihistamines (to treat the symptoms of allergic reactions), to corticosteroids
which are often used to provide relief to patients expressing much more severe allergic symp-
toms. In much more recent times, allergy shots or allergy immunotherapy has been studied,
where patients with allergies are gradually shown to have reduced sensitivity to allergens by
being the individual to controlled amounts of allergens over time, with some patients even
observing long-lasting relief, even after the treatment has been completed.[3] The success
and study of such therapies posed many interesting questions and allowed us to think about
allergies in a different manner, thereby validating a newfound interest in studying the hy-
giene hypothesis and allowing us to think about whether such responses to therapy can be
validated using bioinformatics.
Page 2 of 33
==PAGE:6==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
If we were to apply certain fundamentals in metagenomics to the studies involving the
evaluation of the hygiene hypothesis, it would allow us to more accurately understand the
mechanisms involved in developing an allergic reaction to allergens, and if it would be possible
allergens for individuals before they deal with the negative affects of allergic reactions first
hand. Such an approach would allow us to offer personalized, comprehensive care, with
long term benefits and offering the added benefit of reducing healthcare burden and freeing
individuals from the many medications that currently exist for allergies.
3.1
Development of bioinformatic tools and furthering our under-
standing of allergenicity
With the advancement of bioinformatics research, there has been a growing emphasis
on the investigation and assessment of allergenic potential in various allergens, along with
the prediction of B- and T-cell epitopes within these allergens. The prediction of a protein’s
allergenic potential hinges on two primary aspects: inherent protein allergenicity and cross-
reactivity.[4]
Inherent allergenic potential relates to the protein’s capacity to trigger a T-cell response,
typically quantified by the production of specific IgE antibodies. Conversely, cross-reactivity
assesses how reactive a protein is with pre-existing IgE antibodies induced by other allergens.
In the realm of bioinformatics, these aspects are often evaluated by estimating sequence
similarity for allergenicity assessment.[5]
To facilitate this assessment, we employ curated online allergen databases, which enable
the identification of specific IgE antibodies as key predictive components. For instance, in
Alg-Pred; a predictive algorithm designed for predicting allergenic proteins and mapping
IgE epitopes—a protein is classified as an allergen if it contains regions or peptides identical
to known IgE epitopes.[6]The presence of such regions or peptides is indicative of allergenic
potential. However, it is worth noting that the specificity of AlgPred’s predictions was found
to be suboptimal in a study used to validate the algorithm.[6] This was attributed to the
detection of IgE epitopes in certain non-allergenic proteins, although the epitopes in non-
allergens tended to be shorter in length. This underscores the importance of considering
epitope length as a crucial parameter when assessing allergenicity.
Allergen/epitope prediction as a study dates back to 1981 where the first B-cell epitope
prediction method was developed by Hopp and Woods where amino acid sequences were
analyzed to find the point of greatest local hydrophilicity.[7] However, development in pre-
diction for B-cell epitopes is still a relatively unclear field due to the difficulty in predicting
discontinous epitopes. In the case of predicting T-cell epitopes, MHC-binding predictions
are the key by integration with predictions of proteasomal cleavage and TAP sites.[8]
• Sequence-Based Prediction.
• Structure-Based Prediction.
• Hybrid Prediction.
Page 3 of 33
==PAGE:7==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Sequence-Based Prediction:
The idea behind the sequence-based approach is that a
protein’s sequence dictates its structure, and that similar structures might result in similar
activities. Both common sequence patterns and motifs, which determine the MHC allele
specificity of an epitope, are possible.
In order to locate sequence homologues and give
amino acid scores via multiple alignment of the query protein sequence with template se-
quences in databases, two popular methods for sequence-sequence comparison are BLAST
and FASTA. Experiments, however, have demonstrated that proteins with high sequence
identity may have distinct functions as a result of folding and interactions between variable
regions in various cellular compartments.[9] The prediction of continuous epitopes is the only
application of algorithms based solely on sequence information.
Structure-Based Prediction:
While sequence-based prediction is valuable, it’s impor-
tant to consider alternative approaches. Kolaskaret al. employed structure-based epitope
prediction for the first time in 1999.[10] This approach takes into account the related propen-
sity scales, such as geometric features and structure-based physico-chemical qualities. It
relies on 3D protein structural similarity between the query protein and the template pro-
tein. Recent years have seen a sharp increase in the experimental data of conformational
B-cell epitopes due to the advent of various omics and bioinformatics. Mutagenesis, compe-
tition experiments, free energy scoring function, quantitative structure-activity relationship
(QSAR) analysis[11], protein threading[12], rigid/flexible docking[13], and homology model-
ing are the main methods now used to find structure-based epitopes. Atomistic molecular
dynamics simulations have also been utilized, although they are not frequently used due to
their high computational cost.
Generally, structure-based epitope prediction models tend to provide more accurate pre-
dictions due to their plethora of advantages over sequence-based ones. They can even predict
discontinuous epitopes and those not found in allergen databases. However, it’s essential to
acknowledge the trade-offs: the high computational cost, development complexity, and lim-
ited availability of 3D protein structures make this approach less than ideal as a one-stop
solution for our problem.
Hybrid Prediction:
Predictive techniques utilizing both sequential and structural infor-
mation have been created due to the limitations of epitope predictors that only use one of the
two approaches of analysis—sequence or structure—in their operation. Comparative studies
based on binding motifs have the most accurate MHC-binding peptides predictions, but it is
observed that as data volume increased, models that were based on machine learning meth-
ods, were shown to have more reliability.[14] Among the different models of Machine Learning
available, SVM’s have been shown to perform better, SVM’s in general have been particu-
larly attractive to biological analysis, due to it’s ability to filter noise, large input spaces and
overall accuracy.[8] When aiming to do classification with the aid of ML techniques, K.NN
and decision tree-based classifiers hold the highest performance. This is particularly because
of the nature by which assembly and structure analysis is shown to improve. It is of partic-
ular interest to note, that using assembly to identify the known as a broad-spectrum way to
filter out lists of proteins and performing highly resource-driven structural analysis on the
Page 4 of 33
==PAGE:8==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
remaining proteins (with poor BLAST/assembly scores) seems to show higher performance
rubrics. In this paper, we will predominantly discuss a hybrid model(using NetAllergen -
a tool developed in DTU Health Tech), that incorporates both alignment and structural
learnings to form our predictions and study allergens from metagenomic data.
Table 1: Comparison of Epitope Prediction Approaches
Approach
Pros
Cons
Sequence-
Based Predic-
tion
• Utilizes
com-
mon
sequence
patterns
and
motifs.
• Relatively
fast
and
computa-
tionally efficient.
• Limited
to
se-
quence informa-
tion alone.
• High
sequence
similarity
doesn’t guaran-
tee
functional
similarity.
Structure-
Based Predic-
tion
• Predicts
both
continuous
and
discontinuous
epitopes.
• Can
identify
epitopes
not
found
in
aller-
gen databases.
• High
computa-
tional cost and
complexity.
• Limited
avail-
ability
of
3D
structures
for
many proteins.
Hybrid
Pre-
diction
• Combines
both
sequence
and
structural infor-
mation.
• Improved accu-
racy,
especially
with
larger
datasets.
• Complexity due
to
integration
of multiple data
sources.
• Requires careful
feature selection
and model tun-
ing.
Page 5 of 33
==PAGE:9==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
3.2
Relationship between gut microbiota and allergic diseases
Now that the type of study that is to be used has been determined(Hybrid Predic-
tion Approach), it is imperative to decide the optimal dataset for us to test our approach
on. In recent decades, multiple labs and groups have performed studies to understand the
alterations in the gut microbiota of allergic individuals. These literatures have been stud-
ied to determine a putative causative role for gut microbiota in allergic diseases and their
progressions.[?]
Naturally, the first type of allergens that we would be interested in exploring the re-
lationship between gut microbiota and allergens would be food allergens. Food allergies
are classified as pathological immune reactions triggered by certain proteins found in food,
They cause a variety of symptoms from within the gastrointestinal tract and the skin, with
some cases having fatal anaphylactic reactions.[15]Although food allergies are heterogeneous,
a short list of foods could encompass the majority of all allergenic foods, namely peanut,
wheat, soy, nuts, fish, cow milk, shellfish, eggs, and seeds[16].
Studies have shown that the early colonization of gut microbiota in babies, have shown
to reduce propensity to affect potential of food allergy at later stages of life, In a particular
study where the compositional microbiome of infants of 3-6 months, Low gut microbiota
richness in early infancy and higher Enterobacteriaceae to Bacteroidaceae ratio, was also
shown to be associated with food sensiztization at 1 year. Increase of microbiota richness
correlated with a 55% reduction in risk for food sensitization[17]. Further looking at this
richness allow us to note that the presence of bacteria of the genera of Dialister, Haemophilus,
Clostridium and Dorea were found to be reduced in subjects with food sensitization, while the
presence of Citrobacter, Oscillospira, Lactococcus and Dorea presented strong association
with food allergy, all of which were under-expressed in children who had food allergy[15].
Figure 2: Gut Microbiome diversity of infants from azad et al. 2015[17]
Respiratory allergies have also been linked to dysbiosis within the gut, Of the possible
respiratory allergies the most common one that has been studied, is allergic rhinitis [AR]. A
plethora of studies have been connected in relation to the reduced onset of asthma and AR
Page 6 of 33
==PAGE:10==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
in children growing up in farms, owing to the exposure of a microbially diverse environment
[18][19]. A study comparing the microbial data of 489 school aged children from both rural
and urban areas in Germany, and identified Acinetobacter, Lactobacillus and Staphylococcus
were inversely related to Asthma and hay fever[20]. Mild variation in microbiota diversity
was measured in the children with allergic airway disease and the micro-organisms from
phylum Firmicutes were significantly less expressed when compared to healthy children.[21]
Skin allergies are more widespread but are often less fatal, and atopic dermatitis is one
of the most commonly and vastly studied. Atopic dermatitis is a complex disease, involving
multiple factors which include genetic factors, defective barriers, environmental factors, and
immunologic responses.[22] The belief that skin co-morbidities with gut disorders stems from
the fact that as interface organs, the skin shares a number of common features with the gut,
and its overall integration in the immune system, is responsible. Once again, it is heavily
postulated that the diversity of gut flora seems to be prominent in determining the presence
of skin-based allergies in life. In a study, the presence of species of Bifidobacterium, Akker-
mansi, and Faecalibacterium showed an indirect relation with developing atopic dermatitis
and asthma in later life, while a higher relative abundance of particular fungi (Candida
and Rhodotorula) showed in the same prone group[23]. Another report indicated that Fae-
calibacterium prausnitzii, together with Escherichia coli, Bifidobacterium adolescentis, and
Akkermansia muciniphila were highly discriminant for atopic dermatitis teenagers whether
having food allergy or not[24]. In some studies, it was even proposed that the presence of
Bifidobacterium could alleviate atopic dermatitis [25][26].
4
Materials & Methods
4.1
Database selection
Given how we’ve been able to study and identify potential relationships between gut
microbiomes and allergenicity, in early-life individuals. It becomes imperative that to further
the study of the thesis, we would need data from an ideal source. The data used for this
project comes from a study that created a compendium of 32,277 metagenome-assembled
genomes from the early-life human gut microbiome[27]. De novo assembly of shotgun metage-
nomic reads and binning into metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs)– is thought to be a
useful strategy to efficiently discover the potential microbial diversity that is recalcitrant to
the current culturing approaches in the laboratory. This particularly goes hand-in-hand with
our objective to determine the species of protein families that are responsible for allergies,
and also allow us to find novel families that could be potentially responsible for the same.
The study of the early-life gut genome allows us to take a deeper dive and try to understand
why the early stages of gut microbiota have such a long-lasting effect on individuals[17].
Page 7 of 33
==PAGE:11==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 3: Features of the ELGP dataset
The study used contains data from children under the first three years of life, and
analyzed 6122 fecal metagenomes from the children. These data are stratified by type of
delivery, gestational age, country, and ageFigure 3. These samples were distributed among
11 countries across four continents, with the United States, United Kingdom, and New
Zealand being the top three represented. All metagenomic sequencing data were quality
controlled, and human contamination (hg19 human reference genome) was filtered by using
KneadData v0.7.2 with default parameters, resulting in 1.3 × 1011 paired reads (87% of the
raw sequencing reads). The study was then able to generate a set of 32,277 MAGs, using
assembly (MegaHIT), binning (metaBAT2), and using CheckM to sort between medium
quality bins and high-quality bins. The protein-coding sequences (CDS) for each of these
32,777 MAGs were predicted using Prokka, resulting in a total of 86 million genes. These
genes were clustered using CD-HIT at 95% amino acid identity to give us 4,036,936 proteins.
4.2
Pipeline Overview
An overview of the pipeline utilized in the dataset we studied is provided in the figure
belowFigure 4. The genes studied were generated from the metagenome-assembled genome
(MAG) of 6122 infant participants.
Page 8 of 33
==PAGE:12==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 4: Pipeline used in the study to generate ELGP
The ELGP (Early Life Gut Proteins) forms the starting point on which our hybrid
predictive pipeline aims to work on. The ELGP is observed to contain 4,030,096 protein
sequences and part of 29,739 unique clustered bins (from CD-HIT). However, it is important
to note that over 57% [27] of the sequences were not annotated and as a result, it became
evident that some work would need to be performed on this front to increase the fidelity of
our results. The pipeline we’ve created involves first performing alignment with a curated
allergen database from Allergen online v.20.[28] Setting a threshold to segregate the alligned
data into confirmed allergen proteins and unconfirmed proteins. On the unconfirmed pro-
teins, we aim to use NetAllergen ( a tool developed by DTU Health Tech) that uses MHC
class ii antigen presentation information to predict the allergenicity of proteins with high
accuracy [29].
Page 9 of 33
==PAGE:13==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 5: Predictive pipeline used in this study.
4.3
Annotations and Egg-NOG mapper
Prior, to performing anything, it was noted that in the ELGP, from the data available,
only the fasta protein sequences were available.To ensure that our subsequent analyses could
yield meaningful results, we undertook the task of annotating the vast dataset using the
Egg-NOG mapper[30].
Although there are several tools available for the annotations of
proteins (KEGG, BLASTP, Blast2GO, SMART). Our hoice of EggNOG Mapper was driven
by the unique characteristics of the early-life gut microbiome dataset. This environment
presents a heightened likelihood of encountering previously uncharted microbial species and
proteins, many of which may not have undergone extensive prior investigation. EggNOG-
Mapper’s approach can help predict functions for these novel proteins by associating them
with orthologous groups that might have been characterized in other context and given the
diversity of the organisms found in the EggNOG database.
Moreover, EggNOG Mapper offers an additional advantage in that it facilitates the
analysis of data using the Cluster of Orthologous Groups (COG) classification. The COG
classification system, widely recognized in microbiology, categorizes genes into functional
groups, making it an indispensable tool for elucidating the roles and relationships of proteins
within the dataset.[31]
Page 10 of 33
==PAGE:14==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
4.4
Allignment
Following the annotation step, the 4 million proteins were aligned using MMSeqs2 [32]
by aligning the proteins with a curated reference database of allergens, that have been taken
from the Allergen online database (v.20)[28].
The 2046 allergen protein sequences were
retrieved from the AllergenOnline database. The allergens were filtered to keep only the
sequences containing the standard amino acids, The NCBI/UniProt IDs were used to map
sequenced in the UniProt database, subsequently, the structural information of the same was
collected. Allergens had variable lengths and the lengths were mainly distributed around 175.
These allergens were derived from over 300 different species, for instance, Dermatophagoides
farinae (dust mite), Triticum aestivum (wheat), Betula pendula (birch), Anisakis simplex
(parasite), Aspergillus fumigatus (Fungus), etc.
Additionally, there were 158 rare cases
which only contained one allergen from that specific species. The database also included
the pathway types of allergy development for each allergen, including airway, food, contact
(Table). The “Aero” and “Food” are two dominant categories in the database
Allignment once successfully completed, left us with 185,769 sequences that were show-
ing alignment to our curated allergen database. Upon closer review, it was observed that
some query sequences (from the ELGP) were mapped to multiple sequences from the aller-
gen database, To ease further analysis and perform data cleaning, we used a combination of
SEQID and E-Value similarities to trim the data. Once the alignment was completed, the
aligned data was divided into two parts, those having significantly low e-values (high levels
of similarity to the matched allergens) and with higher e-values. The E-value of 10−15 would
divide the rest of the approx 39,715 sequences. [29]
Figure 6: NetAllergen outperforming BLAST when sequence dissimilarity increases
Page 11 of 33
==PAGE:15==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
4.5
NetAllergen and it’s prerequisited modules
4.5.1
NetAllergen
NetAllergen is bioinformatics tool developed by DTU HealthTech[29] used to predict
allergenic proteins when provided a protein sequence, it does so by comparing protein se-
quences against a database of known allergens, NETALLergen uses a plethora of features to
determine protein allergenicity. Given how we have studied the current available methods
to predict allergenicity revolve heavily around sequence similarity, it is observed that there
is a lack of accuracy in predicting allergenicity when protein sequence similarity diminishes.
MHC class II antigen presentation plays an essential role in the allergic response as allergen
peptides need to be presented on MHC-II in order to develop Th2 and IgE producing immune
responses. NetAllergen. Recently, genome wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed
that several allergies are strongly associated with specific HLA alleles, in particular HLA-
DQ and HLA-DR alleles [33]. NetAllergen was benchmarked against a sequence-based Blast
model and other state-of-the-art predictors and demonstrated to achieve unprecedented per-
formance, particularly for allergens that share limited similarity to previously known and well
characterized allergens[29]. However, it is to be noted that prior to the use of the Random-
Forrest powered NetAllergen, we need to generate the features used in the prediction via
Netsurfp2 and NetMHCiipan.
4.5.2
NetSurfp3
NetSurfP-3 is a protein disorder prediction tool that aims to identify intrinsically disor-
dered regions in protein sequences. Intrinsically disordered regions lack well-defined three-
dimensional structures and are often involved in protein-protein interactions, signaling, and
regulatory processes. NetSurfP-3 uses neural network-based algorithms to predict disorder
propensity, solvent accessibility, and secondary structure from protein sequences. It can pro-
vide valuable insights into the functional and structural characteristics of proteins, especially
those with flexible and dynamic regions.[34]
4.5.3
NetMHCiipan
NetMHCIIpan is a computational tool used to predict peptide binding to major histo-
compatibility complex class II (MHC-II) molecules. MHC-II molecules play a crucial role in
presenting peptides to CD4+ T cells, which is important for immune responses. NetMHCI-
Ipan predicts peptide-MHC-II binding affinity, helping researchers identify potential T cell
epitopes that could trigger immune responses. The tool employs machine learning models
trained on experimental data to predict peptide-MHC-II interactions, considering factors
like peptide sequence, MHC-II allele, and binding affinity.[35]
The HLA (Human Leukocyte Antigen) allele types that are used in MHCiipan predic-
tions are HLA-DQA10201-DQB10202, HLA-DQA10401-DQB10301, HLA-DQA10103-DQB10601,
HLA-DQA10501-DQB10201, HLA-DQA10301-DQB10302, and DRB1-1501. These are cho-
sen as they are the alleles that have specific variants of genes that encode major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC) molecules in humans. These molecules are essential for the
Page 12 of 33
==PAGE:16==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
presentation of antigens (such as peptides from proteins) to the immune system, and it’s
predicting the binding of the allergen proteins to these alleles that allow us to determine
allergenicity or lacktherof.
4.6
Prediction Pipeline
One of the central hindrances in the utilization of NetAllergen is the time taken to
make the prediction. This is primarily because to use NetAllergen to make predictions we
require over 60 features, of the protein sequences to perform the predictions. As such, in
this Master’s thesis, one of the main research objectives was to reduce the time taken to
make predictions, while allowing NetAllergen to provide predictions for a large number of
proteins. Currently, the NetAllergen prediction model runs the feature generation step for
all the proteins, in a linear way. This has been proven to be particularly time-consuming,
with the time required increasing with the number of protein sequences provided for the
predictions.
To deal with this, we designed a pipeline on 2273 protein sequences obtained post-
alignment with MMseqs2. These sequences were those sequences that were shown to align
with the allergens from our curated allergen database but had higher dissimilarity scores,
which led to uncertainty in whether these proteins were truly allergen proteins or not.
The method used in this script firstly divided the fasta file of the 2273 sequences, into
smaller batch files containing 100 sequences each. Subsequently, these sequences were pro-
vided to Netsurfp3 and NetMHCiipan in parallel with a customized job script, The Netsurfp3
pipeline performed predictions on disorder propensity, solvent accessibility, and secondary
structure from protein sequences while the NetMHCIIpan, while a small subset of the NetAl-
lergen code was used to perform the rest of the feature generation (Molecular weight, Amino
Acid Compostion, Isoelectric Point, hydrophobicity with Kyle-Doolittle Hydrophobicity and
Binding Immunoglobulin Domain. Once the features required from the dataset were gen-
erated, scripts were used to validate whether the feature sets generated were accurate and
subsequently the features provided by the different feature generation steps were provided
to NetAllergen to run the prediction. Once the features were generated, NetAllergen was
relatively quick in providing the analysis of the allergen proteins. Once this pipeline was
tested and verified, it was then used to form the predictions on the remainder of the NetAl-
lergen proteins subset (approx 15,000 sequences). The code for the prediction pipeline can
be found here1.
4.7
Comparison with Algpred2
In order to comprehensively evaluate the allergenic potential of proteins within the gut
microbiome, and benchmark the performance of NetAllergen in our case, we also performed
predictions using the Algpred2 webserver on the 2273 protein sequences that we tested our
NetAllergen pipeline on.
Algpred2, a webserver-based tool[6], utilized a hybrid model for allergen prediction, encom-
1https://github.com/varunshankar1997/allergy_predictor_thesis
Page 13 of 33
==PAGE:17==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
passing both sequence-based and structural information. Similarly, to maintain uniformity
in classification standards, the threshold for predictions in Algpred2 was set at 0.3, mirroring
the criteria employed for NetAllergen.This methodological approach was applied to try and
make robust comparisons between the predictions generated by the two methods, shedding
light on the potential disparities and agreements in their allergen classification outputs.
Figure 7: AUC for Comparison of BLAST, NetAllergen(RF-56F) and Algpred2.
5
Results
5.1
Allignments
The 4 million proteins were aligned using MMSeqs2. MMSeqs2 was preferred over the
popular alignment tools like BLAST owing to its higher speed (via parallelization of allign-
ments) and scalability with using large custom databases.[32]
The alignment from MMSeqs2 results were analysed and divided into two separate
datasets based on the alignment values. They were divided into two subcategories of data,
based on their similarity scores to allergens blasted within the database. From the 4 million
proteins found in the ELGP database, we were able to find 185,773 alignments with our
curated allergen database.
However, in these alignments, it was observed that in some
cases, a single query sequence was aligning to multiple proteins in the allergen database.
To facilitate our analysis, we decided to trim these alignments to choose only the “best”
alignments (i.e.
those alignments to our allergen database that we were most sure of).
To decide the “best” alignments, we choose the alignments with the lowest e-values from
Page 14 of 33
==PAGE:18==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
MMseqs2 and highest seqid matches with the allergens.
This resulted in 39,715 unique
alignments that we further divided into two datasets. as part of our analysis.
The Allergen allignment dataset (contains 24,759 sequences) while the rest of the dataset
is believed to be the data, that we need to process with NetAllergen (14,786 sequences). As
it was believed that this would be computationally intensive to test our pipeline on this
entire sequence, we aimed to perform a reduction of the dataset.
Figure 8: Frequency of Most frequent PFAMs
By plotting the most frequent PFAMs that were repeated in the allergen alignment
dataset, we were able to curate a database of protein families that we could divide the rest
of the NetAllergen proteins so as to test our pipeline on it. We hypothesized that if we
choose the most frequent in our alligned allergen dataset, and sort the NetAllergen dataset
by these protein families, we would have an ideal dataset to test our prediction pipeline on.
Page 15 of 33
==PAGE:19==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 9: Description of the most frequent PFAMs.Frequencies compared across Allergen
Alligned and NetAllergen subsets
Observing that a large chunk of the data observed in the frequency histogram to be
cytosolic protiens. Figure 8 We mapped the NetAllergen dataset (14,786) sequences to the
rest of the protein descriptions observed inFigure 9.
This analysis yielded approximately 40 PFAMs for further investigation, with a focus
on characterizing their respective proteins and their interrelationships. By applying these
annotations we were able to get a set of 2,273 protein sequences to test the NetAllergen
pipeline that we developed. Through the application and testing of our prediction pipeline,
we successfully generated allergen predictions for these 2,273 protein sequences. Notably,
among these sequences, approximately 1,095 were predicted to be allergens by NetAllergen.
5.2
Preliminary NetAllergen Results
Once we passed the 2273 sequences in the NetAllergen pipeline, we stratified the 2273
protein families by the 40 key PFAMs(Protein Families) and evaluated whether these protein
families allowed us to better predict the results from NetAllergen.
Page 16 of 33
==PAGE:20==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 10: Description of the most frequent PFAMs,in the NetAllergen Subset
It is interesting to note that out of the 2273 proteins evaluated using the most frequent
PFAMs, only 48% were predicted to be allergen proteins according to NetAllergen. This
result goes to show that there is seemingly no clear-cut-relation between the most frequent
PFAMs in the aligned allergen dataset and those same PFAMs in the NetAllergen subset.
However upon closer evaluation of Figure 11. We can see that there are certain families with
higher co-relations with the NetAllergen predictions.
Thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase (ResA) and the 3-oxoacyl-(acyl-carrier-protein) reductase
FabG seemed to not particularly show any relation based on our selection criteria. However,
Thioredoxin and subsequent thioredoxin-like proteins (such YtpP, YdbP,C1) were found to
be allergen-causing proteins from NetAllergen.
Thioredoxins are small proteins that play a crucial role in maintaining cellular redox
(oxidation-reduction) balance within living cells. Its primary function is to act as a reducing
agent, meaning it helps to keep other proteins in their reduced and active state by donating
electrons to them.
It’s worth noting that some allergenic proteins are known to interact with or be regulated
by thioredoxin(specifically in wheat and yeast). For example, certain allergens have been
shown to contain disulfide bonds that can be reduced by thioredoxin, potentially affecting
their allergenicity. [36] Interstingly enough, sub families of Thioredoxin, such as Thiore-
doxin8, seems to have a negative co-relation with the protein prediction observed. However,
this relation is not backed up sufficiently by literature and needs to be studied further.
Additionally of the remaining groups, Protein isomerases also show some significant
relations between the allergen predictions. Protein isomerases, specifically prolyl isomerases,
play a significant role in the folding and structural stability of proteins. A study of certain
thiol protein isomerases investigates the role of thiol isomerase protein disulfide isomerase
Page 17 of 33
==PAGE:21==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
in mast cell-mediated allergic responses and finds that PDI, a thiol isomerase, is involved in
mast cell-mediated allergic responses and that inhibiting PDI can have suppressive effects
on mast cell activation and allergic symptoms. [37]
Another abundant PFAM present in the 2273 sequences was alpha-amylases and neop-
ullulanases. Alpha-amylases have been more extensively studied in the context of allergenic-
ity, especially in occupational settings and their potential to cross-react with food allergens.
Bakers exposed to high levels of these enzymes may develop allergies, particularly if they
inhale dust or aerosolized enzyme particles[38]. Some individuals sensitized to occupational
alpha-amylases may exhibit cross-reactivity to related allergenic proteins in foods, such as
amylase/trypsin inhibitors (ATIs) found in wheat. This cross-reactivity can contribute to
wheat allergy.[39] [40]. Neopullanases are similar to alpa amylases in their responsibilities
in breaking down complex starches in the food industry. However, suffcient studies haven’t
been conducted pertaining to their allergenicity.
5.3
Phylum & Class diversities in the NetAllergen
Within the NetAllergen subset, we also consequently evaluated the phylogenic species
and class diversity, of the samples.
This was done to identify the potentially abundant
species, in our allergen dataset. We find 9 phyla to be predominant in our predicted subset
(1095 predictions made via NetAllergen)
Figure 11: Plot to evaluate the most frequent Phyla that the predicted allergen proteins
belong to
It is observed that over 68% of the allergens predicted from the metagenomes belong to
bacterial species within the phyla Clostridia, Bacteroidetes, and Bacilli.
Additionally, it is imperative to note, that the 1095 predicted allergens belonged to the
Page 18 of 33
==PAGE:22==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
metagenomes of 584 children/samples. The country-wise split of the alignment data is as
follows Figure 12
Figure 12
It is interesting to point out, that even though the samples from Sweden are approxi-
mately 5% of the total samples in the dataset, Out of the aligned data, it appears that they
are responsible for over 26.5% of the alignment data, Similarly Bangladesh also appears to
have significantly more allergen protein distribution given the total number of metagenomes
that are originated from there (0.8% of the total samples). This could suggest that genomes
from these places have higher microbial diversity, however, these need to be further investi-
gated before any conclusions can be drawn.
Furthermore, we aimed to investigate further the phyla of bacterial species responsible
for 68% of the predicted allergen data. Initially, this dataset was stratified by country to
identify any discernible patternsFigure 13. Clostridia emerged as the most abundant class.
It exhibited significant over-representation in the metagenomes from Sweden, the US, and
New Zealand, with New Zealand displaying a notably higher abundance than the other two
classes. To gain deeper insights into the impact of these classes, we intend to evaluate their
effects by analyzing the relevant phylogenetic families within these three classes.
Page 19 of 33
==PAGE:23==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 13: Predicted allergen distribution stratified by Country.
5.3.1
Evaluation of Bacili composition amongst predicted proteins
Upon initial examination of the graphFigure 14, it becomes evident that the most abun-
dant taxonomic families are Lactobacillaceae and Enterococcaceae, followed by Bacilli and
Staphylococcaceae. Extensive research in allergen literature was conducted to uncover po-
tential relationships between these families and allergen sensitivity.
Figure 14
In a study investigating the effects of Lactobacillus strains on milk allergenicity sever-
ity in mice, the presence of Lactobacillaceae, Enterococcaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, and
Clostridiales in the microbiome of sensitized mice with reduced allergenic reactions sug-
gested that these species could influence allergenicity[41].
Another review paper on the
role of commensal microbiota in dietary allergen tolerance regulation found differences in
microbiota composition between healthy infants and allergic infants, with increased abun-
Page 20 of 33
==PAGE:24==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
dance of Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae in allergic infants[42]. Staphylococcaceae
has also been associated with allergenic reactions to asthma, with non-asthmatic individ-
uals displaying higher microbiome diversity, including Lachnospiraceae, Staphylococcaceae,
Streptococcaceae, Carnobacteriaceae, Fusobacteriaceae, and Peptostreptococcaceae [43][44].
5.3.2
Evaluation of Bacteroidetes composition amongst predicted proteins
When we conducted an in-depth analysis of predictions based on the phyla Bacteroidetes,
we uncovered some noteworthy findingsFigure 15. Specifically, we observed that Bacteroidaceae,
Bacteroidia, and Porphyromonadaceae are among the most abundant families present in the
predicted data. This observation aligns with the taxonomic distribution we encountered.
In support of our findings, a comprehensive study comparing the microbiota composition of
wild-type mice and susceptible mice (IL4raF709) revealed intriguing results. It indicated a
clear over-representation of certain bacterial families, namely Porphyromonadaceae, Lach-
nospiraceae, Lactobacillaceae, and Rikenellaceae, in the microbiota of food-allergic mice [45].
This discovery adds weight to the hypothesis that specific bacterial taxa, particularly within
Bacteroidetes, may play a significant role in the development or exacerbation of food aller-
gies. To further explore this notion, another study ventured into the realm of fecal microbiota
transplants (FMT). This investigation sought to unravel the potential transmission of food
allergy susceptibility through the transfer of gastrointestinal microbiota[46].
Figure 15: Distribution of family counts within phyla Bacteroidetes
Page 21 of 33
==PAGE:25==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
5.3.3
Evaluation of Clostridia composition amongst predicted proteins
From the graph belowFigure 17, it is evident that Clostridiaceae, Ruminococcaceae,
and Clostridia are prominent. We, therefore, explored the link between clostridia and aller-
gens and identified a relationship between Clostridia and the accumulation of colonic Tregs
(CD4+ T cells) in mice [47]. Clostridia became prominent after weaning and persisted in
adult animals, in contrast to Lactobacillus or Enterobacteriaceae, which were more abun-
dant during the neonatal period and declined thereafter. In this study, colonization of the
microbiota by Clostridium species proved more effective in suppressing peanut-specific IgE
and anaphylaxis, suggesting unique regulatory properties of the Clostridia consortium com-
pared to monocolonization with a single Bacteroides species (B. uniformis)[45][48]. It has
also been found that the presence of certain Clostridium bacteria in the gut of mice may lead
to lower levels of IgE-specific antibodies. In another study, children with milk allergies that
resolved over time were found to have gut microbiomes enriched in Clostridia and Firmicutes
compared to those whose milk allergy persisted[49].
Figure 16: Distribution of family counts within Clostridia
5.4
Evaluation of distribution of data in the bins
Once the protein families were evaluated in the subset, the natural follow-up would be
to evaluate the rest of the proteins present in the 14,796 sequences present in the NetAllergen
Page 22 of 33
==PAGE:26==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
dataset. The pipeline created was able to successfully run on the nearly 15,000 sequences
present in the NetAllergen set, and together, we combined the Alligned allergens set, to form
the predicted allergen proteins set. The sequences were divided in short fasta sequences of
around 500 proteins in length. Once these predictions were compiled, we aimed to evaluate
the distribution of protein families in the bins. The unique 7140 bins from the aligned data
were analyzed and stratified by country.
Figure 17: Distribution of family counts within Clostridia
We used the Cluster of Orthologous Genes, in order to better classify our protein fam-
ilies, The Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COGs) database has been devised
as a way to allow phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete microbial genomes
[50].
Using this database allows us flexibility to make our analysis more holistic, Apart
from the straightforward functional annotation of sequenced genomes, it also allows us for
the identification of missing and/or undetected genes in the microbiome, and prediction of
novel functional systems. It basically allows us to account for the proteins that were associ-
ated as “putative” and “hypothetical” and allows us to account for this data loss by finding
the proteins that were the closest to marking to it the closest orthologous proteins. Some
modifications in terms of clustering the different categories have been made for clarity. For
example, some proteins were categorized as C, CE and CEK according to the COG database,
C: corresponds to Energy production and conversion, CE is involved in the Metabolism of
coenzymes and prosthetic groups, these Co-enzymes are vital in the energy-producing path-
ways. CEK corresponds to Nucleotide transport and metabolism, which play roles in energy
Page 23 of 33
==PAGE:27==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Table 2: COG Codes and Their Functions
COG
Function
A
RNA processing and modification
B
Chromatin Structure and dynamics
C
Energy production and conversion
D
Cell cycle control and mitosis
E
Amino Acid metabolism and transport
F
Nucleotide metabolism and transport
G
Carbohydrate metabolism and transport
H
Co-enzyme metabolism
I
Lipid metabolism
J
Translation
K
Transcription
L
Replication and repair
M
Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis
N
Cell motility
O
Post-translational modification, protein turnover, chaperone functions
P
Inorganic ion transport and metabolism
Q
Secondary Structure
T
Signal Transduction
U
Intracellular trafficking and secretion
Y
Nuclear structure
Z
Cytoskeleton
R
General Functional Prediction only
S
Function Unknown
production as components of molecules like ATP. As such we classify all these as C (En-
ergy production and conversion) Similarly the rest of the COG’s have been color coded to
facilitate the fact that the functional groups are different, but also retain some semblance
of similarity. The graphs of only bins from Bangladesh, Estonia, Italy, Sweden, UK and
US were chosen as the remaining countries had too few bins to make meaningful statistical
classificationsFigure 18. Upon looking at the distribution of the protein families within each
bin, we hoped to identify if the bins that aligned to allergens in our database were clustered
by having similar protein families.We are able to observe that in general when the we look at
the bins that have at minimum a frequency of 10 allergen proteins, we are able to see some
mild clustering. In bins that have counts between 10-20, we observe a significant portion of
them across all countries belong to the functional annotations of E, F and G, which belong
to the functional groups of amino acid metabolism and transport Nucleotide metabolism
and transport.
Page 24 of 33
==PAGE:28==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 18: Abundance of protein annotations COGs in Bins
Interestingly enough, given the similarity of function, it would make sense that these
protein families are generally found together in the same bins. The ones that have over 100
counts in terms of abundance, we find that these bins correspond to very different functional
groups. For example in the bins with over 100 counts in Italy and the UK, we find that
these bins contain proteins from Energy Production, Lipid metabolism, Post-translational
modification, and Ion transport and metabolism. This however makes some sense as this
is owing to the fact that if a bin has many proteins, it increases the likelihood of it having
multiple protein families. It’s also interesting to note that some of the groups in Sweden
contain large bins, which have proteins of the functional group Translation, and transcription.
Given that translation and transcription are generally associated with protein synthesis(and
owing to the fact that CD-HIT performs clustering based on sequence similarity), it would
make sense that they would be clustered in the same bins.
Following the analysis of protein families by bins, the natural follow-up to our analyses
seemed to be to evaluate whether the bins seemed to show any grouping based on the
bacterial families. Bins were grouped and sorted by species, and sub-species, stratified by
country. With nearly a thousand bins representing data from all 11 countries in the dataset,
initially, no clear-cut observations emerged due to the multitude of species under evaluation.
However, after applying a minimum count filter of 20, the remaining bins revealed distinct
groupings based on phylogenetic classes.Figure 19
Page 25 of 33
==PAGE:29==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 19: Abundance of bacterial diversity of the bins
To further elucidate this performance we stratified the bins data by country and we
were able to see the following trends. It becomes quite ubiquitous that bins having more
than 20 counts in the predicted allergen dataset were being clustered by their phylogenetic
classes. Figure 20
It’s very interesting to note, that the bins of Bangladesh and Estonia, seemed to be
significantly composed of Bacteroidetes and Bacili, while New Zealand seems to have signfi-
cant bins of Clostridia species. While there are very bins with enough data to warrant this
criterion, it doesn’t allow to deduce anything conclusive. However, The regions of Sweden,
US and UK have significantly higher bacterial families in their bins, most notably of the
class of clostridia. Given the relationships observed between diversity of Clostridia in the
gut and allergenic sensitivity, this could be very interesting to look into further. Italy also
poses some interesting data as it contains a very diverse array of bins containing species
ranging from Alphaproteobacteria,to Bacilli &Bacteriodetes, to Gammaproteobacteria.
Page 26 of 33
==PAGE:30==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 20: Abundance of bacterial diversity of the bins stratified by Country
It would be interesting to explore the diversities of proteins and corresponding bacteria
data in Samples. Since literature shows, that a a greater diversity in the gut microbiome
can contribute to lower chances of being allergenic, further analyses of the sample diversity
could paint a picture of which children from this study could display a strong sensitivity to
allergens and which children wouldn’t.
5.4.1
Evaluation of the distribution of protein families in samples
Figure 21: Abundance of protein families of the samples stratified by Country
Page 27 of 33
==PAGE:31==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Upon initially evaluating the protein distribution among sample data, we note that
Russia, Luxembourg, and Finland have very minimal protein families in their data, and it
seems a lot of samples don’t have a single protein bound to the allergens that we provided.
This could indicate a lack of microbial diversity, but more probabilistically it would indicate
that allergen proteins that we have evaluated don’t seem to be prevalent in the samples from
these regions.
Interestingly enough, even though Bangladesh and Singapore didn’t have
many samples in the study, a fair amount of them were showing a lot of protein families
present in them, this could be an indicator of diverse microbiomes present in children from
Asia. However, we don’t have nearly enough samples from both these countries to draw any
meaningful conclusion from those graphs. Interestingly enough, the samples from Sweden
seemed to be showing alignments with multiple allergen proteins, with samples on average
having 23.6 alignments with different allergen proteins. While the UK has lower protein
families present in the aligned data. Figure 24
Figure 22: Abundance of bacteria of the samples stratified by Country
A key aspect to note is that of the 6122 samples (children’s data) that formed the crux
of the dataset of the 4 million proteins. Only 2192 of these samples were found to have
allergen proteins that we have evaluated. This goes to show that a large section of the
data seems to not have any alignments with our allergen database. However, when trying
to plot the graph, we found that there were still 72 unique species present amongst the
2192 samples. This was difficult to visualize in a legible way, so we only analyzed those
samples that had at least two counts of bacteria species in the analysis. This allows us to
visualize the 910 remaining data points, over 29 classes. Similar to the study with bins,
we were able to observe that Bangladesh and Estonia had predominantly the same type of
analysis, both countries had data with significantly more abundant species of Bacteroidetes
and Bacili, however, it was observable that some children’s data showed some interestingly
diverse bacterias present in the systems (Presence of Clostridia, Betaproteobacteria and
Page 28 of 33
==PAGE:32==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Actinobacteria). Italy had a very varied bacterial abundance with Gammaproteobacteria,
Bacili, Clostridia, Alphaproteobacteria and Neisseraeriales all showing abundancies. What
is rather interesting to observe is that what can be considered Developed countries (Sweden,
the US, and the UK) show a lot of abundancies of various bacterial classes in their samples,
particularly Sweden and the US having nearly 60% of the data comprising of Clostridia, Bacili
and Bacteroidetes. Given the variations from what we consider to be developing countries
(Bangladesh and Estonia, are predominantly dominated by Bacili and Bacteroidetes). This
could suggest that socio-economic factors seem to have some kind of impact on what allergy
proteins and which species of allergy proteins are found in samples.
5.5
Evaluation of feeding type on bacterial abundance
We aimed to visualize the abundance of bacterial allergen protein species based on feed
type. However, one of the limitations of evaluating it this way, was that not all Countries had
data pertaining to feeding methods for the children. Only samples from Italy, Sweden, UK,
and the US had the feed metrics calculated. To plot the trends of abundance, we counted
the amount of different allergen proteins present in each sample, and we colored the data
based on the feed method used.
Figure 23: Abundance of allergen protein bacteria based on Feed technique
Upon analyzing the values of the average amount of allergen proteins present by each
method, we find that via breastfeeding we obtain an average of 23.04 allergen proteins in each
sample, while combined provides us with 19.02 allergen proteins in each sample that utilizes
Page 29 of 33
==PAGE:33==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
this method of feeding. Lastly, feeding via only formula, has an average of 9.43 allergen
proteins per sample. This shows that the presence of allergen proteins takes a signficant dip,
when formula feeding is done. This could adhere to the fact, that formula feeding seems to
correlate with low levels of gutmicrobiome diversity[51]. However, just analyzing the samples
of allergen data isn’t sufficient to arrive at this conclusions and further studies need to be
conducted.
5.6
Comparison between AlgPred2 and NetAllergen
As a part of a sub-study we aimed to analyze the performance of the NetAllergen
pipeline in our current context, and cross-examine the predictions made by NetAllergen
with predictions made with another Allergen protein predictor (viz AlgPred2). The 2273
protein sequences used in the designing of the NetAllergen pipeline are the same amount of
proteins that were used to generate the predictions on AlgPred2. The highest performing
model of AlgPred2 (hybrid, combining sequence similarity, known motifs, and ML where
used to generate the predictions). The thresholds for both the prediction algorithms were
set to the same scores.
To evaluate this metric, we evaluated the similarities using Jaccard’s coefficient matrix
and using the measurement of concordance.
Table 3: Table 1: Similarity measurements
Similarity Measurement
Similarity Score
Jaccard’s Coefficient
0.45
Concordance
0.61
Even though the concordance metric gives us the performance of 61% between both
the algorithms. The confusion matrix Table 4 and the Jaccard similarity index Table 3
provide valuable insights into the performance of the algorithms. While both AlgPred2 and
NetAllergen predict a similar number of allergens, the overlap in their predictions (698)
suggests that they agree on a smaller subset of proteins.
Table 4: Confusion Matrix
AlgPred2
0
1
NetAllergen
0
662
413
1
426
698
Page 30 of 33
==PAGE:34==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Figure 24: Top 10 Annotations with most discrepancies between AlgPred2 and NetAllergen
Out of these discrepancy proteins, it is noted that ResA (Thioldisulfide oxidoreductase
which is required in disulfide reduction during c-type cytochrome synthesis), the discrepancy
could be explained by the fact that these proteins have varied MHC binding sites, and as a
result NetAllergen doesn’t deem it above the required threshold to quantify as prediction.
Given that Allergenicity is a complex property influenced by various factors, including protein
structure, binding affinity to IgE antibodies, and immune response. It is unclear as to exactly
why these proteins are showing discrepancies, but this could be down to a plethora of factors
maybe in the algortihm threshold values. These proteins require further investigation, and
perhaps along with the ground truth proteins, we could study the protein families much
more in depth to arrive at more meaningful conclusions.
6
Discussions
Overall, the work conducted in this thesis lays the foundation for evaluating predicted
allergenic proteins in the gut microbiome. A pipeline was successfully created to overcome
the major challenges encountered when using MHC Class II binding sites to assess allergenic
proteins. This pipeline enables the use of NetAllergen to predict the allergenicity of a large
number of protein sequences by employing parallelized feature generation. This allows an
already high-performing algorithm (NetAllergen) to predict a large number of proteins with
efficiency. The prediction of allergenic proteins has potential applications in various studies
within the pharmaceutical sciences, aiding in drug development (allergen protein prediction
is a critical step in the development of allergen-based immunotherapy).
By utilizing alignment and knowledge of similarities, we can divide the protein dataset,
reducing the computational load compared to using protein structures and other features to
predict allergens. The effectiveness of alignment techniques should not be underestimated;
however, a carefully curated approach ensures a more holistic analysis. Four million protein
sequences were aligned with our curated allergen dataset, resulting in 39,715 sequences.
Of these, 24,869 sequences exhibited high similarities with known allergens. By analyzing
the remaining 14,843 protein sequences with NetAllergen, we predicted an additional 7,816
sequences that we believe are allergens with a high degree of certainty. This represents a
Page 31 of 33
==PAGE:35==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
23% increase in predicted allergen data compared to using simple alignment alone.
Additionally, we studied the relationship between prominent protein families in the pre-
dicted allergen protein dataset and established connections explaining why these proteins
are prominently present in allergens. For instance, when analyzing the frequency of Thiore-
doxins and their NetAllergen predictions, we ascertained that allergens are known to contain
disulfide bonds that can be reduced by thioredoxin, potentially affecting their allergenicity
(Buchanan et al., 1997). Similarly, Thiol polymerases have been shown to be involved in mast
cell-mediated allergic responses (Krajewski et al., 2020). The frequency of alpha-amylases
and neopullanases in our predicted protein dataset corresponds to their role in bakers’ aller-
gies to wheat. This correlation was further supported by evaluating which allergens in the
database these proteins were found in.
Furthermore, we studied protein families and their functions using the COG databases
(Tatusov et al., 2000). We found that the bins somewhat grouped similar proteins, such as
different kinds of transport proteins, translation, and transformation protein groups, within
the same bin data. However, this classification did not seem to hold when the annotations of
protein families in a bin exceeded 100 counts. This discrepancy is hypothesized to be due to
the presence of various similar sequence IDs with multiple functions. Further investigation
is needed to understand the reasons behind this.
We also conducted a study on bacterial abundances and diversity, drawing some interest-
ing conclusions. It was intriguing to observe that Bangladesh and Estonia, both developing
countries, exhibited significantly different abundances of different species of Bacteria and
Bacilli compared to developed countries like the US, UK, and Sweden. They were also found
to lack allergen proteins for Clostridia compared to the developed countries. This may indi-
cate the influence of socio-economic factors on the diversity of allergy-related proteins in the
gut. However, given that only 2,192 samples matched the allergen protein database, it is ev-
ident that to draw concrete conclusions, the entire gut microbiome of the remaining samples
needs further study. This suggests that a more diverse allergen database may be required
for accurate protein predictions. Unfortunately, the presence of allergen proteins alone does
not allow us to assess their importance in predicting individual allergen sensitivity, as the
children’s allergy status remains unclear. To evaluate the impact of allergen proteins in the
gut microbiome, longitudinal data on individuals’ allergen sensitivity would be necessary.
Additionally, apart from assessing bacterial diversity among individuals stratified by
country, we also evaluated the impact of feeding methods on the presence of allergen proteins.
Interestingly, it was noted that breast-feeding and combined-feeding methods showed little
variance in allergenic protein abundance. However, exclusive formula feeding resulted in
significantly lower levels of allergen protein abundance in infants. This finding aligns with
previous research suggesting that formula feeding correlates with reduced gut microbiome
diversity in infants (Ma et al., 2020). However, owing to the small size of available feeding
data, more studies would be required before we can make more insightful conclusions.
The performance of NetAllergen v/s AlgPred2 posed a lot of interesting questions. Even
though both algorithms seemed to agree with each other on 61% of the predicted data(both
Allergen and Non-Allergen). It was quite interesting to note, they had signifcantly different
predictions for values of ResA,FabG and neo-pullanases protein families. This is mainly
theorized to be due to the fact, that these proteins have been shown to have varied binding
Page 32 of 33
==PAGE:36==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
locations to mhcClassii which are responsible for the antigen presentation and subsequent
allergenic reactions. Further studies should incorporate the ground truth (knowledge about
allergenicity), so we can more readily evaluate which predicted allergens are more accurate
and hypothesize why they do so.
7
Conclusion and Final Remarks
In conclusion, this thesis has laid the groundwork for the evaluation of predicted allergen
proteins within the gut microbiome, offering a novel pipeline that overcomes the challenges
associated with MHC Class II binding site analysis. The successful development of this
pipeline, coupled with the utilization of NetAllergen for allergenicity prediction through par-
allelized feature generation, has facilitated the efficient prediction of a substantial number of
protein sequences. This research holds immense promise for pharmaceutical sciences, partic-
ularly in aiding drug development, including allergen-based immunotherapy. By harnessing
alignment techniques and knowledge of similarities, we’ve significantly reduced the compu-
tational load involved in predicting allergens, demonstrating the efficacy of this approach.
Notably, our approach led to a remarkable 23% increase in the prediction of allergenic pro-
teins compared to simple alignment. Furthermore, our study has unveiled valuable insights
into the relationships between prominent protein families and allergen proteins, shedding
light on potential mechanisms underlying allergenicity.
While these findings mark significant progress, further research is warranted to explore the
full scope of the gut microbiome’s impact on allergen protein diversity and its potential
association with socio-economic factors. Moreover, the presence of allergen proteins in the
gut raises intriguing questions about their role in predicting allergen sensitivity, emphasizing
the need to evaluate our pipeline on longitudinal studies. Lastly, our investigation into the
influence of feeding methods on allergen protein abundance underscores the importance of
early-life nutrition on gut microbiome diversity and allergen presence.
In the realm of allergenicity, the intricate puzzle of identifying allergen proteins is akin to
working with puzzles with a large number of pieces. This thesis represents a significant stride
toward assembling this intricate puzzle, offering valuable contributions to our understanding
of allergen proteins within the gut microbiome. However, it’s important to acknowledge the
multifaceted nature of allergenicity. Like puzzle pieces, allergen proteins are diverse and
elusive, often influenced by a multitude of factors.There are still many uncharted territories
and unanswered questions. Nonetheless, this thesis marks an important step forward, offering
a more comprehensive view of allergen proteins and their potential impact. As we continue
to gather and connect these puzzle pieces, we inch closer to the day when we can unveil the
complete picture of allergenicity and its complex interplay with the gut microbiome.
Page 33 of 33
==PAGE:37==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
List of Figures
1
Type of Hypersensitivity Reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Gut Microbiome diversity of infants from azad et al. 2015[17] . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Features of the ELGP dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Pipeline used in the study to generate ELGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Predictive pipeline used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6
NetAllergen outperforming BLAST when sequence dissimilarity increases . .
11
7
AUC for Comparison of BLAST, NetAllergen(RF-56F) and Algpred2. . . . .
14
8
Frequency of Most frequent PFAMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
9
Description of the most frequent PFAMs.Frequencies compared across Aller-
gen Alligned and NetAllergen subsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
10
Description of the most frequent PFAMs,in the NetAllergen Subset
. . . . .
17
11
Plot to evaluate the most frequent Phyla that the predicted allergen proteins
belong to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
13
Predicted allergen distribution stratified by Country.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
14
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
15
Distribution of family counts within phyla Bacteroidetes
. . . . . . . . . . .
21
16
Distribution of family counts within Clostridia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
17
Distribution of family counts within Clostridia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
18
Abundance of protein annotations COGs in Bins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
19
Abundance of bacterial diversity of the bins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
20
Abundance of bacterial diversity of the bins stratified by Country . . . . . .
27
21
Abundance of protein families of the samples stratified by Country . . . . . .
27
22
Abundance of bacteria of the samples stratified by Country . . . . . . . . . .
28
23
Abundance of allergen protein bacteria based on Feed technique . . . . . . .
29
24
Top 10 Annotations with most discrepancies between AlgPred2 and NetAllergen 31
Page I of VIII
==PAGE:38==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
List of Tables
1
Comparison of Epitope Prediction Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
COG Codes and Their Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Table 1: Similarity measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Confusion Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Page II of VIII
==PAGE:39==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
Nomenclature
CAZyme Carbohydrate-activated enzymes
CGE Center of Genomic Epidemiology
COG Clusters of Orthologous genes
ELGP Early Life Gut Proteins
MAG Metagenome-assembled genomes
PFAMs Protein Families
Page III of VIII
==PAGE:40==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
References
[1] D. G. Peroni, G. Nuzzi, I. Trambusti, M. E. Di Cicco, and P. Comberiati, “Micro-
biome composition and its impact on the development of allergic diseases,” Frontiers in
immunology, vol. 11, p. 700, 2020.
[2] T. Rajan,
“The gell–coombs classification of hypersensitivity reactions:
a re-
interpretation,” TRENDS in Immunology, vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 376–379, 2003.
[3] Y. Persaud, Allergy Immunotherapy. StatPearls Publishing, 2023.
[4] Z. Fu and J. Lin, “An overview of bioinformatics tools and resources in allergy,” Food
Allergens: Methods and Protocols, pp. 223–245, 2017.
[5] R. C. Aalberse, “Structural biology of allergens,” Journal of allergy and clinical im-
munology, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 228–238, 2000.
[6] S. Saha and G. P. S. Raghava, “Algpred: prediction of allergenic proteins and mapping
of ige epitopes,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 34, no. suppl_2, pp. W202–W209, 2006.
[7] T. P. Hopp and K. R. Woods, “Prediction of protein antigenic determinants from
amino acid sequences.,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 78, no. 6,
pp. 3824–3828, 1981.
[8] C. Lundegaard, O. Lund, S. Buus, and M. Nielsen, “Major histocompatibility complex
class i binding predictions as a tool in epitope discovery,” Immunology, vol. 130, no. 3,
pp. 309–318, 2010.
[9] H. F. Rosenberg and K. D. Dyer, “Eosinophil cationic protein and eosinophil-derived
neurotoxin: Evolution of novel function in a primate ribonuclease gene family (),” Jour-
nal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 270, no. 37, pp. 21539–21544, 1995.
[10] A. Kolaskar and U. Kulkarni-Kale, “Prediction of three-dimensional structure and map-
ping of conformational epitopes of envelope glycoprotein of japanese encephalitis virus,”
Virology, vol. 261, no. 1, pp. 31–42, 1999.
[11] I. A. Doytchinova and D. R. Flower, “Toward the quantitative prediction of t-cell epi-
topes: comfa and comsia studies of peptides with affinity for the class i mhc molecule
hla-a* 0201,” Journal of medicinal chemistry, vol. 44, no. 22, pp. 3572–3581, 2001.
[12] O. Schueler-Furman, Y. Altuvia, A. Sette, and H. Margalit, “Structure-based prediction
of binding peptides to mhc class i molecules: application to a broad range of mhc
alleles,” Protein Science, vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 1838–1846, 2000.
[13] A. Logean and D. Rognan, “Recovery of known t-cell epitopes by computational scan-
ning of a viral genome,” Journal of computer-aided molecular design, vol. 16, pp. 229–
243, 2002.
Page IV of VIII
==PAGE:41==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
[14] K. Yu, N. Petrovsky, C. Schönbach, J. L. Koh, and V. Brusic, “Methods for prediction
of peptide binding to mhc molecules: a comparative study,” Molecular medicine, vol. 8,
pp. 137–148, 2002.
[15] J. H. Savage, K. A. Lee-Sarwar, J. Sordillo, S. Bunyavanich, Y. Zhou, G. O’Connor,
M. Sandel, L. B. Bacharier, R. Zeiger, E. Sodergren, et al., “A prospective microbiome-
wide association study of food sensitization and food allergy in early childhood,” Allergy,
vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 145–152, 2018.
[16] S. H. Sicherer and H. A. Sampson, “Food allergy: a review and update on epidemiology,
pathogenesis, diagnosis, prevention, and management,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, vol. 141, no. 1, pp. 41–58, 2018.
[17] M. B. Azad, T. Konya, D. S. Guttman, C. Field, M. Sears, K. HayGlass, P. Mandhane,
S. Turvey, P. Subbarao, A. Becker, et al., “Infant gut microbiota and food sensitization:
associations in the first year of life,” Clinical & Experimental Allergy, vol. 45, no. 3,
pp. 632–643, 2015.
[18] D. C. Rennie, C. P. Karunanayake, Y. Chen, J. A. Lawson, L. Hagel, A. Senthilselvan,
P. Pahwa, J. A. Dosman, and S. R. C. S. Group, “Early farm residency and prevalence
of asthma and hay fever in adults,” Journal of Asthma, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 2–10, 2016.
[19] Y. Jie, Z. M. Isa, X. Jie, Z. L. Ju, and N. H. Ismail, “Urban vs. rural factors that affect
adult asthma,” Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology Volume 226,
pp. 33–63, 2013.
[20] M. Ege, M. Mayer, K. Schwaiger, J. Mattes, G. Pershagen, M. Van Hage, A. Scheynius,
J. Bauer, and E. Von Mutius, “Environmental bacteria and childhood asthma,” Allergy,
vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 1565–1571, 2012.
[21] C.-Y. Chiu, Y.-L. Chan, M.-H. Tsai, C.-J. Wang, M.-H. Chiang, and C.-C. Chiu, “Gut
microbial dysbiosis is associated with allergen-specific ige responses in young children
with airway allergies,” World Allergy Organization Journal, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 100021,
2019.
[22] W. David Boothe, J. A. Tarbox, and M. B. Tarbox, “Atopic dermatitis: pathophysiol-
ogy,” Management of atopic dermatitis: methods and challenges, pp. 21–37, 2017.
[23] K. E. Fujimura, A. R. Sitarik, S. Havstad, D. L. Lin, S. Levan, D. Fadrosh, A. R. Panzer,
B. LaMere, E. Rackaityte, N. W. Lukacs, et al., “Neonatal gut microbiota associates
with childhood multisensitized atopy and t cell differentiation,” Nature medicine, vol. 22,
no. 10, pp. 1187–1191, 2016.
[24] K. B. Fieten, J. E. Totte, E. Levin, M. Reyman, Y. Meijer, A. Knulst, F. Schuren, and
S. G. Pasmans, “Fecal microbiome and food allergy in pediatric atopic dermatitis: a
cross-sectional pilot study,” International archives of allergy and immunology, vol. 175,
no. 1-2, pp. 77–84, 2018.
Page V of VIII
==PAGE:42==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
[25] M. Braga, C. Quecchia, C. Perotta, A. Timpini, K. Maccarinelli, L. Di Tommaso,
and M. Di Gioacchino, “Systemic nickel allergy syndrome: nosologic framework and
usefulness of diet regimen for diagnosis,” International Journal of Immunopathology
and Pharmacology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 707–716, 2013.
[26] Z. Fang, W. Lu, J. Zhao, H. Zhang, L. Qian, Q. Wang, and W. Chen, “Probiotics
modulate the gut microbiota composition and immune responses in patients with atopic
dermatitis: a pilot study,” European journal of nutrition, vol. 59, pp. 2119–2130, 2020.
[27] S. Zeng, D. Patangia, A. Almeida, Z. Zhou, D. Mu, R. Paul Ross, C. Stanton, and
S. Wang, “A compendium of 32,277 metagenome-assembled genomes and over 80 million
genes from the early-life human gut microbiome,” Nature Communications, vol. 13,
no. 1, p. 5139, 2022.
[28] R. E. Goodman, M. Ebisawa, F. Ferreira, H. A. Sampson, R. van Ree, S. Vieths, J. L.
Baumert, B. Bohle, S. Lalithambika, J. Wise, et al., “Allergenonline: a peer-reviewed,
curated allergen database to assess novel food proteins for potential cross-reactivity,”
Molecular nutrition & food research, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1183–1198, 2016.
[29] Y. Li, P. W. Sackett, M. Nielsen, and C. Barra, “Netallergen, a random forest model in-
tegrating mhc-ii presentation propensity for improved allergenicity prediction,” bioRxiv,
pp. 2022–09, 2022.
[30] C. P. Cantalapiedra, A. Hernández-Plaza, I. Letunic, P. Bork, and J. Huerta-Cepas,
“eggnog-mapper v2: functional annotation, orthology assignments, and domain pre-
diction at the metagenomic scale,” Molecular biology and evolution, vol. 38, no. 12,
pp. 5825–5829, 2021.
[31] R. L. Tatusov, M. Y. Galperin, D. A. Natale, and E. V. Koonin, “The cog database:
a tool for genome-scale analysis of protein functions and evolution,” Nucleic acids re-
search, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 33–36, 2000.
[32] M. Steinegger and J. Söding, “Mmseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for
the analysis of massive data sets,” Nature biotechnology, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 1026–1028,
2017.
[33] E. Noguchi, M. Akiyama, A. Yagami, T. Hirota, Y. Okada, Z. Kato, R. Kishikawa,
Y. Fukutomi, M. Hide, E. Morita, et al., “Hla-dq and rbfox1 as susceptibility genes for
an outbreak of hydrolyzed wheat allergy,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology,
vol. 144, no. 5, pp. 1354–1363, 2019.
[34] M. H. Høie, E. N. Kiehl, B. Petersen, M. Nielsen, O. Winther, H. Nielsen, J. Hallgren,
and P. Marcatili, “Netsurfp-3.0: accurate and fast prediction of protein structural fea-
tures by protein language models and deep learning,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 50,
no. W1, pp. W510–W515, 2022.
Page VI of VIII
==PAGE:43==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
[35] B. Reynisson, B. Alvarez, S. Paul, B. Peters, and M. Nielsen, “Netmhcpan-4.1 and
netmhciipan-4.0: improved predictions of mhc antigen presentation by concurrent motif
deconvolution and integration of ms mhc eluted ligand data,” Nucleic acids research,
vol. 48, no. W1, pp. W449–W454, 2020.
[36] B. Buchanan, C. Adamidi, R. Lozano, B. Yee, M. Momma, K. Kobrehel, R. Ermel, and
O. Frick, “Thioredoxin-linked mitigation of allergic responses to wheat,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 94, no. 10, pp. 5372–5377, 1997.
[37] D. Krajewski, S. H. Polukort, J. Gelzinis, J. Rovatti, E. Kaczenski, C. Galinski, M. Pan-
tos, N. N. Shah, S. S. Schneider, D. R. Kennedy, et al., “Protein disulfide isomerases
regulate ige-mediated mast cell responses and their inhibition confers protective effects
during food allergy,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 11, p. 606837, 2020.
[38] M.-A. Morren, V. Janssens, A. Dooms-Goossens, E. Van Hoeyveld, A. Cornelis,
C. De Wolf-Peeters, and A. Heremans, “α-amylase, a flour additive: an important
cause of protein contact dermatitis in bakers,” Journal of the American Academy of
Dermatology, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 723–728, 1993.
[39] J. M. James, J. P. Sixbey, R. M. Helm, G. A. Bannon, and A. W. Burks, “Wheat
α-amylase inhibitor: a second route of allergic sensitization,” Journal of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology, vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 239–244, 1997.
[40] E. A. Pastorello, L. Farioli, A. Conti, V. Pravettoni, S. Bonomi, S. Iametti, D. For-
tunato, J. Scibilia, C. Bindslev-Jensen, B. Ballmer-Weber, et al., “Wheat ige-mediated
food allergy in european patients: α-amylase inhibitors, lipid transfer proteins and
low-molecular-weight gluteninsallergenic molecules recognized by double-blind, placebo-
controlled food challenge,” International archives of allergy and immunology, vol. 144,
no. 1, pp. 10–22, 2007.
[41] G. Fu, K. Zhao, H. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Nie, H. Wei, and C. Wan, “Effect of 3 lactobacilli
on immunoregulation and intestinal microbiota in a β-lactoglobulin–induced allergic
mouse model,” Journal of dairy science, vol. 102, no. 3, pp. 1943–1958, 2019.
[42] R. B. Canani, J. A. Gilbert, and C. R. Nagler, “The role of the commensal microbiota in
the regulation of tolerance to dietary allergens,” Current opinion in allergy and clinical
immunology, vol. 15, no. 3, p. 243, 2015.
[43] K. E. Fujimura and S. V. Lynch, “Microbiota in allergy and asthma and the emerging
relationship with the gut microbiome,” Cell host & microbe, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 592–602,
2015.
[44] E. S. Charlson, K. Bittinger, A. R. Haas, A. S. Fitzgerald, I. Frank, A. Yadav, F. D.
Bushman, and R. G. Collman, “Topographical continuity of bacterial populations in
the healthy human respiratory tract,” American journal of respiratory and critical care
medicine, vol. 184, no. 8, pp. 957–963, 2011.
Page VII of VIII
==PAGE:44==
Identification of allergen proteins in the gut microbiome
[45] S. Bunyavanich and M. C. Berin, “Food allergy and the microbiome: Current under-
standings and future directions,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, vol. 144,
no. 6, pp. 1468–1477, 2019.
[46] M. N. Rivas, O. T. Burton, P. Wise, Y.-q. Zhang, S. A. Hobson, M. G. Lloret,
C. Chehoud, J. Kuczynski, T. DeSantis, J. Warrington, et al., “A microbiota signa-
ture associated with experimental food allergy promotes allergic sensitization and ana-
phylaxis,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, vol. 131, no. 1, pp. 201–212,
2013.
[47] K. Atarashi, T. Tanoue, T. Shima, A. Imaoka, T. Kuwahara, Y. Momose, G. Cheng,
S. Yamasaki, T. Saito, Y. Ohba, et al., “Induction of colonic regulatory t cells by in-
digenous clostridium species,” Science, vol. 331, no. 6015, pp. 337–341, 2011.
[48] K. Itoh and T. Mitsuoka, “Characterization of clostridia isolated from faeces of lim-
ited flora mice and their effect on caecal size when associated with germ-free mice,”
Laboratory animals, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 111–118, 1985.
[49] S. Bunyavanich, N. Shen, A. Grishin, R. Wood, W. Burks, P. Dawson, S. M. Jones,
D. Y. Leung, H. Sampson, S. Sicherer, et al., “Early-life gut microbiome composition
and milk allergy resolution,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, vol. 138, no. 4,
pp. 1122–1130, 2016.
[50] R. L. Tatusov, E. V. Koonin, and D. J. Lipman, “A genomic perspective on protein
families,” Science, vol. 278, no. 5338, pp. 631–637, 1997.
[51] J. Ma, Z. Li, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Mei, N. Zhuo, H. Wang, L. Wang, and
D. Wu, “Comparison of gut microbiota in exclusively breast-fed and formula-fed babies:
A study of 91 term infants,” Scientific Reports, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 15792, 2020.
Page VIII of VIII
