==PAGE:1==
Trace element composition of otoliths from ju­
venile flatfish:
The first growth season across the Inner Danish
Waters.
Master Thesis
DTU Aqua
National Institute of Aquatic Resources
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
The first growth season across the Inner Danish Waters.
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Alexandra Drosini
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Kemitorvet Building 202,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.aqua.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Institute of Aquatic research at
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Alexandra Drosini ­ s210211
Signature
Date
ii
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Danish coastal waters are crucial juvenile habitats for various fish species, which later
undergo migration to offshore waters during adulthood, making this life­history migration
vital for both commercial and recreational fisheries. However, the understanding of habi­
tat connectivity and the rates at which different juvenile habitats contribute to adult fish
populations for sustainable harvest remains limited. One instrumental tool employed to
trace the origins of adults back to their juvenile habitats is the analysis of trace elements
within otoliths.
Utilizing pre­collected samples, this study employs Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled
Mass Spectrometry (LA­ICPMS) to analyze trace elements across transects from the
otolith core to the edge. The data obtained will be analyzed to identify common changes in
trace element composition with age across four main areas, Northern kattegat, Southern
kattegat, The Belt Seas, The sound. By exploring the trace element patterns, this re­
search aims to provide insights into the spatial and temporal dynamics of juvenile flatfish
European Plaice Pleuronectes platessa and European flounder Platichthys flesus within
the Inner Danish Waters (IDW). Aims to contribute to a better understanding of popula­
tion connectivity and utilizing unsupervised K­means clustering analysis as a useful tool
for identifying population patterns and their implications for fisheries management.
This master’s thesis will investigate the variability of trace element composition within
the juvenile growth period (from settlement to capture late in their first year). Using pre­
collected samples, Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Mass Spectrometry (LA­ICPMS)
will be employed to analyze the trace elements present in transects from the core of the
otolith to the edge. The data will be analyzed to describe common changes in trace ele­
ment composition with age across various regions and to compare differences between
regions.
The following research questions will be assessed in this study:
1. Is it possible to determine the number of distinct spawning grounds that contribute to
the coastal regions within the Inner Danish Waters by analyzing the chemical otolith
fingerprints of the European Plaice and Flounder?
2. Is it possible with the use of otolith chemistry to discriminate between juvenile indi­
viduals of con­familial species (flounder and plaice), in the case where they coexist
and are captured within the same habitat?
3. Can we detect patterns of the elemental composition of the otoliths that contribute
to the identification of critical habitats and migration behaviors for plaice?
The results of this study identified the number of natal sources that supply the study areas
with settled juveniles of age­0 for both study species. The outcomes concerning juvenile
habitat attributes indicate a lack of linkage to the captured area. Furthermore, the fact that
we saw in this study clusters to have similar patterns of individuals from the core and edge
otolith data at capture time suggests that the elemental signatures are more differentiated
by intrinsic processes than environmental variability across the study area.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Focus Flatfish species. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Otoliths and Their Analytical Applications in Research. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Research questions and hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Materials and Methods
5
2.1
Study Area: The Inner danish waters (IDW) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Otolith Analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Chemical fingerprint in Life stages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Data Analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results
11
3.1
Sample distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Natal sources for Plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Juvenile habitats of Plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Natal sources for Flounder (Platichthys flesus)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Juvenile habitats of Flounder (Platichthys flesus) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Discussion
21
Bibliography
23
iv
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Coastal habitats have been highly exploited by humans, which is a natural consequence
of the growing human population and its needs[1].
This over exploitation can lead to various negative impacts on the environment, affecting
important species, altering fundamental habitats, depleting stocks, and reducing environ­
mental quality. To effectively manage anthropogenic influence and establish appropriate
boundaries for acceptable practices, it is essential to understand how these coastal habi­
tats function and evolve[2]. This includes gaining insights into their requirements and how
environmental changes influence their dynamics. The goal of this holistic approach is to
focus on preserving the balance of ecosystems while nurturing and enhancing the bene­
fits they provide to human communities. The primary objective is to ensure the long­term
health of marine ecosystems and the sustainable support they offer to fisheries.[3]
Estuaries that serve as flatfish nurseries play also an important part of the coastal areas
of the Inner Danish Waters [4]. Many of flatfish species have complex life cycles, includ­
ing of migrations of hundreds of kilometers between coastal areas and inshore nurseries.
Therefore, when developing management and protection plans, it is crucial to consider
the connectivity between these different habitats and what is the effect in the population
dynamics, and productivity. [5]
1.1
Focus Flatfish species.
The two flatfish species in study, European flounder (Platichthys flesus) and plaice (Pleu­
ronectes platessa) are found in Europe’s continental shelf waters. Flatfish development
involves a distinctive physical transformation characterized by a 90° body posture rotation,
and asymmetric pigmentation called metamorphosis. This usually happens during their
transitional phase of settlement, which is generally marked by shifts in behavior and eco­
logical adaptation as they transition from a pelagic to a benthic lifestyle. These transitions
play a pivotal role in the recruitment of flatfish populations by influencing factors like feed­
ing, growth, and survival[6]. During their metamorphosis, juvenile Plaice and Flounder,
undergo this 90 degrees tilt to one side or the other to become the bottom adapted adult
flatfish. The eye on the down side is pushed over to the up side [7].
Around the Baltic Sea area, there is a challenge in identifying hybrids of the species due
to their morphological similarity. In a genetic study, morphology was examined and com­
pared with the DNA of individuals, concluding that the suspected hybrid fish appeared
to be more similar in appearance to plaice than to flounder. [8]. This general challenge
of identifying hybrids can potentially lead to errors in stock classification that is used for
conservation and management purposes. [9]
1.1.1
European Plaice (Pleuronectes platessa)
European plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) has been a commercially important fish in Eu­
rope, particularly in the Northern Sea [10]. The Netherlands has the highest capture of
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
1
==PAGE:8==
flatfish, followed by Denmark, the United Kingdom, Belgium, France, and Germany. How­
ever, it is expected that plaice stocks in the Northern Sea will decrease as fish migrate
further north [10]. This shift in migration patterns may result in increased stock volumes
of European plaice in the Norwegian Sea, leading to evolving significance for Norwegian
fisheries. Limited data is available on the human consumption of plaice in Norway, as
consumer studies typically focus on other regularly consumed fish.[11]
Juvenile European plaice occupy the shallow coastal regions, gradually transitioning to
deeper waters as they mature. In the North Sea, young plaice are predominantly found
in the German Bight during the summer months, although they can also be observed
along the eastern coast of Britain, Southern Bight, Skagerrak, and Kattegat.[12] Surveys
have revealed that their distribution undergoes seasonal changes. During winter, young
plaice of age 0 and 1 tend to leave estuaries and shallow coastal zones, only to return in
spring[12].
The location and behavior of plaice spawning play a crucial role in their life history. They
tend to spawn at greater distances from the shore. To optimize recruitment, plaice em­
ploy two strategies: they either spawn near the nursery grounds in the Irish Sea, where
the currents are relatively calm, or they spawn farther away from the nursery grounds,
such as in the North Sea, to increase dispersal opportunities [13]. The primary spawning
grounds are situated in the southwest Kattegat area, extending towards the Great Belt,
with additional potential spawning zones encompassing the northwest Kattegat, the north­
ern Sound, central Little Belt, and the outer expanse of Flensborg Fjord[14].
1.1.2
European flounder (Platichthys flesus)
The European flounder (P. flesus) is a coastal fish that inhabits estuaries and low­salinity
waters. It can live in freshwater but must return to the sea for spawning so it is considered
a marine, brackishfish[15]. The Kattegat flounder exhibits specific spawning areas: the
southeastern Kattegat, northern coast of Zealand, and the Great Belt. Younger juveniles
flounders primarily inhabit shallow, soft­bottomed coastal areas within inner Danish wa­
ters. Older juveniles aggregate in the Great Belt and north of the sound at first, with a
later shift to the western Baltic in late summer and autumn[14].It is distributed across the
Mediterranean, Atlantic coast of Europe, and northern seas. The species migrates mod­
erate distances and spawns from February to June, has diverse life­history strategies
and exhibits genetic divergences between populations. Larvae use estuarine currents to
reach nursery grounds, and juveniles reside in brackish or freshwater habitats[16].
Geographical factors shape population structure and genetic variations. [17]. It displays
individuals with left­sided or right­sided body asymmetry, reflecting a genetic influence
similar to related species. [18]
The European flounder is influenced by habitat quantity, particularly in estuaries and mud­
flats, which are at risk of habitat loss and reduced water quality due to urbanization and
estuarine management[19]. They predominantly inhabit the benthos after metamorphosis,
making habitat quantity easily measurable. However, habitat quality depends on multiple
interconnected attributes and cannot be directly measured or compared between species.
For the estuarine­based P. flesus and flatfish in general, the quantity and quality of feeding
grounds are crucial. As they are mainly found in intertidal mudflats, estuarine sediments,
and coastal sediments, maintaining these habitats is essential for their survival. Estuaries,
2
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:9==
influenced by tidal cycles, are particularly important for the growth and sustainability of P.
flesus as they allow the species to follow the tide and avoid being out­competed by other
demersal and benthic fish species in coastal and oceanic waters. Although the concept of
carrying capacity and its effects are commonly studied through experiments and models,
there is little evidence that carrying capacities of P. flesus nurseries are reached in the
wild[19].
Platichthys flesus has received relatively little study and recognition despite its wide eco­
logical significance. Due to a perceived lack of economic importance in the past, scientific
understanding of the species has been limited, particularly regarding behaviors and an­
nual events such as spawning and larval migration. As the need for sustainable inshore
fisheries management grows and there is a push for increased understanding of our wa­
terways, our knowledge and monitoring capabilities are improving.[17]
1.2
Otoliths and Their Analytical Applications in Research.
Otoliths are structures primarily composed of calcium carbonate, situated in the inner ear
of Osteichthyes, that serve to balance the body and detect sound and movement[20].
Each fish possesses three pairs of otoliths, namely sagittae, lapilli, and asteriscii. Among
these, the sagittae otoliths, which are generally the largest, are more appropriate for sys­
tematic and ecological research, as well as for taxonomic identification, age estimation,
and life history tracking [21].
Otoliths are considered among the best examples of biochronologies as they provide se­
quences of annual, seasonal, or daily growth during the larval and juvenile stages of the
fish [22], [23].
It is generally understood that the sagittal otoliths in flatfish are similar in shape and size
between the right and left sides. These otoliths exhibit bilateral symmetry and share com­
parable patterns and structures. This similarity is expected because flatfish typically have
a balanced otolithic apparatus to maintain their equilibrium and perception of spatial ori­
entation.[24]
The fact that their calcified structure makes their digestion slower compared to that of other
tissues, makes them highly valuable in the identification of fish that have been preyed
upon by a diverse range of predators, including aquatic mammals, seabirds, and other
fish. Furthermore, the relationships between fish size and otolith measurements are use­
ful in determining the feeding behavior of piscivorous fauna providing vital information for
the management of these species and further paleontological reconstructions of modern
fish[21].
Fish aging is a crucial aspect of fisheries management because fish exhibit indeterminate
growth patterns that are significantly influenced by their environment. Thus, age­based
information is essential for assessing growth rate and mortality in a population and con­
tributes to effective fisheries management by controlling productivity [5].
Accurate age estimation is typically based on the examination of growth increments in
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
3
==PAGE:10==
otoliths and other archival tissues. These metrics form the foundation for understand­
ing population dynamics in fisheries assessments and ensuring precise age assignments
[25].
Age and biomass estimates are typically key components of models used to determine the
safe allowable yield of many fisheries [26]. The length–weight relationship is commonly
used to convert fish lengths to mass and vice versa [27].
Their unique calcification method and their aragonitic composition, gives us the ability to
investigate their living environmental conditions and reconstruct enviromental changes in
life histories on both an individual and population level . Environmental elements like wa­
ter temperature, salinity, and oxygen isotopes, regulate in a level element uptake and can
lead to differences in otolith elemental composition. [28] Factors like genetic background,
fish diet and metabolism or other physiological processes also influence the otolith com­
position variations.
Otolith trace element analyses are frequently used to identify and assign individuals from
mixed populations to the groups they belonged to during the juvenile stage. Several
studies have demonstrated this, including assigning potadromous species to their na­
tal tributaries [29] anadromous species to their natal rivers/estuaries, semi­catadromous
species to their juvenile estuaries [28] and differentiating between co­habitats interbreed­
ing closely related species of juvenile flatfish[30]. Furthermore, measuring concentrations
of elements such as strontium (Sr) has been proved an excellent proxy for ambient salinity
and has frequently been employed to reconstruct a history of anadromous migrations [31].
Also, oxygen stable isotopes deposited in otoliths have been utilized by various studies
to reconstruct temperature histories[5].
This master’s thesis aims to investigate the variability of trace element composition within
the juvenile growth period (from settlement to capture late in their first year) and be­
tween juvenile habitats spanning the Inner Danish Waters of flatfish. Using pre­collected
samples, Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Mass Spectrometry (LA­ICPMS) will be em­
ployed to analyze the trace elements present in transects from the core of the otolith to
the edge. The data will be analyzed to describe common changes in trace element com­
position with change of life stage to compare differences between regions.
1.3
Research questions and hypothesis
Based on our findings, we will attempt to address the following research inquiries:
1. Is it possible to determine the number of distinct spawning grounds that contribute to
the coastal regions within the Inner Danish Waters by analyzing the chemical otolith
fingerprints of the European Plaice and Flounder?
2. Is it possible with the use of otolith chemistry to discriminate between juvenile indi­
viduals of con­familial species (flounder and plaice), in the case where they coexist
and are captured within the same habitat?
3. Can we detect patterns of the elemental composition of the otoliths that contribute
to the identification of critical habitats and migration behaviors for plaice?
4
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:11==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Study Area: The Inner danish waters (IDW)
The Inner Danish Waters (IDW) are the transitional zone between the Greater northern sea
and Baltic Sea, which include the Kattegat, Skagerrak, the Belt Seas and others (Figure
2.1) The inner Danish waters that cover an area of 50.000 km2 from east Jutland all the
way to island of Bornholm are characterized by shallow nearshore areas that are mostly
ice free in winters. Salinity decreases from north Kattegat toward the south, becoming
brackish in the southern part of the Danish Baltic [33]. The hydrography of this area is
characterized by a deep­water inflow of saline water from the North Sea, while freshwater
flows out from river runoff on the surface. This unique combination of topographic and
hydrographic conditions results in a salinity gradient, ranging from fully marine saltwater
in the North Sea to brackish water with very low salinity in the eastern Baltic Sea. Thanks
to this salinity gradient, researchers have an excellent opportunity to study fish migrations
using chronological analyses of the chemical composition of their otoliths. [25]
The bathymetry gradually becomes shallower as we move from > 120 m in the North Sea
and Skagerrak to 40 – 80 m in the northern Kattegat, and finally to depths of 20 – 40 m in
the southern Kattegat. One of the major environmental problems in the IDW is eutrophica­
tion. Since 1990, the nutrient input from land has generally decreased, more specifically
(N) nitrogen and (P) phosphorous. Among other things, the reduction is because of some
legislation regulating agricultural practices. This reduction has also led to the decline of
nutrient concentrations and initiated a change in the dominant primary producers toward
reduced phytoplankton biomass and increased cover of macroalgae in deeper waters.[34]
In this study we will focus in four main areas of the Inner Danish Waters (IDW), The
Northern and Southern Kattegat, The Belt Seas and the Sound. (Figure 2.2)
2.2
Experimental design
We looked at the fish individuals and the areas that they were caught, organizing the data
by specific areas based on important fish habitats[14] and regions with significant change
of average surface salinity and currents zones[35].
In order to answer the research question : ”Is it possible to determine the number of dis­
tinct spawning grounds that contribute to the coastal regions within the Inner Danish Wa­
ters by analyzing the chemical otolith fingerprints?”, we utilised the pre­sectioned otoliths
from [30], and selected to analyse the pre­metamorphosis, core of the otolith. Similarly,
to address the hypothesis: The use of otolith chemistry is a tool to discriminate between
juvenile individuals of con­familial species (flounder and plaice), when they coexist and
are captured within the same habitat?, we analysed the edge of the otoliths with an equiv­
alent of five days worth of growth, to represent the habitats in which they were caught.
Finally, we attempted to do a comparison of elemental signatures from the core and edge
for the plaice individuals to be able to investigate the third aim/hypothesis of this study the
identification of critical habitats and migration behaviors.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: ICES ecoregions and advisory areas. ICES provides advice by ecoregion,
allowing for further development of an ecosystem approach in European waters.[32]
2.3
Otolith Analyses
For this study, pre­collected otolith samples were utilized from the survey conducted in
2016, which is thoroughly described in Brown et al. (2018) [30]. During the survey, ju­
venile fish were collected from the near­shore marine coastal habitat of the Inner Danish
Waters (IDW) using a juvenile beam trawl. After collection, the fish were stored in freezing
conditions. Morphometric data, including fin ray counts, were recorded for species identi­
fication, and then individual fish were dissected to remove otoliths. Selected otoliths were
further prepared and mounted on microscopic slides in a proper way to fit for LA­ICP­MS
analysis.
In addition, the data provided from the above survey [30] also offers information on core­
to­metamorphosis ring measurements, day ring measurements, and total otolith length for
each available individual. These measurements, which indicate the age in days, were ob­
tained from the right otoliths of each individual, which were observable along the horizontal
axis of the mounted otolith. Especially the core to metamorphosis ring measurements is
particularly valuable for our study because the primary objective is to explore and inves­
tigate any significant otolith chemical differences between the early life history of the fish
and the time during juvenile settlement.
The sectioned otoliths were obtained as properly prepared and stored in [30], to apply fur­
ther analysis in LAICPMS. In the left otoliths of the selected individuals a fine sectioning
process were applied. The process that preceded, involves embedding the otoliths until
fully encapsulated in epoxy­resin, and positioned parallel to the longitudinal axis. The
most delicate phase of the process is the transversely controlled cutting of the embedded
6
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: The map of Denmark with the focus areas of this study
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
7
==PAGE:14==
otoliths with a specialized diamond­edged tool with low­speed saw blades.
Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA­ICP­MS) was con­
ducted using a Bruker Aurora Elite ICP­MS and a 193 nm Cetac Analyte G2 excimer
laser, installed with a two­volume HelEx2 sample cell [36]. The otolith samples were ab­
lated with a power of approximately 2 J/cm2, firing at a rate of 7 μm/sec for the first run
and 5 μm/sec for the next 4 runs, with a 20x37 μm laser square spot. The square spot was
set to run in a line starting near the core of the otolith and extending to the edge. Before
measurements, the sectioned otolith’s surface was briefly pre­ablated with 1 J/cm2, firing
at a rate of 150 μm/sec, using a 40x40 μm laser spot, to remove any potential surface
contaminants. The ablation chamber was flushed after each measurement period, and
the ablated material was carried to the mass spectrometer in a stream of helium gas.
To calibrate the measurements, a trace element in glass (NIST612) was employed as the
primary calibration standard. As secondary calibration standards, MACS­3, Jcp­1, and
ECRM­752 were used.
The primary calibration standard (NIST), along with the pressed powder calcium carbon­
ate external standard MACS­3, were ablated repeatedly at the beginning, end, and ap­
proximately after every 9 to 11 otolith samples to account for machine drift. For additional
calibration and control of machine drifting, external standards Jcp­1 and ECRM­752 were
also ablated every 9­11 otolith samples.
In the first run, the mass spectrometer quantified 14 elemental isotopes (7Li, 23Na, 25Mg,
31P, 39K, 43Ca, 55Mn, 57Fe, 63Cu, 66Zn, 88Sr, 137Ba, and 208Pb). An attempt was
made to use Indium (127I) as an indicator of contamination from mounting materials, but
no signal was detected. As a result, Indium (127I) was removed from the isotopes. Like­
wise, Lithium (7Li) was also removed for the same reason, meaning due to a large number
of readings below detection levels. The most probable reasoning fro this is that the inter­
nal and external standards used could not properly identify these two isotopes.
Data reduction was carried out using the Iolite software. For each run, the measurement
baseline was set, the beginning and end of each measurement period were manually
cropped according to the Calcium signal (Ca43) and manual outlier removal was also
applied to each of the elemental isotopes. Furthermore, the output measurements for
the otolith samples were calibrated against the internal and external standards over the
course of the run, including Ca43 at percentage 39. The signal of Calcium (Ca) at 39
percent in otolith samples serves as a factor for converting element concentrations from
parts per million (ppm) to calcium ratios. Since the data is initially measured in ppm, the
presence of Ca at the specified 39percent level allows for accurate conversion to ratios.
2.4
Chemical fingerprint in Life stages
To be able to correctly assign the elemental concentrations of the output of the laser ac­
cording to the life stage, we used the linear interpolation method. With this method we
were able to differentiate the signal that belongs to the metamorphosis life stage of the
fish from the last days of its life. Each individuals day ring measurements were obtained
along the horizontal axis of the right otolith (x axis) and the laser run along the transverse
8
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:15==
transect of the left otolith (y axis) [37].
Based on the information from [24] that the sagittal otolith pair in flatfish exhibits bilateral
symmetry; both left and right otoliths grow and develop at the same rate and manner, we
can use a linear interpolation approach.
First, we define the range of the total distance that the Laser beam traveled in the otolith in
microns (y) by computing the microns scanned per second during the laser run. Similarly,
we defined the range of the day increments distance, again in microns, as the distance
from the center/core of the otolith until the metamorphosis point (x1), and the total dis­
tance from the core point until the edge (x).
By using this linear interpolation formula :
y1 = x1
x y
(2.1)
x = Core to Edge
x1 = Core to Meta
y = total ablation distance
y1 = ablation distance until metamorphosis ring or last 10 day rings distance.
we are able to calculate the corresponding y1 values for each individual fish based on the
total ablation distance and the increments distance, by implementing a simple for loop[38]
within the statistical programming language R. As a result, laser output values that lie
below the y1 ablation distance until metamorphosis ring are allocated as an average value
describing the core concentrations of the given chemical elements. Furthermore, as an
additional data­cleansing step, any values exceeding five times the standard deviation of
this average were excluded. Following an identical procedural protocol, all values that
lie, this time above the y1 last 10 day rings ablation distance are allocated as an average
value describing the edge of the otolith concentrations of the given chemical elements.
2.5
Data Analyses
For the data analysis in our research, we utilized the programming language R[39]. To be
able to determine the number of larval sources contributing to the sample, K­means Clus­
ter Analysis [40] [41] of the core­metamorphosis traced elements was performed. Same
analysis performed for the edge elemental fingerprint separately for the two study species
European Plaice and European Flounder.
To properly use k­means clustering in R we used the R function kmeans from the stats
package. For visualization purposes graphs, bar­plots and heat­maps produced by gg­
plot2 and all multivariate analyses outputs were visualized by the R function fviz from the
factoextra package.
K­means, a widely adopted clustering methodology, segments data into distinct clusters
(k). The procedure of K­means clustering is outlined, beginning with an initial clustering
that is subsequently refined through iterative steps. This iterative process entails relocat­
ing each data point to its nearest center, recalculating cluster centers based on the mean
of member points, and continuing until convergence criteria are satisfied. This unsuper­
vised clustering method, aims to name subgroups within data, maximizing intra­cluster
similarity while minimizing inter­cluster similarity. K­means algorithm select initial clus­
ter centers, assigning observations to the nearest centroid, updating centroids based on
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
9
==PAGE:16==
mean values, and iterating until convergence or a predefined iteration limit is reached.
The number of k­means clusters was defined by the Average Silhouette Method [42],
which describes how well objects are grouped together in a clustering and how each
object fits into its cluster. This cluster validation method calculates the average silhouette
for various numbers of clusters (k). The best k value, or the optimal number of clusters,
is the one that results in the highest average silhouette when tested across the different
possible k values [43]. We used the silhouette function in the cluster package to compute
the average silhouette width in R.
10
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:17==
3
Results
3.1
Sample distribution
After trace element determination, the samples remaining for further analyses were differ­
ent to those reported in [30] 3.1. However, there remained fairly even coverage across
areas but few samples of flounder were available3.2
Upon conducting the analysis of the collected otolith samples, a comprehensive under­
standing of the flatfish population distribution is showcased in 3.1 . The dataset encom­
passes 104 otolith samples, derived from two distinct flatfish species, namely 76 from
plaice and 28 from flounder 3.2 . These samples, strategically collected across four dis­
tinct geographical regions: Northern Kattegat, Southern Kattegat, the Belt Seas, and the
Sound.
In this visual representation, the Southern Kattegat area stands out with a total fish count
of 36 samples. Similarly, the Northern Kattegat region demonstrates a substantial pres­
ence, accounting for 24 samples. The Belt Seas region follows with 26 samples, while
the Sound area exhibits the lowest count of 18 samples.
Figure 3.1: Figure with total count of fish per Area: Northern Kattegat = 24, Southern
Kattegat = 36, The belt seas = 26, The Sound = 18
Further, we examined the distribution per species within each area. Notably, the Northern
Kattegat area is populated by 20 plaice and 4 flounder. In the Southern Kattegat, 31 plaice
and 5 flounder were recorded. Within the Belt Seas, the distribution showcases 17 plaice
and 9 flounder. Lastly, the Sound area displays 8 plaice and 10 flounder, standing as the
only region with a slightly elevated count of flounder compared to plaice .
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: Figure with total count of fish per Area per species
12
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Natal sources for Plaice (Pleuronectes platessa)
The results of the k­means clustering analysis (3.4) that was performed on the otolith near
to core elemental fingerprint gave an insight into the number of natal sources contributing
to the juvenile populations of the Inner Danish waters. The evaluation of k­means clus­
tering was performed using the average silhouette method, suggesting that the optimal
number of clusters is four 3.3. Further examination of the four clusters within each area
implied one (cluster 4) being significantly important in contribution for all areas 3.5, es­
pecially the Northern Kattegat and The Sound. The results indicate that the 75% of the
already settled age­0 juveniles, of European Plaice in Northern Kattegat and The Sound
originating from the same natal source represented by ”cluster 4” in figure 3.5. From the
same natal source it is also derived the 54.8% of age­0 juveniles captured in the Southern
Kattegat and 47.1% captured in The Belt Seas. The Southern kattegat has fewer percent­
ages of the captured individuals derived from the rest natal sources (clusters 1,2,3). The
belt seas on the other hand seems to have two significant sources (cluster 2 and 4) con­
tributing at a same rate, with 41.2% from cluster 2 and 47.1% from cluster 4.
Figure 3.3: Average shillouette method for cluster validation for near to otolith core ele­
mental fingerprint of age­0 European Plaice juveniles.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.4: K­means unsupervised clustering analysis result, for near to otolith core ele­
mental fingerprint of age­0 European Plaice juveniles.
Figure 3.5: Heat map representing the contribution per capture area (%) of the four clus­
ters representing natal sources of age­0 European Plaice juveniles, identified by unsuper­
vised k­means clustering analysis.
14
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:21==
3.3
Juvenile habitats of Plaice (Pleuronectes platessa)
The outcomes derived from k­means clustering analysis applied to the chemical compo­
sitions along the otolith edges of individual European plaice specimens, showcasing the
percentages of fish within the four clusters across the four areas in 3.8.
The results unveil intriguing patterns:
In the northern Kattegat, a significant 75% of the fish populate cluster number 1, while
15% associate with cluster 2, and the remaining 10% form cluster 3, with no presence in
cluster 4 for this Area.
Contrarily, in the Southern Kattegat, cluster 1 accommodates 67.7%, cluster 2 character­
ize just the 9.7%, and cluster 4 the 22.6%, leaving cluster 3 unoccupied.
Noteworthy variations persist in the Belt seas, where both cluster 1 and cluster 3 each
claim 47.1%, cluster 4 entails the rest 5.9%, leaving cluster 2 empty.
In the Sound, we see the majority (87.5%) of the area being characterized by cluster 1
and the remaining percentage from cluster 2, while clusters 3 and 4 have no participation.
Figure 3.6: Average shillouette method for cluster validation for near to otolith edge ele­
mental fingerprint of age­0 European Plaice juveniles.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.7: K­means unsupervised clustering analysis result, for near to otolith edge ele­
mental fingerprint of age­0 European Plaice juveniles.
Figure 3.8: Heat map representing the grouping of Juvenile habitats(%) of identified by
unsupervised k­means clustering analysis for the four study areas. Pleuronectes platessa.
16
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:23==
3.4
Natal sources for Flounder (Platichthys flesus)
Upon subjecting the flounder dataset for natal sources investigation to k­means clustering,
we employed the average silhouette method to ascertain the optimal number of clusters,
that indicated the dataset’s optimal cluster count was five 3.9 and the image of the cluster­
ing space after analysis as seen in figure 3.10, resulted in some clusters contained only
a few observations than cluster 1 that had the majority.
Figure 3.9: Average shillouette method for cluster validation for near to otolith core ele­
mental fingerprint of age­0 European Flounder juveniles.
Figure 3.10: K­means unsupervised clustering analysis result, for near to otolith core
elemental fingerprint of age­0 European Flounder juveniles.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.11: Heat map representing the contribution per capture area (%) of the four
clusters representing natal sources of age­0 European Flounder juveniles, identified by
unsupervised k­means clustering analysis.
18
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:25==
3.5
Juvenile habitats of Flounder (Platichthys flesus)
The optimal cluster for the juvenile habitats test for flounder was proved to be six. 3.12,
resulting in two main clusters containing the majority of observations 3.13 and the perce­
nages of flounder belonging to a cluster per area as shown in figure 3.14.
Figure 3.12: Average shillouette method for cluster validation for near to otolith edge
elemental fingerprint of age­0 European Flounder juveniles.
Figure 3.13: K­means unsupervised clustering analysis result, for near to otolith edge
elemental fingerprint of age­0 European Flounder juveniles.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.14: Heat map representing the grouping of Juvenile habitats(%) of identified by
unsupervised k­means clustering analysis for the four study areas. Platichthys flesus.
20
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:27==
4
Discussion
In our clustering analysis focused on plaice, a singular natal source emerged as signif­
icantly influential across all study areas. The distinct cluster denoted as Cluster 4 (see
Figure 3.5). This result underscores the assumption that a common natal origin predom­
inates across all regions. This phenomenon holds particular significance for the popula­
tions inhabiting the Northern Kattegat and The Sound, each characterized by the 75%
of the captured population in these locales. Interestingly, the Southern Kattegat demon­
strates a departure from this uniform distribution, as it draws from the influence of all four
identified clusters. Furthermore, the belt seas exhibit a more intricate pattern, with two
distinct spawning grounds contributing almost equally to the population.
Observing the analysis results of flounder natal sources on the other hand we can see
some differences a shift of the important cluster this time identified as cluster 1 3.11. Again
, we see that one cluster is contributing the most in all areas (especially Northern Kattegat
(100%) and The Sound(80%)), deriving to the same assumption as before.
With these observations We can address our first hypothesis of this study, that the anal­
yses of the chemical otolith fingerprints of near the core, it is a helpful way to determine
the number of distinct spawning grounds that contribute to the coastal regions within the
Inner Danish Waters. It is interesting to see these two areas that they do not share sea­
borders sharing the same natal sources. We can derive to more conclusions about that
if we combine current movements and results of the Inner Danish Waters dynamics from
previous studies such as [35].
These findings resonate well with the outcomes of spawning ground identification con­
ducted by [14] for both plaice and flounder in the Inner Danish Waters. This results can
contribute to improving our understanding of the stock structure of these flatfish species,
something that is essential for defining appropriate management units and optimising the
use of fishery resources.
The clustering outcome concerning juvenile habitat allocation indicated a not so good link­
age to the captured area. Something that comes in contrast with the results by Brown et.al
2018 that utilized the same samples and similar processes.
The resemblance in distribution patterns between clusters 1 and 4, concerning the pro­
portional representation of plaice individuals from the core and edge otolith data, at the
time of capture, presents an intriguing observation. This similarity raises the possibility
that these two clusters might have undergone analogous changes. It is plausible that the
elemental signatures within these clusters are more influenced by intrinsic processes than
by the environmental variations across the study area.
Another point about trying to identify migration patterns (e.g., 100% of cluster 1 during
birth moving to cluster 2 after settlement)4.1 indicate changes in the chemical composi­
tion of the otoliths over time. This could suggest shifts in the habitat or diet of these fish
during their life.
With these indications we can give an answer to our third study aim, the ability to detect
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
21
==PAGE:28==
patterns of the elemental composition of the otoliths that contribute to the identification
migration behaviors for plaice by saying that fish that share the same core­based cluster
but fall into different edge­based clusters might have left the common spawning ground
and dispersed to various locations before being caught. Keep in mind though, the limi­
tation that K­means clustering doesn’t inherently provide evidence of migration; it simply
groups data points based on similarity in the feature space.
Figure 4.1: Percentage of individuals changed cluster from pre­settlement to the after­
settlement life stage.
In summary, while K­means clustering is a useful tool for identifying patterns, it’s impor­
tant to interpret the results within the context of domain knowledge from the literature and
consider additional analyses and statistical testing to confirm the significance of the ob­
served patterns and their implications for fisheries management
22
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:29==
Bibliography
[1]
R. N. Gibson, R. J. A. Atkinson, and J. D. M. Gordon, eds. Oceanography and
Marine Biology: An annual review. Volume 45. 1st. CRC Press, 2007. DOI: 10.1201/
9781420050943.
[2]
Elliot J Brown et al. “Conflicts in the coastal zone: human impacts on commercially
important fish species utilizing coastal habitat”. In: ICES Journal of Marine Science
75.4 (Jan. 2018), pp. 1203–1213. ISSN: 1054­3139. DOI: 10.1093/icesjms/fsx237.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article-pdf/75/4/1203/31236889/fsx237.
pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsx237.
[3]
R. Quentin Grafton and Dale Squires. R.Q. Grafton, D. Squires. Elsevier, 2013. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-12-375067-9.00186-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
375067-9.00186-9.
[4]
Vitor Freitas, Sebastiaan ALM Kooijman, and Henk W. van der Veer. “Latitudinal
trends in habitat quality of shallow­water flatfish nurseries”. In: Marine Ecology Progress
Series 471 (2012), pp. 203–214. DOI: 10.3354/meps10025.
[5]
Simon R. Thorrold et al. “Natal Homing in a Marine Fish Metapopulation”. In: Sci­
ence 291.5502 (2001), pp. 297–299. DOI: 10.1126/science.291.5502.297. eprint:
https : / / www . science . org /doi /pdf /10 . 1126/ science. 291. 5502 .297. URL: https:
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.291.5502.297.
[6]
A.J. Geffen, H.W. van der Veer, and R.D.M. Nash. “The cost of metamorphosis
in flatfishes”. In: Journal of Sea Research 58.1 (2007). Proceedings of the Sixth
International Symposium on Flatfish Ecology, Part II, pp. 35–45. ISSN: 1385­1101.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seares.2007.02.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1385110107000226.
[7]
Øystein Sæle, Heiđdís Smáradóttir, and Karin Pittman. “Twisted story of eye mi­
gration in flatfish”. In: Journal of Morphology 267.6 (), pp. 730–738. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1002/jmor.10437.
[8]
Song He et al. “Morphology and genetic investigation of flatfish interspecies hybrids
(Pleuronectes platessa X Platichthys flesus) from the Baltic Sea”. In: Fisheries Re­
search 225 (2020), p. 105498. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2020.105498.
[9]
Agnieszka Kijewska, Artur Burzyński, and Roman Wenne. “Molecular identification
of European flounder (Platichthys flesus) and its hybrids with European plaice (Pleu­
ronectes platessa)”. In: ICES Journal of Marine Science 66.5 (Apr. 2009), pp. 902–
906. DOI: 10.1093/icesjms/fsp110.
[10]
Joint Research Centre, Scientific, Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries.
The 2020 annual economic report on the EU fishing fleet (STECF 20­06). Tech. rep.
STECF 20­06. Publications Office, 2020.
[11]
Sophie Kendler et al. “Seasonal variation in chemical composition and contaminants
in European plaice (Pleuronectes Platessa) originated from the west­coast of Nor­
way”. In: Food Chemistry 401 (2023), p. 134155. ISSN: 0308­8146. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2022.134155.
[12]
OA Van Keeken et al. “Changes in the spatial distribution of North Sea plaice (Pleu­
ronectes platessa) and implications for fisheries management”. In: Journal of Sea
Research 57.2­3 (2007), pp. 187–197.
[13]
Michael D. Fox et al. “Spontaneous neuronal activity distinguishes human dorsal
and ventral attention systems”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences 103.26 (2006), pp. 10046–10051. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0604187103.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
23
==PAGE:30==
[14]
Josianne Gatt Støttrup et al. “Essential Fish Habitats for commercially important
marine species in the inner Danish waters”. eng. In: (2019). ISSN: 13958216.
[15]
Françoise Daverat et al. “Colonisation tactics of three temperate catadromous species,
eel Anguilla anguilla, mullet Liza ramada and flounder Plathychtys flesus, revealed
by Bayesian multielemental otolith microchemistry approach”. In: Ecology of Fresh­
water Fish 20.1 (2011), pp. 42–51.
[16]
Pedro Morais et al. “The migration patterns of the European flounder Platichthys
flesus (Linnaeus, 1758) (Pleuronectidae, Pisces) at the southern limit of its distri­
bution range: Ecological implications and fishery management”. In: Journal of Sea
Research 65.2 (2011), pp. 235–246. ISSN: 1385­1101. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.seares.2010.11.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1385110110001255.
[17]
D.J. Skerritt. “A review of the European flounder Platichthys flesus ­ Biology, Life
History and Trends in Population”. In: ().
[18]
Peter N Yershov, Gennadiy V Fuks, and Vadim M Khaitov. “Spatial variation in the
frequency of left­sided morph in European flounder Platichthys flesus (Linnaeus,
1758) from the marginal Arctic (the White Sea)”. In: Diversity 14.11 (2022), p. 1004.
[19]
Robin N Gibson. “Impact of habitat quality and quantity on the recruitment of juvenile
flatfishes”. In: Netherlands Journal of Sea Research 32.2 (1994), pp. 191–206.
[20]
S. Baxendale and T.T. Whitfield. “Zebrafish inner ear development and function”. In:
Development of Auditory and Vestibular Systems. Ed. by R. Romand and I. Varela­
Nieto. © 2014 Elsevier Inc. Academic Press (Elsevier), May 2014, pp. 63–105.
[21]
Daniel Alvares Silveira de Assis et al. “Biometric relation between body size and
otolith size of seven commercial fish species of the south­western Atlantic”. In: Jour­
nal of Applied Ichthyology 34.5 (2018), pp. 1176–1179.
[22]
Steven E. Campana and John D. Neilson. “Microstructure of Fish Otoliths”. In: Cana­
dian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 42.5 (1985), pp. 1014–1032. DOI:
10.1139/f85-127.
[23]
D.L. Pereira et al. “Construction of a 110­year biochronology from sagittae of fresh­
water drum (Aplodinotus grunniens)”. In: Recent Developments in Fish Otolith Re­
search. Ed. by D.H. Secor, J.M. Dean, and S. Campana. Vol. 19. The Belle W.
Baruch Library in Marine Science. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press,
1995, pp. 177–196.
[24]
T. Mille et al. “Sagittal otolith morphogenesis asymmetry in marine fishes”. In: Jour­
nal of Fish Biology 87.3 (2015), pp. 646–663. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/jfb.
12746.
[25]
Karin Hüssy et al. “Where do you come from, where do you go: early life stage drift
and migrations of cod inferred from otolith microchemistry and genetic population
assignment”. In: Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 79.2 (2022),
pp. 300–313. DOI: 10.1139/cjfas-2020-0409.
[26]
R.W Gauldie and D.G.A Nelson. “Otolith growth in fishes”. In: Comparative Bio­
chemistry and Physiology Part A: Physiology 97.2 (1990), pp. 119–135. ISSN: 0300­
9629. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0300-9629(90)90159-P. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/030096299090159P.
[27]
Rainer Froese, Athanassios C Tsikliras, and Konstantinos I Stergiou. “Editorial note
on weight–length relations of fishes”. In: Acta Ichthyologica et Piscatoria 41.4 (2011),
pp. 261–263.
[28]
Patrick Reis­Santos et al. “Effects of temperature, salinity and water composition on
otolith elemental incorporation of Dicentrarchus labrax”. In: Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 446 (2013), pp. 245–252.
24
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:31==
[29]
Angélique Lazartigues et al. “Otolith microchemistry to identify sources of larval
yellow perch in a fluvial lake: an approach towards freshwater fish management”.
In: Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 75.3 (2018), pp. 474–487.
[30]
Elliot Brown et al. “Juvenile fish habitat across the inner Danish waters: Using otolith
chemistry to discriminate between hybridising con­familials and contiguous, coastal
habitat”. In: Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 220 (Feb. 2019). DOI: 10.1016/j.
ecss.2019.02.025.
[31]
David H Secor, J Mark Dean, and Elisabeth H Laban. “Otolith removal and prepa­
ration for microstructural examination”. In: Otolith microstructure examination and
analysis. Canadian special publication of fisheries and aquatic sciences 117 (1992),
pp. 19–57.
[32]
ICES Ecoregions and Advisory Areas. International Council for the Exploration of
the Sea (ICES). 2023. URL: https://www.ices.dk/advice/ICES%20ecoregions%
20and%20advisory%20areas/Pages/ICES-ecosystems-and-advisory-areas.aspx.
[33]
Ib Krag Petersen and Rasmus Due Nielsen. “The Inner Danish Waters and Their
Importance to Waterbirds”. In: The Wetland Book: II: Distribution, Description and
Conservation. Ed. by C. Max Finlayson et al. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2017,
pp. 1–9. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-6173-5_284-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
94-007-6173-5_284-1.
[34]
Bo Riemann et al. “Recovery of Danish coastal ecosystems after reductions in nu­
trient loading: a holistic ecosystem approach”. In: Estuaries and Coasts 39 (2016),
pp. 82–97.
[35]
Clara Ulrich et al. “Variability and connectivity of plaice populations from the Eastern
North Sea to the Western Baltic Sea, and implications for assessment and manage­
ment”. In: Journal of Sea Research 84 (2013), pp. 40–48. ISSN: 1385­1101. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seares.2013.04.007. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1385110113000786.
[36]
Lund University ­ Department of Geology. Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma
Mass Spectrometry (LA­ICP­MS). URL: https : / / www . geology . lu . se / research /
laboratories-equipment/laser-ablation-inductively-coupled-plasma-mass-spectrometry-
la-icp-ms (visited on 08/04/2023).
[37]
Mary Matta and Daniel Kimura. “Age Determination Manual of the Alaska Fisheries
Science Center Age and Growth Program”. In: NOAA Professional Paper NMFS 13
(Feb. 2012).
[38]
Matthew Campbell. “For Loops”. In: Jan. 2013, pp. 35–36. ISBN: 978­1­4302­6487­
3. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4302-6488-0_10.
[39]
R Developement Core Team. “R: A language and environment for statistical com­
puting”. In: (No Title) (2010).
[40]
Stuart P. Lloyd. Least squares quantization in PCM. Technical Report RR­5497. Bell
Lab, Sept. 1957.
[41]
J. B. MacQueen. “Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate ob­
servations”. In: Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statis­
tics and probability. Ed. by L. M. Le Cam and J. Neyman. Vol. 1. University of Cali­
fornia Press. California, 1967, pp. 281–297.
[42]
Fei Wang et al. “An Analysis of the Application of Simplified Silhouette to the Eval­
uation of k­means Clustering Validity”. In: Machine Learning and Data Mining in
Pattern Recognition. Ed. by Petra Perner. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2017, pp. 291–305.
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
25
==PAGE:32==
[43]
Leonard Kaufman and Peter J. Rousseeuw. Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction
to Cluster Analysis. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1990. ISBN: 9780471878766.
DOI: 10.1002/9780470316801.
26
Trace element composition of otoliths from juvenile flatfish:
==PAGE:33==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.aqua.dtu.dk
