==PAGE:1==
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґ
evoked latencyбґlevel functions
Orsolya Anna Megyik
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Orsolya Anna Megyik
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusбґ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
https://wallpapercave.com/w/wp2450741.
Copyright б╘ WallpaperCave
2014 бґ 2023. All Right Reserved
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, ц≤rsteds Plads, Buliding 352,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Orsolya Anna Megyik, MSc Biomedical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Supervisors
Main supervisor
Prof. Torsten Dau
Hearing Systems Section
Health Technology Department
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Coбґsupervisor
PhD. Gerard EncinaбґLlamas
Hearing Systems Section
Health Technology Department
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Coбґsupervisor
Miguel Temboury Gutierrez
Hearing Systems Section
Health Technology Department
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
This thesis was developed with the Hearing Systems (HEA) section, part of the Departбґ
ment of Health Technology at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilбґ
ment for the degree Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering.
Orsolya Anna Megyik бґ s213632
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
2023.08.01.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Auditory brainstem responses (ABR) are subcortical auditory evoked potentials (AEP) in
response to transient acoustic stimuli, e.g. clicks and chirps. ABRs are commonly used
in clinical diagnostics and auditory research because they reflect mostly separated activбґ
ity from different nuclei in the subcortical auditory pathway and can provide information
about hearing impairment at different stages of the auditory system. Wave V, which reбґ
flects activity originating in the inferior colliculus, is the most robust ABR peak, thus it is
most commonly used in diagnostics. However, wave I, which reflects responses from the
auditory nerve, is of great interest because it may potentially be used to detect auditory
nerve (AN) degeneration. Both the amplitude and latency of these waves as a function of
stimulus level can provide information about the levelбґdependent processing ability of the
auditory system.
Phenomenological computational models of the cochlea and the AN can increase the inбґ
terpretability of AEP and improve precision diagnostics. Simulated amplitudeбґ and latencyбґ
level functions in response to transient stimuli should first be compared to responses meaбґ
sured from healthy humans in order to confirm that these models are reliable. Amplitudeбґ
level functions have been successfully simulated with ABR models, but these models
underestimated the latencyбґlevel functions. A challenging aspect of model verification is
that experimental latencyбґlevel functions have shown great variability.
This project included obtaining ABR wave V and compound action potential (CAP), corбґ
responding to wave I, amplitudeбґ and latencyбґlevel functions in young, healthy, normalбґ
hearing listeners using click and chirp stimuli. The recording was done using electroбґ
cochleographic tympanicбґmembrane electrodes and a classical ABR recording montage.
To simulate the amplitudeбґ and latencyбґlevel functions, the AN model of Bruce et al., 2018
and the ABR model framework of Dau, 2003 was used with the same stimuli and simuбґ
lated electrode configurations as in the measurements. Finally, the simulated amplitudeбґ
and latencyбґlevel functions were compared to the experimental data.
Experimental results showed that the latencyбґlevel functions originating from the cochlea
and the brainstem have the same gradient, they are only offset at all levels with a constant
value. These results indicate that the nonбґlinear levelбґdependency of the auditory system
originates mostly from the cochlea. Therefore it might be a reasonable approach to conбґ
volve the AN model output with a linear unitary response (UR) to obtain simulated CAP
and ABR waveforms. However, experimental results also showed that the time interval
between wave I and wave V is a function of stimulus type, indicating that it might be more
appropriate to use a stimulusбґdependent function instead of a stimulusбґindependent UR.
Furthermore, the AN model underestimated the latencyбґlevel functions, which confirmed
that it does not completely capture the levelбґdependent cochlear processing.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to show my appreciation to my supervisors for all their help and kindбґ
ness. Miguel Temboury Gutierrez was always very patient with me, answered all my
questions, and encouraged me throughout this project. Gerard EncimaбґLlamas provided
exceptional explanations and valuable feedback. Furthermore, I am thankful to Torsten
Dau for providing me with the opportunity to work on this project and for his innovative
ideas and enthusiasm for this research topic.
I would also like to say thank you to the doctors at CHBC for dedicating their time to
help with data collectionбґ Dr. Jesper Borchorst Yde, Dr. Stefanie Kenn, Dr. Tove Marie
Holme Jung, Dr. Inga Sielemann and Dr. Kristianna Henrikke Mey. I am grateful to the
experimental participants as well, who volunteered and devoted their time to this project.
Lastly, I want to thank everyone who helped me during my recovery from breaking my anбґ
kle while working on this project. Their support was incredibly important in this challenging
time. Without their help, this project would not have been possible. Thank you!
iv
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
ABR auditory brainstem response
AEP auditory evoked potential
AN auditory nerve
BM basilar membrane
BRA brainstem response audiometry
CAP acousticallyбґevoked compound action potential
dB nHL decibels normal hearing level
dB ppeSPL decibels peakбґtoбґpeak equivalent sound pressure level
ECochG electrocochleography
HHL hidden hearing loss
IHC inner hair cells
IPI interpeak interval
OHC outer hair cells
PSTH peristimulus time histogram
TM tympanic membrane
UR unitary response
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
v
==PAGE:8==
LIST OF FIGURES
List of Figures
2.1
Anatomy of the peripheral auditory system. Taken from: Cortada et al.
(2021). mTOR Signaling in the Inner Ear as Potential Target to Treat Hearбґ
ing Loss. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Schematic of auditory neural pathway. (Redrawn by M. Banoub, J. E. Tetбґ
zlaff, A. Schubert, with permission from Black S, Mahla ME, Cucchiara
RE: Neurologic Monitoring, 5th edition. Edited by Miller RD. Philadelphia,
Churchill Livingston, 2000, p 1339.)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Delay models corresponding to LSбґCE chirps at 20, 40, 60, and 80 dB nHL.
The power functions are vertically offset to have a zero delay at 10 000 Hz.
Taken from: Elberling and Don, 2010.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Human reference data for latencyбґlevel functions. Take from: Verhulst,
Sarah, Alessandro Altoц╗, and Viacheslav Vasilkov (2018). Б─°Computational
modeling of the human auditory periphery: AN responses, evoked potenбґ
tials and hearing lossБ─². In: Hearing Research 360. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Wave V amplitude of the simulated (filled symbols) and the measured data
(open symbols) as a function of the stimulation level (left panel) and correбґ
sponding values for wave V latency (right panel). Taken from: Dau, 2003. .
11
3.1
Schematic of the measurement setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Electrical and acoustical click and chirp stimuli, shown with normalized yбґaxis. 14
3.3
Amplitude spectra of electrical and acoustical click and chirp stimuli. . . . . 15
3.4
A. Average hearing threshold of six participants with and without a TM elecбґ
trode B. Hearing threshold shift caused by the TM electrode.
. . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Schematic of the signal processing procedure.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.6
Definitions of amplitude and latency in the waveforms of a participant. . . . 18
3.7
Schematic of the overall structure of the model of the mammalian auditory
periphery from Zilany et al. (2009, 2014) with the updated structure of the
synapse and spikeбґgeneration model developed in 2018. Figure taken from
Bruce et al., 2018. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.8
Modeling procedure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.1
Grand average waveforms of clickбґ and chirpбґevoked CAPs and ABRs at
different stimulus intensity levels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Amplitudeбґlevel functions of CAP (A) and ABR (B). Error bars represent
standard standard error. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Latencyбґlevel functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Relative growth of click (A) and chirp (B) latencyбґlevel functions.
. . . . . . 27
4.5
A. Click and chirp IPI. B. Effect of shifting the chirp latencyбґlevel functions
by 1.5 ms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.6
A. Click latencies by sex. B. Chirp latencies by sex.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.7
A. Residuals vs fitted values. B. Fitted vs response values. . . . . . . . . . 29
4.8
AN model input and output. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.9
A. Simulated click and chirp amplitudeбґlevel functions B. Simulated latencyбґ
level functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.10 A. UR for CAP. B. UR for ABR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.11 Experimental and simulated CAP waveforms.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
vi
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:9==
LIST OF FIGURES
4.12 Experimental and simulated ABR waveforms.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.13 Amplitudeбґlevel functions of simulated and experimental CAP and ABR. . . 34
4.14 Latencyбґlevel functions of simulated and experimental CAP and ABR. . . . 35
5.1
A. Latencyбґlevel functions found in the current analysis. B. Latencyбґlevel
functions found by Dau, 2003. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.1 Hearing threshold of 6 example participants with and without the TM electrode 49
A.2 Clickбґ and chirpбґevoked CAPs and ABRs at different stimulus instensity
levels of an example test subject. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.3 CAP amplitudeбґlevel functions (experimental results) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.4 ABR amplitudeбґlevel functions (experimental results) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.5 CAP latencyбґlevel functions (experimental results)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.6 ABR latencyбґlevel functions (experimental results)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
vii
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF TABLES
List of Tables
2.1
Experimental properties of studies collecting latencyбґlevel functions (part 1)
9
2.2
Experimental properties of studies collecting latencyбґlevel functions (part 2)
9
4.1
Peak detection resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Percentage of agreement between observers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Model output of full mixed effects model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Model output of final mixed effects model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
A.1 Amplitudes of experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.2 Latencies of experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.3 Latencies and amplitudes of AN model output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.4 Amplitudes of simulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.5 Latencies of simulation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
viii
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Peripheral auditory system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Auditory electrophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Existing ABR models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methods
13
3.1
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Model framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Results
23
4.1
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Modeling results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Discussion
37
5.1
Comparative analysis of clickбґ and chirpбґevoked CAP and ABR . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Evaluation of simulated evoked responses against experimental data
. . . 38
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
49
A.1 Additional figures and tables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
ix
==PAGE:12==
CONTENTS
x
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
The sense of hearing allows us to perceive sound around us. Globally, more than 1.5
billion people (nearly 20 % of the global population) live with hearing loss, and 430 milбґ
lion of them have disabling hearing loss (World Health Organization, 2021). However, it
is likely that even more people suffer from hidden hearing loss (HHL), characterized by
normal hearing thresholds but having difficulty understanding speech in noise (Hind et al.,
2011). HHL cannot be detected by regular audiometric tests, these only measure hearing
thresholds, i.e., the lowest level of sound the listener can detect, but they do not evaluate
whether a listener can make judgments about the sound. As a result, HHL remains unбґ
detected in many cases. Auditory evoked potentials (AEPs), such as auditory brainstem
responses (ABR) or electrocochleographic (ECochG) potentials, can be used to quantify
biological correlates of HLL, which results in abnormal neural responses. This thesis aims
to study one of the fundamental features of AEPs, the latency as a function of stimulus
intensity level.
AEPs provide a powerful tool to assess the neural integrity of the auditory pathway in
response to acoustical stimuli. They can be measured nonбґinvasively using surface elecбґ
trodes on the test subjectБ─≥s scalp. They are an objective method that does not require
any contribution from the subject, unlike psychoacoustic tests, which are subjective and
the active participation of the test subject is necessary. This makes AEPs crucial in diagбґ
nostics in newborns and infants, nonбґcooperative patients, or during surgery. Further adбґ
vantages include being a costбґeffective, relatively fast tool, that is already used in clinical
applications, and useful in research applications as well (Telian et al., 1989). A challenge
of using AEPs is that they only capture a farбґfield oneбґdimensional electric signal, which
is the sum of synchronized neural activity in the auditory pathway. Consequently, it is
difficult to identify the exact generation mechanisms of different peaks of the signal, as
ABR depends on several linear and nonбґlinear processes in the auditory pathway.
One way to test hypotheses regarding generator mechanisms behind AEPs is to build
models of the auditory pathway. These models can predict AEPs to various stimuli, proбґ
viding a tool to study the consequences of different auditory pathologies and improve
AEP application in diagnostics. Phenomenological models aim to describe experimental
results without mimicking the exact biological processes. They can be divided into stages
corresponding to nuclei in the auditory pathway, allowing for the assessment of nearly
every stage of the model. If the model output correctly describes the experimental data
acquired from the cochlea or brainstem, the model is likely to capture the key functionalбґ
ity of that stage. The variability in ABR measurement protocols and experimental results
makes modeling more difficult, as the model might align with results from one study but diбґ
verge from those of another. To solve this problem, a sufficiently large, reliable reference
dataset is needed to create a basis for modeling and parameter adjustment. This thesis
aimed to collect experimental ECochG and ABR data and compare them with model outбґ
puts to evaluate an existing ABR model since it is crucial to fineбґtune the ABR model of
a healthy auditory system before incorporating the effects of pathologies and developing
possible therapeutic devices in the future.
The main goal of this thesis was to investigate latencyбґlevel functions from ECochG and
ABR experimental results and compare them to simulation results. Regarding the simuбґ
lations, the ABR model framework developed by Dau, 2003 was used with an updated
AN model by Bruce et al., 2018. A major motivation for studying this topic was the large
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
1
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
variability observed in existing experimental datasets (see Figure 2.4). Additionally, the
previously mentioned ABR model framework failed to generate latencyбґlevel functions
similar to those observed in human ABR measurements.
The main research questions of this thesis were:
Б─╒ What are the main characteristics of AEP latencyбґlevel functions in response to click
and chirp stimuli, measured in young healthy individuals?
Б─╒ What are the similarities and differences between CAP and ABR recordings obбґ
tained with the same stimuli?
Б─╒ How well does the model match the experimental data, and how accurately can it
describe the observed latencyбґlevel function?
The present thesis is structured as follows: Chapter 2 presents the theoretical background
of AEPs and gives an overview of historical findings related to the topic. Chapter 3 deбґ
scribes the experimental procedure and the ABR modeling framework used in simulaбґ
tions. Chapter 4 presents the results both from experiments and simulations, which are
discussed in Chapter 5 and the final thoughts of this author are summarized in Chapter
6.
2
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Peripheral auditory system
In this section, a short description of the peripheral auditory system is presented (Figure
2.1). Sound enters the auditory system as longitudinal pressure waves. After traveling
through the ear canal, the pressure waves induce tympanic membrane (TM) vibrations.
These vibrations are transmitted to the auditory ossicles in the middle ear and finally
reach the oval window, the membrane covering the opening of the cochlea. The cochlea
is a fluidбґfilled bony organ, situated in the inner ear. When the oval window vibrates,
the cochlear fluid vibrates as well, causing basilar membrane (BM) vibration. The BM
has unique mechanical properties: it has graded stiffness and graded mass, resulting in
spatial separation in frequency coding, termed tonotopic organization (Bц╘kц╘sy, 1960). In
this organization, high frequencies are coded close to the opening of the cochlea (basal
region) and low frequencies are coded further away from that (apical region). As a conбґ
sequence, travelбґtime differences occur in the cochlea, lower frequencies are delayed
compared to high frequencies (BM traveling wave delay). The organ of Corti, located in
the cochlea (detailed view in the right panel of Figure 2.1), contains mechanoreceptor hair
cells that have hairбґlike organelles called stereocilia. When the BM vibrates due to the
fluid vibration in the cochlea, the stereocilia are pushed against the tectorial membrane,
causing stereocilia deflection and hair cell depolarization. Hair cells transmit signals to the
auditory nerve (AN) through their synapses toward the brainstem and the neural signal
finally reaches the auditory cortex.
Figure 2.1: Anatomy of the peripheral auditory system. Taken from: Cortada et al. (2021).
mTOR Signaling in the Inner Ear as Potential Target to Treat Hearing Loss. International
Journal of Molecular Sciences.
2.2
Auditory electrophysiology
In this section, the research of auditory electrophysiology will be explained, starting with
the physiological and measurement basics, followed by the history of latencyбґlevel funcбґ
tions and the challenging aspects of this research area. Auditory electrophysiological
tests capture AEPs, which provide important information about the state of the auditory
pathway. These tests can be classified according to the neural generator sites of the
response in interest:
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
3
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
1. ECochG (from the cochlea and the distal end of the peripheral nerve),
2. ABR (from AN to brainstem) and
3. Cortical response audiometry (from cortex).
This project focuses on the first two of these classes.
ECochG captures electrical signal, generated by neural activity of the cochlea and the disбґ
tal end of the AN within 0бґ10 ms after stimulus onset. Potentials recorded with ECochG
can be divided into presynaptic and postsynaptic potentials, which are receptor currents in
hair cells, action potentials, and excitatory postбґsynaptic potentials (EPSP) from the AN,
respectively. The presynaptic potentials can be separated into the cochlear microphonic
(CM), that follows the stimulus waveform as an AC component, and the summation potenбґ
tial (SP), following the stimulus envelope as a DC component. The postsynaptic potential
is mainly acousticallyбґevoked compound action potential (CAP), which is the summed reбґ
sponse from AN fibers (Legatt, 2015). From animal experiments, it is known that CAP
is composed of two components, N1 and N2, where N1 is equivalent to wave I in ABR
measurements and originates from the synchronization of many nerve fibers. N2 is the
discharge from the AN to the cochlear nucleus, corresponding to wave II in ABR (Fisch
and Ruben, 1962).
Brainstem response audiometry records activity from a larger region of the auditory pathбґ
way, ranging from the AN to the brainstem. The application of ABR is generally more
widespread in clinical settings than ECochG. It is probably because ECochG requires
placing an electrode in the ear, which can be more uncomfortable for the patient. Besides
that, ABR also provides information about the proximal parts of the AN and the brainstem,
thus it allows assessment of higher stages than the ECochG.
One of the challenges of using ABR is that the identification of the exact generator sites
of the human ABR vertices is not completely straightforward, due to the limitations of huбґ
man experimental procedures and, even today, there is not a clear consensus among
the scientific community. First, all ABR peaks were believed to originate from the brainбґ
stem. Later, this belief was disproved, by correlating surface electric responses with depth
recordings during surgery (Mц╦ller and Jannetta, 1982). Surgical measurements of the AN
showed potentials corresponding in latency to scalpбґrecorded waves I and II, while waves
III to V were found to originate from the brainstem. Wave I was proven to be the auditory
compound action potential (CAP) of the AN, wave III corresponded to the site where the
cochlear nerve enters the cochlear nuclear complex (CN), and wave V originated from
higher areas of the brainstem, as illustrated in Figure 2.2 (Mц╦ller and Jannetta, 1982).
While ABR captures the activity of the cochlea and the distal end of the AN, the recorded
wave I often has low signalбґtoбґnoise ratios (SNR) and lacks the reliability to be used for
diagnostics. However, obtaining more reliable information from the cochlea is useful to
determine whether cochlear or retrocochlear pathologies are present. Generally, ECochG
can capture stronger signals from the cochlea compared to scalp electrodes, because the
recording electrodes are positioned closer to the signal generators. This advantage of
ECochG was the main motivating factor for its application in this project.
In ABR measurements the signal of interest is very small compared to the noise. To imбґ
prove the SNR, stimuli are presented repeatedly, and the measured evoked potentials
are averaged across stimulations. The background noise is assumed to be uncorrelated
and is supposed to cancel out in the average processing, resulting in clearer responses.
Despite there are recent attempts to reduce the number of repetitions to reduce measureбґ
4
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Figure 2.2: Schematic of auditory neural pathway. (Redrawn by M. Banoub, J. E. Tetбґ
zlaff, A. Schubert, with permission from Black S, Mahla ME, Cucchiara RE: Neurologic
Monitoring, 5th edition. Edited by Miller RD. Philadelphia, Churchill Livingston, 2000, p
1339.)
ment time, it is still the most common practice to calculate the average waveform from a
high number of repetitions (1000бґ3000).
ABR can be recorded using trains of transient stimuli such as click and chirp trains. The
click contains a broad range of frequencies (350бґ10000 Hz) simultaneously. It was asбґ
sumed that the ABR response is dominated by the onset of the acoustical stimulus, thereбґ
fore the ideal stimulus was thought to be the click, due to the rapid onset, short duration
and broadband nature (Kodera K. and J., 1977). Studies also found that there is a second
ABR waveform at the stimulus offset. (Kodera K. and J., 1977, Brinkmann R., 1979). As a
consequence of the tonotopic organization, neurons are activated sequentially from high
to low frequencies when the stimulus contains all frequencies simultaneously. The high
frequency fibers are better synchronized than the lower frequencies, where partial cancelбґ
lation of their contribution can occur. Hence the measured signal is mostly generated by
neurons coding mid and high frequencies. This restricts the ability to measure the state
of the apical partition of the cochlea, which codes low frequencies (Neely et al., 1988).
This problem motivated the search for a method to improve ABR sensitivity to detect
abnormalities related to low frequency signal processing. A possible solution was to comбґ
pensate for the traveling wave delay at the measurement output stage, by calculating
the stacked ABR, using ABR waveforms measured with highбґpass masking noise, each
with different cutбґoff frequencies (Don et al., 1997). A major difficulty of this method was
the long measurement time. Another possible solution to obtain information from the low
frequency regions was to attempt to compensate for the BM travelling delay with the meaбґ
surement input, to achieve synchronous activation along the entire BM. The new stimulus
that was designed to provide a solution to this issue was the upward chirp, or simply chirp,
that presents higher frequencies delayed compared to the lower frequencies to increase
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
5
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
neural synchrony. There have been several attempts to find the best levelбґindependent
delayбґfrequency functions. The Mбґchirp was developed to match the linear properties of
the cochlea (Dau et al., 2000) using the cochlear model by de Boer, 1980. The Oбґchirp
followed the otoacoustic emission latencies (Fobel and Dau, 2004, Shera and Guinan,
2000). The Aбґchirp was derived from latency functions fitted to toneбґburstбґevoked ABR
wave V data (Fobel and Dau, 2004, Neely et al., 1988). The CEбґchirp was based on
derivedбґband ABR latencies, (Elberling and Don, 2008) and followed a power function
originally described by Anderson et al., 1971:
о└ = k бЇ fБ┬▓d
(2.1)
where о└ is the delay in seconds and f is frequency in Hz. The two parameters, k and d,
dictate the length of the chirp (low values result in shorter chirps).
These levelбґindependent chirps evoked higher ABR wave V amplitude than clicks. Alбґ
though, an essential characteristic of the cochlea, known as the upward spread of exciбґ
tation should also be considered. With increasing stimulation level, the excitation in the
activated BM spreads asymmetrically towards the cochlear base, which encodes high freбґ
quencies (Rhode and Recio, 2000). If the chirp is optimized for low stimulation levels, the
neural response becomes desynchronized, leading to an ABR amplitude reduction (Elбґ
berling et al., 2010). To incorporate the upward spread of excitation, LSбґCE chirps were
developed by Elberling et al., 2010. These chirps have levelбґdependent delay function,
the higher the stimulation level, the smaller the frequency delay. These delay functions
are shown in Figure 2.3
Figure 2.3: Delay models corresponding to LSбґCE chirps at 20, 40, 60, and 80 dB nHL.
The power functions are vertically offset to have a zero delay at 10 000 Hz. Taken from:
Elberling and Don, 2010.
One of the fundamental properties of ABR is the latency of the peaks. Latencyбґlevel
functions have been researched for decades and several features of them have been
investigated. They have been described as nonбґlinear functions, with the largest slope at
low intensities (Oates and Stapells, 1992) and the peaks disappear around the hearing
threshold. Measured latencies can be affected by several factors in terms of the subject,
stimulation characteristics, and other technical aspects. Latency is affected by numerous
subjectбґdependent factors, for example age, head size, sex, and sensorineural hearing
6
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
loss. With increasing age, the latency increases (Hyde, 1985). In the case of larger heads,
the cochlea and the brainstem are located further away from each other, therefore neural
information might need a longer time to travel from the cochlea to the brainstem (Dempsey
et al., 1986). Males appear to have longer response latencies than females (Thomsen et
al., 1978м╬ Beagley and Sheldrake, 1978). However, this can also be explained by the head
size difference between males and females (males typically have larger heads), causing
longer travel distances for males (Dekaban, 1978, Conti et al., 1988). Dennis et al. (1985)
showed that head size and sex are separate factors, thus hormonal, temperature and
neural factors can be possible explanations for the sex differences. Sex hormones have
been found to influence the central nervous system, especially in major development
stages, such as the embryonic, fetal and postnatal periods (MacLusky and Naftolin, 1981).
ElkindбґHirsch et al., 1994 found no significant difference in wave I latencies in males and
females, but the difference became larger in more central regions. This suggests that
the source of latency difference is introduced in the central auditory pathways, not in the
cochlea. With increasing stimulus level, the latency decreases.
By incorporating these factors, the identification of retrocochlear disorders (such as tuбґ
mors on the AN, i.e., acoustic schwannoma) can become more reliable. Clinical screenбґ
ing focuses on wave V, the most robust wave. Some anatomical and physiological factor
effects might be lowered by considering wave IбґV interpeak interval (IPI) instead of absoбґ
lute latencies, but hearing loss (Coats and Martin, 1978), age (Maurizi et al., 1982) and
sex (Dempsey et al., 1986) still affect results. These factors might also interact with each
other, such as age and sex (Rosenhamer et al., 1980). IPI is commonly used to detect
neurological lesions (Ruth et al., 1988). As wave I is not as reliably detected as wave V,
ECochG can be used to detect the CAP N1, which is equivalent to wave I.
There are numerous challenges to using AEP in diagnostics and hearing research. Due to
ethical reasons, it is not possible to do as invasive experiments on humans as on animals,
which causes serious challenges in research. Human auditory research builds heavily
on animal studies conducted with cats, rats, and monkeys (Achor and Starr, 1980м╬ Britt
and Rossi, 1980), based on the assumption of similarities between the human and other
mammalian ascending auditory pathway. Despite the similarities, there are also signifiбґ
cant differences. For example, the AN is only 0.3бґ0.5 cm long in cats and rodents, while it
is approximately 2.5 cm long in humans (Lang, 1981). The difference in distance causes
a difference in travel time as well, thus posing a challenge to human auditory research to
identify the exact generator sites of human ABR. It is also challenging to correlate pathoбґ
logical changes and changes in ABR features, which also causes substantial difficulty for
research and diagnostics.
Another challenge of AEP research is the lack of standardization of measurement proбґ
tocol, which leads to substantial difficulty for comparing experimental results. There are
numerous factors in the measurement process, that can have an impact on the meaбґ
surement outcome. Some of these factors are related to the technical aspects, such as
stimulation rate, duration, polarity, level unit, repetition number, earphone or headphone
type, electrode type and position of the reference electrode, peak detection technique,
and definitions. Other factors could be related to the measurement subject, for example,
age, sex, genetics, and physical properties. The effect of these subjectбґrelated properties
was discussed previously. Comparability between studies could be increased if all these
factors were clearly stated when describing experimental results, because that could help
other researchers to apply some corrective measures to their data or adjust their experiбґ
mental procedure to make it comparable with other studies in the literature, for example
with the selection of measurement participants.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
7
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Stimulus repetition rate has been proven to influence the ABR response, due to the neuбґ
ral adaptation. The increased repetition rate was found to produce increased latency
(Dzulkarnain et al., 2020). Some studies use a very high repetition rate to reduce the exбґ
perimental duration (e.g. Serpanos et al., 1997), but results from these studies might be
affected by neural adaptation. It might have greater importance for tone bursts, but stimбґ
ulus duration also affects ABR, due to the temporal integration. Lower hearing thresholds
have been found with increased stimulus duration (Gorga et al., 1984).
The effect of stimulus polarity (rarefaction, condensation, alternating) has also been reбґ
searched. These studies found that polarity indeed affects the evoked responses (Schwartz
et al., 1990). Although many studies used alternating polarity in recent years, a substantial
number of experiments were conducted either with rarefaction or condensation.
The variety of stimulus intensity units complicates the comparison of experimental results.
Some researchers define the stimulation levels in dB nHL or dB ppeSPL. The conversion
between these units is straightforward by using the standardized peakбґtoбґpeak equivalent
reference threshold sound pressure levels (peRETSPL). Others might use peSPL or SPL.
However, sometimes studies only state dB, without specifying which unit type is used,
which makes it hard to use the results for comparison.
The ECochG electrode type in the ear is also an important factor for evaluating results.
It can be transбґtympanic electrode, TM electrode or extraбґtympanic electrode such as tipбґ
trodes. Using a transбґtympanic electrode would result in the clearest signal, as that is
placed behind the TM on the round window. This method requires puncturing the TM, so
it is not often used for regular human research purposes. TM electrodes are placed in
contact with the TM, so it is also quite close to the cochlea, but it might alter the sound
transmission characteristics in the ear canal and the TM vibrations. Extraбґtympanic elecбґ
trodes are placed in the ear canal, thus they do not alter the sound transmission in the
outer ear and the TM vibrations, but they produce a lower quality signal than the previous
ones, due to the longer distance between the generator sites and the electrode.
The peak detection technique might also vary between studies. Some researchers deбґ
tect the peaks by themselves, others collaborate with trained professionals with years
of experience or they might use peak detection algorithms. Manual peak detection can
be subjective and it is common for two observers to disagree on the detected peaks. To
avoid this, peak detection algorithms provide an objective method, but those might mix up
artifacts with actual peaks, and identify a peak at an unrealistic timeбґpoint. Peak detection
algorithms are not commonly used in clinics today.
As it is mentioned earlier, the definition of latency is of central importance in the exploration
of latencyбґlevel functions. It is crucial to clearly state the reference timeбґpoint of latency
calculation, especially for chirps. As the waveform of LSбґCE chirps changes with level,
the reference timeбґpoint must be specified in a way, that does not affect the latencyбґlevel
functions. Some studies compensate for the sound travel time in the insert earphone tube
and the ear canal, by subtracting 1 ms from the latencies. This modification does not alter
the latencyбґlevel functions, but it does influence the absolute latency values.
Six ABR studies were collected and compared with simulation results by Verhulst et al.,
2018. These studies were from Picton et al., 1981 (PSC81), Prosser and Arslan, 1987
(PA87), Serpanos et al., 1997 (SOG97), Jiang et al., 1991 (JZSL91), Dau, 2003 (D03),
Strelcyk et al., 2009 (SCD09). They will be presented here to demonstrate how different
experimental procedures can be and this might contribute to differences in results. Some
details of the experimental procedure are collected in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2 and the
8
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
latencyбґlevel function results are summarized in Figure 2.4.
Study
Polarity
Duration
Rate [Hz]
Level
Device
SOG97
Rarefaction
100 б╣s
61,4
20,30Б─і90
dB nHL
insert earphone
JZSL91
Rarefaction
100 б╣s
10
0, 10, 20..90
dB HL
headphone
D03
бґ
80 б╣s
20
10,20Б─і60
dB SL
insert earphone
SCD09
Rarefaction
83 б╣s
45
5 levels 16бґ93
dB ppe SPL
insert earphone
PSC81
Alternation
бґ
11
бґ
headphones
PA87
Alternation
100 б╣s
75 ms ISI
0,5,10Б─і90
dB nHL
headphones
Table 2.1: Experimental properties of studies collecting latencyбґlevel functions (part 1)
Study
Repetitions
Electrode
position
No. of
subjects
Age [years]
Sex
SOG97
2 traces, 2000
sweep/trace
earlobe
10
18бґ65
бґ
JZSL91
3 traces, 1024
sweep/trace
earlobe
21
22бґ36
бґ
D03
2 traces, 1000бґ4000
sweep/trace
mastoid
10
21бґ35
2 females,
8 males
SCD09
2 traces, 4096
sweep/trace
mastoid
5
23бґ25
only females
PSC81
1 trace, 8000
sweep/trace
mastoid
8
бґ
бґ
PA87
2 trace, 2000
sweep/trace
mastoid
10
бґ
бґ
Table 2.2: Experimental properties of studies collecting latencyбґlevel functions (part 2)
The tables show that certain details were missing in the description of some of these
studies, for example the stimulus duration and subject sex. Three of these studies used
rarefaction, and only two used alternation. There were great differences in stimulus rate:
they were between 10 and 61,4 Hz. One study reported the inter stimulus interval (ISI),
which can be converted to stimulus rate using the stimulus duration. The studies used
four different intensity units and half of them used insert earphones for stimulation, and
the other half used headphones. There was also a large variety in how they defined the
number of stimulations. Some of them only recorded 1 trace, others 3 traces to check
reproducibility and the number of sweeps also varied between 1000 and 8000 sweeps,
which might influence the SNR. Two studies positioned the reference electrode on the earбґ
lobe, while three of them used the mastoid (behind the ear). The number of test subjects
varied between 5 and 21 people and the age distribution was missing in some experiment
descriptions. Two studies included test subjects in their early twenties, another used a
slightly wider age range, 22бґ36 years. One study included a large age range, between 18
and 65 years old. As it was described earlier, these factors can influence the latencies.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
9
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
There were large differences between the resulting latencyбґlevel functions in these six
studies, as shown in Figure 2.4. A common feature among them is that latency decreased
with increasing stimulation level. Apart from that, there were huge variations in absolute
latencies between the studies. Mean latencies varied approximately between 6 and 7.2
ms at 100 dB peSPL and between 7 and 9 ms at 60 dB peSPL.
Figure 2.4: Human reference data for latencyбґlevel functions. Take from: Verhulst, Sarah,
Alessandro Altoц╗, and Viacheslav Vasilkov (2018). Б─°Computational modeling of the huбґ
man auditory periphery: AN responses, evoked potentials and hearing lossБ─². In: Hearing
Research 360.
2.3
Existing ABR models
In this section, a very brief history of AN and ABR modeling will be presented, starting with
a general introduction to auditory modeling, followed by the development of the models
applied in this thesis and the motivation behind studying them again.
Modeling neural responses provides an effective tool to research the processes in the auбґ
ditory system. Several computational models have been developed for the AN response
(Deng and Geisler, 1987м╬ J. L. Goldstein, 1990м╬ Kates, 1991м╬ Carney, 1993м╬ Robert and
Eriksson, 1999м╬ Zhang et al., 2001м╬ Sumner et al., 2003м╬ Tan and Carney, 2003м╬ M. S. A.
Zilany and Bruce, 2006). Models can be used for studying speech recognition in noise
(Ghitza, 1988м╬ Tchorz and Kollmeier, 1999), hearing aid design (Miller et al., 1999м╬ Bruce,
2004м╬ Bondy et al., 2004) and cochlear implant speech processor design (Wilson et al.,
2005). Models can be physiological models, that try to follow the exact physiology, or
they can be phenomenological, which instead attempt to replicate the response to some
stimuli. The model used in this thesis is classified as the latter one.
According to the concept of M. H. Goldstein and Kiang, 1958, evoked responses generбґ
ated by AN neurons can be calculated as the convolution of the unitary response (UR) and
the instantaneous rate function of the AN cell, discharged as a response to the stimulus.
Later Melcher and Kiang, 1996 generalized this theory to the entire auditory pathway and
built an ABR model. This concept was also applied by Dau, 2003 to create an auditory
10
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
model framework. The UR was estimated by deconvolving click ABR experimental data.
This model accounts for cochlear nonбґlinearities, that BM tuning broadens with increased
stimulus level and shows compressive magnitude responses and nonlinear phase reбґ
sponses (Rhode, 1971). Zhang et al., 2001 built an AN model based on the cochlear map
of a cat, which was later adjusted to the human auditory system to create a humanized
version (Heinz et al., 2001). This humanized version was used by Dau to calculate the
instantaneous discharge rate in the human ABR model, which could predict amplitudeбґ
level functions of experimental data, but failed to predict the latencyбґlevel functions, as
shown in Figure 2.5. A possible explanation of the latencyбґlevel function discrepancy can
be that the used AN model did not capture all the inner ear properties that influence the
response latency. Therefore an AN model developed recently is used in this thesis, that
was originally developed by M. S. Zilany et al., 2009, M. S. Zilany et al., 2014 and a new
synapse model and spike generator process were added by Bruce et al., 2018.
The AN model and the ABR model framework are described in detail in Chapter 3.
Figure 2.5: Wave V amplitude of the simulated (filled symbols) and the measured data
(open symbols) as a function of the stimulation level (left panel) and corresponding values
for wave V latency (right panel). Taken from: Dau, 2003.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
11
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
12
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
3
Methods
3.1
Experimental procedure
This study involved ECochG and ABR measurements carried out at Copenhagen Hearing
and Balance Centre in Rigshospitalet. Twenty young, healthy, normalбґhearing subjects
were tested between the ages of 20 and 26 years old, with mean=23.9, std=1.62 years
old. Ten male and ten female participants were tested. Normal hearing was defined
here as having pureбґtone thresholds better than 20 dB HL at all tested frequencies and
no reported problems associated with hearing. Before the experiment, participants were
provided with written information about the study and the experimental procedure. It was
also explained to them at face to face meetings before the experiment, and they could ask
any questions about it, then they signed the written consent forms. All experiments were
approved by the ScienceбґEthics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference
Hбґ16036391). The total noise dose from the experiments did not exceed the limit of 85 dB
(A), set by the Danish Working Environment Authority (Б─°Arbejdstilsynet бґ EnglishБ─², 2023).
For each subject, either the left or the right ear was chosen by the test subject to be tested.
The choice was given to them, to ensure that they feel comfortable with that side, so that
they could stay still throughout the electrophysiological recording. Before the experiment,
the outer ear was examined with an otoscope to check if they have excessive ear wax or
infection in the tested ear. The head size of the participants was also measured. That
was followed by pureбґtone audiometry at 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12 and 16 kHz to
ensure that they have normal hearing. The main part of the experiment consisted of a
series of ABR recordings, performed in a soundбґisolated and electrically shielded booth
with lights turned off. Subjects were tested in supine position and they were instructed to
relax and stay as still as possible to avoid artifacts.
The ABR measurements were carried out with a two PCбґbased computer system as it is
shown in Figure 3.1. Stimuli were created in MatLab using the PsychToolbox extension
(Brainard, 1997м╬ Kleiner et al., 2007) on the stimulation PC, and the recorded electrical
signals were saved on the recording PC in the ActiveView software. A digital to analogue
converter converted the digitally generated stimulus to an analog waveform. The analog
output was connected to an audio amplifier which presented the stimulus to the subject
through an insert earphone (Etymotic Research ERбґ3A). The neural activity was recorded
with electrodes and the BioSemi ActiveTwo system. Neurology surface electrodes (Ambu
Neuroline 720), also called stictrodes, were placed on the ipsilateral mastoid (inverting,
P9 or P10 depending on left or right ear) and on the lower forehead (reference, FPz).
A TM electrode (SanibelTM) was placed into the ear canal, in contact with the TM. Two
electrodes were used close to the vertex as grounding, the driven right leg (DRL) and
common mode sense (CMS). The ABR signal was recorded as the potential difference
between the electrodes on the forehead and mastoid, and the CAP as the difference
between the TM electrode and the mastoid, as shown in Figure 3.6.
ECochG and ABR recordings were conducted using two types of stimuli: clicks and LS
CEбґchirps (derived from Elberling and Don, 2010) at eight different levels: 10, 20, 30,
40, 50, 60, 70, and 80 dB nHL. All recordings were performed at a rate of 12 Hz, with
a temporal jitter of 2 ms and alternating polarity, aiming to minimize neural adaptation to
repeated stimuli. Click stimuli had a duration of 100 б╣s, while chirps were 60 ms long.
Each stimulation trace consisted of 3000 repetitions of the stimuli. Figure 3.2 illustrates
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
13
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
the presented click and chirp waveforms, the scale was normalized to the peakбґtoбґpeak
amplitude.
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the measurement setup.
Figure 3.2: Electrical and acoustical click and chirp stimuli, shown with normalized yбґaxis.
The acoustical stimuli were recorded using an earбґsimulator (GRAS RA0045бґS1 IEC
60318бґ4), thus the waveforms represent the stimuli that reached the TM, including the
earphone tube. The acoustical waveforms differ from the electrical waveforms, as shown
in Figure 3.2. While a click, as an electrical waveform, is theoretically a rectangular funcбґ
tion with zeros and ones, the acoustical waveform has a negative peak, followed by a posбґ
itive peak. As mentioned earlier, chirp waveforms are levelбґdependent, to compensate
for the levelбґdependent cochlear delay. Chirp waveforms also changed to a great extent
14
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
when going from electrical to acoustical waveforms. Acoustical stimuli appear longer and
have a different shape compared to the electrical stimuli. The amplitude of the electrical
waveform increases over time, which is not as pronounced in the acoustical waveform.
This might be a consequence of the transfer function of the earphone tube.
To analyze the transfer function of the insert earphone, Figure 3.3 presents the amplitude
spectra of the electrical and acoustical stimuli. Both click and chirp acoustical stimuli show
a rapid decrease in amplitude for frequency components above 5 kHz, as in the results
of Kristensen and Elberling, 2012. Another complicating factor is that the delay between
the 5 kHz and 10 kHz components is dependent on the stimulation level. The lower the
level, the larger the delay. Due to this reason, the low level stimuli seem to be shifted
to an earlier timeбґpoint than the high levels. This effect might interfere with the latency
values.
Figure 3.3: Amplitude spectra of electrical and acoustical click and chirp stimuli.
Click and chirp stimuli were calibrated using peakбґtoбґpeak equivalent sound pressure levбґ
els (dB ppeSPL), according to the relevant ISO standard: Б─°ISO 389бґ6:2007 бґ Acoustics бґ
Reference zero for the calibration of audiometric equipment бґ Part 6: Reference threshбґ
old of hearing for test signals of short durationБ─², 2007. The acoustical output from the
insert earphones was captured with a sound level meter (Norsonic Nor139), that was
connected to a PC. The peakбґtoбґpeak pressure of the presented stimulus was compared
to the 1000 Hz reference tone peakбґtoбґpeak pressure at the given level. Clicks were
created in Matlab as rectangular waveforms and calibrated using peRETSPL=35.5 dB
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
15
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
based on the aboveбґmentioned ISO standard, while LS CEбґchirp waveforms were proбґ
vided by Interacoustics at predefined dB nHL levels and they were calibrated indirectly
using the CEбґchirp (Kristensen and Elberling, 2012), with peRETSPL=31.5 dB ppeSPL
value (Gц╦tscheбґRasmussen et al., 2012 ).
To obtain a highбґquality signal from the cochlea and the distal end of the AN, a TM elecбґ
trode was utilized for recording neural activity. However, the presence of an electrode in
the ear canal and its contact with the TM may potentially impact sound transmission and
hearing. It is also possible that the measured electrophysiological waveforms could be
affected as well. To assess the impact of electrode placement, pure tone hearing threshбґ
olds were measured in the presence and absence of a TM electrode in the ear canal. This
measurement was conducted on a subset (six) of the participants.
Figure 3.4A displays the averaged hearing threshold with and without the TM electrode,
while Figure 3.4B shows the threshold shift caused by the TM electrode. The presence of
the TM electrode predominantly affected the lowбґfrequency hearing threshold. The largest
threshold shift was observed at 125 Hz, where the average shift reached 20 dB. However,
at frequencies above 500 Hz, the TM electrode had a relatively minor impact. These
findings partially align with a study conducted by Smith et al., 2016. In their study, they
also observed a greater effect on low frequencies compared to midбґrange frequencies.
However, they reported an effect at 8 kHz, which was not detected in the experiment
involving the six subjects of this study.
Figure 3.4: A. Average hearing threshold of six participants with and without a TM elecбґ
trode B. Hearing threshold shift caused by the TM electrode.
Additionally, the study by Smith et al., 2016 investigated the influence of electrode posiбґ
tioning at different regions of the cochlea but did not find a clear relationship. It is worth
noting that the pressure applied by the TM electrode could also play a role in the threshбґ
old shift, as higher pressure might lead to a larger shift. Individual hearing thresholds with
and without the electrode can be found in the Appendix, in Figure A.1.
The signal processing steps are illustrated in Figure 3.5. The acquired electrical signals
were exported from ActiveView and processed in MatLab. The data preprocessing was
16
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
Figure 3.5: Schematic of the signal processing procedure.
done using the FieldTrip Toolbox (Oostenveld et al., 2011, http://fieldtriptoolbox.org). First,
the signal was bandpass filtered between 100 and 3000 Hz, and a notch filter was applied
to remove the line noise at 50 Hz and its harmonics up to 2 kHz. Subsequently, the signal
was epoched using the sent trigger that accompanied each stimulus, and artifacts were
rejected based on a criterion of exceeding 20 uV within the epoch (Forte et al., 2017).
Among the 3000 trials, those that passed the artifact rejection were averaged to generate
a single signal. Averaging is a widely used technique for reducing unwanted noise. Deбґ
spite recent efforts to develop more efficient and sophisticated preprocessing methods as
alternatives to averaging, their application usually does not guarantee better results than
traditional averaging techniques, therefore averaging was applied in this project. The last
step of signal processing was peak detection.
Peak detection was performed manually by both the author and another person. They inбґ
dividually identified peaks and compared their findings to reach a consensus. The agreeбґ
ment between observers and the overall resolution of peak detection are discussed in
Chapter 4.1. Peaks were defined as significant positive (ABR) or negative (CAP) deflecбґ
tions that stood out from the surrounding peaks. If a peak could not be identified by an
observer, it was marked as 0, indicating nonбґdetection.
The amplitude of a peak was determined by calculating the difference in amplitude beбґ
tween the peak and the subsequent trough, if identifiable. If not, the largest trough within
the first 5 ms after the peak was chosen. Latency was defined as the time interval between
stimulus presentation and the detected peak. One challenging aspect of this calculation
was determining the exact time of stimulus presentation, which is a crucial part of analyzбґ
ing latencyбґlevel functions as mentioned earlier. The way the amplitude and latency were
defined in this study is illustrated in Figure 3.6.
For click stimuli, since they are very short, the timeбґpoint of sending the trigger is almost
equivalent to the actual stimulus presentation time. To account for the sound propagation
time in the plastic tube and ear canal until it reaches the TM, the reference timeбґpoint was
shifted by 1 ms. Defining the reference timeбґpoint for chirps, which are longer in duration
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
17
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
than clicks, is more complex. Some researchers set the chirp reference timeбґpoint as the
stimulus offset (Fobel and Dau, 2004), while the creators of the LS CEбґchirp set it to the
peak of the 10 kHz component of the chirp, with a delay of +1.5 ms compared to the click,
aligning ABR latencies between chirps and clicks. In this study, the reference point was
set to the peak with the largest amplitude (equivalent to the 10 kHz component peak), but
the 1.5 ms delay was not used to maintain consistency in the calculations of clicks and
chirps. The effect of the 1.5 ms delay is briefly discussed in Chapter 4.1.
Figure 3.6: Definitions of amplitude and latency in the waveforms of a participant.
Finally, a mixedбґeffects model was fitted to the dataset, in order to assess whether the
effect of stimulation level, stimulation type (click/chirp) and recording stage (CAP/ABR)
is statistically significant. These were the fixed effects in the model. As there were 20
test participants, it was reasonable to include them in the modeling process as a grouping
factor (random effect), because the measurement values from the same individual cannot
be treated as independent observations. As the age and head measurements of the
participants were also known, these values were also included as random effects.
The mixedбґeffects analysis started with constructing a full model, including all possible
interactions between the three fixed effects. The nonбґsignificant variables were then reбґ
moved, and the final model was evaluated with diagnostic plots and goodness of fit meaбґ
sures.
3.2
Model framework
As mentioned in Chapter 2.3, this project used an ABR model framework, that is based
on the concept of convolving the neural discharge rate function with a stimulus and level
18
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
independent UR. In this section, the model framework is explained in detail, with a deбґ
scription of the AN model developed by Bruce et al., 2018. Finally, a short description of
the modeling procedure in this project is given.
In this framework, the ABR is calculated as the sum of potentials (vi) produced by inбґ
dividual cells in response to stimulus (s). The response also depends on the electrode
positions (x1, x2) and time (t), besides the stimulus.
ABR(t, x1, x2, s) =
n
Б┬▒
i
vi(t, x1, x2, s)
(3.1)
The potential generated by a cell is dependent on the cellular UR (ui), which is the potential
difference produced between the two electrodes, every time the cell discharges. The
generated potential is also dependent on the instantaneous discharge rate (ri), at which
the cell discharges in response to the stimulus. The UR is a property of the cell in the
context of the head, because it depends on the electrode positions (Melcher and Kiang,
1996). The instantaneous discharge rate is the output of the AN model. Convolving (*)
these two functions result in the generated potential.
vi = ui(t, x1, x2, s) Б┬≈ri(t, s)
(3.2)
By combining Equation 3.1 and 3.2, ABR can be expressed as:
ABR(t, x1, x2, s) =
n
Б┬▒
i
ui(t, x1, x2) Б┬≈ri(t, s)
(3.3)
This format is not the most practical fr calculations, since considering each cell individually
would be a very resourceбґintensive computation. For this reason, Melcher and Kiang,
1996 suggested considering groups of cells collectively, based on similarities in anatomy
and physiology. By defining partitions of the cochlea and representing each partition with
a population of cells producing together a sum of potentials (Vp), it is possible to reduce
computation time. In this version, there is (Np) number of cells in population (p), which
have the same UR (ui,p = up). Finally, the UR is simplified to be independent of cell type
(up = UR). With these modifications, Equation 3.3 is transformed in the following way:
ABR(t, x1, x2, s) =
P
Б┬▒
p
Vp(t, x1, x2, s)
(3.4)
ABR(t, x1, x2, s) =
P
Б┬▒
p
Np
Б┬▒
i
vi,p(t, x1, x2, s)
(3.5)
ABR(t, x1, x2, s) =
P
Б┬▒
p
Np
Б┬▒
i
ui,p(t, x1, x2) Б┬≈ri,p(t, s)
(3.6)
ABR(t, x1, x2, s) =
P
Б┬▒
p
(up(t, x1, x2) Б┬≈Rp(t, s))
(3.7)
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
19
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
ABR(t, x1, x2, s) = UR(t, x1, x2) Б┬≈
P
Б┬▒
p
Rp(t, s)
(3.8)
Where (Rp) is the summed discharge rate of population (p). The representation of Equaбґ
tion 3.8 was used in this thesis. To compute the total summed discharge rate, the pheбґ
nomenological AN model was used, which was first developed by M. S. Zilany et al., 2009,
M. S. Zilany et al., 2014 and the IHCбґAN synapse was modified by Bruce (2018).
The AN model structure is shown in Figure 3.7. In this AN model, the acoustical stimulus
is first passed through a middle ear filter. Then it reaches three parallel filter paths: C1, C2
and control path filter. The output of the control path, which represents the OHC, modifies
the C1 filter characteristics. The IHC model output is then transmitted to the updated IHCбґ
AN synapse model, which generates spike times as its output. The schematic shown in
Figure 3.7 only represents the output of a single AN fiber. However, in reality, this model
is run 200 times with different frequency tuning, to get the IHC output of 200 characteristic
frequencies (CFs). For each CF, the IHC model is only run one time, but actually several
nerve fibers innervate that section of the BM, thus the output of the AN fibers (spike rates)
are summed to get the peristimulus time histogram (PSTH) of each CF. The 200 PSTHs
are summed to get the summed discharge rate (sometimes called the compound AN
response or activity). The summed discharge rate is the output of the AN model, which is
then convolved with the UR to get the simulated ABR.
Figure 3.7: Schematic of the overall structure of the model of the mammalian auditory
periphery from Zilany et al. (2009, 2014) with the updated structure of the synapse and
spikeбґgeneration model developed in 2018. Figure taken from Bruce et al., 2018.
The first step for the modeling stage of this project was obtaining the waveforms of the
stimuli at the ear canal (i.e., the acoustical waveforms). Secondly, the reference timeбґ
point for the calculation of the latencies had to be defined, to get simulated latencyбґlevel
20
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
functions that are comparable to experimental results. In the case of clicks, the stimulus
onset (t=0) was set to the largest positive peak of the acoustic stimuli. For chirps, it
was more complicated, due to the long duration of the stimuli and the waveform alteration
between electrical and acoustical stimuli. For this reason, the chirp was recorded together
with a click. The click was placed before the chirp, to know when the chirp waveform
started. As the chirp reference timeбґpoint was previously defined as the largest peak of
the electric stimulus, the same time shift was used on acoustical stimuli as well, to ensure
comparability between experimental data and simulation output.
Figure 3.8 shows a schematic of the different stages in the modeling framework of this
project. As mentioned earlier, the acoustical stimuli were the AN model input and the comбґ
pound neural activities were the output. After the AN simulation, the UR was computed
by deconvolving the experimental results with the AN model output. The CAP and ABR
grand average waveforms were used for this step (as a response to click stimulus at 80
dB nHL), together with the simulated the AN model output in response to click stimuli at 80
dB nHL. Theoretically, any stimulus could be used based on the model assumptions that
the UR is independent of the stimulus type. Finally, the peak amplitudes and latencies
were detected at each level.
Figure 3.8: Modeling procedure.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
21
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
22
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4
Results
4.1
Experimental results
In this section, the experimental results are presented. First, the grand average waveбґ
forms of the two stimuli are displayed. Second, the analysis of peak detection, specifically
the peak resolution and observer agreement are detailed. Later the amplitudeбґlevel and
latencyбґlevel functions are presented, together with the statistical analysis of latencyбґlevel
functions.
The grand average waveforms were computed by aligning the evoked response of each
subject to the mean latency, which was calculated as the average of the found latencies
at a given condition. Figure 4.1 displays the grand average CAP and ABR to click and
to chirp can be seen. Columns A and B show CAP waveforms, while columns C and
D show ABR waveforms, each having its distinctive scale to facilitate comparison within
CAP and ABR data and show the amplitude difference between the levels. In columns A
and B, the large negative deflection shortly after the reference timeбґpoint is the CAP N1,
corresponding to the same generators as the ABR wave I. The peak latency becomes
shorter and the amplitude larger with increasing level for both stimulus types. Above 50
dB nHL, a second, smaller peak is visible right after the N1 which is the N2, corresponding
to the generator of the ABR wave II. Below 60 dB nHL this peak is not visible. Clicks and
chirps produced similar waveforms, but peaks produced by chirps were earlier than those
of the clicks.
As shown in Figures 4.1C and 4.1D, the grand average ABR response also grows in amбґ
plitude and the peakбґlatencies decrease with increasing level, as with the CAPs. While at
low levels only wave V is identifiable, other peaks become more pronounced with increasбґ
ing stimulation level. Wave I can be observed on the ABR waveforms above 60 dB nHL for
clicks and above 40 dB nHL for chirps, but with very small amplitude. As is the case with
the CAP waveforms, click and chirp evoked ABR waveforms show great similarity. They
have quite similar shapes, but again, chirps produced slightly larger amplitudes, which
makes it easier to identify the peaks. For simplicity, during the discussion of results, ABR
wave V will be called ABR.
Although these waveforms were derived by averaging across all subject results where
the peaks were identified, it does not provide information about the cases where peaks
were not detectable. The evoked potentials of an example participant can be found in the
Appendix, in Figure A.2. Table 4.1 summarizes the peak resolutions expressed in percentбґ
ages, referring to the number of cases out of 20 where the peaks were detected. This
information highlights how stimulation type influences detectability and how it changes
with increasing stimulation level. The chirp resolution was as least as high as the click
at all stimulation levels, and ABR had at least as good resolution as the CAP. The lowбґ
est detectability was produced at 10 dB nHL by both clicks and chirps, where it was only
45% for both clickбґCAP and chirpбґCAP. This stimulation level was close to the hearing
threshold of the test participants. At that level, the ABR peak was detected in half of the
participants for clicks and in three quarter of them for chirps. Above 30 dB nHL, the peaks
were detectable in at least 95% of the cases. At 30 dB nHL, it decreases to 80% for click
CAPs, while for other conditions it remains at least 90%.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
23
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.1: Grand average waveforms of clickбґ and chirpбґevoked CAPs and ABRs at
different stimulus intensity levels.
Level
Click CAP
Chirp CAP
Click ABR
Chirp ABR
80
95%
95%
95%
100%
70
100%
100%
100%
100%
60
95%
100%
100%
100%
50
95%
95%
95%
100%
40
95%
95%
95%
100%
30
80%
90%
90%
100%
20
60%
75%
55%
75%
10
45%
45%
50%
75%
Table 4.1: Peak detection resolution
Another important property of peak detection is the variation caused by human observers.
If two observers individually found the peaks at the same location, they agreed on it. Table
4.2 displays the percentage of cases when the two observers identified the peaks at the
same time point individually. The agreement also includes both of them concluding that
they could not find the peak. There was more agreement at high levels than at low levels.
At 80 and 70 dB nHL the observers agreed in at least 90% of the cases. It decreased
to at least 70% between 40 and 60 dB nHL. Below 40 dB nHL it continued to decrease,
especially for clicks.
24
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Level
Click CAP
Chirp CAP
Click ABR
Chirp ABR
80
95%
95%
90%
100%
70
95%
95%
90%
90%
60
90%
95%
85%
90%
50
90%
75%
90%
80%
40
90%
80%
70%
85%
30
85%
90%
55%
90%
20
65%
80%
50%
65%
10
55%
70%
65%
65%
Table 4.2: Percentage of agreement between observers
The amplitudeбґlevel functions are shown in Figure 4.2. The individual amplitudeбґ and laбґ
tency level functions can be found in the Appendix. As expected, the amplitude increased
with increasing level for both clicks and chirps, CAPs and ABRs. For example, click CAP
amplitude grew from 0.17 uV at 10 dB nHL, to 1.24 uV at 80 dB nHL. The results confirm
that LS CEбґchirps evoke larger responses than clicks at all levels, both at the cochlear
and the brainstem level. This advantage of the chirp is more pronounced at middle range
levels, between 20 and 60 dB nHL, for example click ABR amplitude was 0.24 uV at 40 dB
nHL, and the chirp ABR amplitude was 0.41 uV at the same level. Another interesting reбґ
sult is that the advantage of the chirp is relatively greater for the ABRs than for the CAPs.
Furthermore, CAPs have larger amplitudes than ABRs, especially at high stimulation levбґ
els. At 80 dB nHL, the CAP amplitudes were more than double of the ABR amplitudes.
The standard deviation also increases with increasing stimulation level, but there does
not seem to be a large difference between clicks and chirps in this matter.
Figure 4.2: Amplitudeбґlevel functions of CAP (A) and ABR (B). Error bars represent stanбґ
dard standard error.
In Figure 4.2A the CAP amplitudes grew steadily between 10 and 60 dB nHL for both clicks
and chirps. Alamri and Jennings, 2023 also found that the amplitudes grew steadily for
clicks but not for chirps. Above 60 dB nHL the slope increased rapidly. This behavior was
the same for clicks and chirps. At middle range levels chirp amplitudes were larger than
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
25
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
click. This difference vanished at the highest stimulation levels, but the standard errors
(calculated as standard deviation divided by the square root of number of detected peaks)
were also greater there, thus it was not clear whether there was a difference between
amplitudes at high levels or not.
In Figure 4.2B the ABR amplitudeбґlevel functions are shown. The slope of these curves
are quite similar to those of the CAP until 60 dB nHL, but the rapid increase in slope is not
present for ABR. For ABR, the chirp produced larger amplitude at all levels than the click,
but this is not the case for CAP. This might be related to that LSбґCE chirps were designed
to evoke large ABR amplitudes than clicks at all levels, since they are level dependent.
CAP amplitudes were not considered during the development of LSбґCE chirps (Elberling
et al., 2010). This figure provides a visual representation of Table A.1 in the Appendix.
Figure 4.3 shows the mean latencyбґlevel functions for click and chirp, CAP and ABR.
As expected, the latency decreases with increasing stimulation level. Clicks produced
greater latencies than chirps in all conditions. The largest latency shift in the tested 70
dB range was for click CAPs (2.34 ms), followed by click ABRs (2.15 ms) and chirp CAPs
(1.94 ms), and the smallest shift was observed for chirp ABRs (1.69 ms). Based on this
data, clicks evoked more levelбґdependent responses than chirps. The latency standard
deviations also decreased with increasing stinulation level. There is no clear relationбґ
ship between standard deviation and stimulus type or recording stage. This figure clearly
shows that ABRs had larger latency than CAPs as expected, and clicks had larger latency
than chirps. This relationship is influenced by the definition of the reference timeбґpoint,
as discussed previously. There was a bigger gap between click and chirp latencies of
the ABR than of the CAP, which is in connection with the IPI, which is the time differбґ
ence between the CAP and ABR latency for the same condition. By analyzing the relative
growth of the latencies, the similarities between CAP and ABR levelбґdependency can be
investigated.
Figure 4.3: Latencyбґlevel functions.
The relative growth was calculated by subtracting the 80 dB nHL latency from the absolute
latencies, so that the 80 dB nHL latency is zero, and the latency shift caused by decreasing
level is shown at all the lower levels. As shown in Figure 4.4A, the relative growth of click
response latency was nearly identical in the cochlea and the brainstem. Only at 40 and
50 dB nHL had CAP higher relative latency than the ABR. Figure 4.4B shows that the
characteristics of the chirp response were similar to the clicks. A noticeable difference is
that there is a greater difference in relative latency between CAP and ABR latencies at
26
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
middle range frequencies (30бґ50 dB nHL) than for the clicks.
Figure 4.4: Relative growth of click (A) and chirp (B) latencyбґlevel functions.
As mentioned above, the IPI indicates the time difference between the CAP and ABR
wave V at each level, reflecting the cochlear and brainstem processing. This is shown in
Figure 4.5A. The IPI was independent of stimulation level, only slight fluctuations can be
observed on the curves: a decrease at 10 dB nHL and increases above 50 dB nHL. At all
levels the clicks had larger IPI than the chirps. The difference is smaller at the lowest and
highest stimulation level than between 20 and 70 dB nHL.
Figure 4.5B shows shifting the chirp responses by 1.5 ms to align those with the click
responses, as suggested by Kristensen and Elberling, 2012. They argued for this shift to
facilitate the comparison of click and chirp responses, especially at low stimulation levels.
The results presented here confirm that this shift is reasonable for brainstem responses at
low level, but at high levels the chirp slope decreased, causing the curves to grow further
apart from each other. For the CAP this shift resulted in placing the chirp curve above the
click, which means that the 1.5 ms shift was too large for the CAP.
Figure 4.5: A. Click and chirp IPI. B. Effect of shifting the chirp latencyбґlevel functions by
1.5 ms.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
27
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.6 shows the click and chirp latencyбґlevel functions for females and males sepбґ
arately. In the case of the clicks (Figure 4.6A) the latencies for females and males were
very similar between 30 and 80 dB nHL, both for CAP and ABR. At 10 and 20 dB nHL,
males had larger latencies than females both for CAP and for ABR. This is especially
true for 20 dB nHL. The latency difference at this intensity level was larger for ABRs than
CAPs. Figure 4.6B shows the latencies for the chirp. ABR latencies were very similar for
females and males at high level, but with decreasing level the difference became larger
between them, males produced larger latencies than females, in accordance with previбґ
ous studies (Thomsen et al., 1978м╬ Beagley and Sheldrake, 1978). CAP latencies do not
show this difference between sexes. Female and male latencies were very similar to each
other at 10, 40, 60, 70 and 80 dB nHL.
Figure 4.6: A. Click latencies by sex. B. Chirp latencies by sex.
Finally, mixed effects models were fitted to the experimental latency dataset, using 95%
significance level for evaluation. As shown in Table 4.3, the interaction term of all three
fixed effects (p=0.487) was not statistically significant, thus it could be removed from the
model, as well as the interaction of stage and intensity level (p=0.171). The other two
interaction terms were found to be significant.
Name
Estimate
SE
tбґstat
pбґvalue
Intercept
7.69
0.083
93.19
0
stage (CAP/ABR)
бґ3.68
0.104
бґ35.51
1.99eбґ144
type (click/chirp)
бґ1.63
0.096
бґ16.97
3.03eбґ52
intensity level
бґ0.03
0.001
бґ25.56
1.39eбґ95
stage:type
0.44
0.140
3.14
1.79eбґ3
stage: intensity level
бґ0.003
0.002
бґ1.37
0.171
type:intensity level
0.009
0.002
5.04
6.263eбґ7
stage:type:intensity level
бґ0.002
0.003
бґ0.69
0.487
Table 4.3: Model output of full mixed effects model
28
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
The fitted values for the reduced model output is shown in Table 4.4. Diagnostics plots
for this model are shown in Figure 4.7. The stage effect is negative, which means that
the latency is shorter for CAPs than for ABRs. This finding is aligned with Figure 4.3 and
it is also reasonable from the general knowledge of the auditory pathway, that the signal
first reaches the cochlea, then travels to the brainstem. The estimated value of the stage
stage term was бґ3.81, which corresponds to the average IPI. The effect of stimulation type
is бґ1.6, so if the stimulation type is chirp, the latency values should be shifted by бґ1.6 ms.
This value is very close to the бґ1.5 ms shift value proposed by Kristensen and Elberling,
2012. The interaction term of stage and type is statistically significant, which could be
related to the differences found in the IPI. The value of this term was 0.36, indicating that
the average difference in IPI between stimulus types was 0.36 ms. The type and level
interaction term is significant but very small, indicating that the relative growth of clicks
and chirps is indeed different. However, the estimated value of this term was only 0.008,
which corresponds to a minor modification.
Name
Estimate
SE
tбґstat
pбґvalue
Intercept
7.75
0.0678
114.34
0
stage (CAP/ABR)
бґ3.81
0.041
бґ92.27
0
type (click/chirp)
бґ1.60
0.075
бґ21.29
6.80eбґ74
level
бґ0.04
0.001
бґ37
1.34eбґ151
stage:type
0.36
0.057
6.24
8.56eбґ10
type:level
0.008
0.001
6.38
3.76eбґ10
Table 4.4: Model output of final mixed effects model
The residuals against the fitted values are shown in Figure 4.7A, and the plot of the fitted
values against the response is shown in Figure 4.7B. There is no visible trend of the
residuals, and the fitted against the response values plot also looks fine, the values follow
a straight line with only a few outliers.
Figure 4.7: A. Residuals vs fitted values. B. Fitted vs response values.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
29
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.2
Modeling results
In this section, the ABR model framework results will be presented. First, the input and
ouput of the AN model will be shown, followed by the amplitudeбґlevel and latency level
functions. Then, the results of convolving the AN model output with the UR will be preбґ
sented, to obtain the simulated waveforms corresponding to CAPs and ABRs. Finally, the
modeling results will be compared to the experimental results.
The model input is shown in panels A and B of Figure 4.8, which is equivalent to the
acoustical stimuli discussed in Chapter 3.1. The motivation behind using the acoustical
stimuli for simulations was to simulate the experimental conditions as closely as possible.
The waveforms are shown on a normalised scale for better visibility, but the low level stimбґ
uli had substantially smaller amplitudes than the high levels. The recordings contained
considerable amount of noise, which is more visible at 10 and 20 dB nHL, where the noise
had comparable amplitude to the signal in interest, so the SNR was lower.
Figure 4.8: AN model input and output.
Panels C and D of Figure 4.8 show the output of the AN model in response to the click
and chirp stimulus respectively. With increasing stimulus level, the response amplitude
increased. Chirp responses had larger amplitudes than clicks of the same level. The click
response was asymmetrical, with a steep ascending slope and flatter descending slope,
while the chirp slopes were more symmetrical with similar ascending and descending
slopes. As expected, the click responses had longer durations, due to the travelling wave
30
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
delay in the cochlea. In contrast, chirp responses were much sharper with a clear peak
and shorter duration.
Figure 4.9 shows the amplitudeбґlevel and latencyбґlevel functions of the AN model reбґ
sponse. The amplitude and latency values in each condition are summarized in Table A.3
in the Appendix. As shown in Figure 4.9A, for clicks the amplitude response increased
from 27.16 to 102.63 (model unit), so more than tripled from the lowest level to the highбґ
est. The chirp amplitude behaviour is similar to the clicks, with increasing amplitude from
low to high stimulation level and even more levelбґdependency than clicks, with growing
from 34.43 to 188.55 with increasing stimulus level. Below 40 dB nHL, the click and chirp
responses had little differences in amplitude. The chirp amplitudes were slightly higher
than the click amplitudes. A noticeable difference between clicks and chirps was that the
chirp amplitude kept growing rapidly until 60 dB nHL, and then started to decrease. In
contrast, clicks had a slower growth rate, and the amplitude also decreased above 60 dB
nHL.
Figure 4.9: A. Simulated click and chirp amplitudeбґlevel functions B. Simulated latencyбґ
level functions.
Figure 4.9B shows the latencyбґlevel functions of the AN simulation results. In the case of
clicks, increasing stimulation levels resulted in decreasing the latency, except for 20 to 40
dB nHL, where the latency remained nearly constant. For clicks, the latency decreased
by 1.68 ms (from 3.38 ms to 1.7 ms) from the lowest to the highest stimulation level, which
is an almost 50% reduction. As mentioned above, the chirp latencyбґlevel functions do not
show the expected behavior. The chirp latency was substantially less dependent on the
stimulation intensity level than the click latency was, it only decreased by 0.63 ms (from
1.53 ms to 0.94 ms).
The URs (Figure 4.10) were calculated by deconvolving the 80 dB nHL click grandбґaverage
experimental waveforms with the AN model output. The CAP UR (Figure 4.10A) begins
with a negative peak, followed by a positive peak around 1 ms. The ABR UR also has a
very prominent negative peak shortly after 5 ms. The CAP UR has higher amplitude than
the ABR amplitude. This reflects the amplitude difference of CAP and ABR experimental
results, that were used to calculate the URs.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
31
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.10: A. UR for CAP. B. UR for ABR.
Figure 4.11: Experimental and simulated CAP waveforms.
These URs were used to calculate the simulated CAP and ABR waveforms, which are
shown in Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12, respectively. These plots include the experimental
waveforms as well, to facilitate comparison. Both figures show two important properties of
the simulation output. Firstly, chirps produced higher amplitude results than clicks. Secбґ
ondly, the response amplitude increased with increasing stimulus intensity. In simulated
32
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
click CAP (Figure 4.11A), there was a negative peak shortly after t=0, which might have
been an artifact, because it had nearly the same amplitude at all levels. A similar artifact
was reported in Alamri and Jennings, 2023. The actual CAP peak is most likely the negбґ
ative deflection occurring shortly after that, which shows levelбґdependent amplitudes and
latencies, as expected. Simulated chirp waveforms (Figure 4.11B) did not show that negбґ
ative peak close to t=0, only another peak, which has strongly levelбґdependent amplitude,
but did not seem to change in latency across levels.
Figure 4.12: Experimental and simulated ABR waveforms.
Similarly to the AN model output, there is a difference in the CAP width for click and
chirp simulation output. Click CAPs look slightly more spread out over time, while chirp
responses look sharper. This effect is also visible on experimental waveforms. Since
clicks contain all frequencies simultaneously, the cochlea is activated sequentially, leading
to an AN response which is less synchronized in time. This is also reflected in the CAP
and ABR simulations. In contrast, lowбґfrequency components are delayed in the chirp,
therefore the AN response is more synchronized, thus the CAP and ABR waveforms are
also sharper.
Peak amplitudes and latencies were obtained from the simulated CAP and ABR waveбґ
form. These are are plotted together with the experimental results to facilitate comparison.
The amplitudeбґlevel functions are shown in Figure 4.13. The obtained amplitude and laбґ
tency values are summarised in Table A.4 and Table A.5 in the Appendix, respectively.
Similarly to the AN model output, chirpбґevoked amplitudes were greater than clickбґevoked
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
33
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
amplitudes and CAP amplitudes were larger than ABR amplitudes. Generally speaking,
the response amplitude increased with increasing level, but there were a few exceptions.
An important similarity between experimental and simulated data is that the amplitudes
were roughly in the same range. However, a clear difference between experimental and
simulated data is that all simulated amplitude functions peaked around 60 dB nHL and
decreased above that level. In contrast, experimental results showed the steepest slope
between 60 and 80 dB nHL.
In the case of click responses, simulated and experimental amplitudeбґlevel functions inбґ
tersected at 30 dB nHL and 70 dB nHL, both for CAP and ABR. In the case of chirp reбґ
sponses, simulated and experimental amplitudes were very similar at 10 and 80 dB nHL.
For ABR the similarity was even more striking, as simulated and experimental amplitudes
were remarkably close to each other between 10 and 40 dB nHL.
Figure 4.13: Amplitudeбґlevel functions of simulated and experimental CAP and ABR.
The experimental and simulated latencyбґlevel functions are shown in Figure 4.14. Simiбґ
larly to amplitudeбґlevel functions, the simulated latencyбґlevel functions were in the same
range as experimental results, the curves intersect each other between 30 and 50 dB
nHL in all cases. A noticeable difference between experimental and simulated results is
that simulated latencies were far less levelбґdependent, than experimental results. In fact,
simulated chirp response latencies did not change with level at all. Although click ABR
latencies somewhat decreased with increasing stimulation level, the latency change was
34
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
underestimated by the model. In the case of simulated click response CAP latencies,
the latencies for 10 and 20 dB nHL stimulation were similar to the experimental results.
The IPIs were the same for simulated click and chirp response, it was around 3.9 ms. In
contrast, experimental chirp IPIs were shorter than click IPIs. This topic will be discussed
in more detail in Chapter 5.2
Figure 4.14: Latencyбґlevel functions of simulated and experimental CAP and ABR.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
35
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
36
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
5.1
Comparative analysis of clickбґ and chirpбґevoked CAP and
ABR
In this section, the experimental results are discussed focusing on the first two research
questions explained in Chapter 1. The first question concerned the effect of stimulus type
on CAP and ABR amplitude and latencyбґfunctions, whether click or chirp is used. The
second question focused on the generator site, to investigate recorded signals originating
from the cochlea and the brainstem. The questions are closely related to each other,
therefore they are discussed together in this section. Additionally, a comparative analysis
with prior research findings is also given in this section.
As observed in Figure 4.2, CAPs had higher amplitude than ABRs in general. This is
most likely a consequence of the electrode location, since CAPs were captured at the
TM, very close to the signal generators, while ABRs were recorded with scalp electrodes
(Mц╦ller and Jho, 1989). In addition, wave I in the ABR waveforms was only visible at high
stimulation levels (Figure 4.1 and Figure A.2). This suggests that it was necessary to use
ECochG with a TM electrode to attain information from the cochlear activity at low levels
in order to study the cochlear latencyбґfunctions in a large dynamic range.
Peak detectability is an important property of AEPs, due to the common clinical application
of ABR to determine the hearing threshold. Based on the peak resolution of this study
(Table 4.1), chirp was detected in more cases than clicks, which makes chirp a great
alternative to click for hearing threshold determination. Numerous other studies also found
LSбґCE chirps to be superior stimuli for this application, due to their higher amplitude and
higher resolution than clickбґevoked responses (Cargnelutti et al., 2017, Di Scipio and
Mastronardi, 2018).
Latencyбґlevel functions in Figure 4.3 showed that chirps produced shorter latencies than
clicks, which could be related to the way the latency was defined, more precisely to the
reference timeбґpoint from which the latency is measured. This timeбґpoint is inevitably
different for clicks and chirps, due to the fundamental difference in their waveforms. The
chirp reference timeбґpoint in this analysis was the largest peak of the electrical waveforms,
as suggested in Kristensen and Elberling, 2012. As Figure 3.2 showed, acoustical waveбґ
forms ended before the electrical waveforms, and the reference timeбґpoint was defined on
the electrical waveforms. If the chirp reference timeбґpoint was defined on the acoustical
waveforms, the chirp latencies could potentially be increased. This might be an explaбґ
nation for the shorter latency of chirp responses. It might be more suitable to define the
reference timeбґpoint based on the acoustical waveforms. However, another complicating
factor with the chirp waveforms is that the delay function is dependent on level, thus the
waveform is dependent on level. As a result, changing the reference timeбґpoint definition
could also change the resulting latencyбґlevel functions.
The idea proposed by Kristensen and Elberling, 2012 of shifting the chirp evoked latencyбґ
level functions by 1.5 ms looks reasonable for the ABR at low levels, as the click and
chirp latencyбґlevel functions were very close to each other. However, this 1.5 ms shift
does not seem to work for the CAP, as it is shown in Figure 4.5B. The 1.5 ms shift of
the chirp latencyбґlevel functions resulted in placing the chirp curve above the click, which
means that the 1.5 ms shift is probably too large for the CAP, a smaller shift would be
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
37
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
more suitable at the level of the cochlea. This finding could be related to the difference in
IPI between clicks and chirps. It should be noted that the 1.5 ms shift of the chirp latencyбґ
level functions only worked at low levels, because the rate of growth was different for click
and chirps at high levels. While click latencies continued to decrease above 50 dB nHL,
they remained nearly constant for chirps. This could be related to the difference in click
and chirp latency definitions and waveforms, that the chirp latency depends on where the
reference timeбґpoint is.
According to Figure 4.5A, IPI was constant across all levels but it was different for clicks
and chirps. This indicates that the travel time between the cochlea and the brainstem
is probably not dependent on stimulation level, however it is likely to be dependent on
stimulation type. Other studies also found chirp IPI to be shorter than click IPI (da Silva
Ormundo and Lewis, 2021, Di Scipio and Mastronardi, 2018, Pushpalatha and Konadath,
2016, Huang et al., 2022), although the found IPI values showed some variation in these
studies. Based on reported absolute latency values, the studies of Cargnelutti et al., 2017
and AlбґMula, 2021 only found minor differences between click and chirp IPIs. Due to the
variability between these studies, further investigation is required to support the finding
that chirp IPIs are shorter than click IPIs.
The reason for this stimulus dependent IPI has not been closely investigated, but it might
be caused by stimulusбґdependent retrocochlear proccessing. Alternatively, this could be
related to a difference in cochlear processing of clicks and chirps. The click CAP primarбґ
ily involves highбґfrequency cochlear regions, whereas the chirp CAP peak predominantly
reflects middleбґrange frequency activation, exhibiting delayed responses relative to high
frequency activation. This temporal disparity could contribute to the observed IPI disбґ
crepancy due to the delays between high and low frequency activation. For example,
octopus cells in the cochlear nucleus could also contribute to the IPI difference between
click and chirps. Octopus cells compensate differentially for AN fibers tuned to high and
low frequencies (McGinley et al., 2012).
Based on the similarity between CAP and ABR latency growth functions, the latency differбґ
ence between them seems to be a linear shift, hence the travel time between the cochlea
and the brainstem might be independent of level. The mixed effects model also showed
that the interaction term between the recording stage (CAP/ABR) and the stimulation level
is not significant. In practice, this means that the slope of the latencyбґlevel function was
not dependent on whether the signal was generated in the cochlea or in the brainstem.
This finding supports that probably most nonбґlinear processes happen at the distal end
of the auditory pathway. Hence the approach of the ABR model used in this thesis could
provide a very good approximation for simulating ABR waveforms. This is a central finding
of this thesis.
5.2
Evaluation of simulated evoked responses against
experimental data
In this section, the modeling results are evaluated by comparing that to the experimental
findings, which is essentially the third research question explained in Chapter 1. modeling
results are also compared to literature data, starting with a simple comparison of final
latencyбґlevel functions of this project and Dau, 2003.
Figure 5.1A shows the latencyбґlevel functions found in this project next to the latencyбґlevel
functions of Dau, 2003 (Figure 5.1B), which were originally presented in Chapter 2.3. As
mentioned before, it is not straightforward to compare absolute latency values found in
one study to another, because absolute latency depends on the latency definition (how
38
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
the reference timeбґpoint was chosen). Therefore it is more appropriate to compare the
slope of the latencyбґlevel functions and the relative growth. A clear similarity between
the results is that experimental latencies were more level dependent than the simulation
output. There is also great similarity between the slope of the latencyбґlevel functions,
indicating great agreement between the studies. A slight difference is that while Dau,
2003 found the simulated 80 dB nHL response to be the closest to the experimental data
(where the two curves meet), the present study found this intersection at 30 dB nHL. This
is only a minor difference, since the latency growth carries more information than absolute
latency values and this intersection difference might be caused by differences in reference
timeбґpoint definitions.
Figure 5.1: A. Latencyбґlevel functions found in the current analysis. B. Latencyбґlevel
functions found by Dau, 2003.
The UR used in this study shows some similarities with the UR used in Dau, 2003 and
with the UR of Rц╦nne et al., 2012 in terms of peak positioning. All three of these URs had
a large positive peak followed by a large negative peak around 5 ms. However, the peak
around 5 ms was more prominent in those studies, while in this thesis neighboring peaks
had only slightly lower amplitudes than the peak at 5 ms. This might be influenced by the
grand average waveform used for UR computation.
A major motivating factor to study experimental and simulated latencyбґlevel functions was
that the previous modeling attempt concluded that simulated ABR latency was less levelбґ
dependent than human recordings (Dau, 2003). This thesis came to the same conclusion,
even though a different AN model was utilized and more subjects were tested for referбґ
ence dataset. Experimental results showed that the latency difference between cochlear
and brainstem recordings is only a linear shift (Figure 4.4), thus the general idea of conбґ
volving the AN output with a UR is probably a reasonable approach. The latencyбґlevel
discrepancy is most likely to be caused by the limitations of the AN model. A possible
explanation for the discrepancy is that the original AN model, that was developed based
on invasive cat experiments, could capture the levelбґdependency, but this property was
lost during the Б─≤humanizationБ─≥ process of converting the model from cat to human, due to
the lack of human data to adjust the model parameters. This theory could be verified by
running simulations of the cat AN and comparing the resulting latencyбґlevel functions with
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
39
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
cat wave I or wave V latencies. Another possible explanation is that even the cat version
of the model lacks the sufficient levelбґdependency. In any case, the AN model should be
updated.
Some results of this thesis were not entirely aligned with the ABR model used in this
thesis. For example, IPI was different in clicks and chirps, indicating that the travel time
between the cochlea and the brainstem is dependent on stimulation type. If the same UR
response is used in ABR modeling for clicks and chirps, the simulated IPI will theoretically
be the same for clicks and chirps. This was also what this study showed, the simulated IPI
was the same for clicks and chirps, it was 3.9 ms. This result indicates that the UR could
be dependent on the stimulation type, which contradicts the basic concept of a UR and
Equation 3.8, as that is assumed to be a basic cellular property, which is only dependent
on the cell type, time and electrode location (Melcher and Kiang, 1996).
Simulated chirp response latency was less levelбґdependent than click response. This
might be influenced by the recorded chirp waveforms and how the latency derivation was
defined. The acoustical chirp waveforms were different from the electrical output. The
chirps at lower levels ended before the chirps at higher levels. This special condition
might have canceled out some of the levelбґdependency of the simulation output latency.
Alamri and Jennings, 2023 also analyzed the CAP latencyбґlevel functions, in response to
click and chirp, but they used the CEбґchirp instead of the levelбґdependent LS CEбґchirp.
They also applied the convolution framework based on the theory established by M. H.
Goldstein and Kiang, 1958. They used an AN model developed by M. S. Zilany et al.,
2014, which is an earlier version of the AN model used in this study. They also found the
simulated latencies to be less dependent on level than data obtained from experiments.
Their simulations showed identical latencyбґlevel functions for clicks and chirps, while this
study found no levelбґdependency in simulated chirp responses. This supports the idea
that the lack of levelбґdependency in chirp response simulations might be attributed to the
improper chirp latency definition in this study. A possible solution to this problem could be
reevaluating the chirp reference timeбґpoint to fit better to the acoustical chirp stimuli.
40
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
The main goal of this thesis was to collect a sufficiently large and controlled CAP and ABR
reference dataset in response to clicks and chirps across a broad dynamic range, with the
aim of evaluating simulated CAP and ABR responses to these stimuli. The primary focus
of the analysis was examining latencyбґlevel functions, as earlier research indicated that
the ABR model was unable to accurately predict the latencyбґlevel function observed in
human experimental data (Dau, 2003).
Results of this project indicated that both clicks and chirps produced levelбґdependent
CAP and ABR amplitudes and latencies. Chirps evoked greater amplitude responses at
middleбґrange intensities (20бґ60 dB nHL) compared to clicks, and CAPs had higher ampliбґ
tudes than ABRs, and as the stimulation level increased, the latency decreased. Chirps
evoked shorter latency than clicks, and the IPI was mainly intensity levelбґindependent
and shorter for chirps than for clicks. The growth in latency was very similar for CAP and
ABR, which supports the theory behind convolving the AN output with the UR to obtain
simulated CAP and ABR responses. The simulation of AN fibers also showed an increase
in response amplitude with increasing stimulation level. However, only a slight decrease
in latency was observed with increasing stimulation level, which was not as much as
expected based on experimental results. There was a difference in levelбґdependency beбґ
tween click and chirp model output, with chirp response being less dependent on level
than click response.
Overall, experimental results suggest that the latencyбґlevel functions in the cochlea and
brainstem are essentially the same, they are only shifted one from the other. This supбґ
ports that convolving the AN model output with the UR could be a reasonable approach.
However, the AN model underestimated the latencyбґlevel functions. Consequently, the
ABR model output underestimated them as well. In addition, IPI was found to be constant
across levels but dependent on stimulus type, suggesting that the travel time between the
cochlea and the brainstem could be dependent on stimulation type. This indicates that
the ABR model could be oversimplified and instead of a UR, it might be more suitable to
convolve the AN model output with a stimulus dependent function or having different URs
for different CF sections.
Certain limitations in this project need to be highlighted. One of the major limitations is
that the identification of CAP and ABR peaks was not done by trained professionals. To
overcome this limitation, future work could involve validating the identified peaks of this
study and reevaluating the results. Another limitation is that even though the participants
had normal audiograms, there is a possibility that they might have HHL due to overexpoбґ
sure to noise or other causes (e.g. genetic conditions, exposure to ototoxic substances).
The participants were only asked if they had any hearingбґrelated issues, but further meaбґ
surements such as speech intelligibility tests could be conducted to ensure that they do
not have HHL, thus they represent the healthy, young, normal hearing population.
Further investigation can be conducted on the topic of this thesis. Firstly, the experimental
process needs to be examined further to find the most effective settings, such as stimuбґ
lation rate, number of repetitions, and polarity. This is crucial because the lack of stanбґ
dardization in these parameters makes result comparison very challenging. Additionally,
a precise definition of the latency reference point could be established, since researchers
define it differently, resulting in large variability in latencyбґlevel functions, particularly for
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
41
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
chirps where the reference timeбґpoint changes with level. The standardisation of these
details could improve comparability between studies. By achieving better comparability,
the scientific community could arrive at more reliable conclusions based on results that
support each other.
Secondly, a study with followбґup EEG measurements could be conducted to research the
changes in AEP throughout a lifetime. That study could eliminate the individual variations
in data to focus on specific factors that affect AEPs. The most straightforward of these
factors is aging. Having CAP and ABR measurements from individuals when they are
20, 40, 60, 80 years old could provide insight into the aging process of hearing. Besides
aging, the effect of extended noise exposure could also be studied, even specific to the
profession. For example, measuring the AEPs of construction workers every 5 years
could provide information about the hazards of their profession.
Additionally, there is significant potential for improvement in modeling. This study conбґ
cluded that the output of this AN model (and consequently of this ABR model) does not
follow the experimental latencyбґlevel functions. Therefore further efforts could be made to
investigate this relationship. A possible way is to study latencyбґlevel functions in animals.
For example, the original cat AN model could be compared with cat experimental data. If
the experimental and simulated latencyбґlevel functions match, the latencyбґlevel function
discrepancy could originate from the humanisation process. If not, the discrepancy could
potentially originate already from the cat AN model.
Finally, the IPI difference between clickбґ and chirpбґevoked response should be further inбґ
vestigated. The entire experiment could be repeated to confirm this result. If a second set
of measurements confirms that the IPI for chirps is shorter for clicks than chirps, this findбґ
ing could be incorporated into the ABR model framework, by using a stimulusбґdependent
response instead of a UR.
This project has practical implications, as the experimental latencyбґlevel functions could
serve as healthy reference data in various research areas such as studying the impact
of aging, noise exposure, or different diseases. Additionally, it could be used as a referбґ
ence for further modeling work to adjust simulated latencyбґlevel functions to experimental
results of the intact auditory system or modeling pathologies. The experimental results
showed almost identical latencyбґlevel functions originating from the cochlea and the brainбґ
stem. Hence this study supports the theory of using an AN model to simulate the nonбґ
linear processing of the cochlea and then using linear operations to obtain simulated CAP
and ABR. Consequently, this study encourages future work on this ABR framework.
42
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
Achor, L. J., & Starr, A. (1980). Auditory brain stem responses in the cat. II. effects of
lesions. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., 48(2), 174Б─⌠190.
Alamri, Y., & Jennings, S. G. (2023). Computational modeling of the human compound
action potential.
AlбґMula, D. M. S. (2021). The difference between chirp & click stimulation in diagnostic
auditory brainstem response in assessment of hearing among age group between
1бґ10 years iraqi children. Journal of University of Shanghai for Science and Techбґ
nology, 23(5), 433Б─⌠444.
Anderson, D. J., Rose, J. E., Hind, J. E., & Brugge, J. F. (1971). Temporal position of
discharges in single auditory nerve fibers within the cycle of a sineбґwave stimulus:
Frequency and intensity effects. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 49(4), Suppl 2:1131+.
Arbejdstilsynet бґ English [Accessed: May 21, 2023]. (2023).
Beagley, H. A., & Sheldrake, J. B. (1978). Differences in brainstem response latency with
age and sex. Br. J. Audiol., 12(3), 69Б─⌠77.
Bц╘kц╘sy, G. (1960). Experiments in hearing. McGrawбґHill.
Bondy, J., Becker, S., Bruce, I., Trainor, L., & Haykin, S. (2004). A novel signalбґprocessing
strategy for hearingбґaid design: Neurocompensation. Signal Processing, 84(7),
1239Б─⌠1253.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10, 433Б─⌠436.
Brinkmann R., S. M. (1979). Human onбґ and offбґpotentials of the brainstem. influence of
stimulus envelope characteristics. Scand. Audiol, 8, 27Б─⌠32.
Britt, R., & Rossi, G. (1980). Neural generators of brainstem auditory evoked responses.
part i. lesion studies. Neuroscience Abstracts, 6.
Bruce, I. C. (2004). Physiological assessment of contrastбґenhancing frequency shaping
and multiband compression in hearing aids. Physiological measurement, 25(4),
945.
Bruce, I. C., Erfani, Y., & Zilany, M. S. A. (2018). A phenomenological model of the
synapse between the inner hair cell and auditory nerve: Implications of limited
neurotransmitter release sites. Hear. Res., 360, 40Б─⌠54.
Cargnelutti, M., CцЁser, P. L., & Biaggio, E. P. V. (2017). Ls ceбґchirpб╝ vs. click in the neuбґ
roaudiological diagnosis by abr. Brazilian journal of otorhinolaryngology, 83, 313Б─⌠
317.
Carney, L. H. (1993). A model for the responses of lowбґfrequency auditoryбґnerve fibers in
cat. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 93(1), 401Б─⌠417.
Coats, A. C., & Martin, J. L. (1978). Human auditory nerve action potentials and brain stem
evoked responses: Effects of audiogram shape and lesion location. Otolaryngolбґ
ogy, 86(1), ORLБ─⌠110.
Conti, G., Modica, V., Castrataro, A., Fileni, A., & Colosimo, C., Jr. (1988). Latency of the
auditory brainstem response (ABR) and head size. evidence of the relationship by
means of radiographic data. Scand. Audiol. Suppl., 30, 219Б─⌠223.
da Silva Ormundo, D., & Lewis, D. R. (2021). Auditory brainstem response with click and
ceбґchirpб╝ level specific stimuli in hearing infants. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology, 147, 110819. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.
2021.110819
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
43
==PAGE:56==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dau, T., Wegner, O., Mellert, V., & Kollmeier, B. (2000). Auditory brainstem responses with
optimized chirp signals compensating basilarбґmembrane dispersion. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 107(3), 1530Б─⌠1540.
Dau, T. (2003). The importance of cochlear processing for the formation of auditory brainбґ
stem and frequency following responses. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 113(2), 936Б─⌠950.
de Boer, E. (1980). Auditory physics. physical principles in hearing theory. i, Physics Reбґ
ports, 62(2), 87Б─⌠174.
Dekaban, A. S. (1978). Changes in brain weights during the span of human life: Relation
of brain weights to body heights and body weights. Ann. Neurol., 4(4), 345Б─⌠356.
Dempsey, J. J., Censoprano, E., & Mazor, M. (1986). Relationship between head size and
latency of the auditory brainstem response: Le rapport qui existe entre le volume
de la tд⌡le et la latence des rц╘ponses auditives du tronc cц╘rц╘bral. Int. J. Audiol.,
25(4бґ5), 258Б─⌠262.
Deng, L., & Geisler, C. D. (1987). A composite auditory model for processing speech
soundsБ─². J. Acoust. Soc. Am, 82(6), 2001Б─⌠2012.
Di Scipio, E., & Mastronardi, L. (2018). Level specific ceбґchirpб╝ baepБ─≥s: A new faster
technique in neuromonitoring cochlear nerve during cerebelloбґpontine angle tumor
surgery. Interdisciplinary Neurosurgery, 11, 4Б─⌠7. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.inat.2017.10.001
Don, M., Masuda, A., Nelson, R., & Brackmann, D. (1997). Successful detection of small
acoustic tumors using the stacked derivedбґband auditory brain stem response amбґ
plitude. Am J of Otol, 18, 608Б─⌠621.
Dzulkarnain, A. A. A., Shahrudin, F. A., Jamal, F. N., Marzuki, M. N., & Mazlan, M. N. S.
(2020). Effects of stimulus repetition rates on the auditory brainstem response to
levelбґspecific ceбґchirp in normalбґhearing adults. American Journal of Audiology,
29(4), 838Б─⌠850. https://doi.org/10.1044/2020\_AJA-20-00049
Elberling, C., Callц╦, J., & Don, M. (2010). Evaluating auditory brainstem responses to
different chirp stimuli at three levels of stimulation. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 128(1),
215Б─⌠223.
Elberling, C., & Don, M. (2008). Auditory brainstem responses to a chirp stimulus deбґ
signed from derivedбґband latencies in normalбґhearing subjects. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 124(5), 3022Б─⌠3037.
Elberling, C., & Don, M. (2010). A direct approach for the design of chirp stimuli used
for the recording of auditory brainstem responses. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 128(5),
2955Б─⌠2964.
ElkindбґHirsch, K. E., Wallace, E., Malinak, L. R., & Jerger, J. J. (1994). Sex hormones
regulate ABR latency. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg., 110(1), 46Б─⌠52.
Fisch, U. P., & Ruben, R. J. (1962). Electrical acoustical response to click stimulation after
section of the eighth nerve. Acta Otolaryngol., 54(1бґ6), 532Б─⌠542.
Fobel, O., & Dau, T. (2004). Searching for the optimal stimulus eliciting auditory brainstem
responses in humans. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 116(4), 2213Б─⌠2222.
Forte, A. E., Etard, O., & Reichenbach, T. (2017). The human auditory brainstem response
to running speech reveals a subcortical mechanism for selective attention. Elife,
6.
Ghitza, O. (1988). Temporal nonбґplace information in the auditoryбґnerve firing patterns as
a frontбґend for speech recognition in a noisy environment. J. Phon., 16(1), 109Б─⌠
123.
Goldstein, J. L. (1990). Modeling rapid waveform compression on the basilar membrane
as multipleбґbandpassбґnonlinearity filtering. Hear. Res., 49(1бґ3), 39Б─⌠60.
44
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:57==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Goldstein, M. H., & Kiang, N. Y.бґS. (1958). Synchrony of neural activity in electric reбґ
sponses evoked by transient acoustic stimuli. The Journal of the Acoustical Sociбґ
ety of America, 30(2), 107Б─⌠114.
Gorga, M. P., Beauchaine, K. A., Reiland, J. K., Worthington, D. W., & Javel, E. (1984). The
effects of stimulus duration on ABR and behavioral thresholds. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 76(2), 616Б─⌠619. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.391158
Gц╦tscheбґRasmussen, K., Poulsen, T., & Elberling, C. (2012). Reference hearing threshбґ
old levels for chirp signals delivered by an ERбґ3A insert earphone. Int. J. Audiol.,
51(11), 794Б─⌠799.
Heinz, M., Zhang, X., Bruce, I., & Carney, L. (2001). Auditory nerve model for predicting
performance limits of normal and impaired listeners. Acoustics Research Letters
Onlineбґarlo бґ ACOUST RES LETT ONLINEбґARLO, 2. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.
1387155
Hind, S. E., HainesбґBazrafshan, R., Benton, C. L., Brassington, W., Towle, B., & Moore,
D. R. (2011). Prevalence of clinical referrals having hearing thresholds within norбґ
mal limits. Int. J. Audiol., 50(10), 708Б─⌠716.
Huang, H., Chen, Y.бґF., Hsu, C.бґY., Cheng, Y.бґF., & Yang, T.бґH. (2022). Evaluating auditory
brainstem response to a levelбґdependent chirp designed based on derivedбґband
latencies. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 151(4), 2688Б─⌠2700.
Hyde, M. L. (1985). The effects of cochlear lesions on the abr. The Auditory Brainstem
Response, 136Б─⌠146.
ISO 389бґ6:2007 бґ acoustics бґ reference zero for the calibration of audiometric equipment
бґ part 6: Reference threshold of hearing for test signals of short duration [ISO
Standard 389бґ6:2007]. (2007). International Organization for Standardization.
Jiang, Z. D., Zheng, M. S., Sun, D. K., & Liu, X. Y. (1991). Brainstem auditory evoked
responses from birth to adulthood: Normative data of latency and interval. Hearing
Research, 54(1), 67Б─⌠74. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-5955(91)
90137-X
Kates, J. M. (1991). A timeбґdomain digital cochlear model. IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
39(12), 2573Б─⌠2592.
Kleiner, M., Brainard, D., & Pelli, D. (2007). WhatБ─≥s new in psychtoolboxбґ3? Perception,
36, ECVP Abstract Supplement.
Kodera K., Y. H., & J., S. (1977). The effect of onset, offset and riseбґdecay times of tone
bursts on brainstem response. Scand. Audiol, 6, 205Б─⌠210.
Kristensen, S. G. B., & Elberling, C. (2012). Auditory brainstem responses to levelбґspecific
chirps in normalбґhearing adults. J. Am. Acad. Audiol., 23(9), 712Б─⌠721.
Lang, J. (1981). Facial and vestibulocochlear nerve, topographic anatomy and variations.
the cranial nerves. SpringerбґVerlag.
Legatt, A. D. (2015). Chapter 17 бґ electrophysiologic auditory tests. In M. J. Aminoff, F.
Boller, & D. F. Swaab (Eds.), The human auditory system (pp. 289Б─⌠311). Elsevier.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-62630-1.00017-2
MacLusky, N. J., & Naftolin, F. (1981). Sexual differentiation of the central nervous system.
Science, 211(4488), 1294Б─⌠1302.
Maurizi, M., Altissimi, G., Ottaviani, F., Paludetti, G., & Bambini, M. (1982). Auditory brainбґ
stem responses (ABR) in the aged. Int. J. Audiol., 11(4), 213Б─⌠221.
McGinley, M. J., Liberman, M. C., Bal, R., & Oertel, D. (2012). Generating synchrony
from the asynchronous: Compensation for cochlear traveling wave delays by the
dendrites of individual brainstem neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 32(27), 9301Б─⌠
9311.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
45
==PAGE:58==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Melcher, J. R., & Kiang, N. Y. (1996). Generators of the brainstem auditory evoked poбґ
tential in cat iii: Identified cell populations. Hearing research, 93(1бґ2), 52Б─⌠71.
Miller, R. L., Calhoun, B. M., & Young, E. D. (1999). Contrast enhancement improves
the representation of/О©©/бґlike vowels in the hearingбґimpaired auditory nerve. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106(5), 2693Б─⌠2708.
Mц╦ller, A. R., & Jannetta, P. J. (1982). Auditory evoked potentials recorded intracranially
from the brain stem in man. Exp. Neurol., 78(1), 144Б─⌠157.
Mц╦ller, A. R., & Jho, H. D. (1989). Responses from the exposed human auditory nerve to
pseudorandom noise. Hearing research, 42(2бґ3), 237Б─⌠252.
Neely, S. T., Norton, S. J., Gorga, M. P., & Jesteadt, W. (1988). Latency of auditory brainбґ
stem responses and otoacoustic emissions using toneburst stimuli. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 83, 652Б─⌠656.
Oates, P., & Stapells, D. R. (1992). Interaction of click intensity and cochlear hearing loss
on auditory brain stem response wave V latency. Ear Hear., 13(1), 28Б─⌠34.
Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., & Schoffelen, J.бґM. (2011). FieldTrip: Open source
software for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological
data. Comput. Intell. Neurosci., 2011, 156869.
Picton, T., Stapells, D., & Campbell, K. (1981). Auditory evoked potentials from the human
cochlea and brainstem. [Cited by: 74]. The Journal of otolaryngology. Supplement,
9, 1Б─⌠41. https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-0019600650&
partnerID=40&md5=6fee4879c615d6424a58913535d6a2cc
Prosser, S., & Arslan, E. (1987). Prediction of auditory brainstem wave v latency as a diбґ
agnostic tool of sensorineural hearing loss: La prц╘diction dela latence de lБ─≥onde v
de la rц╘ponse du tronc cц╘rц╘bral dans le diagnostic des hypoacousies neurosenбґ
sorielles [PMID: 3662941]. Audiology, 26(3), 179Б─⌠187. https://doi.org/10.3109/
00206098709078420
Pushpalatha, Z., & Konadath, S. (2016). Auditory brainstem responses for click and CEбґ
chirp stimuli in individuals with and without occupational noise exposure. Noise
Health, 18(84), 260.
Rhode, W. S. (1971). Observations of the vibration of the basilar membrane in squirrel
monkeys using the mцІssbauer technique. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 49(4B), 1218Б─⌠1231.
Rhode, W. S., & Recio, A. (2000). Study of mechanical motions in the basal region of
the chinchilla cochlea. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107(6),
3317Б─⌠3332.
Robert, A., & Eriksson, J. L. (1999). A composite model of the auditory periphery for simбґ
ulating responses to complex sounds. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 106(4 Pt 1), 1852Б─⌠
1864.
Rц╦nne, F. M., Dau, T., Harte, J., & Elberling, C. (2012). Modeling auditory evoked brainбґ
stem responses to transient stimuli. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of Amerбґ
ica, 131(5), 3903Б─⌠3913.
Rosenhamer, H. J., LindstrцІm, B., & Lundborg, T. (1980). On the use of clickбґevoked
electric brainstem responses in audiological diagnosis: II. the influence of sex and
age upon the normal response. Scand. Audiol., 9(2), 93Б─⌠100.
Ruth, R. A., Lambert, P. R., & Ferraro, J. A. (1988). Electrocochleography: Methods and
clinical applications. Otology & Neurotology, 9, 1Б─⌠11.
Schwartz, D. M., Morris, M. D., Spydell, J. D., Ten Brink, C., Grim, M. A., & Schwartz,
J. A. (1990). Influence of click polarity on the brainбґstem auditory evoked response
(baer) revisited. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology/Evoked Poбґ
46
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
tentials Section, 77(6), 445Б─⌠457. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-
5597(90)90005-X
Serpanos, Y. C., OБ─≥Malley, H., & Gravel, J. S. (1997). The relationship between loudness
intensity functions and the clickбґabr wave v latency [Cited by: 33]. Ear and Hearing,
18(5), 409Б─⌠419. https://doi.org/10.1097/00003446-199710000-00006
Shera, C. A., & Guinan, J. J. (2000). Frequency dependence of stimulusбґfrequencyбґemission
phase: Implications for cochlear mechanics, Recent Developments in Auditory
Mechanics, 381Б─⌠387.
Smith, S. B., Lichtenhan, J., & Cone, B. (2016). Behavioral pureбґtone threshold shifts
caused by tympanic membrane electrodes. Ear Hear., 37(4), e273Б─⌠5.
Strelcyk, O., Christoforidis, D., & Dau, T. (2009). Relation between derivedбґband auditory
brainstem response latencies and behavioral frequency selectivity. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 126(4), 1878Б─⌠1888. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.
3203310
Sumner, C. J., OБ─≥Mard, L. P., LopezбґPoveda, E. A., & Meddis, R. (2003). A nonlinear filterбґ
bank model of the guineaбґpig cochlear nerve: Rate responses. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 113(6), 3264Б─⌠3274.
Tan, Q., & Carney, L. H. (2003). A phenomenological model for the responses of auditoryбґ
nerve fibers. II. nonlinear tuning with a frequency glide. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 114(4
Pt 1), 2007Б─⌠2020.
Tchorz, J., & Kollmeier, B. (1999). A model of auditory perception as front end for automatic
speech recognition. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 106(4), 2040Б─⌠2050.
Telian, S. A., Kileny, P. R., Niparko, J. K., Kemink, J. L., & Graham, M. D. (1989). Normal
auditory brainstem response in patients with acoustic neuroma. Laryngoscope,
99(1), 10Б─⌠14.
Thomsen, J., Terkildsen, K., & Osterhammel, P. (1978). Auditory brain stem responses in
patinest with acoustic neuromas. Scand Audiol, 7, 179Б─⌠183.
Verhulst, S., Altoц╗, A., & Vasilkov, V. (2018). Computational modeling of the human auбґ
ditory periphery: Auditoryбґnerve responses, evoked potentials and hearing loss
[Computational models of the auditory system]. Hearing Research, 360, 55Б─⌠75.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2017.12.018
Wilson, B. S., Schatzer, R., LopezбґPoveda, E. A., Sun, X., Lawson, D. T., & Wolford, R. D.
(2005). Two new directions in speech processor design for cochlear implants. Ear
Hear., 26(4 Suppl), 73SБ─⌠81S.
World Health Organization. (2021). World report on hearing (tech. rep.) [Licence: CC BYбґ
NCбґSA 3.0 IGO]. World Health Organization. Geneva.
Zhang, X., Heinz, M. G., Bruce, I. C., & Carney, L. H. (2001). A phenomenological model
for the responses of auditoryбґnerve fibers: I. nonlinear tuning with compression
and suppression. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 109(2), 648Б─⌠670.
Zilany, M. S. A., & Bruce, I. C. (2006). Modeling auditoryбґnerve responses for high sound
pressure levels in the normal and impaired auditory periphery. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
120(3), 1446Б─⌠1466.
Zilany, M. S., Bruce, I. C., & Carney, L. H. (2014). Updated parameters and expanded simбґ
ulation options for a model of the auditory periphery. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 135(1), 283Б─⌠286.
Zilany, M. S., Bruce, I. C., Nelson, P. C., & Carney, L. H. (2009). A phenomenological
model of the synapse between the inner hair cell and auditory nerve: Longбґterm
adaptation with powerбґlaw dynamics. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 126(5), 2390Б─⌠2412.
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
47
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
48
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A
Appendix
A.1
Additional figures and tables
Figure A.1: Hearing threshold of 6 example participants with and without the TM electrode
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
49
==PAGE:62==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.2: Clickбґ and chirpбґevoked CAPs and ABRs at different stimulus instensity levels
of an example test subject.
Level
Click CAP
amplitude (uV)
Chirp CAP
amplitude (uV)
Click ABR
amplitude (uV)
Chirp ABR
amplitude (uV)
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
80
1.24
0.98
1.25
0.77
0.37
0.16
0.50
0.27
70
0.79
0.58
0.84
0.51
0.36
0.22
0.42
0.24
60
0.45
0.31
0.59
0.37
0.25
0.11
0.44
0.27
50
0.36
0.21
0.49
0.26
0.24
0.13
0.38
0.14
40
0.33
0.20
0.52
0.34
0.24
0.18
0.41
0.29
30
0.31
0.21
0.41
0.29
0.17
0.07
0.36
0.30
20
0.24
0.15
0.34
0.20
0.17
0.06
0.30
0.27
10
0.17
0.06
0.22
0.09
0.15
0.11
0.21
0.10
Table A.1: Amplitudes of experimental results
50
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Level
Click CAP
latency (ms)
Chirp CAP
latency (ms)
Click ABR
latency (ms)
Chirp ABR
latency (ms)
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
80
1.16
0.16
0.62
0.22
5.08
0.30
4.34
0.30
70
1.30
0.21
0.70
0.22
5.20
0.30
4.27
0.25
60
1.66
0.32
0.82
0.37
5.55
0.31
4.37
0.31
50
2.15
0.40
1.30
0.50
5.88
0.34
4.52
0.40
40
2.56
0.42
1.65
0.42
6.15
0.55
4.96
0.46
30
2.92
0.34
1.98
0.54
6.85
0.57
5.29
0.44
20
3.24
0.48
2.16
0.34
7.21
0.50
5.65
0.56
10
3.50
0.69
2.56
0.35
7.23
0.75
6.03
0.71
Table A.2: Latencies of experimental results
Figure A.3: CAP amplitudeбґlevel functions (experimental results)
Figure A.4: ABR amplitudeбґlevel functions (experimental results)
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
51
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.5: CAP latencyбґlevel functions (experimental results)
Figure A.6: ABR latencyбґlevel functions (experimental results)
Level
Click latency
(ms)
Chirp latency
(ms)
Click amplitude
(model unit)
Chirp amplitude
(model unit)
80
1.70
0.94
102.63
167.67
70
1.93
0.9
111.86
181.87
60
2.10
0.99
114.42
188.55
50
2.45
0.98
108.69
159.30
40
2.94
1.05
92.58
123.20
30
2.94
1.23
67.22
89.92
20
2.90
1.28
40.85
63.75
10
3.38
1.53
27.16
34.43
Table A.3: Latencies and amplitudes of AN model output
52
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Click CAP (uV)
Chirp CAP (uV)
Click ABR (uV)
Chirp ABR (uV)
80
0.95
1.85
0.28
0.6
70
0.91
2.31
0.34
0.74
60
0.94
2.46
0.36
0.76
50
0.84
2.03
0.32
0.64
40
0.6
1.7
0.25
0.45
30
0.35
0.88
0.18
0.42
20
0.16
0.65
0.09
0.30
10
0.07
0.39
0.05
0.17
Table A.4: Amplitudes of simulation results
Click CAP (ms)
Chirp CAP (ms)
Click ABR (ms)
Chirp ABR (ms)
80
2.07
1.19
6.03
5.1
70
2.2
1.21
6.11
5.14
60
2.26
1.18
6.19
5.14
50
2.34
1.15
6.24
5.12
40
2.53
1.14
6.5
5.10
30
2.68
1.15
6.65
5.09
20
3.1
1.17
6.77
5.09
10
3.21
1.18
6.73
5.09
Table A.5: Latencies of simulation results
Exploring cochlear and brainstem auditoryбґevoked latencyбґlevel functions
53
==PAGE:66==
Technical University
of Denmark
ц≤rsteds Plads, Buliding 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
