==PAGE:1==
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware pho­
togrammetry
Application of workflow in practical case
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
Application of workflow in practical case
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
João Augusto César Moutinho
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Brovej, Build­
ing 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months (March­August) at the Department of Elec­
trical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree of Masters of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer vision.
João Augusto César Moutinho ­ s202584
Signature
Date
ii
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Photogrammetric computer vision is a versatile and cost­efficient science that intends on
recreating a physical object from the real world through computational methods in order
to achieve, ideally, a high­fidelity, rigorous and clean 3D representation. These represen­
tations can be in the form of a point cloud, a collection of individual points placed in a
3D space. However, due to slight variations of data, point clouds will most likely produce
measurements that deviate from the object of interest, called outliers. The aim of this
thesis is to achieve a reconstruction of the pillars of the Storebælt Bridge, in Denmark, by
using a dataset of multi­modal images, 2D representations with hardcoded positional in­
formation of the frames and intrinsic camera parameters, through 2D image segmentation
and 3D reconstruction concepts. Additionally, we will provide a pipeline to remove outliers
and overcome unwanted dynamic elements through 2D to 3D reprojection. Experimental
procedures with a combination of different pipelines resulted in a workflow that allowed
each photogrammetric and statistical methods to complement each other to reproduce an
accurate representation of the pillar structure, while maintaining a steady computational
cost.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank both my supervisors Mark Bo Jensen and Siavash Bigdeli who guided
me through my thesis with their knowledge, consideration and attention. Their support is
greatly appreciated, for they were always present to help me along the way. I would
specially like the thank my father Augusto, my mother Isabel, my brother Pedro and my
sister Cátia for the consistent support and love they have given me throughout my life.
Thank you for encouraging me, inspiring me and being a pillar in my life.
iv
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure from Motion vs Multi­View Stereo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Object Detection vs. Image Segmentation vs. Image Classification . . . . .
5
1.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methodology
9
2.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
2D Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3
Mask Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
3D Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Outlier Removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Results
19
3.1
Mask Selection through pixel overlapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Point Cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Outlier Removal by Reprojection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Experiments
31
4.1
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Morphological transformation on bitwise images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
3D­2D Reprojection with smaller dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.4
Outlier Removal: 3D­2D Reprojection vs Statisical And Radius . . . . . . . 44
5
Reproducibility
47
5.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
2D Segmentation and Mask Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.3
Point Cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4
Outlier Removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.5
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
61
A.1 Python Libraries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.2 Code Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The ambitious pursuit of researchers and academics for an accurate and rigorous repli­
cate of any physical object or environment into a virtual setting has been the catalyst for
developments in digital technology, specifically computer vision. One of the technologies
that has seen a constant development to achieve this goal is photogrammetry. Pho­
togrammetry is a science of creating a reliable reconstruction of a physical object through
the interpretation of 2D representation, such as photography. Despite the concept tracing
back to the XIX century, with the article ”Die Photometrographie” [1], its potential was only
truly noticeable through computerization. The ability to create accurate and immersive re­
constructions has allowed its usage to spread on a wide range of applications, including
architecture, entertainment, design and civil engineering.
The fast development of commercially accessible products equipped with high­quality
cameras, combined with the joint efforts of a community with a passion for photogramme­
try, resulted in the creation of multiple tools accessible online. Consequently, the availabil­
ity of resources provoked an interest in the field and incited development on new tech­
nologies and optimization on existing methodologies. The introduction of commercially
available Unnmaned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and drones to the public market also pro­
vided user with the opportunity to improve on the quality of image datasets by exploring
new perspectives and angles. It has also facilitated access to unsafe locations, allowing
for the acquisition of improved information in unexplored scenarios.
Figure 1.1: In 2019, a fire broke out in the roof space of the Notre­Dame Cathedral. The
structure had his roof destroyed and the iconic cathedral’s spire collapsed. In an effort
to rebuild the iconic building, a campaign was launched to supply images, aerial photos
and laser scans. Around 50 billion points were produced by photogrammetry in order to
recreate the Notre Dame Cathedral in 3D, to serve as reference for the rebuilding plan.[2]
For this project, it was provided a dataset of 566 images of a pillar of the Storebaelt,
in Denmark, with the objective to create a 3D model of the structure. The images pro­
vide a visualization of the scene in which the pillar is represented, meaning the existence
of other elements besides the object of interest in the frame, including sky, landscape,
other pillars and the deck of the bridge. The objective of this thesis is to create a work­
flow aimed at segregating all the scene elements and produce a set of data points (point
cloud) focused specifically on the pillar. This paper aims to explain the methodologies
and techniques implemented, alongside the conducted tests, all of which were intended
to maximize optimization with the available resources.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: Example of images present in the dataset
1.1
Structure from Motion vs Multi­View Stereo
In photogrammetry there are two standards for 3D reconstruction: Structure from Mo­
tion (SfM) and Multi­View Stereo (MVS) (Figure 1.3). Throughout all the development in
computer vision, these 2 methodologies have remained the gold standard and are crucial
techniques to produce quality point clouds. Despite being used for the same purpose,
both methods vary in how the workflow is conducted and the appropriate usage varies
according to the type of application.
Figure 1.3: SfM and MVS workflows (Source: 3D Image Reconstruction From Multi­View
Stereo, by Satya[3])
SfM primarily works in estimating camera poses from a dataset of images that vary in
perspective and angle in the real world scenario. The primary objective is to identify
unique features and, consequently, match those features in other images. Each feature
2
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:11==
is composed of keypoint, a specific element within an image, such as edges or corners,
and descriptors, a collection of neighboring pixel values that create a ”fingerprint”, making
that feature unique to all the others. Currently there are several algorithms that serve as
standard for Feature Extraction:
• Scale­Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT)
SIFT[4] is the gold standard and the most commonly used Feature Extraction tech­
nique due to its robustness to variations in illumination, noise and occlusions. Key­
points are detected by local maxima using Difference­of­Gaussians and descriptors
are extracted as 16x16 blocks of neighborhood pixels, which is further divided into
4x4 blocks, each creating a histogram with 8 bins, creating a vector of 128 elements.
• Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF (ORB)
ORB[5] combines two already existing algorithms: FAST (Features From Accel­
erated Segment Test)[6] and BRIEF (Binary Robust Indepdent Elementary Fea­
tures)[7]. FAST quickly identifies pixel value changes that generally corresponds
to corners and uses a modified version of BRIEF to overcome its limited capability
in processing rotation to generate binary strings as descriptors.
• Accelerated KAnade­Lucas­Tomasi Enhanced (AKAZE)
AKAZE[8] uses the determinant of the Hessian (DoH) for feature extraction. De­
scriptors are created with the same concept as the modified BRIEF algorithm used
in ORB.
• Speeded­up Robust Features (SURF)
SURF [9] uses integral images (pixels are summed by the pixels above and to the
left) to accelerate the computation of box­shapped filters. The detection is based on
the Hessian Matrix. SURF descriptors are determined by Haar’s wavelet response
of neighboring blocks.
The identified features will serve as references in order to discover an overlap with other
images. The more common features two images have with each other, the bigger the
overlap they have. Although this implies a complex and exhaustive procedure of match­
ing images one by one, there are proposed methods that solve the scalability problem
[10][11]. One criterion for a good match is estimating a ratio between the closest neigh­
bor to the second closest neighbor. The higher the ratio, the less feature ambiguity the
correspondence has. This concept is applied with Lowe’s Ratio Test [12], giving the user
a control over the precision of matching by adjusting the threshold parameter for the ra­
tio. The translation and rotation of one of images in relation to the other is quantified
by the Fundamental, if the intrinsic values are unknown, or the Essential matrix, if they
are known. Through SVD (single value decomposition), the algorithm then estimates the
rotation and translation of one image frame in relation to the other.
In MVS, rotation and translation are implied in the process. Its core concept revolves
around the estimation of depth of each object in a scene through the apparent motion,
calculated through disparity estimation, of each pixel between a pair of images. The initial
phase of MVS requires both images to undergo Image Rectification (Figure 1.4), implying
an affine transformation in order to make the pair co­planar. Because stereo vision is
restricted by epipolar geometry, each matching pair of pixels must be allign in the same
epipolar line. For efficiency, it is ideal that this line is projected horizontally, so that the
offset between images is only one dimensional and, thus, creating a disparity map that
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
3
==PAGE:12==
only takes into consideration horizontal displacement. This is also possible to do with
three images [13].
Figure 1.4: Image rectification (Source: wikiwand)
The motion of pixels and the distance between the position of the objects in relation to the
frame are directly proportional, meaning the closer the object is to the frame, the bigger
the motion of pixels. Most commonly, the algorithms used to calculate disparity maps are
Block Matching (BM) [14] and Semi­Global Block Matching (SGBM) [15]. BM segments
a frame into blocks of pixels and locally searches for a match in the other frame by as­
signing a motion vector, while SGBM improves on the method of BM by including a global
approach to the already existing local approach, improving robustness over computational
4
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:13==
cost.
Incremental reconstruction follows a similar flow of using triangulation to recreate the 3D
point cloud. There is a difference in output between SfM and MVS: SfM produces a
sparse point cloud, a reconstruction with a reduced number of points based on the features
detected, while MVS produces a dense cloud, where most pixels have a representation
in the 3D model (Figure 1.5). The intention of using one of the other depends on the
desired level of detail. Dense 3D point clouds have higher detail while Sparse 3D point
cloud sacrifice detail over computational cost.
Figure 1.5: Sparse Point cloud (left) and Dense Point Cloud (right)
1.2
Object Detection vs. Image Segmentation vs. Image
Classification
Image Classification (or Image Recognition), Object Detection and Image Segmentation
are computer vision tasks that perform labeling and identification of contents within an
image frame. Despite their concept being related, their output varies in complexity and
precision. Image Classification performs identification of the image’s content in its entirety.
Object detection a type of classification in which the localization of objects is defined by
bounding boxes within the image, according to the objects’ characteristics. Image Seg­
mentation, the most complex of the three tasks, performs localization of different objects
by labeling every pixel, resulting in a far more precise output than the aforementioned
methods. Within Image Segmentation there is Semantic Segmentation, which attributes
a class to each object, and Instance Segmentation, which labels objects according to its
uniqueness within the frame (See Figure 1.6).
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.6: A sample annotated image from the COCO dataset, illustrating the difference
between image­level annotations, object­level annotations, and segmentations at the
class/semantic­ or instance­ level (Source: Robotic Manipulation, by Russ Tedrake[16])
For the work in this paper, more attention will be placed on Image Segmentation [17]. The
object of interest must be highlighted for it’s structural characteristics and not its location
on the scenery, in order to produce a point cloud free of unwanted artifacts that might be
included in the area of interest (for example, the bridge deck).
1.3
Related Work
1.3.1
3D Semantic Segmentation of Point Clouds
Image segmentation is one of the field in computer vision that has been seen more de­
velopment by researchers. The automatic classification of individual objects in a scene is
a crucial feature to take 3D representations to the next level and the advances in Deep
Learning are paving the way for the creation of more and better tools to achieve an au­
tonomous way to segmenting scenes in 3D. Several works have been in the forefront of
3D segmentation and have produced promising results, PointNet[18] being the pioneer
and foundation for consequent developments. PointNet is a Deep Learning algorithm that
provides an architecture that simplifies the processing of point clouds. Most algorithms
transform the point clouds into voxel or image grids before feeding the information into
a neural network. PointNet improves this by directly addressing the unstructured data,
using its architecture to learn from global and local point features. By discarding the ne­
cessity to transform the data and, in the process, increase its volume, PointNet saves
computational cost and improves performance. Since the its release, PointNet has de­
veloped its pipeline to handle more complex scenes with the introduction of PointNet++
[19].
6
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.7: Applications of PointNet (Source: PointNet: Deep Learning on Point Sets for
3D Classification and Segmentation[18])
3D segmentation methods require a platform that can perform computationally expensive
tasks. Additionnally, there is the necessity for a high quality point cloud in order for the
algorithms to produce ideal results. Point Clouds are naturally unstructured 3D set of
data points, which adds complexity to the process. Many photogrammetry tools can not
reconstruct scenes free of unwanted artifacts, consequently creating a chain reaction with
3D segmenting tools, reducing their performance and presenting far from optimal results.
This work presents an alternative that allows the computational cost to be reduced sig­
nificantly and output an equally precise point cloud. Performing 2D segmentation on the
dataset prior to the reconstruction to isolate the desired element increases performance
of photogrammetric workflows, allowing the algorithm to run on simpler scenes.
1.3.2
Outlier Removal
Outliers are measurement errors that are not consistent with the other elements of the
dataset. In photogrammetry there are several factors that might cause inclusion of un­
wanted points: quality of image, presence of obstacles (such as a car passing in front of
the camera when taking a picture of a building) or even repetitive elements in a scene (reg­
ular distribution of windows in a building, similar cars side­by­side, etc). Two commonly
used, and basic, methods to clear a point cloud of outliers are Radius Outlier Removal
(Ref in email sent to supervisors) and Statistical Outlier Removal (SOR) [Ref in email sent
to supervisors]. Initially used to remove falling snow from scenes in severe winter con­
ditions, ROR is a very straightforward method that labels a point in the 3D space as an
outlier if the number of adjacent points within a given radius do not respect the minimum
defined threshold. In similar concept, SOR is also based on proximity points, calculating
the average distance between a predetermined closest number of points and setting up
a threshold level based on their standard deviation. Despite SOR efficiency on sparse
outliers and ROR’s capability of detecting isolated outlier clusters, both methods are con­
ditioned on human input, very sensitive to parameter tuning, making it dependent on “trial
and error” efforts, and perform poorly on non­isolated outliers. There is also one criti­
cal aspect to take into consideration regarding the outlier removal techniques: it is more
efficient to do so during the reconstruction.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.8: Categorization of outliers (Source: ”An efficient outlier removal method for
scattered point cloud data”[20])
The technique applied in this workflow aims at addressing non­isolated outliers efficiently.
The applied method also aims at being completely autonomous, eliminating the need
for ambiguity of hyper­parameters and dispensing any need for user interaction, conse­
quently, also improving the filtering of sparse and isolated outliers seen in ROR and SOR
techniques.
8
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:17==
2
Methodology
The main challenge of this project lies on the composition of a workflow that allows the
user to go from having a dataset of images, to a clear 3D representation of the bridge’s
pillar. It is important to delineate a path that takes into consideration every aspect of the
transformation, the resources available, preprocessing of data and replicability. Because
investigation and testing is a big part of any project, the design of this workflow will be
stratified into general tasks that will have their more specific elements vary according to
the implementation within the respective stages.
The primary challenge is to preprocess the dataset by evaluating the scene contained in
the images and segregate all the framed elements. The proposed solution is to use a
dataset comprised of solely the pillar. It is of the assumption that performing 2D segment­
ing of the dataset prior to the reconstruction is more efficient and accurate than using a
point cloud segmentation. 2D segmentation involves analyzing images, which are simpler
to work with than 3D point clouds. Point Clouds are a natural unstructured data system
with additional dimensions. The result of this segmentation will provide the user with a
dataset of masks that will consequently need to be processed with the raw dataset in order
to create bitwise images. These bitwise iamges are, in turn, served as nputs to a 3D re­
construction algorithm. Once a point cloud is created, it will be processed for optimization
by applying a 3D­2D reprojection method to reduce noise and outliers.
Figure 2.1: Workflow of this project
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
9
==PAGE:18==
2.1
Dataset
The image dataset has 566 images with 4056 x 3040 dimensions taken from a DJI Zen­
muse H20T 4K zoom camera. The images are also multi­modal, which means they are
also comprised of information that might facilitate the process:
• GPS Coordinates
– Latitude
– Longitude
– Latitude
• Camera Information
– Camera Maker
– Camera Model
– F­stop
– Focal Length
– 35mm Focal Length
– ISO Speed
– Exposure time
– Max Aperture
Figure 2.2: DJI Zenmuse H20T camera used to photograph the pillar
Still frames are taken from a drone while performing a spiral trajectory around the pillar,
progressively increasing its altitude in order to capture the structure in its entirety, from
the water level up to the bridge deck.
10
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Top­down view of the trajectory done by the drone during image acquisition.
Taken from reconstruction done in WebODM
Because these images are taken sequentially, dynamic elements like water and light will
interfere in the representation of the pillar. In some images, a small wave might cover
the lower part of the pillar, thus creating an occlusion, while the position of the sun and
weather will also affect lighting. All these factors are catalysts for the creation of outliers.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: Figure (a) shows an occlusion on the bottom size due to small wave. The
same occlusion is not present in (b). Both images were taken with a short difference in
time in relation to each other.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2
2D Segmentation
This stage intents on acquiring a masks that perfectly captures the positive space and
silhouette of the pillar structure using a computationally cost efficient algorithm. It is of
no interest that the algorithm processes every possible element from the scene, just the
object of interest. Despite 2D segmenting being simpler than 3D segmentation, it still
deals with factors that can influence the quality of results, such as lighting, image quality
and the type of objects present in the frame. The earliest strategy in this work was to
primarly deal with the challenge of dynamic elements: First stage was to remove water
using a custom residual neural network (ResNet), pre­trained with a dataset of various
bodies of water, and then use SIFT to deal with the variations in light.
Figure 2.5: ResNet made of 34 layers vs a traditional 34 layers CNN
Resnet [21] is a residual deep learning model that capitalizes on the concept of residual
connection. In traditional neural networks, data transitions from one layer to another se­
quentially, meaning that the input of layer x is the output of layer x­1. Sometimes the input
and the function within the layer are not mutual in their dimensions, causing a gradient
problem. One way to alleviate this problem was the introduction of Skip Connection in
ResNet by flowing data from early layers to latter ones, adding parameters to the models
instead of just using the previous layer’s output.
Figure 2.6: Segmentation with ATLANTIS (ArTificiaL And Natural waTer­bodIes dataSet)
Several works using ResNet as the backbone were taken into consideration, such as
the dataset of ATLANTIS (ArTificiaL And Natural waTer­bodIes dataSet)[22] and the pre­
trained model of WaterNET[23], to segment waterbodies in images. But, even if the water
element were to be taken from the scene, other elements would remain. Sky, bridge deck,
other pillars in the background, landscapes and even different clouds would still be pro­
cessed into the point cloud. Technical difficulties with the TensorFlow libraries also didn’t
12
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:21==
incite the usage of these algorithms.
Figure 2.7: Left side corresponds for the images used for experimenting, right side corre­
sponds to the mask created for detecting bodies of water. Both cases show inconsistency
in performance using WaterNET dataset with ResNet backbone
During the development of this project, Segment Anything (SAM)[24] was released and
its concept was compatible with the requirements of the task. SAM is a state­of­the­art
segmentation tool created by META and includes the largest segmentation dataset to
date (Over one billion masks). The model is pre­trained and ready to be prompted, which
facilitates the interaction with the algorithm and its application on various datasets. A
dataset of images is used as the input which, in turn, produces binary masks in folders
with the respective name. So, if an image named “IMG001” is processed, the folder
“IMG001” will be created and all the masks of the different artifacts segmented will be
imported into it.
(a) Original Image
(b) Segmented Image
Figure 2.8: Segmentation by SAM algorithm
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.9: Masks produced by SAM from image 2.8a
2.3
Mask Processing
Despite SAM capabilities of segmenting elements in a scene, it cannot identify and match
them with the same structure in other images. What for us is the desirable artifact, for
the algorithm is just an unidentified object with a location and size. It is up to a third party
to make the classification. Our approach is to provide a script that can identify matching
masks by the size and overlapping pixels between two images. One of the challenges
is the selection of the ideal mask, while assuming there will be similar masks that will
represent not only the pillar, but also other parts adjacent to the bridge. The method
consists of an evaluation based on a percentage score where agglomerate pixels are the
denominator, and the intersection pixels are the numerator. The closer that score is to
100%, the better the match is. A percentage below the defined threshold (for this case,
35%) would automatically discard the subject. OpenCV library provide the necessary
functions to overlap the two images in order to estimate the agglomerate amount and
the intersection with cv2.bitwise_or() and cv2.bitwise_and() respectively. The function
cv2.countNonZero() serves as a tool to count the non­zero pixels.
Figure 2.10: Overlap of 2 masks and categorization of pixels between ”Agglomerate”
(green) and ”Intersection” (yellow)
overlapping percentage =
∑intersection pixels
∑agglomerate pixels × 100
The resulting output is a dataset of masks segmented from each image where the position
of the pillar is a structure of one values and the rest of the scene is a background of zero
values, resulting in a black and white image. Applying the function cv2.bitwise_and()
14
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:23==
on both a mask and its respective raw image, produces a representation of the pillar
with a black background. To note that the masks must be resized back to their original
resolution to match the resolution of the original dataset before proceeding with the bitwise
operations.
Figure 2.11: Application of the function cv2.bitwise_and() from OpenCV library.
Because the bitwise images are created after the segmentation, the metadata in the raw
images (information encrypted into the file regarding external parameters, like GPS co­
ordinates, and internal camera parameters, such as focal length) is lost in the process of
creating the masks and can not be passed by simply overlapping the pixels. This infor­
mation is influential in certain 3D reconstructions open­source software, so it is important
to transfer it to the final “bitwised” images from the original dataset.
2.4
3D Reconstruction
This stage of the workflow focuses on applying the concepts of photogrammetry in order
to get a point cloud. To achieve the best possible result, two open­source tools were
chosen to perform the reconstruction: OpenSfM and WebODM.
2.4.1
OpenSfM
OpenSfM [25] is an open­source SfM­MVS pipeline written in python on top of a OpenCV
library. Its pipeline follows the typical SfM­MVS structure in creating a dense point cloud
from images. It provides a simple interface and a configuration setting that allows the
user to select appropriate parameters and hyper­parameters for their intended application.
Experiments on these feature extraction parameters were conducted, to which results and
conclusions are presented in Chapter 4.1.
2.4.2
WebODM
WebODM [26] is an improvement of OpenSfM, using the same pipeline but with the addi­
tion of the CMVS/PMVS (Clustering Views for Multi­View Stereo / Patch­Based Multi­View
Stereo)[27] algorithm to produce a denser point cloud. CMVS decomposes the image
dataset into clusters and processes each cluster independently and in parallel to gener­
ate depth maps that are consequently refined by PMVS. In addition, WebODM provides
the user with an web interface for more accessibility to configure the process of recon­
struction with more detail, making it more oriented to users with technical expertise.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
15
==PAGE:24==
The proprocessing procedure done to the dataset will allow for an improvement in the
robustness of results, to be shown by comparison of the point clouds created by both
algorithms. The analyses of that comparison will determine possible improvements to be
implemented.
2.5
Outlier Removal
One of the convenient features included in OpenSfM and WebODM is the creation of json
files that report details about the reconstruction, from performance of feature matching to
a correspondences between frames. The aforementioned correspondences provide the
rotation and translation matrices from SfM, necessary to create a dense point cloud on
the MVS section of the pipeline. These estimations also allow for an outlier removal by
3D­2D reprojection technique to be applied.
The transformation from 3D coordinate to 2D depends on two aspects: extrinsic (location
and orientation) and intrinsic (focal length, field of view, resolution) parameters. Despite
these parameters being independent from each other, both are transformed into their re­
spective matrices in order to translate from one coordinate system to the other. These
parameters allow for the conversion from one coordinate system to the other: The extrin­
sic matrix converts world coordinates into camera coordinates, and the intrinsic camera
converts camera coordinates to pixel coordinates.
This approach does not require statistical analysis in terms of the relationship between 3D
points and establishes the hypothesis of solving the poor performance of statistical and
radius­based models (SOR and ROR) on removing non­isolated outliers present on the
surface of the point cloud. In addition, it is also advantageous to reduce the ambiguity of
hyper­parameters in comparison with the above­mentioned methods, which require input
values that will induce an unwanted ”trial and error” factor to the system. In the case of
the approach applied, the point cloud is reprojected onto each of the binary masks and
highlight the elements that overlap with the background. Instead of being automatically
removed, they will be counted for each time this happens because, what is considered
an outlier in one image, might be considered an inlier in another. In one event, from the
perspective facing the front wall of the pillar, points that exceed the side edges can be
considered outliers. But from the perspective facing one of the side walls, those same
points might be considered inliers. Experiments conducted in Chapter 4.4 proves the
previously mentioned hypothesis.
Figure 2.12: Diagram of Reprojection
The number of times a point is counted as background ­ thus counting as an outlier ­ will be
saved in a dictionary data type variable with keys and values representing index number
and repetitions, respectively. From this dictionary, a list of indexes that repeat themselves
more than a predetermined value is created and used as a parameter, in junction with the
16
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:25==
ply file, for the numpy.delete() function, outputting a point cloud free of the points that are
considered outliers.
Figure 2.13: Blue dots represent reprojection of outliers in the respective images
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
17
==PAGE:26==
18
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:27==
3
Results
3.1
Mask Selection through pixel overlapping
461 out of the 566 were successfully overlapped, representing 81% of the dataset. This is
considered a satisfactory result relative to the scope of the project, where the requirement
lies in the importance of having multiple representations of the different surfaces of the
pillar. The cause for this reduction in dataset is due to the transition of photographs during
corners having a more spatial difference in the sequence of frames, more specifically in the
transitions between the wider walls and side walls, causing a lack of overlapping frames
when performing the applied formula.
Despite the relative success, there is still margin to improve.
• Spatial variation during frames being too big
In some particular cases, the overlapping of a pair did not meet the minimum thresh­
old value. One event like this can result in a chain reaction where the script skips
several images. One of the catalysts for this relates to a ”jump” in the sequence of
photos. In the case below, one image is taken from the perspective facing a front
face of the pillar and the next frame is of the side wall. The script finds a very low
percentage of the threshold in the overlapping of the mask criteria and, therefor,
skips it and goes on to the next. Since the following pictures, do not compensate for
this ”jump”, the script will skip all the images until it gets a proper overlapping score.
This particular case cost 18 images.
Figure 3.1: Optimal (Top) vs Non­Optimal (Bottom) sequence of images
This process was successful in this particular dataset, but its lack of robustness will
cause problems in datasets with larger variations in trajectory and approximation to
the desired object, and low consistency in the spacing between frames.
• Variations in proximity
Including zoomed images in a dataset comprised of wide shots 3.2 will also cause
a mismatch between pairs.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: Sequence with zoomed in images in a wide shot dataset
This is because the segmentation in pictures that do not show the entirety of the
pillar structure will produce masks that the script won’t be able to reference with
other masks
(a) Segmented masks from zoomed image
(b) Segmented masks from wide shot image
Figure 3.3: Masks created from the zoomed pictures and wide shot pictures taken from
sequence in Figure 3.2
Ideally, the dataset should be comprised of only wide shot images in order to maxi­
mize the percentage of processed masks.
• Reoccurance of the structure
This point relates more to the quality of the masks, at times, not being optimal in
comparison with masks with better quality. Few examples show that not always the
best mask is chosen by the script, allowing masks with more than one element or
structures with grainier edges to be picked.
20
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:29==
(a) Mask 1
(b) Mask 2
(c) Original Image
Figure 3.4: Different iterations of the same element
Knowing 3.4a is the best choice due to it showing only the desired structure, 3.4b
was the iteration that was chosen according to the criteria established. Partially due
to the agglomerate value of the formula not taking into consideration the location of
the non­zeros values in the frame, only its existence. Despite not being optimal, this
did not interfere with the overall quality of the point cloud, for there were no cluster
outliers that could be identified as a result of this mismatch.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Point Cloud
Reconstruction was done in OpenSfM with SIFT Feature Matching technique in 7113 sec­
onds (approximately 120 minutes) The wall times for the several stages were (in seconds):
• Extract Metadata: 3.3
• Feature Extraction: 507.2
• Feature Matching: 306.9
• Image pairing: 75.6
• Reconstruction: 2906.4
• Tracking: 22.2
• Undistorting: 484.2
• Computing Depth Maps: 2807.2
The resulting point cloud is composed of 1,539,511 vertices and it was successful in mod­
eling only the object of interest, the bridge pillar. The walls appear to present symmetry
and a matching structure form to the real one, and the coloring appears to match with the
image, as seen in Figure 3.5 and 3.6.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: Comparison between image of one of the front wall and respective represen­
tation from the Point Cloud shows that the format and aesthetics are similar.
22
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: Comparison between image of one of the side wall and respective represen­
tation from the Point Cloud. Characteristic slope of the bottom half of the pillar is identical
between representations.
Although in terms of the aesthetics, colouring and form of the structure being similar to
the ground truth, there is a considerate amount of noise, specially around the corners and
edges. One of the reason for this is the already mentioned presence of dynamic elements
in the scenery with the addition of the background changes.
Figure 3.7: Photos of the same position taken at different times
The most prevalent outliers are the noticeable dark points around the edges and corners
of the point cloud. This is most likely due to the black background in the bitwise dataset.
There is a similar occurrence in the 3D reconstruction performed by WebODM without
the masks, where there is a presence of white colored points in the same corners of
the pillar. It is safe to assume that this is caused by a mismatching of features that are
extracted from the images. In the case of OpenSfM, the black points are more prevalent
on the silhouette of the point cloud because the entire background is composed of only
one uniform element, while the point cloud created from the raw dataset is composed of
several more elements in the background (sky, variations in light, landscape and water).
A solution would be to filter these points by RGB values, but that would only pertain to this
specific case where there are no other similar aspects in the structured regarding color.
In any other case it would create false positive matches on the outliers and would affect
the overall structure of the point cloud.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: Presence of white dots are caused by feature mismatching from the back­
ground.
Figure 3.9: Point Cloud produced by OpenSfM
In comparison, WebODM produces an all around better Point Cloud than the one done
by OpenSfM, even though WebODM uses the latter as an engine. The difference is de­
rived from an improvement on the overall workflow with the addition of algorithms, such
as Patch­Based Multi­view Stereo (PMVS) and Clustering Views for Multi­View Stereo
(CMVS).
24
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.10: Side­by­Side of OpenSfM (Right) and WebODM (Left) Point Clouds
Still, WebODM had its performance improved with the inclusion of the masks produced
from SAM along with the image dataset. Unlike OpenSFM, WebODM can not process
bitwise images (images with structures in a black background) and it requires that the
masks must be uploaded together with the database, plus the addition of ”_mask” at the
end of the filename in order to draw a correspondence to their respective images.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.11: Reconstructions in WebODM without masks (left) and with masks (right)
2D Segmentation proved to be a reliable preprocessing method for WebODM. It was able
to produce an accurate dense point cloud with 1,954,505 points with low noise in less time
than the model created from the raw dataset without masks (39 minutes and 31 seconds
against 50 minutes and 2 seconds, saving approximately 20 minutes). In addition to the
time saved during processing, it also discards the necessity to use third party algorithms
to denoise the point cloud. Perform 3D segmentation is also not necessary, which is
much more computationally expensive than 2D segmentation, on the model due to the
fact that the reduction in scenery contributes to the reduction of points to be processed in
all pipelines of the WebODM workflow.
In conclusion, the addition of a 2D segmentation preprocessing task to a photogrammetry
workflow in computer vision greatly improves the process of isolating desired elements of
a scene. In the case of the point cloud produced by OpenSfM, the presence of noise and
outliers opens up an opportunity to experiment with other outlier removal techniques.
26
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:35==
3.3
Outlier Removal by Reprojection
The point cloud used for this consists of 1,539,511 points, including outliers. While running
all the images, most of the points will be considered outliers due to changes in perspective.
With this possibility in consideration, the threshold must be adjusted in order to remove as
much noise and as few inliers as possible. Five experiments are conducted, each with an
increased threshold. Since there is no ground truth case for this case, the percentage of
outliers removed and a visual evaluation will determine which value is the best threshold.
480 Images / 1,539,511 Points
Threshold
Outliers Removed
(%)
Remaining number of points
20
4.2
1207124
30
6.25
1275365
40
8.3
1320399
50
10.4
1351904
75
15.6
1404668
As expected, the lower the threshold, the more noise is deleted at the cost of the integrity
of the structure. As exemplified in Figure 3.12, at 20 repetitions the top right corner is cut
because the points that are situated in that part of the structure are considered outliers
according to the filtering (Figure 3.13), resulting in a cluster of false positives. The higher
the threshold, the more integrity it retains.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Limit at 20 repetitions
(b) Limit at 30 repetitions
(c) Limit at 40 repetitions
28
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:37==
(d) Limit at 50 repetitions
(e) Limit at 75 repetitions
Figure 3.12
The extinction of those points during the outlier removal is also noticeable in the point
cloud of WebODM. The reason for this, is that the corners and edges are the areas where
the algorithm detects more repeatability of points that can be considered outliers. It will
depend on the user’s intention whether the priority is in removing outliers and noise or
maintaining the structural integrity of the pillar. For the purposes of this project, the point
cloud that was subjected to a threshold of 50 seemed to be ideal. Despite some noticeable
outliers, the model still maintains most of its edges. For aesthetics, most softwares that
allow visualization of the point clouds have a feature where the user can alter the size of
the points. The smaller the size, the less the outliers are noticeable. For visualization,
Figure 3.12 has its point size bigger, so its easier for the reader to detect the outliers in
question.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.13: Heatmap for number of times points are considered outliers in all 480 per­
spectives
30
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:39==
4
Experiments
The workflow of this project is quite extensive and diverse. In order to maximize efficiency,
computational cost and still get precise point clouds, it is necessary to experiment with
various methods within the pipelines and compare results. In computer vision there is a
wide range of alternatives to the same end. It is important to have knowledge of them
and what are the conditions that deem its usages appropriate. This chapter is intended to
show the various experiments done throughout the project and present the conclusions.
4.1
Feature Extraction
OpenSfM and WebODM leaves to the user the choice to pick what feature extraction is
more appropriate to their intended output. Since SURF patent rights are still imposed, it
is not possible for it to be use in this project without a permission issued by the patent
holders. For this reason, SURF won’t be tested. HaHOG (Hessian Affine feature point
detector + Histogram of Oriented Gradient descriptors) is also included in the options, but
it is not included in the OpenCV library. To maintain rigor, the experiment will count with an
OpenCV comparison run on SIFT, ORB and AKAZE, and a comparison run in OpenSfM
with HaHOG and the best two techniques from the first stage.
The objective of this experiment is to evaluate SIFT, ORB, HaHOG and AKAZE and anal­
yse their performance with different pairs. The pairs were handpicked to test the methods
with focus on different aspects between images, such rotation, translation, illumination,
occlusion and overlap.
Image 1
Image 2
(a) Pair #1 ­ Noticeable Rotation and minimal translation
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
31
==PAGE:40==
Image 1
Image 2
(b) Pair #2 ­ Minimal spatial mobility
Image 1
Image 2
(c) Pair #3 ­ Minimal spatial mobility with small occlusion in the bottom edge. Low illumination
Image 1
Image 2
(d) Pair #4 ­ Small rotation and difference in illumination
32
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:41==
Image 1
Image 2
(e) Pair #5 ­ Large rotation and translation
Figure 4.1: Pairs used to test SIFT, ORB and AKAZE
Each pair will undergo the process of all 3 feature extraction techniques, taking into ac­
count the number of matches in each pair and their respective wall times, followed by Brute
Force Matching (BF) which will return the 2 best matches by using KNN (K nearest neigh­
bours) with k = 2. Lowe’s Ratio Test will optimize the matches using a threshold of 0.75
ratio, accounting for all good matches from the list of matching features produced by BF.
Good matches will then be input to create an homography matrix produced by RANSAC,
flagging all matches as inliers with the value 1 and outliers with 0. Accuracy is determined
by two factors: percentage of good matches over matches and inliers over good matches.
The bigger the percentage, the more accurate the feature extraction method it is.
Method
Num. of features
Extraction
Time (s)
Number
of matches
Num. of
good matches
Matching
Time (s)
Inliers
Good matches /
Matches
Inliers /
Good matches
Image 1
Image 2
Pair #1
SIFT
4891
4210
3.85
4891
545
0.19
505
11.1%
92.6%
ORB
19843
18130
0.66
19843
964
1.94
808
4.9%
83.8%
AKAZE
1014
1011
2.86
1014
202
0.03
179
19.9%
88.6%
Pair #2
SIFT
5183
5746
3.78
5183
994
0.25
842
19.2%
84.7%
ORB
21323
22895
0.23
51323
1711
2.54
1359
3.33%
79.4%
AKAZE
1216
1371
2.89
1216
432
0.03
360
35.5%
83.3%
Pair #3
SIFT
3211
2520
3.72
3211
275
0.06
245
8.5%
89.1%
ORB
13620
10162
0.20
13620
555
0.77
436
4.1%
78.6%
AKAZE
439
262
2.86
439
69
0.01
58
15.7%
84.5%
Pair #4
SIFT
1373
6006
3.79
1373
110
0.10
64
8.0%
58.2%
ORB
7750
24811
0.21
7750
198
1.06
58
2.6%
29.3%
AKAZE
419
977
2.91
419
27
0.01
12
6.4%
44.4%
Pair #5
SIFT
5132
5990
3.80
5132
152
0.37
74
3.0%
48.7%
ORB
22407
27178
0.24
22407
260
3.2
18
1.2%
6.9%
AKAZE
1548
1048
2.89
1548
32
0.04
15
2.1%
46.9%
Table 4.1
According to the values registered on Table 4.1, ORB and SIFT appear to be an overall
better choice for this project than AKAZE, who shows consistent lower number of features,
matches and inliers. ORB also appears to produce a lot more features but sacrifices more
computational cost during matching, due to relying on quantity over quality. Despite this,
in Pair #1, #2 and #3, which are tests that look for performance during low rotation and
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
33
==PAGE:42==
translation differences between the pair, it produces more inliers in comparison with SIFT.
SIFT, on the other hand, produces much better results on Pair #4 and #5. These pairs
were chosen to test the performance for larger rotations and differences in illumination.
AKAZE also tends to be better than ORB in Pair #5, showing much better efficiency and
less time of computation while only sacrificing a very small amount of inliers in comparison.
ORB seems to produce a lot of quality features in cases of clear overlapping in images, but
shows poor results when there are large variations in rotation, translation and illumination
present. For this, SIFT produces much better results overall, highlighting its robustness
and efficiency in comparison.
(a) SIFT
(b) ORB
(c) AKAZE
Figure 4.2: Pair #1
34
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:43==
(a) SIFT
(b) ORB
(c) AKAZE
Figure 4.3: Pair #2
(a) SIFT
(b) ORB
(c) AKAZE
Figure 4.4: Pair #3
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) SIFT
(b) ORB
(c) AKAZE
Figure 4.5: Pair #4
(a) SIFT
(b) ORB
(c) AKAZE
Figure 4.6: Pair #5
36
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:45==
To further reinforce the quality of results of this experience, OpenSfM ran the same recon­
struction with 3 different feature extraction techniques: SIFT and ORB (which was con­
cluded to be the best 2 results according to the established criteria), and HaHOG, which
uses the same descriptor as SIFT and a Hessian Affine feature detector. Otherwise, the
reconstructions will be done with the same configuration and in the same hardware.
(a) HaHOG
(b) SIFT
(c) ORB
Figure 4.7: Point Cloud produced from different Feature Extraction techniques
The results from ORB, seen in Figure 4.7c, were immediately discarded due to the lack
of structure of the reconstruction. The assumption is that this was caused by ORB’s
algorithm being inconsistent with variations in rotation and lighting. Due to this reason,
the experiment proceeded only with the comparison between SIFT and HaHOG.
(a) HaHOG
(b) SIFT
Figure 4.8
Method
Detect
Features Time (s)
Matching
Features Time(s)
Total Reconstruction
time (s)
Point Cloud
size
SIFT
2816.5
270.5
8,935.2
1,585,936
HaHOG
528.0
333.7
7,268.9
1,542,040
Table 4.2
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) HaHOG
(b) SIFT
Figure 4.9: Visual noise comparison
According to the values from Table 4.2, the point cloud produced with HaHOG feature
extraction was faster than the one produced with SIFT while maintaining an approximate
density of points. Despite this, a closer look at the point cloud through Figure 4.9 shows
that the point cloud produced by HaHOG contained more noise than its counterpart. Since
this approach intends to obtain the best quality possible, SIFT is, by this criteria, the most
appropriate option to perform feature extraction.
4.2
Morphological transformation on bitwise images
One of the challenged raised during this project was how to remove the noticeable noise
in the initial OpenSfM output. Upon closer inspection of the bitwise dataset, small clusters
were found around the edges of the images (Figure 4.10a and 4.10b). To test the influence
of this points on the overall 3D reconstruction procedure, we hypothesised the production
of a better point cloud if the bitwise images underwent a morphological transformation
prior to the reconstruction.
38
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: Noise clusters around the edges of the structure
Morphological transformations are image processing operations that are based on the
shape of the image. Using a structuring element (or kernel), each pixel of the image
undergoes a transformation based on its neighbour pixels. The most basic operations
are Erosion and Dilation.
• Erosion: The objective of this operation is to reduce the size and thickness of an
object in frame by removing pixels from and near its boundaries. The amount of
pixels discarded during the operation depends on the size of the kernel.
• Dilation: Dilation, as the name implies, increases the volume of the object by adding
pixels. This is ideally used to complement erosion in noise removal, to regain the
initial structure of the object.
Variations of both these operations allow for a wide variety of applications. Closing (Dila­
tion followed by Erosion) is effective on filling small gaps in the image, Opening (Erosion
followed by Dilation) is very useful in removing noise, and Gradient (equals the difference
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.11: Source: Moeslund, T.B. (2012). Morphology. In: Introduction to Video and
Image Processing. Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science. Springer, London.
between Erosion and Dilation of an image) is used in edge detection and segmentation.
Although the usefulness and the potential wide range of possible applications these tools
have, morphological operations are only effective in binary images. In this scenario, the
experiment is done on the masks produced by the 2D segmentation before we implement
the bitwise functions.
The objective of this experiment is to create a dataset of masks that have underwent
morphological transformations, overlapping those masks with the raw dataset and input
the resulting dataset into OpenSfM. The conclusion of this experiment will derive from an
analytic comparison between the produced point clouds with the point cloud created from
the unaltered dataset.
In the first case (BC), a Gaussian Blur with a 7 by 7 kernel is applied previously to miti­
gate the noise. Gaussian Blur is an effective method to reduce high­frequency information
while preserving the integrity of the image. Consequently, a Closing transformation is ap­
plied with the OpenCV function cv2.morphologyEx() with a 7 by 7 kernel and 20 iterations
(20 Dilations steps, followed by 20 Erosion steps). In the second case (CDB), we assign
a Closing transformation with 1 iteration and, prior to the implemention of the Blur, add a
dilation iteration, in order give some spatial tolerance to the edges of the pillar.
(a) Original
(b) BC
(c) CDB
Figure 4.13: Point Cloud from the respective transformations.
40
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:49==
(a) Original
(b) BC
(c) CDB
Figure 4.12: Top side of the pillar. Result from the blur and morphological transformations.
As evidenced by 4.13, there is no clear sign of improvement from applying transformations
to the dataset of masks to eliminate the noise present in the masks. Adding to the conclu­
sion of this experiment, the noise present in the masks derived from the 2D segmentation
are not the cause for the noise. Therefor, there is no incentive to apply a pipeline destined
to apply morphological transformation to the dataset.
4.3
3D­2D Reprojection with smaller dataset
With an already existing result by reprojecting the dataset of masks to removal outliers
from the point cloud, the hypothesis that an equal point cloud in terms of quality would be
produced even with a smaller sample of the dataset. The approach is to randomly select
50% of the masks for one case and 75% for a second one. Each case will be run 3 times
in order to see if the element of ”randomness” would be a factor in the end result. The
threshold for repetitiveness implemented in 3.3 of 40 will be used to categorize if the point
is an inlier or outlier.
The ”Number of detections” in table 4.3 refer to the number of times one point is consid­
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
41
==PAGE:50==
ered an outlier during the entire process. The column ”Number of Unique points” trans­
lates to the total amount of points that have been considered an outlier at least once.
Case
Time
(s)
Number of detections
Number of Unique points
Size of Point Cloud
(Num. of points)
50%
1
3460.2
15,851,447
852,076
1,327,696
2
3473.9
15,753,876
841,187
1,330,602
3
3483.6
16,113,084
1,115,908
1,331,398
75%
1
5337.9
23,870,791
1,176,845
1,330,708
2
5154.9
24,332,287
1,191,633
1,330,250
3
5174.3
24,297,197
1,153,608
1,327,064
100%
9252.0
32,057,844
1,200,796
1,320,399
Table 4.3
As seen in the results presented in table 4.3, the element of randomness of images used
to perform the reprojection have an influence in the performance of the algorithm. An
example of this is the case 3 of the 50% dataset, where the number of unique points is
considerably higher than the other two cases. Despite the changes, there is no significant
reduction or increase in point cloud size.
For comparison of results, MeshLab is used for the accessible point size feature, which
allows the user to increase it in order to check for outliers more easily.
Figure 4.14: Point cloud used as a term of comparison for this exercise.
42
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:51==
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
(c) Case 3
(d) Case 1
(e) Case 2
(f) Case 3
Figure 4.15: Result of reprojection from 50% (left) and 75% (right) of the dataset
The experiment used with 100% of the dataset shows the best results, but it requires more
than 4000 seconds for a small improvement in outlier removal. The 50% dataset shows
good results but is highly dependent on which images are picked to process, which can
vary the quality of the reconstruction, as seen in Case 3.
(a) 100% Dataset
(b) Case 3 of 50% dataset
(c) Case 3 of 75% dataset
Figure 4.16: Point cloud representation in MeshLab
In conclusion, the best overall result is dependent on the intentions of the user and how
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
43
==PAGE:52==
the point cloud is to be presented. If the priority is time, then using only part of the dataset
would be recommended, while the visualization can be done with a smaller point size, as
seen in 4.17 with CloudCompare, where the point cloud’s default point size is smaller than
the one represented in 4.16 with MeshLab. If the priority is quality, then the best result
would be to perform the outlier removal with all images available.
(a) 100% Dataset
(b) Case 3 of 50% dataset
(c) Case 3 of 75% dataset
Figure 4.17: Point Cloud representation in CloudCompare
This experiment relates only to this particular case. Results would vary according to the
number of images available to perform a reconstruction. For example, a dataset with 1000
images is most likely get the same results with 750 images, because, despite also being
75% of this hypothetical sample, the workflow would be processed with more images
than the project this work is based on. This test is not described in the results’ chapter,
but rather in chapter of experiments, because of the ambiguity of one’s intent and what
the purpose of the application.
4.4
Outlier Removal: 3D­2D Reprojection vs Statisical And
Radius
The hypothesis the applied approach in this project raises, is one of improvement in re­
lation to SOR and ROR, as mentioned previously in chapter 2.5. While SOR and ROR
have good performance on isolated and cluster outliers, it under­delivers when a point
cloud has non­isolated outliers. To test this hypothesis, this experiment will use 4 cases
to the same point cloud: SOR, ROR, SOR+ROR and reprojection. The objective is too
see how each method handles the 3 classes of outliers.
The SOR and ROR are applied using the inbuilt funcions from the Open3D[28], an open­
source python library that allows users to manipulate 3D data in order to support rapid
development. SOR takes the average distance of the k nearest neighbors and removes
them if they are above it, allowing for a threshold based on a given standard deviation,
and ROR removes points that have fewer neighbors than a predefined value in a given
radius. Both functions require 2 input parameters.
statistical_outlier_removal + radius_outlier_removal
Case
Input parameters
Point Cloud
size
SOR
ROR
nb_neighbors
std_ratio
nb_points
radius
1
100
0.5
3
005
1,301,195
2
100
0.5
5
005
1,250,371
Table 4.4
44
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:53==
radius_outlier_removal
Case
Input parameters
Point Cloud
size
nb_points
radius
1
2
0.05
1,452,698
2
20
0.05
455,389
Table 4.6
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
Figure 4.18: SOR
statistical_outlier_removal
Case
Input parameters
Point Cloud
size
nb_neighbors
std_ratio
1
25
0.01
1,065,862
2
100
0.5
1,324,015
Table 4.5
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
Figure 4.19: SOR + ROR
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
Figure 4.20: ROR
The experiment shows that, despite being very efficient at removing isolated outliers (out­
liers that have a considerable distance to the focus area of the point cloud), SOR, ROR
and the combination of both are very inefficient at removing non­isolated outliers. This is
because the outliers in the edges of corners of the pillar are in close distance to inliers,
making the distinction between quality of points through proximity very difficult. Resorting
to less lenient hyper­parameters, also sacrifices the quality of the point cloud, as seen in
the second case of ROR in figure 4.20b, where the Point Cloud was reduced to almost a
third of its original size and still manage to not being able to remove outliers.
Figure 4.21: Point Cloud processed with outlier removing reprojection
This is a common occurrence even in other cases in comparison with the result of 3D­2D
reprojection (Figure 4.21). The point cloud size in both cases of SOR+ROR in table 4.4,
case 1 of SOR in table 4.5 and case 2 of ROR in table 4.6 is smaller in comparison with
the point cloud from reprojection, while still showing noticeable noise in the edges. In
conclusion, reprojection shows significant improvement over point proximity based algo­
rithms to remove outliers in terms of removing noise and maintaining the integral structure
of the point cloud.
46
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:55==
5
Reproducibility
In order to validate the robustness of the process, it is important to achieve the same
quality of results with different input data. This chapter intends on showing that the work­
flow created around the initial objective of reconstructing the pillar bridge is also able to
produce results with a different structure.
5.1
Dataset
The input for this experiment is a dataset of 5616x3744 resolution images of a building
in the Cognac Public Garden (Figure 5.1) in Charente, France taken from a database of
datasets for photogrammetry. Unlike the bridge pillar dataset, this dataset is very limited
in terms of metadata and quantity. The images are not multi­modal, so they have no
information besides the visual representation itself. The dataset is also comprised of only
12 images instead of the 566 used for the creation of the workflow.
Figure 5.1: Examples from dataset (Source: https://github.com/natowi/photogrammetry_datasets)
5.2
2D Segmentation and Mask Processing
Proceeding with the segmentation with such high resolution in images resulted in mem­
ory errors and exceeding thresholds embedded in the SAM algorithm. To overcome this
problem, it was necessary to create a new dataset by reducing the resolution of the raw
images. This allowed for SAM to perform at the expected level, without sacrificing the
quality of the output. The resulting masks had their resized to match the original resolu­
tion. There is no loss of information during this process because the masks only contain
binary values that would later be overlapped with the original unaltered dataset.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.2: The images from the dataset were reduced in order to improve the perfor­
mance of SAM. The resolution of the masks were then increased when they were se­
lected.
5.3
Point Cloud
Both WebODM and OpenSfM ran twice: one time for a dataset with masks applied and
another with only the raw data. It is expected that the run with the masks included result in
point clouds with fewer outlier and presents a better structural integrity. OpenSfM dataset
is a bitwise transformation of the raw dataset with the masks and WebODM dataset is
comprised of the original images input together with their respective masks 5.3.
(a) Sample of the bitwise dataset used to run
OpenSfM.
(b) Sample of the dataset used to run We­
bODM. Raw data + Masks
Figure 5.3
48
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.5: Point Cloud resulted from a dataset of bitwise images. Black dots surrounding
the edges of the facade are to be considered outliers.
OpenSfM
(a) Bitwise Dataset
(b) Raw Data
OpenSfM reconstruction
There is a noticeable cluster of outliers in the top left corner of the images representing the
Point Cloud with the no mask dataset (Figure 5.4b), while the counterpart shows a cleaner
representation of the building facade. In regards to noise in the reconstruction, there are
some presence of black dots of it around the edges of the facade that are considered
noise, similar to what was found in the reconstruction of the pillar.
The size of the Point Cloud produced with raw data is of 412,345, while the one produced
with bitwise transformation is 329,994. This is to be expected, since the reconstruction
with raw data has to process the entirety of the scene
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
49
==PAGE:58==
WebODM
(a) Mask
(b) No Mask
Figure 5.6: Cognac Dataset results in WebODM
Much like the results gathered from the OpenSfM, WebODM produced a much cleaner
and rigorous 366,173 point sized representation with the dataset of masks with consider­
ably less noise in comparison with the 491,484 point sized reconstruction that had solely
the raw data as an input. The time of processing was also less than the latter, reducing 1
minute and 20 seconds from the original 5 minutes and 20 seconds of runtime.
5.4
Outlier Removal
For a comparison of results in 3D­2D outlier removal reprojection and analyse its effi­
ciency, we maintain the same hyper­parameters of thresholding as the ones used for the
bridge pillar (8% of the database) which, in this case, corresponds to 1 repetition. This
means that if a point is considered an outlier in more than 1 reprojection out of 12, then it
will be removed from the point cloud.
50
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:59==
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 5.7: Isometric perspective of the before and after the outlier removal
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 5.8: Top­down perspective of the before and after the outlier removal
Processing
Time (s)
Num. of repeating
points
Unique outliers
Filtered
52.0
92180
25573
17528
Table 5.1: Data on the 3D­2D reprojection applied to the OpenSfM bitwise image recon­
struction
52
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:61==
As expected from the initial experiment, a significant amount of outliers were removed
while the structure maintained its form. The cluster of points seen perpendicular to the
facade of the building (Figure 5.7) are not to be considered outliers, for they are part of
the side of the building. They resemble a cluster of outliers because the lateral part of the
structure lacks representation in this particular image dataset.
5.5
Results
This experiment is successful in proving the robustness of the workflow when imple­
mented with a different set of images. It is important to make a distinction by maintaining
the focuses on infrastructures but, at the same time, varying between level of detail and
form. In the dataset used for the construction of the workflow, the pillar can be described
as low detailed and 4 side structure with a relative large dataset. For this experiment,
we used a more detailed facade with a considerable shorter dataset. 2D segmentation
provided quality masks that could be processed into the input data of the reconstruction
and the outlier removal performed at the expected level of efficiency.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.9: Final results of OpenSfM (left), with a density of 312,466 points, and WebODM
(right), 366,173
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
53
==PAGE:62==
54
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:63==
6
Discussion
The results gathered by this project are to be considered satisfactory and overall success­
ful. The segmentation provided by SAM managed to create masks that corresponded to
the great majority of the images in the dataset and consequently managed to create the
required input for both OpenSfM and WebODM algorithms. The reconstruction from We­
bODM managed to create a dense point cloud of 19,954,505 vertices with appropriate
RGB values, allowing user to intuitively understand and recognize the detail of the pillar
structure without even applying mesh. OpenSfM was able to recreate a reconstruction,
although subpar to the expectations that were otherwise matched by WebODM, produc­
ing a point cloud of approximately 1,539,511 vertices (400,000 points less than WebODM)
that was overlapped with a considerable amount of unwanted points, specially around the
edges and corners. Despite this, it gave the opportunity to explore available tools for out­
lier removal and to apply previous knowledge by studying the efficiency and structure of
3D­2D reprojection. The final point cloud was composed of 1,320,399 points and elimi­
nated most of the outliers. The application of the aforementioned method proved to be
extremely successful, taking into consideration the aesthetically difference between the
initial OpenSfM point cloud and the aftermath. A visual representation of the workflow is
presented in Figure 6.1
Figure 6.1: Project’s workflow
Still there are considerable improvements to be made in both point clouds. In both results,
the top part of the wider walls of the pillar have part of their structure not represented. In
regards of the output 2D­3D reprojection done to the point cloud of OpenSfM, as seen in
Figure 3.13, this is due to the fact that points that are rearranged to the affected areas
being counted as outliers more often that the inner part of the walls. This can be fixed by
increasing the threshold limit for the 3D­2D reprojection pipeline, as seen in Figure 3.12.
although this is equivalent to more outliers being left to be filtered.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.2
It is of the assumption that including SOR and ROR in the outlier removal process would
improve performance of the workflow. Despite the better results provided by our ap­
proach, the time of process could still be improved if less points were to be processed.
This would be possible by having isolated clusters and sparse outliers be removed by sta­
tistical and radius­based methods, since they are very cost efficient and its wall times are
considerably shorter, leaving only the non­isolated outliers to be removed by reprojection.
6.1
Further Work
The previous chapters of this project has explained in detail the work done with the avail­
able resources and research. Further development of the workflow presented in this the­
sis would allow for a considerable improvement on performance and results. This chapter
serves as a construction of suggestions that, if implemented, would serve as assumptions
to the development of this project.
6.1.1
Dataset
A dataset with less spatial variation between frames would benefit the overall performance
of the workflow. Feature extraction would return more keypoints in SfM, MVS would ben­
efit with more detailed depth maps, and a bigger percentage of the overall masks being
matched in the mask processing stage would allow for a bigger dataset of bitwise images.
6.1.2
Mask overlapping
The formula to detect pillars masks after the segmentation in order to create a dataset of
binary images of the pillar would improve if more variables were to take into consideration.
More over, differential mask­matching network[29] follows the same concept as the code
written for this project and its application would benefit the performance and results of the
mask processing stage.
6.1.3
Unify the workflow into one single framework
This project was developed with limited resources and time. This means that, for different
tasks, different hardware and platforms were use in order to comply with the prerequisites
56
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:65==
that were established by the multiple packages used (Some elements had conflict with
Windows, others needed access to better GPUs that those available at the time). Unifying
the workflow into one container would turn the process less exhaustive to the user to
utilise.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
57
==PAGE:66==
58
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Albrecht Meydenbauer. “Die Photometrographie”. In: (1867).
[2]
Birgit Holzer. “Mending a Broken Heart”. In: (). Ed. by About Trust. URL: https :
//abouttrust.tuvsud.com/en/digitization/mending-a-broken-heart.
[3]
Satya. URL: https://medium.com/@satya15july_11937/3d-image-reconstruction-
from-multi-view-stereo-782e6912435b.
[4]
D. G. Lowe. “Distinctive image features from scale­invariant keypoints”. In: Interna­
tional Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 60, no. 2 (2004).
[5]
Ethan Rublee et al. “ORB: An efficient alternative to SIFT or SURF”. In: 2011 In­
ternational Conference on Computer Vision. 2011, pp. 2564–2571. DOI: 10.1109/
ICCV.2011.6126544.
[6]
Edward Rosten and Tom Drummond. “Machine Learning for High­Speed Corner
Detection”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2006. Ed. by Aleš Leonardis, Horst Bischof,
and Axel Pinz. Vol. 3951. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin Hei­
delberg, 2006, pp. 430–443. ISBN: 978­3­540­33832­1. DOI: 10.1007/11744023_34.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11744023_34.
[7]
Michael Calonder et al. “BRIEF: binary robust independent elementary features”.
In: Proceedings of the 11th European conference on Computer vision: Part IV.
ECCV’10. Heraklion, Crete, Greece: Springer­Verlag, 2010, pp. 778–792. ISBN:
3­642­15560­X, 978­3­642­15560­4. URL: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
1888089.1888148.
[8]
Pablo Fernández Alcantarilla, Jesús Nuevo, and Adrien Bartoli. “Fast Explicit Dif­
fusion for Accelerated Features in Nonlinear Scale Spaces.” In: BMVC. Ed. by Tilo
Burghardt et al. BMVA Press, 2013. URL: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/bmvc/
bmvc2013.html#AlcantarillaNB13.
[9]
Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. “SURF: Speeded Up Robust
Features”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2006. Ed. by Aleš Leonardis, Horst Bischof,
and Axel Pinz. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 404–417.
ISBN: 978­3­540­33833­8.
[10]
Sameer Agarwal et al. “Building Rome in a day”. In: 2009 IEEE 12th International
Conference on Computer Vision. 2009, pp. 72–79. DOI: 10 . 1109 / ICCV . 2009 .
5459148.
[11]
Marius Muja and David G. Lowe. “Scalable Nearest Neighbor Algorithms for High
Dimensional Data”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli­
gence 36.11 (2014), pp. 2227–2240. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2014.2321376.
[12]
David G. Lowe. “Distinctive Image Features from Scale­Invariant Keypoints”. In: Int.
J. Comput. Vision 60.2 (Nov. 2004), pp. 91–110. ISSN: 0920­5691. DOI: 10.1023/B:
VISI.0000029664.99615.94. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/B:VISI.0000029664.
99615.94.
[13]
Matthias Heinrichs and Volker Rodehorst. “Trinocular rectification for various cam­
era setups”. In: (May 2012).
[14]
Kurt Konolige. “Small Vision Systems: Hardware and Implementation”. In: Robotics
Research. Ed. by Yoshiaki Shirai and Shigeo Hirose. London: Springer London,
1998, pp. 203–212. ISBN: 978­1­4471­1580­9.
[15]
Heiko Hirschmuller. “Stereo Processing by Semiglobal Matching and Mutual Infor­
mation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 30.2
(2008), pp. 328–341. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1166.
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
59
==PAGE:68==
[16]
Russ Tedrake. Robotic Manipulation. Perception, Planning, and Control. 2023. URL:
http://manipulation.mit.edu.
[17]
Òscar Lorente, Ian Riera, and Aditya Rana. “Image Classification with Classic and
Deep Learning Techniques”. In: CoRR abs/2105.04895 (2021). arXiv: 2105.04895.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04895.
[18]
Charles R Qi et al. “PointNet: Deep Learning on Point Sets for 3D Classification and
Segmentation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.00593 (2016).
[19]
Charles R. Qi et al. PointNet++: Deep Hierarchical Feature Learning on Point Sets
in a Metric Space. 2017. arXiv: 1706.02413 [cs.CV].
[20]
Xiaojuan Ning et al. “An efficient outlier removal method for scattered point cloud
data”. In: PLoS ONE 13 (2018). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
51909428.
[21]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1512.03385
(2015). arXiv: 1512.03385. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[22]
Seyed Mohammad Hassan Erfani et al. “ATLANTIS: A benchmark for semantic seg­
mentation of waterbody images”. In: Environmental Modelling & Software (2022),
p. 105333.
[23]
Yongqing Liang et al. “WaterNet: An adaptive matching pipeline for segmenting wa­
ter with volatile appearance”. In: Computational Visual Media (2020), pp. 1–14.
[24]
Alexander Kirillov et al. “Segment Anything”. In: arXiv:2304.02643 (2023).
[25]
Mapillary. OpenSfM. 1996. URL: https://github.com/mapillary/OpenSfM.
[26]
WebODM. URL: https://github.com/OpenDroneMap/WebODM.
[27]
Yasutaka Furukawa et al. “Towards Internet­scale Multi­view Stereo”. In: vol. 2010.
June 2010, pp. 1434–1441. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2010.5539802.
[28]
Qian­Yi Zhou, Jaesik Park, and Vladlen Koltun. “Open3D: A Modern Library for 3D
Data Processing”. In: arXiv:1801.09847 (2018).
[29]
Xiaohui Zeng et al. “Dmm­net: Differentiable mask­matching network for video ob­
ject segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision. 2019, pp. 3929–3938.
[30]
G. Bradski. “The OpenCV Library”. In: Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools (2000).
[31]
Sameer Agarwal, Keir Mierle, and The Ceres Solver Team. Ceres Solver. Ver­
sion 2.1. Mar. 2022. URL: https://github.com/ceres-solver/ceres-solver.
[32]
P Umesh. “Image Processing in Python”. In: CSI Communications 23 (2012).
[33]
Darsh Ranjan. URL: https://github.com/dranjan/python-plyfile.
[34]
The pandas development team. pandas­dev/pandas: Pandas. Version latest. Feb.
2020. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[35]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High­Performance Deep Learn­
ing Library”. In: CoRR abs/1912.01703 (2019). arXiv: 1912.01703. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1912.01703.
[36]
Sébastien Marcel and Yann Rodriguez. “Torchvision the Machine­Vision Package
of Torch”. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Multimedia.
MM ’10. Firenze, Italy: Association for Computing Machinery, 2010, pp. 1485–1488.
ISBN: 9781605589336. DOI: 10.1145/1873951.1874254. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/1873951.1874254.
[37]
Charles R. Harris et al. “Array programming with NumPy”. In: Nature 585.7825
(Sept. 2020), pp. 357–362. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
60
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Python Libraries
Some of the libraries used in this project include:
• OpenCV [30]
Open source computer vision and machine learning software library.
• Open3D [28]
Open­source library that supports rapid development of software that deals with 3D
data.
• Ceres Solver [31]
Ceres Solver is an open source C++ library for modeling and solving large, compli­
cated optimization problems. It can be used to solve Non­linear Least Squares prob­
lems with bounds constraints and general unconstrained optimization problems.
• OpenSfM [28]
An open­source Structure from Motion library that lets you build 3D models from
images.
• PILlow [32]
PILlow is designed for fast access to data stored in a few basic pixel formats. It
should provide a solid foundation for a general image processing tool.
• plyfile [33]
Python library used to facilitate manipulation and visualization of ply files.
• Pandas [34]
Pandas is a fast, powerful, flexible and easy to use open source data analysis and
manipulation tool.
• PyTorch [35]
PyTorch is a fully featured framework for building deep learning models.
• Torchvision [36]
This package consists of popular datasets, model architectures, and common image
transformations for computer vision.
• NumPy [37]
NumPy is a crucial package for scientific computing with Python.
A.2
Code Samples
1
source /work3/s202584/miniconda/bin/activate base
2
conda activate py39
3
4
cd /work3/s202584/segment -anything/
5
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
61
==PAGE:70==
6
images_dir=/work3/s202584/downscaled_Pillar2/
7
8
SAM_output_folder=/work3/s202584/Result_AnySeg2_ds/
9
10
for dir in $images_dir/*; do
11
echo "Processing image: $dir\n"
12
if [ ! -d "$dir" ]; then
13
obj_name=$(basename "$dir")
14
obj_out_path="$SAM_output_folder/$obj_name"
15
if [ ! -d $obj_out_path ]; then
16
mkdir -p $obj_out_path
17
echo "SAM segmenting on object name: $obj_name"
18
python scripts/amg.py --checkpoint /work3/s202584/sam_vit_h_4b8939
.pth --model-type vit_h --input $images_dir/$obj_name --output
$obj_out_path
19
else
20
echo "Skipping segmentation on" $obj_name "as it already exists"
21
fi
22
fi
23
done
Listing A.1: Execution of Segment Anything in bash
1
def overlap(mask1_dir , mask2_dir):
2
mask1 = cv2.imread(mask1_dir , 0)
# 0 for grayscale
3
mask2 = cv2.imread(mask2_dir , 0)
4
5
# Compute the intersection
6
intersection = cv2.bitwise_and(mask1, mask2)
7
total_pixels = cv2.bitwise_or(mask1,mask2)
8
9
# Count the number of intersection pixels
10
intersection_pixels = cv2.countNonZero(intersection)
11
aglomeration_pixels = cv2.countNonZero(total_pixels)
12
# Calculate the overlap percentage
13
#total_pixels = mask1.size
14
mask1_1s = np.sum(mask1 == 255)
15
mask2_1s = np.sum(mask2 == 255)
16
#total_pixels = mask1_1s + mask2_1s
17
overlap_percentage = (intersection_pixels / aglomeration_pixels) * 100
18
19
#print(f"Overlap percentage: {overlap_percentage:.2f}%")
20
return overlap_percentage
Listing A.2: Python function to calculate the overlapping percentage of two images. The
inputs for this function are filepaths of the masks.
1
2
mask_dataset = "../masks/"
3
PLY_file = "point_cloud.ply"
4
reconstruction = pd.read_json("../bitwise_exif/reconstruction.json")
5
shots = reconstruction['shots'].values[0]
6
images = list(shots.keys())
7
masks = os.listdir(mask_dataset)
8
9
plydata = PlyData.read(PLY_file)
10
11
ply_pts = plydata['vertex'].data
12
rows_shots=[]
13
for i,img_name in tqdm(enumerate(images)):
14
15
rotation = shots[img_name]['rotation']
62
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:71==
16
translation = shots[img_name]['translation']
17
gps_position = shots[img_name]['gps_position']
18
rows_shots.append([img_name[:-4],rotation ,translation ,gps_position])
19
img_data = pd.DataFrame(rows_shots , columns=["Image","Rotation","Translation",
"GPS Position"])
20
XYZ = []
21
for i, point in tqdm(enumerate(ply_pts)):
22
XYZ.append([point[0], point[1], point[2]])
Listing A.3: Structuring data from json file from OpenSfM
1
width = int(image_test.shape[1])
2
height = int(image_test.shape[0])
3
f = 0.7073828300229086
4
C_x = int(width/2.0)
5
C_y = int(height/2.0)
6
7
max_size = max(width, height)
8
9
f_x = f*max_size
10
f_y = f*max_size
11
int_matrix = np.array([[f_x, 0, C_x],
12
[0, f_y, C_y],
13
[0,
0,
1]])
14
15
i = 0
16
counter = 0
17
18
list_outliers_idx = []
19
good = []
20
dict_outliers = {}
21
st = time.time()
22
for mask in masks:
23
if mask[-4:] == ".JPG":
24
#print(mask, flush=True)
25
temp_outlier = []
26
temp_image = cv2.imread(mask_dataset + mask)
27
temp_gray = cv2.imread(mask_dataset+mask)
28
temp_gray = cv2.cvtColor(temp_gray , cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
29
30
31
rotation_matrix_13 = img_data[img_data['Image'] == mask[:-4]]['
Rotation'].to_numpy()[0]
32
translation_matrix =
np.matrix(img_data[img_data['Image'] == mask
[:-4]]['Translation'].to_numpy()[0]).T
33
rotation_matrix = cv2.Rodrigues(np.matrix(rotation_matrix_13))[0]
34
35
RT_matrix = np.append(rotation_matrix ,translation_matrix ,1)
36
RT_matrix4x4 = np.vstack((RT_matrix ,[0,0,0,1]))
37
ones = np.array([[1,0,0,0], [0,1,0,0], [0,0,1,0]])
38
P = int_matrix.dot(ones).dot(RT_matrix4x4)
39
40
for i, point in tqdm(reversed(list(enumerate(XYZ)))):
41
42
test_coord = point.copy()
43
test_coord.append(1)
44
test_coord = np.array(test_coord)
45
46
47
48
coords2D = P.dot(test_coord.T)
49
coords2D = np.array(coords2D.T)
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
63
==PAGE:72==
50
u = coords2D[0] / coords2D[2]
51
v = coords2D[1] / coords2D[2]
52
u = int(u)
53
v = int(v)
54
55
56
if (u >= 0 and u <= width) and (v >= 0 and v <= height):
57
if temp_gray[v][u] > 0:
58
continue
59
else:
60
list_outliers_idx.append(i)
61
62
63
64
else:
65
continue
66
67
68
69
et = time.time()
70
print("Time to completion: ", et-st)
71
df = pd.DataFrame(list_outliers_idx , columns=["index"])
72
df.to_csv('Definite.csv', index=False)
Listing A.4: Code for 2D­3D Reprojection.
1
2
PLY_file = "point_cloud.ply"
3
plydata = PlyData.read(PLY_file)
4
5
df = pd.read_csv('Definite.csv')
6
7
threshold = int(240*0.09)
8
count_dict = dict(Counter(df['index']))
9
idx_filtered = dict((k,v) for k,v in count_dict.items() if v > threshold)
10
indexes = list(idx_filtered.keys())
11
plydata.elements[0].data = np.delete(plydata.elements[0].data, indexes)
12
el = PlyElement.describe(plydata.elements[0].data, 'vertex')
13
PlyData([el]).write('Clean_Point_Cloud.ply')
Listing A.5: Outlier removal script
64
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
==PAGE:73==
3D reconstruction using outlier­aware photogrammetry
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
