==PAGE:1==
A Simulation Study:
Developing an EMGВӯ
Based QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke ReВӯ
habilitation
Supervisors: Silvia Tolu, Sadasivan Puthusserypady
Nuria Fe Garcia del Valle
DTU Autonomous Systems
Department of Elektro
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke
Rehabilitation
Supervisors: Silvia Tolu, Sadasivan Puthusserypady
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Nuria Fe Garcia del Valle
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Elektro, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
LynВӯ
gby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Neurorobotics Laboratory, DeВӯ
partment of Elektro Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Autonomous Systems Master, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of control, neuroВӯ
rehabilitation and functional electrical stimulation devices.
Nuria Fe Garcia del Valle Вӯ s202421
Signature
Date
ii
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Stroke is a leading cause of disability, especially among the elderly, escalating the deВӯ
mand for effective stroke rehabilitation due to anticipated growth in the ageing populaВӯ
tion. This research concentrates on Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) rehabilitation
for muscle recovery, emphasizing the вҖқreaching taskвҖқ exercises. Within this framework,
Electromyography (EMG) sensors dynamically modulate the FES device, fostering paВӯ
tient engagement. The research delineated a threeВӯstage approach to EMGВӯBased FES
controller design. Initially, the Static Controller was devised, anchored on two crucial
SemiВӯParametric Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) models, emphasizing arm stabilВӯ
ity. Subsequently, the Path Following QuasiВӯStatic Controller was introduced, leveraging
the KВӯNearestВӯNeighbours (KNN) algorithm to facilitate movement through predetermined
trajectories. The last stage of the research manifested in the EMGВӯInfluenced FES conВӯ
troller, modulating muscle activations to simulate strokeВӯinduced patterns, accentuated by
the realВӯtime control of a simulated FES device. This controller showcased consistency
across varying stroke severities, marking a significant step towards realВӯworld FES EMGВӯ
based control applicability. The study faced inherent constraints such as the singular
muscleВӯfocused control, the use of only one muscle to influence the controller, and potenВӯ
tial challenges in realВӯworld translation. This work has explored diverse avenues for upper
arm rehabilitation through simulation of EMGВӯbased FES controllers, with innovative conВӯ
trol of Dynamic Arm Simulator (DAS) via neural excitations. The project was developed
in MATLAB facilitating ease of access. It will enable researchers to efficiently design and
simulate their EMGВӯdriven controls for FES devices. This thesis ultimately seeks to revoВӯ
lutionize rehabilitation methods, steering them towards a more patientВӯcentric approach.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Por las segundas partes,
aquellas que ayudan a encontrarte.
Luciendo mi nuevo estandarte,
me siento preparada para lo que viene adelante.
Por aquellos profesionales,
que confiaron en mis potenciales.
Por la familia y la comida,
(simils),
sinГіnimos de lo afortunada que es mi vida.
Por las amigas impresionantes,
cuya compaГұГӯa es la mejor medicina, y su risa un arte.
Por sentirme acogida
en una ciudad desconocida
que con cada pedaleo de mi bici cantarina
poco a poco se convertГӯa en mГӯa.
Por amigos que me hacen recordar
Un gran respiro a veces hay que tomar
y cafeterГӯas que respiran
tanto amor y vitalidad.
Donde no hay canciГіn
que dejemos sin bailar.
Por haber bailado bajo la lluvia,
nadado bajo la nieve
luchado contra tempestad
volviendo a mis seis para poderme resguardar.
Porque ellos todo pueden curar
a base de reir sin parar.
Porque son mi nueva familia
Que llevarГ© en mi corazГіn toda la vida
Por que con sus Гәnicas energГӯas
Han hecho de esta experiencia mis mejores dГӯas.
Por las orejas al otro lado del telГ©fono,
que sin ellas nunca podrГӯa haber podido escuchar
toda aquella sabidurГӯa que me hizo continuar.
Por quereros, quererme y queriendo
me quedo feliz de este capГӯtulo poder cerrar.
Porque lo vivido aquГӯ se queda
dejando un hueco
para que la prГіxima aventura pueda comenzar.
iv
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
PostВӯStroke Upper Limb Rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Rehabilitation Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Current FES technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
FES Control Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Key Takeaways and Thesis Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Design
13
3.1
Design Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Design Considerations: Stroke Coefficient and FES Frequency . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Design Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Comparison between Simulation Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Matlab Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.6
Tool: Dynamic Simulation of the Arm: A Comprehensive Model for MuscuВӯ
loskeletal Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Arm Model Design and Development
27
4.1
Target Positions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
PI Force Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Kinematic Jacobian and Torque Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.4
Model Creation: SemiВӯParametric Gaussian Process Regression . . . . . . 35
5
Control Design and Development
41
5.1
Static Controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Path Following QuasiВӯStatic Controller Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3
EMGВӯInfluenced FES Controller Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6
Results
53
6.1
PI Force Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.2
SemiВӯParametric GPR Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.3
Controllers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7
Discussion and Future Work
75
8
Conclusion
77
Bibliography
79
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
v
==PAGE:8==
A Matlab Code Overview
83
A.1 Finding Force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.2 Torque Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.3 GPR Model Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
vi
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
ANN Artificial Neural Network
DAS Dynamic Arm Simulator
DoF Degrees of Freedom
EMG Electromyography
FES Functional Electrical Stimulation
GPR Gaussian Process Regression
ILC Iterative Learning Control
KNN KВӯNearestВӯNeighbours
NIBS Noninvasive Brain Stimulation
tDCS transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
tMS transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
VR Virtual Reality
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Stroke is the leading cause of disability, and neurorehabilitation aims to enhance brain
plasticity to promote rapid recovery and restore lost motor functions. Functional Electrical
Stimulation (FES) has been shown to improve rehabilitation outcomes. FES effectiveness
increases when combined with a patientвҖҷs voluntary effort, which current openВӯloopВӯbased
or triggered controllers fail to encourage in hospital or rehabilitation center settings.
Newer technologies are emerging, which use electromyography (EMG) sensors to capВӯ
ture muscle signals and encourage active patient contribution. Unfortunately, most of
these devices are thresholdВӯbased or focus only on detecting the intention of movement,
and lack the design of a controller with the ability to learn, generalize, and adapt not only
to different stroke survivors but also to individual stroke survivors over time. Furthermore,
while many studies have examined the importance of wrist flexion, not enough attention
has been paid to arm flexion and the recovery of reaching movements.
In this context, the following crucial questions surface. These questions, while not diВӯ
rectly be addressed within the confines of the thesis but are essential to contextualize the
significance and potential applications of this research.
вҖў Is it possible to develop a technology that can provide FES stimulation tailored to
each patientвҖҷs current muscular activity?
вҖў Is it feasible to create a system that can autonomously respond and adapt to a
patientвҖҷs input without any human interaction?
вҖў Is it possible to create a framework that resembles the arm dynamics that will allow
testing of different control methods that comply with the previous questions?
In the attempt to start developing solutions to answer these questions, this thesis presents
a simulation framework to facilitate the evaluation of various controls that determine the
armвҖҷs functional electrical stimulation input based on EMG signals. A proportional conВӯ
troller was used to test the frameworkвҖҷs effectiveness, showing the potential and adaptВӯ
ability of this strategy.
1.1
Research Goals
This project aims to achieve the following goals. A flow diagram (Figure 1.1) is presented
below the research goals to show the connection between the different research goals
and the three main objectives.
1. Identify Gaps in Current FES Technology:
вҖў Conduct an exhaustive literature review to recognize limitations and shortcomВӯ
ings in the present Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) technology.
вҖў Provide recommendations or potential avenues for advancement based on
identified gaps.
2. Analyze Current FES Control Methods:
вҖў Review and evaluate prevalent FES control methods and strategies from recent
literature.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
1
==PAGE:12==
вҖў Determine and select the most suitable control method for integration with this
project based on performance, reliability, and compatibility metrics.
3. Comprehend and Replicate an Established Model:
вҖў Understand the intricacies and functionalities of the chosen controller.
вҖў Successfully replicate the dynamic arm simulatorвҖҷs movement using the aforeВӯ
mentioned controller.
4. Develop and Validate Arm Dynamics Model and Neural Modelling:
вҖў Design a model that will represent the arm dynamics.
вҖў Record neural activity data from arm movement.
5. Simulate Arm Movements Using Inverted Models:
вҖў Utilize the inverse of the models to simulate the armвҖҷs movement in the dynamic
arm simulator.
вҖў Test with different paths and movements.
6. Integration of Neural activity Data:
вҖў Record artificially created neural activity data for varied arm movements.
вҖў Incorporate this data into the simulator to enhance the authenticity and responВӯ
siveness of the armвҖҷs movements.
вҖў Record arm movements simulated impaired neural activity, simulating stroke
survivorsвҖҷ movement.
7. Develop an Additional Layer for an EMGВӯinspired Control:
вҖў Design and implement an additional layer in the control system to provide supВӯ
plementary neural activity, resembling the FES devices, ensuring smooth and
accurate arm movement.
Figure 1.1: Research Goals Flow Diagram
2
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Project Overview
This thesis covers the process from understanding the research motivation to the detailed
design, tool use, and model development needed to meet our goals.
It is structured in the following way:
Chapter 1: Introduction offers an initial dive into the central research question, the curВӯ
rent existing gaps and the problem statement. Moreover, it introduces the research goals
that will be aimed to be completed along the thesis.
Chapter 2: Literature Review serves as a backbone and clarifies the context of the
research. The chapter shed light on contemporary FES technologies and their inherent
drawbacks, starting with a general overview of the background and moving on to a detailed
examination of postВӯstroke upper limb rehabilitation.
Chapter 3: Design The outline for the research is provided in this chapter. It states
the design criteria and presents an initial design block diagram and the corresponding
requirements for the experiment setup. It also presents in detail the tool employed in this
studyВӯ a comprehensive model for musculoskeletal dynamics of the arm.
Chapter 4: Arm Model Design and Development dives into the intricacies of the arm
dynamics model development. From defining the data used for the model to the creation
of the SemiВӯParametric Gaussian Process Regression model.
Chapter 5: Control Design and Development offers an inВӯdepth analysis of different
studies where multiple controllers were used for FES. A QuasiВӯStatic Controller is chosen
as the most fitted one for this project. In this chapter the controller is developed starting
from a static position, then moving into a pathВӯfollowing quasiВӯstatic controller and finally
into the novelty of adding the EMGВӯinfluenced controller.
Chapter 6: Results presents the results from the SemiВӯParametric GPR Models generВӯ
ation and the implemented stages of the controller.
Chapter 8: Discussion and Future Work critically evaluates the results, highlighting
their implications and significance. Finally, it paves the way forward, suggesting further
directions this research can take.
Chapter 9: Conclusion wraps up the research, summarizing its key findings and their
importance in the grand scheme of upperВӯlimb stroke rehabilitation.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
3
==PAGE:14==
4
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
This chapter presents background information about stroke, postВӯstroke upper limb rehaВӯ
bilitation, the specific types of rehabilitation tasks, current FES technologies and stateВӯ
ofВӯtheВӯart FES Control Methods. The key takeaways from all these topics are taken that
serve as motivation for this project development.
2.1
Background
Stroke is one of the most significant causes of disability worldwide, with a wide range
of physical, cognitive, and psychological consequences. The World Health Organization
states that stroke is the primary cause of disability and death among the senior population
after heart disease [1].
Because of cell death brought on by hypoxia and inflammation that affects both the grey
and white matter pathways, stroke can cause localized lesions in the brain. A wide range
of disorders, including hemiparesis, abnormal posture, spatial neglect, aphasia, spasticity,
and affective and cognitive problems such as chronic pain and depression, can develop
after a stroke. Depending on the severity of it and the patientвҖҷs general health, the onset
and duration of these deficits may differ [2].
According to current statistics, the number of individuals aged 60 years or older is estiВӯ
mated to be around 650 million. However, projections indicate that this number will rise
significantly and reach up to 2 billion by the year 2050 [3]. It is important to note that
the elderly population is at a heightened risk of experiencing a stroke, emphasizing the
need for preventative measures and effective healthcare policies to mitigate the impact
of stroke on this demographic.
Despite advances in prevention and treatment, stroke remains a significant public health
issue, with an expected increase in the stroke population by 2025 [4]. This could have a
significant economic impact on society due to the high survival rate of stroke compared
to other illnesses.
The cost of postВӯstroke care varies widely, from a minimum of 752 USD/month to a maxВӯ
imum of 4850 USD/month. In Europe, there are 1 million new cases of stroke reported
annually, with a total of 6 million stroke survivors. The estimated annual cost of postВӯ
stroke care and treatment in 27 EU countries is 27 billion euros, with 8.5 billion euros in
indirect costs and 18.5 billion euros in direct medical expenses. Denmark has the secondВӯ
highest perВӯpatient cost per month, with 3022 USD/month. [5]. The main contributors to
the high cost of care are nursing care and rehabilitative therapies. To help in creating
efficient public health and rehabilitation strategies, it is crucial to comprehend the major
cost drivers and bridge the knowledge gap.
The aftermath of a stroke can be devastating and can severely impact the affected inВӯ
dividualвҖҷs quality of life. Various developed therapies have been reviewed for their efВӯ
fectiveness in treating stroke including FES, Noninvasive Brain Stimulation (NIBS), tranВӯ
scranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS), transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (tMS), VirВӯ
tual Reality (VR), taskВӯoriented therapy and robotВӯassisted rehabilitation. These therapies
help stroke survivors regain their independence and improve their overall standard of livВӯ
ing.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
5
==PAGE:16==
However, there is a lack of research and studies on stroke survivorsвҖҷ performance durВӯ
ing rehabilitation and tailoredВӯmade rehabilitation that adapt not only to the survivors
but to its own personal progress [6]. Investigating these aspects of stroke rehabilitation
could provide valuable insights into the effectiveness of different therapies and help to
tailor rehabilitation programs to the individual needs of stroke survivors to achieve overall
improved rehabilitation.
In conclusion, stroke is a major cause of disability and death, particularly among the elВӯ
derly population, and it is expected to become more common in the coming years. The
high cost of care is mostly attributed to nursing care and rehabilitative therapies, which
add significantly to the economic burden of stroke. Despite advances in prevention and
treatment, there is a need for effective healthcare policies and preventative measures
to mitigate the impact of stroke on society. Various therapies have been reviewed for
their effectiveness in treating stroke, but further investigation should be developed with a
special focus on adaptable, personalized treatments and the effectiveness of treatment
during rehabilitation. Investigating these aspects could provide valuable impacts on stroke
recovery and reduce the demand for caretakers and healthcare personnel.
2.2
PostВӯStroke Upper Limb Rehabilitation
Most stroke survivors experience weakness in their upper extremities, which limits their
ability to perform daily activities. Arm deficits are particularly significant, as 50% of the
reduction in quality of life after a stroke is due to the inability to use the arm effectively [7].
Unifying the results of 11 rehabilitation pilot studies, it was observed that there is a funcВӯ
tional improvement during the whole postВӯstroke rehabilitation. However, motor recovery
usually progresses nonВӯlinearly, reaching asymptotic levels a few months after the damВӯ
age. In other words, there is a crucial window for recovery that lasts for longer than a
year after a stroke, during which stroke survivors appear more receptive to therapy [8].
In conclusion, early therapy is essential for maximizing recovery potential. Nevertheless,
therapy should also be extended to chronic stroke survivors.
Exercise or physical therapy has been observed to restore sensoryВӯmotor function in
stroke survivors with some residual muscle activity thanks to brain plasticity [9]. It has
been found that repetitive tasks cause an impact on cortical plasticity, improving motor
and muscle function. Training therapies can influence the reorganizational mechanism in
the cerebral cortex promoting functional recovery. Even though the mechanism of neuВӯ
rological recovery after stroke is not yet well understood there is significant evidence that
intervention of one or more therapeutic techniques is helpful for rehabilitation of the neural
pathways [10].
In this project, FES is explored, which is commonly used in two main assistive therapies
for rehabilitation: robotВӯaided rehabilitation, and taskВӯoriented rehabilitation. Below is a
brief explanation presented for each of the three topics.
1. Functional Electrical Stimulation: This therapy involves the use of electrical stimuВӯ
lation to activate muscles that are weak or paralyzed. The stimulation is delivered
through electrodes placed on the skin or implanted in the muscle tissue. FES can
help to improve muscle strength and control, reduce muscle spasms, and prevent
muscle atrophy.
For stroke survivors over 18 with a 2Вӯmonth stroke duration, FES has been shown
to be a successful treatment. However, in cases when FES treatment was started
6
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:17==
more than a year after the strokeвҖҷs onset, no appreciable improvement was seen
[11]
2. RobotВӯassisted rehabilitation: This therapy involves the use of robotic devices to
assist stroke survivors while performing the exercises. The devices provide support,
guidance, and resistance to help stroke survivors improve their range of motion,
strength, and coordination.
Numerous studies have been conducted on the functional activities of robotВӯassisted
therapy, with encouraging but unsatisfying outcomes. There was no significant imВӯ
provement in upper limb motor activity observed in the stroke survivors in compariВӯ
son with routine clinical practice [12].
3. TaskВӯoriented rehabilitation: This therapy focuses on specific tasks and activities
that are relevant to a patientвҖҷs daily life. The goal is to help stroke survivors regain
the skills and abilities they need to perform these tasks independently. TaskВӯoriented
rehabilitation may involve exercises that simulate realВӯlife activities, such as reachВӯ
ing for objects, standing up from a chair, or walking on uneven surfaces.
Studies that included randomized controlled trials came to the conclusion that taskВӯ
oriented muscle therapy training for stroke survivors is a consistent and safe strategy
to improve the therapy results and quality of life. [13].
2.3
Rehabilitation Task
The following section will discuss rehabilitation tasks and interventions aimed at improving
upper limb function in stroke survivors.
Stroke survivors often exhibit decreased amplitudes at the shoulder and elbow joints durВӯ
ing reaching movements, as well as a decrease in range of motion at the elbow joint with a
tendency towards flexion. This hinders the ability to perform appropriate reaching moveВӯ
ments and can lead to compensatory movements, such as excessive shoulder abduction.
Moreover, hand spasticity limits the open and closing hand movements [14].
Grasping, holding, and manipulating objects are daily functions that remain deficient in
55% to 75% of stroke survivors 3 to 6 months postВӯstroke. Intervention studies have foВӯ
cused on increasing exercise duration and intensity, taskВӯspecific training, and enhancing
training through surface neuromuscular electrical nerve stimulation. A pilot study with 15
stroke survivors during a 12Вӯweek training program showed that taskВӯspecific exercises
significantly enhanced recovery when compared to taskВӯspecific exercise alone [11].
A bank of exercises shown below (see Table 2.1), including unilateral and bilateral training
that can be performed by the patient or caregiver, has also been developed to improve
hand functions of chronic stroke survivors in a homeВӯbased, selfВӯadministered program.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
7
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: Upper Extremity Functional Exercises
Exercise CateВӯ
gory
Exercise Type
Description
Passive/Active ROM
Passive ROM
Wrist/elbow/shoulder, self or by family memВӯ
ber
Active/assistive ROM
Wrist/elbow/shoulder
bilateral
with
dowel,
cane
Active ROM
Wrist/elbow/shoulder in sitting and standing
Active ROM with resistance
Wrist/elbow/shoulder in sitting and standing
Weight bearing and supportive reaction
Seated weight bearing
Forearms on tabletop with affected upper exВӯ
tremity
Extending arms
Seated or standing with bilateral upper exВӯ
tremity weight bearing on table
Extended arms with transitional
movements
Side lying to sit, sit to stand, dips
Extended arms and wrist/hand
on wall
From anterior and lateral, progress to wall
push up
Extended arms and wrist/hand
on wall with change in base of
support
Example:
weight shifting, single lower exВӯ
tremity support, lateral wall walking
Reaching activities
Forward supported reach
Bilaterally with cane on tabletop (elbow extenВӯ
sion)
Forward supported reach with
shoulder elevation
Elbow/wrist extension
Reaching against gravity
In frontal and sagittal planes
Reaching overhead
With active wrist/hand movements
Dynamic reaching to a target
Example: catch a ball
Grasping, holding and release
Maintaining digit extension with
weight bearing
Grasp, hold and release containВӯ
ers
With gravity minimized (on table)
Pick up and move/release small
object
On table
Pick up and move/release large
objects
Without proximal support
Incorporate key and pinch grips
in hold and release
Including stacking, lifting and overhead activВӯ
ity
Upper extremity ADL
Dressing, grooming
Carrying objects
With bilateral upper extremities
Opening bottles
Stabilizing with paretic extremity for reaching
Writing, drawing, manipulating
small objects
Folding towels, vacuuming
ROM: range of motionНҫ ADL: activity of daily living
8
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:19==
2.4
Current FES technologies
FES is a technique that uses electrical currents to stimulate muscle contractions in indiВӯ
viduals with neurological or musculoskeletal impairments. It is a popular technology used
for upper limb rehabilitation. Here is a summary of some current FES technologies for
upper limb rehabilitation and whether they are EMG controlled or not:
вҖў NESS H200 and H200 Wireless Вӯ These are two FES devices for the upper limb. The
NESS H200 is EMG controlled, while the H200 Wireless is not. They are designed
to assist with grasping and releasing objects and for stimulating the nerves of the
forearm, wrist, and hand.
вҖў Bioness StimRouter Вӯ This FES device is not EMG controlled and is designed for
use in individuals with upper limb paralysis caused by stroke or traumatic injury. It
uses a small implantable stimulator to stimulate the peripheral nerves in the upper
limb.
вҖў MyoPro Вӯ This is a myoelectric orthosis that uses EMG signals to control FES stimВӯ
ulation. It is designed to help individuals with paralysis or weakness of the arm and
hand due to conditions such as spinal cord injury or stroke.
вҖў Freehand System Вӯ This FES device is EMG controlled and is designed to help
individuals with quadriplegia or upper limb paralysis due to spinal cord injury. It
uses a small implanted stimulator to stimulate the nerves that control the muscles
of the hand and forearm.
вҖў SaeboStim Micro Вӯ This FES device is not EMG controlled and is designed for indiВӯ
viduals with neurological or musculoskeletal impairments affecting the upper limb.
It uses electrical stimulation to activate the muscles and assist with grasping and
releasing objects.
вҖў OmniHi5 Вӯ The OmniHi5 is a wearable robotic exoskeleton that combines advanced
robotics and electrical stimulation to assist individuals with upper limb disabilities
in performing functional activities. The OmniHi5 is highly customizable and proВӯ
grammable to provide a range of stimulation patterns to fit individual needs and
preferences.
Overall, FES has gained popularity in upper limb rehabilitation, and there are several prodВӯ
ucts available in the market for personal use. EMG signals are increasingly being used
as part of product control. However, detailed information about the type of EMG control
used by these devices is scarce, but they appear to be thresholdВӯbased, which means
that the motor response is initiated when the EMG signal crosses a specified threshold
value. Although the threshold can be adjusted to fit individual needs and preferences, this
type of control may be considered somewhat rudimentary and not automatically adaptВӯ
able to each case. Nevertheless, FES technologies for upper limb rehabilitation offer a
promising avenue for individuals with upper limb disabilities to regain or improve their
motor functions.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
9
==PAGE:20==
2.5
FES Control Methods
Searching Criteria
Before researching for stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart control inclusion criteria (IC) and exclusion criteria
(EC) were defined.
вҖў IC1: The article must be written in English
вҖў IC2: The publication date for the stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart control should be in the last 10
years.
вҖў IC3: The study should be based on FES Control methods either for stroke or spinal
cord injury.
вҖў EC1: The papers that do not develop control methods for medicalВӯrelated purposes.
2.5.1
State of the Art
The task of control design for FESВӯenabled reaching motions in the upper extremities is
challenging. The difficulties stem from the goalВӯdirected character of reaching motions,
which demand unique simulation patterns for each reach, in contrast to the cyclic moveВӯ
ments of the lower extremities. This is because tasks involving the upper extremities
are goalВӯdirected, which means that the amplitude, speed, and direction of the motions
are always changing. Therefore, a more sophisticated controller is needed, one that can
continuously calculate the stimulation patterns for a range of userВӯcommanded motions.
[15].
Several studies have been conducted on the development and control of intelligent asВӯ
sistive exoВӯgloves, FES systems, and robotВӯassisted rehabilitation systems. It is one of
the major difficulties to provide an adaptable, functioning and precise controller design.
This is because the external disturbance itself is subjected to another unsolved controller,
human control.
The vast majority of upperВӯlimb stroke patient trials using FES employ openВӯloop or trigВӯ
gered controllers which can lead to imprecise control of movement. The controller system
should have the ability of learning, generalizing and adapt as the human brain controls
the body. This is a very novel topic and is currently being studied.
Many different control strategies have been proposed to accurately treat the arm as a
complete system. A summary of them is presented below:
Feedforward Control: This approach is often used in clinical practice and relies solely
on user command without considering system performance into account. A drawback
is that it cannot be adjusted if the actual movement differs from the desired movement,
despite the fact that it is favourable because sensors are not needed to measure the
system output. [15].
Feedback Control: Feedback control uses sensed information of the current output of the
system to correct for deviations. It can make up for fatigue and disturbances. It enables
optimum tracking performance. However, the systemвҖҷs response time has some inherent
delays that could be problematic, especially for fast actions. [15].
Combined Feedforward and Feedback Control: Some FES system designs have opted
for a feedforward and feedback control combination producing excellent results. Methods
like training an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) with timeВӯdelayed inputs have been used
for the feedforward part, which is often an inverseВӯdynamic model.
10
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:21==
Neural Network Control: Another strategy is to create a nonВӯmodelling control mechaВӯ
nism, such as the neural network control theory. In the research, [16], a traditional PID
controller was combined with ANN to establish the control parameters. The neural netВӯ
work is trained to detect input/output relationships with the least amount of error, and the
PID controller component fineВӯtunes the current. They were able to successfully design
the correct input of electrical stimulating current signals for the patientвҖҷs foot and establish
relationships between stimulating current and ankle joint angle.
Iterative Learning Control (ILC): The recurring aspect of the rehabilitation process is
taken advantage of by the innovative approach known as ILC. Patients repeatedly attempt
the same task, and ILC gradually improves accuracy by leveraging information from earВӯ
lier attempts to modify the FES for the subsequent execution. In [17] an ILC algorithm
adjusted the amount of stimulation applied to the triceps and anterior deltoid muscles to
improve accuracy and maximize voluntary effort. In another study, [18], an inputВӯoutput
linearization structure was developed. It presented few parameters and was shown to be
robust. ILC systems are best used for systems that repeatedly track a fixed reference
signal over a limited time period since they are susceptible to disruptions and modelling
errors.
Fuzzy system with emotional learning control: A more stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart study impleВӯ
mented a fuzzy system equipped with emotional learning to control force and position
separately in the exoВӯglove. The performance of this system was compared to that of a
linear controller, and it was found that the overshoot decreased by up to oneВӯthird and the
settling time declined to oneВӯfifth [19].
In conclusion, it is challenging to establish control parameters for highly dynamic and comВӯ
plex systems, such as upperВӯbody extremity, since new parameters must be redefined for
every subject and might not hold true in all situations. Classical control theoryвҖ”which calls
for a mathematical model of the controlled systemвҖ”is ineffective. FESВӯcontrol systems
are intricate and demand creative solutions to ensure optimal operation on dayВӯtoВӯday or
rehabilitationВӯoriented assistive devices. It is an ongoing field of research with various
approaches to determine the most effective methods to improve outcomes.
2.6
Key Takeaways and Thesis Motivation
The extensive background presented in the sections above offers multiple insights about
stroke, postВӯstroke rehabilitation and challenges and advancements in rehabilitative techВӯ
nologies and therapies. The key takeaways are:
вҖў Prevalence and Impact of Stroke. Stroke is a leading cause of disability, espeВӯ
cially among seniors. A common aftermath of stroke is a reduction in upperВӯlimb
mobility. The elderly population is projected to grow significantly by 2050, increasВӯ
ing the number of people in need of upperВӯlimb stroke rehabilitation.
вҖў Economic Impact. Stroke leads to considerable economic strain due to the high
costs of postВӯstroke care. Major expenses stem from nursing and rehabilitative therВӯ
apies. There is an urgent need to explore and devise costВӯeffective methods to
alleviate this financial stress in future societies.
вҖў Rehabilitative Therapies. Various therapies such as FES, NIBS, tDCS, tMS, VR
and robotВӯassisted rehabilitation have shown effectiveness for postВӯstroke rehaВӯ
bilitation. Training programs that emphasize taskВӯspecific exercises have shown
enhanced recovery. Moreover, patient engagement along therapy increases the
chances of faster rehabilitation.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
11
==PAGE:22==
вҖў Upper Limb Rehabilitation. Impairment of the upper limb is a major postВӯstroke
limitation. Effective rehabilitation can significantly restore independence for stroke
survivors. Reaching tasks have been identified as particularly effective in this type
of rehabilitation.
вҖў FES Control Methods. FES control for the upper extremities is challenging due to
the varied amplitude, speed and direction of movements. Different control strategies
are being researched such as Neural Network Control, ILC, Feedforward and FeedВӯ
back Control. Several of these methods, when paired with EMG data, promise a
better assessment of patient engagement. Yet, the sophistication of these systems
coupled with limited patient data needs further research.
In light of the challenges identified and the stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart studies, the objective of this
thesis is to construct a framework that facilitates the testing of various EMGВӯbased control
methods in a simulated environment replicating an armвҖҷs reaching movement impaired by
the aftermath of a stroke. In the following chapter, a design of the process is presented.
12
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:23==
3
Design
This chapter explores the design that will accomplish the goals delineated in Section 1.1.
It first lays out the essential prerequisites that will help achieve the research goals. MoreВӯ
over, in order to emphasize an accurate portrayal of upper limb rehabilitation, the chapter
examines the requirements needed to correctly simulate a stroke movement and the freВӯ
quency with which the FES is applied during the rehabilitation.
These elements work together as guidelines for the design presented in the design overview.
The design is highly inspired on paper [20] therefore a comparison between the two
projects is provided to help the reader understand the differences and similarities.
At the end of the chapter, the main tool Dynamic Arm Simulator (DAS) used for this project
is explained in detail, including its main functionalities.
3.1
Design Criteria
The project design must fulfil the following criteria to comply with all the research goals.
1. Real Arm Simulator with accurate dynamic representation To correctly reproВӯ
duce realВӯworld dynamics and movements, an exact simulation of an arm was reВӯ
quired a real arm simulator is needed. This arm simulator needs to behave and
respond following the fundamentals of human biomechanics.
2. Tracking Ability to track the armВҙs movement either in joint space or task space.
This will provide flexibility in the control system.
3. EMG Reading It should present the capability or a possibility to read real or fake
muscle activity data. This data will be used as the main driven input to control the
armвҖҷs stimulation.
4. Muscle Stimulation Control There must be a way to activily control or access the
muscle activity. This is important as the objective is to control the FES input based
on EMG signals.
3.2
Design Considerations: Stroke Coefficient and FES
Frequency
When designing this project, two pivotal factors need to be meticulously considered: the
simulation of strokeвҖҷs effect on muscle activation and the optimal frequency for the FES
system.
A stroke significantly alters muscle function. One of its notable manifestations is spasticity,
a type of stiffness that depends on velocity. This condition commonly results in resistance
to arm extension among stroke patients. Such effects are mainly due to increased activity
in the biceps, wrist, and finger flexors, and a reduction in the activity of the triceps, anterior
deltoid, wrist, and finger extensors [18]. Taking into account these ramifications of stroke,
this project primarily focuses on the triceps. Targeting this muscle is essential because
stimulating it can augment muscle tone and reestablish motor control in affected muscles.
Regarding FES devices, their pulse frequencies typically span 23, 35, and 50 Hz [16]. For
this project, a frequency of 35 Hz has been selected.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
13
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Design Overview
The block diagram below (Figure 3.1) shows an overview of the project design about the
objectives presented in Figure 1.1.
Figure 3.1: General Design Block Diagram
The first objective is to control the DAS to achieve the desired arm configuration. To acВӯ
complish this, a quasiВӯstatic controller as inspired by the paper [20] will be developed. Two
models will be generated: the inverse arm statics, which correlates the arm configuration
with the desired torque, and the inverse muscle torque production, which associates the
torque with muscle excitation. This model will be the Gaussian Process Regression model
as shown in [20]. This muscle excitation mirrors the neural activation input to the DAS
responsible for executing the behaviour of the arm dynamics. Additionally, a PI controller
is added to provide the corrective torque necessary to achieve the desired configuration.
This torque will be added to the desired torque to produce the total torque which will then
be again transformed into the corresponding muscle excitations.
Upon successfully establishing a quasiВӯstatic controller for the simulated arm, a stroke
coefficient will be introduced. This coefficient will modify the muscle excitations fed into the
dynamic arm simulator. The adjustments will be grounded on research about the effects
of stroke on arm motion, as detailed in Section 3.2. This will produce a compromised
reaching motion often observed in stroke survivors.
Finally, a FES Controller will be designed to dynamically supplement the corresponding
stimulation. This will ensure the manifestation of natural movement even when the indiВӯ
vidual exhibits strokeВӯinduced motions.
14
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:25==
3.4
Comparison between Simulation Studies
Objective 1 is heavily influenced by the paper titled Developing a QuasiВӯStatic Controller
for Paralyzed Human Arm ([20]). The table below highlights the primary distinctions beВӯ
tween this project and the aforementioned one for the readers better understanding.
Table 3.1: Comparison of Two Simulation Studies
Developing a QuasiВӯStatic Controller
for Paralyzed Human Arm
Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic
Controller for Stroke Reaching Rehabilitation
Focused for spinal cord injury
Focused on stroke survivors
Controlling 9 muscles
Controlling 1 muscle
Surgical FES at 13Hz
External FES stimulation at 30Hz
Exoskeleton Arm Support
No Exoskeleton Arm
(enough mobility provided by the patient)
Wrist Position Control
EMG and Wrist Position Control
Multiple movements in the workspace
Different target, same initial positions.
Repetition of movement for rehabilitation purposes.
3.5
Matlab Code
To develop the controllers MATLAB was used. All the code developed can be found in
the github repository: https://github.com/NuriFe/MasterThesis.
3.6
Tool: Dynamic Simulation of the Arm: A Comprehensive
Model for Musculoskeletal Dynamics
The study of human mobility has benefited greatly from the development of musculoskeleВӯ
tal modelling, which is now a crucial tool for comprehending the dynamics of the human
body. Multibody models have historically proved helpful in resolving inverse dynamic
issues, particularly in the analysis of human gait and arm movement. The main disadВӯ
vantage of these inverse dynamic techniques is the need to gather data from participants
who are actively doing the required movement.
Moving away from inverse dynamics techniques, muscleВӯdriven forward dynamics have
allowed the simulation of innovative and fictional movements that would resemble imВӯ
paired movements, such as those of stroke survivors. These simulations have practical
applications in fields such as rehabilitation and motor control research.
The DAS is forwardВӯdynamic based. DAS allows to test controllers and has been used
in humanВӯinВӯtheВӯloop focused projects [21].For this project, forward dynamics simulation
will be used to test the hypothesis for EMGВӯinspired PD control of Functional Electrical
Stimulation for stroke rehabilitation.
A summary of the DAS musculoskeletal dynamics, including topics like multibody dynamВӯ
ics, muscle contraction dynamics, and muscle activation dynamics, will be covered in
this section. Moreover, an explanation of the forwardВӯdynamic implicit formulation will be
given. This formulation has been proven to improve the computational time required to
model dynamics with only an RMS error of 0.11 degrees in joint angles when running at
realВӯtime speed for a gait simulation with a prosthetic foot and ankle [21].
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
15
==PAGE:26==
All in all, the Dynamic Arm Simulator offers a robust framework for the simulation of huВӯ
man arm movements. It is implemented as a MATLAB Mex function that contains the
system dynamics and other functions, making it accessible via a MATLAB function interВӯ
face, flexible, and adaptable for various applications.
Table 3.2: Nomenclature
Nomenclature
q
Generalized coordinates vector
Лҷq
Generalized angular velocities vector
M(q)
Mass matrix
П„
Generalized forces vector/ Joint moments
B(q, Лҷq)
Coriolis, centrifugal and passive forces matrix
LM
MuscleВӯtendon length
LCE
Muscle contractile element length
П•
Pennation angle
s
Muscle contraction dynamics state variable
a
Activation state
x
State vector x = (q, Лҷq, s, a)T
u
Neural excitations for each muscle
16
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:27==
3.6.1
Structural Overview
The DAS presents 7 links, 11 degrees of freedom and 22 muscles that define the muscuВӯ
loskeletal system.
вҖў 7 Links: Includes the thorax, clavicle, scapula, humerus, ulna, radius, and hand.
Figure 3.2 shows a colourВӯcoded of the different links.
Figure 3.2: Dynamic Arm Simulator 7 Links. Green: Clavicle, Yellow: Scapula, Orange: humerus,
Red: Ulna, Purple: Radius, Blue: hand
вҖў 11 Degrees of Freedom (DoF): These consist of 2 orthogonal hinges at specific
joints, including the sternoclavicular, acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joints, elВӯ
bow flexionВӯextension, and forearm pronationВӯsupination (see Figure 3.3 for referВӯ
ence). Initially, the model was focused on planar movement but was improved by
adding independent control of the shoulder girdle. These additions allowed for more
flexibility and stabilisation when designing the neuroprosthetic control algorithm [22].
The range of motion of the different DoFs is shown in Table 3.3.
Inspired by [22] throughout this project the arm configuration is described in 5 DoF:
plane of elevation, angle of elevation, internal rotation, elbow flexion and forearm
pronation following the recommendation in [23]. These angles were restricted in
order to ensure the correct wrapping of muscles in the model, the final values are
shown in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.3: Shoulder mechanism of skeletal entities: thorax, clavicula, scapula and humerusНҫ
and the joints: sternoclavicular (SC) joint, acromioclavicular joint (AC) and glenohumeral joint
(GH) [24].
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
17
==PAGE:28==
Table 3.3: Angular limits for each degree of freedom (in degrees): The arm mechanism conВӯ
sists of the following skeletal entities SC: Sternoclavicular joint, AC: Acromioclavicular joint, GH:
Glenohumeral joint, EL: Elbow, PS: Forearm Pronation and Supination.
Degree of Freedom
Min Angle (degrees)
Max Angle (degrees)
SC y
Вӯ65.00
Вӯ19.00
SC z
5.00
30.00
SC x
0.00
83.00
AC y
33.00
69.00
AC z
Вӯ22.00
20.00
AC x
Вӯ17.00
18.00
GH y
Вӯ170.00
175.00
GH z
Вӯ30.00
84.00
GH yy
Вӯ177.00
179.00
EL x
5.00
141.00
PS y
5.00
160.00
Figure 3.4: Angular limits for each degree of freedom (in degrees) for the arm configuration folВӯ
lowing [23]. Table from [22]
вҖў 22 Muscles and 138 Muscle Elements: The realВӯtime model consists of 22 musВӯ
cles and muscle components in total. In order to accurately represent the mechanВӯ
ical line of action of each member, muscles are modelled using the fewest amount
of parts possible. The table in Figure 3.5 displays the number of elements utilized
for each muscle as well as the degrees of freedom that each muscle crosses.
18
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: Muscle elements and degrees of freedom crossed by the muscles. Table from [22]
3.6.2
Musculoskeletal Dynamics
The dynamics governing the musculoskeletal system must be thoroughly understood in
order to research it. This analysis is divided into three interconnected components: multiВӯ
body dynamics, muscle activation dynamics, and muscle contraction dynamics. Multibody
dynamics allow us to represent the system as a collection of interconnected rigid or flexВӯ
ible bodies, focusing on the kinematic constraints that guide motion. Muscle contraction
dynamics describes the complex interactions of muscle fibres and surrounding elements
using the threeВӯelement HillВӯtype model, while muscle activation dynamics explores how
neural signals translate into muscle actions.
The thorough analysis of the musculoskeletal dynamics is described in [21]. In this secВӯ
tion, a summary of each most relevant section is presented with a specific focus on the
projectвҖҷs application.
State variables
It is necessary to define the state variables before examining the various dynamics of the
multibody system.
The multibody model has 298 state variables. It is represented with the letter x:
вҖў 11 angles, q
вҖў 11 angular velocities, Лҷq
вҖў 138 muscle contractile element (CE) lengths, LCE
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
19
==PAGE:30==
вҖў 138 muscle active states, a
Multibody dynamics
Multibody dynamics is used to study the motion and forces acting on the musculoskeletal
system as it is identified as a system composed of interconnected rigid or flexible bodies.
Generalised coordinates are used to simplify the description of the system. As a result, the
configuration of the system can be represented using the minimum number of coordinates
to describe the position and orientation.
Generalized coordinates are often denoted by q. They are a set of independent paramВӯ
eters that define the configuration of the system. In the DAS q represents the 11 joint
angles.
The equations of motion for a multibody system can be expressed in the following matrix
form ([25]):
M(q) вҲ—ВЁq + B(q, Лҷq) = П„
(3.1)
Where,
вҖў ВЁq is the vector of generalized accelerations
вҖў M(q) is the mass matrix that describes the inertia of the system. It relates the acВӯ
celeration of q to the generalized forces.
вҖў B(q, Лҷq) is the matrix that describes Coriolis and centrifugal forces that arise from the
motion of the bodies in the system. Moreover, it contains gravity and other passive
forces.
вҖў П„ is the generalised force vector. In the case of DAS, it represents the forces genВӯ
erated by muscles according to the muscle contraction and activation dynamics.
Forward dynamics is used to predict the motion of a multibody system based on its iniВӯ
tial conditions and known forces. As a result Equation 3.1 is solved to the generalized
accelerations ВЁq.
ВЁq = M(q)вҲ’1(П„ вҲ’B(q, Лҷq))
(3.2)
The inverse of the mass matrix, M, is a critical component, as the simulation will not be
possible if it is singular. This singularity is quite common in musculoskeletal systems due
to the small mass and moment of inertia of body segments.
Moreover, elements of B can present high stiffness and damping, leading to high eigenВӯ
values of the Jacobian matrix that correspond to fastВӯchanging components of the system.
These high stiffness and high damping lead to oscillatory behaviours within the system.
The presence of stiffness originates from the ligaments and tendons having highly nonlinВӯ
ear mechanical properties (zero stiffness when unloaded, high stiffness when maximally
loaded).
To counteract the stiff system, when solving using standard numerical methods, such as
the Euler method, small time steps will be required.
Muscle contraction dynamics
The muscle contraction dynamics are based on the threeВӯelement HillВӯtype model. It
represents the muscle fibres (CE: contractile element), the tendon and forceВӯtransmitting
20
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:31==
tissue (SEE: series elastic element), and the passive elastic tissue surrounding the muscle
fibres (PEE: passive elastic element).
Figure 3.6: ThreeВӯelement muscle model. CE: contractile element, SEE: series elastic element,
PEE: parallel elastic element, Pennation angle П•: Angle between the muscle fibre in the CE and
the line of action of the muscle, s state variable for the muscle contraction dynamics [21]
The contractile force is calculated by the multiplicative interaction of the maximal isometric
force, the activation, the fibre length and the fibre length velocity, respectively represented
in the formula below:
FCE = Fmax вҲ—a вҲ—fFL(LCE) вҲ—fFV (
Лҷ
LCE)
(3.3)
The series and parallel elastic elements are represented by passive forceВӯlength relationВӯ
ships.
FSEE = fSEE(LM вҲ’LCE вҲ—cos(П•))
(3.4)
FPEE = fPEE(LCE)
(3.5)
The force balance equation following Figure 3.5 is equal to:
(FCE + FPEE) вҲ—cos(П•) вҲ’FSEE = 0
(3.6)
The differential equation for the state variable LCE is defined by Equation 3.6.
Muscle activation dynamics
The nervous system sends a neural excitation u(t) as a control signal to the muscle that
changes the activation through a firstВӯorder nonВӯlinear activationВӯdeactivation process.
This is because the activation a, also called the active state cannot be directly controlled
by the nervous system. The muscle activation and deactivation of a muscle, Лҷa, is formuВӯ
lated as:
Лҷa = (u вҲ’a)(c1u + c2)
(3.7)
,
where c1 +c2 is the rate constant for activation and c2 is the rate constant for deactivation,
typically in the range of 20Вӯ50 sвҲ’1 [21].
Combining Equation 3.1, Equation 3.6 and Equation 3.7 an implicit state equation for
musculoskeletal dynamics can be formulated.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
21
==PAGE:32==
3.6.3
Forward Dynamics for implicit state equation
The forward dynamic simulation of the musculoskeletal system model is a complex proВӯ
cess that involves determining the state trajectory x(t), starting from an initial state at t = 0
and using a control function u that contains the neural excitations for all muscles.
As mentioned in section 3.6.2 the state vector x is equal to:
x = (q, Лҷq, s, a)T
(3.8)
q and Лҷq for each degree of freedom and s and a for each muscle.
All dynamic equations for the model, which include an equilibrium of forces and activation
for muscle control (Equation 3.1, Equation 3.6 and Equation 3.7) are combined into one
single equation in terms of the state vector x and control input u.
f(x, Лҷx, u) = 0
(3.9)
Solving this differential algebraic equation will allow the prediction of how muscles and
joints change over time based on an initial condition and neural excitations controls.
The equation 3.9 is implicit as there are relationships among the variables. In contrast
with explicit formulation, they can not be solved directly for each variable. Solving this
implicit equation in a conventional way can be hard, as it usually requires small steps in
simulation, making it timeВӯconsuming, computationally expensive and less accurate.
The DAS uses an alternative approach whereby leaving the equation in its implicit form
is possible to calculate the Jacobian of f with respect to x, Лҷx and u. [21].
Knowing the Jacobians, the Rosenbrock method is the best method to solve the implicit
equation as it produces quick and realistic values. The Rosenbrock method is a numerical
technique used to solve ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The Rosenbrock method
will predict the state of the arm motion at the next time step. It iterates until finds the right
guess.
As a result, the DAS implements a firstВӯorder method with constant step size h. This
means that if for example the step size is halved, the error will also be halved.
вҲҶx = (вҲӮf
вҲӮx + 1
h
вҲӮf
вҲӮЛҷx)вҲ’1(вҲӮf
вҲӮЛҷx Лҷxn вҲ’f(xn, Лҷxn, un) вҲ’вҲӮf
вҲӮu вҲ—(un+1 вҲ’un))
xn+1 = xn + вҲҶx
Лҷxn+1 = вҲҶx
h
(3.10)
22
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:33==
3.6.4
Functionalities
The DAS can be downloaded from the simTK.org website (https://simtk.org/projects/DAS).
It includes the main MEX file, some files to test the correct functionality and installation
of the simulation environment and a basic manual for understanding its different functionВӯ
alities.
Loading the model
During the initialization, the MEX function reads the parameters from the model. When
initializing the model the 13 joints and 138 muscle elements are loaded.
1
load model_struct;
2
das3('Initiliaze',model);
Joint Moments
The input is the states of the model and the output presents the moment of the arm for
each degree of freedom (N m)
1
moments = das3('Jointmoments', x) %(ndof x 1)
Muscle Forces
The input is the states of the model and the output presents the forces of the arm for each
muscle (N)
1
forces = das3('Muscleforces', x)
Muscle Length and SEE Slack
The length of each muscle (meters) and the slack length of the series elastic element (m)
are given using the вҖҷMusclelengthsвҖҷ and вҖҷSEEslackвҖҷ functions respectively.
When a muscle contracts, it shortens its length to produce force. Before being applied
to the load, this force passes via the series elastic element (SEE). The SEE is in a slack
or nonВӯstretched state when a muscle is at rest and not exerting any force. Because the
SEE is not applying any further tension to the muscle fibres at this time, the length of the
contractile element (CE) is equal to the length of each muscle fibre. However, when the
force is transmitted through the SEE when the muscle contracts and generates force, the
SEE begins to stretch and the CE shortens.
In general, the CE length is equal to the length of each muscle fibre when the muscle is
relaxed and does not generate any force. When a force is applied, i.e., during muscle
contraction, the CE shortens and the SEE stretches, enabling efficient force transmission
to the load. This is why to calculate the correct length of the muscle in an initial state
where the muscle is contracted, the CE value is equal to the formula below.
LCE = length вҲ’SEEslack
(3.11)
The function below initializes the muscle values for the state correctly when knowing only
the angle values for the different degrees of freedom.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
23
==PAGE:34==
1
function x = initialize_state(position , nstates , iLce)
2
x=zeros(nstates ,1);
3
LCEopt=das3('LCEopt');
4
lengths = das3('Musclelengths', x);
% only the first 11
elements of x (the joint angles) will be used
5
SEEslack = das3('SEEslack');
6
Lce = (lengths - SEEslack);
7
x(iLce)=Lce;
8
x(1:11)=position;
9
10
end
Go to Section 3.6.2 for more information on the threeВӯelement model used to model musВӯ
cle contraction dynamics.
Dynamics
This function is to evaluate the dynamics of the model in the implicit form f(x, Лҷx,u) = 0. The
inputs are:
вҖў x (nstates x 1): the model states.
вҖў Лҷx (nstates x 1): the derivatives of the state of the model.
вҖў u (nmus x 1): muscle excitations.
Some optional inputs include
вҖў M (5x1): moments applied to the thoraxВӯhumerus YZY and the elbow flexion and
supination axes.
вҖў exF (2x1): external vertical force of amplitude exF(2) applied at exF(1) meters from
the elbow.
вҖў handF (3x1): the force applied to the centre of mass of the hand. The positive value
of handF (1) represents the lateral movement far from the thorax, the positive value
of handF (2) represents the upward movement, and the positive value of handF (3)
represents the posterior movement.
The outputs are as follows:
вҖў f (nstates x 1): dynamic imbalance.
Optional outputs include
вҖў
вҲӮf
вҲӮx (nstates x nstates): Jacobian of f with respect to x.
вҖў
вҲӮf
вҲӮЛҷx (nstates x nstates): Jacobian of f with respect to Лҷx.
вҖў
вҲӮf
вҲӮu (nstates x nmus): Jacobian of f with respect to u.
вҖў qTH (3x1): angles between the thorax and humerus (YZY sequence). These angles
are calculated following the standardization on [23]
1
[f, dfdx, dfdxdot , dfdu, ~,~,qTH] = das3('Dynamics',x,xdot,
step_u ,M,exF,handF);
24
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:35==
The das3step function is used to calculate the next time step following the Rosenbrock
method (Equation 3.10) previously explained in Section 3.6.3.
1
function [x, xdot, step_u , qTH] = das3step(x, u, tstep, xdot,
step_u , M, exF, handF)
2
[f, dfdx, dfdxdot , dfdu, ~,~,qTH] = das3('Dynamics',x,xdot,
step_u ,M,exF,handF);
3
4
% Solve the change in x from the 1st order Rosenbrock formula
5
du = u - step_u;
6
dx = (dfdx + dfdxdot/h)\(dfdxdot*xdot - f - dfdu*du);
7
xnew = x + dx;
8
9
% update variables for the next simulation step
10
xdot = dx/h;
11
step_u = u;
12
end
Visualization
The model can be visualised in OpenSim as shown in the image below. However, for
userВӯfriendliness, the DAS presents a function named das3stick(x, model). The inputs
are the model state and the Matlab model structure, and it outputs a Matlab figure with a
more simplified drawing of the model.
Figure 3.7: Open Sim DAS
1
das3stick(xneutral ,model);
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
25
==PAGE:36==
(a) Matlab Visualization Output
(b) Arm Simplification MATLAB overlay with
OpenSim arm
The das3stick function utilizes the вҖҷVisualizationвҖҷ functionality that outputs a 13x12 matrix
d that contains the orientation matrix and position vector information for each bone.
1
d = das3('Visualization',x);
2
p = d(j,1:3)';
% position vector of bone
3
R = reshape(d(j,4:12) ,3,3)';
% orientation matrix
26
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:37==
4
Arm Model Design and Development
The world of modelВӯbased methods for FESВӯbased arm control is vast, encompassing
different approaches. This chapter commences with a detailed background on these diВӯ
verse methods, setting the stage for a deeper exploration. Gaussian Process Regression
(GPR) model was selected to control the simulated arm in the DAS. It is selected for its
nonВӯparametric and dataВӯdriven attributes. This choice allows for a detailed analytical
representation of complex patterns without rigid assumptions about muscle structure.
The chapter then transitions to the design of the two essential models for this projectНҫ
the вҖҷInverse StaticsвҖҷ, which determines the joint torque necessary for a specific static arm
position, and the вҖҷMuscle Torque ProductionвҖҷ that connects arm configuration and muscle
activation to the produced joint torque.
From choosing the target positions for data collection, to the PI controller designed to
compute wrist force to hold static at the target positions, to the torque calculation via the
Kinematic Jacobian, each section builds upon the previous. Later sections provide a comВӯ
parative analysis of the three GPR models, highlighting the semiВӯparametric model that
combines the flexibility of blackВӯbox functions with strong generalization capabilities. With
a foundation in SemiВӯParametric GPR models, the chapter concludes by detailing its imВӯ
plementation on Matlab, delving into data extraction, model fitting, and the final derivation
of hyperparameters representative of the desired models.
4.0.1
Background
ModelВӯbased methods for FES controlling the arm as a unified system and determining
realВӯworld arm dynamics have been suggested in earlier studies as a solution for preВӯ
cise control. For instance, physicsВӯbased models have demonstrated some success in
controlling two muscles for rehabilitation [18]. However, a major challenge lies in the
identification of the physical parameters of the entire arm, which demands a significant
amount of data.
To address this issue, blackВӯbox modelВӯbased control methods have been developed. An
example of these methods successfully utilized an artificial neural network (ANN) to create
a map of task space configuration in relation to the forces that muscles can generate,
thereby achieving control of planar arm tasks [26]. Moreover, LyapunovВӯbased methods
have been employed to create a dataВӯdriven Deep Neural Network (DNN) based adaptive
control method used for FESВӯinduced leg extension rehabilitation [27].
Another difficulty for controlling arm movements lies in establishing control parameters
for these systems, with new parameters needing to be set for each subject. Even for the
same subject, these parameters can vary under different conditions, making the traditional
control theory that requires a mathematical model of the controlled system unsuitable [16].
Despite the potential of modelВӯbased FES control in providing the necessary flexibility and
accuracy, few approaches have found their way into clinical practice. This shortfall can
be attributed to challenges in deriving an accurate model given the limited identification
time due to factors such as onset of fatigue and time constraints of the patient, carer,
physiotherapist, or engineer [18]. Furthermore, due to timeВӯvarying physiological effects,
models must be reВӯidentified at the commencement of each treatment session.
Previous work has demonstrated that a semiВӯparametric Gaussian Process Regression
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
27
==PAGE:38==
(GPR) model can form the foundation for a controller achieving threeВӯdimensional dyВӯ
namic trajectories [20].
This modelВӯbased method avoids parametric modelling chalВӯ
lenges such as the difficulty in defining the parameters. The semiparametric GPR comВӯ
bines the generalization potential of a parameterized model with the ability of a nonlinear
function approximator that represents the diversity of the musculoskeletal dynamics.
In this project, the model identification is developed in a manner similar to the approach
outlined in the paper [20]. The GPR model provides a nonВӯparametric, dataВӯdriven apВӯ
proach, allowing for an analytical representation of complex patterns without necessitating
rigid assumptions regarding the modelвҖҷs structure.
4.0.2
Model Design and Identification
A two part modeled is needed as shown in Figure 3.1. It consists of:
вҖў Inverse Statics. It calculates the joint torque needed to hold a desired static arm
configuration.
вҖў Muscle Torque Production. It maps the arm configuration with the muscle activaВӯ
tion to the joint torque produced.
To gather data for the models a PI controller is designed to compute the force applied
at the wrist in order to hold the arm in a static position, both with and without neural
excitation. This force is subsequently converted into torque using the kinematic Jacobian.
The process is detailed in sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 and a flow diagram is shown in Figure
4.1.
Finally, the collected data is used to train the two semiparametric GPR models which are
used to predict П„j for a given configuration. The process is detailed in section 4.4 and a
flow diagram is shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Data Creation Flow Diagram
28
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: Model Creation Flow Diagram
4.1
Target Positions
In the paper [20] the simulated experiment resembles the one performed in a realВӯcase
scenario. A total of 27 different positions were analyzed where an external robot held
the wrist of the arm into the different static positions. The robot was equipped with a
threeВӯdimensional force sensor at its endВӯeffector [28].
Since no realВӯworld situation has been evaluated for this project, the simulationвҖҷs goal is
to represent a reaching motion beginning from an equilibrium posture. Additionally, the
stroke survivorвҖҷs arm is not being held by an external robot.As detailed in Section 3, this
approach stems from the assumption that the stroke survivor retains a degree of arm
stability, sufficient to facilitate a limited reaching movement.
For this, it is decided to find calculate the forces in 64 different positions. These 64 posiВӯ
tions are automatically generated using the function create_grid().
Figure 4.3: create_grid function output. 64 target positions used to calculate the required force
to hold a this reference static positions with and without neural excitation.
The create_grid() function generates a grid of target points by defining the starting and
ending coordinates for the x, y, and z dimensions and then linearly spacing these coorВӯ
dinates. If a model is provided as an input, the function also plots the wrist references,
offering a visual representation of these coordinates.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
29
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.1: Start and End Positions for x, y, and z Coordinates
Coordinate
Start Position
End Position
x
0.3
Вӯ0.08
y
0
Вӯ0.3
z
Вӯ0.1
Вӯ0.35
4.2
PI Force Controller
The goal of the static force simulation is to determine the necessary force to keep the wrist
in a specific static position for the aforementioned defined target positions. It involves two
distinct scenarios. Both scenarios use a PI controller to exert the required force at the
wrist, using the input handF in the das3_step(...) function.
Figure 4.4: Block Diagram for Two Scenarios
Figure 4.5: Block Diagram for PI Force Controller
In the first scenario, no muscles are excited. The simulation starts from the equilibrium
position and continues for 3 seconds, with a time step of 0.001 seconds. The focus is
to calculate how much force is needed to apply to maintain a specific arm configuration
static.
In the second scenario, the simulation begins with the arm configuration that was deterВӯ
30
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:41==
mined after running the previous noВӯexcitation simulation, as explained in the flow diagram
of Figure 4.4. Here, one muscle at a time is stimulated at 100%, i.e, uj. The index j repВӯ
resents the muscle, this values goes from 1 to 9. Although the muscles may deviate from
the starting position, the PI controller continuously adjusts to keep the hand in its initial
position. This simulation is shorter, running for 0.5 seconds, but still utilizes a time step
of 0.001 seconds.
After each time step,in both scenarios, the difference between the wristвҖҷs current position
and the target is computed as shown in Figure 4.5. This error is then multiplied by the
Proportional (P) coefficient (Kp) of the PI controller. Concurrently, the accumulated error is
updated and multiplied by the Integral (I) coefficient (Ki). The sum of both the proportional
and integral terms dictates the handF for the next step (Equation 4.1). In the context of
the PI controller, the proportional segment is responsible for creating an output in direct
relation to the present error, while the integral portion systematically reduces steadyВӯstate
error by considering the history of past errors.
errorpos = handgoal вҲ’handcurrent;
errori = errori + errorpos вҲ—tstep;
handF = Kp вҲ—errorpos + Ki вҲ—errori;
(4.1)
where errorpos is the difference between the target goal and the current position, the
errori represent the cumulative error from every time step and handF is the calculated
force that will be exerted on the hand to achieve the goal position.
The specific values for T, tstep, PI parameters for both scenarios are detailed in Table 4.2.
The force necessary to reach each point is calculated by averaging the last 10% of the data
collected during the simulation.The resulting information, including the forces exerted,
mean force, and the armвҖҷs configuration, is saved for each point in the simulation.
Table 4.2: Values for Period (T), Time step (tstep), and PI Gains for PI controller with no neural
excitation (uj = 0) and with neural excitation for each muscle (uj = 1). The index j represents
each muscle jПө[1, 9].
Parameter
uj = 0
uj = 1
T (Period)
3
0.5
tstep (Time Step)
0.001
0.001
Kp (Proportional Gain)
2000
2000
Ki (Integral Gain)
100
100
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
31
==PAGE:42==
4.2.1
Implementation
Below is a MATLAB code snippet that represents the PI Controller shown in Figure 4.5.
1
hand_current = wrist_position(x)
2
error_pos = hand_goal - hand_current
3
error_int = error_int + error_pos*tstep;
4
5
% PI calculation for time step
6
handF = K*error_pos+I*error_int;
7
8
[x, xdot, step_u] = das3step(x, u, tstep, xdot, step_u, M, exF,
handF);
The function wrist_position(x) calculates the global position of the wrist using transforВӯ
mation techniques. Initially, the das3(вҖҷVisualizationвҖҷ,..) is wrist position vector (p) and the
orientation matrix (R). Constants and position vectors are defined, including the local
coordinates of bone points.
Next, the function transforms the local coordinates into global ones. By utilizing the oriВӯ
entation matrix R and the position vector p, it applies a transformation to the local coВӯ
ordinates, yielding the global coordinates x, y, and z. The process is a straightforward
application of the principles of rotation and translation, aligning the local wrist coordinates
with a global frame of reference.
protated = R вҲ—plocal
pglobal = protated + t
(4.2)
where protated is the rotated position vector, R is the orientation matrix, plocal is the local
position vector, and t is the translation vector representing the shift from the local to the
global coordinate system.
32
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:43==
4.3
Kinematic Jacobian and Torque Calculation
4.3.1
Background
The Kinematic Jacobian is a critical part of the transformation of the recorded robot conВӯ
troller force to the joint torque П„j. The index j represents the muscle group being activated,
when no muscle is being activated j is equal to 0.
In robotics, the Jacobian matrix provides essential information about the relationship beВӯ
tween the velocities of the joints and the endВӯeffector of a robot manipulator. This relaВӯ
tionship can be expressed using the equation
Лҷx = J В· Лҷq
(4.3)
where Лҷx is the endВӯeffector velocity and Лҷq is the joint velocity.
Understanding the relationship between how the robot jointвҖҷs velocities correlate to the
endВӯeffectorвҖҷs velocities is vital for planning trajectories in different spaces.
Furthermore, the kinematic Jacobian can be use to determined the necessary forces in
joint space to achieve specific forces in endВӯeffector space. In the musculosketal system
it is assumed that the 11 degreesВӯofВӯfreedom have no friction at the joint. The joint torques
(П„ПөRn) required to bear an endpoint/hand force (FПөR6x1), are given by,
П„ = JT вҲ—F
(4.4)
where the Jacobian matrix (JПөR6xn) relates the infinitesimal joint displacement dq to the
infinitesimal endВӯeffector displacements dp. The theorem is proven using the Principle of
Virtual Work [29].
dq = J вҲ—dp
(4.5)
Calculating the kinematic Jacobian in robotics involves defining the structure and paramВӯ
eters of the robotвҖҷs joints and links, often using conventions like DenavitВӯHartenberg (DВӯH)
parameters. Transformation matrices are found for each joint, and the endВӯeffector posiВӯ
tion is obtained by multiplying these matrices.
The Jacobian matrix is then constructed by differentiating the endВӯeffectorвҖҷs position with
respect to each joint variable, considering whether the joint is revolute or prismatic. The
resulting 6Г—n matrix, where n is the number of joints, maps the joint velocities to the linear
and angular velocities of the endВӯeffector. In this projectВҙs scope the linear velocities will
be the only ones taken into account.
4.3.2
Implementation
The equation 4.5 is applied as shown in the MATLAB code below to calculate the torque
values from the mean forces previously calculate using the PI controller.
1
[dPhand_dx , ~, ~] = handpos_jacobian(x);
2
torque = dPhand_dx '*hand_F;
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
33
==PAGE:44==
Due to the complex system, to calculate the kinematic Jacobian of the arm, the conВӯ
cept of infinitesimal displacement presented in Equation 4.5 is used. The function handВӯ
pos_jacobian(x) (MATLAB code below) takes the state and perturbs each degree of freeВӯ
dom by a small mount h. For each perturbation, the old and the new hand positions are
subtracted and divided by h. This describes how the changes in the degrees of freedom
affect the handВҙs position at that particular state.
1
function [dPhand_dx , Phand, Phand_new] = handpos_jacobian(x)
2
dPhand_dx = zeros(3,11);
3
stick = das3('Visualization', x);
4
Phand = stick(13,1:3)';
5
h = 1e-7;
6
for i = 1:11
7
tmp = x(i);
8
x(i) = x(i) + h;
9
stick = das3('Visualization',x);
10
Phand_new = stick(13,1:3)';
11
dPhand_dx(:,i) = (Phand_new - Phand)/h;
12
x(i) = tmp;
13
end
14
end
The shoulder and elbow torques are computed using the transpose of the kinematic JacoВӯ
bian. They are denoted by П„j, where j symbolizes the muscle group being activated, with
0 signifying no active muscles. The torque concerning elbow pronation is disregarded as
it does not influence the wristвҖҷs positions.
If no muscles are activated, the torque needed to hold the the wrist in static position is
equal to,
П„0 = p(q)
(4.6)
where p(q)ПөR4x1.
The torque produced by the muscleвҖҷs group j activations is calculating by subtracting the
torques recorded when no muscles are activated and the torques recorded with muscle
group j active. This torque is represented by M(q)Оұ where ОұПөM8x1 is the vector of muscle
group activations and M(q)ПөM4x8 is the mapping from muscle group activation to joint
torque. It is assumed that the torques scales linearly with activation [30].
Mj(q) = П„0 вҲ’П„j
(4.7)
Each column of M(q) describes the torque generated by each muscle group at full actiВӯ
vation. It is assumed that individual muscle torques add linearly without interference from
adjacent muscles or connective tissue interactions.
34
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:45==
4.4
Model Creation: SemiВӯParametric Gaussian Process
Regression
4.4.1
Background
Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) is a powerful and flexible tool used in machine learnВӯ
ing for fitting a function to data. It is rooted in the mathematical foundation of Multivariate
Gaussian Distributions, where each random variable is distributed normally, and their joint
distribution is also Gaussian. GPR can be expressed as
f(x) вҲјGP(Вө(x), k(x, xвҖІ))
(4.8)
where Вө is the the mean vector and k(x, xвҖІ) is the covariance or kernel function. The
mean vector Вө describes the expected value of the distribution, while the kernel models
the variance along each dimension and determines how the different random variables
are correlated. The covariance matrix is always symmetric and positive semiВӯdefinite.
GPR creates a model of the function it is trying to learn, using a process that considers an
infinite number of dimensions and includes an element of randomness. It encapsulates
initial beliefs about the function in the prior distribution, defined by the mean and kernel
functions. Observations are used to update these beliefs through the likelihood function,
leading to the computation of the posterior distribution. This posterior reflects updated
beliefs about the possible functions that best fit the data.
Predictions are made by calculating the mean and variance of the predictive distribution
at new inputs, allowing for both point estimates and uncertainty estimates.
In summary, GPR operates on the foundational principles of Bayesian inference to model
a function from given data. This enables GPR to deliver both point predictions and assoВӯ
ciated uncertainties. The inherent flexibility and adaptability of GPR makes it a powerful
and widely applicable tool for function approximation in machine learning and statistical
analysis. [31]
Figure 4.6: Gaussian Process Regression [32]
4.4.2
Comparative Analysis of Model Types
A comparative accuracy analysis was conducted between nonВӯparametric, semiparametВӯ
ric, and parametric models in [30]. The semiparametric GP model resulted as the most
accurate, combining the flexibility of a blackВӯbox function approximation with the generВӯ
alization strength of a parameterized model, as indicated in [30]. This semiparametric
model estimated torques during muscle stimulation with less than 20% error relative to
the total muscle torque and passive torque required to move the arm.
Details on the quality of the model can be found in [30]. A summary of the three models
is described in the table 4.3.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
35
==PAGE:46==
Description
Advantages
Disadvantages
Parametric
Linear
model
used
to
repreВӯ
sent torque in a
single
degree
of
freedom, accountВӯ
ing
mainly
for
joint stiffness and
damping.
Simplicity
and
efficiency
due
to
linear
naВӯ
ture.
It
avoids
solving
nonlinВӯ
ear
optimization
problems.
Inaccuracy
with
full
complexity.
Limited application
in simpler version
as it does not acВӯ
count for physicial
properties.
Nonparametric
Utilizes Gaussian
process
regresВӯ
sion
to
predict
arm joint torques,
defining
mean
and
covariance
functions.
It reВӯ
lies
on
training
samples to make
predictions.
Adaptability,
less
overfitting, avoids
identifiability
isВӯ
sues as it does not
need rich enough
data to guarantee
identifiability
of
parameters.
Computational
complexity
and
demanding.
Semiparametric
Combines aspects
of both parametric
and
nonparametВӯ
ric
models.
It
uses a Gaussian
process
where
the mean function
is
derived
from
the
parametric
model
and
the
covariance is the
sum of a squaredВӯ
exponential
coВӯ
variance
function
and an term for
uncertainty in the
parameters of the
parametric model.
Flexibility, generalВӯ
ization,
local relВӯ
evance (dominate
predictions for inВӯ
puts close to trainВӯ
ing data) with comВӯ
plex dynamics.
Complexity
in
understanding,
implementing, and
tuning.
Table 4.3: Comparison of Parametric, Nonparametric, and Semiparametric Models
4.4.3
Implementation
Based on the results of the aforementioned study, the data for the set of 64 training posiВӯ
tions is used to train semiparametric GPR models which are used to predict П„j for a given
configuration. The models are used to determine the static arm torques p(q) and the musВӯ
cle force mapping R(q) for a desired arm configuration. The kernel function used in the
GPR was the squared exponential function using the distance metric for rigid bodies.
A MATLAB script, compute_GPR_model, is designed to compute the model performing
36
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:47==
Gaussian Process Regression to fit the data. The flow diagram on Figure 4.7 shows the
steps followed on the code to compute the hyperparameters of the model.
The code firsts initializes the prior parameters and the covariance matrices the data conВӯ
taining the information related to each model is loaded. The script sets up 9 specific
muscles and 64 target positions.
A loop iterates through each muscle, executing the following steps:
вҖў Data Extraction. The angle and torque data to each muscle is extracted.
вҖў Model Fitting The script applies both parametric and semiparametric fitting methВӯ
ods to the five different configurations: elevation plane, shoulder elevation, shoulder
rotation, elbow flexion and elbow pronation. Custom function parametricfunctionВӯ
Reach and semiparametricfunctionReach are called to perform the fitting proВӯ
cess. These functions incorporate GPR to build models that capture the underlying
relationship between joint angles and torques.
вҖў Output Model. Once the analysis is completed the modeldata structure containing
the details of the models for all muscles is saved into a MATLAB file.
This code loads the data and does GPR for each muscle where the inputs are the arm
configuration angles and the output are the joint torques.
PARAMETRIC FUNCTION
For the parametricfunctionReach, Bayesian Regression ([33]) is used to calculate the
mean (Вө) and the covariance (ОЈ) for the prior parameter distribution for the semiparaВӯ
metric model. Bayessian Regression is a statistical method that estimates the unknown
parameters of a linear model by considering them as random variables with prior distribuВӯ
tions. It takes into account prior knowledge of the parameters to provide a more precise
understanding.
In the following paragraphs, the code and the corresponding mathematical implications
will be detailed. Refer to Figure 4.7 for a detailed flow diagram.
First the basis function or design matrix ,ОҰ, is evaluated for each arm configuration torque.
It is used to represent the relationship between the input variables and the target outputs
in a compact and mathematical form.
Then a residual squared error computation following Equation 4.9 is calculated , where
the model parameter, ОІ, to predict the outputs is calculated by isolating it from the linear
model. y is the target/output vector, ОҰ is the design matrix, ОІ is the vector of coefficients,ЛҶy
is the predicted output vector and sqres is the residual error. This residual error will act
as the covariance matrix noise.
y = ОҰОІ
ОІ = ОҰ+y
ЛҶy = ОҰ вҲ—ОІ
sqres = mean((ЛҶy вҲ’y)2)
(4.9)
Finally, the mean Вө and covariance ОЈ of the parameter ОІ distribution that will define the
prior distribution for the semiparametric model are calculated as a posterior distribution
following the Bayesian linear regression.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
37
==PAGE:48==
The prior distribution mean Вө0 and covariance ОЈ0 are given as input to the function. A
Gaussian prior distribution describes the parameters ОІ distribution.
p(ОІ) = N(ОІ|Вө0, ОЈ0)
(4.10)
where Вө0 is the prior mean, and ОЈ0 is the prior covariance matrix.
Given the data, the distribution is updated using BayesвҖҷ theorem to find the posterior
distribution over the parameters:
p(ОІ|ОҰ, y) вҲқp(y|ОҰ, ОІ) В· p(ОІ)
(4.11)
Assuming Gaussian noise, the likelihood term is also Gaussian:
p(y|ОҰ, ОІ) = N(y|ОҰОІ, S)
(4.12)
where S is the covariance matrix of the noise.
The posterior distribution for ОІ given y and ОҰ is also Gaussian, and its mean Вө and coВӯ
variance matrix ОЈ can be found as follows:
Вө = ОЈ(ОҰT ОЈвҲ’1y + SвҲ’1
0 Вө0)
ОЈ =
 ОЈвҲ’1
0
+ ОҰT SвҲ’1ОҰ
вҲ’1
(4.13)
In summary, the prior mean Вө0 and covariance ОЈ0 encapsulate our beliefs about the coefВӯ
ficients before seeing the data. The design matrix ОҰ and the response vector y represent
the data we observe. The posterior mean Вө and covariance ОЈ encapsulate our updated
beliefs about the coefficients after seeing the data.
SEMIВӯPARAMETRIC FUNCTION
In the following paragraphs, the code and the corresponding mathematical implications
for the semiВӯparametricfunctionReach will be detailed. Refer to Figure 4.7 for a detailed
flow diagram.
First the basis function or design matrix ,ОҰ, is evaluated for each arm configuration torque.
It is used to represent the relationship between the input variables and the target outputs
in a compact and mathematical form.
A Gaussian Process is fully specified by the mean function and a covariance function.
Following [30], the mean function is the parametric model and the covariance function is
the sum of squaredВӯexponential covariance (Equation 4.15) function and a term that takes
into account the uncertainty in the parameters of the parametric model.
Вө = ОҰ вҲ—ОІ
ОЈ = k(x, xвҖІ) + ОЈuncertainty
(4.14)
k(x, xвҖІ) = Пғ2 вҲ—exp вҲ’(x вҲ’xвҖІ)2
2l2
(4.15)
The length scale (l) were chosen a priori to be small which means that the correlation
between observations drops off quickly as their separation increases. Leading to a more
flexible model.
38
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:49==
The vertical scale (Пғ2) controls the overall variance of the function values. Higher values
means more significant variation from one point to another, allowing GP to capture strong
fluctuations.
Moreover the likelihood function chosen is the Gaussian Likelihood. The likelihood deВӯ
scribes the noise model, in this case assuming normally distributed noise.
Next, hyperВӯparameters GPR are defined. Hyperparameters are essential parameters
that define how the model behaves. There are three main hyperparameters:
вҖў Mean. The mean previously calculated in the parametric function.
вҖў Covariance. It includes, the length scale parameters, the vertical scale hyperpaВӯ
rameters and the covariance previously calculated in the parametric function.
вҖў Likelihood function. It is set to be the log(10) which suggests a specific setting on
the noise variance in the Gaussian likelihood.
The hyperparameters are optimized to the GP model to best explain the training data. The
optimized hyperparameters are used to make predictions using Gaussian Process model.
All Gaussian process computations are made using the GPML toolbox for MATLAB ([34]).
1
covGP = {@covSEard};
2
likfunc = @likGauss;
3
covfunc1 = {'covSum',{covGP,covUNCERT}};
4
5
% optimize the hyperparameters and then make predictions with
the optimized
6
% parameters
7
[hypOPT fX iter] = minimize(hyp1, @gp, -100, @infExact ,
meanfunc1 , covfunc1 , likfunc , trainingInputs , trainingOutputs
(:,1));
8
[meantest covtest] = gp(hypOPT , @infExact , meanfunc1 , covfunc1 ,
likfunc , trainingInputs , trainingOutputs(:,1), testInputs);
9
%prediction: [ymu ys2 fmu fs2
] = gp(hyp, inf, mean, cov, lik,
x, y, xs);
The prediction outputs are ymu (meantest) for test output mean and ys2 (covtest) for test
output covariance.
The output of the semiparametric model are the hyperparameters that will be used later
for future predictions.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.7: Flow Diagram for Model Computation of SemiВӯParametric GPR
40
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:51==
5
Control Design and Development
This chapter presents the arm control design and development that will achieve the obВӯ
jectives highlighted in Section 3 and illustrated in Figure 3.1. This journey spans across
three stages, each building up from the preceding one, starting from a static control to a
sophisticated EMGВӯinfluenced control.
The chapter commences with the Static Controller. This controllers serves as a founВӯ
dation to ensure the armвҖҷs steadiness in a specified position. Utilizing the models from
Section 4 and combining it with a PI Controller, the necessary neural activations are genВӯ
erated to hold the arm in the static position. To measure its effectiveness, the controller is
assessed across 960 points. From this examination, a select group of feasible points are
identified. A feasible point signifies that the controller was able to find the corresponding
neural activation to sustain a target position uninterrupted for a full second.
Building upon the static controller, the next phase of Path Following QuasiВӯStatic ConВӯ
troller incorporates the element of motion. The calculated feasible points serve as stepВӯ
ping stones, forming a path designed using the KВӯNearestВӯNeighbours algorithm. This
path will be used by the controller to move the arm from point to point, steadily aiming for
the end target position.
At the end of the chapter the EMGВӯInfluenced FES Controller is studied. Here, muscle
activations are tailored according to the design considerations set in 3.2, resulting in a
distinct strokeВӯlike movement pattern. A FES device is simulated in this phase. Its objecВӯ
tive is to supplement the muscle activation to perform the intended movement. The FES
device control dynamically adjusts its output depending on the realВӯtime neural activity
data from the triceps.
By the end of this chapter, readers will have an understanding of the layered process
performed to design the simulated EMGВӯInfluenced FES controller of this project.
5.1
Static Controller
The development of the controller, inspired by the methodologies proposed in the paper
[20], aims to determine the optimal muscle excitation to stabilize the wristвҖҷs position. The
architectural layout of this controller is portrayed on Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Controller Block Diagram inspired in [20]
The input of the controller is the desired arm configuration. Using the Inverse of the Arm
Statics model, described in Section 4, the required torques to maintain the arm in a static
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
41
==PAGE:52==
position are computed. These torques are subsequently given as an input into the Muscle
Torque Production model, elaborated in Section 4. This model outputs the correspondВӯ
ing muscle excitations which will define the neural excitation input for the Dynamic Arm
Simulator.
The Dynamic Arm Simulator will then determine the armвҖҷs dynamics in accordance with
the Rosenbrock equation, as explained in Section 3.6.4. Post these dynamic computaВӯ
tions, the wristвҖҷs actual position is deduced. The error between the desired and the actual
wrist position will drive a PI Controller, which will calculate the corrective force needed to
match the desired wrist position. The kinematic Jacobian, Section 4.3, will compute the
requisite corrective torque. This torque, when combined with the desired torque from the
Inverse Arm Statics, provides the total torque which is then input to the Inverse Muscle
Torque model, closing the control loop.
PIВӯTuning
To assure the PI ControllerвҖҷs performance, an exhaustive handВӯtuning was undertaken
across 20 different positions, concluding in values of Kp = 300 and Ki = 100. For detailed
results see Section 6.3.1.
5.1.1
Implementation
The code below shows the MATLAB implementation of the Static Controller. It is divided
into two sections the initial configuration and the simulation loop.
1
%%%% INITIALIZATION
2
%Initialize Model
3
[model, nstates, ndof, nmus, iLce] = initialize_model();
4
5
% Initial state
6
x = x_init;
7
8
% Set Simulation Parameters
9
tend = 2;
10
tstep = .003;
11
nsteps = round((tend-time)/tstep+1;
12
13
% Initialize parameters
14
u=zeros(nmus,1);
15
handF=[0;0;0];
16
alpha0 = zeros(8,1);
17
Moments = zeros(5,1);
18
exF=[0;0];
19
20
% Initialize derivatives and muscle excitations
21
xdot = zeros(nstates ,1);
22
step_u = zeros(nmus,1);
23
24
complete = 0;
25
i = 0;
42
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:53==
1
%%%% SIMULATION
2
[~, ~, ~, ~, ~, ~, qTH] = das3('Dynamics',x, zeros(size(x)), zeros(138,1));
3
pose=[qTH;x(10:11)];
4
while i < nsteps
5
i = i+1;
6
7
% Predict static torque
8
staticTorque = predict_static_torque(pose)';
9
% Predict activation torque
10
M = predict_activation_torque(pose);
11
12
% Compute desired torque
13
tau_des = tau_feedback + staticTorque ';
14
15
% PI Feedback
16
Kp = 300;
17
Ki = 100;
18
19
HandCurrent = wrist_position(x);
20
posErr = HandGoal-HandCurrent;
21
sumErr=sumErr+posErr*tstep;
22
Fk=Kp*posErr;
23
Fi=Ki*sumErr;
24
Fdes=Fk+Fi;
25
26
% Compute torque from Kinematic Jacobian
27
[~, ~, ~, ~, ~, ~, qTH] = das3('Dynamics',x, zeros(size(x)), zeros(138,1));
28
pose=[qTH;x(10:11)];
29
J=computeJacobianDAS_5angles(pose);
30
J=J(:,1:4);
31
tau_feedback=J'*Fdes;
32
33
% Compute Activation
34
alpha0 = computeActivation(M,tau_des,alpha0);
35
for j=1:9
36
mus = muscledict(j);
37
u(mus) = alpha0(j);
38
end
39
40
% Advance simulation by a step
41
[x, xdot, step_u] = das3step(x, u, tstep, xdot, step_u, Moments, exF, handF);
42
end
5.1.2
Predicting Static Torque and MuscleВӯTorque Relationship
To predict the static torque values for an arm configuration (q(5x1)), the hyperparameters
found for the Gaussian Process Arm Statics model described on Section 4 are used. The
resultant torque represent the torque needed to hold the arm static in that configuration.
The muscleВӯtorque relationships M is predicted using the Muscle Torque Production model
hyperparameters calculated following the steps explain in Section 4 (see Formula 4.7).
The code gives out a matrix where each column represents the torque for the desired
shoulder elevation plane, shoulder elevation, shoulder rotation and elbow flexion proВӯ
duced by each muscle group.
Implementation
To calculate the static torque i = 9 in the code below, resulting in a static torque of size 4x1.
When calculating the muscle torque production the code will loop through the 8 muscles
(i = [1:8]) giving an output matrix of 4x8.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
43
==PAGE:54==
1
load('modeldata.mat');
2
q = desired_position;
3
4
covGP = {@covSEard};
5
static_torque = zeros(4,1);
6
M = zeros(4x8);
7
8
muscledata = modeldata.muscle(i);
9
% for j = 1:4 x= [elevationplane , shoulderelevation , shoulderrotaion , elbowflexion]
10
covSIMPLEj = {@covj};
11
covfuncj = {'covSum',{covGP,covSIMPLEj}};
12
static_torque(j) = gp(muscledata.x.semiparametric.gpHyperparameters , @infExact, @meanj,
covfuncj, @likGauss, muscledata.x.semiparametric.trainingInputs , muscledata.x.
semiparametric.trainingOutputs , q);
13
(...)
5.1.3
Predicting Muscle Excitations
In muscleВӯdriven systems, accurately determining muscle activation patterns is crucial for
understanding force generation.
The objective is to compute the muscle activation Оұ0 for given muscleВӯtorque relationships
M, desired torques П„desired, and initial guesses for activations is given. This is represented
by the following equation:
П„desired = M вҲ—Оұ0
(5.1)
In other words how much activation the different muscle groups need to generate the
desired torque.
The optimized muscle activation solution is calculated employing the quasiВӯnewton method
supported by the Armijo rule and a penaltyВӯbased approach. This method is inspired by
[20].
вҖў The quasiВӯnewton method is the iterative method used to find this functionВҙs miniВӯ
mum. As computing the Hessian tends to be computationally expensive, the quasiВӯ
newton method builds an approximation of it iteratively. In other words, it uses and
approximation of the information of the functionвҖҷs curvature (Hessian) to find the
shortest way to the minimum.
вҖў The Armijo rule is a method to decided how big of a step to take when trying to
find the lower point of a curve or surface. The step is halved every time a step is not
taken into a direction where the value of the function is reduced as expected. The
Armijo rule is used to determine the step size of the quasiВӯNewton method.
вҖў The penalty function makes sure that the muscle activations are withing the range
of [0,1], including constraints to the quasiВӯNewton method.
By employing, the quasiВӯNewton methods, the function efficiently converges to the optimal
solution. The figure below shows how it converges in two random moments of the steps
of the simulation. The plots show a sharp decline and then flattens, indicating that the
optimization is converging.
5.1.4
Feasible Points
With this tuned controller, a grid, encompassing 960 points, was generated using the
create_grid function (refer to Section 4.1). Each pointвҖҷs arm configuration was calculated
using the PI force controller, as detailed in Section 4.2. The feasibility of a point was
determined by the ability of the controller to sustain for 1 second its position with an error
margin of 0.1. For clarification purposes, the start and the goal position of the controller
44
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.2: Convergence Plot: Gradient Norm vs Iteration
are set to be the same. For seamless and accurate operations, a time step (tstep) of 0.001
is employed. To improve the controllerвҖҷs stability an auxiliary force is exerted on the arm
in the first 100 steps. This eliminates potential oscillations and assures a better control
performance.
The figures (gif if opened in Adobe Acrobat) below present the generated grid. Points
in red signify positions where the controller failed to find the neural excitation needed to
sustain for 1 second. In contrast, green points indicate successful stabilization by the
controller. These feasible points will be used in the following section (Section 5.2) to
generate paths for the arm to follow.
Figure 5.3: Feasible points. Open in Adobe Acrobat to see gif movement.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
45
==PAGE:56==
5.2
Path Following QuasiВӯStatic Controller Development
The goal is to develop a controller that allows the dynamic arm to navigate or follow a speВӯ
cific trajectory or path. This will simulate the rehabilitation reaching task to be performed.
For more information on rehabilitation tasks refer back to Section 2.3. QuasiВӯstatic control
allows to design a safe, precise and movementВӯcontrolled therapy, as it focuses on slow,
steady and controlled operations. It facilitates the decomposition of the entire reaching
path trajectory into smaller static positions. Dividing the task into smaller steps offers
some benefits under the rehabilitation lens:
вҖў Gradual Progression. Rehabilitation often demands gradual approach towards
exercises, specially for recovering patients. progress.
вҖў Progress Tracking Breaking the movement into smaller steps helps not only paВӯ
tients to progress at a comfortable and safe pace but allows to keep track of the
progress.
вҖў Minimized Fatigue Continuous motions can take a toll in patients with limited strength
and endurance. Smaller tasks reduce muscle and join strain preventing fatigue. UsВӯ
ing a quasiВӯstatic controller can help modify the parameters to adjust to the patientвҖҷs
abilities.
Figure 5.4: Flow Diagram QuasiВӯStatic Path Controller
46
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:57==
For a clearer understanding of the quasiВӯstatic control designed, refer to the flow diagram
included in this chapter (Figure 5.4). HereвҖҷs a descriptive stepВӯbyВӯstep breakdown of the
process of path controller:
1. Selection of Target Position: From a set of feasible points, a target position is
chosen. This serves as the endВӯpoint or goal for the system.
2. Path Discovery via the вҖҷfind pathвҖҷ Function (see Section 5.2.1, for a more detailed
explanation of the function): The selected target position is input into the вҖҷfind pathвҖҷ
function. This function works by first identifying the nearest neighbors from the feaВӯ
sible points workspace. Among the first 200 nearest neighbors of the starting point,
it selects one that:
вҖў Is at a distance d = 4 units away from the starting point. This distance recomВӯ
mendation comes from the paper [20].
вҖў Lies in the direction of the endВӯpoint or target position.
Through this method, a path consisting of multiple positions is generated.
3. Setting Initial Simulation Parameters: At the beginning of the simulation, the initial
position from the path is defined. Moreover the simulation parameter are set: tstep =
0.003, and a frequency of 30Hz. The variable frequency refers to the rate at which
the FES (Functional Electrical Stimulation) device can change its input. This is a
criteria detailed on the design Section 3 limited by the FES devices.
4. Control Loop: The control loop operates as previously outlined in the Section 5.1 ,
with a few distinct modifications:
вҖў Neural Excitation: This only takes place at set intervals based on the defined
frequency.
вҖў Position Switching: At every timeswitch the position in the control system is
updated to the subsequent one in the predefined path array.
If the hand has not reached the vicinity of the targeted position within the set
time frame of timeswitch, the system will attempt to reach the position a maxiВӯ
mum of two more times before potentially moving to the next point or terminatВӯ
ing.
In conclusion, the proposed controller is designed to guide a dynamic arm through speciВӯ
fied trajectories, mimicking the rehabilitation reaching tasks outlined in Section 2.3. QuasiВӯ
static control is used to emphasize safety, precision and control, three key components
for a successful rehabilitation. Key components of the control system presented include a
find_path function that uses KNN to find the best positions that will define the path to the
desired target. Moreover the control loop, adapted from the one on Section 5.1, operated
with timed neural excitation (controlled by the variable frequency) and position switching
to guide the arm accurately along the predefined path (controlled by variable timeswitch).
5.2.1
Find Path Function
The FindPath function calculates a path between two positions within a predefined set of
feasible wrist points. The function takes three input parameters: d, startPos and endPos.
The code will load a file that contains all the feasible wrists positions to calculate a path
from. Section 5.1 explains how the feasible positions are determined.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
47
==PAGE:58==
Once all the initial parameters are set, the function begins to construct the path. KВӯNearest
Neighbours is the supervised machine learning algorithm used to calculate the most opВӯ
timal path. The Matlab function knnsearch is used to seek the predefined number of
nearest neighbours to the current position within the feasible positions. Then, another
knnsearch is performed to identify which one of the closest neighbours is closer to the
end position. The selected point should be within a distance d from the current position
but closet to the end position.
This process is repeated until the path reaches the desired end position. As a result, find
path outputs an array called path will all the positions.
Figure 5.5: Flow Diagram Find Path Function
5.2.2
Implementation
The Matlab code implements the Path Following QuasiВӯStatic Controller .
1
%%% INITIALIZATION same as Static Controller
2
(...)
3
switchTime = 1.3;
4
startPos = x;
5
endPos = target;
6
d = 4;
7
last = 0;
8
pathIdx = 2;
9
(...)
10
11
path = FindPath(d, startPos, endPos);
12
13
%%% SIMULATION
14
15
while last = 0
16
(...) % Same as Static Controller
17
GoalPos = path(pathIdx);
18
if mod(i,floor(switchTime/tstep))==0
19
HandCurrent = wrist_position(x);
20
distance = norm(HandGoal-HandCurrent);
21
if distance < 0.05 || trial >0
22
if pathIdx < length(path)
23
pathIdx=pathIdx+1;
24
else
25
last =1; %last point in path
26
end
27
GoalPos = path(pathIdx);
28
[~, ~, ~, ~, ~, ~, qTH] = das3('Dynamics ',GoalPos, zeros (size(x)), zeros
29
(138 ,1));
30
pose =[ qTH; GoalPos(10:11)]
31
32
% Predict static torque (...)
33
% Predict activation torque (...)
34
end
35
% PI Feedback
36
37
if mod(i,frequency)==0
38
%Compute Activation (...)
39
end
40
41
%Advanced simulation by a step (...)
48
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:59==
5.3
EMGВӯInfluenced FES Controller Development
Building on top of the controllers previously designed and discussed in this section, the
investigation is extended into the intricate challenges faced by stroke patients. An afterВӯ
math of stroke is the muscular imbalances, most specifically muscle spasticity, which
refers to muscle stiffness that influences movement and speed. As a result, they present
difficulty extending the arm. The biceps tend to be overВӯactivated and the triceps and anteВӯ
rior deltoid underВӯactivated [18]. To counteract these muscular imbalances, this controller
has being design to simulate an effective and targeted electric stimulation.
Two key additions are included in the following controller design:
1. a component that emulates the over activity of the biceps postВӯstroke
2. the addition of FES to activate the triceps
A complete flow diagram is portrayed on Figure 5.6.
5.3.1
Emulating Biceps OverВӯActivity
The code segment initiates by calculating muscle activation levels using the computeВӯ
Activations function, which factors in muscle force models and desired torques (refer
to Section 5.1). Then, it proceeds to iterate through the set of muscles. When the loop
reaches the biceps, the activation level of the biceps is modulated by a factor termed
stroke, representing the overВӯactivity induced due to the stroke condition. This modulaВӯ
tion is subsequently bounded: if the resultant activation surpasses a threshold of 1, it is
capped at this upper limit. In scenarios where the activation is null and the stroke factor
exceeds 1, a minimal activation level of 0.3 is set to ensure a base activation. For each
iteration, the modified activation values are assigned to the corresponding muscle index
in the control input vector u. It is important to highlight that the values are only updated
with respect to the FES frequency (concept explained in Section 5.2).
5.3.2
FES Stimulator for the Triceps
Considering the biomechanical implications, this project focuses on applying the FuncВӯ
tional Electrical Stimulation the triceps. The control examines the triceps activation levels.
This information comes from the Dynamic Arm Simulator and in a real case scenario it
will come from EMG sensors situated in the triceps of the human.
If no activation is detected, a default minimal value is assigned. However, in cases with
existing activation, a sigmoidВӯbased control system is adopted.
Пғ(z) =
1
1 + eвҲ’z
(5.2)
This methods adapts the gain in a smooth manner between predefined boundaries, alВӯ
lowing for a nuanced control response that remains sensitive to the velocityВӯdriven nature
of spasticity.
For correct simulation it is ensured that the triceps activation remains bounded between
[0.2, 1].
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.6: Flow Diagram for EMGВӯinfluenced FES Controller
50
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:61==
5.3.3
PD Controller Tuning: Simulated Annealing
Building on the insights from the study by [35], where they refine the performance of a proВӯ
portional derivative controller for a twoВӯsegment planar arm model, simulated annealing
is used to tune the gains of the FES controller.
The core idea is to identify the best controller gains for the sigmoid function (Equation 5.2)
by minimizing the positional error over time. This error was quantified by the formula:
ferror =
v
u
u
t
1
2TNm
Nm
X
i=1
3
X
j=1
Z T
0
(ПҶij(t) вҲ’ПҶtarget
ij
)2dt
(5.3)
Here, ПҶij(t) represents the wristвҖҷs current position in either x, y, or z coordinates, while
ПҶtarget
ij
indicates the desired wrist position. The term T specifies the movementвҖҷs time
span, and Nm denotes the 10 arbitrary movements carried out during the simulation.
To calculate the optimal values, simulated annealing algorithm [36] was utilized. SimВӯ
ulated annealing is a probabilistic technique for approximating the global optimum of a
given function. It seeks to find the best solution.
It begins with a initial solution which is set to an initial high temperature. This temperature
will control the likelihood of accepting worse solutions as the algorithm progresses. At
each iteration a neighbouring solution is chosen randomly. If the neighbouring solution
is better than the current one it is accepted as the new current solution. If it is worsen it
may accept it depending on the temperature and the difference in quality of accepting the
solution or not. After each iteration the temperature is cooled down following the cooling
schedule.
The Matlab function simulannealbn is used with the default annealing function annealВӯ
ingfast. This function represents how the new points are generated for the next iteration.
In this case it has a step with the length temperature (higher temperature higher step) and
with a direction uniformly at random. The temperature function used is temperatureexp,
an exponential decay where the temperature is multiplied by a factor between 0 and 1.
The algorithm stops when the temperature reaches a predetermined minimum value, after
a fixed number of iterations.
Simulated annealing avoids getting trapped in local minima, as early on when the temВӯ
perature is higher the algorithm is more willing to accept worse solutions. In other words,
as the temperature cools down the algorithm becomes more selective.
For this project purposes, maximum of 100 iterations is stipulated, a fixed a function tolВӯ
erance at 1eВӯ3, and an initial estimate of [10 1.3] for the sigmoid functionвҖҷs two gains is
provided.. The bounds for the controller gains were set between [1.2 3] and [3 15].
The simulated annealing successfully calculated the proportional value to be equal to
[2.99 14.478].
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.7: Simulated Annealing Explanatory Diagram [37]
52
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:63==
6
Results
This chapter presents the findings of the research related to simulating an EMGВӯBased
QuasiВӯStatic controller for stroke rehabilitation. The data is organized to reflect the methВӯ
ods used, with key points illustrated through charts and tables. Further interpretation of
these results are discussed in each section.
6.1
PI Force Controller
In this section the results for the PI Force Controller are presented. First a summary of reВӯ
sults is given for each scenario presented in Section 4.2. Then three different comparisons
that were studied are presented one of PI vs PID performance, support vs nonВӯsupport
simulation, 1s vs 3s Simulation.
Figure Layout Explanation
Before diving into the results it is important to have a clear understanding of the image
layout. The oval shape represented in the figures symbolizes the patientвҖҷs body and the
lines provide a basic representation of the arm (see Figure 3.8b).
The green dot resembles the start of the movement and the red dot the end. The large
blue dot indicates the desired position, while the series of smaller blue dots trace the armвҖҷs
trajectory.
The PI controller was successfully implemented across 64 points (see Figure 4.3).
6.1.1
Scenario 1: From equilibrium position to target without Neural
Excitation
Scenario 1 was simulated during 3 seconds with a time step of 0.001s, Kp=2000 and
Ki=100 (See Table 4.2). The PI model successfully controlled the force for the 64 positions
reaching. The table below presents performance results from Scenario 1.
Table 6.1: Results for PI Controller Without Neural Excitation from Equilibrium Position to Target
Position
Parameter
Mean
Variance
Target Position Error (m)
[Вӯ0.0026 Вӯ0.0022 Вӯ0.0041]
[0.206 0.2916 0.3936]вҲ—10вҲ’4
Steady State Time (s)
0.4066
0.0093
Simulation Time (s)
4.91
0.0093
It can be seen that the mean target position error is very low and there is not a high
variance for the 64 different positions. The force values achiev a steady value early during
the simulation. Finally, it is interesting to highlight that the simulation running time has a
2s difference from the realВӯtime simulation.
The GIF 6.1 (best viewed in Adobe Acrobat) illustrated the OpenSIM movement under
the PI controller without neural excitation from equilibrium position to target position.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.1: PI Controller No Excitation from Equilibrium Position. Open in Adobe Acrobat to see
gif movement.
6.1.2
Scenario 2: Holding initial position with different muscles Neural
Excitation
Scenario 2 was simulated during 0.5 seconds with a time step of 0.001s, Kp=2000 and
Ki=100 (See Table 4.2). The PI model successfully controlled the force for the 64 posiВӯ
tions. The table below presents some results from Scenario 2 for the 9 muscle categories.
Table 6.2: Results for PI Controller With Neural Excitation to Hold Static Position for Each Muscle
Target Position Error (m)
Steady State Time (s)
Simulation Time (s)
Muscle Group
Mean
Variance
Mean
Variance
Mean
Variance
Triceps
[0.005
0.006
0.027]
[0.244
0.08
0.054]вҲ—10вҲ’3
0.100
0.027
2.80
0.070
Serratus Anterior
[ 0.001
Вӯ0.001
0.004]
[0.146
0.339
0.054]вҲ—10вҲ’4
0.201
0.005
2.86
0.126
Biceps/ Brachialis
[0.001
Вӯ0.002
Вӯ0.012]
[0.219
0.191
0.04]вҲ—10вҲ’3
0.143
0.027
2.89
0.048
Supra/ Infraspinatus
[Вӯ0.027
Вӯ0.018
0.013]
[0.104
0.06
0.110]вҲ—10вҲ’3
0.229
0.025
3.07
0.088
Rhomboids
[0.000
0.000
0.002]
[0.132
0.342
0.065]вҲ—10вҲ’4
0.219
0.003
2.97
0.028
Lower Pectoralis
[0.023
Вӯ0.010
0.002]
[0.110
0.293
0.199]вҲ—10вҲ’3
0.131
0.035
2.90
0.105
Upper Pectoralis
[0.008
Вӯ0.007
0.006]
[0.258
0.242
0.291]вҲ—10вҲ’4
0.216
0.029
2.87
0.070
None
[0.000
0.000
0.002]
[0.137
0.314
0.053]вҲ—10вҲ’4
0.207
0.004
2.72
0.033
The average target position error remains very low with a low variance for the 64 different
positions. In addition, the PI controller is able to find the force that will maintain a steady
state in half of the simulation time. However, the real simulation time is more than high
times higher than the simulated time. This could be because when a matrix singularity is
found the system is reset with different initial arm length values. This could delay the proВӯ
cess of simulation. The GIF 6.2 (best viewed in Adobe Acrobat) illustrated the OpenSIM
movement under the PI controller maintaining the position during triceps stimulation.
54
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.2: PI Controller maintaining Static Position with Triceps Excitation. Open in Adobe AcВӯ
robat to see gif movement.
6.1.3
PI vs PID Controller
In the evaluation process for optimizing PI parameters, it was observed that integrating
the derivative term (D) of the PID controller did not yield significant improvements in perВӯ
formance with respect to target position, simulation time or reaching a steady position
time. The only difference is that the PID presents lower variance with respect to the tarВӯ
get position but the difference is not very substantial.
As a result, the simpler PI model was adopted. A comparison between PI and PID perforВӯ
mances is provided in the accompanying image. For the PI model, the constants utilized
were Kp = 2000 and Ki = 100 and for the PID model the Kd=300.
Table 6.3: Comparison between PI and PID Controller Results
Target Position Error (m)
Steady State Time (s)
Simulation Time (s)
Controller
Mean
Variance
Mean
Variance
Mean
Variance
PID
[0.000
Вӯ0.001
0.002]
[0.01
0.027
0.05]вҲ—10вҲ’4
0.230
0.004
2.73
0.064
PI
[0.000
0.000
0.002]
[0.137
0.314
0.053]вҲ—10вҲ’4
0.207
0.004
2.72
0.033
Figure 6.3: PID Controller Holding Static Position with One Muscle Excitation.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
55
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.4: PI Controller Holding Static Position with One Muscle Excitation.
6.1.4
1s vs 3s Duration for Simulations Without Neural Excitation
Initially, simulations were conducted over a 3Вӯsecond duration. However, upon iterative
testing, it was discerned that a duration of 1 second was sufficient. This conclusion is
supported by the information seen on Table 6.2 The introduction of arm support reinforced
this observation, as a marked reduction in oscillations was noted, leading to faster arm
stabilization. A comparative analysis between scenarios with and without arm support is
explored in the subsequent section.
Figure 6.5: PI Controller 3 seconds Simulation.
Figure 6.6: PI Controller 1 second Simulation.
56
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:67==
6.1.5
Support vs NonВӯSupport
Inspired on the work done in the research [28],[20] and [38] an arm support component
was integrated into the PI controller to simulate the robotic arm that held the patientвҖҷs
arm as they suffered from spinal cord injury that did not allow them to lift their arm. In
the scope a project, an arm support is added to mimic the common scenario observed
in stroke survivors, where they leverage their own strength to support and stabilize their
affected arm during rehabilitation exercises. The inclusion of this arm support component
in the simulation is pivotal, as it offers a more realistic representation of the rehabilitation
process. By accounting for the patientвҖҷs inherent capability to selfВӯsupport, the simulation
ensures that the outcomes align closely with realВӯworld scenarios, paving the way for
more tailored and effective rehabilitation strategies. In the code of Matlab this arm support
mechanism acts provides an additional force to guide the hand toward a desired position
and maintaining stability by mitigating rapid or undesirable movements.
As seen in the Figures below the arm support reduces oscillation improving the stability of
the control. On the top image the figure shows the simulation to find the equivalent force
without arm support and on the bottom figure the simulation with arm support. Figure
6.7 presents the case when no neural excitation is provided and Figure 6.8 when Neural
Excitation is given for one muscle.
(a) PI Controller Without Arm Support.
(b) PI Controller With Arm Support.
Figure 6.7: PI Controller from Equilibrium Position to Static Position with No Muscles Excitation.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
57
==PAGE:68==
(a) PI Controller Without Arm Support.
(b) PI Controller With Arm Support.
Figure 6.8: PI Controller for holding Static Position with One Muscle Excitation.
58
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:69==
6.2
SemiВӯParametric GPR Models
In this section the results of the GPR models for two muscles is shown. Figure 6.10 repreВӯ
sents Lower Pectoralis and Figure 6.11 represents the Triceps. The rest of the Figures for
the rest of the muscles can be found in the github repository under the Data/ModelFigures
file.
The figures illustrate a comparison between the parametric and semiparametric models
derived from Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) for various muscles across the five
arm configurations. The parametric model serves as the foundational representation,
built solely on predefined mathematical structures that capture the general tendencies of
the data. Consequently, its predictive nature tends to exhibit higher variance since it might
not fully grasp all the nuanced details or irregularities inherent in the biological data. In
contrast, the semiparametric model, while preserving the core structure of the parametВӯ
ric model, introduces flexible, nonВӯparametric components. By harnessing insights from
the parametric data, the semiparametric model becomes more tailored and capable of
adapting to specific data peculiarities.
Each plot presents:
вҖў The actual test outputs (in blue).
вҖў The predicted test outputs (in red dashed lines).
вҖў A shaded region representing a confidence interval (Вұ2 standard deviations) around
the predicted values.
The efficiency of the models were tested by computing the feasibility of 960 generated
points (Figure 6.9). A point was considered feasible if the static controller developed
on Section 5.1 was able to calculate the corresponding neural activations that will hold
the arm in that position for 1 second. The static controller was able to find the neural
excitations for 74.06% of the points. The GIF 5.3 shows in green the feasible points and
in red the nonВӯfeasible ones.
Figure 6.9: 960 generated points
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
59
==PAGE:70==
(a) Elbow Pronation Parametric
(b) Elbow Pronation SemiВӯparametric
(c) Elbow Flexion Parametric
(d) Elbow Flexion SemiВӯparametric
(e) Shoulder Rotation Parametric
(f) Shoulder Rotation SemiВӯparametric
(g) Shoulder Elevation Parametric
(h) Shoulder Elevation SemiВӯparametric
(i) Elevation Plane Parametric
(j) Elevation Plane SemiВӯparametric
Figure 6.10: Gaussian Process Regression Parametric and SemiВӯParametric for Muscle Lower
Pectoralis
60
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:71==
(a) Elbow Pronation Parametric
(b) Elbow Pronation SemiВӯparametric
(c) Elbow Flexion Parametric
(d) Elbow Flexion SemiВӯparametric
(e) Shoulder Rotation Parametric
(f) Shoulder Rotation SemiВӯparametric
(g) Shoulder Elevation Parametric
(h) Shoulder Elevation SemiВӯparametric
(i) Elevation Plane Parametric
(j) Elevation Plane SemiВӯparametric
Figure 6.11: Gaussian Process Regression Parametric and SemiВӯParametric for Muscle Triceps
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
61
==PAGE:72==
6.3
Controllers
To test the different controllers a set of positions were chosen as target reaching positions.
These points can be seen in the Figure 6.12. The initial position is marked in red and the
target positions are marked in blue.
Figure 6.12: Desired Targets for Reaching in Rehabilitation Task (Front View, Side View)
Figure 6.13 provides an initial overview of the different controllers operating at the same
point. The progression begins with the static controller, transitions to pathВӯfollowing for
the target point, and then introduces the stroke factor, affecting the armвҖҷs movement. In
the final layer, the EMGВӯInfluenced FES controller is integrated with the strokeВӯaffected
movement, allowing the arm to execute motions similar to those in a nonВӯstroke scenario.
(a) Static Controller
(b) NonВӯStroke PathВӯFollowing QuasiВӯStatic Controller
(c) Stroke PathВӯFollowing QuasiВӯStatic Controller
(d) Stroke EMGВӯInfluenced QuasiВӯStatic Controller
Figure 6.13: Wrist Position Plots over Time
62
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:73==
6.3.1
Static Controller
The PI tuning for the static controller was done with half of the desired points. However,
the results shown in the table below show the error and variance of the target positions for
all the desired targets. It can be seen that the higher Kp value reduces the variance and
the mean target error. Moreover, it can be seen from the results and also from the plots on
Figure 6.15 that the steady state error is reduced by the introduction of integrating value.
In Figure 6.16, the performance results of the Static Controller are presented across all
29 positions. Furthermore, Figure 6.14 illustrates the temporal variations in muscle forces
and neural excitations for the triceps, deltoids, and biceps. This figure also emphasizes
the efficacy of the PD controller, showcasing the feedback force which is subsequently
converted to feedback torque, assisting in maintaining the armвҖҷs static position.
Figure 6.14: Static Control Example Muscle Forces, Activation Step, Feedback Force and FeedВӯ
back Torque
Table 6.4: Comparison between PI Values Results
Controller
Target Position Error (m)
Mean
Variance
Kp = 100, Ki = 0
[0.020 Вӯ0.026 0.003]
[0.060 0.238 0.025]вҲ—10вҲ’3
Kp = 100, Ki = 50
[0.015 Вӯ0.021 0.003]
[0.046 0.160 0.024]вҲ—10вҲ’3
Kp = 300, Ki = 50
[0.007 Вӯ0.012 0.002]
[0.012 0.041 0.013]вҲ—10вҲ’3
Kp = 300, Ki = 100
[0.003 Вӯ0.012 Вӯ0.001]
[0.011 0.035 0.010]вҲ—10вҲ’3
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
63
==PAGE:74==
(a) Position 1: Kp=100 Ki=0
(b) Position 2: Kp=100 Ki=0
(c) Position 1: Kp=100 Ki=50
(d) Position 2: Kp=100 Ki=50
(e) Position 1: Kp=300 Ki=50
(f) Position 2: Kp=300 Ki=50
(g) Position 1: Kp=300 Ki=100
(h) Position 2: Kp=300 Ki=100
Figure 6.15: Static Controller Different PI values for Tuning
64
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:75==
Figure 6.16: Desired Targets in Static Control
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
65
==PAGE:76==
6.3.2
Path Following QuasiВӯStatic Controller
The path following quasiВӯstatic controller successfully found a path for each of the 29
points (see Figure 6.18). The table below presents the mean target position error and
the variance. It can be seen that even though some of the intermediate points were not
reached perfectly the target position is reached with a maximum error of 0.012 in the y
coordinate.
Figure 6.17 shows 3 examples of the 29 positions where it can be seen the progression
of the wrist position over time. It can be seen that in some cases there exists some
oscillations. This could be improved by the addition of a derivative gain in the controller.
Table 6.5: Comparison between PI Values Results
Controller
Target Position Error (m)
Mean
Variance
QuasiВӯStatic
[0.003 Вӯ0.012 Вӯ0.001]
[0.363 0.045 0.019]вҲ—10вҲ’3
(a) Position 1: Wrist Position Plot 3D
(b) Position 1: Wrist Position Plot 2D
(c) Position 2: Wrist Position Plot 3D
(d) Position 2: Wrist Position Plot 2D
(e) Position 3: Wrist Position Plot 2D
(f) Position 3: Wrist Position Plot 2D
Figure 6.17: Path Following QuasiВӯStatic Controller
66
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.18: Desired Targets in PathВӯFollowing QuasiВӯStatic Control
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
67
==PAGE:78==
6.3.3
EMGВӯInfluenced Control
This section comprises two parts. The first pertains to objective number 2, as illustrated
in Figure 3.1, emphasizing the inclusion of the stroke parameter based on the design
criteria. The latter part focuses on objective 3, integrating the FES controller to counВӯ
terbalance the strokeвҖҷs repercussions, thereby facilitating patients in accomplishing the
reaching movement.
Emulating Biceps OverВӯActivity
Figure 6.19 illustrates the overВӯactivity effect of the stroke factor on the bicepsвҖҷ muscle acВӯ
tivity (index = 2), leading to its overВӯactivation. Additionally, the compensatory behaviour
of other muscles is evident as they respond to this heightened activity. As it can be seen,
this emulation of the overВӯactivity results in the arm not being able to perform the arm
вҖқreachingвҖқ task properly.
(a) NonВӯStroke Muscle Activity
(b) Stroke = 7 Muscle Activity
(c) NonВӯStroke Wrist Position 3D
(d) Stroke=7 Wrist Position 3D
Figure 6.19: Comparison of Muscle Activity and Wrist Position 3D
68
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:79==
FES EMGВӯInfluenced Control for Triceps
In this section, we present the outcomes of using a proportional gain controller to simulate
the EMGВӯbased control of the FES device.
Table 6.6 reveals that the controller consistently achieved a comparable average target
position error and variance, regardless of stroke parameter variations. Figures 6.20 depict
the wristвҖҷs x, y, and z positions for varying stroke values, revealing oscillatory behaviours
attributed to the quasiВӯstatic control. This oscillation, indicative of the path taken through
intermediate points, becomes more evident in Figures 6.21 and 6.22. Notably, the latter
figures highlight the interplay between the muscleвҖҷs basic excitation (in orange), additional
excitation from the FES (in red), and their combined effect (in blue). These visuals validate
the FES deviceвҖҷs ability to dynamically adjust to muscle input. This dynamic response
ensures that as a patient initiates a movement, the FES adapts to it, supporting the core
objective of enhancing patient engagement, a principal aim of this thesis.
Nevertheless, the controller successfully achieves its foundational goal of reaching the
target positions. This success is evidenced across 29 set positions. While Figure 6.23
shows none of the trials reached the target with a stroke value of 7, introducing the EMGВӯ
based controller enabled the arm to complete this task, as seen in Figure 6.24. However,
some trials exhibited oscillations, indicating areas for refinement. Potential improvements
might incorporate derivative or integrative components to minimize steadyВӯstate errors
evident in Figure 6.20. Exploring other control methods, such as bioВӯinspired or ANN
approaches that offer more dynamic adaptability, could be beneficial.
Table 6.6: Comparison between Stroke Values
Controller
Target Position Error (m)
Mean
Variance
Stroke = 3
[0.009 Вӯ0.030 0.004]
[0.059 0.024 0.103]вҲ—10вҲ’3
Stroke = 7
[0.007 Вӯ0.029 Вӯ0.003]
[0.048 0.015 0.163]вҲ—10вҲ’3
Stroke = 10
[0.006 Вӯ0.028 Вӯ0.005]
[0.046 0.018 0.189]вҲ—10вҲ’3
NonВӯStroke
[0.003 Вӯ0.012 Вӯ0.001]
[0.363 0.045 0.019]вҲ—10вҲ’3
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
69
==PAGE:80==
(a) Example 1. Stroke=3.
(b) Example 2. Stroke=3.
(c) Example 1. Stroke=7.
(d) Example 2. Stroke=7.
(e) Example 1. Stroke=10.
(f) Example 1. Stroke=10.
Figure 6.20: Comparison for different stroke values of Wrist Position 2D with FES Controller
70
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:81==
(a) Stroke=3.
Wrist Position 3D
without FES Controller
(b) Stroke=3. Wrist Position 3D with
FES Controller
(c) Stroke=3. FES Excitation, MusВӯ
cle Activity and Total Excitation
(d) Stroke=7.
Wrist Position 3D
without FES Controller
(e) Stroke=7. Wrist Position 3D with
FES Controller
(f) Stroke=7. FES Excitation, MusВӯ
cle Activity and Total Excitation
(g) Stroke=10.
Wrist Position 3D
without FES Controller
(h) Stroke=10.
Wrist Position 3D
with FES Controller
(i) Stroke=10. FES Excitation, MusВӯ
cle Activity and Total Excitation
Figure 6.21: Example 1: EMGВӯInspired FES Controller for Different Stroke
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
71
==PAGE:82==
(a) Stroke=3.
Wrist Position 3D
without FES Controller
(b) Stroke=3. Wrist Position 3D with
FES Controller
(c) Stroke=3. FES Excitation, MusВӯ
cle Activity and Total Excitation
(d) Stroke=7.
Wrist Position 3D
without FES Controller
(e) Stroke=7. Wrist Position 3D with
FES Controller
(f) Stroke=7. FES Excitation, MusВӯ
cle Activity and Total Excitation
(g) Stroke=10.
Wrist Position 3D
without FES Controller
(h) Stroke=10.
Wrist Position 3D
with FES Controller
(i) Stroke=10. FES Excitation, MusВӯ
cle Activity and Total Excitation
Figure 6.22: Example 2: EMGВӯInspired FES Controller for Different Stroke
72
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:83==
Figure 6.23: Desired Targets With Stroke = 7 Without EMGВӯInfluenced Control
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
73
==PAGE:84==
Figure 6.24: Desired Targets With Stroke = 7 With EMGВӯInfluenced Control
74
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:85==
7
Discussion and Future Work
Stroke is a leading cause of disability, particularly among the elderly. There will be greater
demand for stroke rehabilitation because estimates point to an increase in the older popВӯ
ulation. In particular rehabilitation of the upper limbs, as arm hemiparesis is a common
aftermath of stroke. The economic implications of stroke are profound, largely stemming
from the high costs associated with postВӯstroke care and rehabilitation therapies. This
emphasizes the need for costВӯeffective rehabilitation strategies. This project focuses on
FES rehabilitation, where electrical stimulation is used to improve muscle recovery. TaskВӯ
specific exercises with training programs, especially when encouraging patient engageВӯ
ment, lead to betterВӯrecovering results. Consequently, this project is centered on вҖқreachВӯ
ing taskвҖқ exercises, where EMG sensors regulate the FES device, adjusting the electrical
current based on muscle activity, thereby promoting patient involvement. The goal of this
thesis is to create a simulation framework tailored for testing a range of EMGВӯbased conВӯ
trol methods, particularly focusing on the repercussions of stroke on an armвҖҷs reaching
movement.
The research journey can be delineated into three primary stages of controller design,
each iteratively building upon its predecessor. Each controller was tested over 29 reachВӯ
ing positions spaced every 0.01m.
The foundational stage was the Static Controller,
aimed at ensuring arm stability at a specific point. In this phase, two critical SemiВӯParametric
Gaussian Process Regression models were developed: the Inverse Statics model and the
Muscle Torque Production model. The former calculates the essential joint torque for a
given static arm position, while the latter associates arm configuration and muscle actiВӯ
vation with the resulting joint torque. Torque values were derived by converting the force
required to maintain static positions, both with and without muscle activation, through the
Kinematic Jacobian. This force determination involved a PIВӯtuned controller. By mergВӯ
ing the Inverse Static, which provides the desired static torque, with a refined PI controller
supplying the corrective torque, the Static Controller generates the required torque to susВӯ
tain the arm. This torque is converted into muscle activation by optimizing the equation
that relates them, using the mapping matrix from the Muscle Torque Production model.
The Static ControllerвҖҷs performance was measured across 960 distinct points with a sucВӯ
cess rate of 74.06%. When tested over the 29 reaching positions the Static Controller
maintained the position with minimal variance. It showcased high accuracy in the x and z
coordinates, but slightly less precision in the y coordinate.
The following phase introduced movement with the Path Following QuasiВӯStatic ConВӯ
troller. Building on the feasible points from the prior stage, a navigational path was generВӯ
ated using the KВӯNearestВӯNeighbours algorithm. This defined trajectory directed the arm
through a sequence of predetermined points. Similar to the Static Controller, there was
greater accuracy and precision in the x and z coordinates compared to the y coordinate.
However, the target positions across the 29 designated spots were achieved with notable
success.
The last part of this research was marked by the introduction of the EMGВӯInfluenced FES
controller. In this stage, muscle activations were strategically modulated to mimic a strokeВӯ
like movement pattern, primarily by overactivating the biceps. This phase introduced a
simulated FES device, with its control parameters dynamically adjusted based on realВӯ
time neural activity data, specifically the triceps. The purpose of the FES device is to
adjust the muscle excitation directed at the triceps. This controller was assessed across
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
75
==PAGE:86==
the predetermined reaching points at three distinct stroke severity levels. It maintained
consistent accuracy and precision across these stroke levels, mirroring the pattern obВӯ
served in previous controllers where performance in the yВӯdirection was slightly less optiВӯ
mal. Nevertheless, this controller effectively introduced the required neural stimulation to
the arm, aiding it in following the intended trajectory. Notably, oscillations were observed
when the FES controller was incorporated, likely because the employed controller lacked
both derivative and integrator components. Still, this achievement solidly establishes a
foundation for the development and deployment of superior EMGВӯbased controllers that
could be integrated into realВӯworld FES scenarios.
This research journey culminated in the successful deployment of an EMGВӯinfluenced
FES controller, setting the stage for further exploration of EMGВӯbased FES controllers.
The potential implications are profound, suggesting avenues for creating more efficient,
accessible, and patientВӯcentric solutions.
Despite its successes, this study acknowledges its constraints. Primarily, the study was
limited to the control of a single muscle, with the EMGВӯBased FES controllerвҖҷs design
being influenced solely by one muscleвҖҷs excitation. Additionally, challenges may arise
when translating these findings into a realВӯworld FES implementation. To achieve a more
accurate depiction of an authentic recruitment model, translating the required muscle acВӯ
tivations into the FES deviceвҖҷs current generation is essential. There is also a clear need
for refining the tuning of stroke parameters, potentially achieved through comparative
analyses with actual EMG data.
Looking ahead, several promising avenues may be explored. This work has laid the
groundwork for experimenting with diverse EMGВӯbased FES controllers for upper arm
rehabilitation. Some possible controllers will include PID, bioВӯinspired controllers, to arВӯ
tificial neural network control approaches. Expanding the study to encapsulate multiple
muscles and a broader array of movements is also a clear next step, as is the integration
of realВӯworld EMG data. Central to this study is its pioneering strategy of controlling the
DAS via neural excitations, introducing a realm of untapped potential. While the MATLABВӯ
centric approach enhances accessibility, it isnвҖҷt without its limitations, such as integration
with Simulink. Nonetheless, this research stands as a bedrock for future advancements,
providing a comprehensive literature for understanding the DAS with the objective of leverВӯ
aging this knowledge for innovative, patientВӯcentric solutions.
76
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:87==
8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to devise a simulation framework for the exploration of EMGВӯ
based FES control methods, emphasizing the impact of stroke on an armвҖҷs reaching
movement. This was motivated by the growing need for efficient stroke rehabilitation for
the increasing elderly population. Through an intricate threeВӯstage process, the research
evolved from stabilizing arm positions using the Static Controller to inducing movement
with the Path Following QuasiВӯStatic Controller, culminating in the development of the
EMGВӯInfluenced FES controller. This latter achievement, particularly notable for its potenВӯ
tial in simulating strokeВӯlike movement patterns, encapsulates the essence of the thesis.
Although the research acknowledges limitations like focusing solely on a single muscleвҖҷs
excitation and single muscleвҖҷs activity readings, its findings spotlight the profound potential
of EMGВӯcontrolled FES for future patientВӯcentric rehabilitation solutions. The exploration
in this study sets a solid foundation for further advancements in this domain, promising
more inclusive, efficient, and effective therapeutic interventions.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
77
==PAGE:88==
78
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization. вҖңWHO methods for life expectancy and healthy life exВӯ
pectancy.вҖқ In: Global Health Estimates Technical Paper WHO/HIS/HSI/GHE (2014).
[2]
Maurizio Corbetta et al. вҖңCommon behavioral clusters and subcortical anatomy in
strokeвҖқ. In: Neuron 85 (5 Mar. 2015), pp. 927вҖ“941. ISSN: 1097Вӯ4199. DOI: 10.1016/
J.NEURON.2015.02.027. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25741721/.
[3]
вҖңPrevention of cardiovascular disease : guidelines for assessment and management
of total cardiovascular riskвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/
43685.
[4]
Saba Anwer et al. вҖңRehabilitation of Upper Limb Motor Impairment in Stroke: A NarВӯ
rative Review on the Prevalence, Risk Factors, and Economic Statistics of Stroke
and State of the Art TherapiesвҖқ. In: Healthcare 2022, Vol. 10, Page 190 10 (2 Jan.
2022), p. 190. ISSN: 2227Вӯ9032. DOI: 10.3390/HEALTHCARE10020190. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2227-9032/10/2/190/htm%20https://www.mdpi.com/2227-
9032/10/2/190.
[5]
Thinni Nurul Rochmah et al. вҖңEconomic Burden of Stroke Disease: A Systematic
ReviewвҖқ. In: International journal of environmental research and public health 18
(14 July 2021). ISSN: 1660Вӯ4601. DOI: 10.3390/IJERPH18147552. URL: https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34299999/.
[6]
вҖңInvestigation of upper arm muscle activation for the progress monitoring in stroke
rehabilitationвҖқ. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 2045 (1 Dec. 2018), p. 20028. ISSN:
15517616. DOI: 10.1063/1.5080841/817075. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/acp/
article/2045/1/020028/817075/Investigation-of-upper-arm-muscle-activation-for.
[7]
Iza FariaВӯFortini et al. вҖңUpper extremity function in stroke subjects: relationships beВӯ
tween the international classification of functioning, disability, and health domainsвҖқ.
In: Journal of hand therapy : official journal of the American Society of Hand TherВӯ
apists 24 (3 July 2011), pp. 257вҖ“265. ISSN: 1545Вӯ004X. DOI: 10.1016/J.JHT.2011.
01.002. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21420279/.
[8]
BelГ©n Rubio Ballester et al. вҖңA critical time window for recovery extends beyond
oneВӯyear postВӯstrokeвҖқ. In: Journal of neurophysiology 122 (1 July 2019), pp. 350вҖ“
357. ISSN: 1522Вӯ1598. DOI: 10.1152/JN.00762.2018. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/31141442/.
[9]
Kristina S. Beekhuizen and Edelle C. FieldВӯFote. вҖңMassed Practice versus Massed
Practice with Stimulation: Effects on Upper Extremity Function and Cortical PlasВӯ
ticity in Individuals with Incomplete Cervical Spinal Cord InjuryвҖқ. In: 19 (1 Mar.
2005), pp. 33вҖ“45. ISSN: 15459683. DOI: 10.1177/1545968305274517. URL: https:
//journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1545968305274517.
[10]
Stefano Masiero and Elena Carraro. вҖңUpper limb movements and cerebral plasВӯ
ticity in postВӯstroke rehabilitationвҖқ. In: Aging clinical and experimental research 20
(2 2008), pp. 103вҖ“108. ISSN: 1594Вӯ0667. DOI: 10.1007/BF03324755. URL: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18431076/.
[11]
Gad Alon, Alan F. Levitt, and Patricia A. McCarthy. вҖңFunctional electrical stimulation
enhancement of upper extremity functional recovery during stroke rehabilitation: A
pilot studyвҖқ. In: Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 21 (3 Sept. 2007), pp. 207вҖ“
215. ISSN: 15459683. DOI: 10.1177/1545968306297871.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
79
==PAGE:90==
[12]
Stefano Masiero et al. вҖңThe value of robotic systems in stroke rehabilitationвҖқ. In:
Expert review of medical devices 11 (2 Mar. 2014), pp. 187вҖ“198. ISSN: 1745Вӯ2422.
DOI: 10.1586/17434440.2014.882766. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
24479445/.
[13]
Marijke Rensink et al. вҖңTaskВӯoriented training in rehabilitation after stroke: systemВӯ
atic reviewвҖқ. In: Journal of advanced nursing 65 (4 Apr. 2009), pp. 737вҖ“754. ISSN:
1365Вӯ2648. DOI: 10.1111/J.1365-2648.2008.04925.X. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/19228241/.
[14]
Shailesh Kantak, Steven Jax, and George Wittenberg. вҖңBimanual coordination: A
missing piece of arm rehabilitation after strokeвҖқ. In: Restorative neurology and neuВӯ
roscience 35 (4 2017), pp. 347вҖ“364. ISSN: 1878Вӯ3627. DOI: 10.3233/RNN-170737.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28697575/.
[15]
Dimitra Blana, Robert F. Kirsch, and Edward K. Chadwick. вҖңCombined feedforward
and feedback control of a redundant, nonlinear, dynamic musculoskeletal systemвҖқ.
In: Medical
Biological Engineering
Computing 47 (5 May 2009), pp. 533вҖ“542.
ISSN: 0140Вӯ0118. DOI: 10.1007/s11517-009-0479-3.
[16]
YuВӯLuen Chen et al. вҖңDevelopment of the FES System with Neural Network+PID
Controller for the StrokeвҖқ. In: 2005 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and
Systems (), pp. 5119вҖ“5121. DOI: 10.1109/ISCAS.2005.1465786.
[17]
Katie L Meadmore et al. вҖңFunctional electrical stimulation mediated by iterative
learning control and 3D robotics reduces motor impairment in chronic strokeвҖқ. In:
Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 9 (1 2012), p. 32. ISSN: 1743Вӯ0003.
DOI: 10.1186/1743-0003-9-32.
[18]
Christopher T. Freeman. вҖңUpper Limb Electrical Stimulation Using InputВӯOutput LinВӯ
earization and Iterative Learning ControlвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Control SysВӯ
tems Technology 23 (4 July 2015), pp. 1546вҖ“1554. ISSN: 1063Вӯ6536. DOI: 10 .
1109/TCST.2014.2363412.
[19]
Arash Abarghooei, Hassan Salarieh, and Mehrdad Boroushaki. вҖңDevelopment and
control of an intelligent assistive exoВӯglove via fuzzy controller and emotional learnВӯ
ing systemвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C:
Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science 235 (16 Aug. 2021), pp. 3058вҖ“3070.
ISSN: 0954Вӯ4062. DOI: 10.1177/0954406220959100.
[20]
Derek N. Wolf and Eric M. Schearer. вҖңDeveloping a quasiВӯstatic controller for a parВӯ
alyzed human arm: A simulation studyвҖқ. In: vol. 2019ВӯJune. 2019. DOI: 10.1109/
ICORR.2019.8779381.
[21]
Antonie J. Van Den Bogert, Dimitra Blana, and Dieter Heinrich. вҖңImplicit methods
for efficient musculoskeletal simulation and optimal controlвҖқ. In: vol. 2. 2011. DOI:
10.1016/j.piutam.2011.04.027.
[22]
Edward K. Chadwick et al. вҖңA realВӯtime, 3ВӯD musculoskeletal model for dynamic
simulation of arm movementsвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
56 (4 2009). ISSN: 00189294. DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2008.2005946.
[23]
Ge Wu et al. вҖңISB recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate systems of
various joints for the reporting of human joint motion Вӯ Part II: Shoulder, elbow, wrist
and handвҖқ. In: Journal of Biomechanics 38 (5 2005). ISSN: 00219290. DOI: 10.
1016/j.jbiomech.2004.05.042.
[24]
Mary D. Klein Breteler, Cornelis W. Spoor, and Frans C.T. Van Der Helm. вҖңMeasuring
muscle and joint geometry parameters of a shoulder for modeling purposesвҖқ. In:
Journal of Biomechanics 32 (11 Nov. 1999), pp. 1191вҖ“1197. ISSN: 0021Вӯ9290. DOI:
10.1016/S0021-9290(99)00122-0.
80
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:91==
[25]
Bruno Siciliano et al. Robotics: Modelling, planning and control. 2009. DOI: 10.5860/
choice.46-6226.
[26]
Reza Sharif Razavian et al. вҖңFeedback Control of Functional Electrical Stimulation
for 2ВӯD Arm Reaching MovementsвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering 26 (10 2018). ISSN: 15344320. DOI: 10.1109/TNSRE.
2018.2853573.
[27]
Emily J. Griffis et al. вҖңClosedВӯLoop Deep Neural NetworkВӯBased FES Control for
Human Limb TrackingвҖқ. In: IEEE, Dec. 2021, pp. 360вҖ“365. ISBN: 978Вӯ1Вӯ6654Вӯ3659Вӯ
5. DOI: 10.1109/CDC45484.2021.9683206.
[28]
Derek N. Wolf and Eric M. Schearer. вҖңHolding Static Arm Configurations with FuncВӯ
tional Electrical Stimulation: A Case StudyвҖқ. In: IEEE transactions on neural systems
and rehabilitation engineering : a publication of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society 26 (10 Oct. 2018), p. 2044. ISSN: 15344320. DOI: 10.1109/
TNSRE.2018.2866226.
[29]
H.Harry Asada. вҖңIntroduction to RoboticsвҖқ. In: MIT Education (2011).
[30]
Eric M. Schearer et al. вҖңSemiparametric Identification of Human Arm Dynamics for
Flexible Control of a Functional Electrical Stimulation NeuroprosthesisвҖқ. In: IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 24 (12 2016). ISSN:
15344320. DOI: 10.1109/TNSRE.2016.2535348.
[31]
Distill. Visual Exploration of Gaussian Processes. 2019. URL: https://distill.pub/
2019/visual-exploration-gaussian-processes/.
[32]
Gaussian Process Regression. URL: https://ru.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/%5C%D0%
5C%A4%5C%D0%5C%B0%5C%D0%5C%B9%5C%D0%5C%BB:Gaussian_Process_
Regression.png.
[33]
Carlos Eduardo Cancino Chacon, Maarten Grachten, and Gerhard Widmer. вҖңBayesian
Linear Basis Models with Gaussian Priors for Musical ExpressionвҖқ. In: Austrian ReВӯ
search Institute for Artificial Intelligence 1.1 (2014), p. 23. DOI: doi.
[34]
Documentation for GPML Matlab Code. URL: http://gaussianprocess.org/gpml/
code/matlab/doc/.
[35]
Kathleen M. Jagodnik and Antonie J. van den Bogert. вҖңOptimization and evaluaВӯ
tion of a proportional derivative controller for planar arm movementвҖқ. In: Journal of
Biomechanics 43 (6 2010). ISSN: 00219290. DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.12.017.
[36]
William L. Goffe, Gary D. Ferrier, and John Rogers. вҖңGlobal optimization of statistiВӯ
cal functions with simulated annealingвҖқ. In: Journal of Econometrics 60 (1Вӯ2 1994).
ISSN: 03044076. DOI: 10.1016/0304-4076(94)90038-8.
[37]
Li Yang. вҖңResearch on Logistics Distribution Vehicle Path Optimization Based on
Simulated Annealing AlgorithmвҖқ. In: Advances in Multimedia 2022 (2022). ISSN:
16875699. DOI: 10.1155/2022/7363279.
[38]
Edward K. Chadwick et al. вҖңRealВӯtime simulation of threeВӯdimensional shoulder girВӯ
dle and arm dynamicsвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 61 (7
2014). ISSN: 15582531. DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309727.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
81
==PAGE:92==
82
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:93==
A
Matlab Code Overview
In this appendix section, the structure of the code developed in the research is explained.
A.1
Finding Force
In this folder the code to find the corresponding force needed to hold the wrist position in
static position is given. This includes code for holding the hand when there is no neural
excitation and when each muscle is excited to its maximum.
A.1.1
static_force_simulation.m
Finding Force for Static Position Without Neural Excitation:
вҖў Inputs: DAS model, predefined positions, and the вҖҳequilibrium.matвҖҳ file for initial
states.
вҖў Outputs: Configuration array (вҖҳconfgвҖҳ) for successful simulations and data saved in
вҖҷxxx.matвҖҷ.
вҖў Functionality: The code simulates model dynamics to achieve desired hand posiВӯ
tions, manages warnings, and reselects initial muscle length when required.
A.1.2
excited_force_simulation.m
Finding Force for Static Position With Neural Excitation:
вҖў Inputs: Arm configuration files from the directory 'C:\... \Static Forces' stored
as *.mat files. These files describe arm states and configurations.
вҖў Outputs: Simulated forces, states, and joint moments stored in the directory 'C:\...
\Stimulated Forces/'.
вҖў Functionality: The script simulates Dynamic Arm Simulation (DAS) to determine
forces based on neural muscle excitations. It uses a PI controller for hand forces,
manages MATLAB warnings, and adjusts initial conditions when necessary.
A.2
Torque Calculation
A.2.1
torque_calculation.m
Torque Calculate from Forces:
вҖў Processes muscleВӯstimulation forces to derive torques, joint configurations, wrist
positions, and wrist forces.
вҖў Inputs: Preprocessed вҖҷ.matвҖҷ files with force data in a specific directory.
вҖў Outputs: Matrices for torques, joint configurations, wrist positions, and wrist forces.
вҖў Requirements:
вҖ“ Structured вҖҷ.matвҖҷ file format.
вҖ“ вҖҷdas3вҖҷ function and necessary models in the MATLAB path.
вҖў Adjust вҖҷdirectoryвҖҷ to change data source and save path.
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
83
==PAGE:94==
A.3
GPR Model Creation
A.3.1
compute_GPR_model.m
вҖў The script loads a specific dataset and conducts Gaussian Process Regression
(GPR) for each muscle. Joint angles act as inputs and joint torques as outputs.
Both parametric and semiparametric models are constructed for each muscle conВӯ
cerning the data.
вҖў Input: Previously calculated data that includes: torques, joint configuration, wrist
positions and wrist forces.
вҖў Output: Model file contains the modeldata structure, which comprises both paraВӯ
metric and semiparametric models for each muscle across different joint angles.
84
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
==PAGE:95==
A Simulation Study: Developing an EMGВӯBased QuasiВӯStatic Controller for Stroke Rehabilitation
85
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
