==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Length of identity-by-descent 
tracks over time 
Master’s Thesis 
 
 
Author: 
Mikkel Spallou Eriksen 
s122455 
 
Supervisors: 
Gabriel Renaud, Associate Professor 
Jan van Waaij, Postdoc 
 
Hand-in date: September 3, 2023 
ECTS: 30 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This master’s thesis explores the dynamics of genetic inheritance, population size, and
runs of homozygosity (ROH) using a custom Golang-based population model. Key findings
include:
Genetic Ancestry: We uncover a shift from exponential to logistic growth in genetic an-
cestors as finite population constraints come into play. Population size significantly influ-
ences the number of genetic ancestors. Notably, a comparison with Coop’s genetic ancestor
model emphasizes the role of population size in genetic ancestry analysis, highlighting the
implications of finite populations.
Relatedness Trends: Our analysis of genetic descendants reveals relatedness trends, with
smaller populations showing quicker convergence. Meiosis plays a vital role in the gap
between genetic and genealogical relatedness.
Identity-by-Descent (IBD) Segments: We observe a consistent decrease in IBD segment
length, countered by an increase in count, reflecting the impact of genetic recombination.
This has implications for predictability.
Runs of Homozygosity (ROH): ROH lengths closely resemble IBD segment length distri-
butions. Notably, population size significantly influences ROH frequency. In a small popu-
lation of 50 individuals, ROH frequency can reach almost 40% after 50 generations, while
in a larger population of 1000 individuals, it decreases significantly to 2.5%. This under-
scores the role of population size in shaping ROH patterns.
Furthermore, ourresearchdemonstratesthatROHanalysiscanprovideinsightsintohighly
drifted populations like the Faroe Islands, shedding light on the genetic consequences of
their unique demographic histories.
In summary, our study advances our understanding of population genetics principles and
offers practical applications for genetic data interpretation. The Golang-based population
i
==PAGE:3==
simulation model provides a versatile tool for exploring the intricate interplay between
genetic inheritance, population size, and the effects of evolutionary forces in diverse sce-
narios, including those involving highly drifted populations.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The pursuit of this thesis has led me on a reflective intellectual exploration of population
genetics, a field initially unfamiliar to me. I delved into intricate genetic diversity dynamics
within populations, with a pivotal moment being the development and implementation of
a population model. This venture into mathematical models and statistical frameworks
illuminated complex population dynamics.
Notably, I transitioned from Python to Golang, enhancing my programming skills and accel-
erating model development. I would like to acknowledge that ChatGPT played a valuable
role in providing assistance with refining certain aspects of the phrasing in my master’s
thesis and helping with visualizing data in Matplotlib. However, I want to emphasize that
the entire content and ideas presented in this thesis are solely the result of my own re-
search and analysis, or have been properly attributed to their respective sources in accor-
dance with academic standards and the references cited throughout the work.
This thesis represents both an academic endeavor and a personal journey of discovery and
growth. I extend sincere thanks to my supervisors, Gabriel Renaud and Jan van Waaij, and
the DTU Health Tech Bioinformatics community for their invaluable support.
Mikkel Spallou Eriksen
September, 2023
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction and theory
1
1.1
The human genome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Sexual reproduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Population and evolutionary genetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Genetic drift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.2
Gene flow (Migration) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.3
Natural selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Genetic variance at the molecular level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.1
Mutation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4.2
Recombination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4.3
Independent assortment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Identity by descent and runs of homozygosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
The Wright-Fisher model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.7
Coalescent theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.8
Number of genealogical and genetic ancestors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Methodology
17
2.1
Simulations with msprime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
The proposed population model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Initialize a population of individuals across generations . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
Find genealogical relatives across individuals
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
Find genetic relatedness across time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3
Utilizing the proposed model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.1
Running the simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Results
26
3.1
Number of ancestors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Number of descendants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iv
==PAGE:6==
3.3
Length of identity-by-descent (IBD) segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Length and frequency of runs of homozygosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Discussion
36
4.1
Genetic and genealogical ancestors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Comparison with Coop’s results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Genetic descendants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Identity-by-descent segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Runs of homozygosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.6
Understanding ROH patterns in drifted populations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion
41
5.1
Future perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Appendices
48
A
Expected number of distinct draws from a pool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
v
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction and theory
In this master’s thesis, we delve into the genetics that connects individuals across genera-
tions. Drawing on population models and evolutionary theory, we embark on a journey to
unravel the ancestral threads that bind us. Our primary objective is to trace the lineage of
source chromosomes through time and quantify the number of contributors to a given in-
dividual within the contemporary population. Additionally, we endeavor to shed light on
the expected levels of identity-by-descent (IBD) and runs of homozygosity (ROH) under
various population scenarios.
Eukaryotic species, including humans, employ sexual reproduction as the means to prop-
agate their genetic material. This process entails the inheritance of genetic material from
both parents, resulting in offspring bearing a mosaic of maternal and paternal chromo-
somes. These chromosomes, far from being identical copies of their forebears, are mosaics
comprising segments inherited from ancestors from generations ago [1]. The composition
and origin of these segments hold the key to understanding the genetic ancestry of indi-
viduals and entire populations.
Central to our investigation is the discipline of population genetics, a field that illuminates
the inheritance and evolution of genetic material within and among populations [2]. Its
roots trace back to the visionary insights of scientific luminaries like Ronald Fisher, Sewall
Wright, and J. B. S. Haldane. In the early 20th century, Fisher synthesized the principles
of natural selection and Mendelian genetics, providing a mathematical framework for in-
terpreting genetic variations and heredity. Fisher’s pioneering work laid the theoretical
groundwork for population genetics [3].
Within this framework, Fisher and Sewall Wright jointly conceived the Wright-Fisher
1
==PAGE:8==
model, a foundational concept in population genetics. This model offers a simplified yet
powerful representation of reproduction within an idealized population, facilitating our
understanding of genetic dynamics over time.
Beyond its theoretical underpinnings, population genetics holds a vital role in unraveling
the prevalence of specific genetic diseases within distinct population groups. By decipher-
ing patterns of genetic variation and inheritance, researchers can uncover the reasons be-
hind the varying incidence of diseases among different demographics.
For instance, the population of the Faroe Islands exhibit a high incidence of carnitine trans-
porter deficiency [4], offering a compelling example of how historical events can shape the
genetic health of a population. This island community, settled by Norse founders from Nor-
way around A.D. 800, remained small in size for centuries before experiencing growth in
the 1800s [5]. Today, its population exceeds 50,000 individuals.
In the pages that follow, we will present the biological underpinnings of chromosomes,
genes, and reproduction. Additionally, we will discover various sides of population genet-
ics, offering a comprehensive view of this multifaceted field.
1.1
The human genome
The human genome is a set of the DNA found in the nucleus and the DNA found in the
mitochondria both located inside the human cell [6]. Together they store all the genetic
material that are inherited across generations.
The DNA inside the nucleus is segmented into structures, known as chromosomes. The
chromosomes are constructed of proteins and a single DNA-molecule. They have an entan-
gled thread-like structure that permits a high degree of compactness. The human somatic
cells (non-reproductive cells) are diploid and possess 23 pairs or 46 individual chromo-
somes (Figure 1.1). Among these, the 22 pairs are known as autosomes. For each homol-
ogous pair, one chromosome is maternally inherited (from the mother) while the other
is paternally inherited (from the father). The remaining 23rd pair, is the sex-determining
chromosome. Specifically, females carry two X chromosomes, whereas males have a single
X and a single Y chromosome [6].
The genetic material present in the mitochondria is, like the X chromosome, solely mater-
nally inherited. This means that it is passed only from mother to offspring. Consequently,
the mitochondrial lineage provides a unique path to trace maternal ancestry across gener-
2
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.1: The 23 chromosome pairs of the human cell. Figure from Sadava et al. [7].
ations.
Thelengthoftheentiregenomeisabout3.2billionbasepairs(bp)–thisincludesthelength
of 22 autosomes, X, and Y chromosomes. The length of the chromosomes varies from 46
Mbp to 249 Mbp [8]. For comparison, the length of the mitochondrial DNA is only 16,500
bp. The number of genes is much larger than the number of chromosomes, meaning that
severalgenesarelocatedoneachchromosome. Historically, researchersestimatedthatthe
human genome contained between 60,000 to 100,000 genes. However, recent consensus
indicates that this number is closer to approximately 20,000 genes [9].
1.2
Sexual reproduction
Thesexualreproductionofhumans, andmostothereukaryoticspecies, startsinthediploid
germ cells [7]. The cells undergo a cell division process known as meiosis. Meiosis con-
sists of two successive stages, meiosis I and meiosis II, resulting in the formation of four
genetically unique daughter cells. Each of these stages can be further divided into specific
phases. Here is a detailed step-by-step breakdown of the phases of meiosis:
Interphase: Before meiosis begins, the DNA in the cell is replicated during the S-phase of
the cell cycle. Each chromosome is copied to form two identical sister chromatids, which
are bound together (Figure 1.2.a).
Meiosis I: This is the first round of cell division, and it consists of the following phases:
• Prophase I: The chromosomes condense, and the nuclear envelope breaks down.
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: The different stages of meiosis and their outcome. Figure from Wikipedia [10].
Homologous chromosomes (one maternal and one paternal) pair up in a process
called synapsis, forming a structure known as a tetrad. It is here the crossing over
(recombination) occurs between non-sister chromatids – leading to recombinant
chromosomes. The process of recombination is responsible for the genetic diversity
between individuals across generations and prevents them from inheriting identical
genes from their parents.
• Metaphase I: The homologous pairs (tetrads) line up along the metaphase plate.
The orientation of each pair is random, which leads to a process called independent
assortment – another source of genetic diversity.
• Anaphase I: The paired homologous chromosomes separate and are pulled to op-
posite sides of the cell. Note that sister chromatids of each chromosome remain to-
gether.
• Telophase I and Cytokinesis: Two haploid cells are formed, each containing a pair
of sister chromatids for each chromosome. The cytoplasm is divided between the
two cells in a process known as cytokinesis (Figure 1.2.b).
Meiosis II: This is the second round of division, which includes the following phases:
• Prophase II: A new spindle apparatus forms in each of the two haploid cells.
• Metaphase II: The chromosomes, each consisting of two sister chromatids, line up
along the metaphase plate.
• Anaphase II: The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the spindle fibers and move
4
==PAGE:11==
to opposite poles.
• Telophase II and Cytokinesis: The nuclear envelope re-forms around the separated
sister chromatids, now individual chromosomes, followed by cytokinesis. At the end
of Meiosis II, four haploid cells are produced (Figure 1.2.c).
These haploid cells are the gametes (sperm or eggs cells). Upon fertilization, a sperm cell
and an egg cell are merged, creating a zygote, where the diploid number of chromosomes
is restored. The zygote might develop into a new individual [7].
1.3
Population and evolutionary genetics
In biological terms, a population is defined as a group of individuals of the same species,
who live and interbreed within a same geographical area [11]. Each population possesses
a certain level of genetic variance, which can be quantified by analyzing the population’s
gene pool. This gene pool represents the sum of all alleles (variant forms of a gene), found
in the population or at a specific locus within the population. From this data, we can com-
pute the allele frequency, providing insight into the genetic diversity of the population [12].
Genetic diversity is an important concept for the adaptation and the evolution of a popu-
lation. Furthermore, a diverse population might have better resilience to disease [13]. If
the individuals within a population have different genetic variants, some may possess re-
sistance or immunity to certain disease. This means, while some might die from a disease,
others will survive and reproduce [13].
The genetic variance observed in a population is especially attributed to the evolutionary
forces (also known as the mechanisms of evolution) The evolutionary forces include ge-
netic drift, gene flow, natural selection, and mutation [12], the latter will be introduced in
the next section.
1.3.1
Genetic drift
Genetic drift refers to changes in allele frequency across generations due to chance [12].
This could be due to uneven distribution of descendants among a population’s individuals.
Genetic drift can also be influenced by sexual reproduction in diploid individuals, where
only half of an individual’s genes are transferred to their offspring. These factors can lead
to a decrease in genetic variation in subsequent generations.
The impact of genetic drift is more pronounced in smaller populations, where the gene
5
==PAGE:12==
pool is typically less diverse compared to larger populations. Genetic drift can be subdi-
vided into two main effects: the bottleneck effect, which describes a significant reduction
in population size – e.g., due to a natural disaster, and the founder effect, which occurs
when a small subset of individuals from a population establishes a new population – e.g.,
individuals migrating to an uninhabited island or refusing to interbreed with an existing
population (illustrated in Figure 1.3) [12].
Figure 1.3: This figure exemplifies genetic drift within ladybug populations. Two distinct
phenotypes, red and yellow ladybugs, coexist in a single population. When a portion of
this population migrates to a nearby island, only one phenotype is carried over. This
random event results in the loss of genetic diversity within the new island population.
Figure from socratic.org [14].
Here, we also want to introduce a concept called the effective population size (𝑁𝑒). In real-
ity, populations are rarely stable in size with minimal variation in reproductive success. Ac-
tualpopulationsgothroughsignificant sizefluctuations, andthereisfrequentlysubstantial
variability in reproductive success. Consequently, the rates of genetic drift in natural pop-
ulations often exceed what would be anticipated based solely on the recorded population
size. The concept of effective population size represents the hypothetical population size
that, under idealized conditions of constant size (consistent with our modeling assump-
tions), would produce the same rate of genetic drift as observed in our real population
[15].
1.3.2
Gene flow (Migration)
Gene flow describes the impact on the gene pool when individuals migrate into or out of a
population. An example of gene flow is observable in non-African populations of modern
humans (Homo sapiens) [16]. A group of modern humans migrated from Africa to Eurasia
about 60,000 years ago. As they migrated and settled in different regions, they encoun-
tered other archaic human populations like the Neanderthals in Europe and Asia and the
Denisovans in Asia.
6
==PAGE:13==
Interbreeding events between modern humans and these archaic human populations led
to gene flow. Today, we find evidence of this ancient interbreeding in the DNA of modern
non-African populations. For example, individuals of non-African descent typically carry
between 1.5 - 2.5% Neanderthal DNA [16, 17] – evidence to the gene flow that occurred
when our ancestors encountered the Neanderthals.
1.3.3
Natural selection
Natural selection plays a significant role in evolutionary mechanisms [12]. Originally pro-
posed by Charles Darwin and Russel Wallace in 1858, natural selection is characterized by
the differential survival and reproduction of individuals based on variation in their traits.
Natural selection can be best described as the process through which individuals with ad-
vantageous traits (phenotypes) for their specific environment tend to survive and repro-
duce at higher rates compared to those with less favorable traits [12].
One classic example of natural selection can be observed in the Galápagos finches, also
known as Darwin’s finches [18, 19]. These finches originated from a single South American
finch species that colonized the islands. The islands’ geographical isolation and diverse en-
vironmental conditions contributed to allopatric speciation, wherein different lineages of
finches on each island underwent unique evolutionary paths over millions of years. Dar-
win observed that their beaks are of different shapes and sizes, ranging from the thick,
short, strong beaks of seed eating species to the thin, long beaks of insect eating species
[18].
These genetic and physical differences have resulted in limited interbreeding between
finches from different islands. When occasional immigrants arrive from other islands, they
either fail to mate with the resident finches or their hybrid offspring do not thrive as well
as the offspring of established residents. This isolation and reproductive separation con-
tribute to maintaining the genetic distinctness of each finch species from one another, pre-
serving the unique evolutionary trajectory of each population [19].
1.4
Genetic variance at the molecular level
In the preceding section, we delved into the concept of evolutionary forces, explained the
mechanisms that operate among individuals and give rise to genetic diversity. In this sec-
tion, our focus shifts to the molecular level, where we will examine the processes respon-
sible for the genetic variations observed between parents and their offspring. Notably, the
7
==PAGE:14==
mechanisms driving genetic diversity at this molecular level enclose mutation, recombi-
nation (crossing over), and independent assortment [7].
1.4.1
Mutation
Mutations are alterations in the DNA sequence, serving as a source of new genetic varia-
tion. These changes can arise from errors during DNA replication or due to external factors
like exposure to radiation, chemicals, and other mutagenic agents. Mutations can occur in
several forms:
• Substitution: A nucleotide in the DNA is replaced by another.
• Insertion: An additional nucleotide is incorporated into the replicated DNA.
• Deletion: A nucleotide is omitted from the replicated DNA.
While mutations frequently occur, their impact on future generations depends on where
they arise. Mutations in somatic cells don’t influence the individual’s offspring. However,
mutations in germ cells can alter the genetic composition of an individual’s descendants
and subsequently modify allele frequencies within a population [20].
Furthermore, the location of the mutation will also play a role of the outcome of a mutation
[21]. Most of our DNA is non-coding – if a mutation occurs at non-coding position, it will
not affect the protein sequence. Additionally, a mutation might also be in the coding area
without changing the outcome of the protein sequence. We call these cases silent mutation.
Even than the silent mutations, does not change the encoding of our genome, they still play
an important role in tracing relatedness between individuals [21].
1.4.2
Recombination
Recombination occurs during Prophase I when the chromatids are linked together in
tetrads.
Within these tetrads, junctions form between non-sister chromatids, which
are known as chiasmata (Figure 1.4). On average, human cells experience two to three
crossover events per chromosome during meiosis [22]. The probability for a crossover to
occur is random, but these events are more likely to transpire near the telomeres rather
than the centromeres [23]. As a result of these crossover events, genes from maternal and
paternal chromosomes interchange, ensuring that offspring inherit a varied combination
of genes from both grandparents within a single chromosome [7].
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.4: Micrograph of two homologous chromosomes crossing over during Prophase
I of meiosis and a schematic illustration of the recombination process. Figures from
Sadava et. al, 2012 [7].
1.4.3
Independent assortment
The concept of independent assortment was first introduced by Gregor Mendel, derived
from his detailed pea plant experiments. These peas exhibited two clear colors (yellow and
green) and two shapes (round and wrinkled) [24]. In the first-generation offspring (F1),
all displayed the dominant traits of yellow color and round shape. However, in the second
generation (F2), Mendel observed all possible trait combinations. This observation paved
the way for Mendel’s Law of Independent Assortment, which posits that genes segregate
independently of one another during inheritance [24].
During Metaphase I of meiosis, independent assortment is evident when chromosomes
from homologous pairs are randomly allocated to daughter nuclei [7]. As a consequence,
genes located on separate chromosomes are passed on independently.
Genetic linkage represents an exception to Mendel’s Law of Independent Assortment [24].
WhileMendel’sexperimentswithpeaplantsgaverisetothenotionthatgenesareinherited
independently, this principle primarily holds true for genes located on different chromo-
somes or those significantly far apart on the same chromosome (due to recombination).
Genetic linkage, however, describes the phenomenon where genes that are in close prox-
imity on the same chromosome tend to be inherited together, rather than independently.
However, independent assortment is still leading to vast genetic diversity. Even without
considering recombination, independent assortment alone can yield a significant number
9
==PAGE:16==
of chromosome combinations. For instance, humans, with their 23 pairs of chromosomes,
can produce 223 or approximately 8 million distinct combinations, [7].
1.5
Identity by descent and runs of homozygosity
Identity by descent (IBD) is a concept used to describe genetic similarity between relatives.
More specific, if identical DNA segments in relatives are inherited from a common ancestor,
without be broken by recombination, they are defined as IBD segments. The length of the
IBD segments can be used to study hereditary and relatedness in populations. One impor-
tant point is that IBD is not an absolute measure, but is relative to a reference individual
– this could be a common ancestor or it could be an individual that lived at a specific time
[25].
Figure 1.5: A schematic overview of a family tree with recombination, that illustrates the
concept of IBD segments. Figure from Wikipedia [26].
Figure 1.5 shows an example of a family tree (pedigree), to illustrate the concept of IBD.
Within each individual we see a pair of homologous chromosomes. In the upper generation
(earliest in time), we see that no recombination events have occurred. In the subsequent
generation we see the effect of recombinations in the offspring of the upper generation. In
the most recent generation, we see two individuals, who are first cousins – here we observe
that the two individuals are sharing the orange-colored segment at overlapping loci. This
is an IBD segment, since it is passed down from a common ancestor (Third individual from
left in the upper generation).
The previous example shows an IBD segments inherited from a common ancestor in two
10
==PAGE:17==
different individuals. But if the two first cousins are getting a child together, this IBD seg-
ment might be passed down from both parents to their offspring. In this case, we refer
to the segment as runs of homozygosity (ROH). This situation is illustrated in Figure 1.6.
ROH is the effect of inbreeding in a population. This illustration illustrates the potential
outcome when two individuals who are first cousins reproduce. Nevertheless, in the con-
text of a small population, it may not be necessary to trace back many generations before
discovering that some of an individual’s ancestors share a common lineage. In this spe-
cific scenario, the descendants of the cousins have only six distinct great-grandparents,
as opposed to the typical expectation of eight. This highlights the prevalence of runs of
homozygosity (ROH) in isolated and bottlenecked populations [27].
Figure 1.6: A snippet of a family tree to illustrate the concept of ROH. Figure adapted from
Wikipedia [26].
1.6
The Wright-Fisher model
The Wright-Fisher model is a simple population model that is used to simulate genetic
drift in a population over a time period. The Wright-Fisher model works on an idealized
population to simplify the simulation. The basic version of the model is built upon the
following assumptions [28, 29]:
• Non-overlapping generation: Each generation is discrete and does not overlap with
the other generations – this means that individuals can only mate with individuals
within the same generation.
• Constant population size: In the simple form of the model each generation has the
same number of individuals
• Random mating: Each individual has equal chance of mating with every other indi-
vidual from the same generation. This means that the model assumes that all indi-
11
==PAGE:18==
viduals are equally fit and there are no geographical or social structures within the
population.
• No mutations or recombination
Here is an example that describes the steps that are involved in the Wright-Fisher model
for a forward-in-time simulation of a diploid population:
• Let 𝑁be the size of a diploid population. Let A1 and A2 be two alleles of a single gene
in the population. The count of each allele is known at the initial generation.
• Let 𝑖be the number of A1 in the current generation, and 𝑗the number of A1 in the
next generation. Then, we get the following binomial sampling probability:
𝑃𝑖𝑗= ൭2𝑁
𝑗
൱ቆ𝑖
2𝑁ቇ
𝑗
ቆ1 −
𝑖
2𝑁ቇ
2𝑁−𝑗
(1.1)
• The number of A2 in the next generation is given by: 2𝑁−𝑗.
• Notice that the parameters of the binomial distribution are: 𝑛= 2𝑁(the total count
of alleles), and 𝑝=
𝑖
2𝑁(the allele frequency of A1 in the current generation).
• Now, we can simply simulate the number of the alleles from generation to generation,
by sampling random numbers from the binomial distribution. Notice that the distri-
bution in only based on the state of the previous generation – similar to a discrete-
time Markov chain [30].
We should notice, that this example is for a diploid population, meaning the number of
alleles is 2𝑁. However, the model is flexible regarding the ploidy of the population. Addi-
tionally, the example is for two alleles of the same gene – the model also works for multiple
alleles of the same gene, by using a multinomial distribution instead of the binomial dis-
tribution [29].
When we use the Wright-Fisher model, we can expect that some alleles go to fixation (only
this allele is present in the population) or loss (this allele is extinct). The expected time
for fixation or loss is shorter for a small population. This is consistent with our previous
statement regarding genetic drift and small populations – genetic drift has a greater impact
on smaller populations. The average time for fixation or loss is given by:
12
==PAGE:19==
−4𝑁{𝑝log 𝑝+ (1 −𝑝) log(1 −𝑝)}
(1.2)
It is important to note that the stochastic nature of the model introduces a significant level
of uncertainty into this assessment.
Figure 1.7 shows an example of the Wright-Fisher model. A diploid population of 50 indi-
viduals. Initial allele count is 70 for A1 and 30 for A2. Here we can see the allele count for
each generation and the fixation time for A1, and loss time for A2 is 90 generations.
Figure 1.7: Example of genetic drift simulated with the Wright-Fisher model. The code is
available on GitHub [31].
Another approach is to use the Wight-Fisher model to simulate individuals instead of alle-
les. To illustrate this concept, we show an example of a haploid population of 8 individuals
simulated across 6 generations (Figure 1.8). Instead of using the multinomial distribution,
the individuals within each generation are assigned a random parent from the preceding
generation. Fundamentally, the outcome is similar. The simulations shows that some lin-
eages (the ancestral line of descendants) are going extinct after a few generations, and
in the most recent generation, only the blue-colored and the green-colored lineages are
present in the population.
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.8: Example of a population of 8 individuals simulated using the Wright-Fisher
model across 6 generation. The individuals are sorted, to give a tree-like structure that is
easy to read. The simulation is performed with the software from coalescent.dk [28, 32].
1.7
Coalescent theory
In the previous section we introduced the Wright-Fisher model, and showed how to utilize
it in a forward-in-time population simulation. In this section, we pivot towards an alterna-
tive approach known as coalescent theory, a backward-in-time methodology for popula-
tion simulation. Coalescent theory is a concept that emerged in the 1980s with significant
contributions from John Kingman. He introduced what he called n-coalescent or just the
coalescent for a sample of n genes [28]
The heart of coalescent theory lies in its focus on coalescent events, which represent in-
stances when two gene copies, residing within the present-day individuals, converge back
to a common ancestor. The term ”coalesce” denotes the merging or growing together of
genetic lineages. In simpler terms, if we trace back the ancestry of any two genes within a
population, we eventually reach a point where these genes share a common ancestor [33].
Visualizing this process, imagine two gene copies in the present generation. As we rewind
time, these genes eventually meet at a point of common ancestry, the moment of coales-
14
==PAGE:21==
cence. This continues for all gene pairs within the population, revealing a tree of genetic
connections.
To find the distinction between forward-in-time simulations and coalescent simulations,
we consider Figure 1.9. The left side (a) of the figure displays the blue lineage, which we
previously encountered in Figure 1.8, using the Wright-Fisher model. On the right side
(b), we observe the tree structure resulting from a coalescent simulation with identical
outcomes.
Figure 1.9: Comparison of forward-in-time (a) and coalescent simulations (b).
Here, we observe that the coalescent tree has fewer nodes compared to its forward-in-time
counterpart. Moreover, the coalescent tree only extends back by three generations. This
highlights a fundamental aspect of coalescent theory: it traces the most recent generation
of individuals and their common ancestors.
In coalescent theory, the focus is primarily on individuals within the most recent gener-
ation and the ancestors that link them. This approach bypasses information retained in
forward-in-time simulations. In the provided example, individual #3, #4, and #5 share a
most recent common ancestor (MRCA) in individual #6, while #1 and #2 trace their lineage
to MRCA #7. Finally, all individuals converge at MRCA #8.
However, it is essential to acknowledge the limitations of coalescent theory. This approach
15
==PAGE:22==
does not trace individuals with singular offspring or those that have gone extinct, as they
lack the coalescence events that create a shared ancestry [34].
1.8
Number of genealogical and genetic ancestors
In this project, we seek to determine the count of both genealogical and genetic ancestors
and descendants. Genealogical ancestors are the forebears you encounter when tracing
your family tree (pedigree). Genetic ancestors, while often the same in earlier generations,
can differ as you delve further into the past due to the effects of meiosis, where only half
of a person’s genes are inherited. This concept is expounded upon by Coop [35, 36], who
has provided a visual representation in Figure 1.10.
Figure 1.10: Illustration of genetic ancestry. Figure from Coop Lab [36].
In this illustrative plot resembling a peacock, you are positioned in the center. Going back
one generation reveals your parents, each contributing 50% of your genes. As you move
back further, the intensity of color for some relatives diminishes, signifying the propor-
tion of your genes that can be traced to them. Coop also devised a formula for estimating
the expected number of genetic ancestors in ancestral generations [35]. This formula is
grounded in probability methods, and as per Coop’s calculations, when going back 𝑘gen-
erations, we can anticipate having (22+33(𝑘−1)) genetic ancestors in the 𝑘th generation.
Here, the numbers 22 and 33 correspond to autosomes and an estimated 33 recombination
events per transmitted genome [35].
16
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Methodology
In this section, we outline the methodological approach employed in our research to ad-
dress fundamental questions regarding the genetic and genealogical aspects of human
populations. The primary questions under investigation include:
• Ancestral Lineage Exploration: How many genetic and genealogical ancestors
does an individual have when traced backward through time?
• Descendant Lineage Analysis: How many genetic and genealogical descendants
does an individual have when projected forward into the future?
• Genetic Material Transmission: What is the extent and nature of genetic material
passed from one generation to the next, and what is the distribution and length of
these genetic blocks?
• Runs of Homozygosity Assessment: How many runs of homozygosity can be ex-
pected within a population, particularly in populations that have experienced signif-
icant genetic drift and have a limited gene pool?
To address these questions, we have developed a comprehensive population simulation
model that simulates the dynamics of populations across time. Our model incorporates es-
sential genetic processes, including recombination and independent assortment, enabling
us to explore the intricate relationships between genetic inheritance and demographic
changes.
In the subsequent sections of this chapter, we will provide a detailed account of our popula-
tion simulation model, outlining its underlying principles, parameters, and methodologies.
17
==PAGE:24==
Additionally, we will offer practical guidance on how to utilize this model effectively, illus-
trated with a concrete example to demonstrate its application in addressing the research
questions outlined above.
2.1
Simulations with msprime
The Python library msprime is a tool that provides efficient simulation of population ge-
netic data using coalescent theory. It can utilize both the Wright-Fisher model, but also
other models like the Hudson model. It is able to simulate mutations and recombinations
between relatives and gene flow across multiple populations under different demographic
scenarios. msprime uses a data structure called succinct tree sequence (provided by the
tskit framework). This data structure is very computational and memory efficient [34].
Hence the name, it stores a sequence of trees (acyclic graphs), one for each recombination
event found in the present-day generation. All terminal nodes represent the haploid part
of an individual in the present-day generation. The internal nodes represent ancestors
in which a DNA sequence was copied (in terms of forward-in-time) or in which multiple
sequences coalesced into a common ancestor (in terms of moving backward-in-time). A
tree sequence is very similar to an ancestral recombination graph (ARG) and they are of-
ten interchangeable. However, in comparison to ARGs, a tree sequence is a repository of
trees generated by recombination events, rather than an attempt to directly chronicle each
recombination event [34, 37].
We wanted to use the Wright-Fisher model in msprime to answer some of the questions
raised in the introduction: How many ancestors does an individual actual have across
time? What are the lengths of the inherited DNA sequences across time? However, at the
time of writing, the current version of msprime (1.2.0), is only able to record the limited
tree sequence and not the full ARG, that contains more ancestral data of an individual and
past recombination events. Therefore, we did not find a way to answer these questions
with msprime.
2.2
The proposed population model
To address the questions, we implemented a forward-in-time simulation based on the
Wright-Fisher model. The model can track how genes are spread to individuals in a pop-
ulation across time. It can also track the effect of recombination across time. The model
was first implemented in Python 3, but translated to Golang 1.20 for increased perfor-
mance. The model makes the following assumption, many of them are the same as the
18
==PAGE:25==
assumptions, repeated from the basic Wright-Fisher model:
• Discrete-time generations
• Constant population size
• Equal probability of recombination on every locus of the entire genome
• The model only tracks autosomes – no X and Y chromosome or mitochondrial DNA
• Random mating
• Individuals have no gender – but an individual cannot have the same mother and
father
• No mutations
The model uses the following parameters as input:
• Population size
• Number of generations
• Recombination rate
• Sequence lengths of each chromosome in base pairs
The model yields the following quantitative data:
• Average number of ancestors per generation: The model provides the average
number of both genealogical and genetic ancestors per generation, along with the
time of the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) and the identical ancestral point
(IAP), as we trace back through the ancestral lineage from the present-day genera-
tion.
• Average number of descendants per generation: Furthermore, the model calcu-
lates the average number of genealogical and genetic descendants per generation as
we project forward in time from the earliest generation.
• Length and count of identity-by-descent (IBD) segments: The model also fur-
nishes the length of inherited genetic segments, tracking their persistence as they
traverse through time from the earliest generation to the present day.
• Length and frequency of runs of homozygosity: Additionally, the model quantifies
both the length and frequency of runs of homozygosity, following their progression
from the earliest generation to the contemporary era.
19
==PAGE:26==
2.2.1
Initialize a population of individuals across generations
The model works by first simulating all individuals, generation by generation. The chrono-
logical order of the generations depends on whenever we seek the number of descendants
or the number of ancestors. When we want to find the number of descendants across time,
the model uses the forward-in-time order, where the order go from the earliest generation
(number zero) to the most recent generation (number of generations minus one). When
we want to find the number of ancestors, the model uses the opposite order (backward-
in-time), where the most recent generation is number zero.
For each generation (except for the earliest in time generation), all individuals within the
generation are assigned a mother and a father from the preceding in time generation. This
is done by sampling random numbers from a discrete uniform distribution ranging be-
tween 0 up to, but not including, the population size. The program makes sure that the
two parents of an induvial are not identical. An example of what a population could look
like is illustrated in Figure 2.1 – it resembles the tree in Figure 1.8 of a Wright-Fisher pop-
ulation. However, here we see that each individual is given two parents, instead of one. If
the program is generations a forward-in-time population, it will also record a list of the
children of a given individual.
Figure 2.1: Example of the pedigree (family tree) of a population. Each individual is
assigned two random parents from the previous generation.
20
==PAGE:27==
The model treats the entire genome of an individual as a pair of two sequences, one mater-
nal and one paternal. This means that the chromosomes, that an individual inherit from
one parent, are stitched together into a single sequence. An individual is assigned two sets
of break positions – one per parent. The positions are the locations across the sequence
where the model switches back-and-forth between the two sequences found in a single
parent. The break positions represent both the recombination events (chiasmata) and the
mechanism of independent assortment. Since all chromosomes are stitched together in a
single sequence, the model makes sure that chromosomes are inherited independently on
each other, by switching to the other sequence of the parent by chance.
The model samples a binary random variable for each break position between chromo-
somes along the sequence, to specify which of the two chromosomes of the parent that are
inherited. To determine the recombination positions, the model first specify the number of
recombination events over the entire sequence. The model is drawing samples from a bi-
nomial distribution characterized by the parameters n = sequence length and p = recombi-
nation rate (The binomial sampling is provided by Gonum Numerical Packages [38]). This
choice reflects the assumption of a uniform likelihood for recombination events across the
entire sequence, where the recombination rate represents the probability of such an event
occurring. After obtaining the count of recombination events, the model determines their
positions by sampling from a uniform distribution ranging from 0 up to, but not including,
the sequence length.
2.2.2
Find genealogical relatives across individuals
First, we want to find the numbers of genealogical ancestors and descendants. The meth-
ods to find these are almost identical. We will first describe the method to find the number
of ancestors – afterwards we will explain how we find the number of descendants. To find
the number of ancestors, the model uses a population with the backward-in-time order.
Then, the model uses the breadth-first search (BFS) algorithm. BFS visits all connected
nodes, here individuals, in increasing order to their distance from the starting node [39],
here the starting node is the individual we seek the number of ancestors for. By connected
we mean connected in the direction of the order of the generations, i.e., the algorithm trace
parents, and parents of parents, when we are seeking the number of ancestors. Since BFS
are vesting nodes in order of distance from the start node, we can get the number of ances-
tors per generation. When a node is visited it is marked, so a node is only visited one time
per BFS run (in our implementation we use a distinct queue system). The model run BFS
for each individual in the most recent generation. In the implementation of the model, the
function returns the average number of ancestors per generation, given the population.
21
==PAGE:28==
When we trace the number of ancestors, we can also find the time of the most recent com-
mon ancestor (TMRCA) and the identical ancestors point (IAP). This is done by counting
how many descendants each individual in a given generation have from the most recent
generation – each time a node is visited during BFS it is counted – since a node can only be
visited one time per BFS it will only get a counter per descendant in the most recent gen-
eration. The TMRCA is found when the counter of one, or more, individuals is equal to the
population size. The IAP is found when the counter of all individuals in a generation are
equal to the population size or zero (meaning that the lineage of this individual is extinct).
The number of genealogical descendants is also found by using BFS. Here the model uses
a population with a forward-in-time order. Instead of tracing parents, the BFS algorithm
tracks children, and children of children. It should be noticed that the model does not
find the TMRCA or IAP when it is tracking descendants. The model tracks the number of
descendants per generation for each individual in the earliest in time generation, and it
return the average number of descendants per generation.
2.2.3
Find genetic relatedness across time
Finding the genetic relatives across time is a little more complicated and much more com-
putational expensive. Here, we will first describe the method for finding the number of ge-
netic descendants per generation. First, the model initializes a generation with sequence
pairs for all individuals. Notice that when the population were simulated, the model did
not initialize sequences for each individual, only the break positions.
Instead of representing the sequences with nucleotides, this model using numbers, or IDs
that representing the origin of the sequence. That is, a sequence is a set of ordered blocks,
each with an ID, to identify the organ, and a length of the given block. This structure is
stored in two arrays per sequence, one for the IDs and one for the lengths.
In the first generation, each individual receives two identical sequences of blocks. Each
block corresponds to a chromosome and has a length equal to that of the chromosome.
The ID of each block is equal to the index of the individual within the generation.
The model proceeds to iterate through each subsequent generation up to the most recent
one. In every generation, the blocks inherited from individuals in the preceding generation
are passed on. This inheritance involves each individual receiving a sequence of blocks
from both parents. Notably, each sequence comprises half of the genetic material found
within a single parent.
22
==PAGE:29==
Recalling that an individual has two parents in preceding generation and a set of break
positions, these positions dictate when the transition occurs from one sequence to the
other within a single parent. To facilitate this process, the model employs a function, called
getSequence capable of extracting specific sections of a sequence based on given start and
end positions. When the span between these positions contains more than one block, the
function returns a sequence composed of multiple blocks. Moreover, if the start or end
positions reside within the middle of a block, the function truncates the block from or up
to that position. This function is used to stich a new sequence together, which becomes a
mosaic formed from the genetic material sourced from a single parent.
To assess relatedness between individuals across generations, our approach focuses on
tracking block origins rather than individual nucleotides. This enables quantitative anal-
yses of ancestry relationships. First, we calculate the number of descendants for each in-
dividual in the earliest in time generation. This involves iterating through individuals in
subsequent generations and count distinct blocks present within found in both sequences
ofanindividual. Eachdistinctblockcontributestothedescendantcountofthecorrespond-
ing ancestor from the original generation.
Furthermore, we can determine the average number of blocks and their average length
across generations. This is achieved by aggregating the number of blocks within each in-
dividual’s sequences. Subsequently, to compute the average number of blocks, we divide
this sum by the population size. Similarly, to calculate the average length of the blocks, we
divide by the combined length of sequences across the entire population.
Moving on, a significant metric we gather is the runs of homozygosity (ROH). This is
achieved by identifying a set of break positions that delineate block boundaries in both
sequences of an individual. Subsequently, we use the getSequence function to retrieve the
corresponding segments from both sequences using these break positions. Since these
positions define block boundaries for both sequences, the function returns two sequences
consisting of a single block. If the block IDs of the two sequences match, they are inheri-
tance from the same ancestor, thus identifying a ROH block. The model records both the
length and the number of these ROH blocks. This data is used for calculating the average
frequency and lengths of ROH across the population over time.
It is important to note that these statistics are gathered before the model jumps to the
next generation. To conserve memory, the model retains sequences only for the current
and previous generations, as the sequences of a given generation depend solely on the
preceding one.
23
==PAGE:30==
Determining the number of ancestors is a more intricate process compared to counting de-
scendants. Attempting to trace genetic material backwards can lead to overlapping blocks.
An interesting feature of the method for counting descendants is that the count of distinct
blocks identified within the sequences of an individual corresponds to the count of ances-
tors in the earliest generation.
To find out the number of ancestors across generations, we execute the analysis multi-
ple times for the same population, varying the earliest in-time generation each time. This
iterative approach entails running the analysis for one generation ago, followed by two
generations ago, and so on, up to a specified number of generations. During each iteration,
we count the distinct blocks present within sequences of individuals in the most recent
generation. The culmination of these counts allows us to calculate the average number of
ancestors across generations.
2.3
Utilizing the proposed model
We used the proposed model to quantify the expected numbers of ancestors and descen-
dants, runs of homozygosity (ROH), and the counts and lengths of identify-by-descent
(IBD) – we assume that the blocks separated by recombination and independent assort-
ment are IBD segments. To achieve this, we executed the proposed model under various
population scenarios. Our simulations were based on chromosome lengths reported by
Piovesan et al. [8] and a recombination rate of 10−8.
Simulation Parameters:
• Population Sizes: 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000 individuals
• Generations: 100
• Recombination Rate: 10−8
• Random Seed: 395
• Chromosome Lengths: Obtained from the file chrom_lengths [8]
Furthermore, to analyze the distribution of ROH frequency, we performed 10 simulations
for 50 generations, again for various population sizes of 50, 100, 250, 500, and 1000 indi-
viduals. Additionally, we ran a simulation with a population size of 50 for 1000 generations
to test long-term metrics. To assess the impact of population size, we extended our sim-
ulations to larger populations of 10,000, 25,000, and 100,000 individuals, allowing us to
observe trends over time before the effects of population size become significant.
24
==PAGE:31==
2.3.1
Running the simulation
The model is compiled to run in UNIX, and the program is available on GitHub [31], along
with the source code for compilation on other operating systems. Here is a command-line
example on how to run a simulation:
./forward-go -g 100 -p 50 -r 1e-08 -s 395 -f chrom_lengths >
pop50gen100.json
-g: Number of generations
-p: Population size
-r: Recombination rate
-s: Random seed
-f: File containing chromosome lengths, separated by spaces
The program prints the results to stdout in JSON format. We performed the visualization in
Jupyter Notebook and Matplotlib. The notebook is also available on the GitHub repository
[31]. Linktorepository: https://github.com/mikkel-eriksen/ibd-over-time-public
25
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3
Results
In this chapter, we present the outcomes of our simulations spanning 100 generations
across various population sizes, including 50, 100, 250, 500, and 1000 individuals (except
for comparisons with Coop’s results).
We begin by exploring the number of ancestors, focusing on initial trends and long-term
patterns, followed by an examination of the number of descendants. We then delve into the
length of Identity-by-Descent (IBD) segments, independent of population size. Finally, we
scrutinize Runs of Homozygosity (ROH), studying their length and frequency, particularly
in relation to population size.
3.1
Number of ancestors
First, we present the results regarding the number of ancestors. We start by examining
population sizes of 50 and 100 individuals over the initial 25 generations (Figure 3.1) to
highlight early trends in highly drifted populations. Subsequently, our focus shifts to pop-
ulation sizes of 250, 500, and 1000 individuals, spanning 100 generations and offering
insights into long-term trends (Figure 3.2). In both figures, the Time to Most Recent Com-
mon Ancestor (TMRCA) and the Initial Ancestral Population (IAP) are marked.
From Figures 3.1 and 3.2, we observe the following:
• In the preliminary generations, both genetic and genealogical ancestors exhibit an
exponential growth pattern. However, this rapid growth is swiftly curtailed, with the
number of ancestors stabilizing at approximately 80% of the respective population
size.
26
==PAGE:33==
• The count of genetic ancestors consistently equals or falls below the number of ge-
nealogical ancestors.
• The exponential growth phase extends over a longer duration for larger population
sizes.
Additionally, we compare our results with those from Coop Lap (Graham Coop [35]). We
utilized simulation runs for much larger population sizes of 10,000, 25,000, and 100,000
individuals across 25 generations (Figure 3.3). While our simulations yield lower numbers
of ancestors compared to Coop’s findings, we observe similar trends in both datasets.
Figure 3.1: Number of ancestors in initial generations. This figure shows the number of
ancestors for population sizes of 50 and 100 individuals over the initial 25 generations.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.2: Number of ancestors in long-term analysis. This figure presents the number
of ancestors for population sizes of 250, 500, and 1000 individuals over a span of 100
generations.
Figure 3.3: Comparison with Coop Lap’s results. This figure contrasts the results of our
simulation with those obtained by Coop Lap (Graham Coop [35]).
28
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Number of descendants
Here, we extend our investigation to the average number of descendants per subsequent
generation of individuals in the earliest generation. In each generation, we only consider-
ing those individuals who still have descendants and excluding extinct lineages from our
count. Similar to the ancestral investigation, we conduct a closer examination by plotting
population sizes of 50 and 100 individuals for 25 generations to elucidate early trends (Fig-
ure 3.4). Additionally, we observe population sizes of 250, 500, and 1000 individuals for
100 generations to reveal longer-term patterns (Figure 3.5).
Consistent with the ancestral findings, the initial generations display an exponential
growth phase in the number of descendants. However, unlike the ancestral data, the num-
ber of descendants remains more stable, converging against the population size, showing
less fluctuation.
Figure 3.4: Average number of descendants in initial generations. This figure
demonstrates the average number of descendants per subsequent generation for
individuals from the earliest generation who had offspring.
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.5: Average number of descendants in long-term analysis. This figure presents
the average number of descendants per subsequent generation for population sizes of
250, 500, and 1000 individuals over 100 generations.
30
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Length of identity-by-descent (IBD) segments
Now, we present the results of the length of IBD segments across time (Figure 3.6). Our
observations reveal that the length of IBD segments is decreasing over time, but this de-
crease does not appear to be significantly affected by changes in population size. Note that
the y-axis is in log scale.
The average count of IBD segments within an individual across time is presented in Figure
3.7. Interestingly, we observe a linear trend across time. Again, the count across time is
not affected by the changing population size.
Figure 3.6: This figure displays the length of identity-by-descent (IBD) segments across
time.
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.7: This figure displays the count of identity-by-descent (IBD) segments across
time.
32
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Length and frequency of runs of homozygosity
In this section, we present the analysis of the length (Figure 3.8) and frequency (Figure 3.9)
of ROH across time. Notably, the length of ROH segments does not seem to be influenced by
changes in population size, similar to what we observed with IBD segments. However, the
expected frequency of ROH increases over time, with higher values associated with smaller
population sizes. Boththe length andfrequencyof ROHexhibitfluctuations arounda trend.
To showcase the long-term trend of ROH, we include the results for a population of 50 in-
dividuals across 1000 generations (Figure 3.10). Remarkably, in this scenario, we observe
that after approximately 700 generations, the ROH reaches 100%.
In order to assess the variability in the frequency of runs of homozygosity (ROH) across
different population scenarios, we conducted a series of simulations, each spanning 50
generations. For each population size, we performed 10 simulations to examine the con-
sistency of ROH frequency. In Figure 3.11, we present a boxplot illustrating the distribution
of ROH frequency along with its deviation for each of the population scenarios. Notably, for
a population size of 50 individuals, we observe a ROH frequency, averaging just under 40%
across all simulations. Conversely, when the population size increases to 1000 individuals,
the ROH frequency decreases significantly, stabilizing at approximately 2.5% on average.
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.8: This figure shows the length of runs of homozygosity (ROH) across time.
Figure 3.9: This figure illustrates the frequency of runs of homozygosity (ROH) across
time.
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.10: This figure illustrates the frequency of runs of homozygosity (ROH) across
time.
Figure 3.11: Boxplot depicting the variability in ROH frequency across simulations for
different population scenarios.
35
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4
Discussion
In this section, we present the key observations derived from our analysis of genetic and
genealogical ancestors, genetic and genealogical descendants, genetic material transmis-
sion, and runs of homozygosity in populations. These observations shed light on the com-
plex dynamics of genetic inheritance, population size, and the effects of various genetic
processes such as meiosis, recombination, and genetic drift.
4.1
Genetic and genealogical ancestors
Our analysis of the number of ancestors as we trace back in time provides insights into the
interplay between population size and genetic heritage. One observation is the initial ex-
ponential growth in the number of ancestors, a consequence of each individual having two
parents, four grandparents, and so on. However, this exponential growth is constrained by
the finite size of the population, leading to a transition into logistic growth.
The duration of the exponential growth phase is influenced by population size, with larger
populations exhibiting longer periods of exponential growth. Still, even in smaller popula-
tions, the exponential phase is relatively brief due to the limiting effect of population size.
This observation aligns with our expectations, as in a small population, the genetic diver-
sity is rapidly exhausted, leading to a convergence towards a common set of ancestors.
In contrast to genealogical ancestors, genetic ancestors exhibit a more variable growth
pattern across different population sizes. The influence of recombination and independent
assortment becomes apparent here, allowing genes from different ancestors to be passed
on to offspring. Consequently, the number of genetic ancestors continues to grow over
36
==PAGE:43==
many generations, in contrast to the stabilization observed in genealogical ancestry.
Notably, the number of ancestors converges to around 80% of the population size, a point
reached around the time of the Most Recent Common Ancestor (TMRCA). This convergence
underscores an aspect of genetic ancestry: as we go back in time, a falling number of indi-
viduals are responsible for contributing genetic material to the entire population.
The fluctuations observed around this 80% point can be attributed to the stochastic na-
ture of our model, where not all individuals have offspring in every generation, leading to
variations in the number of individuals contributing genetic material. Despite these fluc-
tuations, this percentage appears to be a reasonable estimate, supported by calculations
based on the expected number of distinct draws from a finite population (For details, see
Appendix A).
4.2
Comparison with Coop’s results
In our analysis, we compared our results with Coop’s for the genetic number of ancestors
[35,36]. Coopisusingaformula, derivedfromprobabilitytheory, predictsahighernumber
of genetic ancestors and a more extended period of exponential growth. Nevertheless,
some similarities between the two methods are evident, particularly in the shape of the
growth curves.
The difference between the two methods can likely be attributed to the finite population
size we considered in our simulations. While we did not explore larger population sizes ex-
tensively, our observations from simulations with population sizes ranging from 10,000 to
100,000 individuals suggest that the differences between the methods reduce with larger
populations. This supports the notion that our finite population size has a noticeable ef-
fect on the outcomes and highlights the importance of considering population size when
analyzing genetic ancestry.
4.3
Genetic descendants
Our analysis of genetic descendants provides insights into the expected relatedness of in-
dividuals moving forward in time. The trend of logistic growth observed mirrors that of
genetic ancestors, with smaller populations converging faster, indicating closer genetic re-
latedness in smaller populations. The stability observed in this convergence, as compared
to when we look backward in time, can be attributed to the fact that while every individual
37
==PAGE:44==
has parents, not everyone becomes a parent, and that is why we don’t see the fluctuations
in the numbers here.
The effect of meiosis becomes evident in the difference between the number of genetic and
genealogical ancestors. Meiosis results in the halving of an individual’s genetic material
passed to offspring, contributing to the gap between genetic and genealogical relatedness.
This observation underscores the significance of genetic processes in shaping the related-
ness of individuals over time.
4.4
Identity-by-descent segments
Turning our attention to the length of identity-by-descent (IBD) segments, we observed a
consistent decrease in the length of IBD segments, unaffected by population structure. This
phenomenon can be attributed to the effect of genetic recombination, where crossovers
between chromosomes during meiosis result in the shuffling of genetic material between
homologous chromosomes.
Unsurprisingly, as the length of IBD segments decrease, we observed a simultaneous in-
crease in their count. This relationship arises from the fact that the total length of an
individual’s genome remains constant. Therefore, when segments become shorter, more
segments are needed to cover the entire genome. This observation aligns with our expec-
tations and underscores the dynamic nature of genetic inheritance.
An interesting finding in our results is the linear increase in IBD segment count. This ob-
servation suggests that the decrease in segment length follows a reciprocal pattern. In
other words, the rate at which segments decrease in length remains consistent as gener-
ations progress. This insight has implications for understanding the predictability of IBD
segment length and count over successive generations. It is essential to emphasize that
the length of IBD segments is relative to the specific generation we are tracking.
4.5
Runs of homozygosity
Our analysis of ROH lengths reveals a trend that closely resembles the length distribution
of IBD segments. This observation suggests that, like IBD segments, the population struc-
ture did not significantly influence the distribution of ROH lengths. However, there was a
notable difference in the stability of these lengths. While IBD segment lengths decreased
in a relatively stable manner, we observed fluctuations in ROH lengths. This phenomenon
could be attributed to the fact that ROH segments are generally fewer in count compared
38
==PAGE:45==
to IBD segments, and the limited number of ROH segments could lead to fluctuations in
their lengths. However, when we considered a high-frequency threshold of 80% (Figure
3.10), indicating that a substantial portion of the population shared these segments, we
still observed a high degree of fluctuations.
The ROH analysis also shed light on the significant impact of population size on the ex-
pected frequency of ROH. Smaller populations showed a much higher degree of ROH, con-
sistent with the principles of genetic drift, where in smaller populations, random sampling
of alleles during reproduction can lead to a greater chance of homozygosity. Similar to the
patterns observed in ROH segment lengths, we also noted fluctuations in ROH frequency
within individuals.
To illustrate our findings, we presented Figure 3.11, which shows the results of the aver-
age ROH frequency after 50 generations for various population sizes. This figure provides
a clear visualization of the mean expected frequency of ROH and their distribution. We see
that for a small population of 50 individuals, we can expect almost 40% ROH after 50 gen-
erations. In contrast, when the population size increases to 1000 individuals, the expected
ROH frequency decreases significantly to 2.5%.
Notably, our model did not account for the evolutionary force of mutation. While this omis-
sion did not significantly affect our analysis of the number of relatives, it likely overesti-
mated the frequency of ROH. The introduction of mutations could lead to increased genetic
diversity, potentially altering the ROH patterns observed in our simulations. Future itera-
tions of the model could consider incorporating mutation rates to refine ROH predictions.
4.6
Understanding ROH patterns in drifted populations
Our analysis of expected ROH frequency offers valuable insights into the degree of Runs
of Homozygosity (ROH) within highly drifted populations. This insight is particularly rel-
evant when considering populations with a history characterized by founder effects, bot-
tlenecks, and limited gene flow, such as the Faroe Islands. The Faroe Islands serve as a
compelling example of a highly drifted population. Founded by a relatively small number
of individuals approximately 50 generations ago, this population experienced low popu-
lation growth rates until the 1800s and minimal migration or gene flow with other popu-
lations. Additionally, historical events, such as the plague outbreak in the 1300s, further
reduced the effective population size due to a bottleneck effect.
Despite the Faroe Islands currently having a population size exceeding 50,000 individuals,
39
==PAGE:46==
the effective population size is believed to be significantly smaller, possibly even lower
than 1,000 individuals. This substantial reduction in effective population size has had a
profound impact on the genetic composition of the population.
In this context, Figure 3.11 becomes a valuable tool for gaining insights into the expected
ROH frequency in populations like the Faroe Islands. By extrapolating from our analysis,
we can make informed estimations about the prevalence of ROH in highly drifted popula-
tions, shedding light on the genetic consequences of their unique demographic histories.
This perspective allows us to appreciate how our research not only contributes to our un-
derstanding of general population genetics principles but also provides practical appli-
cations for assessing and interpreting the genetic makeup of populations with complex
histories of isolation and demographic change, like the Faroe Islands.
40
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In conclusion, our analysis of genetic and genealogical ancestors, genetic descendants,
identity-by-descent segments, and runs of homozygosity has provided valuable insights
into the complex dynamics of genetic inheritance, population size, and the effects of ge-
netic processes.
We found that the relationship between population size and genetic heritage shapes the
number of ancestors, with exponential growth transitioning into logistic growth due to
finite population constraints. Genetic ancestors, influenced by recombination and inde-
pendent assortment, exhibit a more variable growth pattern but eventually converge to
around 80% of the population size.
Comparing our results with Coop’s genetic ancestor model highlighted the significance of
population size in genetic ancestry analysis. Our findings suggest that finite population
size can lead to differences in outcomes, emphasizing the importance of considering pop-
ulation size when studying genetic ancestry.
The analysis of genetic descendants revealed trends in relatedness, with smaller popula-
tions showing faster convergence. Meiosis played a critical role in the gap between genetic
and genealogical relatedness due to halving an individual’s genetic material.
Regarding identity-by-descent segments, we observed a consistent decrease in segment
length, countered by an increase in their count, reflecting the impact of genetic recombi-
nation. The linear increase in IBD segment count over generations has implications for
understanding predictability.
Analyzing runs of homozygosity (ROH), we found that ROH lengths closely resembled IBD
41
==PAGE:48==
segment length distributions. Population size significantly influenced ROH frequency, with
smaller populations exhibiting higher ROH levels due to genetic drift. This insight is partic-
ularly relevant when considering highly drifted populations like the Faroe Islands, where
ROH patterns can shed light on the genetic consequences of their unique demographic his-
tories.
Our findings indicate that ROH lengths closely resemble IBD segment length distributions,
with a significant impact of population size on ROH frequency. For instance, in a small pop-
ulation of 50 individuals, we can expect almost 40% ROH after 50 generations. In contrast,
when the population size increases to 1000 individuals, the expected ROH frequency de-
creases significantly to 2.5%. These numerical results illustrate the pronounced effect of
population size on ROH levels, aligning with principles of genetic drift.
Our research contributes to our understanding of general population genetics principles
and provides practical applications for assessing and interpreting the genetic makeup of
By developing a comprehensive population simulation model, we have created a tool for
exploring the intricate relationships between genetic inheritance, demographic changes,
and the effects of different evolutionary forces in various population scenarios.
5.1
Future perspective
Incorporating Mutations for ROH Analysis: One exciting path for future research is the
inclusion of mutations in the model. Mutations introduce genetic diversity and can impact
the distribution and frequency of ROH segments. By incorporating mutation rates, we can
gain a more realistic understanding of how ROH patterns evolve over time. This addition
could enhance the accuracy of our model and provide insights into the interplay between
ROHs and genetic diversity.
Model Validation with Real-Life Data: To further validate the robustness of our model
and its applicability to real-world scenarios, future research can involve comparing our
simulated results with empirical genetic data. By analyzing genetic datasets from diverse
populations, we can measure how well our model aligns with observed patterns of genetic
inheritance and ROH distribution. This validation process will enhance the credibility and
practical utility of our simulation framework.
Mathematical Derivation and Fitting: Another promising avenue for future research in-
volves conducting a mathematical analysis of the observed ROH patterns within our simu-
lation. We can seek to derive mathematical expressions that capture the expected distribu-
42
==PAGE:49==
tion of ROH lengths and frequencies as functions of key parameters, such as population size
and mutation rates. These mathematical models would provide a quantitative framework
for understanding the dynamics of ROH.
43
==PAGE:50==
References
[1] Ralph P Coop G. The Geography of Recent Genetic Ancestry across Europe. PLOS
Biology, 11(5):e1001555, May 2013.
[2] Clark A. Population Genetics. In Encyclopedia of Genetics, pages 1513–1519.
Elsevier, 2001.
[3] Bodmer W, Bailey RA, Charlesworth B, Eyre-Walker A, Farewell V, Mead A, Senn S.
The outstanding scientist, R.A. Fisher: His views on eugenics and race. Heredity,
126(4):565–576, April 2021.
[4] Poulsen SD, Lund AM, Christensen E, Skovby F. Karnitintransporterdefekt er en
arvelig sygdom med høj hyppighed på Færøerne. Ugeskrift for Laeger,
174(18):1217–9, 2012.
[5] West JFJF. Faroe: The Emergence of a Nation. London, C. Hurst; New York, P.S.
Eriksson, 1972.
[6] Brown TA. The Human Genome. In Genomes. 2nd Edition. Wiley-Liss, 2002.
[7] Sadava DE, Hillis DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum M. The Cell Cycle and Cell Division. In
Life: The Science of Biology. W. H. Freeman, 10th edition, December 2012.
[8] Piovesan A, Pelleri MC, Antonaros F, Strippoli P, Caracausi M, Vitale L. On the length,
weight and GC content of the human genome. BMC Research Notes, 12:106,
February 2019.
[9] Willyard C. New human gene tally reignites debate. Nature, 558(7710):354–355,
June 2018.
[10] Meiosis. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meiosis, June 2016.
44
==PAGE:51==
[11] Tarsi K Tuff T. Introduction to Population Demographics. Nature Education
Knowledge, 3(11):3, 2012.
[12] Sadava DE, Hillis DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum M. Mechanisms of Evolution. In Life:
The Science of Biology. W. H. Freeman, 10th edition, December 2012.
[13] Wilson JW Primack RB. What is Biodiversity? In Conservation Biology in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Open Book Publishers, September 2019.
[14] What are the two forms of genetic drift and examples?
https://socratic.org/questions/what-are-the-two-forms-of-genetic-drift-and-
examples.
[15] Coop G. Population and Quantitative Genetics. January 2020.
[16] Stringer C. What makes a modern human. Nature, 485(7396):33–35, May 2012.
[17] Prüfer K, Racimo F, Patterson N, Jay F, Sankararaman S, Sawyer S, Heinze A, Renaud
G, Sudmant PH, de Filippo C, Li H, Mallick S, Dannemann M, Fu Q, Kircher M,
Kuhlwilm M, Lachmann M, Meyer M, Ongyerth M, Siebauer M, Theunert C, Tandon A,
Moorjani P, Pickrell J, Mullikin JC, Vohr SH, Green RE, Hellmann I, Johnson PLF,
Blanche H, Cann H, Kitzman JO, Shendure J, Eichler EE, Lein ES, Bakken TE,
Golovanova LV, Doronichev VB, Shunkov MV, Derevianko AP, Viola B, Slatkin M,
Reich D, Kelso J, Pääbo S. The complete genome sequence of a Neanderthal from the
Altai Mountains. Nature, 505(7481):43–49, January 2014.
[18] Sadava DE, Hillis DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum M. Genes, Development, and Evolution.
In Life: The Science of Biology. W. H. Freeman, 10th edition, December 2012.
[19] Sadava DE, Hillis DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum M. Speciation. In Life: The Science of
Biology. W. H. Freeman, 10th edition, December 2012.
[20] Clancy S. Genetic mutation. Nature Education, 1(1):187, 2008.
[21] Sadava DE, Hillis DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum M. Gene Mutation and Molecular
Medicine. In Life: The Science of Biology. W. H. Freeman, 10th edition, December
2012.
[22] Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. Meiosis. In Molecular
Biology of the Cell. 4th Edition. Garland Science, 2002.
45
==PAGE:52==
[23] Kong A, Gudbjartsson DF, Sainz J, Jonsdottir GM, Gudjonsson SA, Richardsson B,
Sigurdardottir S, Barnard J, Hallbeck B, Masson G, Shlien A, Palsson ST, Frigge ML,
Thorgeirsson TE, Gulcher JR, Stefansson K. A high-resolution recombination map of
the human genome. Nature Genetics, 31(3):241–247, July 2002.
[24] Sadava DE, Hillis DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum M. Inheritance, Genes, and
Chromosomes. In Life: The Science of Biology. W. H. Freeman, 10th edition,
December 2012.
[25] Thompson EA. Identity by Descent: Variation in Meiosis, Across Genomes, and in
Populations. Genetics, 194(2):301–326, June 2013.
[26] Identity by descent. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Identity_by_de-
scent&oldid=1107234326, August 2022.
[27] Ceballos FC, Joshi PK, Clark DW, Ramsay M, Wilson JF. Runs of homozygosity:
Windows into population history and trait architecture. Nature Reviews Genetics,
19(4):220–234, April 2018.
[28] Hein J, Schierup MH, Wiuf C. Gene Genealogies, Variation and Evolution: A Primer in
Coalescent Theory. Oxford University Press, Oxford ; New York, 2005.
[29] Muirhead CA. Genetic Drift, Models of Random. In Kliman RM, editor, Encyclopedia
of Evolutionary Biology, pages 136–143. Academic Press, Oxford, January 2016.
[30] Messer PW. Neutral Models of Genetic Drift and Mutation. In Kliman RM, editor,
Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Biology, pages 119–123. Academic Press, Oxford,
January 2016.
[31] mikkel-eriksen. Mikkel-eriksen/ibd-over-time-public, September 2023.
[32] Website connected to the book by Hein et al.: Gene genealogies, variation and
evolution: A primer in coalescent theory. https://www.coalescent.dk/, 2005.
[33] Wakeley J. Coalescent Theory: An Introduction. W. H. Freeman, Greenwood Village,
Colo, first edition edition, June 2008.
[34] Tskit - Tutorial. https://tskit.dev/tutorials/.
46
==PAGE:53==
[35] Coop G. How many genetic ancestors do I have?
https://gcbias.org/2013/11/11/how-does-your-number-of-genetic-ancestors-
grow-back-over-time/, November 2013.
[36] Coop G. Where did your genetic ancestors come from?
https://gcbias.org/2017/12/19/1628/, December 2017.
[37] Kelleher J, Wong Y, Wohns AW, Fadil C, Albers PK, McVean G. Inferring
whole-genome histories in large population datasets. Nature Genetics,
51(9):1330–1338, September 2019.
[38] Gonum Numerical Packages. https://www.gonum.org/.
[39] Laaksonen A. Guide to Competitive Programming: Learning and Improving
Algorithms Through Contests. Springer, 1st edition, January 2018.
47
==PAGE:54==
Appendices
A
Expected number of distinct draws from a pool
To find the expected number of distinct draws (here, the number of parents that needs to be
assigned) from a pool (here, the population size), remember that parents can have more
children, so the draws are with replacement. We start by stating the expected number
of values that will not be drawn from a pool of size 𝑁in one round, which is 1 −1/𝑁.
After 𝑘draws, the probability that a number has not been drawn will then be (1 −1/𝑁)𝑘.
Therefore, the expected number of distinct values picked after 𝑘draws is 𝑁(1−(1−1/𝑁)𝑘).
An example for a pool size of 100 and 200 draws is shown below, similar to a population
size of 100 that picks 200 parents.
𝐸(𝑁, 𝑘) = 𝑁൭1 −ቆ1 −1
𝑁ቇ
𝑘
൱= 100 ൭1 −ቆ1 −
1
100ቇ
200
൱≈87
(A.1)
48
