==PAGE:1==
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using
Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learn-
ing.
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Simon Michael Widmer
Project period:
February 10, 2023 - August 10, 2023
Workload:
35 ECTS
Degree:
Master of Science
Field:
Operation Management
Class:
No confidentiality
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover:
own creation inspired by Analyticsinsights.net
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Operations & Sup-
ply Chain Management, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Sci-
ence in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Simon Michael Widmer - s210449
Signature
Date
ii
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
10.08.2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Balancing cost and planning complexities, airlines strive to improve existing planning
methods contributing to enhanced operational efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and safety.
To assist airlines in this endeavour, previous research by Shaukat et al. (2020) offers
optimization methods addressing the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem.
While optimization-based approaches are widely applied in airline planning, recent re-
search demonstrates that machine learning methods utilizing reinforcement learning (RL)
prove to be effective in optimizing an airline’s planning process. Expanding on prior meth-
ods developed by Shaukat et al. (2020), this study explores using simulation and reinforce-
ment learning to address the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem.
With the help of a hybrid simulation model connected to a reinforcement learning envi-
ronment, this study aims to investigate differences and opportunities of the novel RL-
enhanced scheduling approach with previously published methods.
An experimental
study investigates the impact of different scheduling policies on the scheduling perfor-
mance. Additionally, it is demonstrated that RL-enhanced methods adapt well across
a diverse set of scheduling problems, providing more practical results from an airline’s
perspective and improving the quality of resulting schedules from published methods by
20%.
Lastly, opportunities for future research are elaborated which may extend the developed
RL-enhanced LMSP method’s simulation environment to replicate real-world airline main-
tenance scheduling more realistically. Accompanied by incorporating more advanced re-
inforcement learning concepts, it is expected to further increase the robustness of schedul-
ing results. Collaborating with an airline expert, it is found that the novel LMSP method
may enable decision makers at an airline’s maintenance planning department with a more
data-driven, iterative and experimental problem solving procedure. Additionally, the op-
portunity to adapt the developed RL method to address the tail assignment problem is
noted which may provide a strategically more valuable solution for a typical airline. Lastly,
integration possibilities are proposed, envisioning the AI-assisted airline planning of the
future, facilitated by an integrated RL-enhanced tail assignment and line maintenance
scheduling solution.
Therefore, the proposed simulation and reinforcement learning framework offers an ex-
cellent foundation for future studies on AI-enhanced airline scheduling.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This project was carried out under the supervision of Allan Larsen, Cheng-Lung Wu, and
Syed Shaukat.
I extend my gratitude to Allan Larsen for his guidance and support throughout this project.
Especially the openness to accommodate this non-standard thesis format, which consists
of a collaboration between two universities from Denmark and Australia, is highly valued.
Additionally, I am deeply thankful to Cheng-Lung Wu and Syed Shaukat for their essential
support. Joining your research team at UNSW in Sydney and collaborating on this exciting
project has been an incredible journey. I am sincerely thankful for the chance to enhance
my skills while pursuing my passion for the airline industry.
Lastly, the insights derived from this thesis have led to a conference paper currently un-
dergoing revisions. The paper is set to be published in the proceedings of the 2023 Winter
Simulation Conference, scheduled from December 7 to 13 in San Antonio, US. While the
paper has not yet been published as of August 2023, relevant sections citing the results
incorporated in the conference paper are referenced accordingly as Widmer et al. (2023).
Supervisor
Allan Larsen, Professor, Head of Section Operation Management, Department of Tech-
nology, Management and Economics
Co-supervisor
Cheng-Lung Wu, Associate Professor, Deputy Head at the School of Aviation, University
of New South Wales, Sydney
Advisor
Syed Shaukat, PhD student at the School of Aviation, University of New South Wales,
Sydney
iv
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Audience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Airline Line Maintenance Planning
5
2.1
Current approach in sequential airline planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Maintenance scheduling processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Current state of line maintenance scheduling in academia and industry . . .
7
2.4
Why solving this problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Literature Review
10
3.1
Simulation in airline scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Optimization in airline scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Reinforcement learning in airline scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Modeling
29
4.1
Defining the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Defining the system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Establishing performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
Building a conceptual model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.5
Documenting model assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5
Input Data Preparation
45
5.1
Maintenance jobs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Maintenance opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.3
Workforce resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4
Schedule instance scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6
Implementation
51
6.1
Simulation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
RL Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.3
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7
Experimental Study and Results
63
7.1
Influence of scheduling policies on scheduling results
. . . . . . . . . . . . 64
7.2
Performance comparison between simulation model and RL-based schedul-
ing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
7.3
Performance comparison between exact, heuristic and RL-based schedul-
ing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.4
Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
v
==PAGE:7==
8
Outlook, Perspectives, and Future Work
73
8.1
Choice of method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
8.2
Airline industry perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
8.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
9
Conclusion
80
Bibliography
82
A Learning Objectives
87
B DEGREE Framework
88
C Sorting Policies
89
D Algorithms
91
vi
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
Abbreviations
ABS
Agent-based simulation
AF
Airframe
API
Application programming interface
ARP
Aircraft routing problem
AV
Avionics
CSP
Crew scheduling problem
DES
Discrete-event simulation
DP
Dynamic programming
DRL
Deep reinforcement learning
DSS
Decision support system
EN
Engine
FAP
Fleet assigment problem
GSE
Ground support equipment
HS
Hybrid simulation
IDE
Integrated development environment
MDP
Markov decision process
MRO
Maintenance, repair and overhaul
OCC
Operations control center
OPSD
Operations decision support suite
RL
Reinforcement learning
SD
System dynamics
SDP
Schedule design problem
TAP
Task allocation problem
UNSW
University of New South Wales
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The domain of aircraft maintenance presents a complex landscape for airlines, posing
significant challenges in terms cost and planning. A report by IATA (2021) highlights that
the expenses linked to aircraft maintenance account for approximately 11.2% of the costs
associated with operating of a typical airline. Notably, the global spending on mainte-
nance, repair, and overhaul (MRO) services amounted to $78.5 billion USD in the year
2022. As the airline industry adjusts its fleet configurations post-COVID-19, accompa-
nied by a strong emphasis on achieving long-term sustainability improvements and aris-
ing supply chain complexities, experts predict a surge in the global demand for MRO
services to $126.6 billion USD by 2032 (IATA, 2021; Oliver Wymann, 2022). In light of
these projections, airlines are actively exploring ways to trim maintenance expenses while
guaranteeing the safety of its passengers and the airworthiness of their aircraft.
In order to enable airlines to leverage on the advantages of efficient maintenance plan-
ning, research conducted by Shaukat et al. (2020) presents optimization strategies aimed
at tackling the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem. The line maintenance schedul-
ing problem (LMSP) aims to optimize the allocation of minor maintenance tasks during an
aircraft’s turnaround time.
While the airline industry has a long history of employing optimization-based solutions
for enhanced planning, machine-learning methods are gaining traction. Especially rein-
forcement learning (RL), a sub-type of machine learning utilizing trial and error for finding
solutions, proves to provide an alternative approach for effectively dealing with the com-
plexities associated with aircraft maintenance planning. Recent studies by Andrade et al.
(2021) and Hu et al. (2021) highlight RL’s ability to outperform optimization-based meth-
ods in long-term maintenance check planning, presenting solutions that are more flexible
and adaptable. However, these studies do not consider the inclusion of short-term line
maintenance tasks within their planning framework.
Building upon this research gap and expanding on prior research, this study explores us-
ing hybrid simulation and reinforcement learning to address the aircraft line maintenance
scheduling problem. Additionally, this study aims to provide insights on differences and
opportunities of utilizing an RL-enhanced scheduling approach to previously published
methods.
This thesis study is conducted in collaboration with a PhD project and research team
including airline industry experts based at the University of New South Wales (UNSW),
School of Aviation. The PhD project aims to develop a more proactive approach to op-
timize various aircraft maintenance-related scheduling processes at an airline by incor-
porating a hybrid strategy of machine learning methods and optimization algorithms with
the help of reinforcement learning techniques. The project is supported by aircraft main-
tenance data and planning strategy insights sourced by a previous study in collaboration
with an Australian airline.
1.1
Problem definition
The focus of this thesis project will be on how a simulation and reinforcement learning
(RL) approach can be utilized to solve the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem
(LMSP). The line maintenance scheduling problem refers to the task of allocating minor
maintenance activities to available ground time slots during an aircraft’s turn-around time.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
1
==PAGE:10==
The study is inspired upon previous research conducted by Shaukat et al. (2020), which
developed a heuristic scheduling method and provides a set of industrial research data.
The study investigates the performance of an RL-enhanced LMSP method applying vari-
ous scheduling policies across varying schedule scenarios.
To align with the aim of the thesis, the following research question will be investigated:
How can a simulation and reinforcement learning approach be used to solve the aircraft
line maintenance scheduling problem (LMSP) inspired upon a previously published
heuristic method to optimize the allocation of maintenance jobs to opportunities?
Following the research question, several sub-questions arise:
• How does applying different scheduling policies affect the objective function value
of a line maintenance schedule?
• How do RL-enhanced scheduling methods perform on varying scheduling scenar-
ios?
• How does the performance of RL-enhanced methods compare to previously devel-
oped LMSP solutions in terms of objective function value and time to solution?
To achieve the objectives, this study proposes a hybrid simulation model that replicates
the line maintenance scheduling system of an airline. The model incorporates system-
specific knowledge and industrial data obtained from previous research conducted by
Shaukat et al. (2020). Following, the hybrid simulation model is integrated with a rein-
forcement learning platform to train an RL-enhanced LMSP solution. The study aims to
investigate the performance of the RL-enhanced method in scheduling maintenance jobs
to opportunities, considering different scheduling policies and various schedule scenar-
ios. Finally, the study draws upon differences, challenges and opportunities of an RL-
enhanced scheduling approach in comparison to existing line maintenance scheduling
methods.
In addition, a set of learning objectives have been defined to complement the official
learning objectives for a DTU master thesis. These learning objectives can be found
in appendix A.
1.2
Scope of the project
The study’s scope and limitations are detailed to address the extent of exploration within
the research area and to outline aspects that will not be addressed in this study. The
scope of this thesis project aims to explore the application of simulation and reinforce-
ment learning to address the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem, and examine
differences and opportunities in the scheduling performance from previously published
approaches. The scope and limitations of this study are outlined below:
• The thesis is conducted in collaboration with a research team from the School of
Aviation at the University of New South Wales.
• The project is inspired upon and incorporates industrial data and a practical air-
line scheduling procedure informed by a previously published study developed by
Shaukat et al. (2020).
• The experimental design of this study focuses on providing insights on differences
and opportunities between the developed method’s scheduling performance which
utilizes a different technology compared to previously published methods by Shaukat
2
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:11==
et al. (2020). However, the study does neglect exploring various scenario-based
permutations of the airline planning problem.
• This project will concentrate solely on phases one to four of the general simulation
methodology by Rossetti (2016), from problem formulation to experimental design.
• The assumptions integrated into the project are derived from the prior research con-
ducted by Shaukat et al. (2020), along with insights from additional literature, exper-
tise provided by the UNSW research team, and input from an expert in the airline
industry.
• The developed solution of this study is not sufficiently customized for immediate ap-
plication in an airline industry setting. However, potential implementation difficulties
and opportunities are addressed in chapter 8.
1.3
Structure of the report
In the current chapter 1, the motivation, aim, and objective of the project have been clari-
fied, along with the scope and limitations of this thesis.
Chapter 2 introduces the domain of airline line maintenance planning by initially clarify-
ing the typical sequential airline planning process, followed by specifying maintenance-
related scheduling processes. Further, the current state of line maintenance scheduling
in academia and industry is clarified. Lastly, the chapter highlights why this thesis study
helps to solve a real problem.
Chapter 3 presents a literature study encompassing three domains: simulation, optimiza-
tion and reinforcement learning. Initially, general simulation theory and the chosen simula-
tion technique is elaborated along with the simulation methodology supporting this project.
Subsequently, the selected simulation platform is reasoned and a selection of academic
studies applying simulation to airline scheduling is presented. Secondly, the application
of optimization methods in airline scheduling is examined through the foundational case
study for this project and an overview of related studies. Lastly, reinforcement learning
(RL) is introduced, and the chosen RL platform for this thesis is outlined. The chapter
concludes by providing a wider perspective on academic research applying RL to airline
scheduling and other industries.
Chapter 4 focuses on the initial phase of the general simulation methodology where the
problem and system of this project is outlined to ensure a common understanding of the
study’s scope. Moreover, objectives are defined by a set of performance metrics, accom-
panied by presenting a conceptual model along with relevant model assumptions.
This is followed by chapter 5, introducing the utilized input data and addressing applied
data preparation steps.
Subsequently, chapter 6 clarifies the translation and implementation of the simulation
model and RL environment for the line maintenance scheduling system. Furthermore,
the applied verification and validation steps are elaborated.
Chapter 7 presents an experimental study.
The underlying research question of this
project is answered by in the form of three experimental themes, each consisting of a
set of experimental scenarios. Finally, the experimental results and provided insights are
summarized.
Chapter 8 takes a step back and discusses the selected methods utilized in this study
along with a critical assessment of the obtained outcomes through the lens of an airline
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
3
==PAGE:12==
industry expert. This section concludes by providing suggestions for future studies to
advance the field of AI-enhanced airline planning.
Finally, chapter 9 presents a conclusion of this study.
1.4
Audience
This study is aimed at academics and professionals with an interest in airline maintenance
planning. The reader is assumed to have prior knowledge of the fundamental principles
of statistics. Furthermore, having prior knowledge about the fundamentals of machine
learning techniques, especially reinforcement learning, is seen as beneficial but not a
requirement.
4
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:13==
2
Airline Line Maintenance Planning
This chapter introduces the characteristics and complexities of a typical airline planning
process and highlights the specific contribution of this thesis project. Further, aircraft
maintenance-specific planning phases are introduced. This is followed by providing an
overview of the field of line maintenance and discussing the current state of the topic
in both academia and industry. Lastly, the importance of solving the line maintenance
scheduling problem is underscored.
2.1
Current approach in sequential airline planning
Airline scheduling is a complex task that includes a multitude of factors, such as the coor-
dination of thousands of daily flights, management of hundreds of aircraft, adherence to
crew flight time imitations and fatigue, air traffic control, airport operational curfews, fierce
competition by other airlines and various other factors (Barnhart & Cohn, 2004; Belobaba
et al., 2009). The initial step in the airline planning process is for a carrier to establish the
flight demand that the schedule needs to accommodate. Based on the flight demand, an
airline step considers several factors which are of great strategic importance of an airline,
such as a carrier’s business model, network design and fleet choice. Afterwards, the air-
line planning process is divided into four sequential sub-problems as defined by Bazargan
(2016): schedule design problem (SDP), fleet assignment problem (FAP), aircraft routing
problem (ARP), and crew scheduling problem (CSP). The schedule design of an airline
relies on the strategic and tactical objectives of the carrier, along with traffic forecasts
and fluctuations in demand. As a next step, fleet assignment aims to accommodate the
schedule design to available aircraft types and considerations including cruising speed,
fuel efficiency, seat capacity, and other economic considerations. Following the fleet as-
signment process, crew pairing, rostering and scheduling activities take place. Finally,
an aircraft’s routing is established taking several maintenance-related considerations into
account as further elaborated in section 2.2.
Historically, these scheduling sub-problems have been tackled in a sequential manner,
due to the high complexity within the four planning phases. Various efforts have been
made towards achieving a more integrated approach to planning airline schedules. How-
ever, Cadarso and de Celis (2017) emphasize that it has been infeasible so far to pro-
duce a fully functional and optimal schedule using an approach that integrates the four
sub-problems and finds the trade off for critical aspects such as unpredictable operational
constraints.
A typical, sequential airline scheduling process is illustrated in fig. 2.1. The illustration ex-
tends the traditional airline planning process with aircraft maintenance-specific planning
phases which are introduced in more detail in section 2.2. Additionally, the illustration
emphasizes the exposure of airline operations to various stochastic factors such as ad-
verse weather conditions affecting the planned flight routing, changing crew availability or
technical issues limiting aircraft readiness. Therefore, the airline planning process is vul-
nerable to disruptions and may require to be restarted at any phase to restore the original
schedule.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Traditionally sequential airline planning process including four scheduling sub-
problems and maintenance-related processes.
2.2
Maintenance scheduling processes
Within the airline planning process, aircraft maintenance influences the phases of the
fleet assignment and aircraft assignment. While an airline’s maintenance and engineering
capabilities may influence the fleet choice for operating a route, aircraft maintenance is
primarily incorporated in the aircraft routing problem (ARP) as illustrated in fig. 2.1. The
ARP specifies which individual aircraft to fly each flight segment assigned to the fleet
(Belobaba et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2020). Solving the aircraft routing problem includes
to assess the feasibility of the routing plan to satisfy both operational and maintenance
criteria. The ARP can typically be divided into three sequential sub-process as described
in more detail below:
1. Maintenance Check Allocation: Commercial aircraft are subject to regular mainte-
nance checks (letter checks) mandated by aircraft manufacturers and air transporta-
tion regulatory bodies. The objective of the maintenance check allocation phase is
to define the timing and location for each aircraft within a fleet to undergo scheduled
maintenance checks at designated maintenance facilities. These checks are trig-
6
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:15==
gered on various metrics, including the number of performed flight hours, take-offs
and landings (cycles), and elapsed time since the previous maintenance check. Ad-
herence to safety and maintenance standards are strictly enforced. Aircraft failing
to meet minimum requirements are subject to grounding, as outlined by Barnhart
and Smith (2012).
2. Tail Assignment: The goal of the tail assignment phase is to identify which specific
aircraft should be assigned to perform each flight defined in the airline’s flight sched-
ule. The assignment must fulfill the previously defined maintenance check allocation
requirements. Upon completion of the tail assignment phase, three components are
defined for each aircraft: an aircraft’s routing, scheduled maintenance checks at a
maintenance facility, and allocated time intervals for conducting minor maintenance
tasks during the aircraft’s turnaround time between two flights. In the context of this
thesis project, such maintenance slots in between two flights are further referred to
as maintenance opportunities.
3. Job Scheduling: Lastly, the job scheduling phase aims to allocate when and where
each maintenance task should be conducted. The job scheduling task is typically
constraint by the availability of maintenance workers as well as spare parts and
other materials necessary to conduct the jobs. This thesis project targets the job
scheduling phase of the airline planning process by allocating line maintenance jobs
to available maintenance opportunities.
2.3
Current state of line maintenance scheduling in
academia and industry
The literature on the line maintenance scheduling problem is scarce. Senturk and Ozkol
(2018) underline that aircraft utilization can be improved if individual jobs can be executed
every time an aircraft is on the ground, compared to the traditional scheduling of periodic
checks. This may lead to better a utilization of capacity in the line maintenance envi-
ronment while helping to improve the efficiency of aircraft maintenance and balance the
workload at maintenance bases. Therefore, an effective line maintenance plan is crucial
in achieving these objectives, as underlined by Hughes (2006). However, Senturk and
Ozkol (2018) do not provide a mathematical formulation of the underlying problem. The
few existing solution approaches for the LMSP found in the literature consist of simple
heuristics.
Shaukat et al. (2020) formulate the LMSP as a mixed integer programming problem which
involves two planning levels: job assignment and timetabling. The authors propose a
mathematical formulation for the LMSP and presents two solution approaches. Firstly, an
integrated, exact solution algorithm that simultaneously addresses job assignment and
timetabling is presented. Secondly, a sequential, heuristic approach is introduced. The
scheduling performance of both solution approaches is tested on a collection of test in-
stances inspired by airline data. This study serves as the foundation for this thesis project
and is introduced in more detail in section 3.2.1.
Hu et al. (2021) and Andrade et al. (2021) both propose maintenance optimization strate-
gies for aircraft using reinforcement learning.
Both studies demonstrate the potential
benefits of using reinforcement learning in long-term maintenance planning by producing
maintenance schedules that: maximize the flight hour usage of aircraft between checks,
reduce the number of scheduled checks throughout an aircraft’s lifespan, and enable air-
lines to generate more revenue while reducing maintenance expenses. Lee et al. (2022)
apply RL to recover the aircraft routing problem after operational disruptions. The re-
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
7
==PAGE:16==
searchers find that RL offers a significant advantage over optimization-based methods
in airline planning due to its flexibility in meeting a wider range of recovery objectives.
Nevertheless, none of these studies include the planning of short-term line maintenance
jobs.
Driven by recent technological progress, the collection of real-time data using sensors
installed on aircraft has undergone significant advancements (Černỳ, 2019). This has
been made possible by the Internet of Things (IoT) and the increased availability of dig-
ital sensor data. At the example of Airbus, the aircraft manufacturer offers airlines real-
time access to aircraft data in the form of an integrated data platform called Skywise
to address aircraft operations challenges (Airbus, 2023). Similarly, the aircraft mainte-
nance, repair, overhaul and modification services provider Lufthansa Technik offers a
manufacturer-independent aircraft data ecosystem called AVIATAR, comparable to an
app store for aircraft data services (Lufthansa Technik, 2023). The data collected can
be used to make data-driven decisions that enable businesses to optimize maintenance
strategies. This technology enables airlines to adopt a condition-based maintenance ap-
proach, which is based on the aircraft’s health status and operational history, rather than
following predetermined maintenance cycles. With the increasing adoption of condition-
based and predictive maintenance approaches, task-driven maintenance jobs can often
be executed during line maintenance, which is less resource-intensive and costly than
cyclic letter checks (Ruther et al., 2017).
The adoption of data-driven decision-making in the airline industry extends beyond aircraft
maintenance. At the example of Swiss International Air Lines, the carrier is currently de-
veloping a platform called Operations Decision Support Suite (OPSD) integrating various
airline planning sub-problems as illustrated in fig. 2.1. The Swiss carrier partnered with
Google Cloud to integrate crew, passenger, aircraft rotation, and technical sub-problems.
The aim is to adopt a holistic approach to airline planning and optimization by leveraging
data-driven methods, resulting in more fuel-efficient, sustainable, and profitable opera-
tions (Google Cloud, 2023; Lufthansa Group, 2023). Moreover, Lufthansa Systems, an IT
service provider specialized for the airline industry, recently enhanced an industry-leading
core-system for airline operations control by incorporating machine learning techniques
such as reinforcement learning. By leveraging reinforcement learning, the system can
proactively detect potential flight delay risks in advance and provide recommendations to
airline decision-makers for adapting the flight schedule accordingly (Lufthansa Systems,
2023).
2.4
Why solving this problem
Previous research conducted by Shaukat et al. (2020) solved the line maintenance schedul-
ing problem (LMSP) using exact and heuristic optimization methods. In this thesis project,
we build on the work of Shaukat et al. (2020) and aim to pair simulation techniques with the
demonstrated benefits of reinforcement learning for long-term maintenance check plan-
ning and aircraft routing recovery problem to develop an RL-enhanced LMSP method.
This provides a third, alternative approach to solving the line maintenance scheduling
problem along the existing exact and heuristic scheduling methods. An experimental
study aims to analyze how different scheduling policies affect the scheduling results of
the RL-enhanced LMSP method on a set of varying scheduling scenarios. Finally, differ-
ences, challenges and opportunities of an RL-enhanced scheduling approach in compar-
ison to existing line maintenance scheduling methods are discussed. To the best knowl-
edge of the author of this thesis project, this is the first time that the line maintenance
scheduling problem is addressed using a combined simulation and reinforcement learn-
8
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:17==
ing approach. Therefore, it is seen as an opportunity to advance the field and contribute
value to both academia and industry.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Literature Review
This thesis directly relates to three technology areas: simulation, optimization, and rein-
forcement learning. This chapter presents a thorough literature review that encompasses
these technologies. Initially, various simulation techniques, a simulation methodology,
and academic studies applying simulation to airline scheduling are presented. The uti-
lization of optimization methods in airline scheduling is then explored through the intro-
duction of the foundational case study for this project. A broader view of how optimiza-
tion techniques are employed in this context follows. Finally, reinforcement learning (RL)
is introduced, and the chosen RL platform for this thesis is specified. The chapter con-
cludes by providing a broader perspective on academic research that applies RL to airline
scheduling and other industries.
3.1
Simulation in airline scheduling
This section initially introduces the foundations of simulation, followed by elaborating the
selected simulation methodology supporting the modeling phase of this project. Further-
more, available simulation platforms are described. Finally, this section concludes by
highlighting a selection of research studies applying simulation in the domain of airline
scheduling.
3.1.1
Introduction to simulation
Simulation is a methodology for mimicking real-world systems or processes (Rossetti,
2016). It involves creating models that replicate the behavior and interactions of complex
systems as closely as necessary and provides a flexible approach to understanding their
dynamics. Often, conducting simulation studies is considered the next best thing to ob-
serving the real system. Simulation is used when real-world systems are highly complex
or too costly to directly experiment with. Additionally, simulation models may be designed
for training purposes and allow learning without the cost and disruption of on-the-job learn-
ing. It enables the study of internal interactions, the effects of changes, and the prediction
of future system behavior. Simulation can be used to experiment with new designs prior
to implementation and therefore actively support the improvement of the real system.
However, simulation is not suitable when direct experiments are easier to conduct, or
costs of simulating a system outweigh potential savings. Additionally, the outcome of a
simulation study depends on the availability of high-quality input data as well as time and
personnel commitment to accurately evaluate the output of a simulation study. Therefore,
a simulation study is not recommended if insufficient data or a lack of personnel resources
for model evaluation is present (Larsen, 2021b). In summary, simulation is a powerful tool
understanding complex systems, as it allows to observe the behavior of a system under
different conditions without the need for real-world experimentation. However, it provides
approximations rather than exact answers and requires high-quality data acquisition and
validation effort of the model outcome.
In order to facilitate a simulation study as outlined above, modern simulation modeling dis-
tinguishes three main simulation methods: discrete event-based simulation (DES), agent-
based simulation (ABS), and system dynamics (Grigoryev, 2022). The author lines out
that each simulation methodology serves a specific range of abstraction levels to be repli-
cated by the simulation study. Recently, a growing field of research in operations research
focuses on combining two or more of the three main simulation methods, also referred to
10
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:19==
as hybrid simulation modelling (Brailsford et al., 2019). The characteristics of these four
simulation methodologies are outlined in the following section.
Discrete-event simulation models the behavior of a system based on the occurrence of
discrete events, such as arrivals or departures of customers, which occur at specific times.
These events trigger changes in the system, which can be simulated to observe the sys-
tem’s behavior over time (Maidstone, 2012; Sumari et al., 2013). DES is one of the most
commonly applied simulation methods due its suitability for solving process-oriented prob-
lems in a top-down approach. A key element build queuing systems or complex networks
of queues (Siebers et al., 2010). Typical advantages of DES also include its simplicity
in accurately modeling a system and computational efficiency (Brailsford, 2014). This
framework supports both operational and tactical level and is suitable to accommodate a
medium to medium-low abstraction level (Grigoryev, 2022).
Agent-based simulation models the behavior of individual agents within a system, tak-
ing into account their interactions with each other and their environment. These models
are particularly useful for studying complex systems with multiple agents (Siebers et al.,
2010). The authors emphasize that ABS is a more recently developed simulation method-
ology which in contrast to DES, applies a bottom-up modeling approach. This enables
ABS to model a wide range of problems from low to high levels of abstraction. Therefore,
ABS is suitable for both operational, micro-level to more strategic, macro-level problems
(Grigoryev, 2022).
System dynamics (SD) models the behavior of a system over time, based on the inter-
actions between three key elements: stocks, flows, and delays. Stocks represent the
accumulation or storage of objects, such as the number of patients in a hospital depart-
ment. Flows describe the movement of items between different stocks within the system
and the inflow or outflow of items into the system. Delays refer to the time gap between
measuring something within the system and taking action based on that measurement
(Maidstone, 2012). System dynamics models are typically used to study complex systems
from a strategic level of high abstraction, including modeling of an economic systems or
a pandemic (Grigoryev, 2022; Siebers et al., 2010).
Hybrid simulation (HS) describes a multi-method simulation approach which combines
two or more of the previously introduced key simulation methodologies. In the past twenty
years, HS has become increasingly popular due to its ability to capture the complexity and
dynamics of real-world systems which may not be accurately represented by a single sim-
ulation methodology. According to Brailsford et al. (2019), rather than relying on a single
simulation method, the HS approach of integrating multiple simulation methods leverages
the strengths of each method to provide a highly flexible and adaptable simulation model.
Brailsford (2014) and Siebers et al. (2010) emphasize that choosing the right simulation
approach depends on the specific attributes of the system being studied. Both papers ac-
knowledge the potential of ABS and its ability to capture complex interactions and emer-
gent behaviors in systems. Siebers et al. (2010) challenges the relevance of DES due to
its focus on events and their sequencing, failing to capture the complex interactions ob-
served in many real-world systems. However, Brailsford (2014) provides a counterpoint
to this perspective and emphasizes the continued relevance and usefulness of DES. The
author argues that DES is still a highly valuable method due to its simplicity, computational
efficiency, and suitability for well-defined systems with known event sequences. Finally,
Brailsford et al. (2019) emphasizes that real-world systems may not always be accurately
represented using a single simulation methodology. Instead, a HS approach may provide
a more flexible, adaptable and accurate representation of the system.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
11
==PAGE:20==
In the context of this thesis study, the selection of an appropriate simulation methodol-
ogy follows the recommendation of Siebers et al. (2010), Brailsford (2014), and Brailsford
et al. (2019). The line maintenance scheduling system is a highly complex system in-
teracting with multiple agents such as maintenance jobs and opportunities, aircraft and
maintenance workers. On the other hand, the simulation model also must accommo-
date a well-defined job assignment process. Therefore, an approach facilitating medium
to micro-level abstraction, multi-agent decision-making as well as a process perspective
is necessary. Given these conditions, a system dynamics approach is infeasible due
to its strategic focus and high abstraction level. Instead, a hybrid simulation approach
integrating ABS and DES components is capable of effectively capturing the complex re-
lationships and dependencies found in real-world line maintenance operations. Taking
advantage of the strengths of ABS, the model accommodates the individual decision-
making for the interaction of the multiple agents. This is combined with the strength of
DES including simplicity, computational efficiency, and suitability to accurately capture a
well-defined process. Therefore, a hybrid simulation approach is chosen as the preferred
simulation technique for this thesis project.
3.1.2
Simulation methodology
A simulation project is typically carried out following a methodological framework to pro-
vide guidance and facilitate a structured problem-solving approach. This thesis study
follows an adapted version of the general simulation methodology process DEGREE pre-
sented by Rossetti (2016). This methodology follows the principles of systems analysis
to solve problems through systems modeling and consists of the following phases:
1. Define the problem.
2. Establish measures of performance for evaluation.
3. Generate alternative solutions.
4. Rank alternative solutions.
5. Evaluate and iterate during process.
6. Execute and evaluate the solution.
When applying the DEGREE problem-solving methodology for a simulation study, some
modifications must be incorporated into the overall problem-solving process. According
to Rossetti (2016), this allows to adapt the general DEGREE approach tailored for the
interaction between simulation and the problem-solving process. A visualization of the
adapted DEGREE problem solving framework for a simulation study is available in Ap-
pendix B. The refined DEGREE process is described in more detail below.
Initially, the problem formulation phase ensures that the right problem is solved and con-
sists of the following five steps (Rossetti, 2016):
1. Defining the problem clearly outlines the study’s objectives, desired model outputs,
and the specific scenarios or decisions to be explored.
2. Defining the system aims to accurately define and visualize the system, includ-
ing its boundaries. This ensures that the simulation study aligns with stakeholder
interests and establishes a clear understanding of the project scope.
3. Establishing performance metrics involves defining KPI for the model using quan-
titative and qualitative metrics tied to the simulation study’s objectives. A common
12
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:21==
framework for defining KPI is inspired by S.M.A.R.T. (Doran et al., 1981), resulting
in specific, measurable, attainable, relevant and time-bound performance metrics.
4. Building conceptual models with the help of diagrams and flow charts provides a
detailed system description. This facilitates the translation of the model into a digital
representation.
5. Documenting modeling assumptions ensures that all necessary model assump-
tions made during the modeling process are documented.
The second phase, known as ”Model building,” involves creating and validating a simula-
tion model that accurately represents the system being studied. Following the guidelines
established in the previous phase, four activities are conducted: preparing input data,
translating the model, and performing verification and validation processes.
The third phase focuses on experimental study and analysis. This involves testing and
comparing specific scenarios by adjusting model parameters and characteristics, allowing
for a comparison and analysis of the resulting output data.
Phase four includes statistical analysis to validate the model and inform decision-making
through a sufficient number of scenarios. Iterative cycles between phases three and four
are conducted until satisfactory results are obtained. This ensures that the solution aligns
with the study objectives.
In phase five, documentation ensures the continued use and future maintenance of the
simulation model. The final step involves developing implementation plans and executing
the integration of the proposed solutions.
As outlined in section 1.2, the last two phases are not in the scope of this study.
3.1.3
Simulation software
The development of specialized simulation languages has been driven by the increasing
computational power and storage capacity of computers. These languages offer standard
programming facilities and vary in their flexibility and user-friendliness, with some being
more programming-oriented and others more ”drag and drop” oriented. While all simu-
lation languages have their flaws, using a simulation language is crucial for conducting
high-performance simulation studies, requiring different skills and considerations based
on the chosen language’s characteristics.
Different simulation software and platforms exist. Simulation projects may be facilitated
using simulation-specific programming languages, while also specialized software pro-
viding a more user-friendly, ”drag and drop” oriented interface exist (Rossetti, 2016). Se-
lecting a suitable platform depends on multiple factors including the planned simulation
methodology to be implemented. In the context of this thesis project, only simulation plat-
forms facilitating ABS and DES providing a user-friendly drag-and-drop environment are
of relevance.
According to Turner and Garn (2022), commercial DES software include AnyLogic, Arena,
Simul8, or FlexSim. A comprehensive study regarding simulation tools tailored for ABS
is conducted by Abar et al. (2017). The authors emphasize that recent advancements in
ABS platforms include the availability of mature and stable packages within standardized
graphical Integrated Development Environments (IDEs). Examples of such commercial
ABS solutions with IDEs include Altreva Adaptive Modeler, Framsticks, Mimosa and Any-
Logic. Lastly, available simulation software that enables a HS modelling approach is very
limited. To the best knowledge of the author of this thesis and supported by Brailsford
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
13
==PAGE:22==
et al. (2019), AnyLogic is currently the only commercial simulation software designed to
facilitate a hybrid simulation modelling approach.
In this thesis study, the simulation software AnyLogic is chosen due to its ability to accom-
modate hybrid simulation modelling (AnyLogic, 2019; Brailsford et al., 2019). Additionally,
AnyLogic includes integrated functionality to conduct reinforcement learning experiments,
which is further outlined in section 3.3.2. Moreover, AnyLogic provides a free student
license and is an established simulation platform at both the Technical University of Den-
mark as well as the School of Aviation at UNSW. However, the free student license is
restricted to be used solely for classroom instruction and personal learning, and records
the following limitations (AnyLogic, n.d.):
• Up to 10 agent types per model
• Up to 200 embedded agents/blocks in one agent
• Up to 50’000 dynamically created agents per model
These limitations may pose difficulties when simulating the LMSP, particularly when deal-
ing with multiple agent types and populations.
3.1.4
Simulation in airline scheduling
Hölzel et al. (2014) present an aircraft lifecycle approach using a DES model to assess
the cost-effectiveness of Prognostics and Condition-based Maintenance (P-CBM). The
methodology involves creating a detailed simulation model incorporating complex opera-
tional and maintenance processes. By incorporating condition-based maintenance plan-
ning into a cost-benefit model, the study aims to provide insights on the economic viability
of a P-CBM approach in future aircraft. The DES model also utilizes optimization tech-
niques using a branch-and-bound algorithm. A lifecycle cost-benefit model evaluates sim-
ulation outcomes using discounted cash-flow analysis. The simulation and assessment
tool are implemented in MATLAB.
Overall, the study presents sophisticated aircraft lifecycle approach utilizing the DES
model to analyze the cost-benefit dynamics of P-CBM strategies. Hölzel et al. (2014)
describe several limitations and acknowledge that the incorporated DES model does sim-
plify complex processes. Future research could explore varying daily aircraft utilization
to assess the model’s applicability across different airline business models. For instance,
the impact of the approach on low-cost carriers with higher aircraft utilization and network
carriers with longer maintenance opportunities could be investigated. This could further
enhance the benefits and of the proposed approach under more realistic operational con-
ditions.
Albakkoush et al. (2020) present a planning and scheduling method for aircraft line main-
tenance. Maintenance processes are simulated and analyzed using a DES model. The
DES approach creates a simulation model with resources, activities, queues, and entities.
The DES model is used for three main purposes: determining optimal task durations,
evaluating task requirements and productivity, and assessing total elapsed time. Vari-
ous scenarios are examined, including real-world maintenance situations such as task
interruptions due to missing tools or safety concerns. The study contributes to aircraft
maintenance by using DES to plan line maintenance schedules based on maintenance
events. A task classification method is introduced, grouping pending jobs into operational,
ramp check, and service tasks.
In conclusion, DES is utilized to analyze planning and scheduling of line maintenance
tasks. Study limitations include a focus on a specific aircraft type and limited data pre-
14
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:23==
sentation due to confidentiality. However, Albakkoush et al. (2020) do not address how
the DES model handles complexities in a realistic maintenance environment or provide
insights on the simulation platform used. Opportunities for future research include ad-
dressing complex scheduling, more variables, and exploring other aircraft types.
MacKenzie et al. (2012) present an ABS model tailored to optimize the pre-departure
planning process of military aircraft. Within the context of this study, a sortie refers to
a single mission flown by an individual aircraft, while sortie generation refers to the ac-
tivities required to provide mission-ready aircraft to fly a specific flight. The ABS model
incorporates a multi-agent architecture, with distinct agent populations for workers and
their supervisors. These supervisors aid in prioritizing tasks and resource allocation. The
ABS model allows to leverage individualized decision making of agents to analyze how
different skill levels and job codes impact mission completion rates. The model is im-
plemented using the NetLogo ABS environment, a platform developed by Northwestern
University. The study offers examples of ABS logic comparable to state-chart functions
in AnyLogic simulation software.
MacKenzie et al. (2012) conduct an experimental study varying maintenance resource lev-
els, measuring utilization and sortie production. This resembles a scenario-based study
where workforce capacities are changed, and resulting system performance is assessed
through resource utilization and total sortie production. The study reveals that the mix
of skills and job code, represented by United States Air Force Specialty Codes (AFSCs),
significantly affects a flight unit’s capacity and capability. The value of using an ABS mod-
eling framework to capture dynamic relationships in complex sortie generation processes
is highlighted.
Similarly to MacKenzie et al. (2012), Liu et al. (2019) utilizes ABS to develop an innova-
tive strategy for supporting an autonomous system for aircraft maintenance scheduling.
The study proposes a system focused on incorporating technical and business consid-
erations, optimization strategies and includes information regarding maintenance costs,
service levels, and reliability. To demonstrate the viability of the autonomous system’s
design, an ABS model using the simulation software AnyLogic is developed. The system
includes several agents and agent populations. An experimental study is conducted to an-
alyze the impact of maintenance sequence strategies on maintenance costs and service
level. Despite conducting experiments aiming to validate the model’s functionality and the
rationality of the autonomous system’s design, Liu et al. (2019) emphasize that the sim-
ulation model requires further research work focusing on verification of the incorporated
modeling logic.
Contrary to previously presented studies, Saggar et al. (2021) proposes a hybrid simu-
lation approach to improve the planning and resource allocation at airports to efficiently
transition an aircraft between two consecutive flights. During peak times and when re-
source capacity is limited, apron activities can be disrupted due to unavailability of required
equipment or delayed aircraft arrivals and departures. This study introduction a real-time
resource booking system that addresses operational uncertainties. This system enables
airlines to pre-book specific resources, particularly ground support equipment (GSE) such
as ground power units, push-back tractors or conveyor belt devices for baggage handling.
The incorporated HS model combines ABS and DES techniques, implemented using the
AnyLogic simulation platform. The core of the model is facilitated using an ABS approach,
with agents representing aircraft, parking stands, GSEs, storage locations, and ground
handlers. These entities play a crucial role in shaping the emerging dynamics. Agent
behavior and interactions, along with relevant details of all turnaround tasks to be exe-
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
15
==PAGE:24==
cuted, events, and the flow of passive entities such as baggage and cargo, are collectively
defined using state charts, action charts, and DES-based elements.
In an experimental study, a new way of booking assets with the current system is tested
where assets are used in the sequence needed. Saggar et al. (2021) find, that booking
assets could make apron operations more efficient. Specifically, the average waiting time
of an aircraft to be serviced could be reduced, while GSE allocation may to be proactively
steered and located at the right place on time. However, differences depending on the
type of GSE are found.
Saggar et al. (2021) suggest future research need including to study how asset booking
could work at different airports, especially focusing on different airport sizes. Further, it
is suggested to investigate new ways to exchange information between multiple stake-
holders, such as the airport, airlines, and ground service providers, which is predicted to
further improve the benefits of a future GSE booking system. As more evidence in favor
of asset booking is collected, an implementation of such a booking system would pose
a viable next step. This would encompass to define a business plan, costs for airlines
including penalties for late deliveries, and other factors.
3.2
Optimization in airline scheduling
This chapter introduces the application of optimization methods in airline scheduling. Ini-
tially, the case study serving as the foundation of this thesis project is introduced and con-
nections to its objectives are highlighted. This is followed by offering a broader overview
of the utilization of optimization techniques in the field of airline scheduling.
3.2.1
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling and Optimization
As introduced in chapter 1, this thesis study is built upon previous research conducted by
Shaukat et al. (2020). In their study, the authors introduce the Line Maintenance Schedul-
ing Problem (LMSP). Building the foundation of this thesis study, this section initially pro-
vides a comprehensive summary on the previous research conducted. This is followed by
providing a more detailed overview regarding the mathematical formulation of the original
LMSP developed by Shaukat et al. (2020).
Referring to section 2.3, traditional maintenance planning approaches primarily focus on
scheduling more extensive tasks within predetermined block check, which require ex-
tended ground time ranging from hours to weeks. However, the industry gradually transi-
tions to shift many maintenance tasks traditionally conducted during block checks to the
line maintenance environment. In the line maintenance setting, routine maintenance jobs
can be performed during layovers, which is found to improve the overall fleet utilization
efficiency as emphasized by Senturk and Ozkol (2018). Research conducted by Shaukat
et al. (2020) aims to advance the field of aircraft maintenance planning by helping airlines
to optimize their line maintenance planning procedure, which contributes to more efficient,
cost-effective, and safer operations.
The LMSP involves a two-step planning procedure: job assignment and defining a start-
ing time for each maintenance task. Initially, the job assignment phase assigns main-
tenance tasks to available maintenance opportunities informed by flight schedules. The
objective of the LMSP is to allocate the maintenance in a way that minimizes the total de-
viation from a job’s ideal execution time. Due times indicate the ideal service time for each
job. Additionally, maintenance jobs need to be serviced before a determined deadline, to
avoid potentially grounding an aircraft due to strict maintenance regulations. Secondly,
the timetabling phase determines each job’s starting time within its allocated maintenance
16
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Scheduling concept of allocating maintenance jobs to opportunities with the
goal to minimize a job’s deviation (spread) from its most suitable starting time, referred to
as due time.
opportunity. Due to limited resource capacity at airports, timetabling decisions must en-
sure that the workforce capacity at each airport is not exceeded.
These concepts are exemplified in fig. 3.1. On the horizontal axis, the figure illustrates the
objective of scheduling jobs to opportunities before a determined deadline with the goal
of minimizing the deviation from a task’s ideal due time. This deviation is referred to as
spread. Further, the concepts of earliness and tardiness are shown. When a maintenance
job is scheduled before its due time, its spread is classified as earliness (e.g., as Spread
Job 1). On the other hand, if a maintenance task is scheduled after its due time, the spread
deviation is classified as tardiness (e.g., as Spread Job 2). On the vertical axis, the figure
illustrates how the LMSP considers limited airport resource capacities. At the example of
Job 2 shown in fig. 3.1, the may not be allocated at the first maintenance opportunity as the
task exceeds the available resource capacity. Further, Job 2 must be scheduled before
its deadline, which leads the maintenance task to be allocated to the second maintenance
opportunity. Finally, a line maintenance schedule is evaluated utilizing a objective function
as available in section 3.2.1, which incorporates the concept above aiming to minimize
the total sum of earliness and tardiness of mandatory jobs, which corresponds to the total
deviation of a schedule, while adding a determined cost for any non-mandatory job left
unscheduled.
Shaukat et al. (2020) formulate the LMSP as a mixed integer programming problem, which
is further elaborated in section 3.2.1. The authors introduce and compare two solution
approaches for solving the LMSP:
1. An integrated exact solution algorithm (ILMSP) that solves job assignment and timetabling
simultaneously. Finding an optimal solution is guaranteed.
2. A heuristics approach (SLMSP), which solves the two-step LMSP sequentially uti-
lizing a greedy-type heuristic. Finding an optimal solution is not guaranteed.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
17
==PAGE:26==
Further, the study conducts an experimental study which compares the scheduling per-
formance of the exact and approximate optimization solutions using schedule instance
scenarios inspired by data provided by an industry partner. A set of 29 schedule scenar-
ios are used to test both approaches. The schedule instances provide varying scheduling
scenarios differing by the number of jobs, opportunities, aircraft, job process times, and
resource requirements.
The results of the experimental study indicates that the proposed integrated approach
(ILMSP) consistently achieved optimal solutions for the entire set of instances in less than
10 minutes on average. On the other hand, the sequential approach (SLMSP) produced
solutions that were 3.5% worse than those obtained by ILMSP. However, the approximate
SLMSP method excels in terms of efficiency by recording significantly shorter solution
times, averaging around 10 seconds. Shaukat et al. (2020) find that both proposed so-
lution methods can effectively serve as operational decision-making tools, leaning upon
that an airline typically finds a solution time of up to 20 minutes acceptable for a planning
problem. Therefore, the authors argue that from a practical perspective, both methods
can be utilized for regularly re-optimizing the line maintenance schedule whenever new
maintenance requirements are known, using a rolling horizon approach.
Additionally, the study conducts experiments regarding the number of maintenance bases
and overall maintenance capacity. The researchers find that designing a maintenance
network with spatially distributed capacity is advantageous, even at the expense of re-
ducing the overall capacity deployed. An example illustrates that opening a fourth main-
tenance base (increasing the total capacity to 4/3) leads to significantly improved system
performance compared to doubling the capacity at the three initially available facilities.
Further, Shaukat et al. (2020) provide several suggestions for further research. Firstly,
The authors suggest to incorporate more complex line maintenance scheduling condi-
tions. This includes job precedence constraints, dealing with cyclic maintenance tasks,
and specific arrival or departure time requirements. By incorporating these elements, the
model could be enhanced to better represent a realistic line maintenance environment
and serve an airline as a more effective decision-making tool. Secondly, it is considered
to provide value by including the capacity planning aspect of the problem. This would en-
able the model to support strategic decision making of an airline regarding the opening or
closing of maintenance bases and the allocation of resource capacities. Lastly, the study
suggests that introducing the factor of uncertainty would provide a valuable addition to
this study. This might even propel the LMSP to assist and provide value for disruption
management, which is seen as a pressing issue for any airline.
This thesis study focuses on an adapted version of the heuristic LMSP approach (SLMSP).
The sequential, heuristics approach replicates the manual line maintenance planning pro-
cedure used by maintenance schedulers of a study airline. The manual procedure in-
volves prioritizing jobs based on deadlines and importance, allocating them in a specific
order, and estimating resource capacity to create feasible solutions. The first phase of the
process produces an initial solution, and the second phase involves manual fine-tuning to
ensure resource availability and accommodate unscheduled jobs. However, the manual
procedure heavily depends on unpredictable factors such as professional experience of a
maintenance planner, whereas the sequential two-step procedure of the LMSP approach
by Shaukat et al. (2020) aims to optimize this process and increase efficiency. This is
illustrated in fig. 3.2, where the differences between the manual and optimized LMSP
procedures are highlighted.
Differences and similarities of the developed RL-enhanced LMSP method from the orig-
18
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: Manual and optimized LMSP process to improve the scheduling quality and
reduce time to solution.
inal model defined by Shaukat et al. (2020) along with relevant model assumptions are
elaborated further in chapter 4. Additionally, this thesis project utilizes the same schedule
instance scenario data as Shaukat et al. (2020) for model input data (see chapter 5) and
facilitating the experimental study, which is further addressed in chapter 7.
Mathematical formulation of the LMSP
Following, the mixed integer programming (MIP) formulation of the LMSP as developed
by Shaukat et al. (2020) is presented.
The MIP formulation utilizes the following sets and parameters:
Sets:
O: Mandatory jobs.
N: Non-mandatory jobs.
J: Set of all jobs (i.e., J = O ∪N).
P: Set of airports (or maintenance bases), not including fictitious airport p = 0.
F: Set of aircraft.
M: Maintenance opportunities.
Mi: Maintenance opportunities for job i, including a fictitious one when i ∈N.
Mip: Maintenance opportunities for job i taking place at airport p.
K: Types of resources consumed during maintenance jobs.
Parameters:
ai: Cost per unit of earliness for job i.
bi: Cost per unit of tardiness for job i.
ci: Cost for postponing a non-mandatory job i.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
19
==PAGE:28==
Di: Deadline of job i.
Ci: Due time of job i.
Qi: Release time of job i.
Ti: Processing time of job i.
rk
i : Quantity of resource k consumed by job i.
Rk
p: Quantity of resource k available at airport p.
lm: Starting time of maintenance opportunity m.
um: Finishing time of maintenance opportunity m.
tim: Utilization of the aircraft on which mandatory job i must be performed, when
arriving at maintenance opportunity m.
L: Duration of the planning horizon.
ε: Tolerance value used in strict inequalities.
Additionally, a set of variables is presented below. The first two variables are utilized to
facilitate the two-step scheduling process. Firstly, where to allocate a job including the
possibility for postponement, and secondly when to start the job execution. Further, the
list includes auxiliary variables which help to simplify the model formulation.
Variables:
xim: binary, indicates if job i is executed during maintenance opportunity m ∈Mi.
si: instant when job i starts.
ei: instant when job i finishes.
yi: earliness of job i.
zi: tardiness of job i.
wp
i : binary, indicates if job i is executed at airport p.
Aij: binary, indicates if job j begins before job i starts, i.e., if sj ≤si.
Bij: binary, indicates if job j finishes after job i starts, i.e., if si < ej.
Gij : binary, indicates if job j is being executed when job i starts, i.e., if sj ≤si < ej.
F p
ij : binary, indicates if jobs i and j are both carried out at airport p.
Hp
ij : binary, indicates if job j is being executed when job i starts and both jobs are
carried out at airport p.
The LMSP is formulated as a MIP problem, where the objective function 3.1 aims to mini-
mize the sum of earliness and tardiness of mandatory jobs, which corresponds to the total
deviation of a solution, in addition to the cost of leaving non-mandatory jobs unscheduled:
min
!
i∈O
(aiyi + bizi) +
!
i∈N
cixim0
i
(3.1)
The following constraints define a feasible solution of the problem:
!
m∈Mi
xim = 1,
∀i ∈J
(3.2)
20
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:29==
zi −yi =
!
m∈Mi
(ximtim −Ci) ,
∀i ∈O,
(3.3)
!
m∈Mi
ximtim ≥Qi,
∀i ∈O,
(3.4)
ximtim ≤Di,
∀i ∈O, m ∈Mi,
(3.5)
si + Ti = ei,
∀i ∈J,
(3.6)
!
m∈Mi
ximlm ≤si,
∀i ∈J,
(3.7)
ei ≤
!
m∈Mi
ximum,
∀i ∈J,
(3.8)
!
m∈Mip
xim = wp
i ,
∀i ∈J, p ∈P,
(3.9)
!
j∈J,j̸=i
Hp
ijrk
j + wp
i rk
i ≤Rkp,
∀i ∈J, k ∈K, p ∈P
(3.10)
si −sj ≤L · Aij −ε,
∀i ∈J, j ∈J, j ̸= i
(3.11)
ej −si ≤L · Bij,
∀i ∈J, j ∈J, j ̸= i
(3.12)
Gij ≥Aij + Bij −1,
∀i ∈J, j ∈J, j ̸= i
(3.13)
F p
ij ≥wp
i + wp
j −1,
∀i ∈J, j ∈J, j ̸= i, p ∈P
(3.14)
Hp
ij ≥F p
ij + Gij −1,
∀i ∈J, j ∈J, j ̸= i, p ∈P
(3.15)
si, ei, yi, zi ≥0,
∀i ∈J,
(3.16)
wp
i , xim, Aij, Bij, Gij, F p
ij, Hp
ij ∈{0, 1},
∀i ∈J, j ∈J, p ∈P, m ∈M
(3.17)
The initial four constraints in the model focus on job assignment to maintenance oppor-
tunities. Equation 3.2 ensures that each job is assigned to a maintenance opportunity,
even if it is a fictitious one to hold unassigned jobs. Expression 3.3 calculates earliness
or tardiness for mandatory maintenance jobs.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
21
==PAGE:30==
Constraints 3.4 and 3.5 guarantee that mandatory jobs are scheduled within the timeframe
between their release time and deadline. Constraints 3.6 to 3.15 address the timetabling
problem, which determines the exact starting time of jobs within their respective mainte-
nance slot. Expression 3.6 connects the starting and ending times of jobs. Constraints
3.7 and 3.8 ensure that jobs start and end within the designated duration of the allocated
maintenance opportunity. Expression 3.9 defines the specific airport or maintenance base
where a job is carried out.
Constraints 3.10 to 3.15 ensure that the operational schedule remains feasible in terms of
resource utilization at any airport throughout the planning horizon. Expression 3.10 ver-
ifies that resource consumption does not exceed capacity whenever a new job i begins
at an airport. This calculation involves adding up the resources consumed by job i, along
with the resource consumption of overlapping jobs j at that moment. The set of over-
lapping jobs is represented by the auxiliary variable Hp
ij, which is constructed using ex-
pressions 3.11 to 3.15.The remaining constraints 3.16 and 3.17 specify the non-negative
and/or binary nature of each variable involved in the model.
3.2.2
Optimization applied to airline scheduling
The airline industry has a rich history of employing optimization techniques and operations
research to address airline planning challenges (Barnhart et al., 2003). Levin (1971) in-
troduce an integer linear programming approach for fleet scheduling and aircraft routing,
utilizing exact optimization methods like branch and bound to find optimal solutions to
real-world problems. Feo and Bard (1989) apply a column generation method, provid-
ing flight schedules that met the cyclic aircraft maintenance requirements. For three-day
maintenance checks and balance-checks (referred to as quarter C-checks), Gopalan and
Talluri (1998) develop a fast and simple algorithm for aircraft routing, considering night-
shift maintenance and conducting work at a single aircraft maintenance base. Sriram
and Haghani (2003) propose a hybrid heuristic to solve large-scale integer programming
problems for aircraft re-assignment and maintenance scheduling. Combining random
and depth-first searches to tackle aircraft re-assignment and maintenance scheduling,
the method is able to handle complexities arising from fleet heterogeneity and cyclic con-
straints. Though focusing on domestic services and the planning of smaller A- and B-
maintenance checks, this study extends Feo and Bard (1989)’s work.
An operational optimisation strategy for scheduling line maintenance in the form of a
decision-support tool (DSS) is introduced by Papakostas et al. (2010). The structure en-
ables an accurate representation of an airline’s maintenance strategy through the appli-
cation of criteria weights, assessing numerous operational aspects such as aircraft health
data, maintenance records, available resources, and maintenance expenses. The DSS
generates a range of viable maintenance plans for decision-makers, guided by consider-
ations such as cost, flight punctuality, and remaining useful life. This study addresses the
reactive approach typically seen in airline operations for handling unplanned maintenance
events. The proposed framework aims to shift towards a proactive approach, empowering
aircraft operators to address potential unscheduled maintenance issues early. Callewaert
et al. (2018) introduce another DSS, which incorporates dynamic work progress data to
generate alternate plans using heuristics when maintenance tasks deviated from their
schedules. Finally, the study reveals that this framework optimizes maintenance plan-
ning, potentially leading to cost reductions of 45% to 90%.
A dynamic perspective on the LMSP is presented by Lagos et al. (2020), who integrate
aircraft maintenance scheduling with tail assignments. The proposed model is based on
the Markov Decision Process (MDP), a mathematical framework for sequential decision-
22
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:31==
making. The MDP selects a daily set of aircraft and tasks, aiming to minimize expected
long-term costs associated with overdue maintenance jobs. The framework strategically
allocates tasks to optimize resource utilization and enhance maintenance capacity usage.
Additionally, the model incorporates flexibility in task process times through the adjust-
ment of resource consumption rates, which helps to increasing the solution’s adaptability.
Furthermore, the approach leverages the potential of resource sharing or outsourcing
among multiple airlines, taking advantage of economies of scale. However, this research
focuses on a simplified scenario involving a single maintenance base.
A dynamic programming (DP) approach to optimize the long-term maintenance check
schedule for a heterogeneous aircraft fleet is presented by Deng et al. (2020). The re-
searchers integrate multiple check types into a single schedule solution. The DP-based
method strives to enhance aircraft availability by reducing the number of maintenance
checks by approximately 7% over a span of four years. When applied to a project part-
ner airline’s fleet of 45 aircraft, this method could result in potential savings of $1.1Mio
to $3.4Mio USD in maintenance expenses. This is coupled with an anticipated addi-
tional revenue due to increased aircraft availability of up to $9.8M. However, it is to note
that the study does not consider the effect of potential disruptions in aircraft usage or
unforeseen non-routine tasks that might impact maintenance check durations. A new
approach to solve the task allocation problem (TAP) in aircraft maintenance scheduling
is proposed by Witteman et al. (2021). The TAP aims to assign maintenance tasks to
available maintenance windows, which represents a complex challenge that maintenance
operators need to solve on a daily basis. The proposed method builds upon the mainte-
nance scheduling DP approach introduced by Deng et al. (2020). It defines the problem
as a time-constrained variable-sized bin packing problem (TC-VS-BPP) and employs a
worst-fit decreasing algorithm for efficient solutions. The approach’s effectiveness is con-
firmed through an experimental study using maintenance data for a diverse 45-aircraft
fleet sourced from a project partner airline. The results demonstrate a performance gain
of over 30% in terms of efficiency compared to the previous method, with an optimal-
ity gap below 3% in most cases. Subsequently, the DP-based scheduling method and
task allocation approach are combined into a DSS by Deng et al. (2021). This DSS en-
ables maintenance planners to initially create an optimized long-term aircraft maintenance
schedule, followed by assigning specific tasks to each maintenance check using the de-
veloped task allocation method. Finally, the DSS facilitates efficient shift planning based
on the allocated task sequence. The introduced DSS uniquely integrates maintenance
check planning, task allocation, and workforce planning into a single solution, providing
significant insights to both scientific research and practical industry application.
3.3
Reinforcement learning in airline scheduling
This section initially introduces the concept of reinforcement learning (RL) and the impor-
tance of integrating simulation to facilitate RL training. This is followed by establishing the
relevance of applying RL within the context of this thesis project and clarifying the chosen
RL platform. Further, a broader overview on academical studies applying RL to airline
scheduling and other industries is provided.
3.3.1
Principles of reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is an agent-based machine learning method that utilizes trial
and error to find a policy that maximizes the cumulative reward. The agent interacts with
its environment by taking sequential decisions, aiming to determine the optimal action to
take in a given state st. When the agent takes action at, it observes the reward rt and
the next state st+1. Based on the received reward, the agent evaluates the quality of the
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
23
==PAGE:32==
action taken. Often, actions taken by an agent can impact not only immediate rewards but
also the subsequent state, thus influencing all future rewards. These two characteristics,
trial-and-error search and delayed reward, are considered the two most distinguishing
features of reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
Figure 3.3: Framework of the reinforcement learning environment according to (Lee et al.,
2022).
The agent’s interactions with the environment are illustrated in fig. 3.3. In this thesis
project, the agent represents the maintenance controller, who takes decisions by allocat-
ing maintenance tasks to available maintenance time slots. The environment corresponds
to the maintenance scheduling system, which provides information including aircraft main-
tenance tasks, the flight schedule, maintenance bases, and available resources.
The policy defines an agent’s behavior in a given situation. Sutton and Barto (2018)
present a policy as a function that maps states to probabilities of each action, denoted by
π(a|s). The action-value function qπ(s, a) estimates the expected return of taking action a
in state s, following the policy π. In the context of this thesis project, a scheduling policy
represents a specific scheduling method which records a reward indicating how effective
this policy scheduled maintenance jobs to opportunities.
To maximize reward, a reinforcement learning agent must favor actions that have pre-
viously proven to be effective. However, to discover new effective actions, the agent
must explore and try actions it hasn’t selected before. Therefore, training a RL model re-
quires to balance between exploiting current knowledge and exploring uncharted territory
to discover the best policy for taking actions that yield maximum benefits. This trade-off
between exploration and exploitation is known as the exploration-exploitation dilemma
(Sutton & Barto, 2018).
In order to learn a policy that maximizes the total reward, reinforcement learning requires
a very high number of trial-and-error interactions between an agent and its environment.
Simulation environments are a cost-effective and time-efficient way to facilitate these high
numbers of trial-and-error search iterations as illustrated in fig. 3.3. As a result, simulation
environments form a crucial component of any RL project as they enable training of an
RL agent without the need of direct physical interaction with its surrounding environment
(Glockner, 2018).
The importance of integrating simulation environments in reinforcement learning is un-
derscored by Osiński et al. (2020). The study describes that simulation often helps to
overcome safety limitations of training RL agents on simulating real-world situations. Ad-
ditionally, it is emphasized that reinforcement learning enables training with minimal hu-
man intervention, resulting in decreased engineering requirements. Lastly, Osiński et al.
24
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:33==
(2020) underscore the importance of ensuring high-quality simulation environments to
achieve transferable policies.
Finally, multiple versions of reinforcement learning methods exist. Deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) refers to a more sophisticated technique of RL which incorporates neural
networks to reinforcement learning (Pathmind, 2023). With the help of neural networks,
the reinforcement learning algorithm is enabled to take advantage of neural network’s abil-
ity to approximate functions and learn representations with great accuracy and efficiency
(Arulkumaran et al., 2017). By incorporating neural networks to reinforcement learning,
DRL can handle high-dimensional state and action spaces, making it suitable for complex
tasks such as airline scheduling, playing video games, robotics, and autonomous driving
as further outlined in section 3.3.3 and section 3.3.4.
3.3.2
Reinforcement learning platform
In practice, cloud-based and distributed simulation platforms have proven to be the most
efficient means of accessing simulation environments for RL. Leveraging cloud-based
simulation platforms allows the parallel execution of thousands of simulations, significantly
reducing the RL training time (Google Research, 2021). Numerous cloud-based RL train-
ing platforms are available, predominantly as open-source platforms based on Python
(Prathamesh, 2022). Popular RL training platforms include OpenAI Gym, Deepmind Lab,
OpenSpiel, Google’s Dopamine, and Facebook’s ReAgent. At the example of OpenAI
Gym, a flexible RL training platform is provided that allows to build custom simulation
environments, along with a selection of reference simulation environments specifically
designed for common RL problems. These include game simulations (e.g., Atari or Al-
phaGo), control problems like pole balancing for a cart, and optimization challenges such
as rocket trajectory optimization (Brockman et al., 2016; OpenAI Gym, 2023).
Microsoft offers Project Bonsai, a low-code RL platform which enables the integration
of simulation models from popular providers such as AnyLogic, FlexSim, and Simulink.
This platform facilitates cloud-based reinforcement learning (RL) training. Project Bon-
sai utilizes its own programming language called ”Inkling”. Inkling resembles the Python
programming language and allows a user to define a reinforcement learning training cur-
riculum in combination with an interactive, low-code visual interface. This empowers RL
practitioners with limited coding experience to effectively translate their RL project goals
into the platform (Project Bonsai, 2023). The AnyLogic simulation software offers an in-
tegrated RL Experiment feature that connects local simulation models to the cloud-based
Project Bonsai platform (AnyLogic, 2022). Project Bonsai is available as a Microsoft Azure
service, allowing trained RL algorithms to be deployed as web applications. The integra-
tion of Project Bonsai with AnyLogic simplifies the process of accessing RL web appli-
cations for conducting simulation experiments and evaluating the performance of trained
RL algorithms. Furthermore, Microsoft Azure offers cost considerations for university stu-
dents, providing free access to the platform and a $100 USD credit for cloud computing
activities, including RL training using Project Bonsai (Microsoft, n.d.).
In the context of this thesis project, the line maintenance scheduling system environment
is facilitated by a hybrid simulation model. Taking advantage of the underlined benefits
of ABS and DES as outlined in section 3.1.1, the simulation model powers the state-
action framework of the reinforcement learning as illustrated in fig. 3.3. A comprehensive
visualization of the interaction between the simulation model and the RL environment is
illustrated in fig. 4.2.
Choosing a suitable RL environment depends on multiple factors such as the problem use
case to be solved, and the preferred programming language or software to be connected
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
25
==PAGE:34==
to the environment. Microsoft Project Bonsai is chosen as the preferred RL platform for
this thesis project due to its low-code environment, seamless integration with AnyLogic,
and minimal financial investment required. What especially sets Project Bonsai apart
from other RL platforms is the integration to AnyLogic and its low-code environment. This
empowers a user with limited coding experience to swiftly train, deploy and assess the ef-
fectiveness of a reinforcement learning project. Additionally, UNSW has a working history
with Microsoft Project Bonsai (Microsoft, 2020). However, in comparison to Python-based
RL frameworks, Project Bonsai’s level of customization for the RL environment is limited
due to its low-code environment. As such, a limitation of Bonsai is that it only allows
reading states and taking action within the top-level agent of the simulation model, which
could potentially hold back the benefits of an agent-based simulation model (AnyLogic,
2020). Furthermore, as of August 2023, Microsoft’s Project Bonsai is still in the develop-
ment stage and lacks of maturity in comparison to Python-based alternatives. Overall, the
benefits of Project Bonsai aligns best with the project’s scope, time constraints, and cost
considerations and outweigh the limitations of lower customization and product maturity.
3.3.3
Reinforcement learning applied to airline scheduling
Andrade et al. (2021) integrate a RL approach built upon the DP approach previously intro-
duced by Deng et al. (2020) for long-term maintenance check scheduling. The objective
of this research is to assess whether the RL approach can optimize the utilization of flight
hours between resource-intensive heavy maintenance checks. The RL-based method’s
proposed count of scheduled maintenance checks is then compared to the scheduling
outcomes obtained through the DP-based approach. By employing a deep reinforcement
learning method, the study achieves promising scheduling outcomes in comparison to the
DP approach, resulting in a reduced count of scheduled checks over a four-year period.
Hu et al. (2021) introduce an innovative maintenance planning approach that utilizes a
deep reinforcement learning methodology. Conventional aircraft maintenance strategies
encompass a mix of corrective, scheduled, prognostic, and health management tech-
niques. The implemented algorithm seeks to establish a novel data-driven maintenance
strategy that accounts for uncertainties and complexities within the existing operational
context. This novel maintenance strategy adjusts current flight schedules based on fac-
tors such as aircraft health, failure rates, repair expenses, and mission requirements. As
a result, the applied RL-based approach enables a more agile decision support for main-
tenance controllers. The authors suggest that this approach could potentially to replace
maintenance strategies currently employed in the industry. Nonetheless, it is vital to con-
sider that the methodology designed by Hu et al. (2021) is tailored to a single aircraft.
Therefore, further research could extend the model’s scope to encompass multiple air-
craft within a diverse fleet, while addressing challenges linked to flight scheduling, fleet
assignment, crew allocation, and maintenance routing problems.
While Hu et al. (2021) and Andrade et al. (2021) apply RL to aircraft maintenance planning,
Lee et al. (2022) present a deep reinforcement learning algorithm to tackle the aircraft re-
covery problem. The framework aims to support decision makers at an airline’s OCC
during operational disruptions by complementing existing, optimization-based decision
support tools. The RL approach takes factors such as minimum turn-around time, flight
connections, and aircraft balance into account to model the problem as a sequential MDP
utilizing a reward function that guides the scheduling agent’s behavior. The framework
distinguishes itself from earlier investigations by three characteristics: Firstly, the RL ap-
proach allows for the re-timing of specific flights and swapping of aircraft without requiring
duplication of flight arcs. Secondly, the RL agent can flexibly adapt to various objectives
utilizing several reward functions. This could allow the decision maker to find the most
26
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:35==
suitable solution tailored to current operational needs. For example, an operations con-
troller might seek a schedule recovery solution with the objective to minimize flight delays,
or minimize passenger missing a connecting flight, or reassigning a flight rotation due to
crew shortage at a specific fleet type. Lastly, as RL algorithms are coupled to simula-
tion environments, a broad range of real-world scenarios can be managed without heavy
dependence on mathematical models. The RL method is tested using a South Korean
airline’s domestic flight schedule of 94 flights and 20 aircraft across six airports, evaluating
10 proposed scenarios for airport closures. Despite not considering aircraft maintenance
constraints, the RL method delivers promising results and outperforms other methods in
terms of computation time.
Lee et al. (2022) recommend to enhance the developed multi-fleet aircraft recovery so-
lution in three steps: Firstly, the current model is tailored to provide decision support
regarding airport closures affecting the airline’s operations. A general policy for various
airline disruptions should be derived by redefining states and actions and utilizing suitable
functions to approximate the action-value function, in example by applying a neural net-
work method. This could allow the RL approach to learn a policy applicable to a broader
range of operational disruption instances, such as aircraft unavailability, flight delays, crew
limitations and passenger delays. Secondly, the reward functions should be revised to
prevent unnecessary swapping of aircraft. The current method causes unnecessary oper-
ational disturbances reassigning routes to aircraft, which triggers resource-intensive crew
duty changes that add to non-operational costs. Lastly, the proposed approach could
be extended to include additional operational aspects such as the recovery of aircraft,
crews, and passengers by developing an advanced artificial environment to incorporate
the complex operations of these resources.
3.3.4
Reinforcement learning in other industries
Reinforcement learning has a wide range of applications. An important test bed for the de-
velopment of RL methods build board games. TD-Gammon, a program created by Gerald
Tesauro, achieves near-grandmaster level in backgammon despite minimal prior knowl-
edge of the game (Tesauro et al., 1995). More prominently, AlphaGo and its successor
program AlphaGo Zero, demonstrate the potential of artificial intelligence and especially
RL to solve complex problems by mastering the game of Go surpassing human perfor-
mance. While AlphaGo relies on both RL and supervised learning from a large database
of expert human moves, AlphaGo Zero solely relies on RL and no human data or guidance
beyond the basic rules of the game (Silver et al., 2017).
Robotics serves as a critical platform for the integration of emerging technologies into the
advancement of AI solutions, with RL often finding practical use (Y. Li, 2018). Kober et al.
(2013) introduces various applications of RL such as learning helicopter flight, guiding
a radio-controlled vehicle, and teaching a robotic dog to perform jumping actions. It is
further emphasized that challenges in RL applied to robotics remain in designing effective
reward functions, dealing with exploration-exploitation trade-offs, and ensuring safe and
stable learning in physical systems.
RL is a vital part in the advancement of natural language processing, which describes a
machine learning technique processing textual and speech input data. Natural language
processing is crucial in the development of large language models (LLM), which are capa-
ble to predict the next word or word sequence leveraging text training data (DeepLearn-
ing.AI, 2023). The large language model ChatGPT is optimized for dialogue with a user
using RL with Human Feedback (RLHF). This instruction-tuned method guides the RL
model toward desired behavior by using human demonstrations and preference compar-
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
27
==PAGE:36==
isons (OpenAI, 2023).
RL is also incorporated to create value in business applications. Web services utilizing
RL algorithms can personalize content delivery to increase user satisfaction or marketing
campaign yield (Sutton & Barto, 2018). At the example of Li et al. (2010), RL is used
for personalized news article recommendation. The study trained an algorithm to select
articles for users based on contextual information by taking a user’s browsing history and
article categories into account. The algorithm uses user feedback to enhance the learned
policy with the objective to maximize total user clicks. Jiang et al. (2017) introduce an
extensible RL framework solving the general financial portfolio management problem.
The authors demonstrate the strength of the RL-enhanced method by benchmarking the
framework in a cryptocurrency market in comparison to other trading algorithms. The pre-
sented RL method achieved at least four-fold returns in 50 days outperforming competing
trading algorithms.
Intelligent transportation is another field of successfully applying RL. Sallab et al. (2016)
apply RL to develop lane-keeping assistance methods for autonomous driving by feeding
raw sensory data as input to learn the policy. The field of applying DRL to autonomous
driving challenges researchers with factors such as the gap between simulation and reality
to accurately train agents and incorporating safety into decision making RL systems for
autonomous agents (Kiran et al., 2021).
28
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:37==
4
Modeling
This chapter will concentrate on the first phase of the general methodology for applying
simulation to problem solving as introduced in section 3.1.2. This stage involves clarify-
ing the problem and the system to establish a shared understanding of the study’s ex-
tent. Additionally, the project’s objectives will be determined by establishing performance
metrics. Finally, a conceptual model of the system will be showcased, accompanied by
documented assumptions regarding the model.
4.1
Defining the problem
The costs and planning involved in aircraft maintenance pose challenges for airlines.
Therefore, airlines have a strong interest in exploring ways to decrease maintenance
expenses while ensuring the safety of passengers and the airworthiness of their fleet.
Optimizing an airline’s planning process may contribute to more efficient, cost-effective
and safer airline operations. To help airlines address this challenge, previous research
conducted by Shaukat et al. (2020) provide optimization methods to tackle the aircraft line
maintenance scheduling problem.
The objective of this thesis project is to investigate how simulation and reinforcement
learning can be utilized to solve the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem, inspired
upon the previously published heuristic scheduling method by Shaukat et al. (2020). Sim-
ulation is an integral part of any reinforcement learning project, as outlined in section 3.3.1.
Therefore, this project encompasses two major components:
1. Designing a simulation model prototype which accurately replicates a line mainte-
nance scheduling system.
2. Extending the simulation model to establish a connection with a RL platform. This
expansion involves designing an RL curriculum and subsequently training and de-
ploying a novel RL-enhanced method for line maintenance scheduling.
This combined simulation and reinforcement learning study aims to achieve the following
overall objectives:
• Examine the effect of applying different scheduling policies on a maintenance sched-
ule’s objective function value.
• Investigate the scheduling performance of RL-enhanced methods on a set of varying
test schedule instances.
• Examine how RL-enhanced methods perform in comparison to previously published
LMSP solutions.
4.2
Defining the system
In accordance with the general simulation methodology, the subsequent stage of the first
phase involves to establish the system. Previously, chapter 2 assigned the line main-
tenance scheduling problem (LMSP) to the job scheduling phase, which is considered
a sub-problem of the aircraft routing problem within the typical sequential airline plan-
ning process. This is shown in fig. 4.1, which illustrates the airline planning process from
a system’s perspective. The airline planning process forms the airline planning system
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.1: Line maintenance scheduling system including it’s system boundary and con-
nections within the airline planning system.
and includes the aircraft routing system and its sub-problems. The job scheduling sub-
problem consists of two sub-systems: the long-term job scheduling component, which
handles maintenance job scheduling strategically, and the line maintenance scheduling
system, which focuses on tactical scheduling of maintenance tasks. This thesis project’s
system boundary is defined by the line maintenance scheduling system. The job schedul-
ing sub-system is dependent to the previous tail assignment component, as well as sub-
sequent workforce and material planning sub-systems. Additionally, the aircraft mainte-
nance framework provides maintenance-specific information to the aircraft routing sub-
system, including regulatory and airline-specific maintenance procedures and a pool of
current maintenance tasks.
Based on the problem definition outlined in the previous section, the objective of this
thesis study is to tackle the line maintenance scheduling problem by employing simulation
and reinforcement learning techniques. Hence, the line maintenance scheduling problem
forms two sub-systems:
1. A simulation sub-system replicating a line maintenance scheduling system of an
airline.
2. A reinforcement learning sub-system which solves the optimization problem of the
LMSP using reinforcement learning.
The line maintenance scheduling system with its two-component architecture along sys-
tem input and output information is visualized in fig. 4.2. The system receives input in-
formation from three primary sources: maintenance jobs from the aircraft maintenance
framework, maintenance opportunities based on the flight schedule from the previous tail
assignment phase, and airport workforce capacities from the subsequent workforce plan-
ning sub-system. The line maintenance scheduling system generates an RL-enhanced
line maintenance schedule, which can be incorporated into the day-to-day line mainte-
30
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: System overview of the Line Maintenance Scheduling System including the
input and output information, the two sub-systems and its two interactive processes.
nance operations of an airline.
The simulation and reinforcement learning sub-system are interconnected and collabora-
tively build the RL environment framework as illustrated in fig. 3.3 to tackle the line mainte-
nance scheduling problem. Both sub-systems are interconnected by two major processes
as illustrated in fig. 4.2: Firstly, an iterative training process as illustrated in fig. 4.4 which
aims to learn and store the best line maintenance scheduling policy. The training process
solves the optimization problem of the LMSP facilitated by the iterative trial-and-error pro-
cedure between an RL and simulation environment as presented in section 3.3.1. The
second process describes the application of RL-enhanced line maintenance scheduling
as illustrated in fig. 4.5 by utilizing the memorized scheduling policy obtained by the pre-
vious iterative training process.
This thesis project differs from a typical simulation study by outsourcing the optimization
problem of the line maintenance scheduling system from its simulation component. In-
stead, the optimization problem is integrated and solved by the RL sub-system utilizing
reinforcement learning. The sub-systems and interactive processes are described in more
detail in the following section.
4.2.1
Simulation sub-system
The simulation system replicates the line maintenance scheduling system in the form
of a mixed-method simulation model using the simulation software AnyLogic. The key
objective of the simulation environment is to incorporates a set of rules to conduct line
maintenance scheduling, inspired by real-world airline practices built upon the heuristics-
based, sequential LMSP approach developed by Shaukat et al. (2020). The following
section clarifies how the simulation model conducts line maintenance scheduling.
As introduced in section 3.2.1 and visualized in fig. 4.3, the line maintenance scheduling
system uses deterministic input data for maintenance jobs, opportunities, and available
workforce resources. Input data undergoes a pre-processing step which changes the
sorting within the data set, further referred to as the sorting policy. This is followed by a
two-step decision-making process involving job assignments and timetable design. The
processing phase creates the line maintenance system’s output, which is the line main-
tenance schedule consisting of a set of performance metrics defined in section 4.3.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Process overview for the two-step scheduling procedure of the line mainte-
nance scheduling problem (LMSP).
Initially, the flow of agents within the simulation model is clarified. As previously intro-
duced, the simulation model is designed as a hybrid simulation model combining elements
of agent-based simulation and discrete-event simulation. In the ABS component, three
types of agents (Job, Opportunity, and Resource) are created along with their respective
populations. The DES component is based on the process-oriented LMSP, utilizing a two-
step scheduling procedure to allocate maintenance jobs to maintenance opportunities as
illustrated in fig. 4.3.
The flow of job agents in the simulation model involves a sequential process. Job agents
enter the system one-by-one, get paired with opportunity agents, and exit the model upon
pairing. The pairing logic adopts the methodology outlined by Shaukat et al. (2020), in
which each job agent is paired with an opportunity agent. In cases where a job agent is un-
able to find a suitable opportunity, it is assigned to a hypothetical maintenance opportunity
specifically created to accommodate unassigned jobs. In contrast, all opportunity and re-
source agents enter the system simultaneously and remain present until all maintenance
jobs are scheduled, without flow restrictions. Upon scheduling of all jobs, opportunity
and resource agents exit the system. For a more comprehensive understanding of the
simulation model’s concept including a flow chart is provided in section 4.4.
After establishing the flow of agents in the simulation model, the initial job and opportunity
input data undergo pre-processing using specific sorting policies for each dataset. The
simulation model’s schedule output processed in the subsequent two-step scheduling
process depends on the selected sorting policy used during the pre-processing stage.
Additionally, the RL sub-system will actively adjust the sorting policies which is described
in more detail in section 4.2.3.
The pre-processing consists of 18 job sorting policies and 22 opportunity sorting policies at
the first level. The job sorting policies involve 9 sorting priorities in both ascending and de-
scending order, such as job process duration, job deadline, or job resource requirement:
9 x 2 = 18 job sorting policies. Similarly, the maintenance opportunity sorting policies
consist of 11 sorting priorities in ascending and descending order: 11 x 2 = 22 opportunity
sorting policies (e.g., sorted by starting time, duration, or available resource capacity).
This yields a total of 396 (18 x 22) possible choices for first-level sorting policies. Further
information on how these sorting policies are utilized and how the RL algorithm learns the
most effective scheduling policy can be found in section 4.2.3. Two example combina-
32
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:41==
tions of policies available to the subsequent iterative RL training process are provided as
follows:
• Policy A: Sort jobs ascending to job deadline and match to opportunities ordered by
ascending opportunity starting time.
• Policy B: Sort jobs descending to job duration and match to opportunities sorted by
descending aircraft use measured in flight hours.
The selection of sorting policies is guided by the structure of model input data, which is
further elaborated in chapter 5. A comprehensive list of available sorting policies can be
found in appendix C.
The method of employing sorting policies to influence the scheduling outcome in collabo-
ration with reinforcement learning is chosen due to it’s simplicity in terms of implementation
and limitations of the selected RL platform. Referring to section 3.3.2, the Project Bonsai
platform can only interact with the top-level agent of a simulation model, e.g. the level
”main” in AnyLogic. In the scope of this project, Bonsai could not directly interact with
the implemented multi-agent structure of the simulation model consisting of jobs, oppor-
tunities and resources. However, to circumnavigate this limitation, a practical approach
is chosen for applying sorting policies to influence information inside lower-level agent
population instructed from a simulation model’s top-level agent, as elaborated in more
detail in chapter 6. There are more advanced methods available to influence scheduling
outcomes using RL. However, these methods require a more flexible RL platform that can
interact with a simulation environment beyond just the top-level agent.
Following, the two-step procedure of the LMSP is elaborated as introduced in section 3.2.1,
while section 6.1 provides more details regarding its implementation in the simulation
model:
1. The job assignment stage prioritizes mandatory jobs and assigns them to mainte-
nance opportunities in a greedy manner based on their deadlines, while considering
capacity constraints. The job-opportunity pairing feasibility conditions include:
• the aircraft on which a job is to be conducted must be equal to the defined
aircraft of an opportunity
• a job’s deadline must be greater than or equal to the aircraft use at the starting
time of an opportunity
• a job’s process time must be less or equal to an opportunities duration
• a job’s workforce resource requirement must be at or below the remaining re-
source capacity at the airport where the opportunity is located at, for the job’s
process duration
2. During the timetabling stage, the assigned jobs are examined to create a feasible
timetable that takes into account workforce capacity limitations within specific time
intervals (e.g., every 6 minutes) at each airport or maintenance base. This involves
identifying any instances where resource capacity is exceeded and attempting to
reschedule the affected jobs to restore feasibility. The algorithm first tries to resched-
ule the job within its existing maintenance opportunity at a later starting time, and
if that is not possible, it looks for the closest available maintenance opportunity to
accommodate the job.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
33
==PAGE:42==
A more detailed description of the model constraints including a mathematical formula-
tion of the LMSP as a mixed-integer problem by Shaukat et al. (2020) is available in
section 3.2.1.
It is noted that the timetabling algorithm in this project uses a bin structure allowing micro-
timetabling of maintenance jobs to ensure resource capacity is not exceeded within pre-
determined time intervals for each maintenance opportunity. In the context of this thesis
project, the bin structure interval is designed by ten bins per hour, i.e. 6 minutes for each
bin. The micro-timetabling structure aims to set the starting time of a maintenance job as
early as feasible within its allocated time slot. From this perspective, the mathematical
formulation in Shaukat et al. (2020) is more restricted in terms of job timetabling than the
implemented bin structure. The implementation of the bin structure is further described in
section 6.1.
Finally, the simulation model replicating the line maintenance scheduling system requires
preparation for conducting reinforcement learning. The following section summarizes nec-
essary adaptions in the simulation model tailored to create an RL-ready simulation model,
while the subsequent section 4.2.2 elaborates how the simulation model is utilized to train
and deploy an RL-enhanced line maintenance scheduling method.
The AnyLogic simulation software includes the reinforcement learning experiment which
is tailored for integrating an RL-ready AnyLogic model to the Project Bonsai platform. In
order to prepare a model for reinforcement learning, a simulation model needs to meet
specific requirements (AnyLogic, 2023):
• The model has an adjustable configuration as the initial state of each simulation run.
• The model is able to send its current state to the RL environment.
• The model can implement the action the RL environment decides to perform.
Additionally, it is important implement a function to specify decision points that prompt
the RL environment to start the trial-and-error procedure. These decision points can be
associated with events that occur at regular time intervals or with triggers that happen
during the model run, e.g., via condition-based events or statechart transitions. Lastly, it
is crucial to highlight that these requirements must be incorporated into the top-level agent
of a simulation model, as the Bonsai platform cannot retrieve information otherwise.
The next section introduces the RL sub-system in more detail. RL-ready model require-
ments are addressed by the iterative training process in section 4.2.3 and implementation-
related details can be found in chapter 6.
4.2.2
Reinforcement learning sub-system
The reinforcement learning system’s objective is to facilitate the training and deployment
of an RL-enhanced LMSP method. As introduced in section 3.3.1, reinforcement learn-
ing is an agent-based machine learning method that interacts with an environment taking
sequential decisions utilizing a trial-and-error procedure. In the context of this project, the
goal of the RL sub-system is to learn and memorize the best way on how to schedule
line maintenance jobs. This addresses the optimization problem of this study by learn-
ing the most effective scheduling policy from a pool of 396 job and opportunity sorting
policies. The RL system is incorporated using the Microsoft Project Bonsai AI platform,
which enables the training of RL agents using deep reinforcement learning as previously
introduced in section 3.3.2.
The following sections provide a clear description of the two processes within the line
34
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.4: Interaction between the simulation and RL system during the iterative RL
training process.
maintenance scheduling system which enable interactive exchange of information be-
tween the RL- and simulation component. Additionally, the input and output information
of the RL sub-system differs for each process and is clearly explained below.
4.2.3
Iterative RL training process
The iterative training process aims to learn and store the most effective scheduling pol-
icy. By connecting the hybrid simulation model with the reinforcement learning environ-
ment, different scheduling policies are tested, affecting the schedule performance metrics.
Through trial-and-error as outlined in section 3.3.1, the RL sub-system learns the most
effective scheduling policy to solve the line maintenance scheduling problem.
The interaction consists of an eight step process as illustrated in fig. 4.4. The process
is initialized by the simulation sub-system loading input data for jobs, opportunities and
resource capacities. Additionally, the simulation model is initialized by randomly select-
ing a job and opportunity sorting policy from a pool of 396 scheduling policies. Following,
steps two to seven describe the iterative trial-and-error process. In step two, the simula-
tion sub-systems facilitates an endless loop of conducting line maintenance scheduling.
Once a schedule influenced by the sorting policy combination is produced, a set of perfor-
mance metrics are sent as output from the simulation component. This is followed by step
four, where the RL-subsystem reads these metrics as input states. In step five, the RL
sub-system evaluates the produced schedule. This step is guided by a reward function
which guides the RL algorithm along its process to learn the best scheduling policy. In
step six, the RL algorithm takes an action informed by the previous phase, and selects
a new scheduling policy to be sent to the simulation system. Step seven updates the
scheduling policy in the simulation environment according to the action taken by the RL
sub-system. This concludes one iterative state-action-reward loop which is repeated until
the RL agent is fully trained according to the training objective. Finally, step eight stores
the most effective scheduling policy and triggers the termination of the iterative training
process. Project Bonsai refers to a fully trained RL method as a Brain.
Referring back to the RL-ready simulation model requirements as introduced in sec-
tion 4.2.1, the iterative training process addresses the four requirements in the following
steps:
• Step one facilitates an adjustable configuration for the initial state of each simulation
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
35
==PAGE:44==
run by randomly selecting job and opportunity sorting policies.
• Step two triggers the decision point function which informs the RL environment that
a new trial-and-error loop begins every one hour.
• Step four sends performance metrics to the RL subsystem.
• Step seven implements the taken action from the RL sub-system into the simulation
model.
The RL-subsystem includes a learning curriculum incorporated in Project Bonsai that out-
lines the set of states to be read, which actions can be taken, a reward function to assess
the training objective progress along with learning terminal conditions. It is important to
note that except for the first training iteration, schedule performance metrics evaluated
in step five depend on the previous action taken as elaborated in section 3.3.1. Building
upon Sutton and Barto (2018), the RL algorithm prioritizes actions that have been suc-
cessful in the past to maximize the total reward. In the context of this project, the reward
function evaluates the outcome of the last scheduling policy, increasing the reward for
a favorable sorting policy and penalizing for a less favorable one, affecting the overall
accumulated reward.
In Project Bonsai, custom reward functions and terminal conditions can be implemented
or a low-code goal statement can be used, such as minimizing, maximizing, or avoiding
a target value. In this project, a low-code objective is implemented to learn a scheduling
policy that minimizes the objective function value of the resulting schedule solution. The
objective function value is described in more detail in section 4.3. Bonsai uses a goal
satisfaction performance metric, which calculates the average progress in meeting the
training objective as a percentage of the total training iterations. A goal satisfaction rate
of 100% indicates that the Brain has successfully completed the learning curriculum’s
goal, therefore reaching a terminal condition.
Following, key aspects of the implemented RL training curriculum of this project are sum-
marized. A more detailed description of the implemented RL curriculum along with details
to the conducted Brain training in Project Bonsai is provided in section 6.2.
• States: read applied job and opportunity sorting policy during previous action, re-
sulting objective function value, total number of unscheduled jobs
• Actions: select a new job and opportunity sorting policy from nominal action space
of 396 sorting policies
• Reward function: low-code goal to minimize a schedule’s objective function value
• Performance metric: goal satisfaction rate
• Terminal conditions: upon reaching ≥200’000 training iterations; early termination
for ≥25’000 iterations without progress (e.g., goal satisfaction rate leveled off)
The design and structure of the RL curriculum are inspired by a concept introduced by
AnyLogic (2020). The tutorial modifies an agent-based reference simulation model to
incorporate RL-ready elements, providing instructions on configuring the reinforcement
learning experiment and phrasing the problem as Inkling code into the Project Bonsai
platform. Moreover, this tutorial offers insights and ideas for designing an RL procedure
that can address the limitations of Project Bonsai, which is limited to interacting with the
top-level agent of a simulation model. While more advanced methods in designing an RL
36
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.5:
Interaction between the simulation and RL system when applying RL-
enhanced line maintenance scheduling in production.
curriculum are available, they require a more flexible RL platform capable of interacting
with lower-level agents within the simulation environment.
4.2.4
Applying RL-enhanced line maintenance scheduling
This production process describes how the line maintenance scheduling system lever-
ages a fully trained Brain to produce RL-enhanced line maintenance schedules.
The production process follows a seven step procedure as illustrated in fig. 4.5. The initia-
tion of the production process corresponds to the first step of the iterative training process.
In step one, the simulation model loads job, opportunity and resource capacity data and
randomly initializes a job and opportunity sorting policy to pre-process the data input. This
if followed by step two, where the simulation sub-system requests the best scheduling pol-
icy stored by the Brain from the previous training process. The RL-subsystem receives
the request in step three, followed by step four which retrieves the stored scheduling pol-
icy from the Brain and pushes the scheduling policy information back to the simulation
system. In step five, the trained RL scheduling policy is received, pulled into the simu-
lation model which updates the simulation model’s pre-processing configuration. Upon
updating the scheduling policy, the simulation model processes the input data and uti-
lizes the trained scheduling policy to create an RL-enhanced line maintenance schedule.
The production process is finalized by step seven which outputs the RL-enhanced line
maintenance schedule to the user.
The production process is enabled by linking Project Bonsai with the AnyLogic facili-
tated by the simulation software’s reinforcement learning experiment. In this setup, a
fully trained Brain from Bonsai is deployed as a web application on Microsoft Azure. The
reinforcement learning experiment connects the deployed Brain on Azure to the simula-
tion model. The procedure of connecting the platforms is built upon a workflow presented
by AnyLogic (2020), offering a comprehensive tutorial that guides the linking process from
start to finish.
Additionally, the production process plays a role in the experimental study of this project,
which is further explained in chapter 7.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
37
==PAGE:46==
4.3
Establishing performance metrics
The third step in the problem formulation phase of the general simulation methodology
involves defining performance measures for the model. These measures are crucial for
comparing different scenarios and evaluating the system’s performance. The chosen met-
rics should include quantitative statistical measures from the simulation model and from
a systems perspective, and qualitative assessments regarding technical and operational
feasibility. The focus should be on the most important performance measures that align
with the objectives of the simulation study (Rossetti, 2016). A typical framework assisting
the definition of performance metrics is S.M.A.R.T. inspired by Doran et al. (1981), which
allows to specify specific, measurable, attainable, relevant and time-bound performance
metrics.
For this project, a set of performance metrics is chosen that aligns with the key perfor-
mance indicators (KPIs) utilized by Shaukat et al. (2020). Below, three performance met-
rics following the S.M.A.R.T. approach are presented which allow to compare line mainte-
nance scheduling results in terms of effectiveness and efficiency. These KPI are selected
to quantitatively and qualitatively provide insights between the study results and previous
research conducted by the case study project:
• Objective Function Value (O.F.) of a line maintenance schedule.
• O.F. value gap in percentage of a line maintenance schedule.
• Total number of unassigned maintenance jobs in a line maintenance schedule.
• Model runtime in seconds from model start until the line maintenance schedule out-
put is presented to the user.
The first three KPI address the quality of a line maintenance schedule provided by the
RL-enhanced LMSP solution. The last performance indicator draws insights regarding
the efficiency of the provided solution.
The objective function value (O.F.) of the LMSP is determined by a combination of the
weighted sum of earliness and tardiness of mandatory scheduled jobs, plus the cost in-
curred by unscheduled jobs as introduced in section 3.2.1. This performance metric ad-
dresses the quality of a line maintenance schedule and follows the definition provided
by Shaukat et al. (2020). The O.F. definition presented in formula 4.1 and Widmer et al.
(2023) is mathematically equivalent to the objective function defined by Shaukat et al.
(2020). However, there is a difference in how the mandatory and non-mandatory job sets
are treated. In this thesis project, both mandatory and non-mandatory jobs are combined
in a single job set J as outlined in chapter 5. The job categories are distinguished by a
binary identifier mj, while the approach by Shaukat et al. (2020) strictly keeps these job
sets separate throughout the scheduling process (see O.F. definition in section 3.2.1).
min
!
j∈J
mj(ejyj + tjzj) +
!
j∈J
cj(1 −
!
m∈M
xjm)
(4.1)
where,
J: set of all maintenance jobs including mandatory and non-mandatory tasks
M: set of all maintenance opportunities including a fictitious one to accomodate
unassigned jobs
38
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:47==
ej: cost per unit of earliness for of job j.
yj: earliness of job j.
tj: cost per unit of tardiness of job j.
zj: tardiness of job j.
mj: binary, indicates whether job j is mandatory or non-mandatory; mj = 1 defines
that job j is mandatory and must be scheduled.
cj: cost for leaving job j unscheduled.
xjm: binary, indicates if job j is executed during maintenance opportunity m ∈M.
xjm = 1 indicates that job j is scheduled.
If a job fails to find a maintenance opportunity that meets the schedule feasibility crite-
ria clarified earlier, it is marked as unassigned. In such situations, the unassigned job is
then paired with a fictional maintenance opportunity specifically created to accommodate
unassigned jobs. The cost values for earliness, tardiness as well as the cost for unas-
signed jobs are equivalent to the values defined by Shaukat et al. (2020) and outlined in
the documented model assumption in section 4.5.
The second performance metric measures the difference, in terms of percentage, between
the outcomes of two LMSP methods when solving the same schedule scenario. This
metric provides valuable insight into comparing the scheduling quality achieved by this
thesis project with the results of previous research.
The third KPI tracks the total number of unscheduled maintenance jobs when solving a
schedule scenario. This metric assesses the scheduling quality of LMSP method. While
the O.F. value already includes unassigned jobs in formula 4.1, comparing the total num-
ber of unassigned jobs provides a quick and straightforward way to evaluate how the
RL-enhanced method solves the LMSP on specific schedule scenarios.
The last performance metrics measures the model runtime of the simulation model in
seconds. This metric addresses how efficient the hybrid simulation and reinforcement
learning approach solves the LMSP. The model runtime is measured starting from initial-
izing the simulation model and tracks the calculation time in seconds until the schedule
scenario is solved and performance metrics visualized in AnyLogic’s simulation interface.
4.4
Building a conceptual model
Following the general simulation methodology of Rossetti (2016), this section provides a
more detailed model formulation after providing a better understanding of the problem, the
system under investigation along with defined performance metrics. Before implementing
a model using a simulation software, Rossetti (2016) emphasizes the importance to con-
duct model formulation using conceptual modeling tools such as conceptual diagrams,
flow charts, or activity diagrams.
According to Rossetti (2016), an activity diagram illustrates the interaction between an
entity and its resources while within a system. There are two types of activity diagrams:
• Activity flow diagram, which defines the temporary flow of entities.
• Activity cycle diagram, which illustrates if the entity is permanent and remains in the
system.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
39
==PAGE:48==
In addition to the system description in section 4.2, fig. 4.6 visualizes the overall model
flow in the simulation sub-system applicable for both the iterative training process (see
section 4.2.3) and the production process (see section 4.2.4). This diagram combines
elements from activity flow and activity cycle diagrams to illustrate the temporary flow of
job agents and the cyclic flow of opportunity and resource agents. Furthermore, a visual
separation of agents is incorporated which is inspired by swimlane diagrams.
The activity diagram illustrated in fig. 4.6 shows the flow of each agent type on separate
levels, also referred to as swimlanes. Initially, the three agent populations are initialized
from input data. At the example of resource agents, this step involves specifying the re-
source capacity for each resource bin at each airport and trade category for the entire
planning period. After initializing the resource capacity levels, the corresponding capaci-
ties for each opportunity agent within a specific timeframe are assigned.
Following, the job and opportunity agent populations are queued and sorting policies ap-
plied to pre-process the order within each agent populations. This step involves the inter-
action between the RL sub-system and the simulation model during both iterative training
and production processes. Afterward, the job and opportunity agents engage in the two-
step scheduling process. The job agents sequentially pull the set of opportunity agents
into a matching process, where maintenance jobs are paired with opportunities based on
the introduced feasibility conditions in section 4.2.1. Upon pairing, the job agents exit
the matching process and are held back in a queue until all jobs are scheduled. This
completes the flow of job agents for a scheduling iteration. In collaboration with the RL
sub-system, a release signal triggers to free the job agents, reset agent parameters to
their original state, and direct the job agents back into the job queue, upon which a new
schedule iteration may be initiated.
On the other hand, opportunity and resource agents remain within the simulation envi-
ronment until all jobs are scheduled due to their cyclic flow. When a job is scheduled,
it consumes workforce resources at its designated location for the duration of its pro-
cessing time and corresponding workforce trade category. This resource consumption
is processed by the cyclical flow of opportunity and resource agents. Upon pairing with
a job agent, the workforce resource consumption must be recorded in both opportunity
and resource agents. If an opportunity paired with a job, the resource consumption is
processed. Otherwise, an unpaired opportunity agent reenters the queuing and sorting
procedure in preparation for the next job pairing sequence.
The workforce consumption of a scheduled job is accounted for by adjusting the capacity
of resource agents. This adjustment takes into consideration the following factors:
• The airport or maintenance base where the job is performed.
• The duration of the scheduled job’s processing time.
• The workforce trade category required for conducting the maintenance task.
Finally, the resource capacities are updated and passed on the corresponding opportunity
agents. It is important to note that multiple opportunities can occur simultaneously at the
same airport as specified in section 4.5. Additionally, multiple jobs may be scheduled at
the same time if resource capacities are sufficient. To handle the challenge of scheduling
multiple jobs simultaneously that compete for limited workforce resources at the same
airport, a separate resource agent is used instead of incorporating resource capacities
directly into the opportunity agents. Although the chosen multi-agent design increases
the overall model complexity, it allows for effective management of the overall resource
40
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:49==
capacity at a specific airport within a specified time frame.
Once the resource capacities are updated for the respective opportunity agents, they are
ready to be paired with the next job agent. This completes one cycle of job-opportunity
pairing, which repeats until all maintenance job agents are processed.
The activity diagram described above and presented in fig. 4.6 allows for easier devel-
opment and translation of the simulation model into AnyLogic, which is outlined in more
detail in chapter 6.
4.5
Documenting model assumptions
In the final stage of the first phase of the simulation methodology, it is important to doc-
ument the model assumptions. This ensures that all assumptions made during the mod-
eling phase are recorded accurately and understood by all relevant stakeholders. It also
helps in evaluating the impact of these assumptions on the model during the verification
and validation phases.
The following are the assumptions for the simulation model in line with conditions pre-
sented by Shaukat et al. (2020):
• The model data input is deterministic defined by a set of test schedule instances as
available in chapter 5.
• Factors of uncertainty are not considered in the simulation model, such as stochastic
effects of airline operations resulting as delayed aircraft arrival, or varying process-
ing time of maintenance jobs.
• A maintenance job is always scheduled to an opportunity. In case that a job does
not find a feasible opportunity, it is scheduled to the imaginary opportunity designed
to hold unscheduled jobs.
• Multiple maintenance jobs may be serviced simultaneously at the same mainte-
nance base, if airport resource capacity is sufficient.
• Once a maintenance job is scheduled, it is fully processed without the possibility of
preemption.
• Conditions of precedence for maintenance tasks are excluded.
• There is no possibility that a spare part or equipment necessary to service an aircraft
breaks down. It is assumed that maintenance equipment is fully reliable.
• The workforce resource capacity is deterministically known for any of the four main-
tenance bases according to the trade category: three person-hours for airframe
(AF), two for engine (EN), and one for avionics (AV).
• A maintenance job may require workforce resources from more than one trade cat-
egory.
• The workforce resource capacity is not subject to temporal variation, shift patterns
or temporal unavailability of personnel due to sickness.
• Any maintenance job does only record one deadline which must be considered dur-
ing the scheduling process. The applicable deadline may be represented by any of
the following units: either in flying hours, landing cycles or calendar days.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.6: Activity diagram of the simulation model illustrating the line maintenance job
pairing process including the flow of job, opportunity, and resource agents and the inter-
action with the RL sub-system.
42
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:51==
• Due times of maintenance jobs are set to 15 hours, 10 cycles or 1 day before the
deadline, depending on the relevant deadline unit for the job (flying hours, landing
cycles or calendar days).
• Aircraft towing time is not considered to affect the determined duration of a mainte-
nance opportunity.
• The weighting factors relevant for the objective function (see 4.1) are applied to
both earliness and tardiness, therefore ej = tj: weight factor 1 for flying hours, 2.5
for cycles, and 10 for calendar days.
• The weight factor for unscheduled non-mandatory jobs for the objective function
(see O.F. 4.1) is set to cj = 50.
• For a planning problem such as the LMSP, airlines typically consider a solution time
of up to 20 minutes to be acceptable.
Additionally, the following assumptions are added in the scope of this thesis:
• There is no possibility to reschedule a maintenance job once it has been successfully
allocated.
• A relevant deadline value of a mandatory maintenance job must be > 0 due to an
input data preparation step replacing any missing values with the value 0 as outlined
in chapter 5.
• The LMSP method in this project does not consider a release time for maintenance
jobs. Therefore, any maintenance job is immediately available to be scheduled by
the simulation model. A release time is typically applied to influence the point of time
within a planning period when a maintenance job becomes available to be sched-
uled. This enables an airline to ensure that a maintenance jobs are not scheduled
too early, potentially impacting the next recurring maintenance task’s service dead-
line.
• Only maintenance opportunities that record a duration of ≥30 minutes are con-
sidered in this study. Opportunities with a shorter process duration are considered
to be unfeasible for conducting maintenance tasks. This is contrary to Shaukat et
al. (2020), which state that they only considered opportunities with a duration of ≥
2 hours. However, it is discovered that the approximate LMSP method included
maintenance opportunities of ≥30 minutes when examining the code provided by
an author of the previous study. In order to align the RL-enhanced LMSP proce-
dure with the previous study, it is chosen to adopt the 30-minute minimum duration
requirement as well.
• The process duration of a maintenance job instance may be extended if the original
(input data) resource consumption requirement violates the determined resource
capacity limit per hour.
• The bin structure for the timetabling functionality of the two-step scheduling process
is defined to include 10 bins per hour, corresponding to 6 minutes per resource bin.
• The RL sub-system only takes one action which schedules all maintenance jobs in
the schedule scenario for producing a line maintenance schedule.
• One scheduling policy is built from two components: One job sorting and one op-
portunity sorting policy.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
43
==PAGE:52==
• The iterative training process has two terminal conditions which may terminate the
RL training: upon reaching ≥200’000 training iterations or terminating early for ≥
25’000 training iterations without recording any progress of the goal satisfaction rate.
44
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:53==
5
Input Data Preparation
Following the general methodology for applying simulation to problem solving, the second
phase addresses the simulation model building process. According to Rossetti (2016),
this step consists of input data preparation, model translation, followed by a thorough
verification and validation procedure.
This section addresses the input data preparation of this simulation and RL project, while
the subsequent chapter 6 provides insights regarding the simulation model translation,
verification and validation steps.
When preparing model input data, Rossetti (2016) suggests to initially examine available
data to understand its characteristics and identify the need for further data collection. The
required data is then organized into different categories, which assists in subsequently
developing the model using a simulation software. Additionally, the validity of results in a
simulation study heavily rely on the quality of the input data. In other words: ”Garbage in
= garbage out” (Larsen, 2021a).
As introduced in chapter 1, this study builds upon previous research conducted by Shaukat
et al. (2020) and utilizes a high-quality dataset collected from an airline partner and pro-
vided by the previous research study. The dataset consists of comprehensive information
regarding maintenance jobs and flight schedules utilized to derive maintenance opportu-
nities. The input data was sourced from an Australian airline which operates four mainte-
nance bases and and provides details about workforce resource capacities across three
trade categories. Inspired by the sourced airline dataset, the researchers produced a set
of 29 different synthetic schedule instance scenarios consisting each of a set of job and
maintenance opportunities. The obtained dataset is of high quality and sufficiently fulfills
the requirements of this project, including the experimental study. Therefore, the need for
additional data collection is eliminated. The following sections introduce the utilized input
data for maintenance jobs, opportunities, workforce resources and discusses necessary
data preparation steps. Lastly, an overview of the utilized set of 29 synthetic schedule
instance scenarios is provided, which consist of pairs of job and maintenance datasets.
5.1
Maintenance jobs
This project utilizes a set of 29 maintenance job datasets representing typical line main-
tenance tasks to be scheduled for a varying timeframe of up to 30 days. The datasets
are inspired by industrial data ranging from two to thirteen aircraft for domestic flight op-
erations. Each job dataset is associated with a set of maintenance opportunity instances.
The raw input data is provided in text file format (.txt) and consists of two separate files: a
set of mandatory jobs and a set of non-mandatory jobs. As stated by Shaukat et al. (2020),
mandatory jobs must be scheduled before a specified deadline to prevent grounding of the
aircraft, while non-mandatory jobs can be performed at any time. Each job entry includes
various details such as a unique job identifier, the parent aircraft on which the task needs
to be carried out, a determined processing time, the required workforce resources in dec-
imal person-hours and necessary trade category, along with job deadlines expressed in
three different units: flight hours, number of landing cycles, and calendar days.
The raw data processing of mandatory and non-mandatory job datasets includes merging
the two datasets using Microsoft Excel’s Power Query tool for conveniently importing the
input data in the subsequent model development process. Upon merging the datasets,
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 5.1: Sample of processed maintenance job data utilized for model input.
j_id
j_cat
j_ac
j_dur
j_resAF
j_resEN
j_resAV
j_hr
j_fc
j_dy
T00001
1
VH-AC1
1
0.3
0
0
0
0
11
T00002
1
VH-AC2
0.5
0
0
0.5
187
0
0
T00003
1
VH-AC2
1
0
0.6
0
0
0
7
T00004
1
VH-AC3
0.5
0.5
0
0
158
0
0
T00005
0
VH-AC4
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
a binary column is added to distinguish between the non-mandatory and mandatory job
categories. Additionally, a column for indexing the maintenance job instances is added.
Moreover, any missing values in the dataset are replaced by the value 0. Finally, the
maintenance job dataset is converted to an Excel spreadsheet to facilitate a simple data
integration into AnyLogic’s database.
Table 5.1 presents a sample of processed maintenance job input data. The table consists
of several columns providing specific information about each job instance. The first col-
umn represents the unique job identifier (j_id), while the second column (j_cat) indicates
whether the job is mandatory (1) or non-mandatory (0). The third column (j_ac) identifies
the parent aircraft on which the maintenance task is performed, and the fourth column
(j_dur) specifies the total process duration required to complete the job. Following, there
are three columns that records the resource consumption for each job instance. This
includes technicians certified to conduct maintenance related on an aircraft’s airframe
(j_resAF), engine (j_resEN) or avionics (j_resAV). It is possible for a maintenance job to
require technicians from multiple trade categories. Lastly, mandatory maintenance tasks
include a deadline value represented in one of three available units: measured in flight
hours (j_hr), landing cycles (j_fc), or calendar days (j_dy).
While inspecting input data, it is noticed that certain maintenance job instances exceed
the specified workforce resource capacity per hour at each airport, as specified in sec-
tion 5.3. As a result, these job instances cannot be scheduled. Although Shaukat et al.
(2020) previously incorporated the same input data, this issue is not addressed in their
work. To address this problem, it is decided to add a pre-processing step during the job
agent initialization in collaboration with the project sponsor. Inspired upon a procedure
presented by Lagos et al. (2020), this step adjusts the resource consumption of job in-
stances that violate the capacity limit. It involves extending a job’s processing time to
reduce the resource consumption per hour, ensuring it stays within the capacity limits.
For a detailed explanation of this processing step, refer to chapter 6.
Referring to section 4.2.1, the presented structure of maintenance job data in table 5.1 is
instrumental for the definition of job sorting policies. Each column containing numeric data
is utilized to provide a sorting strategy in ascending and descending order as available
in appendix C. A sorting policy based on alphabetically ordering aircraft identifiers is not
pursued. It has been observed that some maintenance job datasets consist of only three
aircraft, as presented in table 5.4, which limits the potential benefits of implementing a
sorting policy.
In addition to the input model data shown in table 5.1, the simulation model initializes
various parameters upon model startup. The calculation of these parameters is described
below and further elaborated in detail in chapter 6.
• Setting job due times for each mandatory job by deducting a due time offsets from
46
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:55==
the relevant deadline value. As outlined in section 4.5, due time offsets are 15 hours,
10 cycles or 1 day before the deadline, depending on the relevant deadline unit for
the job.
• Calculating the number of required job resource bins to process a maintenance
job. The total number of resource bins for a maintenance task depends on a job’s
process duration multiplied by 10 bins per hour as defined in section 4.5.
• Adjusting the job resource consumption for jobs violating the hourly resource ca-
pacity limit by extending the job process duration.
• Calculating the workforce resource requirement per bin. This value is calculated by
dividing the total workforce resource consumption by the number of resource bins
required to process a maintenance task.
5.2
Maintenance opportunities
Upon clarifying the input data related to maintenance jobs, this section introduces the
utilized maintenance opportunity input data. As elaborated in section 2.2, maintenance
opportunities refer to the duration in which an aircraft remains on the ground between
two scheduled flights. A total of 29 varying maintenance opportunity datasets were syn-
thetically created by Shaukat et al. (2020) inspired by a domestic airline schedule. Each
set of maintenance opportunities is associated with a specific maintenance job dataset,
as shown in more detail in section 5.4. The raw input data is provided in text file format
(.txt). The sets of maintenance opportunity data vary in size ranging in planning periods
from two to four weeks. Each opportunity entry includes details such as a unique op-
portunity identifier, a parent aircraft and an airport location. Further, starting and ending
times are defined and represented by a numerical value of decimal hours starting from
time 0, accompanied by the instance’s duration. Finally, a set of three attributes record
the utilization of an aircraft upon arriving at the maintenance opportunity in three units:
flying hours, number of landing cycles, and calendar days.
Similar to the preparation of maintenance tasks, Microsoft Excel’s Power Query tool is
utilized to replace missing values in the datasets with the value 0 and convert the text files
into an Excel spreadsheet. Additionally, one imaginary opportunity instance is added to
each dataset to accommodate unassigned jobs. This imaginary opportunity is designing
to cover the full timeframe of a schedule planning period at a fictional airport with virtually
unlimited resource capacities.
This concludes the necessary maintenance opportunity data preprocessing and enables
a smooth integration of the data into AnyLogic’s database.
A sample of a maintenance opportunity data is available in table 5.2, including a fictional
instance (mx_id: 1000) designated to hold unassigned jobs. The first column (mx_id)
describes a unique identifier of an opportunity, comparable to an index value. The next
three columns include temporal information such as an instance’s starting time (mx_start),
ending time (mx_end) and total duration in decimal hours. Each maintenance opportu-
nities planning period is starting from time instance 0. Column five (mx_ap) clarifies the
location of the airport or maintenance base where the opportunity takes place. This is
followed by column six (mx_ac) which defines the parent aircraft that produces the op-
portunity instance. Finally, the last three columns account for the aircraft utilization which
the associated aircraft records at the starting time of an opportunity. These values are
measured based on the elapsed aircraft utilization since the start of the dataset’s plan-
ning period and are logged in three units: flying hours (mx_hr), number of landing cycles
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 5.2: Sample of pre-processed maintenance opportunity data utilized for model input.
mx_id
mx_start
mx_end
mx_dur
mx_ap
mx_ac
mx_hr
mx_fc
mx_dy
0
7.926
9.289
1.363
Airport X
VH-AC1
0
0
0
1
10.886
19.378
8.492
Airport Y
VH-AC1
1
1
0
2
20.579
21.208
0.629
Airport Z
VH-AC2
2
2
0
3
22.525
33.072
10.547
Airport X
VH-AC3
3
3
0
1000
0
1000
1000
Airport XXX
VH-XXX
0
0
0
(mx_fc), and elapsed calendar days (mx_dy).
Referring to section 4.2.1, the structure of the maintenance opportunity data shown in
table 5.2 is used to establish sorting policies for opportunities. Numeric data in each
column is employed for sorting in both ascending and descending order, as presented in
appendix C. However, sorting policies based on alphabetically ordering airport locations
are not pursued. The available opportunity datasets cover a range of four determined
maintenance bases, which is argued to limit the potential benefits of implementing sorting
policies.
Apart from the input model data described in table 5.2, the simulation model also initializes
several parameters upon model startup. A summary of opportunity input data created
upon model startup is listed below, while chapter 6 provides more insights regarding model
initialization process:
• Mapping the starting and ending time of an opportunity with a specific resource bin
identifier (see section 5.3).
• Providing a list of bin identifiers for occurring at the same airport during the duration
of an opportunity (see section 5.3).
• Initializing a parameter to store the objective function value of a job-opportunity pair
determined during the job scheduling process.
5.3
Workforce resources
This section presents the input data for the simulation model, which provides information
about the workforce resource capacities. Referring to chapter 4, this project simulates
the line maintenance scheduling system of an airline operating four maintenance bases.
According to Shaukat et al. (2020), each maintenance facility (p ∈P) records a resource
capacity in person-hours for three maintenance trade categories: three person-hours for
airframe-related jobs, two person-hours for engine, and one person-hour for technicians
trained to conduct avionic tasks (i.e., RAF
p
= 3, REN
p
= 2, RAV
p
= 1,
∀p ∈P). The
initial resource capacity levels do not fluctuate, therefore the model input data is simplified
and does not represent realistic shift patterns or seasonal workforce fluctuations. Unlike
the maintenance job and opportunity input data, the raw data used for model input was
not provided by Shaukat et al. (2020), however the study defined the applied resource
capacity levels for each maintenance base and trade category.
As introduced in section 4.2.1, the RL-enhanced LMSP method employs a resource bin
structure to manage workforce resource capacities. The resource bin structure is facil-
itated by a set of 7’200 resource bins, each representing a timeframe of 6 minutes for
a planning horizon of up to 30 days: 7’200 bins = (10 bins / hour * 24h/day * 30 days).
Each resource bin is utilized to manage the available resource capacity for its designated
48
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:57==
Table 5.3: Sample of workforce resource bin data utilized for model input.
r_bin
r_time
0
0
1
0.1
2
0.2
3
0.3
7200
720.0
time instance at each airport and each trade category throughout the scheduling process.
Therefore, workforce resource input data utilized in this project consists of two compo-
nents: a set of input data for creating the resource bin structure, and a set of resource
capacities for each location and trade category. While the resource bin structure is static
throughout the line maintenance scheduling process, the set of resource capacities de-
creases upon scheduling a job and consumption of the required person-hour.
A sample of the input data facilitating the resource bin structure is presented in table 5.3.
The first column (r_bin) provides a unique identifier of the resource bin, while the second
column (r_time) defines the starting time in decimal hours of the resource bin instance.
Aside from the presented input data shown in table 5.3, resource bin capacities are man-
aged utilizing a set of 12 parameters for each resource bin agent: 12 resource capac-
ity parameters = 4 airports * 3 trade categories. Resource bin capacities are initialized
upon model startup. The determined initial workforce capacities in person hours as out-
lined above is divided by 10 bins per hour, leading to the following initial resource bin
workforce capacities: 0.3 person-hours for trade category airframe, 0.2 person-hours for
engine, and 0.1 person-hours for avionics. More details regarding the simulation model
startup procedure is available in chapter 6.
5.4
Schedule instance scenarios
Upon presenting the input data for maintenance jobs, opportunities and workforce re-
sources, this section presents an overview of the available schedule scenarios. Shaukat
et al. (2020) provide a collection of 29 schedule scenario instances, where each instance
consists of maintenance job and opportunities dataset as presented in the previous sec-
tions. These schedule instances were randomly generated by the previous study, there-
fore represent synthetic data that replicates the structure of a real dataset provided by
an airline partner. The created schedule instances vary in terms of the number of main-
tenance jobs, aircraft, maintenance opportunities, job processing times, and resource
requirements.
Table 5.4 provides a summary of the characteristics of each schedule scenario instance.
The scenarios are listed in the first column (A/L/J), which clarifies the scenario constella-
tion informing about of the number of aircraft (A), the duration of the planning horizon in
weeks (L), and the total number of maintenance jobs (J) to be scheduled. The schedule
scenario instances are arranged in ascending order of scheduling problem complexity. In
other words, the scheduling problem becomes more challenging to be solved as the num-
ber of aircraft, planning period, and maintenance jobs in the schedule scenario increases.
The second column counts how many mandatory maintenance jobs are included in the job
set for each deadline unit: considering flight hours (|O1|), landing cycles (|O2|), and calen-
dar days (|O3|). Column three (|N|) informs about the number of non-mandatory mainte-
nance jobs. The fourth column (|M|) displays the total count of maintenance opportunities
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
49
==PAGE:58==
Table 5.4: Schedule scenario instances utilized for model input and the subsequent ex-
perimental study (Shaukat et al., 2020).
(A/L/J)
(|O1|/|O2|/|O3|)
|N|
|M|
T (hours)
r−k (AF/EN/AV)
(3/2/57)
(25/10/9)
13
79
1.68
(0.88/0.32/0.16)
(3/3/82)
(42/9/10)
21
138
1.84
(0.62/0.42/0.17)
(3/4/112)
(51/25/10)
26
160
1.53
(0.84/0.26/0.16)
(4/2/77)
(33/15/11)
18
116
1.41
(0.80/0.29/0.14)
(4/3/112)
(53/13/19)
27
155
1.96
(0.67/0.34/0.15)
(4/4/148)
(73/19/21)
35
223
1.58
(0.79/0.32/0.11)
(4/3/157)
(83/10/25)
39
165
1.8
(0.75/0.29/0.18)
(4/4/157)
(75/21/20)
41
209
1.77
(0.74/0.33/0.14)
(5/2/94)
(43/13/14)
24
131
1.8
(0.87/0.21/0.11)
(5/3/150)
(83/20/13)
34
210
1.69
(0.96/0.33/0.08)
(5/3/187)
(91/19/28)
49
207
1.58
(0.75/0.31/0.14)
(5/4/189)
(92/24/25)
48
253
2.03
(0.70/0.25/0.16)
(5/4/202)
(95/27/30)
50
283
1.54
(0.76/0.33/0.14)
(6/4/221)
(108/22/31)
60
352
1.61
(0.82/0.28/0.16)
(6/3/229)
(108/31/29)
61
242
1.59
(0.69/0.31/0.16)
(7/3/243)
(113/43/26)
61
292
1.8
(0.64/0.31/0.17)
(7/4/263)
(134/28/32)
69
399
1.78
(0.74/0.35/0.15)
(8/3/285)
(154/36/23)
72
319
1.61
(0.77/0.31/0.14)
(8/4/298)
(142/41/39)
76
451
1.71
(0.70/0.31/0.19)
(9/4/329)
(159/40/48)
82
499
1.79
(0.78/0.35/0.14)
(9/3/348)
(171/43/47)
87
365
1.82
(0.79/0.26/0.18)
(10/4/372)
(184/38/51)
99
527
1.78
(0.70/0.31/0.16)
(10/3/382)
(194/50/42)
96
414
1.78
(0.74/0.32/0.18)
(11/3/415)
(207/56/48)
104
464
1.7
(0.74/0.35/0.14)
(11/4/424)
(208/55/52)
109
612
1.42
(0.67/0.32/0.17)
(12/3/211)
(111/21/25)
54
509
1.92
(0.83/0.27/0.15)
(12/4/337)
(168/41/41)
87
646
1.71
(0.72/0.31/0.14)
(13/3/370)
(181/55/42)
92
545
1.66
(0.83/0.32/0.15)
(13/4/467)
(220/62/66)
119
722
1.82
(0.74/0.33/0.13)
available to the scheduling procedure. Column five (T) presents the average job process-
ing time in hours. Finally, the last column shows the average resource requirements (r−k)
in person-hours for conducting a maintenance job, distinguished for each trade category:
airframe (AF), engine (EN), and avionics (AV).
Within the scope of this study project, the collection of schedule scenario instances serves
a dual purpose. First, they are utilized for training the RL-enhanced LMSP model, which
is elaborated in more detail in chapter 6. Second, schedule scenarios are employed to
test the RL-enhanced LMSP solution, as discussed further in chapter 7. Referring to
section 4.5, it is important to note that the designed simulation model does not incorpo-
rate factors of uncertainty. However, these diverse schedule instances are leveraged to
conduct a thorough experimental study, aiming to observe how the RL-enhanced LMSP
method performs in varying scheduling scenarios. Further details regarding this study can
be found in chapter 7.
50
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:59==
6
Implementation
This section continues to address the second phase of the general methodology for ap-
plying simulation to problem solving by Rossetti (2016). After discussing input data prepa-
ration in chapter 5, this section focuses on the translation and implementation of the sim-
ulation model and RL environment for the line maintenance scheduling system. This is
followed by clarifying the applied verification and validation steps.
6.1
Simulation model
Building upon chapter 4, this section elaborates on the translation of the conceptual de-
sign of the simulation environment into a simulation model. Informed by the activity dia-
gram presented in fig. 4.6, an RL-ready hybrid simulation model is developed in AnyLogic
incorporating the two-step line maintenance scheduling process along with components
to facilitate the iterative training and RL-enhanced scheduling of the line maintenance
scheduling system, which are elaborated in more detail in section 6.2.
Figure 6.1 provides an overview of the developed hybrid simulation model in AnyLogic
while algorithm 1 describes the process of the simulation model producing a line mainte-
nance schedule.
Figure 6.1: Overview on key features of the hybrid simulation model developed in Any-
Logic.
Referring to fig. 6.1, the top level agent of the hybrid simulation model is visualized. The
ABS component is represented by three agents and their populations, consisting of main-
tenance jobs, opportunities and resource bin agents. The flow of agents and the two-
step line maintenance scheduling process is incorporated utilizing DES building blocks.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
51
==PAGE:60==
Additionally, the simulation model includes a set of variables and collections utilized to
calculate, store, and communicate performance metrics with the RL environment. Addi-
tionally, the top area of fig. 6.1 (red-dotted frame) includes RL-specific elements to facil-
itate the interaction with the RL environment. These include a parameter BonsaiMode
which communicates which RL process is currently active. More details regarding the
implementation of RL-ready components can be found in section 6.2.
As presented in fig. 4.6, job agents flow sequentially through the scheduling system, while
opportunity agents are not subject to any flow restriction. On the other hand, resource
bin agents are connected to opportunity agents, but do not flow through the scheduling
system. Upon initializing the job agent population, the sequential flow of job agents is im-
plemented by queuing the job agents, sorting the agent population according to the active
job sorting policy, followed by sequentially pulling the top agent of the population into the
matching block, which builds the key component of the scheduling process. As opportu-
nity agents are not subject to flow restrictions, all agents are directed into the matching
block upon initialization, queued and sorted according to a opportunity sorting policy. The
matching block synchronizes two streams of agents by matching agent pairs according
to a given criteria. In the context of this simulation model, the matching criteria incorpo-
rates the scheduling heuristic as presented in section 4.2.1 to pair maintenance jobs to
opportunities. The selection of the pairs depends on the applied pre-processing sorting
policies. The scheduling heuristic ensures that each maintenance job is paired with an
opportunity agent. In case no feasible opportunity instance is found, the job instance is
paired with the fictional opportunity designated to hold unassigned jobs. Upon pairing of a
maintenance job, the agent leaves the matching block and is held back in a queue, while
the paired opportunity agent immediately re-enters the matching block along with pro-
cessing the consumed resource consumption associated with scheduling a maintenance
job. This process continues until all agents in the job population are scheduled, which
concludes one line maintenance schedule iteration. Upon receiving a release signal by
the RL environment, the job agents are released upon which a new schedule iteration can
be initiated.
Upon introducing the hybrid simulation model’s components and basic functionality, al-
gorithm 1 presents how the simulation model performs a scheduling iteration producing
a line maintenance schedule. Algorithm 1, referred to as Concept LMSP, incorporates
a set of 10 sub-programs and one function, which are available in appendix D. These
sub programs fine-tune the simulation model’s functionality using Java code instructions
incorporated into various drag-and-drop DES building blocks.
Algorithm 1 initially clarifies model input and output, along with introducing three oper-
ational modes: a model startup procedure (modelstartup), the iterative training process
(training), and the production process for applying RL-enhanced LMSP by utilizing the
learned best policy (RL −replay). The simulation model’s input consists of the input data
sets for maintenance jobs, opportunities and resources. Additionally, the model incorpo-
rates the initial job and opportunity sorting policies depending on the active operational
mode of the simulation model. In the modelstartup mode, sorting policies for jobs and
opportunities are initialized randomly. During training or RL −replay mode, the sorting
policies are updated based on the action received from the RL environment.
The scheduling procedure starts by loading input data for jobs, opportunities, and re-
sources. It then initializes each agent and its population instructed by initialization sub-
programs. Upon model startup, algorithm 3 performs a set of operations for each job
agent, such as determining a job’s due time, calculating an extended process duration
52
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:61==
Algorithm 1 Concept LMSP: Simulation model performing Line Maintenance Scheduling
1: Bonsaimode ∈{modelstartup, training, RL −replay} ←modelstartup
2: Input:
3: j ∈J ←job data set
4: o ∈O ←opportunity data set
5: r ∈R ←resource data set
6: jSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 17} ←initialize or receive action from RL-environment
7: oSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 21} ←initialize or receive action from RL-environment
8: Output: send as state to RL-environment
9: jSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 17}
10: oSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 21}
11: OF ←resulting schedule objective function value
12: JobsUnsched ←count of unscheduled jobs
13: Scheduling Procedure:
14: load input data for all {j ∈J, o ∈O, r ∈R}
15: apply(Concept: Initializing Job agents) for all j ∈J
16: apply(Concept: Initializing Opportunity agents) for all o ∈O
17: apply(Concept: Initializing Resource bin agents) for all r ∈R
18: if Bonsaimode = modelstartup then
19:
jSortingPolicy ←random({0, . . . , 17})
20:
oSortingPolicy ←random({0, . . . , 21})
21: else if Bonsaimode = training or RL −replay then
22:
jSortingPolicy ←action(jSortingPolicy)
23:
jSortingPolicy ←action(oSortingPolicy)
24: end if
25: repeat
26:
if Bonsaimode = training then
27:
release all j ∈J from ReturnDelayQueue, reset performance metrics, reset agent pa-
rameters for j ∈J, o ∈O, r ∈R to original state
28:
end if
29:
place all j ∈J in jobQueue
30:
place all o ∈O in Queue inside Matching Block
31:
apply(jSortingPolicy, oSortingPolicy)
32:
for each j entering Matching Block do
33:
apply(On Enter Job Concept OF Calculation)
34:
apply(On Enter Job Concept Bin Capacity Calculations)
35:
apply(On Enter Job Concept Resource Constraint Feasibility)
36:
apply(jSortingPolicy)
37:
end for
38:
for each o entering Matching Block do
39:
apply(On Enter Opportunity Concept)
40:
apply(oSortingPolicy)
41:
end for
42:
apply(function: Check Matching Conditions)
43:
apply(On Match Concept)
44:
for each j exiting Matching Block do
45:
apply(On Exit Job Concept)
46:
place all exiting j ∈J in ReturnDelayQueue
47:
end for
48:
for each o exiting Matching Block do
49:
apply(On Exit Opportunity Concept)
50:
end for
51: until jobQueue.size() < 1
52: return jSortingPolicy
53: return oSortingPolicy
54: return OF
55: return JobsUnsched
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
53
==PAGE:62==
for job instances violating determined resource consumption limits, determining the num-
ber of resource bins required for the job’s duration, and distributes resource consumption
requirements among the bins accordingly. Algorithm 4 initializes opportunity agents by
setting a parameter which will store the objective function value of a job-opportunity pair.
This is followed by incorporating the resource bin structure to opportunity agents by iden-
tifying the start and end bins id based on the opportunity’s start and end times. Further,
the the number of resource bins covered by the opportunity instance is calculated, along
with creating a collection for storing the bin identifiers corresponding to the bins covered
by the opportunity. Finally, algorithm 5 describes the resource bin agent procedure which
involves setting the resource bin capacities for every airport and trade category for the du-
ration of the 30 day planning period. Each resource bin agent is uniquely identified using
a bin id corresponding to the time instance the bin covers. Upon completing the agent ini-
tialization procedures, the algorithm determines the current operational mode which may
include updating the incorporated scheduling policies.
Following, the simulation model enters the iterative scheduling procedure which is re-
peated until each maintenance job is paired to an opportunity agent. Upon queuing and
sorting the job and opportunity populations utilizing the sorting policies, the scheduling
process is driven by sequentially pulling one job agent at a time into the matching block.
Upon entering the matching block, a set of operations are applied for both job and oppor-
tunity agents as outlined below.
The entry procedure of opportunity agents into the matching block is specified by algo-
rithm 6. The algorithm updates the resource bin capacity levels for each opportunity. It cal-
culates the initial resource bin capacity levels based on the determined resource capacity
limits and the number of bins per hour. It then adjusts the bin capacity levels for the oppor-
tunity based on its start and end times and the fraction of bins occupied by the opportunity.
This includes verifying whether the starting or ending time of an opportunity does not align
with the starting time of its associated resource bin agent. If the starting or ending time of
an opportunity lies within a resource bin agent, the capacity is fractionally adjusted using a
binFractionAdjustment factor. The adjustment is made for each airport p. Finally, each
opportunity is equipped with six resource capacity collections: three pre-match collections
for each trade category (e.g., BinCapacityPreMatchR1) and three post-match resource
bin capacity collections (e.g., BinCapacityPostMatchR1) which record the resource bin
capacity levels available to an opportunity. BinCapacityPreMatch collections are uti-
lized for calculating whether a job may be accommodated by an opportunity. Similarly,
BinCapacityPostMatch will store the most recent resource bin capacity levels remaining
after successfully pairing a job to an opportunity.
Once a job agent enters the matching block, three sub-programs are applied. Initially,
algorithm 7 calculates the objective function values for a subset of opportunity agents.
The subset of opportunity agents describes potential matching candidates, and is ob-
tained by initially relaxing the scheduling heuristic by removing the timetabling constraint.
The O.F. value for each potential pair is calculated as introduced in section 4.3, and
stored in an opportunity’s MatchedJobOF parameter. This is followed by further reducing
the subset of potential opportunity matching candidates by incorporating the timetabling
constraints (o.ResourceRequirementFeasible) in two steps. Firstly, algorithm 8 adjusts
a job’s resource bin consumption based on the fraction that an opportunity may seize
from an available resource bin, applying a similar functionality as the previously intro-
duced binFractionAdjustment procedure. This is followed by deducting a job’s resource
bin consumption requirements from the remaining resource capacity, utilizing the set of
BinCapacityPreMatch collections. Secondly, the timetabling phase is concluded by al-
54
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:63==
gorithm 9 which identifies whether the resource constraint feasibility is met. If the resource
constraint is violated, the algorithm sets the o.ResourceRequirementFeasible parameter
of this opportunity instance as false, which removes the candidate from the subset of
feasible matching candidates. If the resource constraint is met, the algorithm identifies
and records the earliest starting time of the job, which may involve sliding the starting time
within the boundary of its allocated opportunity.
The algorithm then performs the job-to-opportunity pairing in the matching block facil-
itated by two sub-programs. Firstly, algorithm 10 is a function that incorporates the six
conditions of the line maintenance scheduling job pairing process. Secondly, algorithm 11
checks the matching conditions for each opportunity in the matching block, and creates a
candidate list of feasible opportunities ordered based on the OppSortingPolicy. The top
opportunity agent from the sorted candidate list is selected as the match for the job agent.
The algorithm updates various parameters for the matched opportunity and collects the
previously calculated objective function value of the pair. It also keeps track of the number
of scheduled and unscheduled jobs.
Following the pairing procedure and upon a job agent’s exit from the matching block, algo-
rithm 12 calculates and updates a schedule’s OF value. Further, the algorithm classifies
each job’s earliness, tardiness, or penalty cost for leaving a job unassigned as specified
in the objective function 4.1 in section 4.3. The process repeats for each job exiting the
matching block, resulting in the overall schedule’s objective function value. Exiting job
agents are held back in the ReturnDelayQueue until a signal triggered by the RL environ-
ment releases the job agents during the training mode of the simulation model, resets
schedule performance metrics and agent parameters to their original state.
Upon exiting the matching block by an opportunity agent, algorithm 13 updates the re-
source bin capacity levels for each resource bin agent. Initially, the algorithm checks if
the resource bin id is within the range of bins covered by the matched job’s start and end
bins to reduce the algorithms action space. Then, it deducts the resource consumption
by the matched job for each resource type based on the job’s bin resource requirement.
The algorithm subtracts the job’s resource consumption from the affected resource bins,
adjusting for the fraction of bins occupied by the opportunity utilizing the previously in-
troduced binFractionAdjustment factor. Afterwards, the opportunity agent re-enters the
matching block available for a new job pairing process.
Upon scheduling all maintenance jobs, the algorithm returns the applied sorting policies
for jobs and opportunities, the resulting OF value and the count of unscheduled jobs for
the produced schedule. This represents the output of the simulation model and concludes
one iteration of the simulation model. The output of the simulation model is utilized as
model input for the iterative training process and applying RL-enhanced line maintenance
scheduling, which is presented in the following section.
6.2
RL Environment
After clarifying the model translation phase for the simulation model, this section ad-
dresses the implementation of the reinforcement learning component of the line main-
tenance scheduling system. This section initially discusses the implementation of the
RL environment using the Microsoft Project Bonsai AI platform. Algorithm 2 presents a
training and RL-replay procedure enabling to learn, store and apply the most effective
scheduling policy in interaction with the simulation model introduced in algorithm 1. This
is followed by elaborating on the training process of two RL-enhanced LMSP methods.
Referring to section 4.2.1, the RL-ready simulation model incorporates a set of compo-
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
55
==PAGE:64==
nents connecting the AnyLogic reinforcement learning experiment to the Project Bonsai
AI platform. Within the reinforcement learning experiment, system input and output from
the simulation model and the reinforcement learning environment is set up. Additionally,
AnyLogic provides the bonsaiConnector library, an add-on library connecting an RL-ready
AnyLogic simulation model with the Project Bonsai platform. This is accompanied by the
RL training curriculum, presented in Algorithm 2 and incorporated on the Microsoft Project
Bonsai platform using the Microsoft Inkling programming language. Bonsai allows to up-
load the local, RL-ready simulation model into the Bonsai platform, where the RL training
procedure is conducted in a cloud computing environment. Upon completing the RL train-
ing curriculum, the Bonsai platform allows to deploy a fully trained RL method, also re-
ferred to as a brain. This is facilitated by deploying a trained brains as web applications on
the Microsoft Azure platform. The trained brain may be accessed from a local computer
by connecting AnyLogic to Azure using a custom url. Finally, AnyLogic’s RL-Replay ex-
periment incorporates the deployed RL method into the local AnyLogic simulation model.
Algorithm 2 represents the implemented RL curriculum and initially clarifies the system
input and output information, along with a set of parameters utilized to steer the rein-
forcement learning algorithm. The RL system’s input consists of the simulation model’s
output as presented in algorithm 1. The input parameters include the applied sorting poli-
cies for jobs and opportunities, the OF value and the count of unscheduled jobs of the
schedule produced by the simulation model. The output information consist of the action
taken by the RL environment, hence selecting a new jSortingPolicy and oSortingPolicy.
RL-specific parameters include the previously introduced three operational modes, along
with two binary parameters. RLEventTrigger informs the RL system whether a new
trial-and-error procedure should be initiated, while terminalCondition is utilized to check
whether the training process is completed. Additionally, iterationCount keeps track on
the number of training iterations conducted.
The training procedure initially defines the terminalCondition of the training, which con-
cludes the training process upon reaching 200’000 iterations or allows for early termination
if the goal satisfaction rate doesn’t improve for 25’000 iterations.
The algorithm starts in modelstartup mode, where it applies the Concept LMSP outlined
in algorithm 1 to initialize the simulation model, and then switches to the training mode.
While training, the algorithm repeats the following steps: reading the input parameters
of the schedule produced during the previous iteration as states, evaluating the quality
of the previous action by calculating the goal satisfaction rate using a reward function,
selecting new sorting policies as the next action, sending the chosen action back to the
simulation model, and applying Concept LMSP as outlined in algorithm 1. This completes
one training iteration. The training continues until a terminal condition is met, upon which
the algorithm stores the best jSortingPolicy and oSortingPolicy.
Finally, algorithm 2 describes the RL-Replay procedure, which refers to the production
process of applying RL-enhanced line maintenance scheduling. This process is initiated
by running the RL-Replay experiment in the AnyLogic, activating the Bonsaimodel =
RL −replay which triggers algorithm 2 to push the learned best scheduling policies to
the simulation model. The final result of the RL-Replay experiment is to return the perfor-
mance metrics of a RL-enhanced line maintenance schedule to the user. This completes
the RL-replay procedure.
In the scope of this thesis project, two RL-enhanced LMSP methods are trained and de-
ployed with the help of the presented hybrid simulation model and iterative training pro-
cess as introduced in algorithm 2. Each brain is trained upon a schedule instance each
56
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:65==
Algorithm 2 Iterative RL training and Applying RL-enhanced LMSP process
1: Bonsaimode ∈{modelstartup, training, RL −replay} ←modelstartup
2: RLEventTrigger ∈{true, false} ←false
3: terminalCondition ∈{true, false} ←false
4: iterationCount ←0
5: Input: read as state from simulation environment
6: jSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 17}
7: oSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 21}
8: OF ←resulting schedule objective function value
9: JobsUnsched ←count of unscheduled jobs
10: Output: send as action from RL-environment
11: jSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 17}
12: oSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 21}
13: Training Procedure:
14: if iterationCount
≥
200′000 or goal satisfaction rate does not improve for
iterationCount ≥25’000 then
15:
terminalCondition ←true
16: end if
17: repeat
18:
if Bonsaimode = modelstartup then
19:
apply(Concept LMSP)
20:
iterationCount ←iterationCount + 1
21:
Bonsaimode ←training
22:
else if Bonsaimode = training then
23:
read jSortingPolicy, oSortingPolicy, OF, JobsUnsched as state
24:
apply reward function and calculate goal satisfaction rate
25:
RLEventTrigger ←true
26:
select new(jSortingPolicy, oSortingPolicy) as action
27:
iterationCount ←iterationCount + 1
28:
return action(jSortingPolicy)
29:
return action(oSortingPolicy)
30:
apply(Concept LMSP)
31:
end if
32: until terminalCondition = true
33: store best jSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 17}
34: store best oSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 21}
35: RL-Replay Procedure:
36: Bonsaimode ←RL −replay
37: return action(jSortingPolicy) ←stored best jSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 17}
38: return action(oSortingPolicy) ←stored best oSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 21}
39: apply(Concept LMSP)
40: return RL-enhanced Line Maintenance Schedule to user
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
57
==PAGE:66==
Table 6.1: Training performance of the two RL-enhanced LMSP methods: Brain 148J and
Brain 329J (Widmer et al., 2023).
Brain 148J
Brain 329J
Iterations
Duration (min)
Goal Satisfaction
Duration (min)
Goal Satisfaction
400
1
81.7%
1
66.2%
48’000
40
81.7%
71
86.2%
73’000
64
97.8%
177
100%
98’000
90
98.8%
281
100%
selected from the available set of schedule instance scenarios presented in table 5.4:
Brain 148J is trained upon schedule instance scenario (4/4/148), trained for solving a
scheduling problem covering four aircraft, a planning period of four weeks, and 148 jobs.
On the other hand, Brain 329J is trained using schedule instance scenario (9/4/329).
Therefore, Brain 329J is trained to solve a scheduling problem tailored for nine aircraft,
a planning period of four weeks, and 329 maintenance jobs. Both RL methods followed
the training curriculum incorporated in algorithm 2 with the goal of minimizing the objec-
tive function value of a schedule in learning the best scheduling policy before reaching
a terminal condition. As shown in table 6.1, both RL-enhanced LMSP methods are fully
trained by the Project Bonsai cloud computing environment within a time frame of 1 hour
30 minutes to 3 hours 36 minutes. In terms of effectiveness of the learned scheduling
policy, the brains record a goal satisfaction rate between 98.8% to 100% in selecting
the best scheduling policy. Both brains successfully minimized the schedule objective
function value at 98’000 training iterations, leading to an early termination of the training
process before reaching a terminal condition of 200’000 training iterations. It is identi-
fied that both brains stored similar scheduling policies: Brain 148J applies a scheduling
policy consisting of jSortingPolicy = 8, oSortingPolicy = 20, which consists of sorting
the job population in ascending order by a job’s resource consumption requirement of the
trade category engine, and pairing jobs to opportunity agents recording the minimum O.F.
value for the pair. Similarly, Brain 329J selected the best scheduling policy to consist of
jSortingPolicy = 9, oSortingPolicy = 20, which orders the job population in descend-
ing order by a job’s resource consumption requirement of the trade category engine, and
pairs jobs to opportunities by the minimum O.F. value for the pair.
The two RL-enhanced LMSP methods obtained will be utilized and their scheduling per-
formance tested in the subsequent experiment study phase in chapter 7.
6.3
Verification
Upon input data preparation, translation and implementation of the simulation model and
reinforcement learning environment, this chapter focuses on verification, which builds the
the third step in the second phase of the general methodology for applying simulation
to problem solving. According to Rossetti (2016), verification is carried out to determine
whether the simulation program performs as intended. Typically, this process involves
checking for errors related to control flow, entity creation, resource release, and logical
or arithmetic operations. Particularly important errors include issues that may lead to im-
proper functioning or incorrect statistics. To ensure accuracy, Rossetti (2016) suggests to
debug the model by repeating scenarios with the same random number seeds, subjecting
it to sensitivity analysis by varying factors and their levels to match anticipated behavior.
Additionally, individual modules within the simulation code are tested to ensure their in-
58
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:67==
tended functioning. Complementary to the recommendations outlined by Rossetti (2016),
Law (2007) present a set of techniques for verifying simulation models. Although the veri-
fication techniques presented were initially designed for simulation models, it is observed
that many of these techniques are not only limited to simulation studies, but may also be
useful to the combined simulation and reinforcement learning approach of this project.
In the scope of this project, the verification phase ensures that the simulation model ac-
curately incorporates the line maintenance scheduling problem’s flow of agents, schedul-
ing logic and interaction with the RL environment as presented in the activity diagram
in fig. 4.6. Following, a set of four techniques inspired upon Law (2007) are utilized to
facilitate the verification of this study.
Technique 1 addresses the benefits of establishing a simple model at the beginning, fol-
lowed by incrementally increasing the model’s complexity. This approach aims to prevent
the debugging of highly complex and long code sections, which is a time-consuming and
complex task to identify code malfunctions. This approach is applied by initially modeling
the line maintenance scheduling system in a reduced complexity, by implementing the
timetabling constraint in an aggregated manner without its complex resource bin struc-
ture. Following, the scheduling system’s complexity is increased by fully incorporating
the resource bin structure utilized to model the workforce resource capacity constraint.
Similarly, the RL environment including its learning curriculum is initially set up incorpo-
rating only including three scheduling policies. This facilitates to efficiently verify that the
RL environment properly connected with the AnyLogic simulation model completing the
training session in a brief training time while consuming a fraction of cloud computing
resources in comparison to running the training curriculum including all 396 scheduling
policy options.
Technique 2 emphasizes the importance of having multiple individuals review the estab-
lished model and become reliable with it. This technique aims to to avoid bias induced
by a single developer to oversee a malfunction or falsely assuming the correctness of a
statement. In the scope of this project, this technique becomes especially important, as
the project is mainly conducted by a single author. However, each main algorithm and
sub-concept of this study as presented in chapter 6 has been reviewed by the multiple
individuals within the project team at UNSW to ensure consensus on the various subpro-
grams and their impact on the simulation model. This procedure also benefits the project
by adding a factor of redundancy and knowledge sharing, avoiding that the knowledge for
modeling the line maintenance scheduling system is centered by the single author. An
added benefit of this technique can also be found in enabling low entry-barriers in terms of
domain knowledge for further development of the system upon completion of this project.
Technique 3 advocates testing the simulation model with varying input parameters to
validate a reasonable model output in line with the expected behavior. The model is exe-
cuted with various settings such as different scheduling policies and varying input data for
jobs and opportunities to stress the system and assess how these factors influenced the
model’s output. For stress testing the line maintenance scheduling system, schedule sce-
nario instance (4/4/148) is chosen, and the number of jobs to be scheduled is increased
by up to 600%, while maintaining the original number of maintenance opportunities. It is
expected that the number of unscheduled jobs and the resulting O.F. value of the sched-
ule increases. Similarly, a scenario simulating for ”underloading” the system is created in
which the number of jobs to be scheduled for schedule instance (4/4/148) is kept steady,
while the number of opportunities available to the scheduling system is increased by up
to 600%. This scenario is expected to accommodate all jobs and record a lower O.F.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
59
==PAGE:68==
value as using the original schedule instance scenario (4/4/148). This rigorous testing is
conducted to assess whether the scheduling system accurately classifies and accounts
for unscheduled jobs or dealing with high opportunity capacity, verifying the accuracy of
scheduling logic and resulting objective function values. In both cases, the scheduling
system performs as expected.
Technique 4 addresses the challenge of debugging a DES program is addressed, and
the effectiveness of the trace technique is emphasized. By implementing a trace, the de-
veloper is able to observe the system’s state after each event, with the option to tailor the
output to be traced depending on a users need. This allows the programmer to compare
a simulation model’s state variables or statistical parameters with manually conducted
calculations to ensure the system performs as intended. In the context of this project, the
trace technique is applied while developing each concept of the simulation model. In the
context of this study, this technique is of vital importance while verifying the proper func-
tionality of the implemented resource capacity constraint. This technique allowed to verify
that consumed resources by a scheduled job are accurately deducted from the available
resource bin capacities. Further, a trace function is implemented which keeps track on
whether any resource bin agent consumes more resources than available, which would
indicate that the model does not function accurately. At the example of Project Bonsai,
trace functions are incorporated to actively observe the trial-and-error procedure. For ex-
ample, this enables a user to visually verify during a training session whether the training
curriculum actively explores new scheduling policies or already converges its progress of
learning the best scheduling policy.
6.4
Validation
Following the procedure of Rossetti (2016), the last step of the implementation phase aims
to validate whether the simulation model accurately represents the real system. Typically,
the model is presented to personnel at different levels involved with the system, and their
feedback regarding its realism is vital for validation. Additionally, Rossetti (2016) recom-
mends to compare the simulation system’s output with observations of the actual system.
Often through statistical analysis, significant differences between the two are identified.
In the scope of this project, the validation steps aim to ensure that the model is accu-
rately representing the simulated line maintenance scheduling system as introduced in
section 4.2. This is conducted by utilizing the two validation recommendations presented
by Rossetti (2016). Initially, a critical review of the developed line maintenance schedul-
ing system is conducted. Participants of the critical review meeting consist of the project
team at UNSW as well as an airline industry expert with extensive professional experi-
ence in aircraft maintenance, airline operations and scheduling. Additionally, the airline
expert is currently employed as a maintenance scheduling planner at the study airline
partner. During the validation workshop, the participants validated whether the incorpo-
rated scheduling logic aligns with the method presented by Shaukat et al. (2020) as well
as current practises at the study airline partner. Especially the adapted resource con-
straint functionality utilizing a resource bin structure is observed in more detail. This is
facilitated by manually validating the accuracy of the assigned job allocation and resulting
resource capacity levels before and after pairing.
Secondly, an initial sample of the developed RL-enhanced LMSP method’s output is uti-
lized to identify significant differences in the method’s scheduling performance in compari-
son to the closest real output data available to this study. Unfortunately, a thorough statis-
tical analysis of the developed RL-enhanced LMSP method’s output in comparison to the
real system at the study’s airline partner is not possible. On one hand, the study partner
60
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:69==
Table 6.2: Differences in scheduling output used for validation between previously pub-
lished LMSP solutions and the developed RL-methods.
Schedule Instance (4/4/148)
Schedule Instance (5/4/189)
Spread
O.F.
U
Spread
O.F.
U
Exact (ILMSP)
103.0
155.0
0
231.0
305.5
0
Heuristic (SLMSP)
-
155.0
0
-
307.0
0
RL Brain 148J
102.0
123.0
0
233.0
270.5
0
RL Brain 329J
102.0
123.0
0
230.0
266.0
0
airline does currently not operate an RL-enhanced line maintenance scheduling method.
Therefore, comparable real RL-enhanced line maintenance scheduling data does not ex-
ist. On the other hand, a line maintenance schedule generated by the scheduling system
deployed at the study airline is not available to this project. However, the closest to real
line maintenance scheduling output data available to this study consists of output gen-
erated by the previously developed LMSP solutions published by Shaukat et al. (2020).
Table 6.2 presents differences in the scheduling output generated by the developed RL-
enhanced LMSP and previously published exact (ILMSP) and heuristics (SLMSP) ap-
proach.
Table 6.2 presents differences in scheduling output in terms of total schedule spread, a
schedule’s objective function value (O.F.) and the resulting count of unscheduled jobs
(U) of the novel and published LMSP methods at the example of two schedule instance
scenarios. Scenario (4/4/148) represents a scheduling problem covering a planning pe-
riod of four aircraft, four weeks and 148 maintenance jobs. The second schedule instance
(5/4/189) represents a scheduling problem for a planning period of five aircraft, four weeks
and 180 tasks.
According to results presented by table 6.2, both RL-enhanced scheduling methods pro-
duce different line maintenance schedules, where the total schedule spread value differs
by up to 1.9%, the schedule O.F. value between 11.5% to 20.6%. Both RL-methods
schedule all maintenance jobs for both schedule instance scenarios in line with the previ-
ously published LMSP methods. At the example of the two schedule instance scenarios,
the preliminary validation results indicate that the RL-methods allocate jobs in a similar
manner by minimizing the deviation from a job’s due time, which is indicated by the total
schedule spread which only differs by up to 1.9% in comparison to the published solu-
tions. However, both brains seem to significantly differ the allocation of maintenance jobs
to opportunities within the subset of opportunity pairing candidates recording similar job
spread values, driven by the incorporated sorting policies affecting the order of agents
within the candidate subset. Due to the weighting factors associated with the objective
function, this difference is shown by the resulting objective function values which differ by
up to 20.6%. Additionally, both scheduling methods are able to schedule all maintenance
tasks.
Based upon the qualitative and quantitative verification and validation of both the incor-
porated scheduling logic and resulting scheduling performance, the participants of the
validation workshop agree that the developed RL-enhanced LMSP does accurately rep-
resent the real system under study. This concludes the second phase of the the general
methodology for applying simulation to problem solving by Rossetti (2016).
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
61
==PAGE:70==
The scheduling results presented in table 6.2 build a basis for a more detailed analysis of
the RL-methods scheduling performance, which is conducted in the subsequent experi-
mental study presented in chapter 7.
62
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:71==
7
Experimental Study and Results
This chapter presents an experimental study of the combined simulation and reinforce-
ment learning project. To address the underlying research question of this thesis project,
the experimental study is designed in three parts, each consisting of a set of experimental
scenarios as presented in fig. 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Three experimental study themes including sub-scenarios facilitated by sched-
ule instance scenario data.
Initially, the experimental study investigates the influence of applying different scheduling
policies on the scheduling performance of a line maintenance schedule. The influence of
applying any of 396 possible scheduling policies is studied through parameter variation
experiments using the AnyLogic simulation model.
The second part investigates the performance of the two RL-enhanced scheduling meth-
ods on a set of 29 varying schedule instance scenarios. Initially, a best-fit schedule serving
as a baseline for each of the schedule instances is established by conducting parame-
ter variation experiments using the simulation model. Following, the trained RL-methods
scheduling performance in solving any of the 29 schedule instance scenarios is compared
to the scenario’s best-fit schedule.
Lastly, the experimental study investigates how the scheduling performance of RL-enhanced
LMSP methods differs in comparison to previously published LMSP solutions for any of
the 29 schedule instance scenarios.
All experiments conducted in this study utilize the following LMSP configuration. This
streamlined approach aims to maximize comparability of obtained experimental results
in this thesis project to previously published methods by Shaukat et al. (2020) and is
summarized below:
• The available resource capacity at any of the four maintenance bases is three person-
hours for airframe, two for engine, and one for avionics.
• Due times of maintenance jobs are set to 15 hours, 10 cycles or 1 day before the
deadline, according to the relevant unit for the job (flying hours, landing cycles or
calendar days).
• Weighting factors in the objective function (4.1) are equal for both earliness and
tardiness (ej = tj): weight factor 1 for flying hours, 2.5 for landing cycles, and 10 for
calendar days. Weight factor cj = 50 is used to account for any unscheduled job.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
63
==PAGE:72==
7.1
Influence of scheduling policies on scheduling results
This section investigates how applying different scheduling policies affects the scheduling
performance of a line maintenance schedule’s objective function value (O.F.).
The hybrid simulation model facilitates this experiment through parameter variations. Re-
ferring to algorithm 1, the experiment involves varying jSortingPolicy and oSortingPolicy
across their ranges, resulting in a total of 396 policy combinations (18*22=396). There-
fore, each parameter experiment consists of 396 scheduling iterations, each generating
a line maintenance schedule and its corresponding output performance metrics. Initially,
three parameter variation experiments are conducted using three schedule instance sce-
narios as presented in table 5.4 of varying scheduling problem complexity. The first in-
stance (4/4/148) represents a low-complexity scheduling scenario with four aircraft, four
weeks, and 148 jobs. The second instance (7/3/243) represents an intermediate schedule
complexity covering seven aircraft, a three-week planning period, and 243 maintenance
tasks. Lastly, the third instance (9/3/348) is chosen to analyze the impact of different
scheduling policies on a complex scenario, corresponding to nine aircraft, a three-week
planning period, and 348 jobs.
Figure 7.2: Applying 396 scheduling policies and their influence on the scheduling perfor-
mance at the example of schedule instance (4/4/148), (7/3/243) and (9/3/348).
Figure 7.2 presents the resulting objective function values of applying 396 scheduling
policies to the three selected schedule instance scenarios. The vertical axis employs a
logarithmic scale to represent the O.F. value for each policy, while the horizontal axis
groups all 396 policies based on ascending opportunity sorting identifiers. These op-
portunity identifier groups are numerically encoded according to the naming convention
outlined in fig. 7.2, with each identifier grouping corresponding to a subset of 18 job sorting
policies. The following insights on the influence of applying different scheduling policies
to a schedule’s objective function value can be identified.
Firstly, fig. 7.2 highlights that the objective function values for any schedule instance sce-
nario reacts more sensitively to the choice of opportunity sorting policies than the corre-
sponding job sorting policy. This is shown by the mostly uniform objective function values
recorded within an opportunity sorting group and its associated 18 job sorting policies.
64
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:73==
It is argued that this relationship is linked to the simulation model’s incorporated flow of
agents, where jobs are sequentially matched with the entire agent pool of opportunities.
Secondly, fig. 7.2 shows that the lowest O.F. values across all schedule instances are con-
sistently associated with the subset of 18 scheduling policies linked to oSortingPolicy =
20. Referring to table C.1, this group of sorting policies pairs maintenance jobs to oppor-
tunities by selecting the top matching candidate recording the lowest resulting objective
function value of the job-opportunity pair. Therefore, fig. 7.2 underscores that the best
scheduling performance of any scheduling scenario is to be found within the subset of 18
scheduling policies connected to oSortingPolicy = 20. This observation aligns with the
findings outlined in section 6.2, where both trained RL methods identified and stored a
scheduling policy tied to oSortingPolicy = 20.
Expanding upon the initial insight, an extended parameter variation experiment is con-
ducted for all 29 schedule instance scenarios. These experiments aim to further inves-
tigate the observed scheduling performance sensitivity, emphasizing the impact of the
opportunity sorting policy over the job sorting policy. For each schedule scenario, the
job sorting policy component jSortingPolicy ∈{0, . . . , 18} is varied while the opportunity
sorting component is fixed using oSortingPolicy = 20, which demonstrated to produce
the subset of best-fit scheduling policies. Subsequently, the number of policy configura-
tions that yield the lowest O.F. value within the subset of 18 scheduling policies is counted.
This count of best-fit scheduling policies for each schedule instance scenario is incorpo-
rated in column Q of table 7.1. The count of best-fit policies range from 18 for instance
(3/2/57) to 1 for schedule instances (11/4/424) to (13/4/467). The table shows that the
count of best-fit policies declines as the scheduling problem becomes larger and more
complex with an increasing number of jobs, aircraft, and an extended planning horizon.
This trend is further visualized by a line plot and trend line in fig. 7.3.
Therefore, a third insight of applying different scheduling policies is identified. If a schedul-
ing scenario is less complex, the scheduling performance is less sensitive to the choice
of job sorting policy. However, the choice of a job sorting policy component gains of
importance as the scheduling problem becomes more complexity, as shown in fig. 7.3.
7.2
Performance comparison between simulation model and
RL-based scheduling methods
This section investigates the scheduling performance of the two RL-enhanced LMSP
methods on a set of 29 schedule scenarios of varying complexity in comparison to a base-
line schedule for each scenario. The second experimental theme of this thesis project
consists of a total of 87 experiments, where 29 schedule instance scenarios are utilized
by three LMSP methods. This includes the hybrid simulation model, and the two RL-based
LMSP methods.
Initially, a best-fit schedule serving as a baseline for each of the 29 scheduling scenar-
ios is established. The baseline schedule represents a line maintenance schedule ob-
tained by applying the best-fit scheduling policy for each scheduling problem. Referring
to section 7.1, the baseline schedule result and scenario-specific best-fit scheduling pol-
icy configuration is obtained by the third parameter variation experiment of the previous
experimental theme using the simulation model. Furthermore, both RL-trained LMSP
methods are employed to solve each of the 29 schedule instance scenarios facilitated by
algorithm 2 and incorporated in AnyLogic’s RL-Replay experiment, as elaborated in sec-
tion 6.2. In table 7.1, comparative scheduling results are presented for the baseline model
and both RL-enhanced LMSP methods across the 29 schedule instance scenarios.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
65
==PAGE:74==
Table 7.1: Comparative scheduling results between the best-fit scheduling policy provided
by the simulation model (Qmin O.F.), both RL-trained methods, and the count of best-fit
scheduling policies (Q) for each schedule instance scenario.
A/L/J
Qmin O.F.
Time (s)
U
Brain 148J O.F.
Gap
Time (s)
U
Brain 329J O.F.
Gap
Time (s)
U
Q
(3/2/57)
53
2
0
53
0.0%
3
0
53
0.0%
2
0
18
(3/3/82)
77.5
5
0
77.5
0.0%
7
0
77.5
0.0%
6
0
16
(3/4/112)
109.5
4
0
109.5
0.0%
5
0
109.5
0.0%
5
0
18
(4/2/77)
41.5
2
0
41.5
0.0%
4
0
41.5
0.0%
3
0
17
(4/3/112)
122
4
0
122
0.0%
6
0
122
0.0%
6
0
15
(4/4/148)
123
6
0
123
0.0%
8
0
123
0.0%
8
0
11
(4/3/157)
171.5
6
0
171.5
0.0%
8
0
171.5
0.0%
8
0
15
(4/4/157)
167
8
0
169.5
1.5%
9
0
169.5
1.5%
9
0
14
(5/2/94)
109
3
0
111
1.8%
4
0
109
0.0%
4
0
16
(5/3/150)
159
6
0
160
0.6%
8
0
159
0.0%
8
0
12
(5/3/187)
166.5
8
0
166.5
0.0%
10
0
166.5
0.0%
11
0
3
(5/4/189)
266
12
0
270.5
1.7%
14
0
266
0.0%
13
0
12
(5/4/202)
128
13
0
128
0.0%
16
0
131.5
2.7%
15
0
9
(6/4/221)
224
17
0
231
3.1%
18
0
231
3.1%
18
0
1
(6/3/229)
206.5
11
0
214
3.6%
13
0
206.5
0.0%
12
0
4
(7/3/243)
246.5
12
0
246.5
0.0%
14
0
246.5
0.0%
15
0
2
(7/4/263)
227
23
0
232
2.2%
24
0
231.5
2.0%
24
0
1
(8/3/285)
276.5
17
0
278.5
0.7%
17
0
278.5
0.7%
18
0
8
(8/4/298)
302
30
0
313.5
3.8%
33
0
311
3.0%
34
0
3
(9/4/329)
293
38
0
298
1.7%
40
0
296
1.0%
40
0
4
(9/3/348)
389.5
22
0
389.5
0.0%
25
0
389.5
0.0%
23
0
2
(10/4/372)
390
46
0
391
0.3%
49
0
394
1.0%
48
0
7
(10/3/382)
392.5
29
0
394.5
0.5%
32
0
396.5
1.0%
31
0
3
(11/3/415)
449
37
0
460.5
2.6%
39
0
450
0.2%
40
0
2
(11/4/424)
330
54
0
337
2.1%
46
0
339
2.7%
46
0
1
(12/3/211)
200.5
36
0
206
2.7%
39
0
200.5
0.0%
38
0
1
(12/4/337)
348.5
61
0
355.5
2.0%
64
0
357
2.4%
62
0
1
(13/3/370)
378.5
44
0
390.5
3.2%
47
0
385
1.7%
48
0
1
(13/4/467)
456.5
74
0
467.5
2.4%
79
0
463
1.4%
78
0
1
Average
234.6
21.7
0
238.2
1.3%
24.1
0
237.1
0.8%
23.8
0
8
The first column of table 7.1 arranges each schedule instance scenario in in ascending
order of complexity. Referring to table 5.4, each scheduling problem is characterized by a
number of aircraft (A), a planning period duration (L), and the total number of maintenance
tasks (J) to be scheduled. The subsequent three columns present the baseline model’s
scheduling performance including the baseline’s objective function value (Qmin O.F.), so-
lution time in seconds, and the count of unscheduled jobs (U). This is followed by metrics
of the scheduling performance for both trained RL methods. Column five (Brain 148J
O.F.) displays the schedule O.F. value for each scenario, along with the percentage gap
compared to the baseline model’s O.F. value. Column seven (Time) shows the duration in
seconds required to solve a schedule instance, followed by column (U) which records the
number of unscheduled maintenance tasks. Similarly, column nine to twelve record the
scheduling performance for Brain 329J, including the method’s O.F. value, performance
gap to the baseline model, model runtime in seconds and number of unscheduled jobs.
The last column (Q) records the count of best-fit scheduling policies for a scenario, as
introduced in section 7.1.
All three methods solved the scheduling problems without producing any unscheduled
maintenance tasks, scheduling all mandatory and non-mandatory jobs to maintenance
opportunities. Table 7.1 shows that both trained brains solve the schedule instance sce-
narios in line with the baseline model, producing schedules with an average O.F. gap of
up to 1.3%. Throughout the RL-replay experiments, it is observed that Project Bonsai
generally requires 2-3 seconds to incorporate the learned scheduling policy and solve
the problem. This delay is shown in table 7.1, where the average solution time for the
66
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:75==
Figure 7.3: Objective function value comparison between simulation model and both RL-
trained brains including the number of best-fit policies for increasing schedule instance
complexity.
baseline model records 21.7 seconds. In comparison, the trained RL methods achieved
average solution times of 24.1 seconds for Brain 148J and 23.8 seconds for Brain 329J.
As the scheduling problem becomes larger and more complex with an increasing number
of jobs, aircraft, and an extended planning horizon, all three methods record increasing
O.F. values and require more time to solve a scheduling scenario. This trend is visualized
in fig. 7.3, where the bar chart showcases the O.F. value for schedule instance scenario
in increasing problem complexity across all three methods.
While the RL-enhanced scheduling methods solve the scheduling problems similarly to
the baseline model recording an O.F. gap of up to 1.3% on average, differences in schedul-
ing performance related to the complexity of scheduling problems are identified. Fig-
ure 7.4 presents cluster plots for each RL-trained method, displaying the O.F. gap to the
baseline model on the vertical axis and the number of jobs of the scheduling problem on
the horizontal axis. These cluster plots visualize the scheduling performance of the trained
methods (O.F. gap) classified in two groups: one cluster for scheduling problems with
fewer than 250 jobs, and another for scheduling problems for ≥250 maintenance tasks.
Examining the cluster centroids, which are obtained considering the sum of squares dis-
tances from the centroid to each data instance within the cluster, fig. 7.4 demonstrates
that the RL methods perform better when dealing with less complex scheduling problems.
At the example of Brain 148J, the average O.F. gap to the baseline model when solving
a scheduling problem of low complexity records 0.9%, and 0.5% for Brain 329J. On the
other hand, both RL methods record higher O.F. gap value for solving complex scheduling
problems, recording 1.8% Brain 148J, and 1.5% Brain 329J. In both cases, the scheduling
performance of Brain 329J is more favorable than its 148J counterpart.
In conclusion, the second experimental theme yields two primary insights. Firstly, both
trained RL methods solve the set of 29 scheduling instances in line with an instance’s
baseline method by providing solutions differing on average between 0.8% to 1.3% and
recording 2-3 seconds longer time to solution.
Secondly, it is identified that the RL-
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 7.4: Cluster plot of O.F. value Gap between Brain 148J and Brain 329J presenting
scheduling performance differences for solving problems up to and exceeding 250 jobs.
enhances LMSP solutions perform better when dealing with simpler scheduling problems
of fewer than 250 jobs in terms of resulting O.F. value. Furthermore, all three methods
record an increasing O.F. values and longer solution times as scheduling problems in-
crease in complexity.
7.3
Performance comparison between exact, heuristic and
RL-based scheduling methods
This section investigates differences in the scheduling performance of RL-enhanced and
previously published LMSP solutions presented by Shaukat et al. (2020). Therefore, the
third experimental theme of this thesis project draws upon scheduling results obtained
by the previous experiments presented in section 7.2, as well as published experimental
results for an exact (ILMSP) and a heuristics scheduling method (SLMSP) developed by
Shaukat et al. (2020). Table 7.2 presents the scheduling performance of RL-enhanced
and existing LMSP solutions using the set of 29 schedule instance scenarios.
The initial column of table 7.2 lists the schedule instance scenario progressing in com-
plexity based on aircraft quantity (A), scheduling timeframe (L), and maintenance task
count (J). Following, the scheduling performance of previously published LMSP solu-
tions by Shaukat et al. (2020) is then showcased. The second and third column display
the O.F. value and time to solution in seconds for the exact, integrated LMSP method
(ILMSP). This is followed by column three (SLMSP O.F.) presenting the O.F. value for
the sequential heuristics method (SLMSP), its gap in percentage to the O.F. value of the
exact method, along with the duration to solve the schedule instance in seconds. Visu-
ally separated by a bold vertical line, the RL-enhanced method’s scheduling results are
shown. Columns seven to nine present the resulting O.F. value, gap in percentage to
the exact method’s O.F. value, as well as the observed time to solution in seconds for the
RL-enhanced method Brain 148J. Similarly, columns ten to twelve present the scheduling
results for the trained Brain 329J.
As shown in table 7.2, both RL-enhanced methods generate line maintenance schedules
with lower O.F. values and shorter time to solution for all schedule instance scenarios
68
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:77==
Table 7.2: Comparative computational results from previously published exact (ILMSP)
and heuristic (SLMSP) methods by Shaukat et al. (2020), and novel RL-enhanced meth-
ods for Brain 148J, Brain 329J (Widmer et al., 2023).
(A/L/J)
ILMSP O.F.
Time (s)
SLMSP O.F.
Gap
Time (s)
Brain 148J O.F.
Gap
Time (s)
Brain 329J O.F.
Gap
Time (s)
(3/2/57)
66.0
6
66.0
0.0%
3
53.0
-19.7%
3
53.0
-19.7%
2
(3/3/82)
92.0
13
98.0
6.5%
4
77.5
-15.8%
7
77.5
-15.8%
6
(3/4/112)
148.0
5
148.0
0.0%
5
109.5
-26.0%
5
109.5
-26.0%
5
(4/2/77)
58.0
14
58.0
0.0%
3
41.5
-28.4%
4
41.5
-28.4%
3
(4/3/112)
150.0
8
157.0
4.7%
4
122.0
-18.7%
6
122.0
-18.7%
6
(4/4/148)
155.0
10
155.0
0.0%
7
123.0
-20.6%
8
123.0
-20.6%
8
(4/3/157)
211.5
91
214.5
1.4%
7
171.5
-18.9%
8
171.5
-18.9%
8
(4/4/157)
204.5
10
204.5
0.0%
7
169.5
-17.1%
9
169.5
-17.1%
9
(5/2/94)
124.5
5
134.5
8.0%
2
111.0
-10.8%
4
109.0
-12.4%
4
(5/3/150)
193.0
10
197.0
2.1%
5
160.0
-17.1%
8
159.0
-17.6%
8
(5/3/187)
222.5
90
235.5
5.8%
9
166.5
-25.2%
10
166.5
-25.2%
11
(5/4/189)
305.5
42
307.0
0.5%
6
270.5
-11.5%
14
266.0
-12.9%
13
(5/4/202)
194.5
92
195.5
0.5%
10
128.0
-34.2%
16
131.5
-32.4%
15
(6/4/221)
286.0
400
286.0
0.0%
11
231.0
-19.2%
18
231.0
-19.2%
18
(6/3/229)
247.0
209
254.0
2.8%
11
214.0
-13.4%
13
206.5
-16.4%
12
(7/3/243)
309.5
236
309.5
0.0%
11
246.5
-20.4%
14
246.5
-20.4%
15
(7/4/263)
299.0
892
303.5
1.5%
14
232.0
-22.4%
24
231.5
-22.6%
24
(8/3/285)
357.0
685
362.0
1.4%
12
278.5
-22.0%
17
278.5
-22.0%
18
(8/4/298)
369.0
124
385.0
4.3%
15
313.5
-15.0%
33
311.0
-15.7%
34
(9/4/329)
388.0
938
428.5
10.4%
16
298.0
-23.2%
40
296.0
-23.7%
40
(9/3/348)
464.0
1230
477.0
2.8%
16
389.5
-16.1%
25
389.5
-16.1%
23
(10/4/372)
482.0
781
516.0
7.1%
17
391.0
-18.9%
49
394.0
-18.3%
48
(10/3/382)
490.5
3600
520.0
6.0%
18
394.5
-19.6%
32
396.5
-19.2%
31
(11/3/415)
611.0
1791
681.5
11.5%
18
460.5
-24.6%
39
450.0
-26.4%
40
(11/4/424)
434.5
1223
447.5
3.0%
20
337.0
-22.4%
46
339.0
-22.0%
46
(12/3/211)
238.0
123
242.5
1.9%
10
206.0
-13.4%
39
200.5
-15.8%
38
(12/4/337)
449.0
329
475.5
5.9%
13
355.5
-20.8%
64
357.0
-20.5%
62
(13/3/370)
469.0
743
509.5
8.6%
16
390.5
-16.7%
47
385.0
-17.9%
48
(13/4/467)
532.0
1822
554.5
4.2%
22
467.5
-12.1%
79
463.0
-13.0%
78
Average
294.8
535.2
307.7
3.5%
10.8
238.2
-19.5%
24.1
237.1
-19.8%
23.8
in comparison to the exact (ILMSP) solution. As illustrated in fig. 7.5, the O.F. value
for scheduling problems solved by Brain 148J and Brain 329J is on average 20% lower
compared to the schedule results obtained by the exact (ILMSP) method, and 23% lower
compared to the heuristics approach (SLMSP). As shown in table 7.1, both RL-enhanced
methods, which are inspired upon the sequential heuristics (SLMSP) approach, schedule
all mandatory and non-mandatory jobs to maintenance opportunities consistent with the
exact (ILMSP) solution.
The recorded time to solution varies significantly between the exact (ILMSP) algorithm and
remaining heuristics and RL methods. On average, the exact (ILMSP) scheduling method
produces line maintenance schedules in 535 seconds, whereas both trained brains solve
the LMSP on average within 24 seconds. The heuristics (SLMSP) approach proofs to be
the the most efficient method, producing results within an average of 10.8 seconds for
any given schedule instance scenario.
As schedule instance scenarios become larger and more complex to solve, the time to
reach a solution and the O.F. values increase across all scheduling methods. However,
fig. 7.6 displays that the model runtime of the RL-enhanced methods rises at a lower rate
for more complex instances compared to the exact (ILMSP) method. Table 7.2 reveals that
an RL method reduces the model runtime for providing a new feasible schedule solution
in comparison to the exact (ILMSP) approach. However, both brains require training time
of up to 3 and a half hours before being deployed to solve problems, as mentioned in
section 6.2. In terms of model runtime, the heuristic (SLMSP) approach demonstrates
superior scheduling efficiency, especially in complex schedule scenarios of more than
250 jobs. In schedule test instances of up to 250 jobs, the SLMSP method records on
average 37% less model runtime of 6.8 seconds, in comparison to 10.9 seconds for Brain
148J and 10.6 seconds for Brain 329J. However, in complex test instances of ≥250 jobs,
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 7.5: Objective function value comparison for increasing schedule instance com-
plexity (Widmer et al., 2023).
the heuristics (SLMSP) method outperforms both RL-enhanced methods by 2.5 times, by
producing schedules on average within 16.4s, in comparison to 41.3 seconds for Brain
148J and 41 seconds for Brain 329J.
A key driver for producing different scheduling results between the previously published
and novel RL scheduling methods is identified by their distinctive objective when solving a
schedule instance scenario. While RL-enhanced LMSP are inspired upon the sequential
heuristics (SLMSP) method which allows to produce unscheduled jobs, the exact (ILMSP)
does guarantee a feasible exact solution without any unscheduled maintenance jobs. Ad-
ditionally, the RL methods incorporate a different timetabling functionality consisting of a
resource bin structure as introduced in chapter 4. Therefore, it is emphasized that the
optimization problem for the exact (ILMSP) and heuristics (SLMSP) scheduling method
developed by Shaukat et al. (2020) is more restricted in terms of job timetabling than the
implemented resource bin structure of RL-enhanced methods.
When investigating the resulting line maintenance schedules, it is identified that the exact
method’s objective to avoid penalties for unscheduled non-mandatory jobs can lead to
the displacement of mandatory jobs from their most-suitable maintenance opportunity. As
demonstrated in table 7.3, the exact (ILMSP) method assigns the mandatory job (T00141)
to maintenance opportunity labeled as 327, leading to a job spread value of 1 and a
weighted O.F. value of 2.5. Contrary, the RL method schedules the job closer to its due
time using a neighboring opportunity (id 328), resulting in a more favorable job spread
and O.F. value of 0. Both methods adhere to the available airport resource capacity.
In summary, the third experimental theme of this study highlights that RL-enhanced schedul-
ing methods yield line maintenance schedules recording 20% lower O.F. values in com-
parison to previously published LMSP methods. The lower O.F. values are mainly driven
by the incorporated timetabling functionality which differs from previously published meth-
ods. Additionally, it is identified that the exact (ILMSP) method may allocate mandatory
maintenance jobs to less favorable maintenance opportunities due to the method’s objec-
tive of avoiding any unscheduled maintenance jobs. In terms of efficiency, it is observed
70
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:79==
Figure 7.6: Model runtime comparison for increasing schedule instance complexity (Wid-
mer et al., 2023).
Table 7.3: Comparison of allocation for mandatory job T00141 (deadline type: Flight Cy-
cle) in schedule scenario (4/4/148): exact (ILMSP) method vs. RL-enhanced method
(Widmer et al., 2023).
Method
Job Id
Opportunity Id
Spread
O.F.
ILMSP
T00141
327
1
2.5
RL
T00141
328
0
0
that the heuristics method outperforms both developed RL-enhanced LMSP methods,
particularly when tackling complex scheduling problems consisting of ≥250 jobs. How-
ever, both RL-enhanced LMSP methods solve the scheduling problems on average within
24 seconds, presenting a significant advantage over the exact (ILMSP) algorithm which
records an average time to solution of 535 seconds.
7.4
Summary of results
This experimental study investigates the research question of this thesis study with the
help of three experimental themes. Initially, the influence of applying different scheduling
policies on the scheduling performance is investigated. Following, the scheduling perfor-
mance of the developed RL-enhanced methods is studied on a set of 29 different schedule
instance scenarios. Finally, the study investigates how the scheduling performance of the
RL-enhanced LMSP methods differs and compares to previously published solutions.
The first study theme highlights that the developed LMSP method reacts more sensitively
to the selection of opportunity sorting policy than its job sorting component. Additionally,
it is identified that the best-fit scheduling policies are to be found within a subset of 18
scheduling policies connected to oSortingPolicy = 20. Furthermore, the study theme
finds that the choice of the job sorting component gains of importance as a scheduling
problems becomes more complex and difficult to solve.
The second experimental theme demonstrates that the developed RL-enhanced LMSP
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
71
==PAGE:80==
achieve near-optimal scheduling results on a set of 29 schedule instance scenarios by
providing solutions differing on average between 0.8% to 1.3% from a scenario’s baseline
performance. Additionally, it is found that a schedule’s O.F. value and time to solution
increases as the scheduling problem becomes more complex to solve.
While the RL-methods are trained on particular schedule instance scenarios, the third
study theme highlights that the developed RL-enhanced LMSP methods displayed nearly
optimal scheduling outcomes across diverse test cases of varying scheduling complex-
ity. The RL-enhanced scheduling methods yield line maintenance schedules recording
a lower O.F. value of 20% in comparison to the previously published exact and heuris-
tic scheduling method. However, it is important to note that the RL methods developed
in this study differ from the exact (ILMSP) method in two ways. Firstly, it incorporates
a scheduling heuristic that aligns with real-world airline practices and allows jobs to be
left unscheduled. Secondly, an adapted timetabling functionality utilizing a resource bin
structure is implemented. In contrast, the exact method guarantees an exact and feasible
solution. It is observed that the exact method places an overemphasis on scheduling non-
mandatory jobs due to a high penalty cost associated with unscheduled non-mandatory
jobs. Table 7.3 demonstrates that the focus on achieving an exact solution can lead to the
displacement of mandatory jobs from their optimal maintenance slots, which may affect
the resulting schedule O.F. value. In this regard, the developed RL-enhanced scheduling
method offers a more practical scheduling result from an airline perspective.
In terms of efficiency, the RL-enhanced methods achieve feasible schedules in less than
24 seconds on average, while the exact algorithm takes around 10 minutes. However,
a limitation of the RL approaches is found in comparison to the previously published
heuristics-based solution. The heuristic method outperforms the trained brains by offering
superior scheduling efficiency, especially when solving complex scheduling problems of
≥250 jobs. According to Shaukat et al. (2020), airlines typically consider a solution time
of up to 20 minutes acceptable for planning problems. The RL-enhanced method’s short
time to solution offers airlines the advantage of swift adaptation to changing conditions
and exploration of various scenarios. Unlike the exact method, RL-enhanced scheduling
methods enable iterative and experimental problem solving within the same timeframe,
providing additional value missing from the exact (ILMSP) solution. However, it should
be noted that RL-enhanced scheduling solutions require significant training time of up to
3 hours and 36 minutes before deployment. This training time can be reduced by uti-
lizing more cloud computing resources. Additionally, an RL-enhanced LMSP approach
requires a detailed simulation environment which accurately replicates an airline’s line
maintenance scheduling system which is a time-consuming development effort.
72
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:81==
8
Outlook, Perspectives, and Future Work
This chapter concludes the study on how simulation and reinforcement learning can be
utilized for solving the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem. Initially, this section
takes a step back and discusses the choice of methods incorporated in this study. This
is followed by critically discussing the usefulness of the study results from an airline in-
dustry perspective accompanied by opportunities for future work to advance the field of
AI-enhanced airline planning.
8.1
Choice of method
Initially, the choice of employing simulation and reinforcement learning is addressed. Re-
ferring to this project’s research question, the experimental results presented in chapter 7
demonstrate that a combined simulation and reinforcement learning approach can solve
the line maintenance scheduling problem and proofs to be a competitive methodology in
comparison to previously published LMSP solutions.
Sutton and Barto (2018) introduce reinforcement learning as an agent-based machine
learning method that employs trial and error to determine a policy for maximizing cumu-
lative rewards. The agent interacts with its simulation environment, making sequential
decisions to identify the best course of action in a given state. This facilitates the distinc-
tive trial and error process of exploration and reward assessment that sets reinforcement
learning apart from other machine learning and optimization methods.
However, other methodologies for solving the aircraft line maintenance scheduling prob-
lem exist. According to Barnhart et al. (2003), the airline industry has traditionally relied on
optimization techniques and operations research to address airline planning challenges.
At the example of Deng et al. (2020), researchers employ a dynamic programming (DP)
approach to optimize long-term maintenance schedules for diverse aircraft fleets. Fur-
thermore, Deng et al. (2021) incorporate the DP-based scheduling method and task allo-
cation into a decision support system (DSS), addressing multiple sub-problems within the
airline planning process outlined in fig. 2.1. Lastly, the efficiency of employing scheduling
heuristics is highlighted by Shaukat et al. (2020) in efficiently solving line maintenance
scheduling problem.
However, with the progress and opportunities presented by machine learning techniques,
Andrade et al. (2021) and Hu et al. (2021) showcase the integration of reinforcement
learning into long-term maintenance check planning, yielding promising scheduling out-
comes. Particularly, Lee et al. (2022) address the schedule recovery problem using rein-
forcement learning in a way that surpasses conventional optimization methods, offering
improved flexibility and adaptability for a common airline planning problem. The authors
propose training a reinforcement learning model with multiple reward functions, enabling
the selection of various strategies to restore a schedule. This enables decision makers at
an airline with highly flexible decision support that adapts to current operational needs.
Referring to section 3.3.1, integrating simulation environments in reinforcement learn-
ing is a technological requirement. Osiński et al. (2020) emphasize the advantages of
employing simulation models as a secure and effective approach for trial-and-error pro-
cesses. However, a limitation of RL solutions lies in the substantial training effort needed
to effectively learn an effective policy, as demonstrated in table 6.1.
Additionally, it’s
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
73
==PAGE:82==
important to note that a more complex RL algorithm directly extends the required train-
ing duration, a challenge that can be practically mitigated through increased utilization of
cloud-computing resources. Given the highlighted benefits of reinforcement learning in
addressing airline planning issues by Andrade et al. (2021), Hu et al. (2021), and Lee et
al. (2022), it is proposed that adopting simulation and reinforcement learning represents
a practical and future-oriented choice of methodology. Nevertheless, optimization meth-
ods demonstrate an extensive track record in addressing airline planning challenges and
are widely integrated into current airline planning solutions. Thus, optimization methods
indeed provide an alternative methodology for solving the line maintenance scheduling
problem, exemplified by research from Shaukat et al. (2020), Deng et al. (2020), and
Deng et al. (2021).
The second aspect of the chosen method under discussion is the applied hybrid simu-
lation technique. Following, the potential influence and applicability of other simulation
methodologies is discussed.
Referring to section 3.1.1, this thesis study requires a simulation methodology which fa-
cilitates a medium to micro-level abstraction, multi-agent decision-making as well as a
accommodates a well-defined process perspective. In respect to these requirements, a
system dynamics simulation methodology is ruled out due to its characteristics to enable
simulation studies tailored for a strategic level and high level of abstraction (Grigoryev,
2022; Siebers et al., 2010).
DES replicates the behavior of a system based on the occurrence of discrete events, and
allows to observe a system’s behavior over time (Maidstone, 2012; Sumari et al., 2013).
According to Brailsford (2014), DES is one of the most commonly applied simulation meth-
ods due its suitability for solving process-oriented problems, simplicity of implementation,
and computational efficiency. However, Siebers et al. (2010) argues that DES lacks to
capture the complex interactions observed in many real-world systems, especially when
interacting with multiple agents, which is a crucial requirement for accurately simulating
the line maintenance scheduling system. Therefore, it is argued that a uniformly designed
DES model could not incorporate the complexities of this project.
On the other hand, Siebers et al. (2010) emphasizes that ABS enables to model indi-
vidual decision making of agents within a system, taking into account their interactions
with each other and their environment. ABS is particularly suitable for replicating complex
systems with multiple agents. This enables ABS to model problems for both operational,
micro-level to more strategic, macro-level focus (Grigoryev, 2022). Further, Siebers et
al. (2010) argues that most problems, including process-driven procedures, may be ac-
curately incorporated in a simulation model using an ABS approach. ABS incorporated
in AnyLogic does offer an user-friendly development environment by incorporating state
charts. The current implementation of the two-step job scheduling process heavily de-
pends on complex Java code instructions, as available in appendix D. Employing a state-
chart-focused ABS modeling approach could make it easier for future researchers to un-
derstand and further develop the implemented simulation model. Therefore, incorporating
the line maintenance scheduling system in an uniformly ABS approach can be considered
as an alternative approach to hybrid simulation method. Nevertheless, it is argued that
an ABS modeling approach does correspond to an increased development effort, which
considering the time limitations associated with the timeframe of this project, can be seen
as a limitation.
Brailsford (2014) and Siebers et al. (2010) agree that choosing the most suitable simu-
lation approach depends on the specific attributes of the system being studied. This is
74
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:83==
accompanied by Brailsford et al. (2019), who argues that rather than relying on a single
simulation method, the HS method of integrating multiple simulation methods leverages
the strengths of each method to provide a highly flexible and adaptable simulation model.
Therefore, informed by Siebers et al. (2010), Brailsford (2014) and Brailsford et al. (2019),
a hybrid simulation approach is argued to provide most value in the scope of this thesis
project.
A third point of discussion consists of the utilized research data. The decision to build
upon previously published research data including 29 schedule instance scenarios is ar-
gued to hold several advantages. Firstly, the utilized research data available to this study
is inspired from real-world airline data and therefore represents practical airline schedul-
ing scenarios. Secondly, the data facilitates maximum comparability with previously pub-
lished study outcomes of Shaukat et al. (2020) who utilized the exact same research data.
Therefore, it is argued that this alignment with prior research strengthens the scientific
foundation of this thesis project. By building upon existing data and model assumptions
derived from Shaukat et al. (2020), this approach aligns well with the primary goal of this
thesis study to provide insights into the impact of utilizing simulation and reinforcement
learning for line maintenance scheduling.
A crucial aspect of this study’s methodology involves the incorporation of an alternative
timetabling functionality, which is discussed in the following. This adjustment significantly
influences the study’s experimental results. It is argued that the adopted methodology
aligns more closely with the sequential, heuristics (SLMSP) scheduling approach and real-
world airline practices compared to the more constraint mathematical formulation tailored
for the exact method presented by Shaukat et al. (2020). However, it is acknowledged that
the incorporated timetabling functionality is less restricted, and therefore does not solve
the exact same problem as Shaukat et al. (2020). Additionally, in consultation with an
airline expert, it is found that unscheduled non-mandatory jobs have a near-insignificant
impact for an airline when conducting line maintenance scheduling. Contrarily, the formu-
lation presented in section 3.2.1 highly penalizes leaving such jobs unscheduled, which
is argued to not accurately represent the negligible impact from an airline’s perspective.
Moreover, the chosen experimental research design is discussed. Alternate approaches
of the experimental study concept could involve scenario-based experiments in adjust-
ing model input parameters such as workforce resource capacities, due time offsets, or
objective function parameters were possible. However, the study’s chosen path of the
designed three-theme experimental study remains consistent with the objective of this
thesis study. The primary aim of this project is to provide insights to the influence of utiliz-
ing a different technology to solve the LMSP, rather than exploring various permutations of
the current airline planning problem. Therefore, it is argued that the selected experimen-
tal study design aligns well with the project’s overarching objectives of yielding insights
into the scheduling performance of a LMSP method utilizing simulation and reinforcement
learning.
Additionally, the selected reinforcement learning concept is discussed along with alterna-
tive approaches. The decision to utilize sorting policies within the reinforcement learning
framework is influenced by real-world practices in the airline industry, replicating the man-
ual prioritization of maintenance tasks by an airline’s maintenance scheduler. While this
approach offers a straightforward and intuitive methodology, its capacity to fully lever-
age reinforcement learning is limited by the available 396 scheduling policies applying
first-level ordering of agents.
There exist alternative, more advanced RL approaches which could enhance the overall
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
75
==PAGE:84==
scheduling performance by incorporating the two-step scheduling heuristic into the RL
curriculum. At present, the RL environment takes a single action, applying the chosen
sorting policy throughout the entire line maintenance scheduling process. A more sophis-
ticated RL concept could introduce higher adaptability of the scheduling model by enabling
to take an action before each job assignment. This adaptability is exemplified in the work
of Lee et al. (2022), who propose a highly flexible RL curriculum including multiple reward
functions tailored to different scheduling objectives. In the scope of this project, this could
include enable a maintenance scheduler to select from a set of scheduling strategies,
rather than just one method. For example, this could include a strategy to maximize the
utilization of a specific maintenance base, incorporating a maintenance cost-driven LMSP
strategy, or adapting the job scheduling influenced by the lack of a specific workforce trade
type.
However, the adoption of such advanced methodologies is accompanied by several chal-
lenges. It requires a deeper understanding of reinforcement learning and is associated
with an increased development effort. Furthermore, the complexity of the scheduling algo-
rithm would increase, leading to extended training periods and greater computational re-
source requirements. Considering the trade-offs between simplicity and advanced meth-
ods, the chosen approach strikes a balance by offering a clear starting point while ac-
knowledging the potential for more advanced techniques demanding a higher level of
expertise, and high commitment for development effort and resources.
Finally, the chosen platforms to facilitate the simulation and reinforcement learning project
is discussed and argued. While recognizing the existence of other simulation and RL plat-
form options, the selection of AnyLogic and Project Bonsai is driven by the need for a com-
prehensive solution within the study’s scope and time limitations. AnyLogic’s integrated
RL functionality and connectivity to Project Bonsai offered notable benefits, accompanied
with AnyLogic’s user-friendly IDE and the ability to design a hybrid simulation model. How-
ever, it is important to note that Project Bonsai has substantial limitations, as elaborated
in section 3.3.2. Most importantly, the limitation of accessing only the top-level agent of
a simulation model imposes constraints on the potential of developing a more advanced
RL approach. It is argued that an alternative platform might provide the required level of
customization to develop more advanced RL concepts.
8.2
Airline industry perspective
This section critically reflects on the study’s results from an airline industry perspective.
These insights are gathered in collaboration with an airline industry expert who possesses
extensive professional experience in aircraft maintenance, operations, and scheduling.
According to the airline expert, the proposed RL-enhanced LMSP solution presents sev-
eral opportunities for airlines. Firstly, it is underscored that current maintenance planning
practices heavily rely on a maintenance planner’s individual expertise, with limited access
to technological decision support. Therefore, the data-driven approach offered by the RL-
enhanced LMSP is seen as an advancement that could streamline and harmonize future
line maintenance planning processes. It could also save time by automating the tedious
sorting and prioritization of maintenance tasks using a data-driven decision support tool
incorporating the RL-enhanced LMSP method.
Regarding the research results presented in n chapter 7, a key aspect of interest from
an airline’s standpoint is the RL-enhanced method’s short solution time. This provides
airlines with the advantage of quickly adapting to changing conditions and exploring dif-
ferent scenarios. Unlike exact methods, the RL-enhanced scheduling approach could
76
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:85==
enable iterative and experimental problem-solving within the same timeframe, adding
value beyond the exact (ILMSP) solution. Referring to section 4.5, it is important to note
that the currently developed RL-enhanced LMSP method includes several simplifications.
Therefore, the current LMSP requires further development to accommodate the complex
scheduling conditions of real-world aircraft line maintenance.
Enhancements to the current LMSP concept could encompass to incorporate factors of
uncertainty into the simulation model. This is driven by the significant stochastic influences
affecting daily airline operations, which also impact the line maintenance scheduling sys-
tem. Additionally, a more comprehensive scheduling heuristic would need to consider
factors such as job precedence and interconnected maintenance tasks. Furthermore, it
is vital in the airline industry to consider maintenance costs, considering external mainte-
nance service providers, and specific workforce capacities varying at each maintenance
base and time of the day. Incorporating these factors would further enhance the potential
of a future RL-enhanced LMSP method.
From a technological perspective, RL is not yet widely adopted in the airline planning
environment. Established solutions for airline planning are primarily optimization-based
rather than machine learning-driven. Nevertheless, as highlighted in section 2.3, machine
learning is gaining importance in the airline planning domain, driven by recent develop-
ments such as Lufthansa System’s aiOCC and Lufthansa Group’s OPSD (Google Cloud,
2023; Lufthansa Group, 2023; Lufthansa Systems, 2023).
Practical implementation of a RL-enhanced LMSP method may include two main chal-
lenges. Firstly, introducing such a system requires significant change management ef-
fort within an airline’s maintenance planning environment. The existing line maintenance
scheduling process heavily relies on individual expertise and limited technological sup-
port. Therefore, the development of an adapted scheduling process would be required
in collaboration with decision-makers. Regulatory considerations might also restrict the
adoption of a fully data-driven approach, demanding thorough feasibility study.
Secondly, integrating a RL-enhanced LMSP method into existing airline maintenance sys-
tems presents technological challenges. Airline planning systems typically lack full cus-
tomization capabilities, requiring collaboration with the system provider. These providers
might not be inclined to provide a custom-built API or similar interface to extract required
data from an existing planning system into the RL-enhanced LMSP solution.
From a strategic perspective, addressing an airline’s line maintenance scheduling prob-
lem might not be the highest priority for a typical carrier. The airline expert points to
the tail assignment problem, which is a higher hierarchy problem in the airline planning
process as illustrated in fig. 2.1. Nonetheless, it is emphasized that the developed RL-
enhanced LMSP solution along with insights gained from this study could be utilized to
address the tail assignment problem. Potentially, building an integrated decision support
system utilizing RL by first solving the tail assignment problem, followed by the subse-
quent line maintenance scheduling problem. This integrated approach would follow the
steps of Deng et al. (2021) and Andrade et al. (2021), who present an integrated decision
support system for long-term maintenance check planning and adopting the scheduling
methodology utilizing RL. Such an integrated approach aligns with existing practices, and
solving the tail assignment problem using data-driven methodologies could bring substan-
tial value to airlines, especially considering operational disruptions. Further, this approach
aligns with current industry trends observed in projects such as Lufthansa Group’s OPSD
and Lufthansa System’s aiOCC.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
77
==PAGE:86==
8.3
Future work
This study investigates how simulation and reinforcement learning can be utilized to solve
the line maintenance scheduling problem with a focus on providing insights on how the
scheduling performance differs to previously published solutions. However, the field of
line maintenance scheduling is a highly complex domain within the aircraft maintenance
domain and offers more research opportunities which could not be addressed in the scope
of this study. This section suggests opportunities for future work focusing on two streams.
Firstly, suggestions for enhancing the developed RL-enhanced LMSP method are elabo-
rated. Secondly, opportunities for further research to extend the presented RL-enhanced
LMSP method to address an airline’s tail assignment problem are outlined.
The current RL-enhanced LMSP method is simplified by several model assumptions in-
formed by Shaukat et al. (2020) as outlined in chapter 4. To improve the existing hybrid
simulation model, it is suggested to study how factors of uncertainty could be incorpo-
rated. Currently, the simulation relies on deterministic data from prior research. An alter-
native approach involves dynamically generating new input data inspired by the existing
sets, considering uncertainties like varying job durations, delayed aircraft arrivals, and
maintenance equipment failures. Furthermore, the current LMSP setup assumes a con-
stant workforce capacity across all airports at all times. A more realistic approach would
consider varying resource capacities due to shift patterns and unforeseen workforce un-
availability.
The basic scheduling heuristic offers potential for further exploration by integrating more
complex, real-world aircraft maintenance constraints. This could involve job precedence
limitations, allowing preemption to interrupt ongoing maintenance for higher-priority tasks,
and introducing more diverse workforce trade categories with specialized mechanic certi-
fications. Moreover, considering factors of maintenance costs is crucial for practical airline
maintenance planning. However, implementing such enhancements would demand sig-
nificant structural changes and extensive research and development effort. Nonetheless,
it is anticipated that the real-world representation of the line maintenance scheduling sys-
tem would improve the robustness of resulting schedules is enhanced.
Regarding the design of the incorporated hybrid simulation model in AnyLogic, utilizing
more user-friendly ABS features provided by AnyLogic into the simulation model including
state charts to increase user-friendliness of the developed model. The objective would
be to reducing the reliance on java code instructions to accompany the implemented two-
step scheduling process using DES blocks. This has the potential to make it easier for
future researchers to get started and enhance the developed LMSP simulation model.
In relation to the incorporated RL concept, the current RL-enhanced LMSP approach is
being trained on a single schedule instance scenario. It is seen as an opportunity to
consider the integration of multiple schedule instance scenario variations into the training
process of a brain. Additionally, the developed solution incorporates a set of first-level
sorting policies to pre-process the agent populations. However, it would be of interest to
investigate the feasibility of employing multi-stage sorting policies. Despite the expected
increase in the required for model training time as the complexity of the RL curriculum
expands, it is anticipated that combining training across multiple scenarios and introducing
multi-level sorting policies will lead to further enhancement in the scheduling performance
of a prospective RL-enhanced LMSP solution.
Finally, informed by an airline expert, it is suggested to investigate the possibility to de-
velop an integrated solution tackling the tail assignment problem and the subsequent line
78
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:87==
maintenance scheduling problem in the form of an RL-enhanced decision support sys-
tem. Drawing upon insights from Lee et al. (2022), an excellent foundation is laid out for
creating an RL algorithm to handle multi-fleet aircraft recovery during airline disruptions.
The research also offers guidance on how to design a more advanced RL approach in-
corporating multiple reward functions to provide highly flexible and adaptable solutions to
recover an airline’s aircraft routing problem, which includes the tail assignment problem
as illustrated in fig. 2.1. However, the study by Lee et al. (2022) finds that the presented
methodology does produce unnecessary aircraft swaps, which are associated with crew
duty changes adding non-operational costs and consumption of other resources. Addi-
tionally, due to the limitations of Project Bonsai outlined in section 3.3.2, it is suggested
to investigate the adoption of a more advanced RL platform offering a higher level of
customization. Therefore, it is recommended to investigate how these insights could be
incorporated into a future integrated RL-enhanced tail assignment and line maintenance
scheduling solution.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
79
==PAGE:88==
9
Conclusion
Balancing cost and planning challenges, airlines strive to minimize maintenance expenses
while upholding passenger safety and fleet airworthiness. Enhanced planning contributes
to enhance operational efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and safety. To assist airlines to
leverage benefits of efficient maintenance planning, previous work by Shaukat et al. (2020)
offers optimization solutions addressing the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem.
While airlines have traditionally leveraged optimization-based approaches for planning,
machine-learning methods are gaining traction. Recent research demonstrates that uti-
lizing reinforcement learning proves to be effective in optimizing long-term maintenance
check planning and assisting in recovering disrupted airline schedules. Expanding on
prior methods developed by Shaukat et al. (2020), this study explores using simulation and
reinforcement learning to address the aircraft line maintenance scheduling problem. Ad-
ditionally, this study aims to investigate differences and opportunities of an RL-enhanced
scheduling approach with previously published methods.
To tackle this challenge, a hybrid simulation model is developed. The simulation envi-
ronment replicates an airline’s line maintenance scheduling system and incorporating a
two-step scheduling process and realistic input data inspired upon previous research con-
ducted by Shaukat et al. (2020). The model development is guided by Rossetti (2016) who
provides a refined general problem-solving methodology for applying simulation. Collab-
orating with a reinforcement learning environment, the simulation model includes a range
of scheduling policies to simulate schedule outcome adjustments. This collaborative pro-
cedure facilitates the training of two RL-enhanced LMSP methods.
To address the research question, a three-themed experimental study is conducted. The
impact of diverse scheduling policies on the scheduling performance is analyzed, reveal-
ing that the novel LMSP method’s scheduling outcome depends more on the applied op-
portunity sorting policy than the job sorting component. Optimal scheduling policies are
identified, primarily linked to oSortingPolicy = 20, with a job sorting policy’s significance
increasing in complex scenarios. The RL-enhanced LMSP method achieves promising
results in line with benchmark schedules, showing deviations of 0.8% to 1.3% in O.F.
value on a diverse set of 29 scheduling scenarios. Further, it is identified that increasing
scheduling complexity also increases solution time. RL-enhanced methods demonstrate
adaptability across diverse test cases, where the quality of resulting schedules differs
from published methods by 20%. However, it is crucial to note that the RL-enhanced
LMSP method incorporates a different timetabling functionality and the published solu-
tion’s mathematical formulation is more constraint.
It is argued that the incorporated LMSP method in this study aligns more closely with
real-world airline practices contrary to the mathematical formulation tailored for the exact
method proposed by Shaukat et al. (2020). Moreover, it is demonstrated that the empha-
sis on achieving exact solutions can result in the displacement of mandatory jobs from
their optimal maintenance slots, potentially impacting the resulting schedule results.
In terms of efficiency, the RL methods require on average 24 seconds for feasible sched-
ules, offering swift adaptation and experimental problem-solving for airlines compared to
the 10-minute exact method. However, the RL-enhanced methods are outperformed by
the superior scheduling efficiency of the previously published heuristic-based approach.
Finally, RL methods demand a 3 hour 36-minute training time before deployment.
80
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:89==
Lastly, the study suggests opportunities for future research, expanding the current RL-
enhanced LMSP method’s simulation environment to replicate real-world airline mainte-
nance scheduling more realistically. Furthermore, the potential benefits of incorporating
more advanced reinforcement learning concepts are outlined, expected to yield more ro-
bust and improved scheduling outcomes. The study’s results are then discussed and
evaluated in collaboration with an airline expert, revealing that the RL-enhanced LMSP
solution could offer maintenance planners more data-driven decision support, and an it-
erative solution approach in comparison to existing line maintenance scheduling prac-
tices. Additionally, the developed RL-enhanced LMSP solution’s adaptability to address
the tail assignment problem is recognized, which represents a strategically more valuable
and higher hierarchy problem for a typical airline. Lastly, the possibility of integration is
proposed, envisioning a future AI-enhanced airline planning facilitated by an integrated
RL-enhanced tail assignment and line maintenance scheduling solution.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
81
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
Abar, S., Theodoropoulos, G. K., Lemarinier, P., & O’Hare, G. M. (2017). Agent based
modelling and simulation tools: A review of the state-of-art software. Computer
Science Review, 24, 13–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2017.03.001
Airbus. (2023). Airbus Skywise [Accessed on June 9, 2023]. https://aircraft.airbus.com/
en/services/enhance/skywise
Albakkoush, S., Pagone, E., & Salonitis, K. (2020). An approach to airline MRO operators
planning and scheduling during aircraft line maintenance checks using discrete
event simulation. Procedia Manufacturing, 54, 160–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.promfg.2021.07.024
Andrade, P., Silva, C., Ribeiro, B., & Santos, B. F. (2021). Aircraft maintenance check
scheduling using reinforcement learning. Aerospace, 8. https://doi.org/10.3390/
aerospace8040113
AnyLogic. (n.d.). Anylogic editions: Ple, researcher, professional [Accessed on June 24,
2023]. https://anylogic.help/anylogic/ui/editions.html
AnyLogic. (2019). White paper: Multimethod simulation modeling for business [Accessed
on June 24, 2023]. https://www.anylogic.com/blog/whitepaper- multimethod-
simulation-modeling-for-business/
AnyLogic. (2020). Project Bonsai End-to-End Workflow - YouTube [Accessed on March
12, 2023]. https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v= - iTSZaG3lg8 & ab _ channel =
AnyLogic
AnyLogic. (2022). Training ai-agents with microsoft project bonsai [Accessed on June 18,
2023]. https://www.anylogic.com/features/artificial-intelligence/microsoft-bonsai/
AnyLogic. (2023). Reinforcement Learning experiment [Accessed on March 12, 2023].
https://anylogic.help/anylogic/experiments/rl-experiment.html
Arulkumaran, K., Deisenroth, M. P., Brundage, M., & Bharath, A. A. (2017). Deep rein-
forcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(6), 26–
38.
Barnhart, C., Belobaba, P., & Odoni, A. R. (2003). Applications of operations research in
the air transport industry. Transportation Science, 37. https://doi.org/10.1287/
trsc.37.4.368.23276
Barnhart, C., & Cohn, A. (2004). Airline schedule planning: Accomplishments and op-
portunities. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 6, 3–22. https:
//doi.org/10.1287/MSOM.1030.0018
Barnhart, C., & Smith, B. (2012). Quantitative problem solving methods in the airline in-
dustry : A modeling methodology handbook. Springer.
Bazargan, M. (2016). Airline operations and scheduling. Routeledge. https://doi.org/10.
4324/9781315566474
Belobaba, P., Odoni, A., & Barnhart, C. (2009). The global airline industry. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9780470744734
Brailsford, S. (2014). Discrete-event simulation is alive and kicking. Journal of Simulation,
8(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1057/jos.2013.13
Brailsford, S., Eldabi, T., Kunc, M., Mustafee, N., & Osorio, A. (2019). Hybrid simulation
modelling in operational research: A state-of-the-art review.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J., Schulman, J., Tang, J., & Zaremba,
W. (2016). Openai gym.
82
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:91==
Cadarso, L., & de Celis, R. (2017). Integrated airline planning: Robust update of schedul-
ing and fleet balancing under demand uncertainty. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, 81, 227–245. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRC.2017.06.
003
Callewaert, P., Verhagen, W. J., & Curran, R. (2018). Integrating maintenance work progress
monitoring into aircraft maintenance planning decision support. Transportation Re-
search Procedia, 29, 58–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRPRO.2018.02.006
Černỳ, M. (2019). Narrow big data in a stream: Computational limitations and regression.
Information Sciences, 486, 379–392.
DeepLearning.AI. (2023). Chatgpt prompt engineering for developers: Two types of large
language models (llm) [Accessed on 03 June 2023]. DeepLearning.AI. https://
learn.deeplearning.ai/chatgpt-prompt-eng/lesson/1/introduction
Deng, Q., Santos, B. F., & Curran, R. (2020). A practical dynamic programming based
methodology for aircraft maintenance check scheduling optimization. European
Journal of Operational Research, 281, 256–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.
2019.08.025
Deng, Q., Santos, B. F., & Verhagen, W. J. (2021). A novel decision support system for
optimizing aircraft maintenance check schedule and task allocation. Decision Sup-
port Systems, 146, 113545. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DSS.2021.113545
Doran, G. T., et al. (1981). There’sa smart way to write management’s goals and objec-
tives. Management review, 70(11), 35–36.
Feo, T. A., & Bard, J. F. (1989). Flight scheduling and maintenance base planning. Man-
agement Science, 35(12), 1415–1432.
Glockner, C. (2018). Simulators: The key training environment for applied deep reinforce-
ment learning [Accessed on June 18, 2023]. https:/ /towardsdatascience. com/
simulators-the-key-training-environment-for-applied-deep-reinforcement-learning-
9a54353f494f
Google Cloud. (2023). Operations Decision Support Suite (OPSD) at Swiss International
Air Lines [Accessed on June 9, 2023]. https://cloud.google.com/customers/swiss
Google Research. (2021). Speeding up reinforcement learning with a new physics simu-
lation engine [Accessed on June 18, 2023]. https://ai.googleblog.com/2021/07/
speeding-up-reinforcement-learning-with.html
Gopalan, R., & Talluri, K. T. (1998). The aircraft maintenance routing problem. Operations
research, 46(2), 260–271.
Grigoryev, I. (2022). Anylogic in three days: A quick course in simulation modeling [Ac-
cessed on June 24, 2023]. https://www.anylogic.com/upload/al-in-3-days/anylogic-
in-3-days.pdf
Hölzel, N. B., Schilling, T., & Gollnick, V. (2014). An aircraft lifecycle approach for the
cost-benefit analysis of prognostics and condition-based maintenance based on
discrete-event simulation. Phm 2014 - Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
the Prognostics and Health Management Society 2014, 435–450.
Hu, Y., Miao, X., Zhang, J., Liu, J., & Pan, E. (2021). Reinforcement learning-driven main-
tenance strategy: A novel solution for long-term aircraft maintenance decision op-
timization. Computers Industrial Engineering, 153, 107056. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.CIE.2020.107056
Hughes, G. (2006). Right place, right time: The art of short- & long- term planning. Aircraft
Commerce, Issue 46, 53–57.
IATA. (2021). IATA Maintenance Cost Technical Group Report 2021 [Accessed on 13
March 2023]. https://www.iata.org/contentassets/bf8ca67c8bcd4358b3d004b0d6d0916f/
fy2021-mctg-report_public.pdf
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
83
==PAGE:92==
Jiang, Z., Xu, D., & Liang, J. (2017). A deep reinforcement learning framework for the
financial portfolio management problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.10059.
Kiran, B. R., Sobh, I., Talpaert, V., Mannion, P., Al Sallab, A. A., Yogamani, S., & Pérez,
P. (2021). Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6), 4909–4926.
Kober, J., Bagnell, J. A., & Peters, J. (2013). Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey.
The International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(11), 1238–1274.
Lagos, C., Delgado, F., & Klapp, M. A. (2020). Dynamic optimization for airline main-
tenance operations. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2020.0984, 54, 998–1015. https:
//doi.org/10.1287/TRSC.2020.0984
Larsen, A. (2021a). Input modeling - lecture slides from 42417 Simulation in Operations
Management [Accessed on May 15, 2023]. https://learn.inside.dtu.dk
Larsen, A. (2021b). Introduction to simulation - lecture slides from 42417 Simulation in
Operations Management [Accessed on May 15, 2023]. https://learn.inside.dtu.dk
Law, A. M. (2007). Simulation modeling and analysis. McGraw-Hill.
Lee, J., Lee, K., & Moon, I. (2022). A reinforcement learning approach for multi-fleet
aircraft recovery under airline disruption. Applied Soft Computing, 129, 109556.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ASOC.2022.109556
Levin, A. (1971). Scheduling and fleet routing models for transportation systems. Trans-
portation Science, 5(3), 232–255.
Li, Chu, W., Langford, J., & Schapire, R. E. (2010). A contextual-bandit approach to
personalized news article recommendation. Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web, 661–670.
Li, Y. (2018). Deep reinforcement learning: An overview.
Liu, Y., Wang, T., Zhang, H., Cheutet, V., & Shen, G. (2019). The design and simulation
of an autonomous system for aircraft maintenance scheduling. Computers and
Industrial Engineering, 137, 106041. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106041
Lufthansa Group. (2023). CleanTech Hub and SWISS pioneer holistic data-driven opti-
mization of operations for Lufthansa Group [Accessed on June 9, 2023]. https://
cleantechhub.lufthansagroup.com/en/focus-areas/digital-solutions-and-procedures/
ops-suite.html
Lufthansa Systems. (2023). NetLine/Ops ++ aiOCC [Accessed on June 9, 2023]. https:
//www.lhsystems.com/solutions/ground-operations-solutions/operations-control/
netlineops-aiocc
Lufthansa Technik. (2023). Aviatar - The digital operations suite [Accessed on June 9,
2023]. https://www.lufthansa-technik.com/en/aviatar
MacKenzie, A., Miller, J. O., Hill, R. R., & Chambal, S. P. (2012). Application of agent
based modelling to aircraft maintenance manning and sortie generation. Simula-
tion Modelling Practice and Theory, 20(1), 89–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
simpat.2011.09.001
Maidstone, R. (2012). Discrete event simulation, system dynamics and agent based sim-
ulation: Discussion and comparison. System, 1(6), 1–6.
Microsoft. (n.d.). Azure for students [Accessed on June 18, 2023]. https://azure.microsoft.
com/en-au/pricing/offers/ms-azr-0170p/
Microsoft. (2020). Unsw switches cloud-based data lakes for ai and ml capabilities [Ac-
cessed on June 18, 2023]. https://www.microsoftpartnercommunity.com/t5/Data-
AI-Partner-Community/UNSW-switches-cloud-based-data-lakes-for-AI-and-ML-
capabilities/td-p/25625
84
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:93==
Oliver Wymann. (2022). Global fleet and mro market forecast 2022 - 2032 [Accessed on
07 April 2023]. https://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-wyman/v2/
publications/2022/feb/MRO-2022-Master-file_v5.pdf
OpenAI. (2023). What is chatgpt? [Accessed on 22 March 2023]. https://help.openai.com/
en/articles/6783457-what-is-chatgpt
OpenAI Gym. (2023). Gym documentation [Accessed on June 18, 2023]. https://www.
gymlibrary.dev/
Osiński, B., Jakubowski, A., Zięcina, P., Miłoś, P., Galias, C., Homoceanu, S., & Michalewski,
H. (2020). Simulation-based reinforcement learning for real-world autonomous
driving. 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
6411–6418. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196730
Papakostas, N., Papachatzakis, P., Xanthakis, V., Mourtzis, D., & Chryssolouris, G. (2010).
An approach to operational aircraft maintenance planning. Decision Support Sys-
tems, 48, 604–612. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DSS.2009.11.010
Pathmind. (2023). A beginner’s guide to deep reinforcement learning [Accessed on 27
April 2023]. https://wiki.pathmind.com/deep-reinforcement-learning
Prathamesh, I. (2022). Top reinforcement learning tools/platforms in 2022 [Accessed on
June 18, 2023]. https://www.marktechpost.com/2022/09/15/top-reinforcement-
learning-tools-platforms-in-2022/
Project Bonsai. (2023). The bonsai platform [Accessed on June 18, 2023]. https://learn.
microsoft.com/en-us/bonsai/overview/platform/how-it-works
Rossetti, M. D. (2016). Simulation modeling and arena. Wiley.
Ruther, S., Boland, N., Engineer, F. G., & Evans, I. (2017). Integrated aircraft routing,
crew pairing, and tail assignment: Branch-and-price with many pricing problems.
Transportation Science, 51, 177–195. https://doi.org/10.1287/TRSC.2015.0664/
SUPPL_FILE/TRSC.2015.0664-SM.PDF
Saggar, S., Tomasella, M., Cattaneo, G., & Matta, A. (2021). Enhanced operational man-
agement of airport ground support equipment for better aircraft turnaround perfor-
mance. Proceedings - Winter Simulation Conference, 2021-, 12 pp. https://doi.
org/10.1109/WSC52266.2021.9715320
Sallab, A. E., Abdou, M., Perot, E., & Yogamani, S. (2016). End-to-end deep reinforcement
learning for lane keeping assist. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.04340.
Senturk, C., & Ozkol, I. (2018). The effects of the use of single task-oriented maintenance
concept and more accurate letter check alternatives on the reduction of scheduled
maintenance downtime of aircraft. International Journal of Mechanical Engineering
and Robotics Research, 7. https://doi.org/10.18178/ijmerr.7.2.189-196
Shaukat, S., Katscher, M., Wu, C. L., Delgado, F., & Larrain, H. (2020). Aircraft line main-
tenance scheduling and optimisation. Journal of Air Transport Management, 89,
101914. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2020.101914
Siebers, P. O., MacAl, C. M., Garnett, J., Buxton, D., & Pidd, M. (2010). Discrete-event
simulation is dead, long live agent-based simulation! Journal of Simulation, 4(3),
204–210. https://doi.org/10.1057/jos.2010.14
Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, A., Hubert,
T., Baker, L., Lai, M., Bolton, A., et al. (2017). Mastering the game of go without
human knowledge. nature, 550(7676), 354–359.
Sriram, C., & Haghani, A. (2003). An optimization model for aircraft maintenance schedul-
ing and re-assignment. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 37(1),
29–48.
Sumari, S., Ibrahim, R., Zakaria, N. H., & Ab Hamid, A. H. (2013). Comparing three simu-
lation model using taxonomy: System dynamic simulation, discrete event simula-
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
85
==PAGE:94==
tion and agent based simulation. International Journal of Management Excellence,
1(3), 54–59.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press.
Tesauro, G., et al. (1995). Temporal difference learning and td-gammon. Communications
of the ACM, 38(3), 58–68.
Turner, C. J., & Garn, W. (2022). Next generation des simulation: A research agenda for
human centric manufacturing systems. Journal of Industrial Information Integra-
tion, 28, 100354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2022.100354
Widmer, S., Shaukat, S., & Wu, C. L. (2023). Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using
Simulation and Reinforcement Learning. Proceedings of the 2023 Winter Simula-
tion Conference, December 10-13, San Antonio, US.
Witteman, M., Deng, Q., & Santos, B. F. (2021). A bin packing approach to solve the
aircraft maintenance task allocation problem. European Journal of Operational
Research, 294, 365–376. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2021.01.027
Zhou, L., Liang, Z., Chou, C.-A., & Chaovalitwongse, W. A. (2020). Airline planning and
scheduling: Models and solution methodologies. Frontiers of Engineering Man-
agement, 7, 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/S42524-020-0093-5
86
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:95==
A
Learning Objectives
The following project-specific learning objectives have been formulated to complement
the official learning objectives for a DTU master thesis, taking into account the problem
formulation and the clarified scope of the project.
• Understand and describe the concept of airline planning and discuss the integration
of aircraft maintenance scheduling in the general airline planning process as well as
in the example of the project partner airline.
• Create a conceptual model and define performance metrics that capture the differ-
ent aspects and behavior of the system by incorporating the job scheduling and
schedule evaluation logic presented by Shaukat et al. (2020).
• Build a simulation model considering the input data and develop, verify, and validate
test scenarios.
• Design and conduct an experimental study that addresses uncertainty affecting
schedule robustness.
• Analyze the performance of the developed model regarding a schedule’s objective
function value and assess the impact of reinforcement learning on the scheduling
results.
• Evaluate and synthesize the use of simulation and reinforcement learning in the
context of aircraft maintenance scheduling, based on the results of the case study.
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
87
==PAGE:96==
B
DEGREE Framework
Figure B.1: DEGREE general methodology applied to conducting a simulation project as
outlined by Rossetti (2016).
88
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:97==
C
Sorting Policies
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
89
==PAGE:98==
Table C.1: Maintenance job and opportunity sorting policies for pre-processing the input
data including the numeric sorting policy identifier and objective of the policy.
Job Sorting Policies
Policy id
Objective
0
Asc Job Index
1
Desc Job Index
2
Prioritize non-mandatory Jobs (Asc mandatory Jobs)
3
Prioritize mandatory Jobs (Desc mandatory Jobs)
4
Asc Job Duration
5
Desc Job Duration
6
Asc Job Resource Type 1 Consumption
7
Desc Job Resource Type 1 Consumption
8
Asc Job Resource Type 2 Consumption
9
Desc Job Resource Type 2 Consumption
10
Asc Job Resource Type 3 Consumption
11
Desc Job Resource Type 3 Consumption
12
Asc Job Deadline by Hour
13
Desc Job Deadline by Hour
14
Asc Job Deadline by Flight Cycle
15
Desc Job Deadline by Flight Cycle
16
Asc Job Deadline by Calendar Day
17
Desc Job Deadline by Calendar Day
Opportunity Sorting Policies
Policy id
Objective
0
Asc Opp Index
1
Desc Opp Index
2
Asc Opp Starting Time
3
Desc Opp Starting Time
4
Asc Opp Ending Time
5
Desc Opp Ending Time
6
Asc Opp Duration
7
Desc Opp Duration
8
Asc current Aircaft Use by Hour
9
Desc current Aircaft Use by Hour
10
Asc Aircaft Use by Flight Cycle
11
Desc Aircaft Use by Flight Cycle
12
Asc Aircaft Use by Calendar Day
13
Desc Aircaft Use by Calendar Day
14
Asc Opp Resource Type 1 Capacity
15
Desc Opp Resource Type 1 Capacity
16
Asc Opp Resource Type 2 Capacity
17
Desc Opp Resource Type 2 Capacity
18
Asc Opp Resource Type 3 Capacity
19
Asc Opp Resource Type 3 Capacity
20
min O.F. Value of Job-Opp Pair
21
max O.F. Value of Job-Opp Pair
90
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:99==
D
Algorithms
Algorithm 3 Concept: Initializing Job agents
1: offsetDueTimeHr ←15
2: offsetDueTimeFc ←10
3: offsetDueTimeDy ←1
4: R1CapacityperHour ←3
5: R2CapacityperHour ←2
6: R3CapacityperHour ←1
7: BinsperHour ←10
8: for each j upon model startup do
9:
j.OF ←1000
10:
j.DueTimeHr ←max(0, j.DeadlineHr −offsetDueTimeHr ▷set lower bound
to 0
11:
j.DueTimeFc ←max(0, j.DeadlineFc −offsetDueTimeFc)
12:
j.DueTimeDy ←max(0, j.DeadlineDy −offsetDueTimeDy)
13:
j.ExtendedDuration ←max
"
j.R1Requirement
R1CapacityperHour,
j.R2Requirement
R2CapacityperHour,
j.R3Requirement
R3CapacityperHour
#
14:
j.BinCount ←ceil(BinsperHour ∗max(j.Duration, j.ExtendedDuration)
▷
round up bin count to next int
15:
j.R1BinRequirement ←(j.R1Requirement/BinCount)
16:
j.R2BinRequirement ←(j.R2Requirement/BinCount)
17:
j.R3BinRequirement ←(j.R3Requirement/BinCount)
18: end for
Algorithm 4 Concept: Initializing Opportunity agents
1: BinsperHour ←10
2: for each o upon model startup do
3:
o.MatchedJobOF ←1000
4:
o.StartBin ←floor(o.StartTime ∗BinsperHour)
▷Rounded down to account
for partial bins
5:
o.EndBin ←floor(o.EndTime ∗BinsperHour) ▷Rounded down to account for
partial bins
6:
o.BinCount ←(o.EndBin −o.StartBin) + 1
▷Number of bins (inclusive)
7:
for all i ∈{o.StartBin, . . . , i < (o.EndBin + 1) do
8:
o.BinidCollection.add(i)
9:
end for
10: end for
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
91
==PAGE:100==
Algorithm 5 Concept: Initializing Resource bin agents
1: R1CapacityperHour ←3
2: R2CapacityperHour ←2
3: R3CapacityperHour ←1
4: BinsperHour ←10
5: for each r upon model startup do
6:
switch for each airport p ∈W, X, Y, Z, XXX do
7:
case W
8:
r.R1AirportW ←R1CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
9:
r.R2AirportW ←R2CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
10:
r.R3AirportW ←R3CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
11:
case X
12:
r.R1AirportX ←R1CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
13:
r.R2AirportX ←R2CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
14:
r.R3AirportX ←R3CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
15:
case Y
16:
r.R1AirportY ←R1CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
17:
r.R2AirportY ←R2CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
18:
r.R3AirportY ←R3CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
19:
case Z
20:
r.R1AirportZ ←R1CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
21:
r.R2AirportZ ←R2CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
22:
r.R3AirportZ ←R3CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
23:
case XXX
▷Resources for fictional airport holding unassigned jobs
24:
r.R1AirportXXX ←10
25:
r.R2AirportXXX ←10
26:
r.R3AirportXXX ←10
27: end for
92
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:101==
Algorithm 6 On Enter Opportunity Concept: Update Resource bin capacity levels
1: R1CapacityperHour ←3
2: R2CapacityperHour ←2
3: R3CapacityperHour ←1
4: BinsperHour ←10
5: for each o entering Matching Block do
6:
o.ResourceRequirementFeasible ←False
7:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR1.clear()
8:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR2.clear()
9:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR3.clear()
10:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR1.clear()
11:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR2.clear()
12:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR3.clear()
13:
for each r in Resources do
14:
if r.Binid < o.StartBin or r.Binid > o.EndBin then
15:
skip r and continue to next r
16:
end if
17:
R1InitialBinResLevel ←R1CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
18:
R2InitialBinResLevel ←R2CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
19:
R3InitialBinResLevel ←R3CapacityperHour/BinsperHour
20:
binFractionAdjustment ←0
21:
if r.Binid = o.StartBin and r.Binid > 0 then
22:
binFractionAdjustment ←o.StartTime −floor(o.StartTime)
23:
else if r.Binid = o.EndBin then
24:
binFractionAdjustment ←1 −(o.EndTime −floor(o.EndTime)
25:
else
26:
binFractionAdjustment ←0.0
27:
end if
28:
switch for each airport p ∈W, X, Y, Z, XXX do
29:
case W
30:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR1.add(r.R1AirportW −(R1InitialBinResLevel ∗
binFractionAdjustment)
31:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR2.add(r.R2AirportW −(R2InitialBinResLevel ∗
binFractionAdjustment)
32:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR3.add(r.R3AirportW −(R3InitialBinResLevel ∗
binFractionAdjustment)
33:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR1 ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR1
34:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR2 ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR2
35:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR3 ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR3
36:
case X
37:
do the same for resource capacity bins airport p = X
38:
case Y
39:
do the same for resource capacity bins airport p = Y
40:
case Z
41:
do the same for resource capacity bins airport p = Z
42:
case XXX
43:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR1.add(r.R1AirportXXX)
44:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR2.add(r.R2AirportXXX)
45:
o.BinCapacityPreMatchR3.add(r.R3AirportXXX)
46:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR1 ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR1
47:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR2 ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR2
48:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR3 ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR3
49:
end for
50: end for
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
93
==PAGE:102==
Algorithm 7 On Enter Job Concept O.F. Calculation: Calculating O.F. value for subset of
feasible opportunities
1: for each j entering Matching Block do
2:
for each o in Opportunity do
3:
if o.Duration ≥max(j.Duration, j.ExtendedDuration) and o.Aircraft =
j.Aircraft then
4:
OF ←0
5:
if j.DeadlineHr ̸= 0 then
6:
OF ←(j.DueTimeHr −o.AircraftUtilizationHr) ∗1
7:
else if j.DeadlineFc ̸= 0 then
8:
OF ←(j.DueTimeFc −o.AircraftUtilizationFc) ∗2.5
9:
else if j.DeadlineDy ̸= 0 then
10:
OF ←(j.DueTimeDy −o.AircraftUtilizationDy) ∗10
11:
else if j.Category = non −mandatory then
12:
OF ←0.0
13:
end if
14:
o.MatchedJobOF ←OF
15:
end if
16:
end for
17: end for
94
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:103==
Algorithm 8 On Enter Job Concept Bin Capacity Calculation: Fractional bin capacity
adjustment and calculation of potential post-match resource bin capacities
1: for each j entering Matching Block do
2:
for each o in Opportunity do
3:
if o.Duration < max(j.Duration, j.ExtendedDuration) and o.Aircraft ̸=
j.Aircraft and o.Aircraft ̸= imaginary then
4:
o.ResourceRequirementFeasible ←False
5:
skip o and continue to next o
6:
end if
7:
for each i in length(BinIdCollection) do
8:
binresource1Level ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR1.get(i)
9:
binresource2Level ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR2.get(i)
10:
binresource3Level ←o.BinCapacityPreMatchR3.get(i)
11:
binFractionAdjustment ←0
12:
if i = first element of o.BinIdCollection then
13:
binFractionAdjustment ←1 −(o.StartTime −floor(o.StartTime)
14:
else if i = last element of o.BinIdCollection then
15:
binFractionAdjustment ←o.EndTime −floor(EndTime)
16:
else
17:
binFractionAdjustment ←1
18:
end if
19:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR1(i)
←
(binresource1Level
−
(j.R1BinRequirement ∗binFractionAdjustment)
20:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR2(i)
←
(binresource2Level
−
(j.R2BinRequirement ∗binFractionAdjustment)
21:
o.BinCapacityPostMatchR3(i)
←
(binresource3Level
−
(j.R3BinRequirement ∗binFractionAdjustment)
22:
end for
23:
end for
24: end for
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
95
==PAGE:104==
Algorithm 9 On Enter Job Concept Resource Constraint Feasibility: Identify resource
constraint feasibility and set job starting time
1: for each j entering Matching Block do
2:
for each o in Opportunity do
3:
if o.Duration < max(j.Duration, j.ExtendedDuration) and o.Aircraft ̸= j.Aircraft
and o.Aircraft ̸= imaginary then
4:
o.ResourceRequirementFeasible ←False
5:
skip o and continue to next o
6:
end if
7:
o.FindStartingBin ←−1
8:
for all i ∈{0, . . . , i < (length(o.BinIdCollection) −j.BinCount)} do
9:
allNonNegative ←True
10:
for all j ∈{0, . . . , j < (j.BinCount + 1)} do
11:
if o.BinCapacityPostMatchR1(i + j) < 0 or o.BinCapacityPostMatchR2(i +
j) < 0 or o.BinCapacityPostMatchR3(i + j) < 0 then
12:
allNonNegative ←False
13:
break
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
if allNonNegative = True then
17:
o.FindStartingBin ←i
18:
o.ResourceRequirementFeasible ←True
19:
if i = 0 then
20:
o.MatchJobStartTime ←o.StartTime
21:
o.MatchJobStartBin ←o.StartBin
22:
o.MatchJobEndTime ←o.StartTime + max(j.Duration, j.ExtendedDuration)
23:
o.MatchJobEndBin ←o.MatchJobStartBin + j.BinCount
24:
else
25:
o.MatchJobStartTime ←(o.StartBin + o.FindStartingBin)/10)
▷10
bins per hour
26:
o.MatchJobStartBin ←(o.StartBin + o.FindStartingBin)
27:
o.MatchJobEndTime ←(o.MatchJobStartBin + j.BinCount)/10)
28:
o.MatchJobEndBin ←o.MatchJobStartBin + (j.BinCount −1)
29:
end if
30:
break
31:
end if
32:
end for
33:
end for
34: end for
96
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:105==
Algorithm 10 Function: Check Matching Conditions
1: function CheckMatchingConditions(j, o)
2:
condition1 ←j.Aircraft = o.Aircraft ? j.Aircraft = o.Aircraft : j.Aircraft ̸=
o.Aircraaft and o.Airport = fictional
3:
condition2 ←o.Duration ≤max(j.Duration, j.ExtendedDuration)
4:
condition3 ←o.ResourceRequirementFeasible = True
5:
condition4
←
j.Category
=
mandatory
and j.DeadlineHr
̸=
0 ?
o.AircraftUtilizationHr ≤j.DeadlineHr : j.DeadlineHr ≤o.UtilizationHr
6:
condition5
←
j.Category
=
mandatory
and
j.DeadlineFc
̸=
0
?
o.AircraftUtilizationFc
≤
j.DeadlineFc
:
j.DeadlineFc
≤
o.AircraftUtilizationFc
7:
condition6
←
j.Category
=
mandatory
and
j.DeadlineDy
̸=
0
?
o.AircraftUtilizationDy
≤
j.DeadlineDy
:
j.DeadlineDy
≤
o.AircraftUtilizationDy
8:
if condition1 and condition2 and condition3 and condition4 and condition5 and
condition6 then
9:
return True
10:
else
11:
return False
12:
end if
13: end function
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
97
==PAGE:106==
Algorithm 11 On Match Concept: Job to Opportunity pairing
1: j ←current job agent in Matching Block
2: candidateList ←empty
3: JobsScheduled ←0
4: JobsUnscheduled ←0
5: CollectionOFHr ←empty
6: CollectionOFFc ←empty
7: CollectionOFDy ←empty
8: for each o in Matching Block do
9:
if CHECKMATCHINGCONDITIONS(j, o) = True then
10:
candidateList.add(o)
11:
else
12:
o ←infeasible
13:
end if
14: end for
15: apply(OppSortingPolicy) to candidateList
16: for first o in candidateList do
▷Select top agent from sorted candidatelist
17:
o.MatchJobId ←j.Id
18:
o.MatchJobR1BinRequirement ←j.R1BinRequirement
19:
o.MatchJobR2BinRequirement ←j.R2BinRequirement
20:
o.MatchJobR3BinRequirement ←j.R3BinRequirement
21:
if j.DeadlineHr ̸= 0 then
22:
CollectionOFHr.add(o.MatchedJobOF)
23:
else if j.DeadlineFc ̸= 0 then
24:
CollectionOFFc.add(o.MatchedJobOF)
25:
else if j.DeadlineDy ̸= 0 then
26:
CollectionOFDy.add(o.MatchedJobOF)
27:
end if
28:
if o.Airport = fictional then
29:
JobsUnsched ←JobsUnsched + 1
30:
else
31:
JobsScheduled ←JobsScheduled + 1
32:
end if
33: end for
Algorithm 12 On Exit Job Concept: Calculate Schedule Objective Function Value
1: for each j exiting Matching Block do
2:
EarlynessHr ←sum(CollectionOFHr, j →j < 0 ? |j| : 0);
3:
EarlynessFc ←sum(CollectionOFFc, j →j < 0 ? |j| : 0);
4:
EarlynessDy ←sum(CollectionOFDy, j →j < 0 ? |j| : 0);
5:
TardynessHr ←sum(CollectionOFHr, j →j > 0 ? |j| : 0);
6:
TardynessFc ←sum(CollectionOFFc, j →j > 0 ? |j| : 0);
7:
TardynessDy ←sum(CollectionOFDy, j →j > 0 ? |j| : 0);
8:
ObjFunctionHr ←(EarlynessHr + TardynessHr)
9:
ObjFunctionFc ←(EarlynessFc + TardynessFc)
10:
ObjFunctionDy ←(EarlynessDy + TardynessDy)
11:
OF ←(ObjFunctionHr + ObjFunctionFc + ObjFunctionDy);
12: end for
98
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
==PAGE:107==
Algorithm 13 On Exit Opportunity Concept: Update Resource bin capacity level by sub-
tracting consumed job resource bin requirement from affected bins
1: for each o exiting Matching Block do
2:
for each r in Resources do
3:
if r.Binid < o.MatchJobStartBin or r.Binid > o.MatchJobEndBin then
4:
skip r and continue to next r
5:
end if
6:
R1MatchBinResConsumption ←o.MatchJobR1BinRequirement
7:
R2MatchBinResConsumption ←o.MatchJobR2BinRequirement
8:
R3MatchBinResConsumption ←o.MatchJobR3BinRequirement
9:
binFractionAdjustment ←0
10:
if r.Binid = o.StartBin and o.StartBin = o.MatchJobStartBin and r.Binid > 0
then
11:
binFractionAdjustment ←1 −(o.StartTime −floor(o.StartTime))
12:
else if r.Binid = o.MatchJobEndBin then
13:
binFractionAdjustment ←o.MatchJobEndTime −floor(o.MatchJobEndTime)
14:
else
15:
binFractionAdjustment ←1.0
16:
end if
17:
switch for each airport p ∈W, X, Y, Z, XXX do
18:
case W
19:
r.R1AirportW
←
r.R1AirportW
−(R1MatchBinResConsumption ∗
binFractionAdjustment)
20:
r.R2AirportW
←
r.R2AirportW
−(R2MatchBinResConsumption ∗
binFractionAdjustment)
21:
r.R3AirportW
←
r.R3AirportW
−
R3MatchBinResConsumption
∗
binFractionAdjustment)
22:
case X
23:
do the same for resource capacity bins airport p = X
24:
case Y
25:
do the same for resource capacity bins airport p = Y
26:
case Z
27:
do the same for resource capacity bins airport p = Z
28:
case XXX
29:
do the same for resource capacity bins airport p = XXX
30:
end for
31: end for
Aircraft Line Maintenance Scheduling using Simulation and Reinforcement Learning.
99
==PAGE:108==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
