==PAGE:1==
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
With Decentralized Coverage and Control
Master Thesis
Gowrisankar Chandrasekharan
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
With Decentralized Coverage and Control
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Gowrisankar Chandrasekharan
Programme:
Autonomous Systems
Period:
10th March 2023 to 10th August 2023
ECTS:
30
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Brovej, Build-
ing 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Automation and Con-
trol, Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Autonomous Systems, MSc Au-
tonomous Systems.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of calculus, control theory,
robotics, and programming.
Gowrisankar Chandrasekharan - s212919
Signature
Date
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis illustrates on developing a system for the decentralized coverage and control
of drone swarms, focusing on a partitioning strategy based on the Voronoi algorithm It will
employ an adaptive coverage and control strategy with Gaussian Regression and Parti-
cle Filter approaches for precision agriculture applications. The study leverages swarm
intelligence to address the challenges of large-scale crop monitoring and weed detec-
tion. The proposed solution utilizes the Robot Operating System (ROS) and MAVROS
for drone control and inter-drone communication. The decentralized but connected net-
work of drones facilitates the calculation of individual Voronoi cells on their own, allowing
drones to adjust their positions towards the centroid of their respective cells, resulting in
an adaptive Voronoi partitioning of the agricultural field. Aimed at efficient coverage and
task distribution among the drones, the algorithm employs probabilistic estimation tech-
niques using Gaussian Process Regression or Particle Filters. The performance is also
evaluated within a physics simulation framework set up with Gazebo, ROS, ArduPilot
SITL, MAVROS, and MAVLink. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed approach in simulations with the drone dynamics involved, highlighting its potential
for real-world agricultural applications. This study contributes to the field of precision agri-
culture and smart farming by opening new avenues for the use of drone swarms, thereby
enhancing efficiency and productivity.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Matteo Fumagalli from DTU,
for his continuous support, encouragement, and guidance throughout this research. His
timely interventions with profound knowledge, insightful feedback, and especially in sug-
gesting critical detours in the implementation process have been instrumental in shaping
this work and keeping me motivated.
Special thanks are also due to my Ph.D. guide, Jeppe Heini Mikkelsen, whose technical
expertise, constructive criticism, and valuable suggestions have greatly contributed to the
quality and rigor of this research. His willingness to share his time and knowledge has
been a source of constant inspiration.
Finally, I extend my heartfelt appreciation to my family and friends for their unwavering
love, encouragement, and belief in me. Their support has been my strength and motiva-
tion throughout this endeavor.
This research would not have been possible without the collective efforts of all these
individuals, and I am profoundly grateful for their contributions.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Swarm Algorithms in Agriculture: A Comprehensive Review . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
SAGA: A Pioneering Approach to Swarm Robotics in Agriculture . . . . . .
5
2.3
Geometric Partitioning Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Combinatorial Algorithms and Metaheuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Adaptive Coverage Control with Voronoi Partitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Methodology
14
3.1
Problem Set-Up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Path Planning for Sensing within Partition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Estimation Strategies within Partition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.4
Locational Optimization for Voronoi Centroid Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.5
Consensus Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Simulation
32
4.1
Simulation Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Coordinate Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.3
Communication and Scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Results and Discussion
43
5.1
Algorithm Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Gazebo Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6
Challenges
55
7
Conclusion and Future Work
56
Bibliography
57
A Appendix
60
A.1 Locational Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.2 Consensus Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.3 Lyapunov-Type Proof
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.4 Graph Laplacian and Its Relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.5 Learning Law Interpretations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Precision agriculture is an emerging area of interest to optimize agricultural practices and
address the challenges faced by conventional farming methods. With the rapid advance-
ments in technology, the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or more commonly
known as drones is gaining significant attention owing to their immense potential in revo-
lutionizing farming practices. This master’s thesis focuses on the development and eval-
uation of a system that will employ a decentralized multi-agent system to enable efficient
and precise farming operations in agricultural fields.
The primary objective of this project is to devise an algorithm that will orchestrate a swarm
of drones to achieve optimal coverage identifying areas that require additional attention
in an unknown environment. In this adventure, we will leverage Voronoi partitioning to
divide the agricultural field into regions and employ an adaptive decentralized coverage
control strategy, to allocate drones effectively and prioritize task(s) based on the needs
of each region. In an agricultural domain, this can include coverage, pesticide spraying,
crop watering, weed detection, and weed removal.
The algorithm’s performance will be evaluated first using simple simulations run on a
Python framework and visualized using plots. Later to validate its effectiveness, a mul-
tiagent physics simulation framework has been constructed using Gazebo, ROS (Robot
Operating System), ArduPilot SITL (Software-In-The-Loop), and MAVLink protocols. This
framework provides a realistic and controlled environment for testing the algorithm’s be-
havior, illustrating various other potential challenges, and will allow us in optimizing pa-
rameters, and refine the swarm coordination strategies.
The practical implementation of the algorithm will involve running experiments on physical
drones in real-world agricultural settings. These experiments can then be used to com-
pare and evaluate the simulation results, considering factors such as coverage efficiency,
task completion time, resource utilization, and overall system performance. By conduct-
ing practical evaluations based on the insights gained from the simulation, we will also
be able to validate the algorithm’s applicability and assess its performance in real-world
scenarios, although time constraints have made it still a work in progress at the time of
writing this report.
In conclusion, this master’s thesis endeavors to contribute to the field of precision agricul-
ture and smart farming by developing an innovative algorithm for coordinating a swarm
of drones in agricultural operations and setting up an integrated system in a physics sim-
ulation environment. By incorporating Voronoi partitioning and adaptive decentralized
coverage control, the algorithm aims to optimize resource allocation, enhance task ef-
ficiency, and improve overall farming practices. The combination of simulation-based
evaluation and practical experiments will provide valuable insights into the algorithm’s
performance (although this report is restricted only to the simulation results) and its po-
tential for real-world implementation, ultimately paving the way for more advanced and
sustainable farming practices in the future.
The code repository can be found at UAV: Decentralised Coverage Control
1.1
Motivation
The agriculture domain presents a myriad of challenges that require efficient and scal-
able solutions. These include but are not limited to, large-scale monitoring of crop health,
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
1
==PAGE:8==
precise application of fertilizers and pesticides, and timely detection and management
of pests and diseases in a dynamic large-scale environment. Traditional methods often
fall short in addressing these challenges due to their labor-intensive nature, lack of pre-
cision, and inability to scale. There are plenty of research and implementations currently
in the farming scenario with autonomous ground vehicles. The advent of drone technol-
ogy presents a promising boost by combining aerial and ground agents or could also be
a complete alternative altogether owing to the added benefits of aerial vehicles when it
comes to movement and coverage. However, the operation of a single drone is limited
by its coverage capacity and battery life. This motivates the need for swarm operations,
where a group of drones can collaboratively perform tasks optimally, thereby maximizing
coverage, minimizing operational time, and increasing overall efficiency. The decentral-
ized nature of swarm operations also enhances robustness, as the failure of a single drone
does not halt the entire operation. It will also create a much more scalable system as we
need not worry about increased overheads on any central resource with the addition of
new agents. Besides a decentralized and distributed system comes with the added benefit
of utilizing better the local information by each drone, while also leveraging simultaneous,
independent, asynchronous, and even heterogeneous operations all encompassed also
by their inter-agent communication. It is also worth mentioning that the SAGA Concept
[1] has been one of the key driving factors behind this pursuit of swarm operations with
drones in agriculture. Thus, the exploration of swarm intelligence in precision agriculture
is not only a necessity but also a significant step toward modern, sustainable, and efficient
farming practices.
1.2
State of the Art
Swarm algorithms have witnessed remarkable progress in general, ushering in greater
efficiency and accuracy. This has gained traction also in the realm of drone operations for
agricultural use cases. There is plenty of active research in this area although the real-
life implementations are few to name. The state-of-the-art technologies all encompass
a diverse array of swarm algorithms and techniques, all aimed at optimizing flight time,
flight paths, coverage, and resource utilization.
When it comes to decentralized swarm algorithms, the state-of-the-art work seems to be
mostly based on the significant work contributed by Schwager et. al [2, 3] and Soltero et.
al [4]. These researches leverage Voronoi partitioning-based cost functions and employ
gradient descent-based control laws to perform the decentralized adaptive coverage con-
trol to generate efficient coverage paths in unknown environments. We will discuss these
approaches in detail in the literature review in chapter 2.
Many Bayesian approaches have also gained momentum within multi-robot systems.
Bayesian estimation techniques have proven to be robust solutions for state estimation
in nonlinear systems, as expounded by Fang et. al [5]. These Bayesian estimation tech-
niques, coupled with Kalman filters [6], furnish a probabilistic framework for precise state
estimation in multi-robot systems.
Moreover, the exploration of Gaussian regression for estimating unknown sensory fields in
multi-robot systems by Todescato et. al [7] has shown great promise. This approach also
built on top of the previous Voronoi-based approaches empowers robots to estimate the
true sensory field with exceptional accuracy while simultaneously computing and exploit-
ing the corresponding centroidal Voronoi partitions. This will be used as the algorithmic
baseline for most of the work in this project.
Other prominent approaches include Particle Swarm Optimization techniques(PSO), draw-
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
2
==PAGE:9==
ing inspiration from the collective intelligence and social behavior observed in bird flocking
or fish schooling [8].
There has also been a significant exploration of the application of swarm intelligence in
coverage and patrolling missions[9]. This research offers a distributed approach to co-
ordinate heterogeneous UAVs, facilitating efficient patrolling missions in irregular areas
with limited communication ranges and memory requirements.
In the context of agriculture, the proposal of using drone swarms for vertical farming[10]
also presents an exciting opportunity. Vertical farming reduces the farming footprint signif-
icantly and holds great promise for large-scale crop monitoring and precision agriculture.
1.3
Thesis Outline
This thesis is divided into seven chapters, each addressing key aspects of precision smart
farming using drone swarm coordination.
The second chapter, the Literature Review, reviews existing algorithms for partitioning,
coverage, and distributed swarm operations in agriculture. It provides a comprehensive
overview of relevant research, exploring their strengths, limitations, and applicability to
the coordination of drone swarms.
The third chapter, the Methodology, takes through the journey of implementing and vali-
dating the baseline algorithms and presents in detail the theoretical frameworks for Voronoi
partitioning, path planning, and decentralized adaptive coverage control. This chapter
then extends the possibilities for enriching these existing algorithms and illustrates the
study and implementations done for the same.
The fourth chapter, Simulation, discusses the setup process for the simulation environ-
ment. It details the integration of Gazebo, ROS, ArduPilot SITL, and MAVLink protocols,
providing a realistic and controlled environment for testing and evaluating the algorithm’s
performance, and presents the experiments that are going to be performed.
In the fifth chapter, Results and Discussion, the outcomes of the various experiments
are analyzed and assessed to evaluate the algorithm’s effectiveness without the physics
simulations, and as well as the demonstrations in the Gazebo Simulation environment are
presented.
The sixth chapter, Challenges, addresses the challenges faced during the project’s exe-
cution. Technical and operational difficulties are discussed, along with a critical analysis
of their impact on the research outcomes.
Finally, in Conclusions and Future Work, the key findings are summarized indicating the
key contributions, and implications of the research while also inscribing the future work. It
emphasizes the algorithm’s impact on precision smart farming and highlights its potential
for enhancing farming practices.
Through these seven sections, this thesis aims to provide a comprehensive exploration
of drone swarm coordination for precision smart farming, from a literature review to simu-
lation and concludes with valuable insights and recommendations for future research and
applications.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature Review
With the motivation to work on employing drone swarms to enhance the efficiency of
agricultural operations, the initial goal of the literature review was to identify the existing
scenario of autonomous farming, and its shortcomings, exploring the current implementa-
tions while keeping in mind the usage of unmanned aerial vehicles, and thereby leverage
the potential opportunities to formulate a use case.
The literature review began with an exploration of using swarm algorithms in agriculture
in section 2.1 before converging to and drawing inspiration from the SAGA project [1] de-
scribed in section 2.2. Following this, an objective was set to perform coverage sensing
of an unknown area in a decentralized way to detect (and eventually interact) with areas
of higher weed concentration in the farm. An exploration of geometric partitioning algo-
rithms was done to decide on an effective partitioning strategy while in parallel a peep
was made into swarm algorithms and combinatorial metaheuristics in general This in-
cluded Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Artificial Bee
Colony (ABC) Optimization, and Genetic Algorithms (GAs). These algorithms, inspired
by natural phenomena, offer powerful optimization techniques for solving complex prob-
lems such as resource allocation, path planning, and coverage optimization Eventually a
convergence occurred to Voronoi-based decentralized coverage control approaches and
Particle Swarm Based optimization techniques.
Cohesively it also paved the way for a more in-depth look into probabilistic estimation
techniques, bayesian optimization, and also on numerous planning algorithms to optimize
the sensing routes. This section, especially the use of Gaussian regression techniques
has been the vital component of the algorithmic base for this project.
2.1
Swarm Algorithms in Agriculture: A Comprehensive
Review
Swarm algorithms have emerged as a transformative approach in the field of agriculture,
offering innovative solutions for monitoring, optimization, and control. This section pro-
vides an overview of recent research that leverages swarm intelligence to address various
challenges in agriculture.
Fine-Tuning of UAV Control Rules for Spraying Pesticides introduced a methodology
based on Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [11] for fine-tuning control rules during pes-
ticide spraying. The methodology reduced pesticide drift by considering weather condi-
tions reported by a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) [12]. Review of Swarm Intelligence
Algorithms in Cloud Computing focused on reviewing swarm intelligence algorithms in
scheduling and optimization problems, including applications in cloud computing environ-
ments. The review emphasized the growing interest in adapting original swarm intelli-
gence algorithms for complex computational challenges. Design and Simulations of a
Self-Assembling Autonomous Vertical Farm [10] introduced a conceptual design for an
autonomous vertical farm with a self-assembling feature. The design aimed at cost mini-
mization and included features like self-powering, greenhouse conversion, data sharing,
and learning. Optimal Multi-UAV Deployment for Smart Farming [13] proposed a multi-
UAV deployment model for monitoring animal behavior in smart farming. By considering
signal interference and path loss changes, the model achieved up to 11x higher deploy-
ment efficiency compared to benchmark clustering algorithms. Decentralized Decision-
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
4
==PAGE:11==
Making for Area Surveillance [14] designed a decentralized swarm of quadcopters for
monitoring open areas and detecting intruders. The real-time decision-making capability
offered a clear advantage over similar systems, as demonstrated in simulation results.
Unmanned Vehicles in Smart Farming presented [15] an overview of autonomous drones
in agriculture and a novel architecture for companion computers. The paper highlighted
the augmented computing capabilities that drones could leverage for more complex and
intelligent applications. Designing Multi-Agent Swarm of UAV for Precise Agriculture [16]
proposed multi-agent technology and a prototype system with UAVs for joint survey mis-
sions in precise agriculture. The approach enabled coordinated flight plans and adaptive
reconfiguration, showing promise for coordinated UAV management.
In conclusion, the integration of swarm algorithms in agriculture has led to significant
advancements in various domains, including UAV deployment, area surveillance, preci-
sion farming, and vertical farming. The collective intelligence and decentralized decision-
making inherent in swarm algorithms offer scalable and efficient solutions, contributing to
sustainability, efficiency, and innovation in modern farming practices.
2.2
SAGA: A Pioneering Approach to Swarm Robotics in
Agriculture
The SAGA (Swarm Robotics for Agricultural Applications) project illustrated in fig. 2.1
is a groundbreaking initiative that converges swarm robotics and precision agriculture.
Funded by the ECHORD++ project, and collaboratively undertaken by the Institute of
Cognitive Sciences and Technologies (ISTC) of the Italian National Research Council
(CNR), Wageningen University and Research Centre (WUR), and Avular B.V., SAGA aims
to apply decentralized monitoring and mapping to detect and map weeds in agricultural
fields.
The core innovation of SAGA lies in employing a group of small unmanned aerial vehi-
cles (UAVs) equipped with onboard cameras, vision processing, UltraWideBand (UWB)
technology, and Nvidia Jetson-based onboard processing. The UAVs patrol a field, virtu-
ally dividing it into cells that can be individually monitored. The collective effort builds a
semantic map of the field, conveying precise information about the presence and amount
of weed in different parts.
SAGA’s research encompasses:
• Advanced UAV for Swarm Operations: Utilizing industrial-grade quadcopters with
self-localization and communication devices.
• Onboard Weed Recognition: Implementing machine learning methods for weed
detection.
• Collective Field Mapping: Developing strategies for optimal exploration and timely
weed recognition, adapting resource allocation to field heterogeneities.
The key contributions included Field Coverage for Weed Mapping illustrating experiments
with UAV swarms for weed mapping [17], Dynamic UAV Swarm Deployment with explo-
ration of non-uniform coverage [18], Monitoring and Mapping with Robot Swarms making
innovative solutions for large-scale farming [19] [20]. These are supported by technolog-
ical innovations such as robust onboard vision routines, radio communication systems,
and protocols for safe swarm operations.
SAGA illuminates the potential of swarm robotics in agriculture, resonating with broader
themes of sustainability, efficiency, and innovation although the approaches were more
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: The Saga Concept [1]
related to weed recognition and less coverage. There was no active work taking place in
the project at the time of the literature review.
2.3
Geometric Partitioning Algorithms
Geometric partitioning algorithms play a crucial role in enabling the efficient division of
a given space into distinct regions, facilitating targeted monitoring, mapping, and inter-
vention, and their application ranges from field coverage and weed detection to resource
allocation and optimization in our context. This section explores some prominent geo-
metric partitioning algorithms, including k-Means Clustering, Voronoi Partitioning, and its
Delaunay Triangulation highlighting their mathematical foundations and practical applica-
tions.
2.3.1
k-Means Clustering
k-Means Clustering is a popular partitioning method that divides a dataset into k distinct
clusters fig. 2.2. The algorithm aims to minimize the within-cluster sum of squares, group-
ing data points based on their similarity. The objective function is:
J =
k
X
i=1
X
x∈Ci
||x −µi||2
(2.1)
where µi is the mean of points in cluster Ci.
The k-Means algorithm typically follows these steps:
1. Initialize k cluster centroids randomly.
2. Assign each data point to the nearest centroid, forming k clusters.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
6
==PAGE:13==
3. Recalculate the centroids as the mean of all points in the cluster.
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 until convergence or a maximum number of iterations is
reached.
Figure 2.2
k-Means Clustering is widely used in various fields, including image segmentation, cus-
tomer segmentation, and anomaly detection. However, it has some limitations, such as
sensitivity to initial centroid placement and the requirement to specify the number of clus-
ters k a priori. Lloyd’s algorithm[21] is a classic approach to solving the k-Means problem
based on vector quantization.
Given a set of n data points X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} in a d-dimensional space Rd and an
integer k, the problem is to determine a set of k vectors Y = {y1, y2, ..., yk}, minimizing
the quantization error E:
E =
n
X
i=1
min
y∈Y ∥xi −y∥2
(2.2)
The algorithm proceeds by iterative refinement and consists of two steps:
1. Assignment step: Each data point xi is assigned to the nearest centroid. The
’nearest’ is defined using Euclidean distance.
S(t)
i
=

xp :
xp −m(t)
i
 ≤
xp −m(t)
j
 ∀j, 1 ≤j ≤k
	
(2.3)
where each xp is assigned to exactly one S(t), even if it could be assigned to two or
more of them.
2. Update step: The centroids are recomputed to be the mean of all data points as-
signed to that centroid’s cluster.
m(t+1)
i
=
1
S(t)
i

X
xj∈S(t)
i
xj
(2.4)
The algorithm iterates between these two steps until a stopping criterion is met (i.e., no
data points change clusters, the sum of the distances is minimized, or some maximum
number of iterations is reached).
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
7
==PAGE:14==
This algorithm is guaranteed to converge to a result. The result may be a local optimum
(i.e., not necessarily the best possible outcome), meaning that assessing more than one
run of the algorithm with randomized starting centroids may give a better outcome.
2.3.2
Voronoi Partitioning
Voronoi partitioning [22] is a spatial partitioning technique widely used to divide a given
space into regions based on the proximity to predefined points, known as seeds or sites.
The resulting Voronoi diagram fig. 2.3 provides a partitioning scheme that can be utilized
for resource allocation, task assignment, and coverage optimization in drone swarm op-
erations.
The mathematics behind Voronoi partitioning is based on distance metrics and computa-
tional geometry algorithms. Given a set of seeds (points) in a space, the Voronoi diagram
can be computed using different algorithms, such as Fortune’s algorithm[23] or incremen-
tal construction[24]. These algorithms iteratively build the Voronoi diagram by adding one
seed at a time, updating the Voronoi cells accordingly.
The mathematical representation of a Voronoi cell is typically defined by a set of points
or vertices that form the boundaries. These vertices are connected by line segments,
which represent the edges of the Voronoi cell. The edges of adjacent Voronoi cells are
perpendicular bisectors of the line segment connecting their corresponding seeds.
Figure 2.3: Sample Voronoi Partitioning
The Voronoi partitioning can be expressed mathematically as follows:
Let P = {p1, p2, . . . , pn} be the set of seeds (points) in a space, and V = {V1, V2, . . . , Vn}
be the set of Voronoi cells associated with each seed. The Voronoi cell Vi corresponding
to seed pi can be defined as:
V (pi) = {x ∈R2 : ||x −pi|| ≤||x −pj||, ∀j ̸= i}
(2.5)
[23], proposed by Steven Fortune in 1986, is one of the most well-known and efficient
algorithms for computing the Voronoi diagram. It has a time complexity of O(n log n),
where n is the number of seeds. The algorithm utilizes a sweep line technique and a
balanced binary search tree data structure to efficiently construct the Voronoi diagram.
The process of computing Voronoi diagrams can be broken down into the following steps:
1. Point Placement: The first step in creating a Voronoi diagram is to place points,
called ”sites”, in a field. These sites will serve as reference points for creating the
Voronoi cells.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
8
==PAGE:15==
2. Perpendicular Bisectors: For every pair of sites, we draw the line that is equidistant
from the two sites. This line, called the ”perpendicular bisector”, will serve as the
boundary between the two sites’ Voronoi cells.
3. Intersection of Bisectors: The intersection of the perpendicular bisectors forms
the vertices of the Voronoi diagram. Each vertex is equidistant from three or more
sites.
4. Formation of Voronoi Cells: The area enclosed by the perpendicular bisectors
around each site forms a Voronoi cell. Every point within a Voronoi cell is closer to
the site within that cell than to any other site.
5. Handling of Boundary Cases: In some cases, the Voronoi cell for a site may ex-
tend to infinity. These are usually handled by enclosing the diagram within a large
rectangle and treating the rectangle’s edges as additional sites.
By utilizing Voronoi partitioning in precision agriculture, researchers and practitioners can
effectively allocate resources, plan trajectories, and optimize coverage in drone swarm
operations, leading to improved efficiency and performance in various farming tasks.
Delaunay Triangulation
Delaunay Triangulation is closely related to Voronoi partitioning and forms a dual graph
fig. 2.4. A detailed exploration of Delaunay Triangulation can be found in the work of
Lee and Schachter (1980) [25]. The circumcircle condition that characterizes a Delaunay
triangulation is as follows: A triangle with vertices pi, pj, pk belongs to the Delaunay trian-
gulation of a set of points P if and only if the circumcircle of the triangle contains no other
point pl in P in its interior. Mathematically, this can be expressed as:
∀pl ∈P,
(xl −xi)2 + (yl −yi)2 ≥(xj −xi)2 + (yj −yi)2 + (xk −xi)2 + (yk −yi)2 (2.6)
where (xi, yi), (xj, yj), (xk, yk) are the coordinates of the vertices of the triangle, and
(xl, yl) is the coordinate of any other point in P.
It connects the sites in such a way that no site is inside the circumcircle of any triangle.
The mathematical condition for a Delaunay edge between points pi and pj is:
∀k ̸= i, j : (pk −pi)T (pk −pj) > (pj −pi)T (pj −pi)
Delaunay triangulation can be utilized for various purposes, including spatial interpolation,
terrain modeling, and path planning for drone swarm navigation.
Figure 2.4: Sample Delaunay Triangulation
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
9
==PAGE:16==
2.3.3
Choosing Voronoi Over k-Means in Agricultural Context
In the context of agricultural applications, particularly in the deployment of drone swarms
for field monitoring and mapping, the choice between Voronoi partitioning and k-Means
Clustering is crucial fig. 2.5. The decision to favor Voronoi over k-Means in this project
was influenced by several factors:
• Deterministic Nature: Voronoi partitioning provides a deterministic division of space,
ensuring consistent and predictable results. In contrast, k-Means can produce dif-
ferent outcomes depending on the initial centroid placement.
• Adaptability to Field Geometry: Voronoi diagrams adapt naturally to the under-
lying geometry of the field, creating partitions that reflect the spatial distribution of
features. k-Means, on the other hand, may create clusters that do not align well with
the physical layout of the field.
• No Need to Specify Cluster Count: Voronoi partitioning does not require the prior
specification of the number of clusters, unlike k-Means, where choosing an appro-
priate k can be challenging.
• Efficiency in Large-Scale Applications: Voronoi’s computational efficiency and
scalability make it suitable for large-scale agricultural applications, where real-time
processing is often essential.
Figure 2.5: Comparing K-means and Voronoi Partitioning
In conclusion, the choice of Voronoi partitioning over k-Means Clustering was driven by
the specific requirements and constraints of the agricultural context. The deterministic
nature, adaptability to field geometry, flexibility in cluster count, and efficiency in large-
scale applications collectively contributed to Voronoi being the preferred method for this
project.
2.4
Combinatorial Algorithms and Metaheuristics
Combinatorial algorithms and metaheuristics offer powerful optimization techniques for
solving complex problems in precision agriculture. These algorithms explore the search
space and find near-optimal solutions for resource allocation, task assignment, and cover-
age optimization in drone swarm operations. In the initial phase of the project, the original
plan had an objective to evaluate the performance of the system among more than one of
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
10
==PAGE:17==
these algorithms. However, due to various challenges and time constraints, it had to be
restricted to drawing inspiration from Particle Swarm approaches to start experimenting
with.
2.4.1
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [26, 27, 28] is a population-based metaheuristic al-
gorithm inspired by the social behavior of bird flocks or fish schools. It utilizes a swarm
of particles that iteratively update their positions and velocities based on their own ex-
perience and the collective knowledge of the swarm. The update equations for the ith
particle’s position xi and velocity vi are:
v(t+1)
i
= wv(t)
i
+ c1r1(pbesti −x(t)
i ) + c2r2(gbest −x(t)
i )
(2.7)
x(t+1)
i
= x(t)
i
+ v(t+1)
i
(2.8)
where w is the inertia weight, c1 and c2 are cognitive and social scaling parameters, r1
and r2 are random numbers, pbesti is the personal best position of the i-th particle, and
gbest is the global best position of the swarm.
2.4.2
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO)
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [29, 30, 31] is a metaheuristic algorithm inspired by the
foraging behavior of ants. It utilizes pheromone trails and heuristic information to guide
the search for optimal solutions. ACO has shown effectiveness in solving various opti-
mization problems such as resource allocation, path planning, and task assignment for
drone swarms. The probability pij that an ant moves from city i to city j is given by:
pij =
(τ α
ij)(ηβ
ij)
P
k∈Ni(τ α
ik)(ηβ
ik)
(2.9)
where τij is the pheromone trail, ηij is the heuristic information, α and β are parameters
controlling the relative importance of the pheromone trail and the heuristic information,
and Ni is the set of cities that have not been visited by the ant located at city i.
2.4.3
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) Optimization
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) Optimization [32, 33, 34] is a swarm intelligence algorithm
inspired by the foraging behavior of honey bees. It simulates the interactions between
employed, onlooker, and scout bees to search for optimal solutions. ABC has been ap-
plied to solve optimization problems in precision agriculture, including task assignment,
coverage optimization, and resource allocation for drone swarms. The position xij of the
i-th bee is updated as:
x(t+1)
ij
= x(t)
ij + ϕij(x(t)
ij −x(t)
kj )
(2.10)
where ϕij is a random number, and xkj is the position of another bee chosen randomly.
2.4.4
Genetic Algorithms
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) [35, 36, 37] are evolutionary computation techniques inspired
by the process of natural selection. GAs use the principles of selection, crossover, and
mutation to evolve a population of candidate solutions toward an optimal solution. The
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
11
==PAGE:18==
new population at generation t + 1 is obtained by applying these operations to the popu-
lation at generation t.
The selection operation is typically performed using a fitness-based approach, where the
fitness of a solution is determined by an objective function. The crossover operation is
performed on two-parent solutions to produce two offspring solutions and is typically rep-
resented as:
child1 = α · parent1 + (1 −α) · parent2,
child2 = α · parent2 + (1 −α) · parent1,
(2.11)
where α is a random number between 0 and 1.
The mutation operation is performed by randomly altering some genes in a solution and
can be represented as:
solutioni = solutioni + β · (upper_bound −lower_bound),
(2.12)
where β is a random number between -1 and 1, and upper_bound and lower_bound are
the upper and lower bounds of the solution space, respectively.
2.5
Adaptive Coverage Control with Voronoi Partitions
Adaptive coverage control using Voronoi partitions has emerged as a significant approach
for decentralized control in multi-robot systems, particularly in the context of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) and drone swarms. This section explores key contributions in this
area, emphasizing the mathematical formulations and techniques employed which will
form the baseline algorithm and core of this project.
Schwager et. al[2] presented a decentralized, adaptive control law to drive a network
of mobile robots to an optimal sensing configuration. The control law is adaptive and
decentralized, using sensor measurements to learn the distribution of sensory informa-
tion and requiring only local information. The key takeaway was the formulation of a
Voronoi-based cost function as in eq. (2.13) where f(x) is the sensory function, wi are the
weights and ϕi(x) are the basis functions. The convergence and consensus of parameters
were proven using Lyapunov-type proof [appendix A.3] as in eq. (2.14), demonstrating the
broader applications of adaptive control methodologies to decentralized control problems
in unknown dynamic environments.
J =
Z  
f(x) −
X
i
wiϕi(x)
!2
dx
(2.13)
V (x) = 1
2xT Px
(2.14)
Soltero et.al[4] proposed a new path-planning algorithm for coverage tasks in unknown
environments based on gradient descent of a Voronoi-based cost function. The algorithm
generates closed paths for single or multi-robot systems to sense or cover the environ-
ment according to a sensory function. The approach uses local information only and drives
the robots to simultaneously identify the regions of interest and shape their paths online.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
12
==PAGE:19==
Lyapunov theory was used to show asymptotic convergence based on a Voronoi-based
coverage criterion.
Todescato et.al[7] studied the problem of multi-robot coverage of a planar region when the
sensory field used to approximate the density of event appearance is not known in ad-
vance. They proposed a probabilistic control strategy based on nonparametric Gaussian
regression to estimate the unknown sensory field. The approach led to the computation
and exploitation of centroidal Voronoi partitions. The key mathematical formulation for the
Gaussian estimation is given by the posterior of the estimation error variance, allowing
the robots to estimate the true sensory field with arbitrary accuracy.
Let x ∈X where X ⊂RN, then we define the gaussian Kernel K be (also referred as µ),
K(x, x′) = exp

−||x −x′||2
2σ2

(2.15)
Given the information set
M =
n
x(h), y(h)
|h ∈{1, ....m}
o
The minimum variance estimate of µ given the information set M is computed as:
ˆµ(x) = E[µ(x)|I] =
m
X
h=1
c(h)K(x(h), x),
x ∈X,
(2.16)
where the coefficients c(h)’s are given by:


c(1)
...
c(m)

=
  ¯K + σ2I
−1


y(1)
...
y(m)

,
(2.17)
with
¯K =


K(x(1), x(1))
. . . K(x(1), x(m))
...
...
K(x(m), x(m))
. . . K(x(m), x(m))


(2.18)
Moreover, the a posteriori variance of the estimate, in a generic location x ∈X, is given
by:
V (x) = Var[µ(x)|I] = K(x, x)
(2.19)
−

K(x(1), x)
. . .
K(x(m), x)

×
  ¯K + σ2I
−1


K(x(1), x)
...
K(x(m), x)


(2.20)
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
13
==PAGE:20==
3
Methodology
In the quest for precision smart farming that leverages the power of multi-agent systems,
specifically a swarm of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), to optimize agricultural prac-
tices, the cornerstone of our approach is the development of a decentralized system that
will explore and map an unknown area to execute agricultural tasks as needed in the
most efficient way. This thesis will restrict the task of detecting regions of interest within
the agricultural field collectively as the operation to be performed. In the process, never-
theless, each agent will accept the responsibility of a region of the field at any point in time.
The regions will not overlap and hence it is ensured that every location in the field is in a
zone that is under the surveillance of at least one agent. The baseline algorithms [2, 3,
4, 7] already discussed in section 2.5 as well as the enhancements on it are rooted in the
principles of calculus, geometry, control theory, robotics, and path planning. It employs
the following key aspects which will be described in this chapter:
• Voronoi Partitioning with adaptive decentralized coverage control
• Path Planning Strategies
• Estimation Strategies using Gaussian Process Regressor and Particle Filter.
• Consensus Strategies
Algorithm 1 Decentralized Adaptive Sensing and Coverage Control for Drone Swarms
Require: A network of drones D = {d1, d2, ..., dn}, a true sensory function f(x, y), fixed
sampling time Ts
Ensure: Optimal coverage of an area A with regions of interest R
1: Initialize the positions of the drones P = {p1, p2, ..., pn}
2: for each drone di in D do
3:
Initialize the estimator ϕi(x, y) with its parameters to be learned
4: end for
5: for iter = 1 to max_iter do
6:
Partition A into Voronoi cells V = {v1, v2, ..., vn} based on P
7:
for each drone di in D do
8:
Plan path traji within vi
9:
for t = 1 to Ts do
10:
Take measurements Mi,t
11:
end for
12:
Train estimator ϕi to update its parameters based on Mi
13:
Use the estimator to sample remaining points Si in vi
14:
Estimate integral Ii =
R
Si ϕi(x, y)dxdy
15:
Calculate the Voronoi Cost J
16:
Update pi by moving in the direction of −∇J
17:
end for
18: end for
19: return The final positions of the drones P and the learned parameters ϕ of the sensory
function
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
14
==PAGE:21==
Algorithm 1 rooted on [2] begins with a network of drones and a sensory function to model
the weed concentration on the farm. A specified boundary is used to calculate the initial
Voronoi centers to arrange the drones and create initial Voronoi partitions. We make the
following assumptions:
Assumption 3.0.1. There is no prior information about the environment except for a
marked boundary to perform coverage.
Assumption 3.0.2. The boundary of the farm is known and the points of interest are set
within the boundary as ground truth. Or we assume the boundary is the sensing area and
the points of interest are set within the sensing area as ground truth for simplicity.
Assumption 3.0.3. Each drone agent is equipped with the capability to perform the nec-
essary calculations and communicate with its neighbors to exchange information.
Within each iteration, every drone agent plans its trajectory traji and starts taking mea-
surement Mi,t until the end of the fixed sampling time Ts or traji is completed. At the
end of the sampling period, the measurements taken are used to update the estimator.
We propose to try experiments with a Gaussian Process Regressor or Particle Filter to
build a good estimator. These are then used for estimating the measurements Ei,t for the
remaining locations in the partition.
At the end of the estimation process, the compiled measurements are used to recalculate
the new Voronoi center p′
i. This is based on a gradient-based cost function that will drive
the drone to a new position where the cost is minimum (more weed concentration implying
a higher area of interest).
When all drones have completed the calculation of their new Voronoi centers pi,iter+1,
these are used to create new Voronoi partitions vi,iter+1 for the next iteration which will
generate a new trajectory for each of them to take measurements and perform estimation
from.
The algorithm returns the final positions of the drones and the learned parameters of the
estimator function. This methodology allows the drone swarm to adaptively manage its
coverage based on the current conditions of the farm, providing more coverage in areas
of interest while still monitoring the rest of the farm.
3.1
Problem Set-Up
In this section, we lay the groundwork for our investigation by defining the problem setup.
We begin by outlining the environment in which our drones operate. We will describe how
the drones are distributed initially. We will also mention how weed distribution was created
for ground truth. Further, we will comment on the sensor models in use. Finally, we define
the performance metrics that we use to evaluate the effectiveness of the network. It is to
be noted that we are defining the problem setup that is applicable to the initial experiments
and verification of the algorithm. The setup for a complete physics simulation with drone
dynamics will be covered later in chapter 4.
3.1.1
Environment
The farm is assumed to be an area that can be organized into grids. The grid size depends
on the resolution specified, which corresponds to the service area for a drone. This could
be for instance dependent on the camera focal length for the drones or the sweep area
of the sensor (or any actuator if we want to remove weeds). The ground truth for weed
distribution is created using a multivariate Gaussian distribution[38]. We can choose the
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
15
==PAGE:22==
(a) Initial Grid Configuration
(b) Initial Circular Configuration
(c) Initial Grid Configuration
(d) Initial Circular Configuration
Figure 3.1: Example Field Configurations
number of points of interest and their locations (or it can be random) and accordingly, a
weed distribution is created in the farm area.
The drones are asked to organize themselves on the farm initially. Based on this, they
position themselves equidistant along the perimeter of a circle or a square as seen in
fig. 3.1. These positions are used as initial Voronoi centers and initial Voronoi partitions
are created. The Voronoi centers for each drone are assumed to be the initial guesses for
the region of interest. Hence, the state model of the system can be defined as the mean
(the Voronoi center) and the covariance (uncertainty) associated with it. The field config-
urations and weed distribution are illustrated in fig. 3.2 and the initial Voronoi partitioning
is illustrated in fig. 3.4 and fig. 3.5.
Noise Generation
To simulate real-world conditions a specific noise model could also added while generating
the weed distribution so that it has some natural characteristic. It was considered to use
Perlin noise[39] for this purpose.
Perlin noise, originally developed for procedural texture generation, is a gradient noise
function. In our application, we generate a 1D Perlin noise signal that gives weed distri-
bution a spatial continuity, which is beneficial for simulating phenomena like sensor drift.
Bounded Voronoi Regions
By default, when a Voronoi diagram is created, we will end up having some infinite regions
as we don’t know what are the finite vertices for the points that are on the exterior in the
space of all points (current drone locations). But in the context of our project, it was
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
16
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Weed Distribution in Farm (Ground Truth)
necessary to create bounded Voronoi regions as in fig. 3.3. This could be achieved by
either adding external points, referred to as boundary points, to the set of points for which
the Voronoi diagram was being computed. But setting the external boundary seemed to
be tricky according if the initial configuration (circle or grid) and seemed to be not generic.
So a more robust approach to compute the vertice along the boundary was found as
illustrated in the Listing 3.1.
Figure 3.3: Unbounded and Bounded Voronoi Diagrams
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
17
==PAGE:24==
1
def voronoi_finite_polygons_2d(self, vor, radius=None):
2
"""Reconstruct infinite Voronoi regions in a 2D diagram to finite
regions."""
3
if vor.points.shape[1] != 2:
4
raise ValueError("Requires 2D input")
5
6
new_regions = []
7
new_vertices = vor.vertices.tolist()
8
9
center = vor.points.mean(axis=0)
10
if radius is None:
11
radius = vor.points.ptp().max()
12
13
# Construct a map containing all ridges for a given point
14
all_ridges = {}
15
for (p1, p2), (v1, v2) in zip(vor.ridge_points , vor.ridge_vertices):
16
all_ridges.setdefault(p1, []).append((p2, v1, v2))
17
all_ridges.setdefault(p2, []).append((p1, v1, v2))
18
19
# Reconstruct infinite regions
20
for p1, region in enumerate(vor.point_region):
21
vertices = vor.regions[region]
22
if all([v >= 0 for v in vertices]):
23
# finite region
24
new_regions.append(vertices)
25
continue
26
# reconstruct a non-finite region
27
ridges = all_ridges[p1]
28
new_region = [v for v in vertices if v >= 0]
29
30
for p2, v1, v2 in ridges:
31
if v2 < 0:
32
v1, v2 = v2, v1
33
if v1 >= 0:
34
# finite ridge: already in the region
35
continue
36
37
# Compute the missing endpoint of an infinite ridge
38
t = vor.points[p2] - vor.points[p1]
# tangent
39
t /= np.linalg.norm(t)
40
n = np.array([-t[1], t[0]])
# normal
41
42
midpoint = vor.points[[p1, p2]].mean(axis=0)
43
direction = np.sign(np.dot(midpoint - center , n)) * n
44
far_point = vor.vertices[v2] + direction * radius
45
46
new_region.append(len(new_vertices))
47
new_vertices.append(far_point.tolist())
48
49
# Sort region counterclockwise.
50
vs = np.asarray([new_vertices[v] for v in new_region])
51
c = vs.mean(axis=0)
52
angles = np.arctan2(vs[:,1] - c[1], vs[:,0] - c[0])
53
new_region = np.array(new_region)[np.argsort(angles)]
54
55
new_regions.append(new_region.tolist())
56
57
return new_regions , np.asarray(new_vertices)
Listing 3.1: Function to Calculate Bounded Voronoi Diagram
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4: Initial Voronoi Partition with Grid Formation
Figure 3.5: Initial Voronoi Partition with Circle Formation
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
19
==PAGE:26==
3.1.2
Measurement Sensor Function
This corresponds to the actual sensor function to be used in the drones for the specific
agricultural task. In this case, it could be a model of the camera to detect the weeds. The
true sensor function in Listing 3.2 gives the actual reading for the weed distribution at a
specified point on the field. Since we are not dealing with cameras or image processing,
we rely on the true weed distribution data to do a programmatic implementation to take
the actual measurements. This function uses the griddata function from Scipy[40] to
interpolate to estimate the weed concentration at a specific point so that we can account
for the measurement at any coordinate that may not be in the original set of grid points(due
to calculations). This is a form of spatial interpolation, which is a reasonable approach to
this problem.
1
def sense_field(coordinate , grid_points , weed_distribution , method='nearest'):
2
"""
3
Function to sense the weed density at a given coordinate in the field.
4
Args:
5
coordinate : Coordinate at which the weed density needs to be sensed.
6
grid_points : The grid points of the field.
7
weed_distribution : The corresponding weed distribution at each grid point
.
8
method : The method to be used for interpolation. Default is 'nearest'.
9
10
Returns:
11
sensed_density : The sensed weed density at the given coordinate.
12
"""
13
# Use the scipy griddata function for interpolation
14
sensed_density = griddata(grid_points , weed_distribution , coordinate ,
method=method)
15
16
return sensed_density
Listing 3.2: Function to Get Weed Concentration
3.1.3
Estimation Sensor Function
To perform a Voronoi Partition Update, we need to know the weed distribution within the
entire partition for each drone. But this is a time taking and computationally expensive
process. Hence we rely on an approximated sensor model that allows us to estimate the
distribution within the partition.
We consider a Gaussian sensor model to represent the estimation process. The model’s
parameters are the estimated weed concentration (mean) and the uncertainty in the esti-
mate (covariance).
The function supports two different modes of estimation: GPR (Gaussian Process Regres-
sion), and Particle Filter. The selection of the mode depends on the type of estimator
used for the weed density estimation. If the estimator to be used is GPR, an Estimator ob-
ject is initialized with a Radial Basis Function Kernel. Instead, if we choose Particle
Filter, the Estimator object is initialized with particles and their weights. We will explain
this in detail in the estimation section.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
20
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Path Planning for Sensing within Partition
To efficiently estimate regions of higher weed density, we need to plan the drone’s path
within the finite Voronoi region, ensuring complete coverage while minimizing measure-
ment time in a real-world scenario. We will start with a simplified approach with the fol-
lowing assumptions:
Assumption 3.2.1. The time taken for all drones to move from one point to the immediate
next point on the grid is the same. (The time to service an area is the same.)
Assumption 3.2.2. All drones have been allocated the same fixed sampling time.
So we need to actually plan the optimal path (that will ensure the coverage of all points
in the region given infinite sampling time) keeping in mind the sampling time, but more
importantly to visit the points that are closer to the current Voronoi center first as this is
assumed to be the current point of interest. An optimal path would also ensure minimal
path length, and fight time and prevents revisiting of nodes.
Initial approaches, such as the lawnmower approach(or boustrophedon[41]), provide sys-
tematic path planning based on grid divisions but may not optimize measurement time by
visiting points of interest first. Therefore, we moved to more advanced planning strate-
gies enabling the drone to visit nodes closer to the center of the partition first and then
progressively move outwards, considering the sampling time. In this section, we explore
these various path planning strategies that were used to achieve efficient weed density
estimation while ensuring effective resource utilization namely:
1. Lawnmower Approach (Boustrophedon Decomposition
2. Spiral Outward Simple Step Movement
3. Spiral Outward with Nearest Neighbor
4. Spiral Outward with A* Algorithm
Figure 3.6: Boustrophedon Coverage
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
21
==PAGE:28==
3.2.1
Lawnmower Approach
The lawnmower approach or Boustrophedon coverage[41] is a simple and systematic
path-planning strategy. Boustrophedon, derived from Greek roots, refers to the way an
ox turns when plowing a field fig. 3.6, i.e., back and forth in parallel lines. The drone
moves horizontally in one direction, then shifts one step down (or up, depending on the
current direction), and repeats this process until the entire Voronoi region is covered. The
path is computed using a grid-based approach, ensuring complete coverage fig. 3.7. The
drawback of this approach is that either the drone starts taking measurements from a
corner of the Voronoi cell and hence unless provided a sufficiently large sampling time,
will most likely be able to take any useful measurement as these are located most likely
near the current Voronoi center. If the drone starts from the canter on the other hand, it
may continue sweeping one half and may miss useful samples if they are on the other
side.
Algorithm 2 Lawnmower Path Planning[41]
Require: Voronoi region as a polygon with vertices V , Voronoi center C, grid resolution
r, maximum time T
1: Generate a grid of points G within the bounding box of the Voronoi region
2: for each point p in G do
3:
if p is not inside V then
4:
Remove p from G
5:
end if
6: end for
7: Sort G by y-coordinate, and then by x-coordinate to split into rows R
8: for each second row r in R do
9:
Reverse the order of points in r
10: end for
11: Find the closest point to C in G, let it be pc
12: Start the movement pattern at pc
13: Initialize the elapsed time t = 0
14: while t < T and there are unvisited points in G do
15:
Move to the next point in G, update t
16: end while
17: return Visited points
3.2.2
Spiral Outward Simple Step Movement
A spiraling approachsection 3.2.2 was thought also considering a biological aspect that if
a weed is found in a region, it is most likely to cause a spread in the nearby region.
The simple spiral outward approach plans a path that moves in a continuous spiral pattern
starting from the center of the Voronoi regionfig. 3.8. The path is simply calculated by
moving left from the current center but incrementing the stride (a straight line within which
each step is a visit of a point) of the movement (initially equal to the grid resolution) by
1 every two movements. The challenge here was on encountering a boundary, we may
need to revisit (or flyover, more path length) over some points. There is also a chance
of not covering some points. This is not a problem in the beginning, but is a concern,
especially when partitions become smaller.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.7: Lawnmover Coverage in Voronoi Partition
Figure 3.8: Simple Spiral Coverage in Voronoi Partition
3.2.3
Nearest Neighbor
The spiral outward with nearest neighbor approach[42] combines the simple spiral pattern
with the nearest neighbor heuristic fig. 3.9. It uses the breadth-first search (BFS)[43]
algorithm on a graph representation of the path. The drone selects the nearest unvisited
node to the current node at each step, ensuring an efficient path that starts from the center
and moves outward. However, this was seen as leading to a staircase pattern most of the
time rather than a spiral.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
23
==PAGE:30==
Algorithm 3 Spiral Outward Simple Step
Require: Start point pi, path traji,v
Ensure: Reordered path traj′
i,v
1: Define direction vectors (right, down, left, up) as
directions =


1
0
0
0
−1
0
−1
0
0
0
1
0


2: Initialize direction_index, d = 0
3: Initialize steps_in_current_direction, stride = 1
4: Initialize steps_taken_in_current_direction, steps = 0
5: Initialize qi = pi
6: Initialize traj′
i,v = [qi]
7: while len(traj′
i,v) < len(traji,v do
8:
if steps = stride then
9:
d = (d + 1) mod 4
10:
stride = 0
11:
if d mod 2 = 0 then
12:
stride+ = 1
13:
end if
14:
end if
15:
Compute qi = qi + directions[d]
16:
while qi ∈trajii, v do
17:
qi+ = directions[d]
18:
end while
19:
traj′
i,v = [traj′
i,v, qi]
20:
pi = qi
21:
stride+ = 1
22: end while
23: return traj′
i,v
Algorithm 4 Nearest Neighbor[42]
Require: Start point pi, path traji,v
Ensure: Reordered path traj′
i,v
1: Remaining_points remi,v = traji,v
2: Initialize traj′
i,v = [pi]
3: Initialize qi = pi
4: dq(,rem) = [|qi −remk|∀remk ∈remi,v]
5: while len(remi,v) > 0 do
6:
Find the closest point si = remi,v[argmin(dq(,rem))]
7:
Add the closest point, push(traj′
i,v, si)
8:
Remove the closest point, pop(remi,v, si)
9: end while
10: return traj′
i,v
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.9: Nearest Neighbour Coverage in Voronoi Partition
3.2.4
Spiral Outward with A* Algorithm
The spiral outward with A* algorithm[44] strategy further optimizes the path by using the
A* search algorithm and is indeed one of the most desirable option. The A* algorithm
considers both the distance between nodes and an admissible heuristic (Euclidean dis-
tance from the Voronoi center) to estimate the distance from each node to the center. This
combination ensures the drone’s path is near-optimal in terms of both distance(or time)
as well as the importance of the visit and also ensures that all points are covered.
A* Heuristic
The A* heuristic uses the Euclidean distance as the admissible heuristic to estimate the
distance from a node to the goal. Given the current node (xc, yc) and the goal node
(xg, yg), the heuristic value h is calculated as follows:
h =
q
(xg −xc)2 + (yg −yc)2
However, this is a simple heuristic. A better heuristic would be to first incorporate also the
distance from the current Voronoi center.
A more advanced approach is the proposition to incorporate the Shannon entropy[45] of
points along the path within the Voronoi partition as part of the heuristic cost. Shannon
entropy is a measure of uncertainty or randomness in a distribution. By including this
entropy measure, we aim to prioritize paths that traverse regions with higher uncertainty,
potentially leading to more informative exploration.
The Shannon entropy of a point p in the Voronoi partition can be calculated using the
formula:
H(p) = −
n
X
i=1
P(pi) log2 P(pi)
(3.1)
Where n is the number of classes or categories, P(pi) is the probability of encountering
category i at point p, and log2 is the base-2 logarithm.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
25
==PAGE:32==
Incorporating the Shannon entropy into the A* heuristic involves modifying the estimated
cost from the current node to the goal node. The modified heuristic function h(p) becomes:
h(p) = hA*(p) + λ · H(p)
(3.2)
Where hA*(p) is the original A* heuristic, λ is a weighting factor that balances the influence
of entropy, and H(p) is the Shannon entropy of point p.
Integrating the Shannon entropy into the A* heuristic allows the algorithm to favor paths
that pass through regions with higher uncertainty. This can lead to improved exploration
and adaptive decision-making in scenarios where information gathering is critical.
3.3
Estimation Strategies within Partition
once the drone collects the measurements from its planned path using its sensor (true
sensor function) for the specified sampling time, it needs to perform the current estimation
for the remaining portion in its partition. The goal is to try to reach a position where the
estimator sensor function makes an estimation close enough to the real sensor (and hence
learns the environment). This step is also necessary for the calculation of the Voronoi
center.
3.3.1
Estimator Sensory Function Approximation with Parameter Vector
This subsection illustrates the baseline algorithm [3] where a parameter vector was tuned
to optimize the estimator sensory function. The sensory function ϕ : Q →R>0, where
R>0 is the set of strictly positive real numbers, is a continuous function that serves as
a weighting of importance over Q. The function ϕ(q) is not known by the drones in the
network, but they have sensors that can measure f(pi) at the robot’s position pi.
The unreliability of the robot’s sensors is defined by a quadratic function 1
2||q−pi||2. Specif-
ically, 1
2||q −pi||2 describes how unreliable is the measurement of the information at q by
a sensor at pi.
A basis function approximation scheme is used for each robot to represent the sensory
function ϕ(q) where K : Q →Rm
>0 is a vector of bounded, continuous basis functions (or
features). Each drone has these functions available for computation. The sensory func-
tion approximation for robot i is given by ˆϕi(q, t) = K(q)T ˆai(t), where ˆai(t) is a parameter
vector that is tuned according to an adaptation law.
Figure 3.10:
The sensory function approximation is illustrated in this simplified 2-D
schematic. The true sensory function is represented by ϕ(q) and robot i’s approxima-
tion of the sensory function is ˆϕi(q). The basis function vector K(q) is shown as three
Gaussians (dashed curves), and the parameter vector ˆai denotes the weighting of each
Gaussian.[3]
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
26
==PAGE:33==
We will take this brilliant idea as the inspiration to do a programmatic implementation using
a Gaussian Regressor Process. later we will extend this concept of parameter tuning, or
weighing of Gaussians to a Particle Filter Based implementation.
Gaussian Process Regression Mode
In this mode is set to GPR, and the function employs the Gaussian Process Regression
technique to predict the weed density at each point along the path within a partition. Every
drone is initialized with an estimator sensor. We will restrict the use RBF (Radial Basis
Function) Kernel for this purpose.
1
class GaussianProcessRegressorEstimator:
2
def __init__(self,
3
kernel = C(1.0, (1e-3, 1e3)) * RBF(10, (1e-2, 1e2)),
4
n_restarts_optimizer=10,
5
alpha=0.1):
6
self.gp = GaussianProcessRegressor(eval(kernel), n_restarts_optimizer ,
alpha=alpha)
7
8
def train(self, X, y):
9
self.gp.fit(X, y)
10
11
def predict(self, X_new):
12
y_pred, sigma = self.gp.predict(X_new, return_std=True)
13
return y_pred, sigma
Listing 3.3: Function to Estimate Using GPR
The regressor is trained at each iteration with collected true measurements. The Python
implementation of this step encapsulates the learning and tuning of the parameter error in
accordance with the approach described in section 3.3.1 by calculating the difference be-
tween the true and estimated values for the measured samples and thereby calculating a
parameter error. The trained (or updated) estimator is now used to perform estimation for
the remaining part of the partition. In addition to the estimates, it will also provide the cor-
responding uncertainty associated with the predictions at each iteration. This can be used
as a measure of the confidence of the estimator for the drone regarding its measurement
and thereby its mapping of the unknown environment.
3.3.2
Particle Filter Mode
In the Particle Filter mode, the function uses a particle filter-based estimation tech-
nique. In this approach, every drone is initialized with an estimator that generates particles
and associated weights for the field. Similar to the previous case, the particle weights are
updated based on the true measurements. a resampling then takes place, which would
assign more particles to those parts in the field where the particles are weighed more.
The estimation is then performed based on the updated weights at each iteration to get
the weed density and its uncertainties for each coordinate in the path within the parti-
tion. The particle filter estimator also provides additional customization like temperature,
cooling, systematic resampling, and random perturbations for optimization providing the
flexibility to tailor the particle filter technique to the specific characteristics of the problem
at hand. Temperature controls the level of perturbation applied to particles during resam-
pling, promoting the exploration of different hypotheses. Cooling is an annealing process
that gradually reduces the perturbation effect, helping particles to converge toward re-
gions with higher likelihoods. These features contribute to a more accurate and stable
estimation by preventing particles from becoming overly concentrated in local minima.
Additionally, the option for systematic resampling enhances the computational efficiency
of the particle filter by efficiently selecting particles in proportion to their weights, reduc-
ing the risk of under-sampling or over-sampling. The inclusion of random perturbations
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
27
==PAGE:34==
introduces a controlled level of randomness, which counteracts the potential pitfalls of
deterministic resampling methods.
1
class ParticleFilterEstimator:
2
def __init__(self, num_grid_points , num_particles=1000, temperature=1.0,
cooling_rate=0.99):
3
self.num_grid_points = num_grid_points
4
self.num_particles = num_particles
5
self.temperature = temperature
6
self.cooling_rate = cooling_rate
7
self.particles = np.ones((num_grid_points , num_particles)) /
num_particles
8
self.particle_weights = np.ones((num_grid_points , num_particles)) /
num_particles
9
10
def update(self, measurement , index_1d):
11
self.particle_weights[index_1d] = norm.pdf(measurement , loc=self.
particles[index_1d], scale=1.0)
12
13
# Check if all weights are zero
14
if np.all(self.particle_weights[index_1d] == 0):
15
self.particle_weights[index_1d] = np.full_like(self.
particle_weights[index_1d], 1e-10)
16
else:
17
self.particle_weights[index_1d] /= self.particle_weights[index_1d
].sum()
# Normalize weights
18
19
self.particle_weights[index_1d] = Sensor.systematic_resample(self.
particle_weights[index_1d])
20
21
# Update the estimated weed density for the current grid index
22
estimated_weed_density = np.average(self.particles[index_1d], weights=
self.particle_weights[index_1d])
23
24
# Resample particles
25
if np.random.uniform() < self.temperature:
26
# Random resampling
27
self.particle_weights[index_1d] = np.ones_like(self.
particle_weights[index_1d]) / self.num_particles
28
else:
29
# Systematic resampling
30
self.particle_weights[index_1d] = Sensor.systematic_resample(self.
particle_weights[index_1d])
31
32
# Randomly perturb particles
33
self.particles[index_1d] += np.random.normal(scale=self.temperature ,
size=self.num_particles)
34
35
# Decrease temperature
36
self.temperature *= self.cooling_rate
37
38
return estimated_weed_density , self.particles[index_1d], self.
particle_weights[index_1d], self.temperature
Listing 3.4: Function to Estimate Using Particle Filter
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
28
==PAGE:35==
3.4
Locational Optimization for Voronoi Centroid Calculation
Locational optimization[appendix A.1 provides a mathematical framework for determining
optimal positions in a given space. In the context of our work, we utilize locational opti-
mization to calculate the centroids of Voronoi regions, which are critical for the movement
and positioning of our mobile sensor network. Most of this part of the work has been based
on [2] which has been the baseline for Voronoi-based coverage optimization problems.
Let there be n drones in a bounded, convex environment Q ⊂RN and q be any arbitrary
point in Q. Given a Voronoi region vi for a drone i, with the Voronoi center of the drone
denoted by pi ∈Q, the estimator sensory function represented by ϕ(q), and the error
associated with measurement represented as 1
2||q −pi||2 the cost of sensing the region,
Q, can be formulated as in [2] as:
H(p1, ..., pn) =
n
X
i=1
Z
vi
1
2||q −pi||2ϕ(q)dq
(3.3)
Here, we see that unreliable sensing is expensive and high values of the sensory function,
ϕ(q), are also expensive. Hence a low value of H corresponds to a good configuration
for sensory coverage of the environment Q.
Three properties analogous to mass-moments of rigid bodies namely, the mass, first mo-
ment, and centroid of a Voronoi region Vi are defined as:
Mvi =
Z
vi
ϕ(q)dq,
Lvi =
Z
vi
qϕ(q)dq,
Cvi = Lvi
Mvi
respectively. Note that ϕ(q) strictly positive implies both Mvi > 0 and CVi ∈vi \ ∂Vi (Cvi
is in the interior of Vi). Thus MVi and CVi have properties intrinsic to physical masses
and centroids. The moments and the Voronoi regions themselves depend on the robot
positions.
A standard result from locational optimization is obtained by taking the gradient of the cost
function in (3.3) :
∂H
∂pi
= −
Z
Vi
(q −pi)ϕ(q)dq = −Mvi(Cvi −pi)
(3.4)
3.4 implies that critical points of H correspond to the configurations such that pi = Cvi for
all i, that is, each agent is located at the centroid of its Voronoi region. It is also known
that all such points are local minima. This brings us to the concept of optimal coverage
summarized in the following definition.
Definition 3.4.1. (Optimal Coverage Configuration[2, 3]) A robot network is said to be in
a (locally) optimal coverage configuration if every robot is positioned at the centroid of its
Voronoi region, pi = Cvi for all i.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
29
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Consensus Strategies
Now that each drone has its estimates, it is time for them to talk with each other and
arrive at a consensus on effectively deciding the next partitioning strategy for the next
iteration. Inspired by the adaptation laws in [3] we’ll begin with exploring the implemen-
tation of two consensus strategies, namely individually and partitionwise, to weigh
the uncertainty of estimated measurements.
3.5.1
Individually Weighted Uncertainty
The estimator while making the estimate, also provides an associated uncertainty. In the
individually weighted uncertainty strategy, we will weigh the uncertainty of each measure-
ment in a partition by the relationship between the current Voronoi center to its neighbors
in the estimation process to determine the new centroid coordinates (Cx, Cy). To deter-
mine how much the uncertainty has to be weighed for a particular measurement, we will
propose a consensus weight for all measurements in a partition to be determined based on
the graph Laplacianappendix A.4 derived from the Delaunay triangulation of the Voronoi
diagram.
Given a Voronoi center, we first identify its neighbors within a specified radius. The Delau-
nay triangulation is then used to create a graph where each Voronoi center is a node, and
edges are formed between neighboring centers. The graph Laplacian matrix is computed,
which characterizes the relationships between Voronoi centers.
Let W be the weight matrix representing the influence of neighboring Voronoi centers.
The graph Laplacian L is defined as the difference between the degree matrix D and the
weight matrix W:
L = D −W
(3.5)
The consensus weight cv for each partition at Voronoi center v is determined by the row
corresponding to the Voronoi center v in the graph Laplacian matrix:
cv =
1
qPN
u=1 Wvu
(3.6)
Where: N - Number of Voronoi centers
Wuv - Weight between Voronoi centers u and v
The consensus weight cv reflects the influence of neighboring centers on the estimation
process for each point in the target partition.
To weigh the uncertainty of estimated measurements, we modify the equations for Mv
using the consensus weight ci:
Mv = cv ·
Kv
X
i=1
mi · wi
PKv
i=1 wi
(3.7)
Cx,v =
PKv
i=1 xi · mi · wi
mv
(3.8)
Cy,v =
PKv
i=1 yi · mi · wi
mv
(3.9)
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
30
==PAGE:37==
Mv - Voronoi mass of vth partition
cv - Concensus weight for vth partition
Kv - Number of measurements in partition v
mi,v - ith measurement in partition v
wi,v - uncertainty corresponding to ith measurement in partition v
(Cx,v, Cy,v) - Voronoi centers of vth partition
3.5.2
Partition-Wise Consensus with Mean Uncertainty
In the partition-wise consensus strategy, we continue to leverage the individually weighted
uncertainty approach while considering the relationships between Voronoi centers to en-
hance estimation accuracy. However, in this strategy, instead of individually weighing
each measurement’s uncertainty, we will use the mean uncertainty for the entire partition
and use the consensus weight as previously from the graph Laplacian.
Mv = cv · ¯wv ·
Kv
X
i=1
mi
(3.10)
Cx,v =
PKv
i=1 xi · mi
Mv
(3.11)
Cy,v =
PKv
i=1 yi · mi
Mv
(3.12)
Where:
¯wv - Mean uncertainty for measurements in partition v
cv - Concensus weight for vth partition
Kv - Number of measurements in partition v
mi,v - ith measurement in partition v
Mv - Voronoi mass of vth partition
Cx,v - x-coordinate of Voronoi center for partition v
Cy,v - y-coordinate of Voronoi center for partition v
This partition-wise consensus strategy incorporates a mean uncertainty approach to pro-
vide better estimations while considering the relationships between Voronoi centers.
3.5.3
Advancing the Consensus strategy
In both of the consensus strategies we have defined, the Laplacian weight Wuv between
Voronoi centers u and v is chosen as the Euclidean distance between the centers. A more
ideal approach would be to incorporate an advanced weighing strategy which would en-
courage an exploration-exploitation phenomenon in the consensus mechanism in similar
to that proposed in the heuristics of section 3.2.4.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
31
==PAGE:38==
4
Simulation
Simulation plays a crucial role in evaluating and validating the performance of the devel-
oped algorithm in a controlled and reproducible environment. In this section, we describe
the simulation framework employed for testing our drone swarm coordination algorithm.
4.1
Simulation Framework
Our drone simulation framework is a comprehensive, open-source platform designed to
accurately model and evaluate drone behavior in various agricultural scenarios. This
framework integrates several key components, each contributing unique capabilities to
create a realistic, flexible, and robust simulation environment.
The framework integrates Gazebo- a 3D robot simulation environment[46], with the Robot
Operating System (ROS)[47] for efficient communication and data processing.
It uti-
lizes ArduPilot’s Software-In-The-Loop (SITL)[48] feature or simulating flight control within
Gazebo, and MAVLink for real-time control and data exchange. Finally, MAVROS bridges
ROS and MAVLink, ensuring seamless communication between the ROS-based algo-
rithm and the simulated drones, creating a robust and realistic testing environment for
drone swarm coordination algorithms.
Together, these components form a cohesive simulation framework, providing a realistic
environment for testing and evaluating drone swarm coordination algorithms in precision
farming scenarios. The following sections will delve into each component in more detail.
4.1.1
ROS Framework
ROS, the Robot Operating System, provides a flexible and modular framework for building
robot applications. It offers a range of libraries, tools, and packages that facilitate com-
munication, data processing, and control across different components of the simulation.
We utilize ROS to integrate the simulation environment, handle data exchange between
nodes, and implement algorithms for drone swarm coordination. Illustrated below is the
journey of implementing a decentralized system leveraging the ROS framework. We out-
line the high-level structure of the code, the flow of information through various compo-
nents, and the use of ROS services, actions, publishers, and subscribers. Additionally,
we discuss the relevance of these components in the context of a decentralized system
and address potential challenges that may arise during implementation.
UAV Classes
The structural blueprint of the decentralized drone control system is founded on mod-
ular code architecture, enabling robust coordination among various components. The
core classes at the heart of this integration are the UAVRosNode, UAV and UAVDrone
classes, which encapsulate individual drone behavior and management. When the pro-
gram execution begins a named ROS node is created for each drone agent and all the
computations are independently performed on this ROS node in parallel (barring synchro-
nization issues). After performing the tasks viz, calculating Voronoi Diagram for current
configuration, planning within a partition, taking measurements, estimating and recalcu-
lating new center as described previously in 1, each drones wait for others to perform the
consensus and compute the new partitions for coverage.
The DroneRosNode class encapsulates the underlying ROS core framework and provides
the methods to invoke the Callbacks, Actions, Services, Publishers and Subscribers for
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
32
==PAGE:39==
various purposes. This class acts as a bridge between the drone’s behavior and ROS-
based communication.
The Drone class is inherited from the DroneRosNode class and represents a drone’s
core attributes and functionalities, including its ID, position, and state, and handles drone-
specific operations such as movement, calculations, and information dissemination at an
algorithmic level (no physics simulation). All the setups related to sensors, planners,
estimators, and other computations are handled at this level.
The Drone class extends to the GNCDrone class, enhancing it with the API required to
integrate with and send messages to the ArduPilot SITL via MavLink to make an actual
drone movement in the Gazebo Simulation or in the real world.
DroneRosNode
Drone
GNCDrone
Figure 4.1: Drone Classes
Following an object-oriented programming approach and modularising the code was very
key in the development, testing, and integration phases at various stages of this project.
Environment.Field
Sensor
Estimators
DroneRosNode
Drone
GNCDrone
ArduPilot SITL
Gazebo
Planner
Figure 4.2: Code High-Level Architecture
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
33
==PAGE:40==
4.1.2
Gazebo
Gazebo is a widely used open-source 3D robot simulation environment. It allows us to
create virtual worlds, simulate physical interactions, and accurately model the behavior
of drones in various agricultural scenarios. Gazebo provides a rich set of tools and plug-
ins, enabling us to visualize and simulate realistic environments, sensor data, and drone
dynamics.
Our objective is to model a gazebo environment that will replicate a real-world farm. Ini-
tially, the modeling was done on the iris_runway world with iris_drones to test the drone
placements in designated areas as an initial configuration. Later we leveraged the base-
line environment provided by the Field Robotics Event[49]. This environment comes with
a preset that can be configured to create a virtual maize field with weeds and some other
objects. It was extended to include iris drone models with Ardupilot and rotor plugins to
enable physics and communication with the drones in the gazebo field. The placement
of drones where computed dynamically based on the arrangement of crops. The drone
models with the plugins were imported courtesy of the infrastructure provided by Intelligent
Quads[50] on setting up a Drone environment in the gazebo with Ardupilot and MavLink.
A key part of setting up the gazebo environment was defining the Drone Model in SDF
(Simulation Description Format (SDF)) which would describe the drone’s physical at-
tributes, such as dimensions, mass, inertia, and visual appearance along with the drone’s
sensors, such as cameras, IMUs, and GPS modules, which are configured within the SDF
model with additional plugins to provide realistic sensor data to the simulation.
ArduPilot’s Software-in-the-Loop (SITL) simulator emulates the behavior of a drone’s au-
topilot system and by creating a bridge between ArduPilot SITL and Gazebo we set them
together. This enables ArduPilot to send control commands to the simulated drone in
Gazebo and receive sensor data in return. This is done by configuring the Input and Out-
put Ports for communicating with the Flight Control Unit (ArduPilot) from Gazebo. The
input ports receive control commands from the ArduPilot SITL simulation, representing
the drone’s intended actions. The output ports transmit sensor data, such as IMU read-
ings and GPS measurements, back to the ArduPilot SITL simulation.
1
<plugin name='arducopter_plugin ' filename='libArduPilotPlugin.so'>
2
<fdm_addr >127.0.0.1</fdm_addr >
3
<fdm_port_in >9012</fdm_port_in >
4
<fdm_port_out >9013</fdm_port_out >
5
<modelXYZToAirplaneXForwardZDown >0 0 0 3.141593 0 0</
modelXYZToAirplaneXForwardZDown >
6
<gazeboXYZToNED >0 0 0 3.141593 0 0</gazeboXYZToNED >
7
<imuName >iris_demo::iris::iris/imu_link::imu_sensor </imuName >
8
<connectionTimeoutMaxCount >5</connectionTimeoutMaxCount >
9
<control channel='0'>
10
----
Listing 4.1: Gazebo ArduPilot FCU Port Configuration
4.1.3
ArduPilot (ArduCopter)
ArduPilot is an open-source, versatile, and robust autopilot software suite that is widely
used in a variety of robotic applications, including drones, rovers, boats, and more. It is
a comprehensive platform that offers a wide range of features, including advanced con-
trol algorithms, real-time telemetry, and support for a multitude of sensors and hardware
platforms.
In our drone simulation framework, we specifically utilize the ArduCopter firmware within
the ArduPilot project. ArduCopter is designed to provide advanced flight control and nav-
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.3: Field View in Gazebo with Drones
igation capabilities for multi-rotor drones. It supports a wide range of flight modes, includ-
ing manual flight modes, assisted flight modes, and fully autonomous flight modes.
Figure 4.4: ArduPilot Vehicles
ArduCopter’s capabilities extend beyond basic flight control. It also offers features such as
waypoint navigation, terrain following, and precision landing, which are essential for drone
swarm coordination in precision farming scenarios. Furthermore, ArduCopter supports a
wide range of sensors, including GPS, IMUs, barometers, and cameras, enabling drones
to sense and interact with their environment effectively.
One of the key features of ArduPilot that we leverage in our simulation framework is its
Software-In-The-Loop (SITL) simulation capability. SITL allows us to simulate the behav-
ior of physical drones within the Gazebo environment without the need for actual hard-
ware. This feature is invaluable for testing and validating the performance of the drone
swarm coordination algorithm in a controlled and reproducible environment.
In SITL mode, ArduCopter runs on the computer and receives sensor data from the sim-
ulated world, and in turn, sends control commands back to the simulated drones. This
bidirectional interaction between the software and the simulated environment enables us
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
35
==PAGE:42==
to accurately model the behavior of the drones and their response to the control algorithm.
Figure 4.5: ArduPilot MissionPlanner [51]
To facilitate this ArduCopter’s SITL mode supports MAVLink, a lightweight communication
protocol designed for drones and other unmanned vehicles. This allows us to establish
a reliable communication link between the simulated drones in Gazebo and the control
algorithm implemented in the ROS framework.
Figure 4.6: ArduPilot SITL-UI [51]
In addition to SITL, ArduPilot also offers a Hardware-In-The-Loop (HITL) simulation mode,
which can be used for testing the algorithm with actual drone hardware in a controlled
environment. This feature can be useful for further validation of the algorithm before
deployment in real-world scenarios.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.7: ArduPilot SITL-Architecture [51]
In summary, ArduPilot, and specifically its ArduCopter firmware, provides a comprehen-
sive and flexible platform for simulating and controlling multi-rotor drones. Its advanced
flight control capabilities, support for a wide range of sensors, and powerful simulation
features make it an ideal choice for our drone simulation framework.
4.1.4
MAVLink (Micro Air Vehicle Communication Protocol)
MAVLink, short for Micro Air Vehicle Link, is a lightweight, open-source communication
protocol specifically designed for micro air vehicles (MAVs) and drones. It’s a crucial
component in the drone ecosystem, enabling high-level control, real-time telemetry, and
data exchange between the drone and the control system.
The primary function of MAVLink is to establish a reliable communication link between the
drone and the control system. This communication link is essential in a drone simulation
environment, such as Gazebo, where it facilitates the interaction between the simulated
drones and the algorithms implemented in the Robot Operating System (ROS) framework.
MAVLink is designed to be as lightweight as possible to fit the limited resources of micro
air vehicles, yet robust enough to handle the complex communication needs of these sys-
tems. It uses a message-oriented approach, where each message represents a specific
command or data packet. This design allows for efficient and flexible communication,
making it suitable for a wide range of drone applications.
In a multi-drone setup, MAVLink plays a pivotal role. It allows for the simultaneous control
of multiple drones, each with its own unique MAVLink connection. This feature is cru-
cial in drone swarm scenarios, where multiple drones need to operate in coordination.
MAVLink’s ability to handle multiple connections simultaneously ensures reliable and ef-
ficient communication in such scenarios.
4.1.5
MAVROS (MAVLink ROS Interface)
MAVROS is a ROS package that acts as a bridge between ROS and MAVLink. It provides
a seamless integration and communication interface between the ROS-based algorithms
and the drones, whether they are real or simulated in an environment like Gazebo.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
37
==PAGE:44==
MAVROS enables the sending of control commands, receiving of sensor data, and mon-
itoring of the drone’s state. These capabilities are essential for implementing and evalu-
ating drone swarm coordination algorithms. By providing a direct link between the control
algorithms and the drones, MAVROS simplifies the process of controlling and monitoring
the drones, making it easier to develop and test complex drone behaviors.
In a multi-drone setup, MAVROS allows for the control and monitoring of multiple drones
simultaneously. Each drone can be individually controlled and monitored, allowing for
complex swarm behaviors to be implemented and tested. This feature is crucial in sce-
narios where multiple drones need to operate in coordination, such as in precision farming.
In the simulation framework, Gazebo provides the virtual environment, ROS facilitates
communication and data processing, ArduPilot enables simulated flight control, and MAVLink/-
MAVROS establishes the communication link between the control system and the simu-
lated drones. These components collectively form the foundation for testing and evaluat-
ing the efficiency and effectiveness of drone swarm coordination algorithms in a simulated
precision farming scenario.
Setting up Software in the Loop (SITL) for multiple drones involves creating a launch
file that initializes each drone node with its own namespace, configuration parameters,
and connection settings. For our work, we will dynamically create a ROS launch file that
will initialize MAVROS nodes for as many drones as specified with the URLs and UDP
Connections to communicate with the Flight Control Unit and Ground Control Station and
plugins to load as well as the APM (ArduPilot Mega Autopilot Platform).
1
2
<node pkg="mavros" type="mavros_node" name="mavros" required="false"
clear_params="true" output="screen" respawn="true" ns="/drone1">
3
<param name="fcu_url" value="udp://127.0.0.1:14550@14555" />
4
<param name="gcs_url" value="" />
5
<param name="target_system_id" value="1" />
6
<param name="target_component_id" value="1" />
7
<param name="fcu_protocol" value="v2.0" />
8
9
<!-- load blacklist , config -->
10
<rosparam command="load" file="$(find mavros)/launch/apm_pluginlists.yaml"
/>
11
<rosparam command="load" file="$(find mavros)/launch/apm_config.yaml" />
12
</node>
Listing 4.2: MavROS Node Configuration
Each MAVROS node is defined within the <node> tag and is given a unique namespace
(e.g., /drone1, /drone2, etc.). This allows each drone to have its own set of topics and
services, preventing interference between different drones.
The fcu_url parameter specifies the connection to the flight controller unit (FCU). The
value udp://127.0.0.1:14550@14555 indicates that the FCU is communicating over UDP
at IP address 127.0.0.1 (localhost) and port 14550. The @14555 part specifies the local
port to bind to. Each drone has a unique pair of ports.
The target_system_id parameter is set to a unique value for each drone, allowing MAVLink
messages to be correctly routed to each drone.
The fcu_protocol parameter is set to v2.0, indicating that MAVLink 2.0 is being used for
communication.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
38
==PAGE:45==
The <rosparam> tags load configuration files for each drone. These files contain settings
for various MAVROS plugins and parameters for the ArduPilot flight stack.
4.2
Coordinate Transformations
The drone navigation system often involves multiple coordinate frames for different pur-
poses. Converting coordinates between these frames is crucial for accurate commu-
nication and control. In this section, we’ll explore the transformation steps required to
seamlessly transition between different coordinate frames, specifically from Gazebo to
ArduPilot and from ArduPilot to the drone’s local frame. These transformations are fun-
damental for coordinating drones’ actions within a shared environment.
4.2.1
Coordinate Transformation: Gazebo to ArduPilot
To transform coordinates from the Gazebo frame to the ArduPilot frame, we’ll use a com-
bination of translation and rotation matrices. The transformation involves two steps:
Step 1: Compute Transformation Matrix
Given the Gazebo drone pose and the MAVROS home position, we’ll compute the trans-
formation matrix as follows:
Transform matrix =


cos(yaw)
−sin(yaw)
0
MAVROS_HOME_X −GAZEBO_ORIGIN_X
sin(yaw)
cos(yaw)
0
MAVROS_HOME_Y −GAZEBO_ORIGIN_Y
0
0
1
MAVROS_HOME_Z −GAZEBO_ORIGIN_Z
0
0
0
1


(4.1)
Here, yaw is the MAVROS home orientation in radians, and GAZEBO_ORIGIN_X, GAZEBO_ORIGIN_Y,
GAZEBO_ORIGIN_Z represent the origin of the Gazebo frame.
Step 2: Apply Transformation
To convert a Gazebo point (x, y, z) to the ArduPilot frame, we’ll apply the transformation
matrix:


ArduPilot_X
ArduPilot_Y
ArduPilot_Z
1

= Transform matrix ×


x
y
z
1


(4.2)
Here, ArduPilot_X, ArduPilot_Y, ArduPilot_Z represent the converted coordinates in
the ArduPilot frame.
4.2.2
Coordinate Transformation: ArduPilot to Drone Local Coordinates
To transform coordinates from the ArduPilot frame to the drone’s local frame, we’ll use a
simple rotation matrix. The transformation involves a single step:
Given the ArduPilot point (x, y, z), we’ll rotate it around the z-axis by the local offset angle
local_offset to obtain the drone’s local coordinates:
xlocal = x · cos(local_offset −90◦) −y · sin(local_offset −90◦)
ylocal = x · sin(local_offset −90◦) + y · cos(local_offset −90◦)
zlocal = z
(4.3)
Here, xlocal, ylocal, and zlocal represent the drone’s local coordinates.
One of the key aspects of the communication setup is the conversion between different
coordinate systems. The drones’ positions are initially in the Earth-centered, Earth-fixed
(ECEF) coordinate system. However, for local navigation and control, it is often more
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
39
==PAGE:46==
convenient to work in a local coordinate system. The enu_2_local method converts a
position from the East-North-Up (ENU) coordinate system to a local coordinate system.
The local coordinate system is defined such that the x-axis points towards the desired
heading and the y-axis is perpendicular to the x-axis.
4.3
Communication and Scheduling
In the context of our decentralized swarm navigation system, effective communication and
scheduling among the drones are crucial for synchronized execution and coordinated be-
havior. The ROS (Robot Operating System) framework played a pivotal role in enabling
seamless communication between the drone agents, facilitating the exchange of informa-
tion critical to the execution of our algorithm.
4.3.1
ROS Publishers, Subscribers, and Callbacks
ROS provides a publish-subscribe mechanism that we harnessed to facilitate informa-
tion exchange among the swarm members. Publishers and subscribers were utilized to
disseminate key information, including calculated Voronoi centers, system states, and
estimator parameters, among others. These messages, distributed via designated ROS
topics, ensured that each drone in the swarm had access to up-to-date and relevant in-
formation to make informed decisions during navigation.
The callback mechanism in ROS allowed us to design responsive agents. Drone agents
subscribed to relevant topics and executed callback functions whenever new messages
were published. This enabled the drones to react promptly to changes in the environment,
adaptation of navigation strategies, or updates from neighboring drones, promoting real-
time synchronization and collaborative behavior.
4.3.2
ROS Services and Synchronization
To ensure a synchronized execution across the swarm, we employed ROS services to
establish a structured communication mechanism. Specifically, we utilized services to
monitor the status of Voronoi center updates. At each iteration, every drone queried the
status of other agents or neighbors through a service call. This mechanism provided a
way to wait until all drones had completed their Voronoi center updates before proceeding
to the next iteration. This synchronization was vital for maintaining the coherence of the
swarm’s navigation strategy and ensuring that each drone operates with consistent and
timely information.
Listing 4.3 demonstrates how ROS services were utilized to achieve this synchronization.
The drone_update_voronoi_service function allows drones to query the update status
of their neighbors. The wait_for_update_voronoi_for_all_drones function illustrates
how drones actively monitor the completion status of their neighbors’ Voronoi updates,
ensuring alignment before proceeding.
This could be further extended with Actions, where we could also monitor the progress of
the event in this case the calculation of the new Voronoi center.
Overall, ROS’s versatile communication infrastructure, encompassing topics, services,
and callbacks, facilitated efficient information exchange and synchronization among the
swarm agents. This enabled us to build a collaborative, decentralized navigation system
that leverages the power of collective intelligence to achieve effective swarm behavior.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
40
==PAGE:47==
1
class Service:
2
def __init__(self, drone):
3
self.drone = drone
4
5
def setup_services(self):
6
self.drone.update_voronoi_completed = False
7
service_name = f'/drone{self.drone.drone_id+1}/update_voronoi_service'
8
rospy.Service(service_name , VoronoiUpdate , self.
drone_update_voronoi_service)
9
rospy.wait_for_service(service_name)
10
11
def drone_update_voronoi_service(self, request):
12
return VoronoiUpdateResponse(success=self.drone.
update_voronoi_completed , iteration_timestamp=self.drone.
current_iteration)
13
14
def wait_for_update_voronoi_for_all_drones(self):
15
drone_update_voronoi_completed = [False] * self.drone.drone_count
16
start_time = time.time()
17
timeout = 60
# Set the timeout duration as needed
18
19
while not all(drone_update_voronoi_completed) and time.time() -
start_time < timeout:
20
rospy.loginfo(f"Drone {self.drone.drone_id+1} waiting for {self.
drone.drone_count -sum(drone_update_voronoi_completed)} Drones
at iteration: {self.drone.current_iteration+1}")
21
for i in range(self.drone.drone_count):
22
try:
23
check_update = rospy.ServiceProxy(
24
'/drone{}/update_voronoi_service'.format(i+1),
VoronoiUpdate)
25
resp = check_update()
26
drone_update_voronoi_completed[i] = resp.success and resp.
iteration_timestamp == self.drone.current_iteration
27
except rospy.ServiceException as e:
28
rospy.loginfo(f"Service call failed: {e}")
29
rospy.sleep(5)
30
31
if time.time() - start_time >= timeout:
32
rospy.loginfo("Timeout reached. Proceeding with the next iteration
...")
Listing 4.3: Function to Leverage ROS Services
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
41
==PAGE:48==
4.4
Experiments
In this section, we will describe the experiments that were run to evaluate the performance
of the model on the agricultural field that was modeled as a 2D grid.
1
[FIELD]
2
size = 50
3
grid_resolution = 1
4
weed_centers = [[-12.5, -12.5], [12.5, 12.5]]
5
weed_cov = [[5, 0], [0, 5]]
6
7
[TEAM]
8
drone_count = 16
9
formation_pattern = circle
10
11
[RUN]
12
iterations = 100
13
disable_warnings = False
14
15
[PLANNER]
16
algorithm = [Lawnmover , SpiralOutSimpleStep , NearestNeighbor , SpiralOutA*,
CovarianceAdaptivePlanner]
17
18
[SAMPLING]
19
sampling_time = [infinite , 30]
20
21
[ESTIMATOR]
22
weigh_uncertainity = [individually , partitionwise]
23
name = [GPR, Particle Filter]
24
25
kernel = C(1.0, (1e-2, 1e2)) * RBF(5, (1e-2, 1e2)) ; for GPR
26
27
num_particles = 2000 ; for particle filter
28
temperature = 1.0 ; for particle filter
29
cooling = 0.95 ; for particle filter
We will maintain a configuration file, where we can specify the size of the field, grid res-
olution, and positions of weed centers. The team consists of 16 drones deployed in a
circular formation. Each experiment was run for 100 iterations. Experiments were run for
multiple planning strategies like Lawnmower, SpiralOutSimpleStep, NearestNeighbor.
For sampling strategies, we tested two variations: infinite time intervals and 30 seconds
intervals. The estimator module was evaluated using two methods: individually weighing
uncertainty and partitionwise weighing uncertainty. We employed Gaussian Process Re-
gression (GPR) and Particle Filter for estimation tasks. The GPR utilized a kernel defined
by the product of a constant term and a radial basis function. The Particle Filter used
2000 particles for filtering, a temperature value of 1.0, and cooling with a factor of 0.95.
Each experiment aimed to assess the performance of the system under different com-
binations of planning, sampling, and estimation methods. By varying these parameters,
we could measure the impact on overall swarm navigation effectiveness, accuracy, and
efficiency. The results obtained from these experiments provide valuable insights into the
strengths and weaknesses of each combination, helping us make informed decisions for
optimizing our swarm navigation strategy.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
42
==PAGE:49==
5
Results and Discussion
We will divide the results into two broad sections to showcase the core algorithm per-
formance evaluation and the simulation results in the Gazebo Physics Simulator which
will also include an evaluation of the integrated setup of the system with ArduPilot Flight
Control Unit and communication via MavLink.
5.1
Algorithm Performance
Experiments were run in a python-ROS Framework using decentralized ROS Nodes (but
still restricted to a single host system - MacAir M1 16GBRAM 8Core with a Parallels Virtu-
alization for Ubuntu 20, having 4 cores and 8GB RAM) to test and evaluate the algorithm
for various configurations.
The initial configuration for all experiments was chosen as shown in fig. 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Caption
5.1.1
Experiment 1: Validating the Voronoi Partition Algorithm
We begin with the evaluation of the baseline algorithm [3]. The results of this experiment
demonstrated the effectiveness of the Voronoi Partition Algorithm in dividing the space
into distinct regions. The computational efficiency and the adaptability of the algorithm
to various geometries were particularly noteworthy given that the algorithm could quickly
converge into an optimal sensing configuration provided that each drone had enough sam-
pling time to take the true measurements from all points in its partition at every iteration.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.2: Final State with unlimited sampling time and lawnmover planning
5.1.2
Experiment 2: Lawnmover Planning
Having demonstrated the effectiveness of the baseline algorithm we now move to the case
of employing simple lawnmower planning section 3.2.1 and taking measurements only
within the provided sampling time. We then see the results after performing estimation
with different strategies viz. Gaussian Process Regression and Particle Filter approach
each without any weighing of uncertainties and with a partition-wise weighing of estimation
uncertainties.
Figure 5.3: Final State with ts = 30, Lawnmover Planning and GPR
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.4: Final State with ts = 30, Lawnmover Planning and GPR, uncertainity ac-
counted
Figure 5.5: Final State with ts = 30, Lawnmover Planning and Particle Filter
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.6: Final State with ts = 30, Lawnmover Planning and Particle Filter, uncertainty
accounted
We see that while with the Gaussian Process Regressor the drones are able to identify the
regions of interest and direct themselves to those, they are not able to achieve the conver-
gence of section 5.1.1 in both cases of not accounting and accounting the measurement
uncertainties as seen in fig. 5.3 and fig. 5.4.
With the Particle Filter approach, the drones are able to identify one region of interest but
have all started moving in that direction in search of better measurements and thereby
completing losing one-half of the field in both cases of not accounting and accounting for
the measurement uncertainties as seen in fig. 5.5 and fig. 5.6.
We suspect that the issue might be with how the true measurements are being taken
in the limited sampling time which may have led the estimators to get stuck at a local
minima since they may have been talking unuseful samples. In the case of a lawnmower
planning, the samples are taken sequentially as part of a back-and-forth movement and
hence there is no direction of any kind to see if the movement within the partition is in a
direction where useful samples could be taken to better update the estimator.
5.1.3
Experiment 3: SpiralOutSimpleStep Planning
The aim to devise a better planning strategy led to the SpiralOutSimpleStep Planning
algorithms. This was based on the idea that the current Voronoi center is assumed to be
the initial guess of the center point of the region of interest, which in our case is higher
weed concentration. And hence, inspired by biology, if there is more weed concentration
it is more likely to have a similar concentration in the nearby vicinity and this may progres-
sively decay in a radially outward pattern. The SpiralOutSimpleStep Planning algorithm
tries to account for this thought and starts taking measurements radially outwards from
the current center within each partition.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
46
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.7: Final State with ts = 30, Spiral Outward Planning and GPR
Figure 5.8: Final State with ts = 30, Spiral Outward Planning and GPR, uncertainty ac-
counted
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.9: Final State with ts = 30, Spiral Outward Planning and Particle Filter
Figure 5.10: Final State with ts = 30, Spiral Outward Planning and Particle Filter, uncer-
tainty accounted
We see that while with the Gaussian Process Regressor the drones are still able to identify
the multiple regions of interest of and direct themselves to those. But there is still not
much improvement in both cases of not accounting and accounting the measurement
uncertainties as seen in fig. 5.7 and fig. 5.8.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
48
==PAGE:55==
With the Particle Filter approach, the drones still continue to identify one region of interest
and have all started moving in that direction again in search of better measurements and
thereby completing the remainder of the field again in both cases of not accounting and
accounting for the measurement uncertainties as seen in fig. 5.9 and fig. 5.10.
We suspect that the Gaussian Process Regressor might still be getting stuck at local min-
ima after a few iterations and the partitions don’t have much alterations later on diminishing
possibilities of further exploration. With the Particle Filter, the results are better in a way
than in the previous case as everyone has now moved at least closer to on center. But
seeing that some of them also moved away from the locations where they were initially
closer to the point of regions, this could be also attributed to the particle weights being
assigned in a biased way. A factor synchronization is also to be considered.
5.1.4
Experiment 4: NearestNeighbor Planning
An attempt was made to use the Nearest Neighbor strategy than a simple spiral. this
was because, the spiraling can cause problems upon hitting the partition boundary, re-
sulting in a longer path to discovering the next point on hitting the wall as well as missing
some points when the partitions may be too small to do the spiral strides. hence nearest
neighbor was thought to be tried out so that we could cover all the points in the partition.
Figure 5.11: Final State with ts = 30, Nearest Neighbour Planning and GPR
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.12: Final State with ts = 30, Nearest Neighbour Planning and GPR, uncertainty
accounted
Figure 5.13: Final State with ts = 30, Nearest Neighbour Planning and Particle Filter
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
50
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.14: Final State with ts = 30, Nearest Neighbour Planning and Particle Filter,
uncertainty accounted
We see that the Gaussian Process Regressor the drones results are still similar to the
previous experiments in both cases of not accounting and accounting the measurement
uncertainties as seen in fig. 5.11 and fig. 5.12.
With the Particle Filter approach, the drones have again drifted to one side of the field in
both cases of not accounting and accounting the measurement uncertainties as seen in
fig. 5.13 and fig. 5.14.
The results could again be explained as the lack of the ability to take useful measurements
resulting in sub-optimal results.
5.1.5
Discussion
The presented results offer insights into the performance and behavior of the decentral-
ized algorithm under different planning strategies and estimation approaches. While the
Voronoi Partition Algorithm showcased its capability to efficiently divide space into distinct
regions, the subsequent experiments highlighted the challenges that arise when drones
aim to converge to optimal sensing configurations.
All the planning strategies showed potential but also limitations with the drones struggle to
maintain an efficient search pattern in environments with high variability. Both the Gaus-
sian Process Regressor (GPR) and Particle Filter estimators had difficulties converging to
the true distribution of weed concentrations. The GPR struggled with convergence, pos-
sibly due to local minima, while the Particle Filter exhibited similar issues with a tendency
to move towards one region.
In light of the complexities observed, future work should focus on developing informed
heuristics for path planning. A* search with carefully designed heuristics that consider
not only distance but also measurement uncertainty, estimated weed concentration, and
partition characteristics could lead to more efficient exploration paths. By incorporating
knowledge about the local environment, drones can adapt their movements to efficiently
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
51
==PAGE:58==
sample areas with higher weed density and avoid previously explored regions. While the
results highlight the algorithm’s potential, they also underscore the need for innovative
planning and estimation approaches that consider the dynamic nature of agricultural en-
vironments and the challenges inherent in decentralized systems. Continued research in
this direction can lead to more efficient and effective weed detection and management
strategies using drone swarms.
5.2
Gazebo Simulation Results
Snaps from the gazebo show fig. 5.15, fig. 5.16, fig. 5.17, fig. 5.18, fig. 5.17, fig. 5.19 the
simulated drones and their configurations at different times.
Figure 5.15: Drones at Iris Runway Ground
Figure 5.16: Drones Take Off Synchronously
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.17: Drones Configure in Initial Voronoi Partitions
Figure 5.18: Drones Sensing at a Particular Instant
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.19: Drones Assembed at a Another Instant
Figure 5.20: Node Graph Illustrating Communication Setup between 2 Drones
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
54
==PAGE:61==
6
Challenges
The development and implementation of a system that will employ a decentralized cov-
erage control algorithm for the exploration of agricultural fields using a swarm of drones
posed several challenges across various facets. The discovery of an effective partition-
ing strategy that dynamically divides the field among drones while avoiding overlapping
regions was the primary challenge in the beginning and consumed a lot of man-hours be-
fore converging upon the Voronoi-based approach. Designing path-planning approaches
that balance efficient coverage with limited (and potentially adaptive) sampling proved in-
tricate, particularly in scenarios with multiple points of interest, and continues to remain
a challenge. Another big challenge involved in achieving reasonable decentralization
across numerous agents necessitating the study of inter-agent communication methods
which required a thorough exploration of the ROS frameworks. Synchronization issues
and ensuring timely information exchange still remain a challenge with the decentraliza-
tion happening in a single host machine for the experiments. This is more a problem of
balancing computational power and resources for the single host computer, particularly
when simulating and evaluating larger drone swarms.
This challenge was most prominent in synchronizing the exchange of Voronoi calcula-
tions and data between agents at every iteration. While in theory, every drone performs
calculations and waits for other drones to complete their calculation, when it comes to
running the experiment on a single computer, it was observed that resources were not
easily allocated to each node process and hence they would start and operate at different
speeds which was not a problem as long as they waited for the flag update on calculation
completion. However, it was observed that following the first iteration, some of the node
processes ran their computations quickly, owing to more allocation of CPU resources,
shorter trajectory or smaller partitions, etc., and were already ready for the status check
at the next iteration when the other node processes had not yet reset their flags after
previous iteration due to lack of synchronization. This was solved to an extent by adding
an iteration timestamp along with the flag an adding a time delay at the end of iterations
to avoid overclocking of CPU resources so that the check was now made for a particular
iteration. But even then synchronization seemed to fail for more than 20 drones without
Gazebo and ArduPilot and more than 8 drones with all the physics simulations enabled.
However, this is a challenge when running simulations on a host computer and should
not be an issue if the decentralization happens on different drone hardware.
Additionally, the process of modeling and simulating the real-world agricultural environ-
ment within Gazebo required careful attention and detail as well. The involvement of
several components with ArduPilot, MaVlink and building the necessary infrastructure to
build a scalable system that can automatically create the necessary configuration files,
settings, assets, and resources for a large swarm demanded smart programming skills.
Despite these challenges, addressing each obstacle contributed to refining this system
and enriching the algorithm, improving its adaptability, and enhancing its potential for
real-world deployment in precision agriculture scenarios.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
55
==PAGE:62==
7
Conclusion and Future Work
In this thesis, we embarked on a journey to develop UAV Aided Smart Farming system
with decentralized adaptive coverage and control. We dissected and made attempts to
enhance the Voronoi-based coverage control algorithm, an essential technique for opti-
mizing agricultural field coverage. Our efforts were directed toward the development of
a comprehensive system capable of testing, evaluating, and refining this algorithm. We
further created an ecosystem that seamlessly integrated various technologies, including
ROS, Gazebo, ArduPilot, and MAVLink, enabling simulation within a dynamic physics
environment that closely resembled a real farm.
By systematically dividing the process into discernible phases, we established a solid
foundation for our exploration. We designed an intricate network of software components,
meticulously fine-tuning each piece to ensure efficient communication and information ex-
change among drones, sensors, and controllers within the simulation framework to the
extent possible. This meticulous programming underpinned the success of our simula-
tions, allowing us to analyze and optimize the algorithm’s performance in a controlled yet
realistic setting.
Our voyage into this multidisciplinary endeavor uncovered key insights and lessons. We
observed that the Voronoi-based coverage algorithm displayed promising potential in agri-
cultural applications, effectively distributing tasks among drones to achieve efficient and
comprehensive coverage. However, we also recognized its sensitivity to various factors
especially throwing light on the topic of informative path planning. These observations
fueled the need to further refine and tailor the algorithm for enhanced adaptability across
diverse field conditions.
As we gaze into the horizon of future work, we envision our exploration extending be-
yond the digital realm. The culmination of our efforts in simulated environments opens
the gateway to real-world applications. The transition from virtual skies to actual fields
introduces a new realm of challenges and opportunities. Flying in true agricultural en-
vironments will provide invaluable data for algorithm refinement and robustness testing,
while also necessitating considerations for safety, logistics, and regulatory compliance.
Beyond mere algorithmic enhancements, we embrace the realm of heuristic evolution
and learning paradigms. Introducing reinforcement learning to optimize path planning
promises to revolutionize coverage control strategies, offering adaptive, self-improving
solutions capable of navigating the complexities of real-world agricultural settings.
As we bid farewell to this chapter of our journey, we are reminded of the words of wisdom
from cinematic classics that echo the essence of our quest:
”Hope is a good thing, maybe the best of things, and no good thing ever dies.”
- The Shawshank Redemption
”Do not go gentle into that good night.” - Interstellar
”Why do we fall, sir? So that we can learn to pick ourselves up.” - Batman Begins
With these timeless insights and a profound belief in the potential of our work, we take
our leave, knowing that the path ahead is as boundless as the sky itself.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
56
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Institute of Cognitive Sciences et al. SAGA: Swarm Robotics for Agricultural Appli-
cations. The SAGA experiment is founded by the ECHORD++ project. 2018. URL:
http://laral.istc.cnr.it/saga/.
[2]
Mac Schwager, Daniela Rus, and Jean-Jacques Slotine. “Decentralized, Adaptive
Coverage Control for Networked Robots”. In: The International Journal of Robotics
Research 28.3 (2007), pp. 357–375. DOI: 10.1177/0278364908100177.
[3]
Mac Schwager, Daniela Rus, and Jean-Jacques Slotine. “Decentralized, Adap-
tive Coverage Control for Networked Robots”. en. In: The International Journal of
Robotics Research 28.3 (Mar. 2009), pp. 357–375. ISSN: 0278-3649, 1741-3176.
URL: http : / / journals . sagepub . com / doi / 10 . 1177 / 0278364908100177 (visited on
02/21/2021).
[4]
Daniel E. Soltero, Mac Schwager, and Daniela Rus. “Decentralized path planning
for coverage tasks using gradient descent adaptive control”. In: International Journal
of Robotics Research 33 (3 2014), pp. 401–425. ISSN: 17413176. DOI: 10.1177/
0278364913497241.
[5]
Huazhen Fang et al. “Nonlinear Bayesian Estimation: From Kalman Filtering to a
Broader Horizon”. In: (Dec. 2017). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.01406.
[6]
Greg Welch and Gary Bishop. An Introduction to the Kalman Filter. URL: http://
www.cs.unc.edu/~gb.
[7]
Marco Todescato et al. “Multi-robots Gaussian estimation and coverage control:
From client–server to peer-to-peer architectures”. In: Automatica 80 (June 2017),
pp. 284–294. ISSN: 00051098. DOI: 10.1016/j.automatica.2017.02.045.
[8]
R. Eberhart and J. Kennedy. “A new optimizer using particle swarm theory”. In:
MHS’95. Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Micro Machine and
Human Science. 1995, pp. 39–43. DOI: 10.1109/MHS.1995.494215.
[9]
Jose Joaquin Acevedo et al. “Distributed Approach for Coverage and Patrolling
Missions with a Team of Heterogeneous Aerial Robots under Communication Con-
straints”. In: International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems 10.1 (2013), p. 28.
DOI: 10.5772/52765. URL: https://doi.org/10.5772/52765.
[10]
Bhanu Watawana and Mats Isaksson. “Design and Simulations of a Self-Assembling
Autonomous Vertical Farm for Urban Farming”. In: Agriculture (Switzerland) 13 (1
Jan. 2023). ISSN: 20770472. DOI: 10.3390/agriculture13010112.
[11]
Bruno S. Faical et al. “Fine-Tuning of UAV Control Rules for Spraying Pesticides on
Crop Fields”. In: vol. 2014-December. IEEE Computer Society, Dec. 2014, pp. 527–
533. ISBN: 9781479965724. DOI: 10.1109/ICTAI.2014.85.
[12]
Yousef Qawqzeh et al. “A review of swarm intelligence algorithms deployment for
scheduling and optimization in cloud computing environments”. In: PeerJ Computer
Science 7 (2021), pp. 1–17. ISSN: 23765992. DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.696.
[13]
Shavbo Salehi, Jahan Hassan, and Ayub Bokani. “An Optimal Multi-UAV Deploy-
ment Model for UAV-assisted Smart Farming”. In: (July 2022). URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/2207.13884.
[14]
Niki Patrinopoulou et al. “A Multi-Agent System Using Decentralized Decision-Making
Techniques for Area Surveillance and Intruder Monitoring”. In: Drones 6 (11 Nov.
2022), p. 357. DOI: 10.3390/drones6110357.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
57
==PAGE:64==
[15]
Daniel Madroñal et al. “Unmanned vehicles in smart farming: A survey and a glance
at future horizons”. In: Association for Computing Machinery, Jan. 2021, pp. 1–8.
ISBN: 9781450389525. DOI: 10.1145/3444950.3444958.
[16]
Petr Skobelev et al. “Designing multi-agent swarm of UAV for precise agriculture”.
In: vol. 887. Springer Verlag, 2018, pp. 47–59. ISBN: 9783319947785. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-319-94779-2_5.
[17]
Dario Albani et al. “Field coverage for weed mapping: toward experiments with a
UAV swarm”. In: Proceedings of the 11th EAI International Conference on Bio-
inspired Information and Communications Technologies (BICT 2019). EAI. Pitts-
burg, US, Mar. 1, 2019, pp. 1–16. URL: http://laral.istc.cnr.it/saga/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/BICT2019.pdf. published.
[18]
Dario Albani et al. “Dynamic UAV Swarm Deployment for Non-Uniform Coverage”.
In: AAMAS ’18: Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems. to appear. Jan. 1, 2018, pp. 1–9. URL: https://dl.
acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3237462. published.
[19]
Dario Albani et al. “Monitoring and Mapping with Robot Swarms for Agricultural
Applications”. In: Intelligent Technologies for Environmental Monitoring Workshop,
IEEE AVSS Conference. Jan. 1, 2017, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/AVSS.2017.8078478.
URL: http://laral.istc.cnr.it/saga/wp- content/uploads/2018/02/ITEMS2017-
ID11.pdf. published.
[20]
Dario Albani, Daniele Nardi, and Vito Trianni. “Field Coverage and Weed Mapping
by UAV Swarms”. In: Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017 IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on. IEEE, Dec. 14, 2017, pp. 4319–4325. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.
2017.8206296. URL: http://laral.istc.cnr.it/saga/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/albani-
iros2017.pdf. published.
[21]
S. P. Lloyd. “Least Squares Quantization in PCM”. In: IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Theory 28.2 (1982), pp. 129–137. DOI: 10.1109/TIT.1982.1056489.
[22]
Franz Aurenhammer. “Voronoi diagrams—a survey of a fundamental geometric
data structure”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 23.3 (Sept. 1991), pp. 345–405. DOI:
10.1145/116873.116880. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145%2F116873.116880.
[23]
Steven Fortune. “A sweepline algorithm for Voronoi diagrams”. In: Algorithmica 2
(1986), pp. 153–174.
[24]
Borut Žalik and Ivana Kolingerová. “An incremental construction algorithm for De-
launay triangulation using the nearest-point paradigm”. In: International Journal
of Geographical Information Science 17.2 (2003), pp. 119–138. DOI: 10 . 1080 /
713811749. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/713811749.
[25]
D. T. Lee and Bruce J. Schachter. “Two algorithms for constructing a Delaunay tri-
angulation”. In: International Journal of Computer & Information Sciences 9 (1980),
pp. 219–242. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10336714.
[26]
James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart. “Particle swarm optimization”. In: Proceed-
ings of ICNN’95 - International Conference on Neural Networks 4 (1995), pp. 1942–
1948.
[27]
Russell Eberhart and James Kennedy. “A new optimizer using particle swarm the-
ory”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Micro Machine and
Human Science. 1995, pp. 39–43.
[28]
Yuhui Shi and Russell C Eberhart. “A modified particle swarm optimizer”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence 1 (1998), pp. 69–
73.
[29]
Marco Dorigo, Vittorio Maniezzo, and Alberto Colorni. “Ant Colony Optimization”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 1.1 (1996), pp. 53–66.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
58
==PAGE:65==
[30]
Marco Dorigo and Thomas Stutzle. Ant Colony Optimization. MIT Press, 2006.
[31]
Christian Blum and Andrea Roli. “Metaheuristics in combinatorial optimization: Overview
and conceptual comparison”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 35.3 (2005),
pp. 268–308.
[32]
Dervis Karaboga. “An idea based on honey bee swarm for numerical optimization”.
In: Technical Report TR06 200 (2005).
[33]
Dervis Karaboga and Bahriye Basturk. “A powerful and efficient algorithm for nu-
merical function optimization: artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm”. In: Journal of
Global Optimization 39.3 (2007), pp. 459–471.
[34]
Bahriye Basturk and Dervis Karaboga. “On the performance of artificial bee colony
(ABC) algorithm”. In: Applied Soft Computing 8.1 (2007), pp. 687–697.
[35]
John H Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. University of Michigan
Press, 1975.
[36]
David E Goldberg. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learn-
ing. Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[37]
Melanie Mitchell. An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms. MIT Press, 1998.
[38]
Carl Friedrich Gauss. Theoria Motus Corporum Coelestium. 1809.
[39]
Ken Perlin. “An Image Synthesizer”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 19.3
(1985), pp. 287–296.
[40]
SciPy Contributors. SciPy: Open Source Scientific Tools for Python. 2021. URL:
https://www.scipy.org/.
[41]
Howie Choset et al. “Boustrophedon: A new concept for on-line and off-line robot
programming”. In: Proceedings 1998 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation. Vol. 2. IEEE. 1998, pp. 1398–1403.
[42]
Francis H Clarke and Wright M Wright. “Nearest Neighbor Algorithm”. In: Operations
Research 12.4 (1964), pp. 568–584.
[43]
Thomas H Cormen et al. “Breadth-First Search”. In: Introduction to Algorithms 3
(2009), pp. 594–601.
[44]
Peter E Hart, Nils J Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. “A Formal Basis for the Heuristic
Determination of Minimum Cost Paths”. In: IEEE Transactions on Systems Science
and Cybernetics 4.2 (1968), pp. 100–107.
[45]
Claude E. Shannon. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication”. In: The Bell Sys-
tem Technical Journal 27.3 (1948), pp. 379–423, 623–656.
[46]
N. Koenig and A. Howard. “Design and Use Paradigms for Gazebo, an Open-
Source Multi-Robot Simulator”. In: Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2004). 2004, pp. 2149–2154.
[47]
Morgan Quigley et al. “ROS: An Open-Source Robot Operating System”. In: ICRA
Workshop on Open Source Software. Vol. 3. 2009.
[48]
Andrew Tridgell and Randy Mackay. “ArduPilot: A Low-Cost, Open-Source Platform
for MAV Research and Development”. In: Proceedings of the International Micro Air
Vehicle Conference and Flight Competition (IMAV). 2016, pp. 337–342.
[49]
Field Robotics Event - https://github.com/FieldRobotEvent.
[50]
Intelligent Quads - https://github.com/Intelligent-Quads/iqgnc.
[51]
Ardupilot SITL Docs -https://ardupilot.org/dev/docs/sitl-simulator-software-in-the-loop.html.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
59
==PAGE:66==
A
Appendix
A.1
Locational Optimization
Locational optimization, also known as facility location optimization, is a branch of opti-
mization theory that deals with optimally placing facilities to minimize transportation costs
or maximize accessibility to the service or product. The facilities might be service centers,
warehouses, schools, or other physical entities for which proximity to populations matters.
In the context of multi-agent systems, locational optimization often refers to the problem
of optimally positioning agents to maximize the coverage or sensing capabilities.
Mathematically, locational optimization problems are often formulated as optimization
problems where the objective is to minimize a cost function related to the distances be-
tween facilities (or agents) and demand points (or areas to be covered). The cost function
typically incorporates factors such as the distance between agents and points of interest,
the capacities of the agents, and possibly the quality of service provided by the agents.
A common technique used in locational optimization is Voronoi partitioning. In a Voronoi
partition of a region, each point in the region is associated with the nearest facility or agent.
The resulting Voronoi cells provide a natural way to divide up the region for coverage or
sensing purposes. The centroids of the Voronoi cells can be used as the optimal locations
for the agents, under certain conditions.
In this project, we use locational optimization to determine the optimal positions for our
drones in order to maximize the coverage of the area they are monitoring. This involves
continuously updating the positions of the drones based on their current locations and the
sensory data they are collecting.
Locational optimization problems are often formulated as mathematical optimization prob-
lems. Here are some of the key formulas:
• Objective Function: The objective in a locational optimization problem is typically
to minimize a cost function. This cost function often takes the form of a sum of
distances between facilities (or agents) and demand points (or areas to be covered).
Mathematically, this can be represented as:
min
n
X
i=1
m
X
j=1
dijxij
(A.1)
where dij represents the distance between facility i and demand point j, and xij
is a binary variable that equals 1 if demand point j is assigned to facility i and 0
otherwise.
• Constraints: Constraints in a locational optimization problem often involve ensuring
that each demand point is assigned to a facility, and that the capacities of the facilities
are not exceeded. These can be represented as:
n
X
i=1
xij = 1
∀j
(A.2)
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
60
==PAGE:67==
m
X
j=1
xij ≤ci
∀i
(A.3)
where ci represents the capacity of facility i.
• Voronoi Partitioning: In the context of locational optimization, Voronoi partitioning
is often used to divide up the region of interest. The Voronoi cell for a given facility
(or agent) consists of all points that are closer to that facility than to any other. The
formula for a Voronoi cell Vi for a facility i is:
Vi = {q ∈Q : ∥q −pi∥≤∥q −pj∥
∀j ̸= i}
(A.4)
where Q is the region of interest, and pi and pj are the positions of facilities i and j,
respectively.
A.2
Consensus Algorithm
The consensus algorithm is a fundamental tool in multi-agent systems, allowing a network
of agents to reach an agreement over a certain quantity of interest. In the context of our
project, we consider the problem of position consensus, where the goal is for all robots in
the network to agree on their positions.
Consider a network of n robots, each with a state xi ∈Rd, where d is the dimension of
the space in which the robots operate. The dynamics of each robot can be described by
the following differential equation:
˙xi = ui,
(A.5)
where ui is the control input. In the consensus algorithm, the control input is chosen as
a sum of the differences between the state of the robot and the states of its neighbors in
the network:
ui =
X
j∈Ni
(xj −xi),
(A.6)
where Ni is the set of neighbors of robot i. This control law drives the state of each robot
to the average of the states of its neighbors, leading to consensus over time.
The consensus algorithm has been widely studied in the literature, and under certain
conditions on the network (such as connectivity), it can be shown that the robots will
reach consensus, i.e., xi = xj for all i, j, as t →∞.
A.3
Lyapunov-Type Proof
Lyapunov’s direct method is a widely used tool in stability analysis of dynamical systems.
The method is based on the concept of a Lyapunov function, a scalar function that provides
a measure of the system’s stability.
Consider a dynamical system described by the differential equation ˙x = f(x), where
x ∈Rn is the state vector and f : Rn →Rn is a smooth function. We are interested in the
stability of an equilibrium point x∗, i.e., a point where f(x∗) = 0.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
61
==PAGE:68==
Definition A.3.1. (Lyapunov Function) A function V : Rn →R is a Lyapunov function for
the equilibrium point x∗if it satisfies the following conditions:
1. V is continuously differentiable.
2. V (x∗) = 0 and V (x) > 0 for all x ̸= x∗.
3. ˙V (x) = ∇V (x) · f(x) ≤0 for all x.
If a Lyapunov function for the equilibrium point x∗can be found, then the equilibrium is
stable. If, in addition, ˙V (x) < 0 for all x ̸= x∗, then the equilibrium is asymptotically stable.
The challenge in applying Lyapunov’s direct method is in finding a suitable Lyapunov
function. This typically requires insight into the dynamics of the system and may not be
straightforward for complex systems.
A.3.1
Lyapunov Function
The Lyapunov function is given by:
˙V = −n
n
X
i=1
h
ϕMV i(ϕCV i −pi)T K(ϕCV i −pi) + ˙aT
i Fiϕai
−˙aT
i Fiϕai −˙aT
i γ(Φbiϕai −λi) −˙aT
i Iproji ˙ϕaprei
i
(A.7)
where V is the Lyapunov function, n is the number of robots, ϕMV i is the approximation
of the mass of the Voronoi region V i, ϕCV i is the approximation of the centroid of V i,
pi is the position of robot i, K is the control gain matrix, ˙ai is the rate of change of the
parameters of robot i, Fi is a term resulting from imperfect sensory approximation, γ is
the adaptive gain for the learning law, Φbi is the weighted integral of the basis functions
vector over the robot trajectory, λi is the weighted integral of sensory measurements over
the robot trajectory, Iproji is the matrix for implementing parameter projection, and ˙ϕaprei
is the time derivative of robot i’s parameters before projection.
A.4
Graph Laplacian and Its Relevance
The Graph Laplacian, denoted as L, is a matrix representation of a graph that captures its
structure. It is defined as the difference between the degree matrix D and the adjacency
matrix A of a graph, i.e., L = D −A. The degree matrix is a diagonal matrix where each
entry Dii corresponds to the degree of a node i (i.e., the number of edges connected to
it), and the adjacency matrix is a binary matrix where each entry Aij indicates whether
there is an edge between nodes i and j.
In the context of our network of drones, the Graph Laplacian can provide insights into the
connectivity and relationships between different drones. For instance, the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of the Graph Laplacian can be used to identify clusters of drones that
are closely connected, which can be useful for planning and coordination. The smallest
non-zero eigenvalue of the Laplacian, known as the algebraic connectivity, can provide
a measure of the overall connectivity of the network. A larger algebraic connectivity in-
dicates a more connected network, which is desirable for efficient communication and
coordination among the drones.
Moreover, the Graph Laplacian can also be used in consensus algorithms, which are cru-
cial for the coordination of multi-agent systems like our network of drones. In a consensus
algorithm, each drone updates its state (e.g., position, velocity) based on the states of
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
62
==PAGE:69==
its neighbors, with the goal of reaching a consensus state (e.g., all drones reaching the
same destination). The update rule in such algorithms often involves the Laplacian of the
communication graph, where each node represents a drone and each edge represents a
communication link.
In summary, the Graph Laplacian is a powerful tool for analyzing and controlling the net-
work of drones, providing a mathematical foundation for understanding its structure and
dynamics.
A.5
Learning Law Interpretations
The learning law is given by:
˙ϕai = −Pi

ϕMV iFiϕai + 1
2w(t)Ki(KT
i ϕai −ϕi) + (Λiϕai −λi)

(A.8)
where Pi is an approximation of Λ−1
i , w(t) is the data weighting function, Ki is the value
of the basis functions at a robot position, and ϕi is the value of the sensory function at a
robot position.
A.5.1
Gradient Interpretation of the Integral Terms of the Learning Law
The gradient interpretation of the integral terms of the learning law is given by:
fi = −˙ai + Pi0Φbi ˙ai = −∂
∂ϕai
1
2 ˙aT
i ˙ai

+ Pi0Φbi ˙ai
(A.9)
where fi is a general learning law, Pi0 is the initial condition for Pi, and Φbi is the weighted
integral of the basis functions vector over the robot trajectory.
UAV Assisted Smart Farming
63
