==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Emotion Classification using Self Supervised
learning with a brain computer interface
device
Julia Cámara Aracil (s210170)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Performing EEG emotion recognition has many potential applications in areas such
as mental health, neuromarketing, and online gaming.
Moreover, self-supervised
learning offers good performance in low-data regimes, which are prevalent in medical
data, such as EEG. Besides, it has already been applied to emotion recognition with
EEG showing good performance. The purpose of this study is to investigate state-
of-the-art Self-Supervised Learning algorithms and evaluate the feasibility of a novel
Brain-Computer Interface, Nexus, focusing on emotion recognition.
With this objective, an experiment was designed to record EEG signals with
the Nexus device while participants watched movie clips to evoke their emotions.
The study focused then on two algorithms, Sequential Contrastive Learning for Rep-
resentation (SeqCLR) and the Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning
method.
SeqCLR was employed for subject-independent classification, however, its imple-
mentation was costly and the results obtained were inconclusive. To address Seq-
CLR’s limitations, the Group Meiosis algorithm was explored for subject-dependent
classification. This algorithm was easier to reproduce, with lower computational cost
and shorter running times. The recorded signals were classified using both algorithms,
obtaining low accuracies when all subjects were taken together. However, when the
classification was performed in individual subjects, some of them showed very high
accuracies, showcasing the potential of the Nexus device for emotion recognition.
This study aims to offer an in-depth overview of Self-supervised Learning and
its applications to EEG, particularly, in emotion recognition, and to contribute to
the assessment of the Nexus device, opening future research directions to confirm its
feasibility for emotion recognition.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Health Technology at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, August 3, 2023
Julia Cámara Aracil (s210170)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisors, Sadasivan Puthusserypady and Kaleem
Corbin for their guidance and feedback throughout my thesis. Their mentorship has
been key to the development of the project. I would also like to thank Alberto and
Louise for developing the experiments together, the discussions, and the company
in the lab. I extend my gratitude to the participants in the study who made this
investigation possible.
I would like to thank my friend, Avi, for his help in making my English more
understandable and Silas, for patiently answering my coding and HPC doubts. To
my roommates, Júlia and Adam, and all my friends, thank you for your support, the
days with you have made this experience more meaningful and worthwhile.
Agradecer tambien a Brandon por creer en mi y alentarme todos los dias, so-
bretodo en los que yo dubaba.
Y, agradecer finalmente a mis padres y a mi hermano, por hacer posible que llegara
hasta aqui con su apoyo incondicional que aun desde lejos, se siente cerca.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Brain Physiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Celular level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
EEG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Basics of Emotion recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Self Supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Literature Review
13
3.1
Emotion recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Self Supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Methods and Materials
21
4.1
Datasets used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Data Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6
Subject independent Classification algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.7
Subject dependent Classification algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Results
43
5.1
Subject independent SEED dataset classification
. . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Subject independent NEXUS data classification . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.3
Subject dependent DEAP, SEED, and DREAMER dataset classification 46
5.4
Subject dependent Nexus data classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Formulary responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Reproducibility of SSL algorithms in the literature . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Performance of SSL algorithms on Nexus data . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Model comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
Overview of the experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.5
Feasibility of nexus device for emotion recognition and points for further
investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Conclusion
61
A
An Appendix
64
A.1 Methods and Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.3 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Bibliography
113
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Emotion recognition, the process of identifying emotional states, plays a crucial role
in understanding human behavior and has significant implications in several domains.
For example, the emotional state has an important effect on psychological health
which can lead to depression[36]. Emotion recognition could then be used to monitor
a patient’s psychological condition to prescribe relevant drug treatments[36][18]. It
could also be implemented in health monitoring systems to improve service quality or
in medical environments to promote relaxation. On the other hand, with the increased
interaction between humans and machines, there is the opportunity for the computer
to understand emotion with the aim of providing enhanced user experience and to
be able to adapt to the user’s emotional state. Besides, computer-based automatic
emotion recognition has great potential in various intelligent systems such as online
gaming, and neuromarketing[56].
There are various ways of capturing emotional states. For example, Electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) signals have been shown to provide important features for emo-
tion recognition. They respond more rapidly to emotional changes than other periph-
eral neural signals due to direct measurement of brain activity[57]. Besides, recently,
portable EEG headsets have been developed, offering a low-cost, more comfortable,
and take-home, alternative to traditional research EEG systems[54]. Additionally,
these devices have also been used for emotion recognition studies achieving good per-
formance[7][25]. However, they are still in the development stages and have certain
limitations including higher measuring errors and fewer electrodes than traditional
EEG devices[54].
In the literature, emotion recognition with EEG has been deeply studied. Re-
searchers have so far focused on the classification of intra-subject emotional states,
showing very high performance. However, there is much work to be done in inter-
subject and inter-dataset modeling. Studies that use fewer electrodes have also been
developed but once again, they mostly perform per subject classification[49]
The essence of emotion detection research is utilizing statistical machine learning
techniques to identify users’ different emotional states in real-time or offline[15]. Addi-
tionally, the emergence of self-supervised learning techniques in machine learning has
opened up exciting possibilities for improving automatic emotion recognition. Self-
supervised learning (SSL) enables models to learn meaningful representations from
unlabeled data, thereby reducing the reliance on large labeled datasets[3]. SSL also
provides means to develop models, that after fine-tuning, can be employed in different
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
target applications[39]. While SSL has been deeply studied in computer vision and
image classification, and its potential has already been demonstrated for EEG, there
are a limited number of studies in this application [44]. Consequently, there are many
undefined fields in SSL for EEG. For example, there is a lack of consensus on data
augmentations for contrastive SSL, or no studies that tackle whether the pretaining
data origin affects the target classification.
1.1
Research Objectives
The main objective of this research project is to apply SSL for emotion recognition
with a newly developed brain-computer interface(BCI) device, Nexus. This way, the
feasibility of using this system for emotional state assessment is explored, as well
as the capabilities of SSL for EEG signal classification.
The considered research
questions are:
• Is it feasible to use the Nexus device for emotion recognition?
• Is it possible to reproduce SSL algorithms in the literature for emotion recogni-
tion?
• Is it possible to use SSL to classify signals obtained with the Nexus device in
different ranges of emotional dimensions?
• Does the amount of data used in the pretaining phase affect the performance
of the downstream task in SSL for emotion recognition on nexus data?
1.2
Thesis Structure
This thesis is organized into five chapters, each addressing specific aspects of the
research. The structure is as follows:
• Chapter 1: Introduction - Illustrates the main objective of the project and
provides a general overview of the questions considered as well as the framework
of the project.
• Chapter 2: Literature Review - Provides an overview of the current trends
in emotion recognition with EEG and Self Supervised Learning for EEG classi-
fication.
• Chapter 3: Methodology - Includes a detailed explanation of the experimen-
tal design and setup as well as the algorithm used for classification.
• Chapter 4: Results - Presents the results of the conducted experiments as
well as the performance of the chosen architecture in freely available datasets.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Thesis Structure
3
• Chapter 5: Discussion - Offers a critical view of the results, comparison with
other state-of-the-art methods, and the achievements of the project.
• Chapter 6: Conclusion - Summarizes the project findings, its limitations,
and future research directions.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This section covers a theoretical introduction to the main technical points of the
project, giving background information on the conducted study. First, brain physiol-
ogy is explained with the objective of understanding basic brain functioning followed
by an in-depth explanation of EEG recordings. Afterwards, the neurophysiology of
emotions and how to measure them is considered. The section ends with a basic
explanation of self-supervised learning, the classification method that is used in the
study.
2.1
Brain Physiology
The brain is the most complex organ in the human body. It is formed by hundreds of
billions of neurons interconnected in different ways and it commands task-evoked re-
sponses, movement, senses, emotions, language, communication, thinking, and mem-
ory. Moreover, it is protected by the skull and 3 covering layers called the meninges,
the dura mater, the arachnoid, and the pia mater.
The brain can be divided into 4 main different parts, the cerebellum, diencephalon,
cerebrum, and brain stem[37][6]:
• The brain stem connects the cerebrum and cerebellum to the spinal cord
and it controls autonomic functions and visceral organs.
For example, it is
responsible for breathing, heart rate, and digestion.
It is composed of the
medulla oblongata, the pons, and the midbrain.
• The cerebellum is the second-largest structure of the brain. It contributes
to the movement of the limbs, trunk, head, larynx, and eyes. It controls fine
movement by making continuous adjustments aided by the proprioceptor input
it receives.
• The diencephalon is almost enclosed in its totality by the cerebrum and
processes sensory and motor information between the superior and inferior brain
areas. It is formed by the thalamus, which is responsible for the coordination
and integration of peripheral sensory stimuli; the hypothalamus which integrates
the homeostatic control of the body’s internal environment and the epithalamus
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
which regulates the production of melatonin and other hormones as well as
motor pathways and emotions.
• The cerebrum, is considered the center of the intellect, as it enables reading,
communication, memory, and feelings for instance. It can be divided into 4
lobes, each related to specific functions:
– The frontal lobe has been found to be responsible for awareness and
rational ideas as well as remembrance, emotion and emotion regulation,
reasoning, decision-making, speech, etc. For example, people with damage
in the frontal lobe may be unable to regulate their emotions.
– The temporal lobe, contains the Wernicke area, which allows the un-
derstanding of spoken and written language. It is also related to smell,
learning, and memory collection.
– The occipital lobe is the main visual area.
– The parietal lobe covers taste, sense, vision, and sensory unification as
well as spatial awareness and speech identification.
Regarding the origin of emotions, the amygdala is the most important structure
in emotional physiology, modulating behavioral responses, fear, intensity of emotion,
and emotional memory.
Emotions also arise from the prefrontal cortex which to-
gether with the amygdala, regulates the reward circuit. The right prefrontal cortex
is concerned with behavioral inhibition and the left with positive reinforcement. The
insular cortex, located between the frontal and the temporal lobes, processes disgust
and discomfort. Finally, the hypothalamus is the emotional transducer where emo-
tional information from the amygdala, insula, and prefrontal cortex, is converted to
autonomic and endocrine responses.[5].
Figure 2.1: The 4 cerebrum lobes, cerebellum and part of the brainstem(pons and
medulla oblongata)[1].
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Celular level
7
2.2
Celular level
The communication between neurons occurs thanks to specialized structures called
synapses, which can be electrical or chemical. Neurons are covered by thousands of
synapses, many of which can be active at the same time. They consist of distinct parts:
cell body, dendrites, and axons. Synapses are formed between these components and
other nerve cells, receptors, or effector cells. Synapses originating in the cell body
are less common.
Before communication between neurons occurs, information is
transmitted within a single neuron through nerve signals. This electrical signal, also
known as action potential, is essentially an abrupt change in membrane potential
with an approximate duration of 5 ms. This signal occurs within the neuron itself
and it can stimulate the presynaptic neuron, triggering the synapse.
There are 2 types of Synapses:
• Electrical synapses are established through gap junctions that allow the trans-
fer of electrical current with the passage of current-carrying ions.
• Chemical synapses are the most common type. In this type of synapse, the
action potential triggers the movement of the synaptic vesicles to the cell mem-
brane and the release of chemical messengers, called neurotransmitters, into
the synaptic cleft, which is the space between the presynaptic and postsynaptic
neuron. Once the neurotransmitter reaches the receptor site in the postsynap-
tic neuron, it can either cause a partial depolarization in the membrane of the
neuron, resulting in an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), or a partial
hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic membrane, known as an inhibitory post-
synaptic potential(IPSP)[41].
Figure 2.2: Representation of a Chemical Synapse between the presynaptic and
postsynaptic neurons.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
2.3
EEG
The electroencephalogram allows the recording of the brain’s bioelectric activity. It
consists of different electrodes placed on the scalp that detect the sum of positive
and negative charges in their vicinity. Pyramidal neurons have cell bodies primarily
in layers three and five of the cerebral cortex. The synchronized synaptic activity
of these neurons generates large extracellular currents that can be detected with the
surface electroencephalogram(EEG)[34][9].
The standardized physical placement and designations of the electrodes of the
EEG on the scalp is called the 10-20 electrode placement system. In this system, the
distance between adjacent electrodes is either 10 or 20% of the total front-back or
right-left distance of the skull[26].
The electrodes are labeled with a letter according to the brain areas they are
located in, F (frontal), C (central), T (temporal), P (posterior), and O (occipital).
The letters are accompanied by odd numbers on the left side of the head and even
numbers on the right side. The left and right side is considered by convention from
the point of view of a subject [50].
Figure 2.3: Representation of the 10-20 electrode placement System.
EEG has been traditionally divided into frequency bands which are related to
different subject conditions:
• Delta (0.1-3.5Hz) related deep sleep.
• Theta(4-7.5 Hz) Related to drowsiness
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Basics of Emotion recognition
9
• Alpha(8-13 Hz) Awake with eyes closed
• Beta (14-30Hz) Increases during cognitive efforts
• Gamma (>30 Hz) Sensory processing and intense concentration [48].
Figure 2.4: Graphical representation of the EEG frequency bands.
Compared to other methods that study brain activity, EEG offers a non-invasive
method with high temporal resolutions (of ms) and, in general, is less expensive than
other techniques such as PET or fMRI. Some EEG devices also offer the advantage
of being portable and it does not aggravate claustrophobia in patients, compared to
MRI[15].
2.4
Basics of Emotion recognition
Emotion is a psycho-physiological process that arises from the conscious and/or un-
conscious perception of an object or situation. It is frequently linked to mood, temper-
ament, personality, disposition, and motivation[27]. Emotions start from a stimulus
that produces a subjective experience. Based on the individual subjective experience,
emotion is reflected in physical behaviors and physiological responses, for example,
it can become apparent through facial expressions or changes in breathing or heart
rate[15][40].
The recognition of emotions can be performed through different mediums: voices
from the microphone, signals from neurophysiological activity, videos from cameras,
etc. Emotions can be captured with various physiological signals. The most popular
techniques are electroencephalography, skin resistance measurements, blood pressure,
heart rate, eye activity, and motion analysis[40] [47] [15]. There are 2 different ap-
proaches to quantifying emotions: discrete and continuous models.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
• Discrete models aﬀirm that emotion is composed of various basic states. The
number of states can go from six to more than fifteen, depending on the consid-
ered model[15]. For instance, Ekman[16] proposed 6 basic emotions: sadness,
happiness, surprise, fear, anger, and disgust. However, there is no consensus on
the number of basic states.
• Continuos models are based on using several orthogonal axes to display emo-
tions in different dimensions. Russell [45] introduced a 2-dimensional system,
valence and arousal. Valence represents the individual happiness for positive
values or sad degrees for negative values. Positive values of arousal indicate, on
the other hand, excitement while negative values. calmness. Another commonly
added dimension to this scheme is dominance, which represents the control de-
gree of the individual.
A common way to capture individual emotions is through self-assessment reports.
The self-assessment manikin (SAM) questionnaire is designed to capture emotional
states through 3 dimensions: valence arousal and dominance.
Figure 2.5: Graphical representation of the Self Assessment manikin (SAM) ques-
tionary. The emotion dimension are represented from top to bottom as
follows: valence, Arousal and dominance.
To elicit emotions several mediums can be used such as audio, videos, or images.
The stimuli presentation can be divided into 3 major parts, pre-stimuli, visual cues
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Self Supervised Learning
11
presented that can influence the recognition of various sensory stimuli; stimuli; and
post-stimuli, where stimulation is reduced by allowing the subject to return to a
neutral state of mind[46].
2.5
Self Supervised Learning
SSL is a field of machine learning that uses unsupervised algorithms to generate
better than random initial parameters for the supervised model. It initially trains
to classify unlabeled data and then utilizes the obtained representation to perform
further downstream classifications[52]. SSL can be divided into two phases,
• The pretext phase: with unlabeled data.
In this phase, the better-than-
random parameters for the downstream model are generated.
• The downstream task: this involves the fine-tuning of the algorithm using
labeled data[44].
There are 3 different types of pretext tasks, contrastive, generative, and hybrid
models:
• In the contrastive model, the objective is to learn the difference between
data augmentations in a supervised or unsupervised manner. In the supervised
model, the original and augmented data are pseudo-labeled negative and posi-
tive respectively and the objective is to find the patterns present in both. On the
other hand, the unsupervised model is usually based on data reconstructions us-
ing, for example, autoencoders, to obtain the original data from the augmented
one[44]. Thus, the first step would be to apply augmentations to the original
data. SSL has been typically applied to images, and for example, some augmen-
tations that have been used are: resizing, cropping, random blurring, and color
jittering [35], in which the semantic meaning is not lost.
Even though not many studies have dug into SSL for EEG, a few of them
have presented several augmentations. Banville et al.[4] used in their study 3
techniques, relative positioning, temporal shuffling, and contrastive predictive
coding. However, the temporal modification of the EEG signals might make
them lose their physiological meaning. For this reason, Moshsenvad et al. [39]
suggested another set of augmentations, that retain this meaning as verified by
neurologists. These augmentations are the following: additive Gaussian noise,
amplitude scale zero masking, time shift, direct current drift, and band-stop
filter.
• Generative models are usually based on the reconstruction or generation of
input data points in an unsupervised way. Commonly used algorithms are au-
toencoders for reconstruction or generative adversarial Networks(GANs), that
are employed to generate synthetic data. However, both models are in general
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
highly computationally expensive[44]. Until now, only one study has used a
generative adversarial network applied to EEG emotion classification[58].
• Hybrid models comprise solutions beyond traditional generative or contrastive
models, merging the advantages of supervised and unsupervised pretexts. For
example, Yuan et al.[55] developed a pretext tracker and corresponding loss
function that includes deep feature extraction and a deep correlation tracking
framework.
Overall, the feature representations obtained after the pretext task relates to the
general characteristics of the data and can be obtained in a supervised or unsupervised
manner. Unlike traditional machine learning methods that are trained on a specific
task, SSL-learned features can be potentially used across multiple tasks. This makes
SSL helpful in low-data regimes such as medicine, where labels are costly to obtain[3].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Literature Review
In this chapter, the state of the art on emotion recognition with EEG and on SSL for
EEG is reviewed and compared. The results reported by these studies will then be
used for comparison with the obtained performance metrics. The research was done
mainly with Google Scholar and Pubmed. All the studies considered were published
after 2018.
The research on emotion recognition focused on papers that study publicly avail-
able datasets or that employed fewer electrodes. The keywords used to find the studies
were: ’emotion recognition for EEG’, ’SEED emotion Recognition’, ’DREAMER emo-
tion recognition’, ’cross subject emotion recognition’, and ’emotion recognition EEG
headband’. When possible, studies with less than 20 citations were discarded.
The research on SSL on EEG was more limited since fewer papers have dug into
this topic. The keywords employed to find the studies were: ‘self-supervised learning
for EEG’, and ’SSL emotion recognition’. When possible, studies with less than 20
citations were discarded.
Moreover, review studies were also considered to obtain a broader view of the
state of the art and methodology in these two topics. A resume with these papers
can be seen in Table 3.1.
Review papers
Paper focus
Review on Stimuli Presentation for Affect
Analysis Based on EEG
Stimuli evocation datasets
Recommendations on experimental setup
Considerations of subject variability
EEG Based Emotion Recognition:
A Tutorial and Review (2022)
Review of the latest research on Emotion
recognition
Overview of feature extraction
Overview of NN optimized for EEG
Self-Supervised Learning for
Electroencephalography
Overview of SSL, pretext tasks, and
advantages and disadvantages with
focus on EEG
EEG-Based Emotion Recognition:
A State-of-the-Art Review of Current
Trends and Opportunities(2020)
Overview of emotion-related physiology
Overview of different articles and how
emotions were measured and classified
Table 3.1: Comparison of review papers used for the study and their main focus.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Literature Review
3.1
Emotion recognition
Over the past decade, emotion recognition studies have gained popularity due to their
variety of applications in health care, especially in mental health, robotics, marketing,
education, and the entertainment industry[12][14][47]. Among various physiological
signals, EEG has demonstrated to be a reliable source to predict emotion patterns
as for example, some studies have found that EEG features alone performed better
than ECG features[12].
The most popular technique to perform emotion recognition studies is event-
induced emotion stimulation, where the participants passively perceive emotional
stimuli such as images, music, and videos to evoke certain emotions[12].
Particu-
larly, the most used stimuli in research studies are visual or audio-visual due to
a better stimulation ability and the accessibility to presentation tools.
Addition-
ally, there are publicly available international datasets for visual, audio-visual, and
audio stimuli, such as The International Affective Picture System(IAPS) or the In-
ternational Affective Digitized Sound(IADS)[46]. There are also EEG databases for
emotion recognition freely available, such as SEED [13], DEAP[27], AMIGOS[38],
DREAMER[25], and MAHONOB. Table 3.2 shows the main characteristics of all
available EEG datasets for emotion recognition.
Using these databases eases the
comparison between different studies.
Dataset
Participants and duration
Type of Stimuli
Emotion measurement
DREAMER
23 participants- 80 minutes each
Movie clips
Valence, Arousal and Dominance
DEAP
32 participants- 40 minutes each
40 music videos
Valence and Arousal
SEED
15 participants- 45 minutes each
15 Chinese film clips
Positive, neutral and
negative emotions
AMIGOS
40 participants
37 minutes
16 short affective video
from movies
4 long videos
Valence, Arousal and Dominance
ASCERTAIN
58 participants
36 movie clips
Valence and arousal
MAHNOB-HCI
30- 40 minutes with 15 seconds
neutral clip between trials
Fragments of movies clips
Included in the dataset
Valence, Arousal and Dominance
Table 3.2: Comparison of the Available Emotion Recognition datasets.
Typically, consumer-grade devices exhibit lower performance metrics than research-
grade EEG devices as the g.tec system. However, certain studies have found that in
specific cases the performance of these devices can be comparable to OpenBCI, a
consumer-grade device, as in emotion recognition studies [12]. Furthermore, studies
performed with fewer electrodes than conventional approaches have also demonstrated
good results as for example in [8] for valence classification with F3, F4, and Fpz. In
this line, emotion recognition studies have also been performed with take-home de-
vices such as the Muse headband, reaching accuracies higher than 90% with different
classifiers[7].
As for the classification task for emotion recognition, many different studies have
proposed various approaches. A typical step in traditional machine learning methods
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Emotion recognition
15
for EEG signal classification is feature extraction.
This can include, for example,
frequency features, such as fast Fourier transform(FFT), short-time Fourier transform
(STFT), and Power spectral density(PSD), or time domain features such as mean
value, variance, skewness, kurtosis, and peak-to-peak interval.
Specifically, power
spectral density, fractal dimension values, and differential entropy have been found
to be highly related to emotional states[12]. Some approaches also include a feature
selection step to retain only the most informative features[15].
Traditionally, the features were then fed to the chosen classifier. However, deep
learning methods can also take the processed EEG as input. The classifiers could
be supervised or unsupervised.
Commonly used techniques are Linear Discrimi-
nant Analysis (LDA), Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (QDA), K-nearest neighbor
(KNN), Random Forest (RF), particle swarm optimization (PSO), support vector ma-
chines(SVM), Probabilistic neural network (PNN), Deep Learning (DL), and Long-
Short Term Memory (LSTM)[47]. A combination of deep learning models can also
be used such as in where a CNN was utilized to extract features from EEG and then
LSTM was applied to train the classifier[29]. Out of the different methods, SVM has
traditionally been the most widely used in physiological signal base emotion recogni-
tion[47].
Over the past few years, deep learning-based approaches have become increasingly
important in EEG-based emotion recognition. Several studies have tested their algo-
rithms in publicly available datasets with subject-dependent approaches, such as in
[32] where they reached 94.6% accuracy in the SEED datasets, around 90% for arousal,
valence, and dominance on the DREAMER and 85.6% on the DEAP for valence, with
a subject dependent multimodal emotion recognition algorithms deep canonical cor-
relation analysis (DCCA). Another study achieved 97.16% accuracy on the SEED
dataset with a hybrid CNN and LSTM model outperforming other state-of-the-art
methods but only reached 64% accuracy on the DEAP dataset[21]. However, another
study has reported above 89% accuracy in the DEAP dataset for binary classification
of valence arousal and dominance with a transformer Capsule Network. The proposed
algorithm consisted of an EEG Transformer module to extract EEG features and an
Emotion Capsule module to refine the features and classify the emotion states[53].
Subject-independent classification is a more challenging task and although it has
gained interest over the past few years, there are still limited results and the perfor-
mance is very low compared to subject-dependent studies. For example, Cimtay &
Ekmekcioglu reported an accuracy of 78.34% for positive, neutral, and negative emo-
tions and 86.5% for only positive and negative emotions on the SEED dataset. They
trained a CNN with raw EEG signals from all subjects except one and obtained the
classification accuracy of that subject[11]. Other papers have also employed different
feature extraction methods for cross-subject classification achieving 83.33% accuracy
on the SEED dataset and a mean accuracy of 59.06% on the DEAP[30].
In the
DREAMER dataset, another study achieved 66.56% on valence with an adversarial
discriminative-temporal convolutional network on differential entropy features[20].
Overall, the highest performance methods for emotion recognition have employed
differential entropy features and trained one classifier per subject. However, there is
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Literature Review
still room for improvement in cross-session, cross-dataset, or cross-subject emotion
recognition since most of the studies are subject-dependent[15].
Table 3.3 summarizes the most relevant characteristics of the papers studied for
this section. The dataset used as well as the emotion measurement techniques are
specified. Moreover, the classification algorithm input, the architecture, and whether
it performs inter or intra-subject classification is stated in the Classification algorithm
column.
Papers
Data used
Emotion measurement
Classification algorithm
Accuracy
Comparing Recognition
Performance and Robustness
of Multimodal Deep learning
models for multimodal
emotion recognition
DREAMER, DEAP
SEED, SEED-V, SEED IV
Discrete states and
emotion dimensions
Classifier input:
Differential entropy
Classifier:
Deep canonical correlation
analysis (DCCA)
Per subject
SEED: 94.6%
SEED IV: 87.5%
SEED V: 85.3%
DEAP: 85.6%
DREAMER:
89.0%, 90.6%, 90.7%
CNN and LSTM-based ensemble
learning for human emotion
recognition using EEG recordings
SEED, DEAP
Emotional dimensions
Classifier input:
Differential Entropy feature
Classifier:
Convolution neural network (CNN)
and long short-term memory (LSTM)
based hybrid model
Per subject
SEED: 97.16%
DEAP: 65%
TC-Net: A Transformer Capsule
Network for EEG-based
emotion recognition
DEAP and DREAMER
Emotional dimensions
Classifier input:
Continuous wavelet transform
Classifier:
Transformer and Capsnet classifier
Per subject
Above 98%
for both datasets
Investigating the Use of Pretrained
Convolutional Neural Network on
Cross-Subject and Cross-Dataset
EEG Emotion Recognition
SEED, DEAP
Emotional states and
emotional dimensions
Classifier input:
Raw EEG data
(windowed and normalized)
Classifier:
Modified InceptionResNet2(CNN)
Subject independent
SEED 78.34%
An adversarial discriminative
temporal convolutional network
for EEG-based cross-domain
emotion recognition
DREAMER
Emotional Dimensions
Classifier input:
Differential Entropy features
Classifier:
Adversarial discriminative
temporal convolutional network
Subject independent
DREAMER:
valence: 66.65%
arousal: 63.60%
EEG-based Emotion Recognition
Recorded: Fpz, F3 and F4
Valence-arousal
Clasifier input:
beta / alpha ratios and power
Classifier:
Binary linear FDA
(Fisher’s Discriminant
Analysis)
Subject dependent
94.9% for both
Fpz and F3/F4.
Mental Emotional Sentiment
Classification with an EEG based
Brain-Machine Interface
Muse headband, AF7, AF8,
Tp9, Tp10. Movie clips
Valence
Clasifier input:
Statistical features
Classifier
Single and ensemble machine
learning algorithms: Naive
Bayes, random forest,
Logistic regression, MLP
Subject dependent
97.89%
Table 3.3: Comparison of papers used for the literature research and their algo-
rithms, data used, and accuracy.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Self Supervised Learning
17
3.2
Self Supervised Learning
Although self-supervised learning concepts are not necessarily new, this method has
gained importance only during the last 3 years, aided among other reasons, by the
increased capacity of GPUs[3].
In recent years, self-supervised learning has been extensively studied in the context
of images, where several projects have achieved comparable performance to previously
designed supervised approaches, sometimes even surpassing them [22]. In addition
to the good performance, this technique has garnered interest due to one of its main
advantages; the ability to train models with large amounts of unlabeled data that can
be later applied to various tasks[3]. This way, the need for large amounts of labeled
data is reduced, and already various studies have shown that SSL presents improved
performance and accuracy in low-labeled data regimes[3][44].
As explained in Section 2.5, Contrastive Self-supervised Learning is a type of
SSL whose pretext is based on minimizing the contrastive loss between 2 pairs of
augmented data, thereby maximizing their similarity. One of the most prominent
algorithms within this category is SimCLR. SimCLR was trained to learn visual
representations by maximizing the similarity between two augmented versions of an
image. These augmentations were obtained by random resizing, rotating, cropping,
color jittering, and random blurring.
Importantly, they were semantic-preserving
transformations, meaning they could also arise in non-augmented data.
Chen et
al[10] introduced with SimCLR the projector network that maps the representations
into another space where the contrastive loss is computed. The algorithm consisted
of an encoder based on the ResNet architecture, followed by the projector, an MLP
with ReLU activation, and a single hidden layer. Additionally, it has been proved
that the projector is beneficial when there is a misalignment between the training
and downstream tasks, as in SSL, where the training task is always different from the
pretext task[3].
The model gained popularity due to its great performance, being able to surpass
preexisting models with even lower amounts of labeled data [10]. For this reason, Sim-
CLR structure has been adapted for many different tasks such as speech recognition
and speech emotion recognition[23], ECG feature wave segmentation[35], 3D medical
image analysis [2] and EEG emotion recognition[39].
As in many other medical fields, labeled EEG data is not abundant. This scarcity
arises from costly experiments, such as in the subject’s terms, or from the need for
manual labeling by medical professionals such as in Sleep EEG data [42]. Therefore,
adapting SSL methods for EEG classification could be really helpful in building robust
models with lower amounts of labeled data. While not many studies have dug into SSL
for EEG, some of them have demonstrated promising results, showcasing the potential
of SSL for EEG signal classification. Notable, among these studies, most of them
have employed contrastive approaches while only one study has utilized generative
SSL through the application of a generative adversarial network for EEG emotion
classification[58].
To benefit from the characteristics of SSL on EEG, one can fuse different relevant
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Literature Review
datasets during the pretraining task, without the requirement of labeled data. Sub-
sequently, the classification or downstream task can be performed with the labeled
objective data[39][44]. For instance, Mohsenvand et al.[39], merged 5 datasets for the
pretraining stage and then evaluated the model’s performance in various downstream
tasks, including emotion recognition, normal vs. abnormal classification, and sleep
stage classification. This approach allows for the utilization of diverse datasets to
enhance the model’s capabilities and generalization across different tasks without the
need for extensive labeled data.
Out of the contrastive models for EEG, several different augmentations have been
utilized. Banville et al.[4] used 3 key techniques in their study; relative positioning,
temporal shuffling, and contrastive predictive coding. However, the temporal modi-
fication of the EEG signals that those augmentations imply, might make them lose
their physiological meaning. For this reason, Mohsenvand et al. [39] suggested an-
other set of augmentations, that retain this meaning as verified by neurologists. These
augmentations are the following: additive Gaussian noise, amplitude scale zero mask-
ing, time shift, direct current drift, and band-stop filter. Similar augmentations have
also been employed by Teevena et al.[33] and both studies showed supremacy when
compared to other unsupervised or supervised methods in the classification of the
same datasets.
As for the classification algorithm, a well-known approach in SSL for computer vi-
sion is using an embedder followed by a projector head, as introduced by SimCLR[10].
Usually, the projector is a 2 or 3-layer MLP with a ReLU activation layer for non-
linearity. As can be seen in Table 3.4, some studies have also explored this type of
architecture with successful outcomes for EEG applications. Mohsenvand et al. used
instead of an MLP projector head a recurrent projector with downsampling and bidi-
rectional LSTM, while Teevena et al.[33] employed an MLP projector with a ReLU
activation layer.
Several studies have applied SSL to emotion recognition. For example, Zhang et
al. achieved 97% accuracy on subject-dependent classification on the SEED dataset
with a generative SLL approach[58].
Emotion Subject dependent contrastive SSL
has also been successfully applied; for example in [24] they achieved state-of-the-art
performance in the DEAP dataset with an accuracy of 94.72% and 95.68% in valence
and arousal dimensions.
Moreover, SSL offers the possibility to generalize to different subjects and it is
suitable for subject-independent classification.
Mohsenvand et al.
obtained 86%
accuracy on the SEED dataset after using dataset fusion and channel recombination
to perform the pretext task with more data. Without adding those techniques, they
achieved 78% accuracy.
There are various unanswered questions in SSL applied to EEG. For instance, un-
derstanding if SSL really benefits from a higher quantity of data, regardless of the
task the data was obtained for. To investigate this, it could be explored how the
performance of the algorithm presented in Mohsenvand et al. would vary without
the inclusion of the sleep-edf dataset since it was recorded during sleep, while the
other datasets included were recorded in an awake state. Furthermore, it remains un-
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Self Supervised Learning
19
clear which augmentations yield superior performance in contrastive SSL or whether
contrastive, generative, or hybrid models are more suitable for EEG tasks[44].
Paper
Data used
Pretext
Downstream task
Uncovering the structure
of clinical EEG signals
with self-supervised learning[4]
Sleep EEG data from Physionet
Challenge 2018 and
TUH Abnormal EEG
Contrastive
Data Augmentation: Relative
positioning, temporal shuffling,
Contrastive predictive coding.
Algorithm: CNN with spatial
and convolution layers
Linear logistic
regression and compare
to different baselines and
handcrafted features
Contrastive Representation
Learning for
Electroencephalogram
Classification[39]
Emotion recognition(SEED),
Normal/Abnormal EEG (TUH dataset),
Sleep-stage(SleepEDF dataset).
Merged all datasets plus 2
others for pretraining
Contrastive
Data augmentation: Channel
augmentation, amplitude scale, time
shift, DC shift, zero-masking,
Gaussian noise, Band-stop filter.
2 Algorithms: a recurrent
encoder and convolutional encoder
followed by a projection head
Recurrent LSTM and
logsoftmax
Learning with self-supervision
on EEG data[17]
Physionet Challenge 2018
and the TUH Abnormal EEG
Contrastive
Relative positioning
Logistic regression
An improved self-supervised
learning for EEG
classification[42]
Available and recorded MI EEG
Contrastive
Data augmentation: Temporal
Rearrange(exploited for MI)
Algorithm: EEGNet-CNN
(convolutional autoencoder)
CNN with cross-entropy
BENDR: Using Transformers and a
Contrastive Self-Supervised
Learning Task to Learn From Massive
Amounts of EEG Data[28]
Temple University Hospital
EEG Corpus(TUEG)
Contrastive
Algorithm: convolutional stage,
masking and transformer encoder
6 different algorithms and
combinations of taking only
specific parts of the pretext
A Self-Supervised Learning Based
Channel Attention MLP-Mixer
Network for Motor Imagery Decoding[19]
BCI Competition III dataset 4a
(Available MI BCI dataset)
Generative
Algorithm: autoencoder with
fully connected layers
MLP with fully connected layers
Cross-Session Motor Imagery
EEG Classification
using self supervised learning[33]
Motor Imagery publicly
available dataset
Contrastive
Data augmentation: zero masking,
axis inversion, additive noise,
crop and resize, cutout
and resize, moving average.
Algorithm: encoder and projector head
Small NN with a convolutional
layer and a linear layer
GANSER: A Self-supervised Data ´
Augmentation framework for EEG-based
emotion recognition[58]
DEAP, DREAMER, and SEED
Contrastive
Algorithm: adversarial augmentation
network
Multifactor multi-training
Network
Table 3.4: Most relevant research papers on Self-supervised Learning for EEG.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Methods and
Materials
In this chapter, all the materials and methods used in the study are explained in
detail. This chapter includes a description of the freely available datasets used and
the experimental design and process of recording the signals with the Nexus device.
Finally, the 2 classification algorithms are described along with the signal processing
steps.
4.1
Datasets used
With the aim of comparing the performance of the algorithm with other related
studies and comparing the feasibility of the Nexus device for emotion recognition,
different freely available datasets were used.
• DREAMER: consists of EEG and ECG recordings of 23 subjects, 14 male and
9 female, while watching 18 movie clips. The signals were recorded with the
Emotive EPOC system, a 14-channel EEG device at a sampling rate of 128 Hz.
After each clip, the participants would rate their emotions into the 3 dimensions,
valence, arousal, and dominance with the Self-assessment mannequin from 1 to
5[25].
• SEED: consists of EEG signals and eye movements from 15 participants, 7
males and 8 females. The experiment was run in 3 different sessions on different
days for each participant and it consisted of 15 Chinese film clips. The EEG
signals were recorded with the 62-channel ESI NeuroScan System at a sampling
rate of 1000 Hz. The signals were then preprocessed with a bandpass filter from
0 to 75 Hz and downsampled to 200 Hz[13].
• DEAP: this dataset has EEG signals and peripheral physiological signals recorded
from 32 participants, half female. The stimuli consisted of 40 music video clips
of a duration of one minute. The participants then rated their emotions with
a self-assessment mannequin on four dimensions: arousal, valence, dominance,
and liking. The EEG signals were recorded with the Biosemi ActiveTwo system
on 32 electrodes.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Methods and Materials
4.2
Experimental Design
To test the performance of the novel EEG device on emotion recognition, an experi-
ment was designed following previous research projects addressing similar topics. For
that, EEG signals were recorded from 11 participants, aged from 20 to 29. Among
the participants, three were female. However, because of technical problems with
the device, 3 recordings had to be discarded, one of them from a female participant,
ending up with a total of 9 subjects, 2 female.
Prior to the experiment, participants were fully informed about the entire proce-
dure including the purpose of the study and the meaning of the emotional dimensions
being assessed. Besides, all of them provided informed consent and filled out an initial
formulary with questions related to the experiment. These questions are stated in the
Appendix Section A.1.2. The signals were recorded in a Faraday Cage to minimize
distractions for the participants and noise that could alter the signal quality.
The experiment involved the visualization by the participants of 16 movie clips
in randomized order. Each clip was then followed by a self-assessment questionnaire,
in which the participants were asked to rate the video they had just watched on a
scale from 1 to 5 in the 3 different emotional dimensions, valence, dominance, and
arousal. After the questionnaire, a neutral movie clip was shown to ensure the return
to a neutral mental state. A brief break was provided to participants after half of the
videos were displayed, allowing them time to drink water and refresh.
Once the participant was ready, the headband was allocated and they were asked
to close their eyes to check for alpha wawes to ensure the recording system was
working correctly. After that, the participant was left alone in the Faraday cage and
the program would start. First, an introductory screen was shown explaining the
first step, the recording of two baseline signals, one with the eyes opened and the
following one with the eyes closed, each of them for 60 seconds. A bip sound would
indicate the end of each recording. This was followed by a trial run that consisted of
the presentation of a neutral clip continued by the self-assessment step. The purpose
of this run was to familiarize the participant with the interface and to interrupt the
process if any doubts arose.
Then, the 16 clips were shown in randomized order, each followed by the self-
assessment questionnaire, a screen indicating the number of videos watched out of
the total, and finally the neutral clip. After the first 8 videos, a screen indicating
the break appeared for a duration of 3 minutes. After the end of the 16 videos, a
thank you screen concluded the experiment. The whole experimental procedure that
involves EEG signal recording can be seen in the flowchart of Figure 4.1 and Figure
4.2.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Experimental Setup
23
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of the experimental procedure, after the participant has filled
the initial formulary and provided informed consent..
Figure 4.2: Flowchart of one experimental run.
4.3
Experimental Setup
4.3.1
Recording devices
Besides the available datasets, data was collected using a novel Brain-Computer In-
terface Device, Nexus, developed by Insai. The device consists of 8 Ag/AgCl main
electrodes: TP9, FT7, AF7, Fp1, Fp2, AF8, FT8, and TP10; allocated in a headband.
In addition, Fpz is used as a bias electrode and the reference electrode is located in
the ear lobe. The headband can be adjusted with 2 straps it has on the sides to fit
different sizes. The system has built-in amplifiers and acquires the signals with a
sample rate of 250Hz.
Figures 4.3 shows the prototype developed by Insai and Figure 4.4 shows the
device that was used for the recording of the signals
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Methods and Materials
Figure 4.3: Nexus headband prototype developed by Insai.
Figure 4.4: Nexus headband device used for the data recording.
Since one of the objectives of this project is to explore the feasibility of the device
for emotion recognition, data was also collected with a research-grade BCI device
developed by G-tec, with the aim of comparing the performance of both in the same
experimental setup. Specifically, the system consisted of 16 wet electrodes connected
to the g.USBAMP amplifier.
However, before the experiments, it was discovered
that the impedance of the electrodes was too high, likely due to a loose cable for the
ground electrode. Therefore, the data couldn’t be collected with this device and the
only available recordings were the ones from the Nexus.
4.3.2
Stimuli Selection and presentation
Different types of stimuli have been used in the literature with the purpose of evok-
ing emotions in subjects. Among them, one of the most effective ones is audio-visual
stimuli which could be for example, movie clips or musical videos[46]. Several inves-
tigations have conducted preliminary studies to determine which videos were more
effective in emotion elicitation[25][27]. After the first assessment, they then reduced
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Experimental Setup
25
the number of videos and used the selected ones to carry out the experiments. Due
to time constraints, such a long procedure wasn’t possible and videos were selected
following previous studies under some conditions.
This way, first, videos from [25] were reviewed and some were discarded on certain
criteria. For instance, clips that were in black and white or had noticeable and inef-
fective or outdated special effects for younger subjects were discarded. Additionally,
stimuli that did not appear suﬀiciently impactful were also removed. Moreover, long
clips were discarded to limit the length of the experiment to avoid the fatigue of the
participants, which could lead to alterations in the results[46]. To compensate for
the reduced video selection, other options were searched in the relevant literature,
such as in [51] where they compared movie clips based on the rating from 144 par-
ticipants. However, after watching and considering the videos from different lists,
four were still missing and they were obtained from personal suggestions or Google
searches. The videos were obtained either from the full movies or clips on YouTube.
The specifications of each clip can be found in Table A.1 in the Appendix.
The average rating of the clips from all participants was used to locate each clip
into a 2-dimensional space representing the arousal and valence dimensions. This way,
an overview of the emotion distribution can be visually examined in Table 4.5
Figure 4.5: Distribution of movie clips according to the average values of valence
and arousal.
To elicit emotions, the movie clips were shown on a screen using PsychoPy, a cross-
platform package that allows running experiments in behavioral sciences[43]. The
interface provided means to show the videos and include an interactive questionnaire
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Methods and Materials
used for the self-assessment of the participant. Figure 4.6 shows the user interface of
this program and Figure 4.7 the interactive screens for the participants’ assessment
of the video clips.
Figure 4.6: Psychopy program interface. At the bottom, it can be seen the design
flow of the experiment with the different screens that were shown during
the experiment.
Figure 4.7: Interface screens for the interactive self-assessment of the emotional
dimensions: valence, arousal, and dominance.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Data Visualization
27
4.4
Data Visualization
To understand the quality of the signals and check the effects of the preprocessing
and downsampling steps, different visualization methods were developed in time and
frequency domains. This way, a method to plot individual channels in one trial was
implemented. It was used then to show the effect on the signals of the different data
augmentations applied in this study.
Moreover, a method to show the Fast Fourier Transform of single channels was
created as well as a method to plot the periodogram of the signals. This was used to
get a general insight into the data and the effect of the preprocessing.
4.5
Data Processing
Since the objective of the pretext is to obtain representations of the EEG data, the
preprocessing was kept simple. The data was first resampled to 200 Hz so that all
the data from the different datasets had the same sampling rate. The resampling was
performed with the resample() function from mne python library that employs the
Fourier method to resample the signals. Then a bandpass filter between 0.3 and 80
Hz was applied, following the procedure in [39]. For that, a Butterworth filter of 5th
order was used. The frequency response of the filter can be seen in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: 5th order Butterworth filter frequency response.
The data was then windowed into 20-second-long signals for the pretext task as
that length showed better performance in the algorithm proposed by Mohsenvand et
al.[39]. On the other hand, it was windowed into 1-second-long signals for the down-
stream task following other studies on emotion recognition for the SEED dataset[13].
After that, the data was normalized with sklearn function preprocess.scale() in the
time dimension.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Methods and Materials
4.6
Subject independent Classification algorithm
To perform the emotion recognition tasks, a contrastive self-supervised learning algo-
rithm was developed, following and adjusting the architecture presented by Mohsen-
vand et al. [39]. The model called SeqCLR, is based on a well-known self-supervised
learning architecture used for image classification, SimCLR. This network was then
adjusted to work with time series data. The algorithm implementation was done in 2
steps: pretext and downstream task or classification. Moreover, prior to the pretext
training being performed, the augmentations were defined.
As is common in contrastive SSL, the pretext task consisted of an encoder followed
by a projector head, and the weights of the encoder were then translated to the
algorithm of the downstream task. The pretext task was performed without taking
into consideration the labels of the data. A representation of the general workflow
can be seen in Figure 4.9
Datset( no 
labels)
Datset( with 
labels)
Pretext task
Downstream 
task
Pretraining
model
Target 
model
Encoder
Projector 
Head
Encoder
Classifier
Figure 4.9: Flowchart of the Contrastive Self-supervised Learning workflow.
4.6.1
Augmentation set
As introduced in section 2.5, the first step in contrastive SSL is applying different
augmentations to the input data.
To define the augmentations, some parameters
have to be chosen between certain values so that the signal doesn’t lose its physio-
==PAGE:39==
4.6 Subject independent Classification algorithm
29
logical meaning. These values were taken as in [39], where they were supervised by
neurologists. In this case, the augmentations applied are:
• Additive noise by adding noise from a Gaussian distribution centered on zero
and a random standard deviation from 0 to 0.2.
Since it is diﬀicult to appreciate the effect of adding Gaussian noise in the time
domain, the FFT was plotted to check the effect in the frequency domain.
Figure 4.10: Interface screens for the interactive self-assessment of the emotional
dimensions: valence, arousal, and dominance.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Methods and Materials
• Time-shift by moving the augmented signal from -50 to 50 samples from the
original signal.
• Zero masking by setting to zero between 0 to 150 number of samples from a
random point of the signal.
• Amplitude scale by multiplying the signal with a random number obtained
from a uniform distribution between 0.5 and 2.
==PAGE:41==
4.6 Subject independent Classification algorithm
31
• Band-stop filter using the iirnotch function from scipy python library at a
frequency from 2.8 to 80 Hz.
Since it is diﬀicult to appreciate the differences in the time domain, the FFT
was plotted to verify that the filter was having the desired effect. For this case,
the notch filter was applied at a frequency of 26.18 Hz.
• DC shift by adding the signal with a random constant from -10 to 10.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Methods and Materials
The augmentation to be applied was randomly chosen with the Python function
sample() from the random module.
4.6.2
Pretext task
The pretext task algorithm consisted of a convolutional encoder, followed by a projec-
tor head. The encoder transforms the input into a feature vector or representation of
the original data. The encoder has been chosen to be convolutional because Mohsen-
vand et al.[39] reported better performance for the emotion recognition task with
this architecture. In the model, reflection padding is used to keep the length of the
signals through the encoder. Therefore, at the end of the encoder, the shape of the
feature vector will be (Number of features(4), temporal length). The structure of the
encoder consists of 3 parallel 1-dimensional convolutions with different kernel and
output sizes. The output of the 3 convolutions is then concatenated and fed to 4
convolutional residual blocks.
In the projector head, the output of the encoder is fed to 3 bidirectional Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) units, one with no downsampling and two after downsampling.
Afterwards, the final output of each direction is concatenated and passed through one
dense layer with a dimensional output of 128, followed by a ReLU activation layer.
A final Dense layer collapses the output to a 32-point vector. The contrastive loss
is computed on this feature representation. The architecture of the encoder and the
projector can be seen in Figure 4.11 and 4.12, respectively.
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Subject independent Classification algorithm
33
Figure 4.11: Convolutional Encoder architecture proposed by Mohsenvand et
al.[39]. In the diagram, RP stands for reflection padding, BN for batch
normalization, and Cat for concatenation.
Figure 4.12: Projector head architecture proposed by Mohsenvand et al.[39]. In the
diagram, RP stands for reflection padding, BN for batch normalization,
FLO for first and last output, and Cat for concatenation.
The algorithm proposed by Mohsenvand et al.[39] uses Contrastive loss, follow-
ing the normalized temperature-scaled cross entropy used in SimCLR by Chen et
al.[10]. The idea behind this function is to maximize the similarity between the two
augmentations of the data, therefore the less similar the learned representations are,
the higher the loss would be. The loss is defined as follows:
li,j = −log
exp(sim(zi, zj)/τ)
∑2N
k=1[k̸=i] exp(sim(zi, zk)/τ)
(4.1)
where sim(u,v) denotes to cosine similarity:
sim(u, v) =
uT v
∥u∥∥v∥
Moreover, the model was trained with Adam optimizer and weight decay of 1∗10−4,
which showed the highest accuracy. They also used a batch size of 1000 samples.
However, the model defined by Mohsenvand et al. had originally 17 million pa-
rameters, exceeding the computational resources available. Therefore, some hyperpa-
rameters had to be adjusted. Specifically, after studying which was the largest model
that could be executed, the output of the parallel convolutional layers was reduced
to half of their original value as well as the output of the dense layer of the residual
blocks. Besides, the batch size had to be reduced to 256. Detailed hyperparameter
selection for the entire model will be specified later in the implementation section.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Methods and Materials
4.6.3
Downstream Task
In this study, the target downstream task is the classification of the trials into different
emotion dimensional values or emotional states depending on the data that is being
analyzed. The algorithm employed resembles the one for the pretext task with a few
modifications that allow the prediction of the classes.
In Mohsenvand et al.
[39], the downstream algorithm consists of an encoder
and a classifier. The encoder follows the same structure as in the pretext task and
the weights of the encoder trained in that phase were translated to perform the
classification. The classifier has a similar architecture to the projector head described
in the previous section. While the projector head output was set to 32 decode features,
the output of the last linear layer of the classifier was set to the number of classes.
Additionally, a softmax layer was added at the end of the final layer. The loss function
utilized for the downstream task was the Cross-Entropy loss function.
As a whole the procedure was as follows: the data was loaded and then separated
into train, validation, and test sets. First, the data was rearranged so that all the
channels were fed individually to the encoder. This way the input of the encoder
would be a 3-dimensional array with the batch size the result of multiplying the
original batch size(128 as indicated by Mohsenvand et al.) and the number of chan-
nels. Subsequently, after the encoder, the data was reshaped to restore the channel
dimension, and the 4 features of length 100 were concatenated before being fed to
the classifier. As a result, the input of the classifier will be: (batch size, number of
channels * number of features(4), time length). The downstream algorithm proposed
by Mohsenvand et al. can be seen in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Downstream algorithm architecture proposed by Mohsenvand et al.
[39]. In the picture, the NLL loss stands for negative log-likelihood
loss. This loss is equivalent to the cross entropy loss but in the late
one, the softmax layer wouldn’t need to be added.
==PAGE:45==
4.6 Subject independent Classification algorithm
35
4.6.4
Implementation
To reduce the computational cost of the model, in terms of memory and time, different
options were considered.
The biggest possible model that could be run with the
available resources was found, minimizing the number of hyperparameters that had
to be reduced. This selection is specified in Tables 4.1 for the pretext task and 4.2 for
the downstream task. Other parameters not specified, such as the kernel size of the
convolutional encoder or the parameters of the projector head, were kept the same
as proposed by Mohsenvand et al. (see Figures 4.12 and 4.11 for the configuration of
the convolutional encoder and the projector head).
Hyperparameter
Mohsenvand et al.
Proposed
Batch Size
1000
256
Output dimension of
residual blocks
(convolutional encoder)
250
125
Output dimension
of 3 paralel
convolutional blocks
(convolutional encoder)
100,100,50
50,50,25
Epochs With
emotion Datasets
pretext
300
70
Epochs With
SEED Dataset
pretext
300
100
Temperature
0.05
0.05
Learning rate
1 ∗10−4
1 ∗10−4
Table 4.1: Hyperparemeter selection for the Pretext task presented by Mohnsenvand
et al. and the current implementation. Parameters not specified of the
architecture of the convolutional encoder and the projector head were
kept the same.
For running the pretext task, different datasets were employed. First, only the
SEED dataset was used, aiming to achieve the performance reported by Mohsenvand
et al.
with no Data fusion of 78% accuracy[39].
Subsequently, the emotion task
datasets were used, SEED, DEAP, and DREAMER to obtain a pretrained model on
emotion data.
Different training splits were also considered. In the literature, a common ap-
proach for SEED subject-independent classification is to train on 9 subjects and test
on the other 6 [30]. In the proposed implementation, to reduce overfitting, cross-
validation is also implemented. However, due to time constraints from the HPC, only
5-fold cross-validation could be tested.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Methods and Materials
The algorithm was implemented on pytorch and run on the HPC DTU cluster,
specifically on the Tesla A100 PCIE 80 GB card.
The code implementation was inspired by a GitHub repository on SSL for EEG.
However, it originally had multiple mistakes and ineﬀiciencies that had to be corrected.
The adaption of the code is shown in the Appendix Section A.3.
Hyperparameter
Mohsenvand et al
Proposed
Batch size
128
128
Output dimension of
residual blocks
(convolutional encoder)
250
125
Output dimension
of 3 parallel
convolutional block
(convolutional encoder)
100,100,50
50,50,25
Epochs
132
Variable
(run with early
stopping)
Learning rate
1 ∗10−4
1 ∗10−4
Table 4.2: Hyperparameter selection for the Downstream task presented by Mohsen-
vand et al. and the current implementation. Parameters not specified of
the architecture of the convolutional encoder and the classifier were kept
the same .
==PAGE:47==
4.7 Subject dependent Classification algorithm
37
4.7
Subject dependent Classification algorithm
After obtaining inconclusive results with the subject-independent classification algo-
rithm on the collected data, alternative approaches were explored.
To deepen in
Self-supervised Learning, a subject-dependent algorithm with lower computational
cost was implemented and tested, following the architecture presented by Ken et
al. in ”Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning for EEG-Based Emotion
Recognition”. Moreover, by running the algorithm on each individual EEG signals,
the study could be considered as an initial investigation of the potential for emotion
recognition of the nexus device.
As in the previous algorithm, the full procedure is divided into pretext task and
downstream task. In this case, the algorithm consists of five components: a group
sampler, the Meiosis data augmentation, a base encoder, a group projector, and a
contrastive loss function.
4.7.1
Pretext Task
Following the schema presented by Chen et al.[10], the pretext task is performed with
an encoder, followed by a projector after which the contrastive loss is computed. The
input of the encoder is the result of getting the data through a group sampler and
the meiosis data augmentation step. The contrastive loss is defined as described in
the previous section (see Equation 4.1).
4.7.1.1
Group sampler
The group sampler creates mini batches following these steps:
1. Selects P number of videos.
First, P videos or stimuli are chosen from the
dataset to include in the mini-batch.
2. Selects 2Q subjects. For each chosen video, 2Q subjects are selected. An indi-
vidual selected subject would be called si, where i ranges from 1 to 2Q.
3. Generates P groups of the same video stimuli with 2Q different subjects. For
each video, a group will be created with 2Q different subjects.
More in detail, being Xs
v a 1-second signal recorded when a subject s watched a
1-second video clip v, a group Gi of a specific video vi would be defined as Gi =
{Xs1
vi , Xs2
vi , ..., Xs2Q
vi }. Overall, the minibatch would be constituted by {G1, G2, .., GP },
being P the number of videos per minibatch.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Methods and Materials
Figure 4.14: Illustration created by Ken et al. describing the group sampler. First,
for a mini-batch, P videos are selected, and then for each video, 2Q
subjects are randomly chosen, generating this way a group Gi.
4.7.1.2
Data Augmentation
In the data augmentation step, positive pairs are generated from each group obtained
through the group sampler. A positive pair will consist of two groups that preserve
the same stimuli-related features. The augmentation process involves a crossover of
two signals within the group, following this procedure:
1. Pairing: individual signals of the same group are paired to form Q pairs. Each
pair consists of two signals from the group.
2. Crossover: For each pair, both signals are split at the same random point in
time. The splits are then combined in a specific way: the first split of a signal of
the pair gets combined with the second split of the other signal and vice versa.
This way, being {a1, a2, ..., aM} the elements of a signal A with M time samples
and B another signal of the same group, formed by the samples b1, b2, ..., bM;
the crossover or meiosis would create 2 new signals A’={b1, b2, .., bc, ac+1, ..., aM}
and B’={a1, a2, .., ac, bc+1, ..., bM}
3. Separation: In the final step, the recombined signals are randomly divided
into 2 groups, and the signals of each pair are required to join separate groups.
As a result, the output of the data augmentation for a Group will be 2 groups
denoted GA′
i
and GB′
i , the result of the Meiosis of a group Gi. Therefore, a batch will
consist of 2P samples, being P the initial number of videos selected to form a group.
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Subject dependent Classification algorithm
39
Figure 4.15: Illustration created by Ken et al. to explain the Meiosis data augmen-
tation. On the left, all the signals within a Group are represented.
Then they are paired 2 by 2 and recombined whiting the pair. Finally,
each signal of the pair is assigned to one of the 2 groups, ending up
with a total of 2P groups in each mini-batch, with P the number of
different videos.
4.7.1.3
Encoder
Each sample is then passed through an encoder that is based on the ResNet18-1D
architecture which maps each signal to a 521-dimensional feature space.
The encoder starts with a convolutional layer followed by Batch normalization
and ReLU activation. Then, a max pool layer proceeds the 8 convolutional residual
blocks. Each convolutional block consists of:
1. Convolutional layer
2. Batch normalization and ReLU activation
3. Convolutional layer
4. Batch normalization
Both convolutional layers in the residual block have the same number and length
of kernels.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Methods and Materials
Figure 4.16: Illustration provided by Ken et al. describing the signal encoder. The
architecture is based on the ResNet18-1D..
4.7.1.4
Group Projector
The group projector is designed to extract group-level features from multiple sam-
ples. It consists of a base projector that is an MLP that projects each individual
representation on a 4096-dimensional space.
The projector comprises three fully connected layers and a ReLU activation layer
function after the first two layers. Moreover, before each layer, Batch Normalization
and dropout are applied to enhance performance.
Once the base projector processes the individual representations, the resulting
features are aggregated with a 1-dimensional max-pooling (MaxPool1D). This pool-
ing operation extracts the maximum values over the 4096 feature dimensions from Q
representations. As a result, we obtain the group feature representation, representing
the maximum values of each of the 4096 points across all the feature representations
within a group. This process integrates the individual signals within that particular
group, leading to a comprehensive group-level feature representation. The architec-
ture of the group projector is shown in Figure 4.17.
After the group representations are computed, the contrastive loss function is
obtained with the objective of maximizing the similarity between zi and zj, where
zi is the group feature representation of GA and zj the feature representation of
GB obtained after the encoder and group projector. In other words, the algorithm
focuses on maximizing the similarity of features corresponding to the same 1-second-
long video clip.
==PAGE:51==
4.7 Subject dependent Classification algorithm
41
Figure 4.17: Illustration provided by Ken et al. describing the group projector. It
can be appreciated how the feature representations, obtained after the
encoder, are passed individually through the MLP base projector and
then all the features of the Group are combined with the MaxPooling
Kernel to obtain a group representation.
4.7.2
Dowsntream Task
As in the previous algorithm, the encoder from the pretext is translated to the down-
stream with the learned weights. The encoder obtains the feature representation of
each 1-second long signal and afterwards, this representation is fed to the classifier.
The classifier consists of several Fully Connected layers, the first two are interca-
lated with batch normalization and ReLU activation functions, while before the last
layer, a dropout of 0.5 is applied to reduce overfitting. Finally, the algorithm is op-
timized using the cross-entropy loss function, which measures the difference between
the predicted output and the actual label during training.
Figure 4.18: Illustration provided by Ken et al. describing the classifier. It can
be appreciated how the feature representations, obtained after the en-
coder, are passed individually through the MLP base projector and
then all the features of the Group are combined with the MaxPooling
Kernel to obtain a group representation.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Methods and Materials
4.7.3
Implementation
The oﬀicial code from the original research study was freely available and therefore
used for this project. Subsequently, it was adapted to work with the DREAMER
dataset and with the data recorded with the Nexus device. The original code had
been tailored by Ken et al. to the specific datasets, the SEED, and the DEAP, to
show the performance of the algorithm. Therefore, modifications were necessary to
optimize its functionality for the new datasets.
For the parameter selection, several combinations were tested to find the best
performance on the DREAMER and nexus data. The final batch size depends on the
chosen values of P and Q since each mini-batch will have P*2Q samples, arising after
the group sampler and augmentation process. While the best-performing values for
SEED and DEAP datasets are provided by Ken et al., for the DREAMER dataset
and the recorded data with the nexus, different combinations were tested for the P
and Q parameters as well as the batch size of the downstream task to obtain better
accuracy.
The algorithm was implemented on Pytorch and run on the HPC cluster of DTU,
specifically on the Tesla A100 PCIE 40 GB card.
The code adaptation for Nexus data is included in the Appendix. The adapta-
tion for the DREAMER is not shown since it is very similar, to avoid overcrowding
the Appendix. The ResNet model needed to run the full algorithm is available at
https://github.com/kanhaoning/Self-supervised-group-meiosis-contrastive-learning-for-
EEG-based-emotion-recognition.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This section aims to objectively describe the results obtained after applying the algo-
rithms explained in the previous chapter.
This section is divided into two parts: first, the results regarding the implementa-
tion of SeqCLR are explained, and then, the results of the Group meiosis algorithm.
At the end, different graphs show the participants’ answers to the most relevant ques-
tions of the questionnaires. The visualization of the preprocessing step is shown in
the Appendix section A.2.1.
5.1
Subject independent SEED dataset classification
First, with the aim of testing whether the results obtained by Mohsenvand et al. [39]
are reproducible, the algorithm was trained on the SEED dataset. Following their
work, the initial focus was to only pretrain the algorithm(i.e., running the pretext
task) with the SEED dataset alone, not including the data fusion or the channel
recombination, a setup that yields 78.93% accuracy in their results. The calculated
loss over the 100 epochs of the pretraining can be seen in Appendix Section A.2.2.
Afterwards, to explore how beneficial adding more data to the pretraining phase
would be, the pretext task was run with SEED, DEAP, and DREAMER datasets.
Due to computational constrains, the number of epochs had to be reduced to 70.
However, it was enough for the model to converge as can be seen in the loss of plot
in Appendix Section A.2.2.
The pretrained models were tested with different downstream data splits. First,
following the implementation of Mohsenvand et al. and other previous studies, 9 sub-
jects were used for training and 6 for testing the classification algorithm. Since there
are 3 sessions for each participant, the model was run 3 times, once per session. More-
over, after seeing that the algorithm was overfitting, early stopping was implemented
to try to avoid that from happening. Figure 5.1 shows the training, validation, and
test sets accuracy evolution, using a pretrained model on the seed dataset. As in
Mohsenvand et al., the batch size selected was 128 samples. Due to early stopping,
it was run only for 40 epochs.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results
Figure 5.1: Accuracy of training, validation, and test set.
The training set was
composed of the second session of data of 9 participants and the test
set included data from the remaining 6 subjects. The model used a
pretrained version of the encoder with only the SEED dataset.
Table 5.1 summarizes the accuracy values for the 3 different sessions, run with
early stopping. Take into account that the task is a 3-class classification problem and
therefore chance level is 33.33% accuracy as there is no class imbalance.
Session
Accuracy(%)
SEED pretrained model
Accuracy(%)
Emotion pretrained model
1st
52.11
51.78
2nd
51.88
51.17
3rd
55.90
58.14
Average
53.30 ± 1.81
53.70 ± 3.1
Table 5.1: Accuracy values for the different sessions. Data from 9 participants were
used for training and the remaining 6 for testing. Emotion pretrained
model refers to the encoder parameters obtained from running the pretext
task with all emotion datasets: SEED, DEAP and DREAMER.
As the model continued overfitting, cross-validation was implemented and tested
on single sessions to compare with the previous model. Figure 5.2 shows the training,
validation, and test accuracy for one split of 5-fold cross-validation of the first session
of data from all participants.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Subject independent NEXUS data classification
45
Figure 5.2: Accuracy of training, validation, and test set for a cross-validation split
of 5 fold using a model pretrained only on the seed dataset. The down-
stream task for this results was run on the first session of all participants.
Table 5.2 shows the average accuracy values over the 5 split of each session and the
final average accuracy for both models. The standard deviation of these last values
was computed using error propagation formulas.
Session
Accuracy(%)
SEED pretrained model
Accuracy(%)
Emotion pretrained model
1st
58.64 ± 4.85
58.98 ± 4.73
2nd
57.63 ± 3.91
59.62 ± 2.60
3rd
60.44 ± 0.71
61.56 ± 1.48
Average
58.63 ± 3.16
60.05 ± 2.94
Table 5.2: Accuracy values for the different sessions.
In this case, 5-fold cross-
validation was applied to each session, the accuracy per session in the
table corresponds to the average accuracy over the 5 splits. The emo-
tion pretrained model refers to the encoder parameters obtained from
running the pretext task with all emotion datasets: SEED, DEAP, and
DREAMER.
5.2
Subject independent NEXUS data classification
Even though the model could not be reproduced with the same performance as in [39],
the obtained accuracy was higher than chance and therefore an attempt to classify the
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results
recorded data was made. Table 5.3 shows the average accuracy values and standard
deviation after a 5-fold cross-validation.
Accuracy(%)
Signal duration
Emotion pretrained
model
SEED pretrained
model
Valence
50.81 ± 3.58
48.53 ± 4.33
Arousal
66.13 ± 21.3
65.53 ± 17.33
Dominance
54.61 ± 13.14
49.04 ± 8.43
Table 5.3: Nexus Valence Accuracy for both pretrained models and different signal
duration.
5.3
Subject dependent DEAP, SEED, and DREAMER
dataset classification
First, the Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning algorithm was tested
on the SEED and DEAP datasets, to validate the performance reported by Ken et
al. Table 5.4 shows the reported accuracy values in [24] and the obtained values with
the same parameters specified in their research. However, the obtained values are the
result of only one run, while they ran their fine-tuning process 5 times and showed
the average accuracy.
Group Meiosis Dataset Classification
Accuracy
Reported (%)
Accuracy
Obtained (%)
SEED
94.04
92.64
DEAP-Valence
94.72
93.61
DEAP-Arousal
95.68
94.35
Table 5.4: Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning accuracy values for
DEAP and SEED datasets as reported by Ken et al. [24] and obtained
with the freely available code implementation.
Afterwards, the algorithm was adapted to work with the DREAMER dataset,
which is the most similar to the data collected in terms of stimuli. Since the algorithm
was not initially optimized for this dataset, the best combination of parameter values
was studied.
The parameters considered were downstream batch size, P(number
of videos per batch), and Q (number of subjects per group). As explained in the
Methods section, the batch size of the pretext task depends on the values of P and
Q, and therefore it wasnt considered as a variable itself.
The values considered for each variable were:
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Subject dependent Nexus data classification
47
• P-number of videos: 2,4,6,8,10,12.
• Q-number of subjects: 2,3,4,6,8,10. Q had to be lower or equal to half the total
number of subjects, 22.
• Batch size: 128, 256.
Each pretrained model was run once for each downstream batch size and was tested
on valence classification. The results are shown in Figure 5.3. Afterwards, the 2 best
performing models were run 5 times for each emotion dimension. The results are
presented in Table 5.5. The class imbalance in this case is 73% high value for arousal
and 62% high value for valence.
Figure 5.3: Accuracy Heatmap of the classification of DREAMER data with the
Group Meiosis Self-supervised Learning algorithm for two different
downstream batch sizes, 256 and 128. P represents the number of videos
per batch in the pretaining algorithm and Q is the number of subjects
per group in the pretext task.
Bacth size
Arousal
P=10,Q=2
Arousal
P=10,Q=6
Valence
P=10,Q=2
Valence
P=10,Q=6
128
87.54
86.66
81.24
80.90
256
85.48
84.96
79.39
79.29
Table 5.5: DREAMER Arousal and Valence accuracy values for the 2 best perform-
ing models.
5.4
Subject dependent Nexus data classification
As for the DREAMER dataset, fine-tuning was performed to find the parameters
that show the best performance for the recorded data. The parameters studied in
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results
the pretext task were P(number of videos per batch), and Q (number of subjects per
group). Moreover, two different batch sizes were considered in the downstream task.
The values tested for each variable were:
• P-number of videos: 2,4,6,8,10,12. P had to be lower than the total number of
videos, 16
• Q-number of subjects: 2,3,4. Q had to be lower or equal to half the total number
of subjects, 9.
• Downstream batch size: 128, 256.
For determining the best values, the pretext task was run for 2000 epochs and
the learning rate was set to 1e−4 since Ken et al. used that value for the pretraining
on DEAP and SEED datasets. Consecutively, the downstream task was run for 70
epochs, since in all cases the accuracy had already reached a stable value or wasn’t
increasing further.
The final accuracy of the classification of valence for all combinations of P, Q,
and batch size is shown in Figure 5.4. It should be taken into account that since the
labels come from the rating of the participants, there is a class imbalance (62% high
valence)
Figure 5.4: Accuracy Heatmap of the classification of valence ratings of nexus data
with the Group Meiosis Self-supervised Learning algorithm for two dif-
ferent downstream batch sizes, 256 and 128. P represents the number
of videos per batch in the pretaining algorithm and Q is the number of
subjects per group in the pretext task.
Furthermore, since the DREAMER dataset is the closest to the recorded data
in terms of stimuli, the best-performing model on the DREAMER was used on the
downstream task of the nexus data, with the aim of determining if even though the
experiments were different in both cases, the similarity is enough so that the higher
amount of data of the DREAMER datasets becomes beneficial for nexus emotion
recognition. The accuracy considered was obtained after running each model five
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Subject dependent Nexus data classification
49
times. Besides, to make a fair comparison, the two best-performing models trained
on the nexus were run 5 times and the average accuracy was taken. The results were
obtained with a downstream batch size of 128 since, as it can be seen in Figure5.4,
it offers in general, higher performance with an average of 59.86%, versus 53.42%
for the batch size of 256. The following table shows the comparison between the
best-performing models:
Batch
Size
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=2
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=6
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=2
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=4
128
65.70 ± 1.07
65.91 ± 0.61
65.41 ± 0.57
66.30 ± 0.65
256
66.07 ± 1.68
63.99 ± 2.2
64.75 ± 0.79
65.37 ± 1.57
Table 5.6: Final results for Nexus data valence classification with pre-trained models
on DREAMER and Nexus data with a batch size of 128. The values
shown result from running each model five times and taking the average
and the associated standard deviation.
The same models were run for arousal (see Table 5.7) and dominance(see Table
5.8). In this case, there is also class imbalance with a high-value percentage of 64%
for arousal and 57% for dominance on average amongst all participants.
Batch
Size
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=2
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=6
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=2
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=4
128
71.70 ± 1.03
71.98 ± 0.34
71.50 ± 1.05
69.96 ± 0.76
256
71.45 ± 1.27
71.78 ± 0.95
70.82 ± 1.11
69.91 ± 1.36
Table 5.7: Arousal classification accuracy on the nexus data with pre-trained models
on DREAMER and nexus data.
Batch
Size
DREAMER
pretrained
P=10,Q=2
DREAMER
pretrained
P=10,Q=6
Nexus
pretrained
P=2, Q=2
Nexus
pretrained
P=2, Q=4
128
61.39 ± 1.03
63.88 ± 1.83
63.58 ± 0.59
63.54 ± 1.23
256
62.06 ± 1.10
63.72 ± 0.44
62.85 ± 1.12
64.49 ± 0.95
Table 5.8: Dominance classification accuracy on the nexus data with pre-trained
models on DREAMER and nexus data.
Finally, since the models showed poor performance and with the aim of studying
the source of these results, individual subject classification was carried out. For this
purpose, the 2 best performing models pretrained on the whole nexus data and the 2
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results
best performing models of the DREAMER pretraining were used to obtain individual
accuracy metrics. Figure 5.5 shows the boxplot to illustrate the distribution of the
individual’s valence accuracy. The obtained values per subject for valence are specified
in Table 5.9, where it can be appreciated that subject 6(in bold) has substantially
higher accuracy than other participants, also taking into account the class imbalance
of this specific subject which is amongst the lowest. Moreover, the same study was
performed for arousal and dominance classification and the results are specified in
Tables 5.10 and 5.11, respectively.
Figure 5.5: Boxplots of the distribution of individual valence accuracies .
Accuracy %
Subject ID
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=2
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=4
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=2
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=6
Class Imbalance
(high value
ratio)
S1
75.00
83.33
81.67
80.83
0.8
S2
80.83
69.17
73.33
75.83
0.64
S3
63.83
65.00
63.33
66.67
0.66
S4
80.10
80.00
84.17
81.67
0.61
S5
75.00
71.67
70.83
71.67
0.59
S6
86.83
85.00
85.83
85.00
0.52
S7
62.59
64.57
65.00
69.17
0.52
S8
69.17
66.67
67.50
69.17
0.51
S9
75.00
76.67
76.67
72.50
0.64
Average
74.26 ± 7.51
73.56 ± 7.47
74.26 ± 7.86
74.72 ± 6.08
Table 5.9: Individual subject Valence accuracy with Group meiosis algorithm.
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Subject dependent Nexus data classification
51
Accuracy %
Subject ID
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=2
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=4
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=2
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=6
Class Imbalance
(high value
ratio)
S1
85.00
83.33
83.33
85.00
0.7
S2
77.50
73.33
77.50
75.00
0.74
S3
67.50
63.33
66.67
60.83
0.49
S4
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
0
S5
70.83
74.17
72.83
70.83
0.69
S6
63.33
62.50
65.50
60.83
0.59
S7
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
1
S8
92.50
91.67
92.50
93.00
0.92
S9
73.33
67.50
68.33
70.00
0.76
Average
82.08 ± 13.10
81.04 ± 14.01
82.29 ± 13.10
80.69 ± 14.67
Table 5.10: Individual subject Arousal classification accuracy with Group meiosis
algorithm.
Accuracy %
Subject ID
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=2
Nexus
pretrain
P=2, Q=4
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=2
DREAMER
pretrain
P=10,Q=6
Class Imbalance
(high value
ratio)
S1
79.17
78.33
77.50
75.00
0.5
S2
65.83
67.5
51.67
66.67
0.7
S3
65.83
65.00
63.33
61.67
0.65
S4
95.00
95.83
95.00
90.83
0.94
S5
71.67
71.7
69.17
71.67
0.35
S6
78.33
76.7
68.33
64.17
0.63
S7
60.00
60.00
57.50
63.33
0.35
S8
77.5
75.83
66.77
70.00
0.48
S9
60.00
0.6417
69.17
67.50
0.53
Average
72.59
65.73
68.66
70.42
Table 5.11: Dominance accuracy values for individual subjects.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Results
5.5
Formulary responses
In this section, the main answers by the participants to the formulary about the
experiment are detailed.
It is known that certain substances such as alcohol or caffeine, can affect the
subject’s emotional state[46]. For this reason, participants were asked whether they
had consumed alcohol or caffeine within the last 24 hours. Only one participant had
consumed alcohol and two, caffeine. Additionally, it is also acknowledged that the
cultural background of the participants affects the way they perceive the emotional
stimuli. The participants of the study were mainly students at DTU, from Spain,
Italy, Germany, Mexico, India, and Denmark. Prior to the experiment, participants
were asked to what extent they believed they would be affected by stimuli designed
to evoke different emotions. Figure 5.6 shows the average rating per participant for
the different discrete emotions.
Figure 5.6: Average ratings from all participants when being asked how susceptible
they are to each emotion.
After the experiment, to assess the success of the selected stimuli, participants
were asked to rate how much the videos elicited their emotions. Additionally, partic-
ipants were inquired about their level of fatigue and the mental workload involved in
the entire procedure, as it is known that fatigue can also affect how people experiment
with emotions [46].
==PAGE:63==
5.5 Formulary responses
53
Figure 5.7: Participant rating on the question: How much did you think the videos
elicited your emotions?.
Figure 5.8: Participant rating on the question: How much mental workload was
required?.
Figure 5.9: Participant rating on the question: How fatigued were you at the end
of the experiment?.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Results
Furthermore, they were asked which video had the highest and the lowest impact
on them to assess the quality of the chosen stimuli. Movie clips targeting calmness
were voted to be less effective. On the other hand, participants claimed that videos
regarding anger and fear had a greater impact on them.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This section aims to interpret the results presented in the previous chapter, in relation
to the research questions and related work. The achievements and limitations of the
methods used will also be discussed.
6.1
Reproducibility of SSL algorithms in the literature
One of the main objectives of this research was to study the feasibility of state-of-the-
art SSL algorithms for emotion recognition.
6.1.1
Implementation of SeqCLR
First SeqCLR was implemented. This algorithm was chosen due to its great advan-
tages, such as the possibility of developing the pretext task with different datasets,
independently of the task they had been acquired for or the number of channels.
Moreover, this algorithm showed higher than state-of-the-art accuracy for sleep stage
detection and emotion recognition and it allows for subject-independent classifica-
tion[39].
However, due to limited computational resources, the exact model proposed by
Mohsenvad et al. could not be implemented and some hyperparameters had to be
reduced. As expected, among the pretrained models used, the emotion pretrained
model, i.e. using the dataset DEAP, SEED, and DREAMER, showed slightly better
accuracy, in line with other studies that report higher accuracy when more data is
used in the pretext task.
Although the results obtained on the SEED dataset present higher accuracy(60%
with the emotion-pretrained model) than chance levels (33%), they are far from the
ones reported by Mohsenvand et al.(78.6% accuracy) and other state-of-the-art meth-
ods on individual subject classification such as in [30] with 78.39% accuracy.
On
the other hand, another study that has implemented the SeqCLR algorithm for their
research projects has also obtained lower accuracies than those reported by Mohsen-
vand et al. with an accuracy of 64.56% [31], highlighting the diﬀiculty in reproducing
the algorithm’s performance.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Discussion
6.1.2
Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning
algorithm
Given the limitations of implementing SeqCLR, another, easier task was approached,
subject-dependent classification. Initially, this model was tested with the SEED and
DEAP datasets to compare the reported results, obtaining a very close performance
to the one presented in the paper, and showing its reproducibility.
6.2
Performance of SSL algorithms on Nexus data
6.2.1
SeqCLR algorithm
The results obtained with SeqCLR on the nexus data can not be properly discussed as
the algorithm could not be reproduced with the specifications or the exact architecture
it was designed with.
The very high standard deviation shows the imprecision of the classification, very
dependent on the training data chosen. Moreover, the pretrained models can’t be
compared due to this big variability in the split accuracies that most likely surges
due to the class imbalance. What is more, in some cases the performance is lower
than the class distribution.
Regarding the pretrained models, as there were low amounts of recorded data
with the Nexus device, the pretext task wasn’t run only with this data since the
algorithm requires big amounts to learn good feature representations. The emotion-
pretrained model showed higher performance than the pretrained model with only
the SEED data. However, as a whole, no conclusions can be made on the nexus
data from the performance of the proposed implementation of SeqCLR as it does not
surpass the class distribution. As the EEG features obtained during the pretraining
with the proposed architecture didn’t yield good results for SEED data, it can be
concluded that these feature representations are not good enough to perform emotion
recognition.
Therefore, the low performance is not necessarily due to the Nexus
data but to the model implementation, which couldn’t match the fine-tuned values
presented by Mohsenvand et al.
6.2.2
Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning
algorithm
The algorithm presented in ”Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning for
EEG-Based Emotion Recognition” by Ken et al.
was adapted to work with the
DREAMER dataset and the recorded data with the nexus device.
Regarding the classification of the DREAMER dataset, the obtained accuracy
for the best-performing models is around 87% for arousal and 81% for valence with
a batch size of 128 in the downstream, which was found to be beneficial for the
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Performance of SSL algorithms on Nexus data
57
classification of both dimensions.
The model trained with P=10 and Q=2 shows
slightly higher accuracy for both dimensions. However, other subject-dependent state-
of-the-art methods have achieved around 98% accuracy for both valence and arousal
using as input the continuous wavelet transform of the signal [32] or around 90% using
differential entropy features as input for the classifier[53]. This could suggest that to
optimize the performance for this dataset, a deeper fine-tuning process is required,
exploring, for example, more values for the batch size or pretraining for a higher
number of epochs. It could also indicate that this data requires further preprocessing
to avoid noise interference as higher accuracies have been obtained without using the
raw data.
As for the classification of the nexus data, the highest obtained accuracy when
classifying data from all subjects together was 66.30% for valence and 71.98% for
arousal. However, it is important to point out the class imbalance that arises from
the participants’ rating of the videos.
Specifically, 62% of the labels for valence
correspond to high value and 64% correspond to the high value of arousal. For this
reason, the results obtained are not very reliable, as they are slightly higher than
the class distribution. To further study how the imbalance of the classes impacts
the results, other performance metrics could be employed such as the F1 score that
wasn’t implemented due to a lack of studies reporting results from this metric, or
techniques to balance the number of classes could be used.
To investigate the source of the poor performance, individual subject classification
was tested. For the valence dimension, the results from different participants were
significantly variable, with a standard deviation ranging from 6.08% to 7.86% for
distinct models. While some subjects showed very good performance such as subject
6, with 86% accuracy for valence, with low class imbalance, for other participants the
accuracy obtained was just the percentage of class imbalance, meaning the algorithm
might have just learned the class distribution for that subject. This exemplifies how
much EEG signals differ within different subjects. However, the good results obtained
for certain participants suggest that the nexus device is capable of recording EEG
signals with recognizable EEG emotion recognition patterns, showing the potential
of this device for this type of task.
On the other hand, arousal dimension classification is more challenging to inter-
pret. The overall class imbalance does not seem to be high on average, but when
looking at individual subjects, two subjects rated all the videos on arousal with a
high-value percentage of 100% and 92%. On average the class imbalance was neutral-
ized by another participant who rated 0 all video clips for arousal. Moreover, for most
of the subjects, the obtained accuracy is very close to the percentage of high-value
labels, meaning the algorithm might have just learned the class distribution. Taking
into account this information, the best-performing subject will be S3, with a balanced
number of high and low values for arousal and an accuracy reaching 67.50% for the
nexus pretrained model with P=2 and Q=2.
In the same line, the accuracy classification of individual subjects of dominance
dimension is for most of the subjects around the class distribution. For this case, the
best-performing subject would be S1, with a balanced class distribution and above
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Discussion
79% accuracy for the nexus pretrained model.
Regarding the extent to which the performance was affected by the pretext tasks
model, the accuracy could be improved by more than 20% selecting appropriate values
of P and Q (see Figure 5.4). Besides it was proven that a pretrain model with the
DREAMER dataset could also be used to classify the recorded data, obtaining in
some cases, higher accuracy than with models pretrained on the Nexus data. The
nexus data was recorded in a similar way as the DREAMER, sharing some of the
stimuli used in the experiment, which supported the use of these pretrained models.
6.3
Model comparison
As an advantage, both algorithms work with raw data, with minimal preprocessing,
eliminating the need for a previous feature extraction step.
Dataset fusion in SSL consists of adding more EEG data from different sources to
pretrain the algorithm. The SeqCLR algorithm allows dataset fusion and better accu-
racy was reported in both the original study[39] and in the proposed implementation
for most of the classification tasks with higher amounts of pretraining data. However,
since the Group meiosis algorithm groups data according to the videos, dataset fusion
couldn’t be applied. This constitutes a clear disadvantage as using higher amounts
of data for the pretext task has shown higher performance than only using the target
dataset[39] and it is one of the main advantages of SSL[3].
For this reason, SeqCLR seemed to be a more robust model, as it works with the
principles of SSL, using large amounts of unlabeled data for the pretext task and
then employing this pretrained model in the classification task. However, the high
implementation cost makes it impractical to develop numerous studies and use it as
an SSL framework for EEG. Moreover, the diﬀiculty in the implementation suggested
by the lower accuracy reported by other papers testing this architecture suggests the
need for a very specific fine-tuning process that can not be easily reproduced.
On the other hand, the Group Meiosis algorithm was easily reproducible and
adaptable to other datasets. It shows good performance for SEED and state-of-the-
art performance for DEAP. The accuracy obtained for DREAMER is lower than
others reported in the literature but still bigger than chance, meaning the encoder is
learning meaningful representations that could still be improved. Furthermore, the
computational cost of the algorithm was much lower in terms of memory, taking less
time to run. This allowed a more in-depth study of the best-performing parameters.
However, the pretext task needs to be run for every dataset and although it does
not rely on labeled data it uses stimuli-specific information. The model is also not
designed for subject-independent classification, which is a harder but more interesting
task in terms of possible future applications.
Further research is needed to develop an SSL algorithm with low computational
requirements that performs subject-independent classification for emotion recognition,
and that ideally, can be adapted to different datasets.
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Overview of the experimental design
59
6.4
Overview of the experimental design
Further research should be performed to study the reason for this significant variabil-
ity between subjects and the poor performance of the algorithm when all subjects are
taken together. One possible cause might be the experimental design. It is known
that multiple factors affect how a person experiences emotions, such as cultural back-
ground. Generally, subjects show higher emotion evocation when the stimuli belong
to their own cultural group[46]. The videos were all in English except one and all the
movies come from occidental countries. However, the participants came from different
backgrounds including different continents, and adhering to the cultural background
of all of them was not feasible. This might have impacted the way some of the subjects
experienced the emotions, potentially deviating from the expected effect in some of
them.
Employing self-reported labels instead of a fixed label for each clip offers the
possibility to adapt to the subject’s experience of each stimulus, compensating for
the differences that arise in the experience of emotions due to various reasons, such
as the mentioned cultural background. However, this type of assessment can lead
to the surge of class imbalances despite having chosen the videos to cover all ranges
of emotions. Furthermore, even though the interface shows a graphical explanation
of each dimension, their meaning might have not been properly understood by all
subjects, as for example in arousal, some subjects punctuated with the same value,
either 0 or 5, all the video clips.
The duration of the experiment might have also affected the way subjects expe-
rienced the videos. It is known that fatigue might disrupt the EEG recordings as
well as the emotional ratings because the responses and focus to stimuli become less
eﬀicient. Only one participant reported not being tired at all, while 8 participants
were a bit tired or tired as can be seen in Figure 5.9. Making shorter experiments is
beneficial for reducing the fatigue of the participants, but on the counterpart, fewer
data will be available. A compensatory mechanism could then be recording more
sessions with the same participants or obtaining data from more subjects.
It is significant to point out, that the number of subjects for the recorded data
is lower than in other databases for emotion recognition such as the SEED, with 15,
DEAP with 32, and DREAMER with 23. It is known that the higher the number of
subjects, the more statistically significant the study is[46].
To improve the experimental design, a pre-study could be conducted in which the
participants rate a great number of videos prior to the selection of the final stimuli.
This way, all the stimuli would be backed up by participants’ ratings, making sure
they have the desired effect. Additionally, limiting the cultural background of the
participants to one country and making sure the stimuli are selected in their mater-
nal language, could increase the potential effect of the chosen stimuli [46]. Finally,
to improve the significance of the study, increasing the number of participants and
minimizing the gender ratio inequality could be very beneficial.
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Discussion
6.5
Feasibility of nexus device for emotion recognition
and points for further investigation
With the aim of testing the feasibility of the nexus device for emotion recognition,
the initial objective was to record signals using the same experimental design with
a research-grade device. However, due to technical problems with this device, the
data had to be collected only with the Nexus, complicating the study of the Nexus
performance.
Without being able to compare to another device, it is diﬀicult to
confirm whether the low performance for most of the subjects is sorely due to issues
with the experimental design, such as lack of evocation of emotions from the selected
stimuli or misunderstanding of the labeling system.
Overall, the accuracy results were low compared to other research studies per-
formed with other headbands or low amounts of electrodes[7][8]. However, the algo-
rithms in those studies didn’t use the raw signal as input. Even though some subjects
showed very good performance for valence, the arousal dimension didn’t draw any
conclusive results, due partly to the self-reported labels.
In general, thanks to significant accuracy values above chance levels for certain
individuals, it could be admitted that the Nexus is capable of acquiring EEG sig-
nals that are suﬀicient for emotion recognition. However, more research should be
performed to be able to confirm these findings, ideally increasing the number of par-
ticipants and using another device to compare the obtained results, minimizing the
impact of the experimental setup on assessing the quality of the device.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The objectives of this thesis were to explore the reproducibility of state-of-the-art
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) algorithms for emotion recognition, the feasibility
of the Nexus device to perform emotion recognition, and the application of SSL to
the recorded data with this device. Two main SSL algorithms were studied: Seq-
CLR and the ”Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning” algorithm. Se-
qCLR presents some advantages such as allowing subject-independent classification
and dataset fusion in the pretext task. However, SeqCLR requires too many com-
putational resources and very specific fine-tuning, until a point that it can not be
handled by the high-performance computer of DTU, therefore, making it not feasible
to reproduce.
To address the limitations of SeqCLR implementation, the Group Meiosis algo-
rithm was adopted for subject-dependent classification. This algorithm did not in-
volve such high computational costs, with low running times, making it feasible to
perform a fine-tuning process to optimize performance. Moreover, the performance
reported in the original paper was very close to the one obtained, showcasing its repro-
ducibility. This algorithm carries however other disadvantages, such as being dataset-
dependent and designed for intra-subject classification. Therefore, further research
could focus on finding an SSL algorithm that offers dataset and subject-independent
classification with a low computational cost and reasonable running times.
In terms of how feasible the nexus device is for emotion recognition, some results
from individual subjects obtained with the group meiosis algorithm could suggest the
device has the potential to be used for this task. However, further research with more
participants should be performed to draw statistically significant results. Moreover,
comparing its performance to a research-grade EEG device under the same experi-
mental conditions could help confirm the feasibility of the nexus device. Furthermore,
improvements in the experimental design could be implemented such as limiting the
differences in the participants’ cultural backgrounds and maintaining a balanced gen-
der ratio. Besides, for future experiments, other labeling strategies could be tested
such as the one used in the SEED dataset, with fixed discrete labels for every clip.
In summary, this study focused on understanding the potential of SSL in emotion
recognition and applying algorithms with state-of-the-art performance to recorded
data with a novel BCI device, with the aim of studying its feasibility for this task.
The work performed, helped open new questions and research opportunities in Self-
supervised learning for emotion recognition.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
==PAGE:74==
64
A An Appendix
A.1
Methods and Materials
A.1.1
Waiver of Informed Consent
Waiver of Informed Consent 
 
Project Title: Emotion Classification using Self Supervised learning with a brain computer interface device. 
Researchers: Julia Camara Aracil, Alberto Morgana, Luise Vogt 
DTU supervisor(s): Sadasivan Puthusserypady, Kaleem Corbin 
 
Participant basic information: 
• Name:  
• Gender:  
• Age:  
• Email: 
• Subject no.:  
I confirm that… 
• 
I have been provided with sufficient information (written, oral or otherwise) to understand the purpose of 
this study and what is expected of me Initials: ________ 
• 
I understand that my participation is voluntary and that I am free to withdraw at any time, without giving 
any reason or notice, with no consequence. Initials: ________ 
• 
I agree to participate to the best of my abilities in the present study. Initials: ________ 
• 
I allow EEG data to be recorded and that this data may be analysed and published at the discretion of the 
researchers. Initials: ___ _____ 
• 
I am informed that data will only be stored in an anonymous format and treated according to the principles 
of the General Data Protection Regulation Initials: __ ______ 
• 
I agree that the researchers can contact me later by e-mail concerning the research and provide me further 
information about my results. Initials: __ ______ 
 
Participant signature: ________________________________ date: ________________ 
Researchers signature: _______________________________ date: ________________ 
==PAGE:75==
A.1 Methods and Materials
65
A.1.2
Questionary for participants regarding the experient
Prior to the experiment, the participants were asked to fill in a questionnaire on a
self-assessment on how they perceived they could react to different stimuli and after
the experiment, some questions were added to determine how successful the stimuli
were. The formulary was developed using Google Forms. The questions included are
the following:
• Have you participated in research studies before?
• How old are you?
• Have you consumed alcohol 24 hours before the experiment? Yes/No
• Have you consumed caffeine 24 hours before the experiment?
• Have you smoked 24 hours before the experiment?
• Which country are you from?
• What is your gender?
• Are you suffering from any medical conditions? If yes, please specify which one
• On a Scale from 1 to 5: How well do you think you can assess your emotions in
the 3 dimensions: Valence dominance and arousal
• On a scale from 1 to 5: How susceptible do you think you are to disgust?
• On a scale from 1 to 5: How susceptible do you think you are to anger?
• On a scale from 1 to 5: How susceptible do you think you are to sadness?
• On a scale from 1 to 5: How susceptible do you think you are to joy?
• On a scale from 1 to 5: How susceptible do you think you are to amusement?
• On a scale from 1 to 5: How susceptible do you think you are to calmness?
• On a scale from 1 to 5: How susceptible do you think you are to fear?
To be completed after the experiment
• On a scale from 1 to 5, how much did you think the videos elicited your emo-
tions?
• Was there any video that didn’t have any effect on you? If so, which one?
• Was there any video that had a high impact on your emotions? If so, please
specify which one
• On a scale from 1 to 5, how fatigued were you at the end of the experiment?
• On a scale from 1 to 5, How much mental workload was required?
==PAGE:76==
66
A An Appendix
A.1.3
Video clip selection and target emotion
Movie
Target emotion
Start
End
Duration
link
Source
The Oﬀice - Season 6,
Episode 1
Amusement
15:55
17:15
2:00
https://www.youtube.com/watch
?v=jaXoWVZN2lc
Gilman et al.
When Harry Met Sally
Amusement
0:00
1:43
1:43
https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=Eg7ScERP8jc
Meike et al.
The Crash
Anger
Katsigiannis and
Ramzan
American History X
Anger
Gilman et al.
Master and Commander
Calmness
https://www.youtube.com/watch
?v=PZ7kx8z5M2Y&ab_channel=Flins
Personal suggestion
Pride and Prejudice
Calmness
1:13
2:50
1:37
Katsigiannis and
Ramzan
The Fly
Disgust
1:25:27
1:28:22
2:55
Katsigiannis and
Ramzan
Trainspotting
Disgust
1:33
2:23
0:50
https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=7RoMaS1pzOE
Gilman et al.
300
Excitement
44:16:00
46:31:00
2:15
Katsigiannis and
Ramzan
The Baby Driver
Excitement
Personal suggestion
Scream 2
Fear
2:00
3:01
1:01
https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=dyVpo1QLG-U
Meike et al.
Rec
Fear
0:07
0:57
0:57
https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=BXBkxq4AcfA
Personal suggestion
Wall-E
Happiness
58:51:00
55:32:00
3:14
Katsigiannis and
Ramzan
Jojo Rabbit
Happiness
1:34
2:34
1:00
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=BfL5V3WHhqM
Personal suggestion
The Shawshank
Redemption
Sadness
1:00:49
1:05:03
4:14
Gabert-Quillen et al.
Gladiator
Sadness
1:48
2:50
1:02
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=J4XtFeUZ5M8
Meike et al.
The Departed
Surprise
2:16:20
2:19:25
3:05
Katsigiannis and
Ramzan
Table A.1: Video list for each target emotion used for the experiment.
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Results
67
A.2
Results
A.2.1
Preprocessing visualization
In Figure A.1 it can be appreciated the effect of the bandpass filter on frequencies
above 80 Hz, whose magnitude is practically zero.
Figure A.1: FFT of a 20-second signal from the first participant and the first session
of the SEED dataset after preprocessing with a bandpass filter from
0.3 to 80 Hz .
==PAGE:78==
68
A An Appendix
A.2.2
Subject independent SEED dataset classification
Figure A.2: Training loss after performing the Pretext task of ”Contrastive Rep-
resentation Learning for Electroencephalogram Classification” for the
SEED dataset.
Figure A.3: Training loss after performing the Pretext task of ”Contrastive Rep-
resentation Learning for Electroencephalogram Classification” for the
SEED, DREAMER and DEAP datasets.
==PAGE:79==
A.3 Code
69
A.3
Code
A.3.1
SeqCLR pretext task
1 import numpy as np
2 import os
3 import sys
4 from zipfile import ZipFile, ZIP_DEFLATED
5 import gc
6 import random
7 from models import *
8 from data_loaders import *
9 import torch
10 import tqdm
11
12 current_dir = os.path.dirname(os.path.realpath(__file__))
13 parent_dir = os.path.dirname(current_dir)
14 sys.path.append(parent_dir)
15
16 import pickle as pkl
17 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
18
19 import itertools
20
21 import copy
22
23
24 def get_number_of_correct_preds(y_pred, y_true):
25
return ((y_pred*y_true) > 0).float().sum().item()
26
27 def get_number_of_correct_cpc_preds(y_pred):
28
arg_max = torch.argmax(y_pred, dim=2)
29
correct = (torch.sum(arg_max==0)).float().sum().item()
30
return correct, arg_max.nelement()
31
32 def plot_avgs(avg_train_losses , avg_train_accs , avg_val_accs ,avg_test_accs ,
plot_series_name , save_path):
33
fig1, ax1 = plt.subplots()
34
ax1.plot(avg_train_losses)
35
ax1.set_xlabel("Epoch")
36
ax1.set_ylabel("Average Loss")
37
ax1.set_title(plot_series_name+": Average Training Losses")
38
plt.legend()
39
plt.draw()
40
loss_plot_save_path = os.path.join(save_path, plot_series_name+"
_loss_visualization.png")
41
fig1.savefig(loss_plot_save_path)
42
43
fig2, ax2 = plt.subplots()
44
ax2.plot(avg_train_accs , label="training")
45
ax2.plot(avg_val_accs , label="validation")
46
ax2.plot(avg_test_accs , label="test")
47
ax2.set_xlabel("Epoch")
48
ax2.set_ylabel("Average Accuracy")
==PAGE:80==
70
A An Appendix
49
ax2.set_title(plot_series_name+": Average Prediction Accuracy")
50
plt.legend()
51
plt.draw()
52
accuracy_plot_save_path = os.path.join(save_path, plot_series_name+"
_accuracy_visualization.png")
53
fig2.savefig(accuracy_plot_save_path)
54
55
56
57 class ContrastiveLoss(nn.Module):
58
"""
59
see Section 2.3 of proceedings.mlr.press/v136/mohsenvand20a/
mohsenvand20a.pdf
60
"""
61
def __init__(self, temperature):
62
super(ContrastiveLoss , self).__init__()
63
self.BATCH_DIM = 0
64
self.tau = temperature
65
self.cos_sim = torch.nn.CosineSimilarity(0)
66
self.eps = torch.tensor(1e-8)
67
68
def cos_sim_cross(self, a, b):
69
norm_a_times_norm_b = torch.einsum("a,b->ab", torch.norm(a, dim=1),
torch.norm(b, dim=1))
70
cosine_similarity = torch.einsum("ab,cb->ac", a, b) / torch.maximum(
norm_a_times_norm_b , self.eps)
71
return cosine_similarity
72
73
def forward(self, z1s, z2s):
74
75
loss = 0.
76
curr_batch_size = z1s.size(self.BATCH_DIM)
77
78
z1s = z1s.view(curr_batch_size , -1)
79
z2s = z2s.view(curr_batch_size , -1)
80
81
self._cos_sim = torch.nn.CosineSimilarity(dim=1)
82
83
numerator1 = torch.exp(self._cos_sim(z1s, z2s) / self.tau)
84
denominator1 = torch.exp(self.cos_sim_cross(z1s, z2s) / self.tau).
sum(dim=1)
85
_denominator1 = torch.exp(self.cos_sim_cross(z1s, z1s) / self.tau)
86
_denominator1 = torch.scatter(_denominator1 , 1, torch.arange(0,
curr_batch_size).long().unsqueeze(-1).repeat(1, 2).cuda(), 0.0).
sum(dim=1)
87
denominator1 = denominator1 + _denominator1
88
89
loss1 = -1.*torch.log(numerator1 / denominator1)
90
91
numerator2 = torch.exp(self._cos_sim(z2s, z1s) / self.tau)
92
denominator2 = torch.exp(self.cos_sim_cross(z2s, z1s) / self.tau).
sum(dim=1)
93
_denominator2 = torch.exp(self.cos_sim_cross(z2s, z2s) / self.tau)
94
_denominator2 = torch.scatter(_denominator2 , 1, torch.arange(0,
curr_batch_size).long().unsqueeze(-1).repeat(1, 2).cuda(), 0.0).
==PAGE:81==
A.3 Code
71
sum(dim=1)
95
denominator2 = denominator2 + _denominator2
96
97
loss2 = -1.*torch.log(numerator2 / denominator2)
98
99
loss = loss1.sum(dim=0) + loss2.sum(dim=0)
100
101
loss = loss / (curr_batch_size*2.*(2.*curr_batch_size - 1.)) # take
the average loss across the entire batches of both augmented and
original signals
102
return loss
103
104
def get_number_of_correct_sq_reps(self, z1s, z2s):
105
106
curr_batch_size = z1s.size(self.BATCH_DIM)
107
108
z1s = z1s.view(curr_batch_size , -1)
109
z2s = z2s.view(curr_batch_size , -1)
110
111
112
num_correct_reps = 0
113
self._cos_sim = torch.nn.CosineSimilarity(dim=1)
114
sim_measure_of_interest = self._cos_sim(z1s, z2s)
115
other_sim_measure = self.cos_sim_cross(z1s, z2s)
116
_other_sim_measure = self.cos_sim_cross(z1s, z1s)
117
representation_is_correct = ~ torch.logical_or((other_sim_measure >
sim_measure_of_interest).any(dim=1), _other_sim_measure.diag() >
sim_measure_of_interest)
118
num_correct_reps += representation_is_correct.sum()
119
120
sim_measure_of_interest = self._cos_sim(z2s, z1s)
121
other_sim_measure = self.cos_sim_cross(z2s, z1s)
122
_other_sim_measure = self.cos_sim_cross(z2s, z2s)
123
representation_is_correct = ~ torch.logical_or((other_sim_measure >
sim_measure_of_interest).any(dim=1), _other_sim_measure.diag() >
sim_measure_of_interest)
124
num_correct_reps += representation_is_correct.sum()
125
126
return num_correct_reps.detach().cpu().item()
127
128 def train_SQ_model(save_dir_for_model , model_file_name="final_SQ_model.bin",
batch_size=256, shuffle=True, # hyper parameters for training loop
129
max_epochs=70, learning_rate=1e-5, beta_vals=(0.9,
0.999), weight_decay=0.001, #num_workers=4,
130
max_evals_after_saving=6, save_freq=10,
former_state_dict_file=None, ct_dim=None, h_dim=None
,
131
channels=62, temporal_len=4000, dropout_rate=0.5,
embed_dim=4, encoder_type="convolutional", bw=5,
randomized_augmentation=False,
num_upstream_decode_features=32, temperature=0.05, #
hyper parameters for SQ Model
132
cached_datasets_list_dir=None, total_points_val=2000,
tpos_val=None, tneg_val=None, window_size=3, #hyper
parameters for data loaders
==PAGE:82==
72
A An Appendix
133
sfreq=200, Nc=None, Np=None, Nb=None, max_Nb_iters=None,
total_points_factor=None,
134
windowed_data_name="P.npy",
135
windowed_start_time_name="ST.npy", data_folder_name="/
work3/s210170/Data/",
136
data_root_name="All_pretraining", file_names_list="../
seed_pretext.txt", train_portion=0.7,
137
val_portion=0.2, test_portion=0.1):
138
139
140
train_set, val_set, test_set = load_SSL_Dataset('SQ',
141
cached_datasets_list_dir
=
cached_datasets_list_dir
,
142
total_points_val=
total_points_val ,
143
tpos_val=tpos_val,
144
tneg_val=tneg_val,
145
window_size=window_size ,
146
sfreq=sfreq,
147
Nc=Nc,
148
Np=Np,
149
Nb=Nb,
150
max_Nb_iters=
max_Nb_iters ,
151
total_points_factor=
total_points_factor ,
152
bw=bw,
153
randomized_augmentation=
randomized_augmentation
,
# items unique
to SQ data loading
154
num_channels=channels,
# items unique to SQ
data loading
155
temporal_len=
temporal_len ,
156
windowed_data_name=
windowed_data_name ,
157
windowed_start_time_name
=
windowed_start_time_name
,
158
data_folder_name=
data_folder_name ,
159
data_root_name=
data_root_name ,
160
file_names_list=
file_names_list ,
161
train_portion=
train_portion ,
162
val_portion=val_portion ,
==PAGE:83==
A.3 Code
73
163
test_portion=
test_portion
164
)
165
166
# initialize data loaders for training
167
168
train_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(train_set,
169
batch_size=batch_size,
170
shuffle=shuffle)
171
val_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(val_set,
172
batch_size=batch_size ,
173
shuffle=shuffle
174
)
175
176
print("train_SQ_model: len of the train_loader is ", len(train_loader))
177
178
# cuda setup if allowed
179
device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu") #
Pytorch v0.4.0
180
181
# initialize model
182
# Applies augmentation in this step
183
#Channels: 11, temporal_len=3000
184
model = SQNet(encoder_type , channels, temporal_len , dropout_rate=
dropout_rate , embed_dim=embed_dim, num_upstream_decode_features=
num_upstream_decode_features).to(device)
185
if former_state_dict_file is not None:
186
model.load_state_dict(torch.load(former_state_dict_file))
187
188
189
n_params = sum(p.numel() for p in model.parameters() if p.requires_grad)
190
print(f"SQ_model: {n_params} parameters")
191
192
print("train_SQ_model: START OF TRAINING")
193
# initialize training state
194
min_val_inaccuracy = float("inf")
195
min_state = None
196
num_evaluations_since_model_saved = 0
197
saved_model = None
198
loss_fn = ContrastiveLoss(temperature=temperature)
199
200
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), betas=beta_vals, lr=
learning_rate , weight_decay=weight_decay)
201
202
# Iterate over epochs
203
avg_train_losses = []
204
avg_train_accs = []
205
avg_val_accs = []
206
avg_test_accs=[]
207
for epoch in tqdm.tqdm(range(max_epochs)): #to show how long per epoch
208
print("train_SQ_model: epoch ", epoch, " of ", max_epochs)
209
model.train()
210
running_train_loss = 0
211
num_correct_train_preds = 0
212
total_num_train_preds = 0
==PAGE:84==
74
A An Appendix
213
214
# iterate over training batches
215
print("train_SQ_model: \tNow performing training updates")
216
counter = 0
217
218
for x1, x2 in train_loader: # Calling the instances of the class-->
applying augmentations
219
# transfer to GPU
220
x1, x2 = x1.to(device), x2.to(device)
221
# zero out any pre-existing gradients
222
optimizer.zero_grad()
223
224
# make prediction and compute resulting loss
225
226
x1_rep = model(x1)
227
228
x2_rep = model(x2)
229
230
loss = loss_fn(x1_rep, x2_rep)
231
232
233
# compute accuracy
234
235
num_correct_train_preds += loss_fn.get_number_of_correct_sq_reps
(x1_rep, x2_rep)
236
237
total_num_train_preds += 2.*len(x1_rep)
238
239
# update weights
240
241
loss.backward()
242
243
optimizer.step()
244
245
# track loss
246
247
running_train_loss += loss.item()
248
249
250
if counter % 5 == 0:
251
print("train_SQ_model: \t\tFinished batch ", counter)
252
counter += 1
253
254
# iterate over validation batches
255
print("train_SQ_model: \tNow performing validation")
256
num_correct_val_preds = 0
257
total_num_val_preds = 0
258
with torch.no_grad():
259
model.eval()
260
261
for x1, x2 in val_loader:
262
x1, x2 = x1.to(device), x2.to(device)
263
264
# evaluate model
265
x1_rep = model(x1)
==PAGE:85==
A.3 Code
75
266
x2_rep = model(x2)
267
num_correct_val_preds += loss_fn.
get_number_of_correct_sq_reps(x1_rep, x2_rep)
268
total_num_val_preds += 2.*len(x1_rep)
269
270
271
272
# record averages
273
avg_train_accs.append(num_correct_train_preds /
total_num_train_preds)
274
avg_val_accs.append(num_correct_val_preds / total_num_val_preds)
275
avg_train_losses.append(running_train_loss / len(train_loader))
276
avg_test_accs.append(0)
277
# check stopping criterion / save model
278
incorrect_val_percentage = 1. - (num_correct_val_preds /
total_num_val_preds)
279
if incorrect_val_percentage < min_val_inaccuracy:
280
num_evaluations_since_model_saved = 0
281
min_val_inaccuracy = incorrect_val_percentage
282
saved_model = model.state_dict()
283
else:
284
num_evaluations_since_model_saved += 1
285
286
287
# save intermediate state_dicts just in case
288
289
if epoch % save_freq == 0:
290
temp_model_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model , "
temp_full_SQ_model_epoch"+str(epoch)+".bin")
291
torch.save(model.state_dict(), temp_model_save_path)
292
embedder_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model , "
temp_embedder_epoch"+str(epoch)+".bin")
293
torch.save(model.embed_model.state_dict(), embedder_save_path)
294
plot_avgs(avg_train_losses , avg_train_accs , avg_val_accs ,
avg_test_accs , "epoch"+str(epoch), save_dir_for_model)
295
print("train_SQ_model: END OF TRAINING - now saving final model
/ other info")
296
297
# save final model
298
model.load_state_dict(saved_model)
299
model_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model , model_file_name)
300
torch.save(model.state_dict(), model_save_path)
301
embedder_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model , "embedder_"+
model_file_name)
302
torch.save(model.embed_model.state_dict(), embedder_save_path)
303
304
meta_data_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model , "
meta_data_and_hyper_parameters.pkl")
305
with open(meta_data_save_path , 'wb') as outfile:
306
pkl.dump({
307
"avg_train_losses": avg_train_losses ,
308
"avg_train_accs": avg_train_accs ,
309
"avg_val_accs": avg_val_accs ,
310
"save_dir_for_model": save_dir_for_model ,
311
"model_file_name": model_file_name ,
==PAGE:86==
76
A An Appendix
312
"batch_size": batch_size,
313
"shuffle": shuffle, #"num_workers": num_workers ,
314
"max_epochs": max_epochs,
315
"learning_rate": learning_rate ,
316
"beta_vals": beta_vals,
317
"weight_decay": weight_decay ,
318
"max_evals_after_saving": max_evals_after_saving ,
319
"save_freq": save_freq,
320
"former_state_dict_file": former_state_dict_file ,
321
"h_dim": h_dim,
322
"channels": channels,
323
"temporal_len": temporal_len ,
324
"dropout_rate": dropout_rate ,
325
"embed_dim": embed_dim,
326
"encoder_type": encoder_type ,
327
"bw": bw,
328
"randomized_augmentation": randomized_augmentation ,
329
"num_upstream_decode_features": num_upstream_decode_features ,
330
"temperature": temperature ,
331
"cached_datasets_list_dir": cached_datasets_list_dir ,
332
"total_points_val": total_points_val ,
333
"tpos_val": tpos_val,
334
"tneg_val": tneg_val,
335
"window_size": window_size ,
336
"sfreq": sfreq,
337
"windowed_data_name": windowed_data_name ,
338
"windowed_start_time_name": windowed_start_time_name ,
339
"data_folder_name": data_folder_name ,
340
"data_root_name": data_root_name ,
341
"file_names_list": file_names_list ,
342
"train_portion": train_portion ,
343
"val_portion": val_portion ,
344
"test_portion": test_portion ,
345
}, outfile)
346
347
plot_avgs(avg_train_losses , avg_train_accs , avg_val_accs , avg_test_accs ,
"Final", save_dir_for_model)
348
349
350
print("train_SQ_model: DONE!")
.
A.3.1.1
Network models
1 class SeqCLRConvolutionalEncoder(torch.nn.Module):
2
"""
3
see Figure 4.B of proceedings.mlr.press/v136/mohsenvand20a/mohsenvand20a
.pdf for diagram
4
"""
5
def __init__(self, num_channels , temporal_len , dropout_rate=0.5,
embed_dim=100):
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Code
77
6
super(SeqCLRConvolutionalEncoder , self).__init__()#because it is a
subclass of Module from pytorch. Base class for all nn
7
self.BATCH_DIM = 0
8
self.CHANNEL_DIM = 2 # 1
9
self.TEMPORAL_DIM = 1 # 2
10
11
self.K128 = 128 # 128 # 64
12
self.K64 = 64 # 64 # 32
13
self.K16 = 16 # 16 # 8
14
#Halved this parameters
15
self.D_INTERNAL_100 = 50 # 100
16
self.D_INTERNAL_50 = 25 # 50
17
self.D_INTERNAL_250 = 125 # 250
18
self.D_OUT = embed_dim
19
20
self.conv_block_1 = torch.nn.Sequential(
21
torch.nn.ReflectionPad1d(((self.K128//2)-1, self.K128//2)),
22
torch.nn.Conv1d(num_channels , self.D_INTERNAL_100 , self.K128)
23
)
24
self.conv_block_2 = torch.nn.Sequential(
25
torch.nn.ReflectionPad1d(((self.K64//2)-1, self.K64//2)),
26
torch.nn.Conv1d(num_channels , self.D_INTERNAL_100 , self.K64)
27
)
28
self.conv_block_3 = torch.nn.Sequential(
29
torch.nn.ReflectionPad1d(((self.K16//2)-1, self.K16//2)),
30
torch.nn.Conv1d(num_channels , self.D_INTERNAL_50 , self.K16)
31
)
32
33
self.res_block_1 = SeqCLRConvolutionalResidualBlock(self.
D_INTERNAL_250 , self.K64)
34
self.res_block_2 = SeqCLRConvolutionalResidualBlock(self.
D_INTERNAL_250 , self.K64)
35
self.res_block_3 = SeqCLRConvolutionalResidualBlock(self.
D_INTERNAL_250 , self.K64)
36
self.res_block_4 = SeqCLRConvolutionalResidualBlock(self.
D_INTERNAL_250 , self.K64)
37
38
self.final_relu = torch.nn.ReLU()
39
self.final_batch_norm = torch.nn.BatchNorm1d(self.D_INTERNAL_250)
40
self.final_reflective_padding = torch.nn.ReflectionPad1d(((self.K64
//2)-1, self.K64//2))
41
self.final_conv_layer = torch.nn.Conv1d(self.D_INTERNAL_250 , self.
D_OUT, self.K64)
42
43
self.num_channels = num_channels
44
self.temporal_len = temporal_len
45
self.dropout_rate = dropout_rate
46
self.embed_dim = embed_dim
47
48
49
def forward(self, x):
50
51
orig_batch_num = x.size(0)
52
x = x.permute(self.BATCH_DIM, self.CHANNEL_DIM , self.TEMPORAL_DIM)#
changes channel and temporal dim
==PAGE:88==
78
A An Appendix
53
54
# embed x using various convolutional modules
55
x_embed_1 = self.conv_block_1(x)
56
x_embed_2 = self.conv_block_2(x)
57
x_embed_3 = self.conv_block_3(x)
58
59
# combine embeddings
60
x = torch.cat(tuple([x_embed_1, x_embed_2, x_embed_3]), dim=1)
61
62
# first residual block pass
63
x_hat = self.res_block_1(x)
64
x = x + x_hat
65
66
# second residual block pass
67
x_hat = self.res_block_2(x)
68
x = x + x_hat
69
70
# third residual block pass
71
x_hat = self.res_block_3(x)
72
x = x + x_hat
73
74
# fourth residual block pass
75
x_hat = self.res_block_4(x)
76
x = x + x_hat
77
78
# final output generation
79
x = self.final_relu(x)
80
x = self.final_batch_norm(x)
81
x = self.final_reflective_padding(x)
82
x = self.final_conv_layer(x)
83
84
85
86
return x, torch.cat((x[:,0,:],x[:,1,:],x[:,2,:],x[:,3,:]),axis=1)#
torch.mean(x, dim=2) # x is used for upstream task and torch.
mean(x, dim=1) for downstream
87
88 class SeqCLRDecoder(torch.nn.Module):
89
"""
90
see Figure 4.C of proceedings.mlr.press/v136/mohsenvand20a/mohsenvand20a
.pdf for diagram
91
"""
92
def __init__(self, num_channels , temporal_len , dropout_rate=0.5,
num_upstream_decode_features=32,downstream=False):
93
super(SeqCLRDecoder , self).__init__()
94
self.TEMPORAL_DIM = 2
95
self.BATCH_DIM = 0
96
self.CHANNEL_DIM = 1
97
98
self.out_features_256 = 256# 256
99
self.out_features_128 = 128# 128
100
self.out_features_64 =64 # 64
101
self.bdlstm_1 = torch.nn.LSTM(num_channels , self.out_features_256 ,
bidirectional=True)
==PAGE:89==
A.3 Code
79
102
self.bdlstm_2 = torch.nn.LSTM(num_channels , self.out_features_128 ,
bidirectional=True)
103
self.bdlstm_3 = torch.nn.LSTM(num_channels , self.out_features_64 ,
bidirectional=True)
104
105
self.x_linear_1 = torch.nn.Linear(2*2*self.out_features_256+2*2*self
.out_features_128+2*2*self.out_features_64 , self.
out_features_128)
106
self.x_relu_1 = torch.nn.ReLU()
107
108
109
self.final_linear = torch.nn.Linear(self.out_features_128 ,
num_upstream_decode_features)
110
111
112
113
self.num_channels = num_channels
114
self.temporal_len = temporal_len
115
self.dropout_rate = dropout_rate
116
self.num_upstream_decode_features = num_upstream_decode_features
117
self.downstream=downstream
118
119
def forward(self, x):
120
121
orig_temporal_len = x.size(self.TEMPORAL_DIM)
122
orig_batch_num = x.size(self.BATCH_DIM)
123
124
# prepare x for processing
125
x_down_1 = torch.nn.functional.interpolate(x, size=(x.size(self.
TEMPORAL_DIM)//2))
126
127
128
x_down_2 = torch.nn.functional.interpolate(x_down_1, size=(x_down_1.
size(self.TEMPORAL_DIM)//2))
129
130
131
x = x.permute(self.TEMPORAL_DIM , self.BATCH_DIM, self.CHANNEL_DIM)
132
133
x_down_1 = x_down_1.permute(self.TEMPORAL_DIM , self.BATCH_DIM, self.
CHANNEL_DIM)
134
x_down_2 = x_down_2.permute(self.TEMPORAL_DIM , self.BATCH_DIM, self.
CHANNEL_DIM)
135
136
# embed x using various gru modules
137
x_embed_1, (h_1, c_1) = self.bdlstm_1(x)
138
x_embed_2, (h_2, c_2) = self.bdlstm_2(x_down_1)
139
x_embed_3, (h_3, c_3) = self.bdlstm_3(x_down_2)
140
141
x_embed_1 = x_embed_1.permute(1, 0, 2)
142
x_embed_2 = x_embed_2.permute(1, 0, 2)
143
x_embed_3 = x_embed_3.permute(1, 0, 2)
144
145
# combine embeddings
146
x = torch.cat(tuple([x_embed_1[:,0,:],
147
x_embed_1[:,-1,:],
==PAGE:90==
80
A An Appendix
148
x_embed_2[:,0,:],
149
x_embed_2[:,-1,:],
150
x_embed_3[:,0,:],
151
x_embed_3[:,-1,:]]),
152
dim=1
153
)
154
155
156
x = self.x_linear_1(x)
157
x = self.x_relu_1(x)
158
159
160
# final output generation
161
162
163
164
out = self.final_linear(x)
165
166
return out
167
168 class SQNet(torch.nn.Module):
169
"""
170
see proceedings.mlr.press/v136/mohsenvand20a/mohsenvand20a.pdf
171
"""
172
def __init__(self, encoder_type , num_channels , temporal_len ,
dropout_rate=0.5, embed_dim=100, num_upstream_decode_features=32,
downstream=False, mlp=False):
173
super(SQNet, self).__init__()
174
175
if encoder_type == "recurrent":
176
self.embed_model = SeqCLRRecurrentEncoder(num_channels ,
temporal_len , dropout_rate=dropout_rate , embed_dim=embed_dim
)
177
self.decode_model = SeqCLRDecoder(embed_dim,
178
temporal_len ,
179
dropout_rate=dropout_rate ,
180
num_upstream_decode_features=
num_upstream_decode_features
181
)
182
183
elif encoder_type == "convolutional":
184
self.embed_model = SeqCLRConvolutionalEncoder(num_channels ,
temporal_len , dropout_rate=dropout_rate , embed_dim=embed_dim
)
185
186
self.decode_model = SeqCLRDecoder(embed_dim,
187
temporal_len ,
188
dropout_rate=dropout_rate ,
189
num_upstream_decode_features=
num_upstream_decode_features ,
190
downstream=downstream#added
191
)
192
193
elif encoder_type == "simplified":
==PAGE:91==
A.3 Code
81
194
self.embed_model = PhaseSwapFCN(num_channels , dropout_rate=
dropout_rate , embed_dim=embed_dim)
195
self.decode_model = PhaseSwapUpstreamDecoder(embed_dim,
temporal_len , dropout_rate=dropout_rate , decode_dim=
num_upstream_decode_features)
196
else:
197
raise ValueError("encoder_type "+str(encoder_type)+" not
supported")
198
199
self.encoder_type = encoder_type
200
201
202
def forward(self, x):
203
x, _ = self.embed_model(x)
204
x = self.decode_model(x)
205
return x
206
207
208 class SQDataset(torch.utils.data.Dataset):
209
def __init__(self, cached_ps_dataset , path=None, total_points=None,
window_size=None, sfreq=100, bw=5,
210
randomized_augmentation=False, num_channels=62,
temporal_len=2000,
211
windowed_data_name="_Windowed_Pretext_Preprocess.npy",
windowed_start_time_name="_Windowed_StartTime.npy"):
212
if cached_ps_dataset is not None:
213
self.init_from_cached_data(cached_ps_dataset)
214
else:
215
#self of SQ object has the data in the format (windows ,3000(time
), 11(electrodes))
216
self.init_params_from_scratch(path,
217
total_points ,
218
sfreq,
219
bw,
220
randomized_augmentation ,
221
num_channels ,
222
temporal_len ,
223
windowed_data_name ,
224
windowed_start_time_name
225
)
226
227
228
def init_params_from_scratch(self, path, total_points , sfreq, bw,
229
randomized_augmentation , num_channels ,
temporal_len ,
230
windowed_data_name="
_Windowed_Pretext_Preprocess.npy",
231
windowed_start_time_name="
_Windowed_StartTime.npy"):
232
self.available_augmentations = {
233
"amplitude_scale": [0.5, 2],
234
"time_shift": [-50, 50],
235
"DC_shift": [-10, 10],
236
"zero-masking": [0, 150],
237
"additive_Gaussian_noise": [0, 0.2],
==PAGE:92==
82
A An Appendix
238
"band-stop_filter": [2.8, 80], #Changeed because FS is lower
than 200 and this max value ahs to be half of freq sample
239
}
240
self.TEMPORAL_DIM = 0
241
self.CHANNEL_DIM = 1
242
self.NUM_AUGMENTATIONS = 2
243
#self.NUM_CHANNELS = num_channels Changeed
244
245
self.TEMPORAL_LEN = temporal_len
246
self.SFREQ = sfreq
247
self.BW = bw # band width (?) see https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/
reference/generated/scipy.signal.iirnotch.html
248
249
data_path = path + windowed_data_name
250
self.data = np.load(data_path) # loading the numpy array
251
252
self.NUM_CHANNELS=self.data.shape[2]
253
254
data_path = path + windowed_start_time_name
255
self.start_times = np.load(data_path)
256
self.total_windows = len(self.data)
257
self.randomized_augmentation = randomized_augmentation
258
#pairs has the set of augmentations combinations with ther
randomized value
259
self.pairs, self.labels = self.get_samples_and_labels(size=
total_points)
260
261
262
def init_from_cached_data(self, cached_rp_dataset):
263
cached_dataset = None
264
with open(cached_rp_dataset , 'rb') as infile:
265
cached_dataset = pkl.load(infile)
266
267
self.available_augmentations = cached_dataset['
available_augmentations']
268
self.TEMPORAL_DIM = cached_dataset['TEMPORAL_DIM']
269
self.CHANNEL_DIM = cached_dataset['CHANNEL_DIM']
270
self.NUM_AUGMENTATIONS = cached_dataset['NUM_AUGMENTATIONS']
271
self.NUM_CHANNELS = cached_dataset['NUM_CHANNELS']
272
self.TEMPORAL_LEN = cached_dataset['TEMPORAL_LEN']
273
self.SFREQ = cached_dataset['SFREQ']
274
self.BW = cached_dataset['BW']
275
self.data = cached_dataset['data']
276
277
self.start_times = cached_dataset['start_times']
278
self.total_windows = cached_dataset['total_windows']
279
self.randomized_augmentation = cached_dataset['
randomized_augmentation']
280
self.pairs = cached_dataset['pairs']
281
self.labels = cached_dataset['labels']
282
283
del cached_dataset
284
285
286
def save_as_dictionary(self, path):
==PAGE:93==
A.3 Code
83
287
with open(path, 'wb') as outfile:
288
pkl.dump({
289
'available_augmentations': self.available_augmentations ,
290
'TEMPORAL_DIM': self.TEMPORAL_DIM ,
291
'CHANNEL_DIM': self.CHANNEL_DIM ,
292
'NUM_AUGMENTATIONS': self.NUM_AUGMENTATIONS ,
293
'NUM_CHANNELS': self.NUM_CHANNELS ,
294
'TEMPORAL_LEN': self.TEMPORAL_LEN ,
295
'SFREQ': self.SFREQ,
296
'BW': self.BW,
297
'data': self.data,
298
'start_times': self.start_times ,
299
'total_windows': self.total_windows ,
300
'randomized_augmentation': self.randomized_augmentation ,
301
'pairs': self.pairs,
302
'labels': self.labels,
303
}, outfile)
304
305
def __len__(self):
306
return len(self.pairs)
307
308
def __getitem__(self, index):
309
x = self.data[self.pairs[index][0], :, :]
310
x_aug = self.data[self.pairs[index][0], :, :]
311
if False:#self.pairs[index][1] is not None:
312
# print("SQDataset.__getitem__: using STORED augmentations set
self.pairs[index][1] == ", self.pairs[index][1])
313
314
x_aug = self.apply_augmentations(x_aug, self.pairs[index][1])
315
316
else:
317
# print("SQDataset.__getitem__: using NEW augmentations set
because self.pairs[index][1] == ", self.pairs[index][1])
318
curr_augmentations = self.get_augmentation_set()
319
# print("SQDataset.__getitem__: using NEW augmentations set
curr_augmentations == ", curr_augmentations)
320
x_aug = self.apply_augmentations(x_aug, curr_augmentations)
321
curr_augmentations = self.get_augmentation_set()
322
x_aug1 = self.apply_augmentations(x_aug, curr_augmentations)
323
324
325
x_aug1 = torch.from_numpy(x).float()
326
x_aug = torch.from_numpy(x_aug).float()
327
328
329
return x_aug1, x_aug
330
331
def get_samples_and_labels(self, size):
332
333
pairs = [[None, None] for _ in range(size)] # np.zeros((size, 2),
dtype=int)
334
labels = None
335
336
for i in range(size):
337
anchor_val = np.random.randint(low=0, high=self.total_windows)
==PAGE:94==
84
A An Appendix
338
second_val = None
339
if not self.randomized_augmentation: # decide whether or not to
save augmentation strategy for curr sample
340
second_val = self.get_augmentation_set()
341
# else:
342
#
second_val = None
343
344
pairs[i][0] = anchor_val
345
pairs[i][1] = second_val
346
347
# print("PSDataset.get_samples_and_labels: labels shape == ", labels
.shape)
348
return pairs, labels #returns a list of len 2000. the list is a list
of 2 lements, a random number
349
#that is one of the windows and a whole dict for the augmentations
350
351
def get_augmentation_set(self):
352
"""
353
see Section 2.3 of proceedings.mlr.press/v136/mohsenvand20a/
mohsenvand20a.pdf
354
"""
355
augmentation_set = [] # [dict()]*self.NUM_CHANNELS
356
357
for j in range(self.NUM_CHANNELS):
358
augmentation_set.append(dict())
359
selected_augmentations = random.sample(list(self.
available_augmentations.keys()), self.NUM_AUGMENTATIONS) #
see https://pynative.com/python-random-sample/#:~:text=
Python's%20random%20module%20provides%20random,it%20random
%20sampling%20without%20replacement.
360
assert len(selected_augmentations) == 2
361
362
counter = 0
363
for _, curr_augmentation in enumerate(selected_augmentations):
364
curr_augmentation_val = None
365
366
if curr_augmentation in ['amplitude_scale', 'DC_shift', '
additive_Gaussian_noise', 'band-stop_filter']: #
augmentation that requires float val
367
curr_augmentation_val = random.uniform(self.
available_augmentations[curr_augmentation][0], self.
available_augmentations[curr_augmentation][1]) # see
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6088077/how-to-
get-a-random-number-between-a-float-range
368
369
elif curr_augmentation in ['time_shift', 'zero-masking']: #
augmentation that requires int val
370
curr_augmentation_val = random.randint(self.
available_augmentations[curr_augmentation][0], self.
available_augmentations[curr_augmentation][1]) # see
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3996904/
generate-random-integers-between-0-and-9
371
if curr_augmentation == 'zero-masking':
372
curr_augmentation_val = [curr_augmentation_val ,
random.randint(0, self.TEMPORAL_LEN -1)]
==PAGE:95==
A.3 Code
85
373
374
else:
375
raise NotImplementedError("curr_augmentation == "+str(
curr_augmentation)+" not recognized for value
sampling")
376
377
augmentation_set[j][curr_augmentation] =
curr_augmentation_val
378
counter += 1
379
380
assert len(list(augmentation_set[j].keys())) == 2
381
assert counter == 2
382
# raise NotImplementedError()
383
384
return augmentation_set
385
386
def apply_augmentations(self, x, augmentations):
387
"""
388
see Section 2.2 of proceedings.mlr.press/v136/mohsenvand20a/
mohsenvand20a.pdf
389
"""
390
y=x.copy()
391
392
for j, curr_augmentation_set in enumerate(augmentations):
393
assert len(list(curr_augmentation_set.keys())) == 2
394
395
for _, curr_augmentation in enumerate(list(curr_augmentation_set
.keys())):
396
397
curr_augmentation_val = curr_augmentation_set[
curr_augmentation]
398
399
if curr_augmentation == 'amplitude_scale':
400
401
y[:,j] = curr_augmentation_val * y[:,j]
402
403
elif curr_augmentation == 'DC_shift':
404
405
y[:,j] = y[:,j] + curr_augmentation_val
406
407
elif curr_augmentation == 'additive_Gaussian_noise':
408
409
y[:,j] = y[:,j] + np.random.normal(0,
curr_augmentation_val , x[:,j].shape)# see https://
stackoverflow.com/questions/14058340/adding-noise-to
-a-signal-in-python and https://numpy.org/doc/stable
/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.normal.html
410
411
elif curr_augmentation == 'band-stop_filter':
412
413
b, a = iirnotch(curr_augmentation_val ,
curr_augmentation_val/self.BW, self.SFREQ)
414
415
y[:,j] = lfilter(b, a, y[:,j])
416
==PAGE:96==
86
A An Appendix
417
elif curr_augmentation == 'time_shift':
418
419
if curr_augmentation_val != 0:
420
421
new_signal = np.zeros(x[:,j].shape)
422
if curr_augmentation_val < 0:
423
new_signal[curr_augmentation_val:] = y[:np.abs(
curr_augmentation_val),j]
424
else:
425
new_signal[:curr_augmentation_val] = x[-
curr_augmentation_val:,j]
426
new_signal[curr_augmentation_val:] = x[:-
curr_augmentation_val ,j]
427
428
y[:,j] = new_signal
429
430
elif curr_augmentation == 'zero-masking':
431
y[curr_augmentation_val[1]:curr_augmentation_val[1]+
curr_augmentation_val[0], j] = 0.
432
else:
433
raise NotImplementedError("curr_augmentation == "+str(
curr_augmentation)+" not recognized for application"
)
434
435
# print("SQDataset.apply_augmentations: x shape == ", x.shape)
436
return y
437 def load_SSL_Dataset(task_id, cached_datasets_list_dir=None,
total_points_val=2000, tpos_val=30, tneg_val=120,
438
window_size=3, sfreq=100, Nc=10, Np=16, Nb=4,
max_Nb_iters=1000, total_points_factor=0.05,
439
bw=5, randomized_augmentation=False, num_channels=11,
temporal_len=3000, # items relevant to SQ/SA data
loading
440
NUM_AUGMENTATIONS=2, perturb_orig_signal=True, # items
unique to SA data loading
441
windowed_data_name="_Windowed_Pretext_Preprocess.npy",
442
windowed_start_time_name="_Windowed_StartTime.npy",
data_folder_name="Mouse_Training_Data",
443
data_root_name="Windowed_Data", file_names_list="
training_names.txt",
444
train_portion=0.7, val_portion=0.2, test_portion=0.1):
445
assert task_id in ['RP', 'TS', 'CPC', 'PS', 'SQ', 'SA']
446
root = os.path.join(data_folder_name , data_root_name , "")
447
448
datasets_list = []
449
450
print("load_SSL_Dataset: loading data")
451
if cached_datasets_list_dir is not None:
452
cached_datasets_file_names = os.listdir(cached_datasets_list_dir)
453
for name in cached_datasets_file_names:
454
curr_path = os.path.join(cached_datasets_list_dir , name, "")
455
if task_id == 'RP':
456
datasets_list.append(RPDataset(curr_path))
457
elif task_id == 'TS':
458
datasets_list.append(TSDataset(curr_path))
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Code
87
459
elif task_id == 'CPC':
460
datasets_list.append(CPCDataset(curr_path))
461
elif task_id == 'PS':
462
datasets_list.append(PSDataset(curr_path))
463
elif task_id == 'SQ':
464
datasets_list.append(SQDataset(curr_path))
465
elif task_id == 'SA':
466
datasets_list.append(SQDataset(curr_path))
467
else:
468
raise ValueError("load_SSL_Dataset: task_id == "+str(task_id
)+" not recognized")
469
else:
470
f = open(os.path.join(file_names_list), 'r')
471
lines = f.readlines()
472
print("load_SSL_Dataset: ASSUMING EACH LINE IN ", str(
file_names_list), " REPRESENTS A DIFFERENT, INDIVIDUAL TEST
SUBJECT")
473
for i, line in enumerate(lines):
474
record_name = line.strip()
475
# print("load_SSL_Dataset: processing ", record_name)
476
data_file = root+record_name+os.sep+record_name
477
if task_id == 'RP':
478
datasets_list.append(
479
RPDataset(None,
480
path=data_file,
481
total_points=total_points_val ,
482
tpos=tpos_val,
483
tneg=tneg_val,
484
window_size=window_size ,
485
sfreq=sfreq,
486
windowed_data_name=windowed_data_name ,
487
windowed_start_time_name=
windowed_start_time_name
488
)
489
)
490
elif task_id == 'TS':
491
datasets_list.append(
492
TSDataset(None,
493
path=data_file,
494
total_points=total_points_val ,
495
tpos=tpos_val,
496
tneg=tneg_val,
497
window_size=window_size ,
498
sfreq=sfreq,
499
windowed_data_name=windowed_data_name ,
500
windowed_start_time_name=
windowed_start_time_name
501
)
502
)
503
elif task_id == 'CPC':
504
datasets_list.append(
505
CPCDataset(None,
506
path=data_file,
507
Nc=Nc,
508
Np=Np,
==PAGE:98==
88
A An Appendix
509
Nb=Nb, # this used to be 2 not 4, but 4 would
work better
510
max_Nb_iters=max_Nb_iters ,
511
total_points_factor=total_points_factor ,
512
windowed_data_name=windowed_data_name ,
513
windowed_start_time_name=
windowed_start_time_name
514
)
515
)
516
elif task_id == 'PS':
517
datasets_list.append(
518
PSDataset(None,
519
path=data_file,
520
total_points=total_points_val ,
521
window_size=window_size ,
522
sfreq=sfreq,
523
windowed_data_name=windowed_data_name ,
524
windowed_start_time_name=
windowed_start_time_name
525
)
526
)
527
elif task_id == 'SQ':
528
# print("task_id == SQ")
529
datasets_list.append(
530
SQDataset(None,
531
path=data_file,
532
total_points=total_points_val ,
533
window_size=window_size ,
534
sfreq=sfreq,
535
bw=bw,
536
randomized_augmentation=
randomized_augmentation ,
537
num_channels=num_channels ,
538
temporal_len=temporal_len ,
539
windowed_data_name=windowed_data_name ,
540
windowed_start_time_name=
windowed_start_time_name
541
)
542
)
543
elif task_id == 'SA':
544
# print("task_id == SA")
545
datasets_list.append(
546
SADataset(None,
547
path=data_file,
548
total_points=total_points_val ,
549
window_size=window_size ,
550
sfreq=sfreq,
551
bw=bw,
552
randomized_augmentation=
randomized_augmentation ,
553
num_channels=num_channels ,
554
temporal_len=temporal_len ,
555
NUM_AUGMENTATIONS=NUM_AUGMENTATIONS ,
556
perturb_orig_signal=perturb_orig_signal ,
557
individual_id=i,
==PAGE:99==
A.3 Code
89
558
num_individuals_in_label=len(lines),
559
windowed_data_name=windowed_data_name ,
560
windowed_start_time_name=
windowed_start_time_name
561
)
562
)
563
else:
564
raise ValueError("load_SSL_Dataset: task_id == "+str(task_id
)+" not recognized")
565
f.close()
566
#Not augmented data data shape: windows, time, channels
567
combined_dataset = torch.utils.data.ConcatDataset(datasets_list)
568
569
data_len = len(combined_dataset)
570
train_len = int(data_len*train_portion)
571
val_len = int(data_len*val_portion)
572
test_len = int(data_len - (train_len+val_len))
573
574
# see https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/data.html
575
train_set, val_set, test_set = torch.utils.data.random_split(
combined_dataset ,
576
[train_len,
val_len
,
test_len
],
577
generator=
torch.
Generator
().
manual_seed
(0)
578
)
579
return train_set, val_set, test_set
.
A.3.2
SeqCLR Downstream task
1 def train_downstream_model(save_dir, model_file_name="
final_downstream_model_seed_1sec_1channel.bin", batch_size=256, # hyper
parameters for training loop
2
shuffle=True, max_epochs=50, learning_rate=1e-5,
beta_vals=(0.9, 0.999), weight_decay=0.001,
3
max_evals_after_saving=6,
4
save_freq=25, sample_log_base=10, final_plot_title="
cross_val_summary",
5
former_state_dict_file=None, ct_dim=100, h_dim=100,
channels=62, temporal_len=100, dropout_rate=0.5,
embed_dim=4, # hyper parameters for Downstream Model
==PAGE:100==
90
A An Appendix
6
num_classes=2, path_to_pretrained_embedders=None, Np=16,
update_embedders=True, sq_encoder_type='
convolutional', num_upstream_decode_features=32,
7
cached_datasets_list_dir=None, n_cross_val_splits=5, #
hyper parameters for data loaders
8
windowed_data_name="P.npy",
9
data_folder_name='/work3/s210170/Data/',
10
data_root_name="Nexus_data/Processed_nexus/dominance/
uncropped/1sec",#data_root_name="SEED_EEG",
11
windowed_label_name="L.npy",
12
file_names_list="../seed_200_ds_subject1.txt",,
13
val_portion=0.2, model_plot_name="
DownstreamModel_CVSplit",
14
linear=False):
15
16
17
# First, load the training, validation , and test sets
18
train_sets, val_sets, test_sets = load_Downstream_Dataset(
cached_datasets_list_dir=cached_datasets_list_dir ,
19
n_cross_val_splits
=
n_cross_val_splits
,
20
windowed_data_name
=
windowed_data_name
,
21
data_folder_name
=
data_folder_name
,
22
data_root_name
=
data_root_name
,
23
file_names_list
=
file_names_list
,
24
val_portion=
val_portion
25
)
26
27
# GET LIST OF THE NUMBERS OF SAMPLES PER CLASS ON A LOG SCALE
28
max_num_available_samples_from_smallest_class = None
29
for cv_split_num in range(len(train_sets)):
30
train_set = train_sets[cv_split_num]
31
smallest_num_class_samples =
get_smallest_class_sample_num_for_downstream_training(train_set,
num_classes)
32
if max_num_available_samples_from_smallest_class is None or
smallest_num_class_samples <
max_num_available_samples_from_smallest_class:
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Code
91
33
max_num_available_samples_from_smallest_class =
smallest_num_class_samples
34
35
nums_of_training_samples_per_class = []
36
exponential_counter = 1
37
while sample_log_base**exponential_counter <
max_num_available_samples_from_smallest_class:
38
nums_of_training_samples_per_class.append(sample_log_base**
exponential_counter)
39
exponential_counter += 1
40
nums_of_training_samples_per_class.append(
max_num_available_samples_from_smallest_class) #10, 76
41
nums_of_training_samples_per_class=nums_of_training_samples_per_class
[-1]#changed to only get the maximum number of smaples
42
# PERFORM EXPERIMENTS
43
test_accuracies_per_num_train_samps_on_cv_sets = [] # will be list of
lists for plotting num_train_samps vs test_acc for each cv split
44
for cv_split_num in range(len(train_sets)):
45
print("\ntrain_downstream_model: NOW PERFORMING CROSS-VAL EXPERIMENT
NUMBER ", cv_split_num , " out of ", len(train_sets))
46
# iterate over different levels of training samples
47
train_set = train_sets[cv_split_num]
48
val_set = val_sets[cv_split_num]
49
test_set = test_sets[cv_split_num]
50
curr_test_accs_per_num_train_samps = []
51
52
for num_train_samps in [nums_of_training_samples_per_class]: #
changed for only highest number of samples
53
save_dir_for_model = save_dir + os.sep + model_plot_name + str(
cv_split_num) + "_NumTrainSamps" + str(num_train_samps)
54
os.mkdir(save_dir_for_model) # see geeksforgeeks.org/create-a-
directory-in-python/
55
56
train_set_reduced =
restrict_training_size_per_class_for_downstream_training(
train_set, num_train_samps , num_classes)
57
58
59
data_loader_params = {'batch_size': batch_size ,
60
'shuffle': shuffle
61
}
62
train_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(train_set_reduced , **
data_loader_params)
63
val_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(val_set, **
data_loader_params)
64
test_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(test_set, **
data_loader_params)
65
66
# cuda setup if allowed
67
device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "
cpu") # Pytorch v0.4.0
68
69
# initialize downstream model
70
embedders = []
71
if path_to_pretrained_embedders is None:
==PAGE:102==
92
A An Appendix
72
73
embedders = [["SQ", SQNet(sq_encoder_type , channels,
temporal_len , dropout_rate=dropout_rate , embed_dim=
embed_dim, num_upstream_decode_features=
num_upstream_decode_features ,downstream=True).
embed_model] #.embed_model
74
]
75
else:
76
embedder_file_names = [x for x in os.listdir(
path_to_pretrained_embedders) if x.endswith(".bin")] #
see stackoverflow.com/questions/3964681/find-all-files-
in-a-directory-with-extension-txt-in-python
77
for file_name in embedder_file_names:
78
curr_model_type = None
79
curr_model = None
80
81
curr_model_type = "SQ"
82
83
curr_model = SQNet(sq_encoder_type , channels,
temporal_len , dropout_rate=dropout_rate , embed_dim=
embed_dim, num_upstream_decode_features=
num_upstream_decode_features ,downstream=True)
84
curr_model=curr_model.embed_model
85
86
print("train_downstream_model: ASSUMING PRETRAINED SQ
MODEL TYPE IS <<< ", sq_encoder_type , " >>> AND THAT
THE STATE-DICT STORED AT ", str(
path_to_pretrained_embedders+os.sep+file_name), "
MATCHES THIS ARCHITECTURE.")
87
curr_model.load_state_dict(torch.load(
path_to_pretrained_embedders+os.sep+file_name))
88
embedders.append([curr_model_type , curr_model])
89
if not(update_embedders):
90
91
for p in embedders[0][1].embed_model.parameters():
92
p.requires_grad = False
93
94
#Pretraining finished
95
downstream_model = DownstreamNet(embedders, num_classes ,
embed_dim=embed_dim,linear=linear,time_length=temporal_len)
96
if former_state_dict_file is not None:
97
downstream_model.load_state_dict(torch.load(
former_state_dict_file))
98
downstream_model = downstream_model.to(device)
99
100
# initialize objective function and optimizer
101
102
objective_function = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
103
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(downstream_model.parameters(),
betas=beta_vals, lr=learning_rate , weight_decay=weight_decay
)
104
105
# initialize training state
106
min_val_inaccuracy = float("inf")
107
min_state = None
==PAGE:103==
A.3 Code
93
108
num_evaluations_since_model_saved = 0
109
saved_model = None
110
111
avg_train_losses = []
112
avg_train_accs = []
113
avg_val_accs = []
114
avg_test_accs=[]
115
# perform training and validation
116
for epoch in range(max_epochs):
117
downstream_model.train()
118
running_train_loss = 0
119
num_correct_train_preds = 0
120
total_num_train_preds = 0
121
122
# update weights
123
for x, y in train_loader:
124
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device) # transfer to device
125
optimizer.zero_grad()
# zero out any pre-
existing gradients
126
127
128
y_pred = downstream_model(x)
# make prediction and
compute resulting loss
129
130
131
132
loss = objective_function(y_pred, y)
133
134
# compute accuracy
135
new_num_correct , new_num_total =
get_number_of_correct_downstream_preds(y_pred, y)
136
num_correct_train_preds += new_num_correct
137
total_num_train_preds += new_num_total
138
139
# update weights
140
loss.backward()
141
optimizer.step()
142
143
# track loss
144
running_train_loss += loss.item()
145
146
147
# perform validation
148
num_correct_val_preds = 0
149
total_num_val_preds = 0
150
with torch.no_grad():
151
downstream_model.eval()
152
153
for x, y in val_loader:
154
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device)
155
156
y_pred = downstream_model(x)
157
158
new_num_correct , new_num_total =
get_number_of_correct_downstream_preds(y_pred, y
==PAGE:104==
94
A An Appendix
)
159
num_correct_val_preds += new_num_correct
160
total_num_val_preds += new_num_total
161
162
#Evaluating Test data
163
#
164
num_correct_test_preds = 0
165
total_num_test_preds = 0
166
with torch.no_grad():
167
downstream_model.eval()
168
169
for x, y in test_loader:
170
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device)
171
172
y_pred = downstream_model(x)
173
174
new_num_correct , new_num_total =
get_number_of_correct_downstream_preds(y_pred, y
)
175
num_correct_test_preds += new_num_correct
176
total_num_test_preds += new_num_total
177
178
179
torch.cuda.empty_cache()
180
# record averages
181
avg_train_losses.append(running_train_loss / len(
train_loader))
182
avg_train_accs.append(num_correct_train_preds /
total_num_train_preds)
183
avg_val_accs.append(num_correct_val_preds /
total_num_val_preds)
184
avg_test_accs.append(num_correct_test_preds /
total_num_test_preds)
185
186
# check stopping criterion / stop
187
incorrect_val_percentage = 1. - (num_correct_val_preds /
total_num_val_preds)
188
if incorrect_val_percentage < min_val_inaccuracy:
189
num_evaluations_since_model_saved = 0
190
min_val_inaccuracy = incorrect_val_percentage
191
saved_model = downstream_model.state_dict()
192
else:
193
num_evaluations_since_model_saved += 1
194
if num_evaluations_since_model_saved >=
max_evals_after_saving:
195
print("train_downstream_model: EARLY STOPPING on
epoch ", epoch)
196
break
197
198
# check if model should be saved / save model
199
if epoch % save_freq == 0:
200
temp_model_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model ,
"temp_full_Downstream_model_epoch"+str(epoch)+".bin"
)
==PAGE:105==
A.3 Code
95
201
torch.save(downstream_model.state_dict(),
temp_model_save_path)
202
plot_avgs(avg_train_losses , avg_train_accs , avg_val_accs
,avg_test_accs , "epoch"+str(epoch),
save_dir_for_model)
203
204
print("train_downstream_model: END OF TRAINING - now saving
final model / other info")
205
206
# save final model for current experiment, along with hyper
params / cv split num and num_train samps
207
downstream_model.load_state_dict(saved_model)
208
model_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model ,
model_file_name)
209
torch.save(downstream_model.state_dict(), model_save_path)
210
211
curr_avg_test_acc = num_correct_test_preds /
total_num_test_preds
212
curr_test_accs_per_num_train_samps.append(curr_avg_test_acc)
213
214
meta_data_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir_for_model , "
meta_data_and_hyper_parameters.pkl")
215
with open(meta_data_save_path , 'wb') as outfile:
216
pkl.dump({
217
"avg_train_losses": avg_train_losses ,
218
"avg_train_accs": avg_train_accs ,
219
"avg_val_accs": avg_val_accs ,
220
"curr_avg_test_acc": curr_avg_test_acc ,
221
"save_dir_for_model": save_dir_for_model ,
222
"model_file_name": model_file_name ,
223
"batch_size": batch_size,
224
"shuffle": shuffle, #"num_workers": num_workers ,
225
"max_epochs": max_epochs,
226
"learning_rate": learning_rate ,
227
"beta_vals": beta_vals,
228
"weight_decay": weight_decay ,
229
"max_evals_after_saving": max_evals_after_saving ,
230
"save_freq": save_freq,
231
"sample_log_base":sample_log_base ,
232
"former_state_dict_file": former_state_dict_file ,
233
"ct_dim": ct_dim,
234
"h_dim": h_dim,
235
"channels": channels,
236
"temporal_len": temporal_len ,
237
"dropout_rate": dropout_rate ,
238
"embed_dim": embed_dim,
239
"num_classes": num_classes ,
240
"path_to_pretrained_embedders":
path_to_pretrained_embedders ,
241
"update_embedders": update_embedders ,
242
"sq_encoder_type": sq_encoder_type ,
243
"num_upstream_decode_features":
num_upstream_decode_features ,
244
"cached_datasets_list_dir": cached_datasets_list_dir ,
245
"Np": Np,
==PAGE:106==
96
A An Appendix
246
"windowed_data_name": windowed_data_name ,
247
"data_folder_name": data_folder_name ,
248
"data_root_name": data_root_name ,
249
"windowed_label_name": windowed_label_name ,
250
"file_names_list": file_names_list ,
251
"val_portion": val_portion ,
252
"n_cross_val_splits": n_cross_val_splits ,
253
"curr_cross_val_split": cv_split_num ,
254
"num_train_samps": num_train_samps ,
255
}, outfile)
256
257
plot_avgs(avg_train_losses , avg_train_accs , avg_val_accs ,
avg_test_accs , "Final", save_dir_for_model)
258
259
print("train_downstream_model: done with current experiment
iteration on cv_split_num==", cv_split_num , " and
num_train_samps==", num_train_samps)
260
261
test_accuracies_per_num_train_samps_on_cv_sets.append(
curr_test_accs_per_num_train_samps)
262
print(test_accuracies_per_num_train_samps_on_cv_sets)
263
264
# MAKE PLOTS / SUMMARIZE RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS
265
print("train_downstream_model: ALL EXPERIMENTS COMPLETE - SUMMARIZING
RESULTS")
266
plot_cv_summary_for_downstream_tests(save_dir, final_plot_title ,
test_accuracies_per_num_train_samps_on_cv_sets ,
nums_of_training_samples_per_class)
267
test_acc_summary_save_path = os.path.join(save_dir, "
final_cross_val_test_accuracy_summary.pkl")
268
with open(test_acc_summary_save_path , 'wb') as outfile:
269
pkl.dump({
270
"test_accuracies_per_num_train_samps_on_cv_sets":
test_accuracies_per_num_train_samps_on_cv_sets ,
271
"nums_of_training_samples_per_class":
nums_of_training_samples_per_class ,
272
}, outfile)
273
print(test_accuracies_per_num_train_samps_on_cv_sets[-1])
274
print("train_downstream_model: DONE!")
275 class DownstreamDataset(torch.utils.data.Dataset):
276
def __init__(self, cached_dataset_path , path=None, windowed_data_name="
_Windowed_Pretext_Preprocess.npy",
277
windowed_label_name="_Windowed_Label.npy"):
278
if cached_dataset_path is not None:
279
self.init_from_cached_data(cached_dataset_path)
280
else:
281
self.init_params_from_scratch(path,
282
windowed_data_name=
windowed_data_name ,
283
windowed_label_name=
windowed_label_name
284
)
285
286
287
def remove_unknowns_from_dataset(self):
==PAGE:107==
A.3 Code
97
288
# need to remove the -1 labels (unknown)
289
unknown_locs = np.where(self.labels < 0)
290
#self.data = np.delete(self.data, unknown_locs , axis=self.
SAMPLE_AXIS)
291
#self.labels = np.delete(self.labels, unknown_locs)
292
print("DownstreamDataset.remove_unknowns_from_dataset(): removed ",
len(unknown_locs[0]), " unknown entries from loaded data")
293
294
295
def init_params_from_scratch(self, path, windowed_data_name="
_Windowed_Pretext_Preprocess.npy",
296
windowed_label_name="_Windowed_Label.npy"):
297
self.SAMPLE_AXIS = 0
298
299
data_path = path + windowed_data_name
300
self.data = np.load(data_path)
301
#assert(self.data.shape[0]==54)
302
# print("init_params_from_scratch: data_path == ", data_path)
303
# print("init_params_from_scratch: self.data.shape == ", self.data.
shape)
304
# print("init_params_from_scratch: self.data == ", self.data)
305
data_path = path + windowed_label_name
306
#self.labels = np.load(data_path)[:,0] UNcomment for dreamer
307
self.labels = np.load(data_path)
308
# print("init_params_from_scratch: data_path == ", data_path)
309
print("init_params_from_scratch: self.labels.shape == ", self.labels
.shape)
310
# print("init_params_from_scratch: self.labels == ", self.labels)
311
312
#self.remove_unknowns_from_dataset()
313
314
315
def init_from_cached_data(self, cached_dataset_path):
316
cached_dataset = None
317
with open(cached_dataset_path , 'rb') as infile:
318
cached_dataset = pkl.load(infile)
319
320
self.SAMPLE_AXIS = cached_dataset['SAMPLE_AXIS']
321
self.data = cached_dataset['data']
322
self.labels = cached_dataset['labels']
323
324
#self.remove_unknowns_from_dataset()
325
326
327
def save_as_dictionary(self, path):
328
with open(path, 'wb') as outfile:
329
pkl.dump({
330
'data': self.data,
331
'labels': self.labels,
332
'SAMPLE_AXIS': self.SAMPLE_AXIS ,
333
}, outfile)
334
335
def __len__(self):
336
return len(self.labels)
337
==PAGE:108==
98
A An Appendix
338
def __getitem__(self, index):
339
x = torch.from_numpy(self.data[index ,:,:]).float()
340
y = torch.from_numpy(np.array(self.labels[index])).long()
341
return x, y
342
343 def load_Downstream_Dataset(cached_datasets_list_dir=None,
n_cross_val_splits=5,
344
windowed_data_name="_Windowed_Pretext_Preprocess
.npy",
345
data_folder_name="Mouse_Training_Data",
data_root_name="Windowed_Data",
346
windowed_label_name="L.npy",#windowed_label_name
="_Windowed_Label.npy",
347
file_names_list="training_names.txt",
val_portion=0.2):
348
root = os.path.join(data_folder_name , data_root_name , "")
349
350
x_vals = []
351
y_vals = []
352
groups = []
353
354
print("load_Downstream_Dataset: loading data")
355
if cached_datasets_list_dir is not None:
356
cached_datasets_file_names = os.listdir(cached_datasets_list_dir)
357
for i, name in enumerate(cached_datasets_file_names):
358
curr_path = os.path.join(cached_datasets_list_dir , name, "")
359
data_set = DownstreamDataset(curr_path)
360
x_vals.append(data_set.data)
361
#y_vals.append(data_set.labels)
362
y_vals.append(data_set.labels)
363
groups.append(np.ones(len(data_set.labels))*i)
364
else:
365
f = open(os.path.join(file_names_list), 'r')
366
lines = f.readlines()
367
for i, line in enumerate(lines):
368
record_name = line.strip()
369
# print("load_Downstream_Dataset: processing ", record_name)
370
data_file = root+record_name+os.sep+record_name
371
data_set = DownstreamDataset(None,
372
path=data_file,
373
windowed_data_name=windowed_data_name ,
374
windowed_label_name=windowed_label_name
375
)
376
x_vals.append(data_set.data)
377
y_vals.append(data_set.labels)
378
groups.append(np.ones(len(data_set.labels))*i)
379
380
f.close()
381
382
x_vals = np.vstack(x_vals)#All data in a list to array with all
participants combined
383
#y_vals = np.concatenate(y_vals, axis=0)-1 UNcomment for dreamer
384
#y_vals=np.where(y_vals >2.5,1,0) Uncomment for dreamer or binary
385
y_vals = np.concatenate(y_vals, axis=0) #For seed
386
y_vals[y_vals==-1]=2 # For seed
==PAGE:109==
A.3 Code
99
387
groups = np.concatenate(groups, axis=0)#Changed
388
print("load_Downstream_Dataset: x_vals shape == ", x_vals.shape)
389
print("load_Downstream_Dataset: y_vals shape == ", y_vals.shape)
390
print("load_Downstream_Dataset: groups shape == ", groups.shape)
391
392
cross_val_kfold = GroupKFold(n_splits=n_cross_val_splits)
393
cross_val_kfold.get_n_splits(x_vals, y_vals, groups)
394
395
cv_train_sets = []
396
cv_val_sets = []
397
cv_test_sets = []
398
split_counter = 0
399
for train_index , test_index in cross_val_kfold.split(x_vals, y_vals,
groups):
400
unique_test_mouse = np.unique(groups[test_index])
401
print("load_Downstream_Dataset: cross val split number ",
split_counter , " leaves out mouse number ", unique_test_mouse)
402
403
orig_train_set = TensorDataset(torch.tensor(x_vals[train_index],
dtype=torch.float), torch.tensor(y_vals[train_index], dtype=
torch.long))
404
train_data_len = int(len(orig_train_set)*(1. - val_portion))
405
val_data_len = len(orig_train_set) - train_data_len
406
407
train_set, val_set = torch.utils.data.random_split(orig_train_set , #
see https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/data.html
408
[train_data_len ,
val_data_len
],
409
generator=torch.
Generator().
manual_seed
(0)
410
)
411
412
cv_train_sets.append(train_set)
413
cv_val_sets.append(val_set)
414
cv_test_sets.append(TensorDataset(torch.tensor(x_vals[test_index],
dtype=torch.float), torch.tensor(y_vals[test_index], dtype=torch
.long)))
415
416
return cv_train_sets , cv_val_sets , cv_test_sets
.
A.3.3
Nexus data preprocessing for group Meiosis algorithm
1
2 import os
3 import mne
4 import glob
5 import pandas as pd
6 from pathlib import Path
==PAGE:110==
100
A An Appendix
7 import numpy as np
8 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
9
10
11 folder = "/work3/s210170/Data/Nexus_data/"
12 def pairwise(iterable):
13
"s -> (s0, s1), (s2, s3), (s4, s5), ..."
14
a = iter(iterable)
15
return zip(a, a)
16
17 def set_labels(cropped,raw,labels,clip_duration=50,score_type='valence'):
18
anon = {i:[] for i in ['onsets','duration','description']}
19
l = []
20
for annotation in pairwise(raw.annotations):
21
video_name =annotation[0]['description'].split('_')
22
if video_name[0]=='video':
23
if cropped:
24
onset = annotation[1]['onset']-clip_duration
25
duration = clip_duration
26
else:
27
onset = annotation[0]['onset']
28
duration = annotation[1]['onset']-annotation[0]['onset']
29
video_id = int(video_name[2])
30
idx = labels.index[labels['video_id'] == video_id]
31
anon['onsets'].append(onset)
32
anon['duration'].append(duration)
33
label_score = 1 if labels[score_type].values[idx][0] > 2 else 0
34
anon['description'].append(label_score)
35
annotations = mne.Annotations(
36
onset=anon['onsets'],
# in seconds, the moment each epoch starts
37
duration=anon['duration'],
# in seconds, too, duration of each
epoch (if data clipped 50s, should be equal for all)
38
description=anon['description']#["a n dim description would be nice"
for _ in range(len(l))],
39
)
40
raw.set_annotations(annotations)
41
return raw, annotations.description , video_id
42
43 def get_segments_labels(folder,subject,cropped=True,score_type='valence'):
44
raw = mne.io.Raw(folder+'Data/'+subject+'_eeg.fif', preload=True,verbose
=False)
45
labels = pd.read_csv(folder+'ratings/'+subject+'.csv')
46
segments, labels = get_segments(raw,labels,cropped,score_type)
47
return segments, labels
48
49 def get_segments(raw,labels,cropped,score_type ,sfreq=250):
50
raw,labels,video_id = set_labels(cropped,raw,labels,score_type=
score_type)
51
sfreq = 250
52
segments = []
53
events_from_annot , event_dict = mne.events_from_annotations(raw)
54
start_idx = events_from_annot[:,0]
55
end_idx = events_from_annot[:,0] + (raw.annotations.duration*sfreq).
astype(int)
56
# bandpass filter 1-45 Hz
==PAGE:111==
A.3 Code
101
57
filtered_raw = raw.filter(l_freq=0.3, h_freq=50,verbose=False).
notch_filter([50,100],verbose=False)
58
#filtered_raw.plot(scalings=1e4,duration=300)
59
for indices in zip(start_idx,end_idx):
60
#print(np.diff(indices))
61
#print(raw.info['sfreq'])
62
d=filtered_raw.get_data()
63
segments.append(filtered_raw.get_data()[:,indices[0]:indices[1]].T)
64
print(filtered_raw.get_data()[:,indices[0]:indices[1]].shape)
65
#segments.append(d[:,indices[0]:indices[1]][:,(d.shape[1]-250*50):].
transpose(0,2,1))
66
return segments, labels
67
68 def norm_dataset(dataset_1D):
69
print("
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
")
70
print("dataset -1D:",dataset_1D.shape)
71
norm_dataset_1D = np.zeros([dataset_1D.shape[0], 8])
72
for i in range(dataset_1D.shape[0]):
73
norm_dataset_1D[i] = feature_normalize(dataset_1D[i])
74
return norm_dataset_1D
75
76 def feature_normalize(data):
77
mean = data[data.nonzero()].mean()
78
sigma = data[data. nonzero ()].std()
79
data_normalized = data
80
data_normalized[data_normalized.nonzero()] = (data_normalized[
data_normalized.nonzero()] - mean)/sigma
81
return data_normalized
82
83 def windows(data, size):
84
start = 0
85
while ((start + size) <= data.shape[0]):
86
yield int(start), int(start + size)
87
start += size
88
89 def segment_signal_without_transition(data,label,label_index ,window_size):
90
print(" label index:", label_index)
91
print("data shape:", data.shape)
92
for (start, end) in windows(data, window_size):
93
# break
94
if ((len(data[start:end]) == window_size)):
95
if(start == 0):
96
segments = data[start:end]
97
labels = np.array(label[label_index])
98
print('label:', labels)
99
else:
100
segments = np.vstack([segments, data[start:end]])
101
labels = np.append(labels, np.array(label[label_index]))
102
print(set(labels))
103
return segments, labels
104
105
106 files = sorted(glob.glob(folder+"/Data/*"))
==PAGE:112==
102
A An Appendix
107
108
109 for idx,filename in enumerate(files):
110
DATA_NEXUS = []
111
LABEL_NEXUS = []
112
cropped=True
113
score_type='arousal'
114
subject = Path(filename).stem[:-4]
115
window_size=1*250
116
print('Subject:',subject)
117
segments, labels = get_segments_labels(folder,subject,cropped,score_type
)
118
segments=np.stack(segments) #video, time, channel
119
label_inter = []
120
data_inter = []
121
trials=16
122
for i in range(trials):
123
124
data = norm_dataset(segments[i,:,:])
125
data, label = segment_signal_without_transition(data, labels,i,
window_size)
126
data = data.reshape(int(data.shape[0]/window_size), window_size , 8)#
final sahpe (60,128,32) windows, time, channel
127
data_inter.append(data)
128
label_inter.append(label)
129
130
data_inter = np.array(data_inter)
131
label_inter = np.array(label_inter)
132
print("total data size:", data_inter.shape)
133
print("total label size:", label_inter.shape)
134
135
DATA_NEXUS.append(data_inter)
136
LABEL_NEXUS.append(label_inter)
137
138
139
140
DATA_NEXUS = np.array(DATA_NEXUS) #(32, 40, 60, 128, 32)(subject, trial,
second, sampling_point. channel)
141
DATA_NEXUS = np.transpose(DATA_NEXUS, (1, 2, 0, 4, 3)) #(40, 60, 32, 32,
128)
142
LABEL_NEXUS = np.array(LABEL_NEXUS) #(3, 40, 60)
143
LABEL_NEXUS = np.transpose(LABEL_NEXUS , (1,2,0)) #(40, 60, 32)
144
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
145
DATA_NEXUS = np.reshape(DATA_NEXUS, (-1,DATA_NEXUS.shape[2], 1,
DATA_NEXUS.shape[-2],DATA_NEXUS.shape[-1])) #(2400, 32, 1, 32, 128)
146
LABEL_NEXUS = np.reshape(LABEL_NEXUS , (-1, LABEL_NEXUS.shape[-1]))#
(2400, 32)
147
148
x_train_NEXUS , x_test_NEXUS , y_train_NEXUS , y_test_NEXUS =
train_test_split(DATA_NEXUS, LABEL_NEXUS , random_state=42, test_size
=0.3)
149
x_test_NEXUS , x_val_NEXUS , y_test_NEXUS , y_val_NEXUS = train_test_split(
x_test_NEXUS , y_test_NEXUS , random_state=42, test_size=0.5)
150
151
root='/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis_arousal/'+str(idx)+'/'
==PAGE:113==
A.3 Code
103
152
np.save(root+'DATA_NEXUS_arousal.npy',DATA_NEXUS)
153
np.save(root+'LABEL_NEXUS_arousal.npy',LABEL_NEXUS)
154
np.save(root+'x_train_NEXUS_arousal.npy',x_train_NEXUS)
155
np.save(root+'x_test_NEXUS_arousal.npy',x_test_NEXUS)
156
np.save(root+'x_val_NEXUS_arousal.npy',x_val_NEXUS)
157
np.save(root+'y_train_NEXUS_arousal.npy',y_train_NEXUS)
158
np.save(root+'y_test_NEXUS_arousalnpy',y_test_NEXUS)
159
np.save(root+'y_val_NEXUS_arousal.npy',y_val_NEXUS)
.
A.3.4
Groups meiosis algorithm for Nexus pretraining
1 import numpy as np
2 import torch
3 import torch.nn as nn
4 from torch import nn
5 import torch.nn.functional as F
6 import tqdm
7 import time
8 from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix , f1_score
9 from sklearn.model_selection import GridSearchCV
10 import random
11 from torch.utils import data
12 import argparse
13 import pandas as pd
14 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
15 import os, shutil
16 from ResNet_model import ResNet
17
18
19 parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(formatter_class=argparse.
ArgumentDefaultsHelpFormatter)
20 torch.set_default_tensor_type(torch.FloatTensor)
21 device = torch.device('cuda')
22
23
24 #Data augmentation function
25 def Meiosis(signal,Q,rand_subs_stre , split):
26
num_subs = signal.shape[0]
27
signal_len = signal.shape[-2]
28
new_signal = []
29
new_signal1 = []
30
new_signal2 = []
31
for i in range(0,4):
32
si = rand_subs_stre[i]
33
sj = rand_subs_stre[i+Q]
34
xi = np.concatenate([signal[si, :, :, :split], signal[sj, :, :,
split:]], axis=2)
35
xj = np.concatenate([signal[sj, :, :, :split], signal[si, :, :,
split:]], axis=2)
36
new_signal1.append(xi)
37
new_signal2.append(xj)
==PAGE:114==
104
A An Appendix
38
new_signal = new_signal1 + new_signal2
39
new_signal = np.array(new_signal)
40
return new_signal
41
42 # Contrast loss function
43 def constrast_loss(x, criterion, tau):
44
LARGE_NUM = 1e9
45
x = F.normalize(x, dim=-1)
46
num = int(x.shape[0]/2)
47
hidden1, hidden2 = torch.split(x, num)
48
hidden1_large = hidden1
49
hidden2_large = hidden2
50
labels = torch.arange(0,num).to('cuda')
51
masks = F.one_hot(torch.arange(0,num), num).to('cuda')
52
logits_aa = torch.matmul(hidden1, hidden1_large.T) / tau
53
logits_aa = logits_aa - masks * LARGE_NUM
54
logits_bb = torch.matmul(hidden2, hidden2_large.T) / tau
55
logits_bb = logits_bb - masks * LARGE_NUM
56
logits_ab = torch.matmul(hidden1, hidden2_large.T) / tau
57
logits_ba = torch.matmul(hidden2, hidden1_large.T) / tau
58
loss_a = criterion(torch.cat([logits_ab, logits_aa], 1),
59
labels)
60
loss_b = criterion(torch.cat([logits_ba, logits_bb], 1),
61
labels)
62
loss = torch.mean(loss_a + loss_b)
63
return loss, labels, logits_ab
64
65 #Test function
66 def _eval(model, test_loader , Q, tau):
67
iters = 0
68
total_acc = 0
69
total_loss = 0
70
with torch.no_grad():
71
for x, y in test_loader:
72
iters += 1
73
#
print('iters:',iters)
74
bs,ss = x.shape[0], x.shape[1]
75
rand_subs_stre = random.sample(range(0, ss), ss)
76
split = random.randint(1,250-2) #128 is length of step
77
x = x.cpu().numpy()
78
x_copia=np.zeros((x.shape[0],8,x.shape[2],x.shape[3],x.shape[4])
)
79
for i in range(bs):
80
#x[i] = Meiosis(x[i],Q,rand_subs_stre , split)
81
x_copia[i] = Meiosis(x[i],Q,rand_subs_stre , split)
82
groups = []
83
groups_1 = []
84
groups_2 = []
85
rand_subs1 = list(range(0, Q))
86
rand_subs2 = list(range(int(ss / 2), int(ss / 2) + Q))
87
for i in range(bs):
88
groups_1.append(x_copia[i,rand_subs1])
89
for i in range(bs):
90
groups_2.append(x_copia[i,rand_subs2])
91
groups = groups_1 + groups_2
==PAGE:115==
A.3 Code
105
92
groups = np.concatenate(groups)
93
groups = groups.reshape(-1, groups.shape[-3], groups.shape[-2],
groups.shape[-1])
94
groups = torch.tensor(groups, dtype=torch.float, device=device)
95
out = model(groups, 'contrast')
96
out = torch.reshape(out, (-1, Q, out.shape[-1]))
97
out = torch.max(out, dim=1)[0]
98
tem_loss, lab_con, logits_ab = constrast_loss(out, criterion,
tau)
99
_, log_p = torch.max(logits_ab.data, 1)
100
loss = tem_loss
101
evaluation_batch = ((log_p == lab_con).cpu().numpy()*1)
102
acc = sum(evaluation_batch) /evaluation_batch.shape[0]
103
total_acc += acc
104
total_loss += loss
105
test_acc = total_acc / iters
106
test_loss = total_loss / iters
107
#print(f'Epoch: {epoch}, Train_loss: {test_loss:.4f}, Test_acc: {
test_acc:.4f}')
108
return test_acc, test_loss
109
110 #Training function
111 def _train(model, train_loader , optimizer, epoch, Q, tau):
112
model.train()
113
evaluation = []
114
train_losses = []
115
train_acces = []
116
iters = 0
117
for x, y in train_loader:
118
iters += 1
119
bs,ss = x.shape[0], x.shape[1]
120
rand_subs_stre = random.sample(range(0, ss), ss)
121
split = random.randint(1,250-2)
122
x = x.cpu().numpy()
123
x_copia=np.zeros((x.shape[0],8,x.shape[2],x.shape[3],x.shape[4]))
124
125
for i in range(bs):
126
x_copia[i] = Meiosis(x[i], Q,rand_subs_stre , split)
127
groups = []
128
groups_1 = []
129
groups_2 = []
130
rand_subs1 = list(range(0,Q))#rand_subs[per:]
131
rand_subs2 = list(range(int(ss/2),int(ss/2)+Q))
132
for i in range(bs):
133
groups_1.append(x_copia[i,rand_subs1])
134
for i in range(bs):
135
groups_2.append(x_copia[i,rand_subs2])
136
groups = groups_1 + groups_2
137
groups = np.concatenate(groups)
138
groups = groups.reshape(-1, groups.shape[-3],groups.shape[-2],groups
.shape[-1])
139
groups = torch.tensor(groups, dtype=torch.float, device=device)
140
out = model(groups, 'contrast')
141
out = torch.reshape(out, (-1, Q, out.shape[-1]))
142
out = torch.max(out, dim=1)[0]
==PAGE:116==
106
A An Appendix
143
optimizer.zero_grad()
144
tem_loss, lab_con, logits_ab = constrast_loss(out, criterion, tau)
145
_, log_p = torch.max(logits_ab.data, 1)
146
loss = tem_loss
147
evaluation_batch = ((log_p == lab_con).cpu().numpy()*1)
148
loss.backward()
149
loss = loss.item()
150
optimizer.step()
151
acc = sum(evaluation_batch) / evaluation_batch.shape[0]
152
train_losses.append(loss)
153
train_acces.append(acc)
154
#print(f'Epoch: {epoch}, batch: {iters}, Train_loss: {loss:.4f},
Train_acc: {acc:.4f}')
155
return train_acces , train_losses
156
157 #SSL training function
158 def _train_epochs(model, train_loader , test_loader , epochs, per, tau):
159
optimizer = optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr)
160
test_acc, test_loss = _eval(model, test_loader , Q, tau)
161
print(f'Epoch: {0}, Test_loss: {test_loss:.4f}, Test_acc: {test_acc:.4f}
')
162
test_acces = [test_acc]
163
test_losses = [test_loss]
164
train_acces = []
165
train_losses = []
166
for epoch in range(1,epochs+1):
167
train_acces_tem , train_losses_tem = _train(model, train_loader ,
optimizer, epoch, Q, tau)
168
if epoch % 500 == 0:
169
torch.save(model,
170
os.path.join(saved_models_dir , saved_models_dir+';
epoch={}.pth'.format(str(epoch).zfill(4))))
171
train_acces.extend(train_acces_tem)
172
train_losses.extend(train_losses_tem)
173
#￿￿￿￿￿￿epoch
174
test_acc, test_loss = _eval(model, test_loader , Q, tau)
175
test_losses.append(test_loss)
176
test_acces.append(test_acc)
177
print(f'Epoch: {epoch}, Test_loss: {test_loss:.4f}, Test_acc: {
test_acc:.4f}')
178
return test_acces , test_losses , train_acces , train_losses
179
180 device = "cuda"
181 #Import data and set hyper-parameter
182
183 x_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/x_train_NEXUS.npy'
184 x_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/x_test_NEXUS.npy'
185 y_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/y_train_NEXUS.npy'
186 y_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/y_test_NEXUS.npy'
187
188 x_train = np.load(x_train_path)
189 x_test = np.load(x_test_path)
190 y_train = np.load(y_train_path)
191 y_test = np.load(y_test_path)
192
==PAGE:117==
A.3 Code
107
193 x_train = torch.tensor(x_train, dtype=torch.float)
194 x_test = torch.tensor(x_test, dtype=torch.float)
195 y_train = torch.tensor(y_train.astype(int), dtype=torch.long)#windows
196 y_test = torch.tensor(y_test.astype(int), dtype=torch.long)
197 print(x_train.shape)
198
199 model = ResNet()
200 model = nn.DataParallel(model)
201 criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss().to(device)
202 import torch.optim as optim
203
204
205
206 epochs = 2000
207
208 tau = 0.05
209 P = 2 #has to be lower than 16
210 Q = 2 #has to be lower than 4
211 lr=0.0001
212
213
214 train_dataset = data.TensorDataset(x_train, y_train)
215 train_loader = data.DataLoader(train_dataset , P, shuffle=True)
216 test_dataset = data.TensorDataset(x_test, y_test)
217 test_loader = data.DataLoader(test_dataset , P, shuffle=True)
218
219 #Set model storage address
220 model_name = 'ResNet_NEXUS_Parameters'
221 saved_models_dir = 'Pretrained_'+model_name+';totalepochs='+format(str(
epochs).zfill(3))+';P='+format(str(P).zfill(3))+';Q='+format(str(Q).
zfill(2))+';tau='+format(tau,'.2E')+';lr='+format(lr,'.2E')
222 ssl_logs = os.path.join(saved_models_dir ,'ssl_logs')
223
224 os.makedirs(ssl_logs, exist_ok=True)
225 if not os.path.exists(ssl_logs):
226
os.makedirs(ssl_logs)
227
228
229 #SSL Training
230 test_acces , test_losses , train_acces , train_losses = _train_epochs(model,
231
train_loader
,
232
test_loader ,
233
epochs,
234
Q,
235
tau)
236
237 #Plot
238
239 name_path_per_ssl_epoch = os.path.join(ssl_logs,saved_models_dir+';ssl_acces
.xls')
240 per_ssl_accs = pd.DataFrame(test_acces, columns=['ssl_acc'])
241
242
243 plt.plot(test_acces)
==PAGE:118==
108
A An Appendix
244 plt.legend(['pre-train_ssl'], loc='upper left')
245 plt.ylabel('test_acc')
246 plt.xlabel('epoch_of_pretrain')
247 plt.title(saved_models_dir+';ssl_log', fontdict={'size':9})
248 plt.title(saved_models_dir)
249 plt.savefig(os.path.join(ssl_logs,saved_models_dir+'.jpg'))
250 plt.show()
.
A.3.5
Groups meiosis algorithm Fine tuning
1 import numpy as np
2 import os
3 from sklearn.metrics import roc_auc_score , precision_score , recall_score ,
accuracy_score
4 import torch
5 import torch.nn as nn
6 import torch.optim as optim
7 from torch.utils import data
8 from torch.autograd import Variable
9 import torch.nn.functional as F
10 import torch.optim as optim
11 from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
12 from ResNet_model import ResNet
13 import pandas as pd
14 device=torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
15 import warnings
16 warnings.filterwarnings("ignore", category=UserWarning)
17
18 #Test function
19 def _eval(model, test_loader ,loss_fn):
20
model.eval()
21
total_loss = 0
22
total_acc = 0
23
with torch.no_grad():
24
for pair in test_loader:
25
x, y = pair[0], pair[1]
26
x = x.cuda().float().contiguous()
27
y = y.cuda().long().contiguous()
28
out = model(x, mode='classifier')
29
acc = (torch.sum(torch.eq(torch.argmax(out, 1), y)).float()/y.
shape[0]).item()
30
loss = loss_fn(out, y)
31
loss = loss.item()
32
total_loss += loss * y.shape[0]
33
total_acc += acc * y.shape[0]
34
test_loss = total_loss / len(test_loader.dataset)
35
test_acc = total_acc / len(test_loader.dataset)
36
return test_loss, test_acc
37
38 #Training function
39 def _train(model, train_loader , optimizer, epoch, loss_fn):
==PAGE:119==
A.3 Code
109
40
train_losses_tem = []
41
train_acces_tem = []
42
num = 0
43
for pair in train_loader:
44
num += 1
45
x, y = pair[0], pair[1]
46
x = x.cuda().float().contiguous()
47
y = y.cuda().long().contiguous()
48
optimizer.zero_grad()
49
out = model(x, mode='classifier')
50
acc = (torch.sum(torch.eq(torch.argmax(out, 1), y)).float() / y.
shape[0]).item()
51
loss = loss_fn(out, y)
52
loss.backward()
53
loss = loss.item()
54
optimizer.step()
55
train_losses_tem.append(loss)
56
train_acces_tem.append(acc)
57
#print(f'Epoch: {epoch}, batch: {num}, Train_loss: {loss:.4f},
Train_acc: {acc:.4f}')
58
return train_losses_tem , train_acces_tem
59
60 #Emotional recognition training function
61 def _train_epochs(model, train_loader , test_loader , epochs, lr):
62
optimizer = optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=lr)
63
loss_fn = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
64
train_losses = []
65
train_acces = []
66
test_loss, test_acc = _eval(model, test_loader , loss_fn)
67
test_losses = [test_loss]
68
test_acces = [test_acc]
69
print(f'Epoch {0}, Test loss {test_loss:.4f}, Test acc {test_acc:.4f}')
70
#￿￿￿￿
71
for epoch in range(1, epochs+1):
72
model.train()
73
train_losses_tem , train_acces_tem = _train(model, train_loader ,
optimizer, epoch, loss_fn)
74
#print(f'Epoch: {epoch}, batch: {num}, Train_loss: {loss:.4f},
Train_acc: {acc:.4f}')
75
train_acces.extend(train_acces_tem)
76
train_losses.extend(train_losses_tem)
77
test_loss, test_acc = _eval(model, test_loader , loss_fn)
78
test_losses.append(test_loss)
79
test_acces.append(test_acc)
80
print(f'Epoch {epoch}, Test loss {test_loss:.4f}, Test acc {test_acc
:.4f}')
81
return train_losses , train_acces , test_losses , test_acces
82
83 #Import data and set hyper-parameters
84
85 #SEED
86 '''
87 x_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/seed_meiosis_norepeat/x_train_SEED.npy'
88 x_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/seed_meiosis_norepeat//x_test_SEED.npy'
89 y_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/seed_meiosis_norepeat//y_train_SEED.npy'
==PAGE:120==
110
A An Appendix
90 y_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/seed_meiosis_norepeat//y_test_SEED.npy'
91
92
93 x_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/deap_meiosis/x_train_DEAP.npy'
94 x_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/deap_meiosis/x_test_DEAP.npy'
95 y_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/deap_meiosis/y_train_DEAP.npy'
96 y_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/deap_meiosis/y_test_DEAP.npy'
97
98 x_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/x_train_NEXUS.npy'
99 x_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/x_test_NEXUS.npy'
100 y_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/y_train_NEXUS.npy'
101 y_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis/y_test_NEXUS.npy'
102 '''
103
104 x_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis_dominance/8/
x_train_NEXUS_dominance.npy'
105 x_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis_dominance/8/
x_test_NEXUS_dominance.npy'
106 y_train_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis_dominance/8/
y_train_NEXUS_dominance.npy'
107 y_test_path = '/work3/s210170/Data/nexus_meiosis_dominance/8/
y_test_NEXUS_dominancenpy.npy'
108
109
110 x_train = np.load(x_train_path)
111 x_test = np.load(x_test_path)
112 y_train = np.load(y_train_path).astype(int)
113 y_test = np.load(y_test_path).astype(int)
114
115 x_train = x_train.reshape(-1, 1, x_train.shape[-2], x_train.shape[-1])
116 x_test = x_test.reshape(-1, 1, x_test.shape[-2], x_test.shape[-1])
117 y_train = y_train.reshape(-1,)
118 y_test = y_test.reshape(-1,)
119
120 print(np.sum(y_test)/len(y_test))
121
122 batch_size = 256
123
124 train_dataset = data.TensorDataset(torch.tensor(x_train), torch.tensor(
y_train))
125 train_loader = data.DataLoader(train_dataset , batch_size=batch_size , shuffle
=True)
126 test_dataset = data.TensorDataset(torch.tensor(x_test), torch.tensor(y_test)
)
127 test_loader = data.DataLoader(test_dataset , batch_size=batch_size, shuffle=
True)
128
129 epochs = 70
130 lr = 0.001
131 loss_fn = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
132
133 #Import pre-trained model
134 #ssl_root='./Pretrained_ResNet_DREAMER_Parameters;totalepochs=2000;P=002;Q
=02;tau=1.00E-01;lr=1.00E-04/Pretrained_ResNet_DREAMER_Parameters;
totalepochs=2000;P=002;Q=02;tau=1.00E-01;lr=1.00E-04;epoch=2000.pth'
==PAGE:121==
A.3 Code
111
135 ssl_root = './Pretrained_ResNet_DREAMER_Parameters;totalepochs=2000;P=010;Q
=06;tau=1.00E-01;lr=1.00E-04/Pretrained_ResNet_DREAMER_Parameters;
totalepochs=2000;P=010;Q=06;tau=1.00E-01;lr=1.00E-04;epoch=2000.pth'
136 model = ResNet()
137 model = torch.load(ssl_root)
138 model.to(device)
139 optimizer = optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=lr)
140
141 #Training
142 train_losses , train_acces , test_losses , test_acces= _train_epochs(model,
train_loader , test_loader , epochs, lr)
143 test_losses= [ '%.3f' % elem for elem in test_losses ]
144 test_losses= [ '%.3f' % elem for elem in train_losses ]
145
146 test_acces= [ '%.3f' % elem for elem in test_acces ]
147 train_acces= [ '%.3f' % elem for elem in train_acces ]
148 #Plot
149 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
150 plt.plot(np.array(test_acces).astype(float))
151 plt.ylabel('test_acc')
152 plt.xlabel('epoch')
153 plt.title('Fine-tuning')
154 plt.savefig('./Results/nexus_test')
155 plt.show()
156
157
158 plt.plot(np.array(train_acces).astype(float))
159 plt.ylabel('test_acc')
160 plt.xlabel('epoch')
161 plt.title('Fine-tuning')
162 plt.savefig('./Results/nexus')
.
==PAGE:122==
112
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[1]
5.2: Navigating the Functional Anatomy of the Brain. Medicine LibreTexts.
June 16, 2019. (Visited on May 14, 2023).
[2]
Yamen Ali et al. “Self-Supervised Learning for 3D Medical Image Analysis
using 3D SimCLR and Monte Carlo Dropout.” In: CoRR abs/2109.14288 (2021).
arXiv: 2109.14288. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14288.
[3]
Randall Balestriero et al. A Cookbook of Self-Supervised Learning. 2023. eprint:
2304.12210.
[4]
Hubert Banville et al. Uncovering the structure of clinical EEG signals with self-
supervised learning. July 31, 2020. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.16104.
[5]
Rituparna Barooah. “Physiology of Emotion.” In: Application of Biomedical
Engineering in Neuroscience. Edited by Sudip Paul. Singapore: Springer, 2019,
pages 415–435. isbn: 9789811371424. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-7142-4_21.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 981- 13- 7142- 4_21 (visited on
August 2, 2023).
[6]
Rashmi Bhushan, V. Ravichandiran, and Nitesh Kumar. “1 - An overview of
the anatomy and physiology of the brain.” In: Nanocarriers for Drug-Targeting
Brain Tumors. Micro and Nano Technologies. Elsevier, 2022, pages 3–29. isbn:
978-0-323-90773-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 323- 90773-
6.00023-3.
[7]
Jordan Bird et al. “Mental Emotional Sentiment Classification with an EEG-
based Brain-machine Interface.” In: April 2019.
[8]
Danny Oude Bos. “EEG-based Emotion Recognition.” In: ().
[9]
Marianna Brienza and Oriano Mecarelli. “Neurophysiological Basis of EEG.” In:
Clinical Electroencephalography. Edited by Oriano Mecarelli. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pages 9–21. isbn: 978-3-030-04572-2 978-3-030-
04573-9. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-04573-9_2. url: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-3-030-04573-9_2 (visited on May 30, 2023).
[10]
Ting Chen et al. “A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual
Representations.” In: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. International Conference on Machine Learning. ISSN: 2640-
3498. PMLR, November 21, 2020, pages 1597–1607. url: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html.
==PAGE:124==
114
Bibliography
[11]
Yucel Cimtay and Erhan Ekmekcioglu. “Investigating the use of pretrained
convolutional neural network on cross-subject and cross-dataset EEG emotion
recognition.” In: Sensors 20.7 (2020), page 2034.
[12]
Didar Dadebayev, Wei Wei Goh, and Ee Xion Tan. “EEG-based emotion recog-
nition: Review of commercial EEG devices and machine learning techniques.”
In: Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences 34.7
(2022), pages 4385–4401. issn: 1319-1578. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jksuci.2021.03.009. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1319157821000732.
[13]
Ruo-Nan Duan, Jia-Yi Zhu, and Bao-Liang Lu. “Differential entropy feature
for EEG-based emotion classification.” In: 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS
Conference on Neural Engineering (NER). 2013, pages 81–84. doi: 10.1109/
NER.2013.6695876.
[14]
Andrius Dzedzickis, Artūras Kaklauskas, and Vytautas Bucinskas. “Human
Emotion Recognition: Review of Sensors and Methods.” In: Sensors 20.3 (2020).
issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s20030592. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-
8220/20/3/592.
[15]
EEG Based Emotion Recognition: A Tutorial and Review | ACM Computing Sur-
veys. url: https://dl.acm.org/doi/full/10.1145/3524499?casa_token=
ypXscNc5OoIAAAAA%5C%3AX9CXMubDdGS9KV9jynbDSUP6skKORvaGUxqwZEq2ujxYvOpn8tOeWjL3U3
(visited on February 21, 2023).
[16]
Paul Ekman. “An argument for basic emotions.” In: Cognition and Emotion
6.3-4 (1992), pages 169–200. doi: 10.1080/02699939208411068. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1080/02699939208411068. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/
02699939208411068.
[17]
Alexandre Gramfort et al. “Learning with self-supervision on EEG data.” In:
2021 9th International Winter Conference on Brain-Computer Interface (BCI).
2021 9th International Winter Conference on Brain-Computer Interface (BCI).
ISSN: 2572-7672. February 2021, pages 1–2. doi: 10.1109/BCI51272.2021.
9385345.
[18]
Muhammad Anas Hasnul et al. “Electrocardiogram-Based Emotion Recognition
Systems and Their Applications in Healthcare—A Review.” In: Sensors 21.15
(2021). issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s21155015. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/21/15/5015.
[19]
Yanbin He et al. “A Self-Supervised Learning Based Channel Attention MLP-
Mixer Network for Motor Imagery Decoding.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 30 (2022), pages 2406–2417. doi: 10.
1109/TNSRE.2022.3199363.
[20]
Zhipeng He, Yongshi Zhong, and Jiahui Pan. “An adversarial discriminative
temporal convolutional network for EEG-based cross-domain emotion recogni-
tion.” In: Computers in biology and medicine 141 (2022), page 105048.
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
115
[21]
Abhishek Iyer et al. “CNN and LSTM based Ensemble Learning for Human
Emotion Recognition using EEG Recordings.” In: Multimedia Tools and Appli-
cations (April 2022). doi: 10.1007/s11042-022-12310-7.
[22]
Ashish Jaiswal et al. “A Survey on Contrastive Self-supervised Learning.” In:
CoRR abs/2011.00362 (2020). arXiv: 2011.00362. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2011.00362.
[23]
Dongwei Jiang et al. “Speech SIMCLR: Combining Contrastive and Reconstruc-
tion Objective for Self-supervised Speech Representation Learning.” In: CoRR
abs/2010.13991 (2020). arXiv: 2010.13991. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2010.13991.
[24]
Haoning Kan et al. Self-supervised Group Meiosis Contrastive Learning for
EEG-Based Emotion Recognition. 2022. arXiv: 2208.00877 [eess.SP].
[25]
Stamos Katsigiannis and Naeem Ramzan. “DREAMER: A Database for Emo-
tion Recognition Through EEG and ECG Signals From Wireless Low-cost Off-
the-Shelf Devices.” In: IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 22.1
(January 2018), pages 98–107. issn: 2168-2194, 2168-2208. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.
2017.2688239. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7887697/.
[26]
Manzoor Khazi and Atul Kumar. “Analysis of EEG Using 10:20 Electrode Sys-
tem.” In: 1.2 ().
[27]
S. Koelstra et al. “DEAP: A Database for Emotion Analysis ;Using Physiological
Signals.” In: IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 3.1 (January 2012),
pages 18–31. issn: 1949-3045. doi: 10.1109/T- AFFC.2011.15. url: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5871728/ (visited on March 29, 2023).
[28]
Demetres Kostas, Stéphane Aroca-Ouellette, and Frank Rudzicz. “BENDR: Us-
ing Transformers and a Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning Task to Learn
From Massive Amounts of EEG Data.” In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
15 (June 23, 2021), page 653659. issn: 1662-5161. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.
653659. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.
2021.653659/full.
[29]
Xiang Li et al. “Emotion recognition from multi-channel EEG data through
Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network.” In: 2016 IEEE International Con-
ference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). 2016, pages 352–359. doi:
10.1109/BIBM.2016.7822545.
[30]
Xiang Li et al. “Exploring EEG features in cross-subject emotion recognition.”
In: Frontiers in neuroscience 12 (2018), page 162.
[31]
Yang Li et al. GMSS: Graph-Based Multi-Task Self-Supervised Learning for
EEG Emotion Recognition. 2022. arXiv: 2205.01030 [eess.SP].
[32]
Wei Liu et al. “Comparing Recognition Performance and Robustness of Multi-
modal Deep Learning Models for Multimodal Emotion Recognition.” In: IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (2021).
==PAGE:126==
116
Bibliography
[33]
Taveena Lotey et al. “Cross-Session Motor Imagery EEG Classification using
Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning.” In: 2022 26th International Conference
on Pattern Recognition (ICPR). ISSN: 2831-7475. August 2022, pages 975–981.
doi: 10.1109/ICPR56361.2022.9956291.
[34]
Erik K. St Louis et al. “Appendix 1. The Scientific Basis of EEG: Neurophys-
iology of EEG Generation in the Brain.” In: Electroencephalography (EEG):
An Introductory Text and Atlas of Normal and Abnormal Findings in Adults,
Children, and Infants [Internet]. American Epilepsy Society, 2016. url: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK390351/.
[35]
Jianhong Ma et al. “SimCLR-Unet: An ECG Feature Wave Segmentation Algo-
rithm Based on a Self-Supervised Learning Strategy.” In: Dongguan, China: As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, 2023, pages 1354–1359. isbn: 9781450398343.
doi: 10.1145/3584376.3584615. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3584376.
3584615.
[36]
M. Maithri et al. “multi emotion recognition: Current trends and future per-
spectives.” In: Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 215 (2022),
page 106646. issn: 0169-2607. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.
106646. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0169260722000311.
[37]
Alsayouri K Maldonado KA. Physiology, Brain. AStatPearls Publishing, 2023
Mar 17.
[38]
Juan Abdon Miranda-Correa et al. “AMIGOS: A Dataset for Affect, Personality
and Mood Research on Individuals and Groups.” In: IEEE Transactions on
Affective Computing 12.2 (April 1, 2021), pages 479–493. issn: 1949-3045, 2371-
9850. doi: 10.1109/TAFFC.2018.2884461. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/8554112/.
[39]
Neo’ Mohsenvand. “Contrastive Representation Learning for Electroencephalo-
gram Classification.” In: ().
[40]
Kevin G. Montero Quispe et al. “Applying Self-Supervised Representation Learn-
ing for Emotion Recognition Using Physiological Signals.” In: Sensors 22.23
(2022). issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s22239102. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/22/23/9102.
[41]
Tommie L. Norris and Rupa Lalchandani Tuan. Porth’s Essentials of Patho-
physiology. Fifth edition. Philadelphia Baltimore New York London Buenos
Aires Hong Kong Sydney Tokyo: Wolters Kluwer, 2020. 1389 pages. isbn: 978-
1-975107-19-2.
[42]
Yanghan Ou et al. “An improved self-supervised learning for EEG classifica-
tion.” In: Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering 19.7 (2022), pages 6907–
6922. doi: 10 . 3934 / mbe . 2022325. url: http : / / www . aimspress . com /
article/doi/10.3934/mbe.2022325.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
117
[43]
Jonathan Peirce et al. “PsychoPy2: Experiments in behavior made easy.” In:
Behavior Research Methods 51 (February 2019). doi: 10.3758/s13428-018-
01193-y.
[44]
Mohammad H. Rafiei et al. “Self-Supervised Learning for Electroencephalogra-
phy.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2022),
pages 1–15. issn: 2162-237X, 2162-2388. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3190448.
url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9837871/.
[45]
James Russell. “A Circumplex Model of Affect.” In: Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 39 (December 1980), pages 1161–1178. doi: 10.1037/
h0077714.
[46]
Parthana Sarma and Shovan Barma. “Review on Stimuli Presentation for Affect
Analysis Based on EEG.” In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pages 51991–52009. issn:
2169-3536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2980893. url: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/9036897/.
[47]
Lin Shu et al. “A Review of Emotion Recognition Using Physiological Signals.”
In: Sensors 18.7 (2018). issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s18072074. url: https:
//www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/7/2074.
[48]
“Standard Electroencephalography in Clinical Psychiatry.” In: (). ISBN: 9780470974612.
url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epub/10.1002/9780470974612.
[49]
Nazmi Sofian Suhaimi, James Mountstephens, and Jason Teo. “EEG-Based n
Recognition: A State-of-the-Art Review of Current Trends and Opportunities.”
In: Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2020 (September 16, 2020).
Publisher: Hindawi, e8875426. issn: 1687-5265. doi: 10.1155/2020/8875426.
url: https://www.hindawi.com/journals/cin/2020/8875426/?limit=all
(visited on February 21, 2023).
[50]
M Teplan. “FUNDAMENTALS OF EEG MEASUREMENT.” In: MEASURE-
MENT SCIENCE REVIEW 2 (2002).
[51]
Meike K. Uhrig et al. “Emotion Elicitation: A Comparison of Pictures and
Films.” In: Frontiers in Psychology 7 (2016). issn: 1664-1078. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.00180. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
3389/fpsyg.2016.00180.
[52]
Neeraj Wagh et al. “Domain-guided Self-supervision of EEG Data Improves
Downstream Classification Performance and Generalizability.” In: Proceedings of
Machine Learning for Health (November 28, 2021), pages 130–142. url: https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v158/wagh21a.html.
[53]
Yi Wei et al. “TC-Net: A Transformer Capsule Network for EEG-based emotion
recognition.” In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 152 (2023), page 106463.
issn: 0010-4825. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compbiomed . 2022 .
106463. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0010482522011714.
==PAGE:128==
118
Bibliography
[54]
Jiahui Xu and Baichang Zhong. “Review on Portable EEG Technology in Ed-
ucational Research.” In: Computers in Human Behavior 81 (December 2017),
pages 340–349. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2017.12.037.
[55]
Di Yuan et al. “Self-Supervised Deep Correlation Tracking.” In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Image Processing 30 (2021). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, pages 976–985. issn: 1941-0042. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2020.
3037518.
[56]
Jianhua Zhang et al. “Emotion Recognition Using Multi-Modal Data and Ma-
chine Learning Techniques: A Tutorial and Review.” In: Information Fusion 59
(July 2020). doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2020.01.011.
[57]
Jianhua Zhang et al. “Emotion recognition using multi-modal data and machine
learning techniques: A tutorial and review.” In: Information Fusion 59 (2020),
pages 103–126. issn: 1566-2535. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.
2020.01.011. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1566253519302532.
[58]
Zhi Zhang, Sheng-hua Zhong, and Yan Liu. “GANSER: A Self-supervised Data
Augmentation Framework for EEG-based n Recognition.” In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Affective Computing (2022). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on
Affective Computing, pages 1–1. issn: 1949-3045. doi: 10.1109/TAFFC.2022.
3170369.
