==PAGE:1==
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised
Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Compute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised
Learning
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Anders Brammer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5.5 months at the Section for Cognitive Systems, DTU
Compute, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning and
deep learning.
Anders Brammer ­ s181479
Signature
Date
ii
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Sight is one of the most important senses of humans. The processing of visual information
in the visual cortex is widely described in different literature, yet decoding fMRI­derived
brain activity into tangible information about the visual experience of a subject has proved
to be an immensely difficult task.
Initial attempts at visual decoding demonstrated the feasibility of decoding basic features
from visual cortex activity. The rapid development of parallel GPU computing and ac­
cessible labeled datasets has led the way in the application of powerful deep learning
frameworks to visual decoding. New waves of models have the capability to generate
semantically accurate reconstructions of a subject’s visual experiences solely from their
visual cortex’s brain activity.
The capability to reconstruct an individual’s visual experiences holds considerable scien­
tific and practical implications. It offers the potential to gain deeper insights into mecha­
nisms related to dreaming and attention in the realm of vision. Moreover, from a clinical
standpoint, such technology could serve as a means for patients to establish commu­
nication with their external environment. Looking forward, when integrated with futuristic
technologies, it has the potential to manifest in novel and unforeseen applications through
Brain­Computer Interfaces.
Among these novel models is MindVis, which employs a masked autoencoder with a
vision transformer backbone to establish a robust representation of the visual experience
linked to observing images. This encoder conditions a latent diffusion model, with the goal
of generating images that closely resemble the observed images.
MindVis, in its current form, requires subject­specific finetuning to generate images with
accurate semantic value. The objective of this thesis is to extend the applicability of Mind­
Vis to multiple subjects. To realize this objective, contrastive learning is integrated to
effectively separate subject­related information from other image­related information, fa­
cilitating the efficient representation of brain activity. This disentanglement is introduced
within the context of the masked autoencoder and subsequently examined for its efficacy
in the generation process.
This thesis uncovers intriguing findings that highlight the potential of contrastive learning
to enhance subject generalizability in MindVis. Notably, these outcomes are observed in
both the masked autoencoder and the generative model contexts. It is important to ac­
knowledge, however, that the results are accompanied by a notable degree of uncertainty.
As a consequence, this thesis does not offer a definitive basis for drawing conclusions.
Instead, it provides valuable insights that warrant further investigation and consideration.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Anders Brammer, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Morten Mørup, Professor, Section for Cognitive Systems, Department of Applied Math­
ematics and Computer Science
Supervisor
Anders Stevnhoved Olsen, PhD Student, Section for Cognitive Systems, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Supervisor
I wish to express my sincere appreciation to my supervisors, Morten Mørup and Anders
Stevnhoved Olsen, from the Section for Cognitive Systems, Department of Applied Math­
ematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark. Their unwaver­
ing guidance, wholehearted support, and valuable insights throughout the entirety of this
project have been truly invaluable. I am deeply grateful for their expertise and the dedi­
cated time they have devoted to assisting me in this endeavor. Their exceptional support
during personal challenges that affected my thesis progress is particularly noteworthy.
I would also like to thank Anders Vestergaard Nørskov for his endless willingness to be
my sparring partner and help with implementation issues when needed.
Furthermore, I would like to extend my thanks to DTU Compute, the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, for providing the essential computational resources
that were crucial for the successful completion of this project.
iv
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Generative model
β1, ..., βT Variance schedule for diffusion
T
Number of diffusion steps
˜yt
Image in latent space with t diffusion steps
ˆy
Reconstructed image
ϵθ
Denoising function
τθ
fMRI encoder with linear projection
M
Tunable parameter
dtau
The latent dimension of the fMRI encoder
ϕ
Intermediate values of the UNet of the denoiser
σθ
Time step embedding
dt
Time embedding dimension
General Notation
X
fMRI data space
x
fMRI data point
Xa
Data space of to a specific group a
y
Image
Masked Autoencoder
Eθ
Encoder
Dθ
Decoder
Z
Latent space
ˆz
Final latent representation
zl
Intermediate latent representation
zd
l
Intermediate latent representation in decoder space
ˆx
Reconstruction
xp
Patch of data point
P
Number of patches
xe
initial embedding of the fMRI scans
de
Embedding dimension
E
Embedder
Epos
Position embedding
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
z0
Embedding + positional encoding
Lr
Reconstruction loss
Lc
Contrastive loss
Q
Query in attention
K
Key in attention
V
Value in attention
W Q
Linear projection weights for the queries
W K
Linear projection weights for the keys
W V
Linear projection weights for the values
W O
Linear projection weights for the output in multihead attention
MHA Multihead attention
MLP Multilayer perceptron
L
Number of transformer blocks in transformer encoder
Ld
Number of transformer blocks in transformer decoder
xsubject Learnable subject token
xclass
Learnable class token
ˆzsubject Subject latent token
ˆzclass
Class latent token
z+
i
Latent belonging to the same group as zi
z−
i
Latent belonging to a different group than zi
vi
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Data and Pre­processing
5
2.1
Human Connectome Project data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Generic Object Decoding data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Final notes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Representation learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Masked Autoencoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Generative model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Experiments
27
4.1
Masked autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Generative
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Results
31
5.1
Masked autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Generative model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
Issues with datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.3
fMRI data in this setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.4
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Supplementary material
61
A.1 More results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.2 Reconstruction plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.3 TSNE regression plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.4 GOD + HCP small model regression plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.5 Confusion matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.6 LDM more pics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Among the five traditional senses (sight, hearing, touch, smell, and taste), sight is for
many considered the most important sense. Studies show that people would rather live
4.6 years of life in perfect health than 10 years of life with complete sight loss [1]. More
than 50% of the brain is directly or indirectly part of processing visual information [2]. In
EEG, it is easy to see how the signal changes as soon as visual stimuli are restricted
(eyes are closed) [3]. All support the empirical data of sight being a very important sense.
The primary cortical region that receives, integrates, and processes visual information is
called the visual cortex. It is located in the occipital lobe of the primary cerebral cortex
in the posterior region of the brain. It consists of five different areas; V1, V2, V3, V4,
and V5. Visual information arrives from the retinas, through the thalamus and begins its
processing in V1, known as the primary visual cortex. The information is then passed
along each subsequent visual cortex area, each with a more specialized function. The
process is mostly unconscious and can lead to misinterpretations, which is apparent in
various visual illusions [4]. After being processed in the visual cortex, the information is
sent to other regions of the brain to be analyzed and utilized. [5]
Reconstructing a person’s visual experience at any moment could have significant scien­
tific and practical use. For instance, the reconstructions could indicate the extent of the
visual stimuli that are processed in the brain or it might serve to discover an individual’s
attention based on how accurate different parts of the reconstructions would be. As the
neural patterns of imagining, dreaming, and seeing things are very similar [6], it may also
be used as a tool to interrogate people. It’s conceivable that concealing unconscious
imaginative processes, which authorities could exploit, might prove challenging for indi­
viduals if they were able to read your mind. Furthermore, the ability to search through
dreams could significantly enhance our comprehension and potentially validate theories
concerning the reasons and mechanisms behind dreaming [7].
From a clinical perspective, this technology holds the potential to offer assistance to pa­
tients. For instance, for patients who endure severe brain injuries and find themselves in a
vegetative state, this technology could potentially serve as a means for them to establish
communication with the external world [8].
With future technologies, it may also build a solid foundation for bridging human and
computer vision through Brain­Computer Interface. For instance, a tangible idea is the
integration with virtual reality which may improve the user experience [9].
Visual decoding of brain activity is a challenging and complicated process [10]. Early
studies from the beginning of the 21st century showed that it is possible to decode ori­
entation [11, 12], position [13] and object categories [14, 15] from activity in the visual
cortex collected using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). These studies re­
lied on simple image stimuli such as gratings or fixed categories. Later, Gallant tried to
generalize this idea to more complicated natural images [10, 16].
After these studies, factors such as the empowerment of parallel GPU computing, and
the accessibility of large, high­quality labeled datasets have opened new doors to utilize
highly potential deep learning frameworks in computer vision tasks [17]. Still, acquiring
sufficient labeled pairs of images and corresponding fMRI responses to span the space
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
1
==PAGE:12==
of natural images requires enormous resources and is thus not widely available. Conse­
quently, the issue requires models with a high degree of data efficiency such that they can
accommodate the scarcity of labeled data [18]. An alternative to label­dependent learn­
ing, such as supervised learning, is self­supervised learning (SSL) which leverages input
data itself as supervision [19]. This paradigm has shown promising results and many
state­of­the­art models utilize it ­ including brain decoding models.
Utilizing the new technological developments, visual decoding studies have shown great
promise in making decodings that are semantically similar to the visual experience. One
example is a model that utilizes an encoder network (image to fMRI) and a decoder net­
work (fMRI to image) allowing training directly on unlabeled images and fMRIs [18]. Im­
ages are encoded using the encoder network and then reconstructed using the decoder
network where a pixel­wise reconstruction loss is driving the training. Similarly, the fMRI is
”decoded” using the decoder network and then reconstructed using the encoder network.
This approach allows for self­supervised learning using un­paired images and fMRI data.
However, relying mainly on a reconstruction loss leads to noisy decodings that look like
an extremely pixelated version of the actual stimuli [18, 20].
Another approach was taken in [21] where an Instance­Condition Generative Adversarial
Network pretrained for natural image generation was used to generate images from latent
variables extracted from the fMRI. This resulted in much more clean images but does
have the drawback that it may generate images that are semantically very different from
the stimuli.
Finally, the model that this thesis will have as a foundation is called MinD­Vis (Later re­
ferred to as MindVis): Sparse Masked Brain Modeling with Double­Condition Latent Dif­
fusion Model for Human Vision Decoding [22]. In this study, a masked autoencoder for
latent variable extraction was introduced and used with a pretrained diffusion model for
generating images. This state­of­the­art model outperformed the previous best models
and is able to generate images with plausible details, accurate semantics, and image fea­
tures. Examples of this are shown in Figure 1.1. The model will be further introduced
later.
Figure 1.1: Example of visual stimuli and corresponding generated images. Figure is
taken from [22].
Though these models have been shown to generate images that are semantically similar
to the corresponding stimuli, they do not generalizable well to multiple subjects. That is,
2
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:13==
they can only generate images that have any semantic value for one specific subject.
This limits the models for real­life use, as it would require that the model be finetuned to
specific subjects all the time.
In recent years, deep metric learning has gained much popularity. The goal of this type
of learning is to learn an embedding representation of some data that preserves a small
distance between similar data points and a larger distance between dissimilar data points
[23]. Contrastive learning is a type of metric learning that is used in many self­supervised
representation learning tasks but is also applicable in a fully­supervised setting [24]. Clus­
ters of data points belonging to the same class are pulled together while simultaneously
pushing apart data points belonging to different classes.
By adapting MindVis with contrastive learning, the idea is that the representation learning
can be guided to more explicitly represent features of interest in the learned representation
and ideally help generalize the model to accommodate the issue of dealing with multiple
subjects.
1.1
Research questions
The goal of this thesis is to apply and train different variations of MindVis to generalize
across subjects. This is done by steering the subject variability and image variability
into specific disentangled representations. Specifically, this is done using variations of
contrastive learning in the pretext task.
More specifically this purpose can be split into the following research questions:
1) How well do the learned representations of the data represent the images, their classes,
and the subjects? Can contrastive learning help make these representations even more
explicit?
The initial research question will be explored through the training of various masked au­
toencoder models based on MindVis. A comparative analysis will be conducted between
these models and the original MindVis model. Variations involving contrastive learning
and adjustments will be applied to the original MindVis model, aiming to enhance the qual­
ity of the representations. The assessment and comparison of these models will involve
tasks such as subject classification, image ID classification, and image class classifica­
tion.
2) Is it possible to generalize the models by explicitly representing the subjects?
The subsequent research question aims to explore whether models explicitly trained to
represent subjects exhibit improved generalization capabilities. In essence, the investiga­
tion searches into whether a model designed with an explicit subject representation can
also generate representations of image classes and IDs free of subject information. This
assessment involves examining whether it’s possible to enhance accuracy in image class
and ID predictions while observing a decline in subject­related accuracy within the latent
representation not explicitly designed for subject learning.
3) Can the explicit representation of subjects translate into subject generalization in the
generative model as well?
The final research question will be explored through the extended training of the gen­
erative model. This will involve utilizing the previously trained masked autoencoder as
a starting point for initializing the fMRI encoder. The study will include a comparison
between the MindVis pretrained model and models trained using contrastive learning,
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
3
==PAGE:14==
wherein the explicitly defined subject representation is excluded in the generative task.
The assessment of these models will revolve around their capacity to accurately classify
image classes of the generated images.
Guided by these research questions, this thesis aims to comprehensively investigate the
feasibility of extending MindVis to generalize to multiple subjects. Firstly, an introduction
to the data under consideration is provided, followed by an overview of the methodolo­
gies. Subsequently, the experimental configuration and results are presented. Lastly, a
comprehensive discussion, including an in­depth analysis of the results, the limitations of
the model and the data, and addressing various related aspects.
4
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:15==
2
Data and Pre­processing
The experiments in this thesis were conducted on two datasets: Human Connectome
Project (HCP) [25] and Generic Object Decoding Dataset (GOD) [26]. HCP is comprised
of resting­state fMRI (rfMRI) data and is only used in the pretext task while GOD has fMRI­
image pairs and is considered the main data set. For all purposes, the data is processed
to follow the procedures of MindVis.
2.1
Human Connectome Project data
The HCP dataset is comprised of resting­state fMRI time­series from 1091 healthy young
adults. Each subject was scanned 4 times in a 15­minute resting­state setting with 2
scans in L/R phase encoding direction and two in R/L phase encoding direction. For the
purpose of this thesis, only scans in L/R phase encoding direction were considered. The
HCP is made up of 91282 grayordinates [25]. For the task at hand, only areas of the visual
cortex are considered, more specifically the areas; {V1, V2, V3, V4} defined in the HCP
space [27]. The visual areas of this parcellation are shown in Figure 2.1 and constitute
4192 voxels. Some examples of the data averaged over 12­time frames are shown in
Figure 2.2. This corresponds to the data used in [22].
Figure 2.1: Glasser [27] parcellation of visual cortex; {V1, V2, V3, V4}.
2.1.1
Pre­processing
The HCP data was pre­processed using the minimal pre­processing pipeline [28]. For
the anatomical data, this includes 1) distortion correction, 2) surface construction, and 3)
alignment to a standard space. Similarly, the functional data pre­processing included 1)
distortion correction, 2) motion correction, 3) alignment to standard space, and 4) surface
projection.
The strucutal pre­processing consists of three pipelines. The first, PreFreeSurfer pro­
duces an undistorted ”native” structural volume space for each subject, aligns the T1w
and T2w images and registers the native structural volume to the Montreal Neurologi­
cal Institute and Hospital (MNI) standard space. The subsequent pipeline, FreeSurfer,
aims to segment the volume into predefined structures, reconstruct white and pial cortical
surfaces, and perform a standard folding­based surface registration. The final pipeline,
PostFreeSurfer, applies surface registration and downsamples the registered surfaces.
After the structural pre­processing, functional pre­processing can be done.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Resting state fMRI data from three different subjects. The data is averaged
over roughly 8 seconds corresponding to 12 images. The upper graphs show the activa­
tion plotted in the order {lV1, rV1, lV2, rV2, lV3, rV3, lV4, rV4} where l and r represent the
left and right hemispheres. The lower graphs show activation maps of the brain illustrated
in a standard brain.
The functional pre­processing is, like the structural pre­processing, made up of multiple
pipelines. The first pipeline, named fMRIVolume, includes steps where spatial distortions
are removed, volumes are realigned to compensate for subject motion, the functional
data is registered to the processed structural data, and normalized using a global mean.
In the second pipeline, named fMRISurface, the time series are brought into the CIFTI
grayordinates standard space. This is a standard set such that each subject’s functional
images are projected into a 91282­dimensional space with spatial correspondence. These
data are also smoothed. Further, the ICA­FIX [29] was used for final denoising. Finally,
the data was normalized per voxel for each unique scan.
2.2
Generic Object Decoding data
The main data set, GOD, is used for both the pretext task and the downstream task.
2.2.1
Experimental setup
The study consists of data from five healthy adults (one female and four males between
23 and 38 years old).
Two types of experiments were conducted; an image presentation experiment and an im­
agery experiment. In this thesis, we will only focus on the image presentation experiment.
For the image presentation experiment, there were two distinct sessions; training image
sessions and test image sessions, with 24 and 35 separate runs respectively. Each run
contained 55 stimulus blocks where an image was flashed at 2 Hz for 9 seconds. The
images were from the online image database ImageNet [30] which consists of annotated
natural images. Between every run, subjects had time to rest. For each block, an image
was presented at the center of a display with a central fixation spot. The image sessions
were split into a training session, with a total of 1200 images from 150 object categories
(8 images per category) which were presented once each, and a test session with a total
of 50 images from 50 object categories (1 image per category) which were presented 35
times each. This was done to increase the signal­to­noise­ratio (SNR) in the test set.
6
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Three examples of fMRI­image pairs. Notice that it is highly noticeable that
the HCP data and the GOD data are different when inspecting the activation plots. There
are multiple factors affecting this such as the data being from different modalities, the
sequence order being different, and pre­processing steps varying.
2.2.2
Defining brain areas
As with the HCP data only visual brain regions were considered, though in addition to
{V1, V2, V3, V4}, also the lateral occipital complex (LOC), fusiform face area (FFA), and
parahippocampal place area (PPA) were included. The visual areas (V1­V4) were found
using a retinotopy experiment [31, 32] and the acquired data were used to delineate bor­
ders between each visual cortical area for each individual subject. To further identify the
LOC, FFA and PPA for each individual subject, functional localizer experiments were per­
formed [33, 34, 35]. Consequently, there is no projection into a normal space meaning
that the dimensionality of the scans for each subject differs. The data thus constitutes
4133 ­ 4643 voxels. The individual differences in the primary visual cortex are illustrated
in Figure 2.4.
2.2.3
MRI acquisition
The image presentation fMRI data were collected using 3.0­Tesla Siements MAGNETOM
Trio A Time scanners. An interleaved T2*­weighted gradient­EPI (echo­planar imaging)
scan was performed to acquire functional images covering the entire brain. A repetition
time (TR) of 3s, and an echo time (TE) of 0.03s were used and the voxel size was 3 × 3 ×
3mm3.
2.2.4
Pre­processing
The first 9 seconds of scans of each run were discarded to allow for the MRI scanner
to stabilize. The scans were motion­corrected using SPM5. Afterward, the data were
coregistered to a within­session high­resolution anatomical image and interpolated by
3 × 3 × 3 mm3 voxels. Within­run linear trends were removed, and voxel amplitudes were
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.4: The subjects from the GOD dataset had individual differences in the regions
responding to visual stimuli. Here, the red color indicates the primary visual cortex in the
left hemisphere and correspondingly the orange shows the right hemisphere. The figure
is directly taken from [22].
normalized relative to the mean amplitude with each run. To compensate for haemody­
namic delays, the data were shifted 3s and then averaged for each 9s stimulus block.
Important to note for the subjects in the GOD dataset is the difference in signal­to­noise­
ratio (SNR). The highest SNR is ≈1.63 times higher than the lowest, though with a high
standard deviation meaning that they are not significantly different from a statistical point
of view. The SNR was calculated over the temporal dimension of the data, such that the
temporal mean is divided by its standard deviation over time. The SNRs for the subjects
are shown in Table 2.1.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
SNR
0.064±0.07
0.061±0.05
0.10±0.11
0.092±0.01
0.065±0.06
Table 2.1: Differences in voxel­wise mean SNR for each subject obtained from [26].
2.3
Final notes
2.3.1
Extra pre­processing
To address variances in the voxel resolution the data is padded in a wrap­around manner.
Specifically, for samples possessing fewer voxels, the end of the sample is padded with
initial voxels from the same scan. This adjustment aligns with the sample with the highest
voxel resolution. As the GOD data were averaged over the time that the subjects looked at
the visual stimuli, HCP data is similarly averaged over 8.64 seconds (i.e. 12 time frames)
to make the data resemble each other. Furthermore, the fMRI was normalized using the
mean and standard deviation from the training set.
2.3.2
Split of GOD data
The GOD dataset only includes one data point for each class for each subject in the
test set. That is, there are 50 fMRI­image pairs per subject in the test set spanning 50
different classes. Consequently, evaluating the models only on this data would mean that
in the image class accuracy, the classifiers should be able to distinguish between only
5 data points all belonging to different subjects, making this equivalent to the image ID
classification.
To address this limitation, an additional division of the dataset was executed. Specifically,
nine categories were randomly selected, namely: 1) Wine Bottle, 2) Wooden Spoon, 3)
Cauliflower, 4) Mushroom, 5) Granny Smith, 6) Strawberry, 7) Orange, 8) Ballplayer, and
8
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:19==
9) Ear. This subdivision was utilized for training and evaluating the masked autoencoder
of the model. The original train­test set was used to train and evaluate the latent diffusion
model
2.3.3
Comments
Altogether, as outlined in the MindVis paper [22], the total dataset sums up to 136,000 pure
fMRI scans including 6000 fMRI­image pairs. However, it is worth noting that, as specified
in the supplementary material [22], the utilization of 2000 × 15 min 3T resting state fMRI
runs from 1091 subjects would actually account for 259,228 pure fMRI scans including
6000 fMRI­image pairs. The number 130,000 would roughly correspond to having used
one 15­minute scan for each subject (some subjects have multiple 15­minute scans).
Thus, it’s inferred that this scenario is likely the case.
Another noteworthy point is that, despite the favorable outcomes associated with wrap­
around padding, it’s important to note that reducing the data to the smallest resolution
yielded suboptimal results, as indicated in the MindVis paper [22]. An initial examination
of the pretrained model reveals that its configuration was exclusively trained on instances
with a resolution of 4192 voxels, which corresponds to the sample with the lowest resolu­
tion. This observation implies that a cutting approach was employed during the model’s
training. While the code can be readily adjusted for higher resolutions, there remains
uncertainty about which approach was used.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
The objective of this thesis is to adapt the MindVis model to generalize to multiple subjects.
Through guidance in the training, the idea is that subject variability can be isolated in a
latent space so that functional brain activity related to specific images can be represented
independently from the specific subject.
Variability in the human brain, both across and within individuals, is a major challenge
when working with functional brain data. For example, differences in brain anatomy and
function contribute to inter­subject variability. In relation to the intra­subject variability
of neural processing, the non­stationarity of brain activity and other factors are present.
Thus, the issue of representing information across brains is very complex. [36]
In this thesis, different types of learning will be distinguished, namely:
• Supervised learning: A framework where the learning of a model is guided by man­
ually annotated labels.
• Unsupervised learning: A framework where the learning of a model is done without
any labels.
• Self­supervised learning: A framework where the learning of a model is guided by
labels that are known from itself. This could for example be through data augmen­
tation or masking part of the original data to recover it. [19]
This section will give an introduction to various methods used in this thesis. This in­
cludes representation learning, transformer models, masked autoencoders, and the dif­
fusion model.
3.1
Representation learning
Simple machine learning models are often heavily dependent on the representation of the
data they are provided. Particularly for complex data such as fMRI, effective preprocess­
ing is often necessary to extract any meaningful information relevant to the intended task.
The concept of representation learning aims to precisely learn a relevant representation
of the data. Learned representations can also often make adaptation to new tasks easier.
[37]
Representations can thus be convenient to express many general priors about the data
that would not be apparent in the raw data. Such general­purpose priors can for ex­
ample be 1) Smoothness, 2) Multiple explanatory factors, 3) A hierarchical organization
of explanatory factors, 4) Semi­supervised Learning, 5) Shared factors across tasks, 6)
Manifolds, 7) Natural clustering, 8) Temporal and spatial coherence, and 10) Sparsity [38].
One of the most commonly applied examples of representation learning is the autoen­
coder. An autoencoder [39] is defined by an encoder which is denoted as Eθ : X →Z
and a decoder denoted as Dθ : Z →X where X is the space of decoded representations
and Z is the space of encoded representations often referred to as the latent space. For
any x ∈X we have z = Eθ(x) and similarly ˆx = Dθ(z). The architecture is trained using
the reconstruction loss between the input data, x and the reconstruction ˆx; Lr(x, ˆx).
In the autoencoder framework of representation learning, there is no clear objective, mak­
ing it difficult to train. The autoencoder essentially assimilates a new, abstract version of
the raw data, aiming to encapsulate the maximum feasible information.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
11
==PAGE:22==
Given the aim to disentangle specific factors of variation, it remains valuable to impart
a certain degree of guidance to representation learning, and this guidance will become
evident in the modeling process.
3.2
Transformers
Deep learning also facilitates the construction of intricate concepts through the combina­
tion of simpler ones, as well as the transformation of complex structures and correlations
into more straightforward features. An illustration of this is the utilization of neural net­
works as both encoder and decoder in the implementation of an autoencoder [37]. One
such neural network can be based on transformers.
Transformers [40] were first introduced to address computational challenges faced by
earlier state­of­the­art approaches like recurrent neural networks, long short­term mem­
ory (LSTM) [41], and gated recurrent neural networks [42]. The issue with these models
was that they typically factor computation along the symbol positions of the sequences,
such that positions and computation steps are aligned precluding parallelization within
training samples [40]. The introduction of the Transformer model significantly enhances
parallelization capabilities, thereby greatly enhancing the computational efficiency of mod­
eling extended sequences. Initially, this concept found its application in natural language
processing (NLP).
Inspired by the scaling successes in NLP, the idea was adapted to computer vision prob­
lems in the form of the Vision Transformer (ViT) [43]. The architecture of the ViT closely
follows that of the original Transformer. The majority of modifications happen during the
preliminary pre­encoder processing stages, involving the arrangement of patches and
embeddings to mirror the word tokens employed in the original Transformer architecture.
These steps will be introduced in the description of the masked autoencoder later.
A Transformer encoder consists of Transformer blocks [43]. A block consists of alternating
layers of multiheaded self­attention and MLP blocks. Layernorm is applied before every
block and residual connections after every block. These blocks are adapted from the
original Transformer [40]. An overview of a Transformer block is shown in Figure 3.1.
One of the most essential units in the Transformer block is the attention function. It can
be described as mapping a query and a set of key­value pairs to an output. In ViT the
self­attention mechanism is used which means that they all relate to the image patches
described earlier. By doing this it is possible to capture long­range dependencies and
contextual information.
The specific attention function used in ViT is the Scaled Dot­Product Attention. The un­
masked patches from a specific scan are packed together into matrices Q, K, and V and
the attention is computed by:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√de

V
(3.1)
where de is the embedding dimension. The scaling by de works to regularize the dot
products of QKT such that it does not grow too large in magnitude where the softmax
function has very small gradients. [40]
Instead of using a single attention function, Multi­Head Attention (MHA) allows for jointly
attending to information from different representation sub­spaces. Here the queries, keys,
and values are projected to h different sub­spaces that can be attended to each other. The
12
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: The leftmost figure illustrates the computations involved in a Scaled Dot­
Product Attention. The middle figure shows how the Multi­head Attention allows for jointly
attending to information from different representation sub­spaces. Finally, the rightmost
figure shows how an entire Transformer is built. The illustration is inspired by the original
transformer paper [40].
outputs of the different attentions can then be averaged to get back to the original space,
ready for the residual connections.
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, ..., headh)W O
(3.2)
where headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(3.3)
where the linear projection weights are W Q
i , W K
i , W V
i
∈Rde×de and W O ∈Rhde×de.
The transformer blocks and attention mechanisms are illustrated in Figure 3.1.
To the output from the attention functions and a residual connection, Layernorm is applied
and subsequently inputted into a Multilayer perceptron (MLP) block. The block contains
two layers with de hidden units and GELU non­linearities.
3.3
Masked Autoencoder
With increased computational capacity and the possibility to develop huge architectures,
models today can easily overfit large image datasets [30, 44].
Self­supervised pre­training has successfully addressed this issue in natural language
processing (NLP). For example autoregressive language modeling in GPT [45, 46, 47] has
revolutionized language models. Earlier masked autoencoding in BERT [48] also proved
successful. Conceptually this is straightforward: a portion of the data is concealed, and
the model learns to predict this hidden part based on the retained information.
Promising results have also been shown for masked autoencoding in computer vision
problems [44]. Unlike in NLP, where a relatively low mask ratio (25%) is commonly applied
[48], computer vision tasks have displayed promising results with a notably high masking
ratio (75%) [44].
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
13
==PAGE:24==
Within the context of MindVis and the scope of this project, a masked autoencoder featur­
ing a ViT backbone is employed to derive latent representations of fMRI data within the
visual cortex, subsequently utilized for image decoding. In the initial phases, this model
undergoes independent training, excluding the image decoder. A pretrained version of
this model serves as the baseline model in the forthcoming sections.
With the autoencoder structure introduced in mind, the baseline model has the following
steps:
1. Patching of input data
2. Embedding
3. Positional encoding
4. Masking
5. Transformer encoder
6. Projection to decoding latents
7. Transformer decoder
8. Projection to input space
The first three steps are illustrated in Figure 3.2 and the remaining steps in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.2: The figure shows the pre­encoder steps of the masked autoencoder. First, the
already flattened fMRI is divided into regular non­overlapping patches. Next a large por­
tion of these are masked. This resembles the tokenization as in the original Transformer
model [40].
14
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:25==
3.3.1
Patching and embedding
The flattened fMRI data is partitioned into regular non­overlapping patches [44], repre­
sented as xp ∈RP×de, where P signifies the count of patches and de represents the em­
bedding dimension. These patches then undergo embedding through a linear projection.
In terms of implementation, this process is achieved using a 1D convolution with a stride
equal to the patch size and output channels equivalent to the embedding dimension. The
baseline patch size stands at 16, implying P ∈[250, 300] based on the dataset, and the
baseline embedding dimension is set at de = 1024. Denoted as E, the embedder yields
the output xpE ∈RP×de, representing the embedding of the fMRI scans. Contrasted
with the approach in other masked autoencoders for computer vision tasks [44], where
they employ an embedding­to­patch ratio of 1, MindVis employs a significantly larger ratio
(1024/16 = 64). This decision is rooted in the rationale that it amplifies the information
capacity of the representation, aligned with the sparse coding of information within the
brain [49].
3.3.2
Positional encoding
Functional brain activity exhibits a notable correlation rooted in positional dependencies
[50], although this aspect isn’t directly integrated into the model. In a manner akin to
the initial Transformer model employed in NLP [40], the Vision Transformer (ViT) [43,
44] frequently incorporates a positional encoding for images. A sine­cosine positional
encoding [40] is introduced to both the inputs of the encoder and decoder stages;
PEpos,i = sin(pos/10000i/dmodel)
PEpos,i+dmodel/2 = sin(pos/10000i/dmodel)
where pos is the position relative to the other patches and i is the embedding dimension.
This allows the model to learn to attend by the relative positions.
3.3.3
Masking
The self­supervised aspect of the model involves the masking of a certain proportion of
patches and subsequently reconstructing them. In this process, random patches are
drawn without repetition based on a uniform distribution.
For the sake of accommo­
dating later patch contrastive learning, this is executed in such a manner that, within a
batch, identical positional samples are masked. A substantial masking ratio of 75% is
employed, effectively rendering the task resistant to simple resolution through interpo­
lation from neighboring patches. Several instances of masking are visually depicted in
Figure 3.3.
Together, these steps constitute the pre­encoder processing.
Figure 3.2 summarises
these steps with the patching implicitly including the embedding step.
3.3.4
Encoder
The final Transformer encoder consists of a series of L layers comprising sequential
Transformer blocks. The progression from the raw data to the latent representation is
structured as follows:
z0 = [xlearnable; x1
pE; x2
pE; ..., xN
p E] + Epos
(3.4)
z′
l = MHA(LN(zl−1)) + zl−1,
l = 1, ..., L
(3.5)
zl = MLP(LN(z′
l)) + z′
l,
l = 1, ..., L
(3.6)
ˆz = LN(zL)
(3.7)
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: A visualization of 75% masking of fMRI scans.
where xlearnable is an extra learnable token that is usually used for classification tasks.
There may be multiple learnable tokens depending on the model. The output ˆz is the
latent representation that will be used for downstream tasks. [43]
3.3.5
Decoder
Following the encoding phase, a linear projection is applied to ˆz to establish an asym­
metric architecture. This entails a comparatively downsized decoder, characterized by
a reduced number of Transformer blocks (Ld < L) and a smaller decoder embedding
dimension (dd < de). Given that a substantial proportion of patches underwent mask­
ing during encoding, corresponding mask tokens are reintegrated at their initial positions
prior to masking. This strategy enables the incorporation of positional encoding into the
decoder embeddings, akin to its implementation in the encoder embeddings.
Consequently, the design of the decoder closely parallels that of the encoder, culminating
in a linear projection that restores the transition from the embedding space to the input
space:
zd
0 = Linear(ˆz)
(3.8)
zd′
ld = MHA(LN(zd
ld)) + zd
ld,
l = 1, ..., Ld
(3.9)
zd
ld = MLP(LN(zd′
ld)) + zd′
ld,
l = 1, ..., Ld
(3.10)
ˆx = Linear(zd
Ld)
(3.11)
3.3.6
Loss
Given a datapoint xi ∈X where X is the dataset then we have the reconstruction:
ˆx = Dθ(Eθ(x))
then the reconstruction loss between the datapoint and the reconstruction, Lr(x, ˆx) by:
Lr(xi) = ||xi −ˆxi||2
2
16
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:27==
Considering all these steps, the comprehensive depiction of the final model is encapsu­
lated in Figure 3.4 supported by the pre­encoder steps depicted in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.4: The figure initiates from the bottom left corner, illustrating the comprehensive
sequence of the masked autoencoder’s workflow. Initially, unmasked patches undergo
embedding via a linear projection. Following this, learnable embeddings are introduced
into the embedded patches, potentially trained to capture subject or class­related infor­
mation. Subsequently, positional encoding is integrated to enable the model to account
for positional relationships. The positional­encoded embeddings then undergo encoding
through a ViT encoder, resulting in a latent representation primed for downstream tasks.
Before entering the decoding phase, the latent representations are projected into the de­
coder space through a linear projection. At the positions of the masked patches, mask
tokens are inserted, accompanied by the addition of positional encoding. The latent repre­
sentation within the decoder is then decoded, culminating in the application of a final linear
prediction projection. Ultimately, as part of the model training process, the reconstruction
loss between the generated reconstructions and the initial patches is computed.
3.3.7
Pretrained MindVis model
In the ViT paper [43], it is stated that Transformers lack some of the inductive biases
inherent to CNNs, such as translation equivariance and locality. Consequently, empiric
experiments show that they do not generalize well when trained on insufficient amounts
of data. That means that large­scale training is required.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
17
==PAGE:28==
As the computing resources for this project are limited, a pre­trained MindVis model has
to be used in many of the experiments. The model­specific hyperparameters of the pre­
trained model are shown in Table 3.1.
parameter
value
parameter
value
patch size
16
encoder heads
16
mask ratio
0.75
decoder depth
8
embedding dim
1024
decoder heads
16
encoder depth
24
decoder embed dim
512
Table 3.1: The table shows the hyperparameters used in the pretrained MindVis model.
3.3.8
Alterations to the Masked Autoencoder
To guide the self­supervised representation learning to disentangle specific factors of vari­
ation some alterations are made to the masked autoencoder.
Split latents
As introduced in Equation 3.4, a learnable token is inserted before the patch tokens. Typ­
ically, this token serves as a classification identifier [40, 43], yet in MindVis, it is entirely
disregarded for the generation task. Given the thesis’ core objective of achieving gener­
alization across subjects, diverse divisions of the latent space are explored to implicitly
differentiate various information components.
The approach of partitioning the latent space into subject and task latent spaces can be
realized by employing a shared encoder for all embeddings and subsequently bifurcating
the paths into separate latent spaces [51]. This shared encoder can be readily imple­
mented by incorporating an additional learnable token. In essence, the structure involves
introducing tokens designated for subjects, classes, and individual patches. This arrange­
ment follows an alternating pattern, modifying Equation 3.4 to:
z0 = [xsubject; xclass; x1
pE; x2
pE; ..., xN
p E]
(3.12)
Notice that xsubject remains consistent across all subjects, while xclass remains constant
for each respective class. Consequently, it’s only during the encoding and their interac­
tions with the other embeddings that the latent­specific information is encoded. This leads
to the following relationship:
ˆz = [ˆzsubject; ˆzclass; ˆz1
p; ˆz2
p; ...; ˆzN
p ]
(3.13)
This way it is now possible to explicitly represent multiple variances originating from dif­
ferent sources.
Contrastive loss
Merely dividing the latent spaces isn’t sufficient to separate the information effectively. A
distinct loss is required to incentivize the information to be represented in thee designated
latent spaces. To accomplish this objective, contrastive loss is utilized.
Let Lc denote the contrastive loss. It is applied to the similarity between two latents, ˆza
and ˆzb where a is a set of latents belonging to the same group of input data, Xa, and b is
again a set of latents belonging to a group of input data, Xb. In this thesis, the groups we
are working with are subjects, image classes, and image IDs.
The N­pair loss [23], an extension of the triplet­loss [52], aims to differentiate a posi­
tive sample from multiple negative samples. Given a set of (n + 1) samples denoted
18
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:29==
as {ˆz; ˆz+, ˆz−
1 , ..., ˆzn−1−}, where ˆz+ represents a positive sample belonging to the same
sample group as ˆz, and all the negative pairs {ˆz−
1 , ..., ˆzn−1−} originate from a different
sample group than ˆz, the N­pair loss is defined as follows:
LNpair(ˆz) = −log
exp (sim(ˆz, ˆz+))
exp (sim(ˆz, ˆz+)) + Pn−1
k
exp (sim(ˆz, ˆz−
k=1))
(3.14)
where sim(ˆz, ˆz+) is a similarity function, such as the cosine similarity, defined as:
simcosine(a, b) =
a · b
||a||||b||
(3.15)
where || · || is the euclidian distance.
To enhance computational efficiency and maximize batch utilization, the multi­class N­
pair loss [23] has been introduced. This variant of the loss leverages positive samples
associated with one sample to serve as negative samples for another sample from a
distinct group. In other words, for a given ˆzi alongside its corresponding positive sample
ˆz+
i , the set of negative samples is constituted by ˆz+
k |k ̸= i. This formulation gives rise to
the following loss expression:
LNpair(ˆzi) = −log
exp (sim(ˆzi, ˆz+
i ))
exp Pn
k=1 exp (sim(ˆzi, ˆz+
k ))
(3.16)
which is simply the log­softmax function applied to the similarity vector [sim(ˆzi, ˆz1+), ..., sim(ˆzi, ˆzn+)].
This loss requires a particular sampling strategy which will be described later.
As −log (x) is a monotonically decreasing function, the loss will seek to maximize the nu­
merator and minimize the denominator consequently maximizing the similarity, sim(ˆzi, ˆzi+),
and minimizing the similarities sim(ˆzi, ˆzk+) for k ̸= i as is the purpose of the contrastive
loss.
An illustration of how the contrastive loss works is shown in Figure 3.5.
Sampling strategy
The contrastive learning approach described earlier needs a specialized batch construc­
tion process to ensure the presence of sample pairs originating from a specific group,
along with a number of samples from diverse groups, all while maintaining manageable
computational complexity.
The multi­class N­pair batch construction technique [23] involves the sampling of pairs,
guaranteeing the inclusion of two samples from each group. This results in a batch size of
2N, where N signifies the number of distinct groups. Importantly, the positive samples can
be reused as negative samples for other groups, obviating the need to explicitly sample
separate negative instances. This concept is visually illustrated in Figure 3.6.
Attention maps
In the original implementation of the masked autoencoder, the attention mechanism does
not inherently involve masking. This aspect is depicted as optional in Figure 3.1. However,
in the context of the attention between patch representations and the representations of
the learnable tokens, a more specific approach can be adopted. This involves allowing
information to propagate in a single direction, thereby disentangling the attention. Given
that the model’s primary objective revolves around isolating subject variation through con­
trastive learning, there’s no necessity for information from this token to propagate back
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.5: Visualization depicting the underlying concept of the contrastive loss. The
objective is to cluster positive pairs closely together while simultaneously driving negative
pairs farther apart.
to the patches. Allowing such backflow could inadvertently introduce subject­related in­
formation into the patch representations, which conflicts with the objective of the loss
function. This potential issue can possibly be mitigated by applying appropriate attention
maps.
Regularization
Due to certain models being fine­tuned from the pretrained model using only a fraction of
the available data due to computational constraints, there is a risk of potential overfitting.
This concern is exemplified by the fact that the pretrained model consists of over 100
million learnable parameters, while the dataset only encompasses 6000 fMRI­image pairs.
Consequently, despite the high dimensionality involving around 4500 voxels, there exist
merely 27 million data points – a number even smaller than the count of parameters. This
situation makes the model vulnerable to overfitting.
To counteract this overfitting risk, regularization strategies can be employed. One ef­
fective approach involves the partial freezing of components within the models during
training. Furthermore, the addition of transformer encoder blocks (while keeping the rest
of the model frozen) can be considered to bolster regularization efforts. These strategies
collectively contribute to enhancing the model’s generalization capacity and mitigating
overfitting tendencies.
3.4
Generative model
Following the initial phase of representation learning within the masked autoencoder, the
subsequent objective is to decode visual content from this acquired representation. This
is accomplished through the introduction of a generative model. Notably, the realm of
image synthesis has witnessed significant advancements lately, although it comes with
substantial computational demands.
For instance, the emergence of Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [53] in 2014 has
showcased the generation of remarkably lifelike synthetic images. However, GANs have
also encountered limitations in terms of generating data with diverse variability, often at­
tributed to difficulties in scaling towards modeling intricate, multi­modal distributions [53,
54].
20
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.6: The sampling strategy for efficient batch construction that works with the multi­
class N­pair technique.
Alternatively, diffusion models [55], employed in an image synthesis context [56], have
demonstrated success. These models hinge on likelihood­based principles, which solve
some of the mode­collapse issues and training instabilities that GANs may encounter.
Furthermore, by capitalizing on parameter sharing, diffusion models effectively circumvent
the necessity for an excessively extensive parameter count [57].
3.4.1
Diffusion models
A diffusion model [55] operates as a latent variable model represented by the equation
pθ =
R
pθ(y0:T )dy1:T . In this context, y0, ..., yT refer to latent variables sharing the same
dimensionality as the original data, with y0 drawn from the distribution q(y0).
Functionally, the diffusion model employs a forward diffusion process by introducing noise
to y0. Subsequently, the model learns to reverse this process in order to reconstruct the
original data [56]. Specifically, it is a parameterized Markov chain that undergoes training
to generate samples that ultimately align with the data, culminating within a finite number
of time steps. The mechanism is visually depicted in Figure 3.7.
That is, the reverse process:
pθ(y0:T ) = p(yT )
T
Y
t=1
pθ(yt−1|yt),
pθ(yt−1|yt) = N(yt−1; µθ(yt, t), Σθ(yt, t))
(3.17)
is defined as a Markov chain with learned Gaussian transitions starting at p(yT ) = N(yT ; 0, I).
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.7: Markov chain in the diffusion model.
The diffusion process, often referred to as the approximate posterior, q(y1:T |y0), is fixed
to a Markov chain that gradually adds Gaussian noise to the data, according to some
schedule, β1, ..., βT :
q(y1:T |y0) =
T
Y
t=1
q(yt|yt−1),
q(yt|yt−1) = N(yt;
p
1 −βtyt−1, βtI)
(3.18)
where β1, ..., βT can be learnable by reparameterization or set as hyperparameters.
In training, the variational bound on the negative log­likelihood is optimized:
ℓ= E[−log pθ(y0)] ≤E

−log pθ(y0:T )
q(y1:t|y0)

= E

−log p(yT ) −
X
t≥1
log pθ(yt−1|yt)
q(yt|yt−1)


(3.19)
which can be rewritten as:
ℓ= Eq

DKL(q(yT |y0)||pθ(yT ))
|
{z
}
ℓT
+
X
t>1
DKL(q(yt−1|yt, y0)||pθ(yt−1|yt))
|
{z
}
ℓt−1
−log pθ(y0|y1)
|
{z
}
ℓ0


(3.20)
It is worth noting that the forward process allows for sampling yt at an arbitrary timestep
t in closed form, with notation ¯βt = Qt
s=1(1 −βs) as:
q(yt|y0) = N

yt;
q
¯βty0, (1 −¯βt)I

(3.21)
and that when the forward process posterior is conditioned on y0:
q(yt−1|yt, y0) = N(yt−1; ˜µ(yt, y0), ˜βtI),
(3.22)
where
˜µ(xt, y0) =
p¯βt−1βt
1 −¯βt
y0 +
√1 −βt(1 −¯βt−1)
1 −¯βt
and
˜βt = 1 −¯βt−1
1 −¯βt
βt (3.23)
This formulation results in all KL divergences in Equation 3.20 being comparisons between
Gaussian distributions, allowing for their calculation through closed­form expressions [56].
It’s important to note that the choice of the prior, pθ(yT ), is not strictly limited to a standard
normal distribution. Different choices for the prior could lead to varying outcomes, but for
the context of this project, the assumptions specified here are maintained.
22
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:33==
Following [56], if we set Σθ(yt, t)) = σ2
t I to untrained time dependent constants such that
pθ(yt−1|yt) = N(yt−1; µθ(yt, t), σ2
t I), we can write:
ℓt−1 = Eq
 1
2σ2
t
||˜µt(yt, y0) −µθ(yt, t)||2

+ C
(3.24)
Further reparameterizing Equation 3.21 with yt(y0, ϵ) =
p ¯βty0 +
p
1 −¯βϵ with ϵ ∼
N(0, I), applying the forward process posterior from Equation 3.23 and using the pa­
rameterization
µθ(yt, t) = ˜µt
 
yt,
1
p¯βt
(yt −
q
1 −¯βϵθ(yt))
!
=
1
√1 −βt
 
yt −
βt
p
1 −¯βt
ϵθ(yt, t)
!
(3.25)
where ϵθ is a function approximator that predicts ϵ from yt ­ Equation 3.24 can be rewritten
to:
ℓt−1 = Ey0,ϵ
"
β2
t
2σ2
t (1 −βt)(1 −¯βt)
ϵ −ϵθ
q
¯βty0 +
q
1 −¯βtϵ, t

2#
(3.26)
Experimentally, it was found that ignoring the weighting in Equation 3.26 led to better
sample quality to train on [58], and thus the final objective is simplified to:
Lsimple(θ) = Et,y0,ϵ
h
∥ϵ −ϵθ(y0, t)∥2i
(3.27)
where ϵ(y0, t) works as a set of denoising functions that are usually implemented as UNets
[58] and t uniformly sampled from {1, ..., T}.
3.4.2
Latent diffusion model (LDM)
In order to enhance the model’s focus on more important semantic features of the data
and to mitigate computational demands, a diffusion model operating within a latent space
is introduced [59, 60]. This approach enables the model to potentially disregard less
significant image details, while also reducing the computational burden associated with
the high­dimensional image space.
In this context, y signifies an image in the conventional pixel space, and ˜y = E(y) repre­
sents the encoded image in the latent space with a corresponding image reconstruction
ˆy = D(˜y). To facilitate this latent space transformation, a Vector Quantized Variational
Autoencoder (VQ­VAE) [57], pre­trained on Imagenet, is employed for image encoding
and decoding. It is worth noting that the encoder’s parameters are kept frozen throughout
training, and hence no further elaboration on it is provided.
The model is illustrated in Figure 3.8.
3.4.3
Conditioning mechanisms
In image­focused scenarios, it’s a common practice to condition generative models on
e.g. classes. This approach encourages the generative model to produce diverse im­
ages within a given class, without targeting any specific image. However, in our context,
the goal is to attain strong generation consistency not only based on class but also on
the corresponding fMRI scan, which corresponds to a distinct image. This implies that
comparable brain activity should lead to the generation of semantically similar images. To
achieve this level of generation consistency, the integration of cross­attention and time­
step conditioning [61] is employed. This combination ensures that the generative process
maintains a high level of consistency to similar brain activity.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.8: The diagram summarizes the components of the generative model. Initially,
the fMRI data undergoes encoding to attain ˆz, which is then linearly projected with τθ in
preparation for the subsequent denoising phase. Simultaneously, an image y is encoded
into a separate latent space, wherein various levels of forward diffusion introduce noise to
the image for training purposes. With a sufficiently high value of T and its associated noise,
the image adopts an isotropic Gaussian distribution denoted as ˜yT . This forms the basis
for multiple denoising iterations through a UNet denoted as ϵθ. The UNet incorporates
conditioning mechanisms derived from the encoded fMRI at intermediate stages. The
partially denoised and fully denoised outputs are compared against their respective noisy
counterparts, which were sampled from y and used for training.
The reverse diffusion process can be reformulated as q(yt−1|yt, x), allowing the sub­
sequent diffusion step to be dependent on both the previous step and the input fMRI,
denoted as x. This conditional information from x is incorporated through cross­attention
heads within a UNet structure, functioning as the denoiser ϵ(y0, t). The structure of cross­
attention resembles the attention mechanism introduced earlier in Equation 3.1 and illus­
trated in Figure 3.1, but in the cross­attention, we have:
Q = W Q
i ϕi(˜yt),
K = W K
i τθ(x),
V = W V
i τθ(x)
(3.28)
where τθ ∈RM×dτ denotes the fMRI encoder where M is a tunable parameter and a
suitable dimension projector and ϕi(˜yt) denotes intermediate values of the UNet.
The cross­attention conditioning is integrated with time steps conditioning to provide even
stronger guidance for the task. This is simply done by projecting τθ(x) a suitable dimen­
sion dt and adding this to the intermediate layers of the UNet such that ϕi(yt) is also
dependent on a time step embedding σθ(τθ(x)), that is ϕi(yt, σθ(τθ(x))). This is imple­
mented using a 1d convolution (equivalent to a linear projection), a batch normalization,
and a RELU activation function. The conditioning mechanism is also illustrated in Fig­
ure 3.8.
24
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:35==
3.5
Evaluation
3.5.1
Masked autoencoder
The performance of the masked autoencoder was assessed through an ablation study,
which focused on investigating various combinations of loss functions and model sizes.
These different model variants were compared against the pretrained model to determine
if any of the proposed modeling decisions yielded improved results.
In order to assess the models’ capacity to disentangle subject­related variability from
image­related variability, three metrics were utilized: subject classification accuracy, im­
age class classification accuracy, and image ID classification accuracy. This evaluation
process aimed to ascertain whether the model accurately classifies the subject, image
class, and the specific image. These evaluations were conducted separately for the learn­
able latent representations and latent patch representations.
Four different classifiers were employed to assess the extent to which the model disen­
tangled the variability within the data. These classifiers were selected to cover various
aspects of data relationships.
1. Support Vector Machine (SVM) Classifier with Linear Kernel: This classifier was
used to evaluate the model’s ability to linearly separate the data.
2. Random Forest Classifier: Employing a random forest classifier aimed to deter­
mine whether the model effectively represented latents with non­linear relationships.
3. Multi­Layer Perceptron (MLP) Classifier: The inclusion of a simple MLP classi­
fier provided the assessment with maximum flexibility, allowing for the detection of
complex relationships.
4. K­Nearest Neighbors with Cosine Similarity Measure: Utilizing a K­nearest neigh­
bors classifier with a cosine similarity measure directly aligned with the optimization
objectives of the contrastive loss.
By employing this diverse set of classifiers, a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s
disentangling capabilities was achieved, considering both linear and non­linear data rela­
tionships.
The process of calculating classification accuracies involved training one of the aforemen­
tioned classifiers on the designated validation set. To ensure robust results, the validation
set was partitioned using a 5­fold cross­validation strategy. For each fold, the classifier
was trained and evaluated independently for subject accuracy, image class accuracy,
and image ID accuracy. This approach aimed to provide a thorough assessment of the
model’s performance across different classification tasks.
To compare these accuracies with those of the pretrained model, a paired t­test was em­
ployed. This statistical test is tailored to compare the means of the same groups under
two distinct conditions. In this context, if we maintain an identical split of the validation set
for all classifiers, the paired t­test can determine whether the mean difference in accura­
cies significantly deviates from zero. The test statistic is computed using the differences
in accuracies for each fold, denoted as δi = Apretrained
i
−AM
i , where Apretrained
i
repre­
sents the accuracy of the pretrained model and AM
i
represents the accuracy of the model
being evaluated. The mean difference is given by ¯δ = 1
n
Pn
i=0 δi, and the variance of the
differences is computed as σ2
δ =
1
n−1
Pn
i=0(δi −¯δ)2. The t­statistic is then calculated as:
t =
¯δ
σδ/√n
(3.29)
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
25
==PAGE:36==
Here, i corresponds to a fold in the cross­validation split, and n represents the total number
of folds. A p­value is then found by comparing t to a student t distribution. The t­test aims
to assess the statistical significance of the observed differences in accuracies between
the two models.
To visualize what the model learns in the latent space, t­SNE plots [62] were used. This
tool allows for a visual inspection of how the models separate the latents in a low dimen­
sion, namely two dimensions. Unlike accuracy measures, t­SNE plots offer a qualitative
assessment, providing a tangible understanding of the model’s behavior and its represen­
tation of the data.
3.5.2
Generative model
The evaluation of the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) involves both qualitative and quanti­
tative measures. Qualitative assessment is carried out by visually inspecting images and
assessing the quality of image reconstruction pairs.
For quantitative evaluation, a pretrained ResNet classifier, denoted as C(·), trained on
the ImageNet dataset is employed. The ground truth labels are determined by applying
this classifier to the original images. Similarly, the classifier is used to assess the recon­
structed images. N output probabilities, including that of the ground truth, are randomly
selected from the classifier’s predictions. If the probability corresponding to the ground
truth label ranks within the top­N probabilities, it is considered a correct classification. This
approach quantitatively measures the accuracy of the classifier in correctly classifying the
reconstructed images.
26
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:37==
4
Experiments
4.1
Masked autoencoder
4.1.1
Implementation
The masked autoencoder was implemented using PyTorch, based on the code provided
by the MindVis repository (https://github.com/zjc062/mind­vis/) and further adapted from
the Facebook research repository (https://github.com/facebookresearch/mae). The train­
ing process utilized Nvidia A100 GPUs, as well as Nvidia V100 GPUs provided by DTU
Compute at the Technical University of Denmark.
The number of parameters is exponentially dependent on the number of transformer
blocks and the embedding dimension. Consequently, there is a substantial contrast in
the parameter count between the smaller and larger models. Specifically, the pretrained
model and models sharing its design consist of 164 million parameters, while the small
model comprises only 600 thousand parameters. This corresponds to merely 0.37% of
the size of the pretrained model.
4.1.2
Training
The training data for the models differed. In the ablation study, corresponding to models
presented in tables with model names corresponding to those in Table 4.3, the models
were either trained or fine­tuned utilizing exclusively the GOD dataset. If not explicitly indi­
cated otherwise, this approach was followed. Due to the substantial model sizes and the
considerable volume of data, this constraint was deemed necessary. Training a single
epoch on the complete dataset, solely using a reconstruction loss, demanded approx­
imately two hours. Consequently, training a model analogous to the pretrained model
(which underwent 500 epochs of training) would entail an estimated duration of nearly 42
days. However, specific experiments were conducted on both datasets or solely on the
HCP dataset, where the latter was restricted to only 100 scans, approximately equivalent
to 50 subjects.
All models were trained using the Adam optimizer [63] with a learning rate of maximum
2.5 × 10−4 and a 40­epochs warmup schedule. During this warmup phase, the learning
rate progressed linearly from 0 to the maximum value over the 40­epoch period. After
this, the learning rate decayed with half­cycle cosine in the number of epochs trained.
Models were trained for 100, 200, or 500 epochs. If nothing is stated, the models were
trained for 500 epochs otherwise it will be explicitly noted. A batch size of 50 was used
for all autoencoder models.
Individual dataloaders were established for each type of contrastive learning. Conse­
quently, the effective batch size was proportionate to the number of contrastive losses
employed. For instance, when utilizing all three contrastive losses, the effective sample
size would total 150. Importantly, samples were drawn with replacement. This ensured
that the pairing of samples would encompass the entire dataset while preserving a com­
pletely random pairing approach.
As a result, during the course of one epoch, a given sample could be encountered multiple
times within a single dataloader, as well as across various dataloaders. Due to the specific
design of the sampling strategy, it was not guaranteed that the model encountered every
data point during each epoch. However, over a sufficiently high number of epochs, the
data would tend to be sampled an equal number of times, providing a balanced exposure.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
27
==PAGE:38==
Given a batch size of 50, all the losses were around the same scale, and thus models
with multiple losses were trained using equal weighting.
In the experiments presented within the results section, three distinct model sizes were
employed. The ”Normal” sized models, as well as those that underwent finetuning based
on the pretrained model, were configured using the masked autoencoder­specific hyper­
parameters as delineated in Table 3.1. The ”Small” sized models were established using
the masked autoencoder­specific hyperparameters specified in Table 4.1. Finally, the
”Very small” models used the same autoencoder­specific hyperparameters but the em­
bedding and decoder embedding dimensions were reduced to 16. In later chapters, the
models will be referred to as normal model (or normal­sized), small model (or small­sized),
very small model (or very­small­sized), and pretrained initialized model.
parameter
value
parameter
value
patch size
16
encoder heads
2
mask ratio
0.75
decoder depth
2
embedding dim
128
decoder heads
2
encoder depth
4
decoder embed dim
64
Table 4.1: The table shows the hyperparameters used in the ”small” models.
4.1.3
Evaluation
All models undergo evaluation using classification accuracies concerning subject, image
class, and image IDs. Additionally, the reconstruction capability of the model is assessed
through the correlation between the input data, x, and the reconstructions, ˆx.
For the classification of ˆzlearnable, characterized by a dimension of de, various classifiers
were employed. Initially, four distinct classifiers were utilized: K­nearest neighbors (KNN),
a linear support vector classifier (SVC), a random forest (RF) classifier, and a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) classifier.
In the KNN classifier, K = {1, 4, 10, 25, 50} were employed, utilizing a cosine similarity
measure with uniform weighting. The SVC employed a linear kernel with regularization
parameter C = {0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 1, 10}. The RF classifier utilized 50 estimator trees,
imposing no constraints on the depth of the tree. Lastly, the MLP classifier was con­
structed with a single layer having h = 500 hidden units, ReLU as the activation function,
the Adam optimizer, a weight decay of 1×10−4, and a learning rate of 1×10−3. Other hy­
perparameters correspond to the default parameters of their scikit­learn implementation.
Due to the computational requirements, the MLP classifier was not used in the ablation
study. The latent representations of subject ˆzsubject and class ˆzclass were classified using
all classifiers, and the best classification accuracy was chosen. The latent representations
of the image patches ˆzi
p were all concatenated into a single latent of dimension R1×(de·P)
and only a linear SVC with regularization parameter, C = 1, was used to classify these
due to the high dimensionality.
For the latent representations of image patches, ˆzi
p, they were concatenated into a single
latent vector of dimension R1×(de·P). In this scenario, due to the higher dimensionality,
only a linear support vector classifier (SVC) with a regularization parameter of C = 1 was
employed for classification.
The main results will be presented in a table including the definitions shown in Table 4.2.
28
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:39==
Symbol
Definition
Types
M
Model name
See Table 4.3
T
Objective of token encoding
U: No specific objective, S: Subject, C: Class
Cor
Correlation metric
[0,1]
Sacc
Subject accuracy
[0,100]
S: p­val
probability of no effect
[0,1]
Cacc
Image class accuracy
[0,100]
C: p­val
probability of no effect
[0,1]
Iacc
Image ID accuracy
[0,100]
I: p­val
probability of no effect
[0,1]
Cl
Best classifier
L: SVM, R: RF, K: KNN, NN: MLP classifier
­
­
Number: K­neighbors or regularization par
Table 4.2: Abbreviations used in the tables in the results section.
4.1.4
Models
In the ablation study of the autoencoder models, the models will be referred to by letters
corresponding to the losses that are used in the training. They follow the structure given
in Table 4.3.
M
Definition
Pre
Baseline pretrained autoencoder
R
Autoencoder trained only with reconstruction loss
S
Autoencoder with learnable token trained with subject contrast + reconstruction loss
C
Autoencoder with learnable token trained with class contrast + reconstruction loss
I
Autoencoder with patch tokens trained with image contrast + reconstruction loss
SC
Autoencoder with S and C contrastive losses combined + reconstruction loss
SI
Autoencoder with S and I contrastive losses combined + reconstruction loss
CI
Autoencoder with C and I contrastive losses combined + reconstruction loss
A
Autoencoder with S, C and I contrastive losses combined + reconstruction loss
Table 4.3: Model abbreviations used in the results section.
4.2
Generative
4.2.1
Implementation
Only minor adaptations were implemented to the generative model from MindVis. The
MindVis implementation was based on CompVis (https://github.com/CompVis/latent­diffusion).
The same computational resources were used for this part as for the masked autoencoder.
4.2.2
Training
All generative models were trained using the same exact data, namely the GOD data.
Similarly, they were all evaluated on the test set corresponding to the GOD data set.
In the diffusion sampling, 5 samples were used, and T was set to 250.
A learning rate of 5.3 × 10−5 was used with a batch size of 5 and all models were trained
for 24 hours.
In different experiments, different parts of the latent representations given from the fMRI
encoder were used. Either the patches were used exclusively, both the patches and
the associated class token (or CLS token in the case of the pretrained model), or the
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
29
==PAGE:40==
class/CLS latent exclusively. This token is referred to as Ltok This Will be explicitly stated
for all models.
For the pretrained latent diffusion model, a class­conditioned model trained on ImageNet
was used [59]. In training, only the conditioning mechanism, the fMRI encoder, and the
linear projector parameters were updated.
4.2.3
Evaluation
To evaluate the models, the accuracy was found by using a ResNet classifier (https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/m
50 output probabilities, including the ground truth, were randomly selected, and if the
ground truth class had the highest probability it was counted as a success. The accuracy
was then given by
successes
successes+misses.
For each epoch, a small subset of test images was used to indicate the performance of
the model. In case this showed promising results ­ an accuracy above 0.15 ­ a validation
was made on the full data set. The training step achieving the best accuracy is the one
reported in the results section.
Images were also generated for different models to qualitatively assess the models. These
images are generated from the model that achieved the highest accuracy.
30
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:41==
5
Results
The results are presented in the same order as the order of chapter 4, such that first
the results of the masked autoencoder are presented followed by those of the generative
model.
5.1
Masked autoencoder
5.1.1
Initial results
Initial basic models were trained to ascertain the effectiveness of the implemented mod­
els in achieving their intended objectives. The classification accuracies of fundamental
machine learning and deep learning classifiers for these basic models were compared
against the same classifiers applied to both the raw data and the pretrained model.
The first step involved assessing whether it was feasible to train the contrastive losses
independently. This analysis was focused solely on examining the learnable class and
subject token representations, without considering the patch representations. Addition­
ally, only a single learnable token was trained in each model. Comparisons were drawn
against raw data and the pretrained model from MindVis.
Specifically, four different classifiers were utilized to inspect the accuracy of class classi­
fication and subject classification on the HCP and GOD datasets, respectively. For the
image class classification task, the models were trained solely on the GOD dataset. On
the other hand, for the subject classification task, the models were trained using only one
of the datasets, the same one they were subsequently evaluated on. The results are
presented in Figure 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3. There seem to be minor differences in the specific
classifiers’ accuracies, however, they do not look to be significantly different.
Figure 5.1: The image class classification accuracy of simple models trained with either
only the reconstruction loss or both the reconstruction loss and contrastive loss was eval­
uated. Four different classifiers were employed for this evaluation. Additionally, the per­
formance of these classifiers in classifying image classes in the pretrained model and raw
data was also included for comparison. In the visual representation of the results, a red
line denotes the accuracy expected from random guessing, while a green line indicates
the maximum achieved accuracy.
The preliminary findings suggest that the contrastive loss contributes to the success of
image class classification regardless of the model size. Nevertheless, it’s important to
note that these results are accompanied by a high level of uncertainty. In the task of sub­
ject classification, the effectiveness of the contrastive loss appears to be more prominent
within the small models. These results with be further discussed later.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.2: The subject classification accuracy of simple models trained with either only
the reconstruction loss or both the reconstruction loss and contrastive loss was evaluated.
Four different classifiers were employed for this evaluation. Additionally, the performance
of these classifiers in classifying subjects in the pretrained model and raw data was also in­
cluded for comparison. The models were only trained and evaluated on the GOD dataset.
In the visual representation of the results, a red line denotes the accuracy expected from
random guessing, while a green line indicates the maximum achieved accuracy.
Figure 5.3: The subject classification accuracy of simple models trained with either only
the reconstruction loss or both the reconstruction loss and contrastive loss was evaluated.
Four different classifiers were employed for this evaluation. Additionally, the performance
of these classifiers in classifying subjects in the pretrained model and raw data was also in­
cluded for comparison. The models were only trained and evaluated on the HCP dataset.
In the visual representation of the results, a red line denotes the accuracy expected from
random guessing, while a green line indicates the maximum achieved accuracy.
An investigation into whether the model compromises reconstruction quality is conducted
by presenting a sample, along with a masked version of it, and reconstructed outputs from
different models, as depicted in Figure 5.4. The color scheme used aligns with the bar
plots previously shown.
In summary, the results indicate that contrastive learning is more effective in small models
compared to larger ones. Further analysis of the learning process will be performed in
the following section.
5.1.2
Further analysis of some initial models
To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of the combined losses during training and
their interaction, the loss curves of selected models are examined. Drawing inspiration
from the earlier findings, three model sizes are considered. Specifically, for the normal­
sized model, both random initialization and initialization with the pretrained model are
explored. All the models are trained with a combination of reconstruction loss, image
class contrastive loss, subject contrastive loss, and image ID contrastive loss. Training
data consists of the entire GOD dataset and a subset of the HCP dataset comprising 100
scans. The analysis aims to shed light on how the various loss components contribute to
32
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.4: Reconstructions of the same sample using the same simple models that were
analyzed earlier. The color scheme used aligns with the bar plots previously shown. The
left­most graph shows the ground­truth, the middle graph shows the masked sample, and
the right most shows the reconstruction. The correlation between the ground­truth and
the reconstruction is given on the right side of the figure.
the overall training process and how they interact in different model configurations.
Figure 5.5, presents six relevant plots depicting different losses and the correlation be­
tween reconstructions and raw data for the models. Notably, all loss components are
nearly within the same scale, with the reconstruction loss being slightly lower than the
other losses. However, the differences are relatively minor, and the magnitudes are com­
parable. Focusing on the model initialized with the pretrained model, emphasized in the
upper left plot, it’s apparent that all contrastive losses converge towards zero relatively
quickly, while the reconstruction loss takes more time to decrease.
Initially, the reconstruction losses for all models exhibit a rapid decrease, followed by
a more gradual descent. Interestingly, despite the reconstruction loss decreasing, the
correlation between the reconstructions and the raw data does not exhibit the expected
consistent increase. This phenomenon is particularly notable in the case of the smaller
models, which appear to achieve only moderate levels of reconstruction quality.
The behavior of the image class and image ID contrastive losses appears to be quite
similar. In the case of the model initialized from the pretrained model, these losses rapidly
converge towards zero. However, outside of this scenario, it appears that only the small
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.5: The figure illustrates the pertinent loss progression and the correlation evolu­
tion of models with varying sizes, as well as one model initialized as the pretrained model.
All the models were trained using reconstruction loss and subject, image class, and image
ID contrastive learning for 500 epochs.
model demonstrates substantial learning in these contrastive losses.
The subject contrastive loss exhibits an initial drop for all models followed by a steady
drop similar to the other contrastive losses.
For a visualization of the learning process of the small model some t­SNE plots are shown
in figures Figure A.3, A.4, and A.5 in the supplementary material. Similarly, it is shown for
the model initialized with the pretrained model in Figure A.6, A.7, and A.8.
5.1.3
Ablation
Taking into consideration the outcomes from the initial models, various models were
trained with varying combinations of losses, different sizes, and varying numbers of epochs.
The experimental configuration is detailed in chapter 4. The tables present the contrast
used for training the specific token (T ), the reconstruction quality measured by correla­
tion (Cor), and the performance of classifiers in recognizing subjects, image classes, and
image IDs based on the latent representation.
A selection was made to train three specific models: a small­sized model, a normal­sized
model, and a normal­sized model initialized with the pretrained model. These models
were trained for 500 epochs. The decision to choose these models was influenced by a
qualitative evaluation that considered various metrics and aspects of model performance.
34
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:45==
M
T
Cor
Sacc
S: p­val
Cl
Cacc
C: p­val
Cl
Iacc
I: p­val
Cl
Pre
U
0.32
98.06 ± 1.11
N/A
L1
15.0 ± 3.09
N/A
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
N/A
L1
R
U
0.08
58.06 ± 3.33
2.6e­05
L10
16.11 ± 5.09
7.9e­01
L0001
3.06 ± 2.69
8.3e­01
K10
S
S
0.06
85.83 ± 4.84
8.1e­03
L01
13.06 ± 1.88
4.1e­01
R
1.94 ± 1.42
3.0e­01
R
C
C
0.03
44.44 ± 9.5
3.0e­04
L10
24.17 ± 2.42
2.7e­02
L1
6.11 ± 1.88
2.4e­02
L1
I
U
0.17
56.67 ± 7.73
3.8e­04
L10
14.44 ± 5.39
9.0e­01
L10
2.78 ± 1.96
1.0e+00
R
SC
S
0.05
83.89 ± 2.86
1.3e­03
L01
16.39 ± 2.97
5.1e­01
L1
2.5 ± 1.84
7.8e­01
R
SC
C
0.05
67.22 ± 6.25
5.6e­04
L10
22.5 ± 6.17
1.7e­01
L1
3.61 ± 2.86
6.6e­01
K25
SI
S
0.11
79.17 ± 4.39
1.5e­03
R
13.61 ± 1.04
3.0e­01
K4
1.94 ± 1.42
3.7e­01
R
CI
C
0.14
43.89 ± 7.06
1.5e­04
L10
20.83 ± 4.21
1.8e­01
L0001
5.0 ± 3.12
2.1e­01
L0001
A
S
0.11
73.06 ± 5.46
7.6e­04
L1
14.17 ± 5.79
7.2e­01
L1
2.78 ± 1.52
1.0e+00
K4
A
C
0.11
60.83 ± 3.77
6.2e­05
L10
22.78 ± 6.19
1.3e­01
L1
3.89 ± 2.04
4.6e­01
L0001
Pre
P
0.32
97.5 ± 1.04
N/A
L1
13.89 ± 2.48
N/A
L1
2.22 ± 1.42
N/A
L1
R
P
0.08
49.72 ± 3.33
1.3e­05
L1
15.0 ± 3.22
4.8e­01
L1
1.39 ± 1.52
3.7e­01
L1
S
P
0.06
72.22 ± 3.83
1.3e­04
L1
11.39 ± 2.97
3.7e­02
L1
2.22 ± 1.11
1.0e+00
L1
C
P
0.03
25.0 ± 2.91
1.2e­06
L1
15.0 ± 5.0
7.2e­01
L1
2.78 ± 2.91
7.9e­01
L1
I
P
0.17
26.67 ± 1.36
8.0e­08
L1
11.39 ± 3.22
4.0e­01
L1
1.67 ± 1.04
6.5e­01
L1
SC
P
0.05
62.5 ± 4.89
2.2e­04
L1
14.72 ± 2.86
7.0e­01
L1
2.78 ± 2.48
7.6e­01
L1
SI
P
0.11
51.94 ± 6.0
6.4e­05
L1
13.06 ± 5.31
8.1e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.11
1.0e+00
L1
CI
P
0.14
27.22 ± 3.24
3.9e­06
L1
12.5 ± 3.4
5.4e­01
L1
3.06 ± 3.09
7.3e­01
L1
A
P
0.11
51.67 ± 5.79
1.6e­04
L1
12.5 ± 4.56
7.1e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.88
1.0e+00
L1
Table 5.1: Table displaying the relevant results of the masked autoencoders with small
size that were trained for 200 epochs. See Table 4.2 and 4.3 for information about the
abbreviations.
Small models
Table 5.1 shows outcomes associated with various small models trained for 200 epochs.
Additionally, Table A.2 displays analogous findings for small models trained for 100 epochs.
In general, the correlation metric tends to increase as the number of epochs increases,
although this trend is not consistent across all models. Among the various models, none
of them achieves superior accuracy compared to the pretrained model in terms of subject
classification. However, when it comes to image class accuracy, most models surpass
it. Notably, statistical significance is only observed in two instances: after 100 epochs,
for the model trained with image class and image ID contrast, and after 200 epochs, for
the model trained with only image class contrast. The ladder model achieves the highest
class accuracy.
Furthermore, it’s important to highlight that the optimal class accuracies are attained by
latent representations specially trained for this purpose. Similarly, the subject accuracy
also follows this trend. On the other hand, models trained with image ID contrast generally
don’t exhibit improved performance in the image ID classification task.
Among the small models, the model using only contrastive class loss (C) is chosen to
be further trained. This model achieved the best class accuracy independently of train­
ing time or whether the image class representation or the patch representations were
inspected.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
35
==PAGE:46==
M
T
Cor
Sacc
S: p­val
Cl
Cacc
C: p­val
Cl
Iacc
I: p­val
Cl
Pre
U
0.32
98.06 ± 1.11
N/A
L1
15.0 ± 3.09
N/A
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
N/A
L1
R
U
0.20
71.94 ± 4.6
3.0e­04
L1
15.56 ± 3.45
6.9e­01
L1
2.5 ± 1.04
7.5e­01
K1
S
S
0.18
41.67 ± 6.02
3.9e­05
L10
15.28 ± 2.64
9.1e­01
L10
2.22 ± 1.42
4.8e­01
R
C
C
0.37
33.33 ± 4.39
7.6e­06
L10
19.72 ± 3.22
2.0e­01
R
3.33 ± 1.11
4.8e­01
K25
I
U
0.34
86.94 ± 2.58
3.6e­03
L1
16.11 ± 4.18
7.6e­01
R
4.17 ± 1.96
1.9e­01
K50
SC
S
0.43
39.72 ± 5.17
3.7e­05
R
15.0 ± 3.45
1.0e+00
L1
1.67 ± 1.04
9.9e­02
L10
SC
C
0.43
38.89 ± 3.62
1.2e­05
R
14.72 ± 3.79
9.2e­01
L0001
2.5 ± 1.04
7.5e­01
K10
SI
S
0.29
51.11 ± 7.68
2.0e­04
L1
14.44 ± 4.18
8.6e­01
K50
3.33 ± 3.58
7.3e­01
L1
CI
C
0.35
47.78 ± 1.67
1.0e­06
L10
22.78 ± 5.31
1.1e­01
L01
4.72 ± 2.72
1.3e­01
K50
A
S
0.46
45.0 ± 3.69
3.6e­06
L10
13.33 ± 1.67
3.2e­01
L0001
2.5 ± 1.04
7.8e­01
K1
A
C
0.46
38.61 ± 4.16
8.9e­06
R
13.89 ± 6.15
7.8e­01
R
1.94 ± 0.68
2.1e­01
R
Pre
P
0.32
97.5 ± 1.04
N/A
L1
13.89 ± 2.48
N/A
L1
2.22 ± 1.42
N/A
L1
R
P
0.20
70.0 ± 5.31
3.9e­04
L1
11.39 ± 4.16
4.7e­01
L1
0.83 ± 0.68
3.4e­02
L1
S
P
0.18
30.28 ± 4.84
7.1e­06
L1
9.72 ± 1.96
9.5e­02
L1
2.5 ± 1.36
8.0e­01
L1
C
P
0.37
21.67 ± 5.31
5.5e­06
L1
16.11 ± 4.44
5.2e­01
L1
2.5 ± 1.04
7.5e­01
L1
I
P
0.34
87.22 ± 4.16
9.2e­03
L1
15.28 ± 5.05
6.8e­01
L1
3.06 ± 1.04
4.7e­01
L1
SC
P
0.43
33.89 ± 1.67
7.4e­07
L1
9.44 ± 3.66
1.6e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.67
1.0e+00
L1
SI
P
0.29
38.61 ± 3.22
5.1e­06
L1
10.56 ± 3.36
2.4e­01
L1
1.67 ± 1.04
5.4e­01
L1
CI
P
0.35
31.39 ± 4.18
4.9e­06
L1
19.44 ± 3.51
1.0e­01
L1
3.33 ± 2.58
6.1e­01
L1
A
P
0.46
31.94 ± 4.12
2.2e­06
L1
10.28 ± 4.18
3.0e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.88
1.0e+00
L1
Table 5.2: Table displaying the relevant results of the masked autoencoders with normal
size that were trained for 200 epochs. See Table 4.2 and 4.3 for information about the
abbreviations.
Normal­sized models
Similarly, the outcomes for models with a normal size trained for 100 epochs are presented
in Table A.3, and for 200 epochs, they are shown in Table 5.2.
Among the normal­sized models, the model using contrastive image class loss and image
ID contrastive loss (CI) is chosen to be further trained. This model achieved the best class
accuracy independently of training time or whether the image class representation or the
patch representations were inspected.
Pretrained initialized models
Finally, the results for normal­sized models initialized with the pretrained model and trained
for 100 epochs are presented in Table 5.3. In this case, the correlation metric shows a
substantial improvement compared to the other types of models, although all of these
achieve nearly the same level. Additionally, these models appear to perfectly separate
subjects, given that the tokens are specifically trained for this purpose.
Among the normal­sized models initialized with the pretrained model, the model trained
with both subject contrast and image class contrast is selected for further training. This
particular model achieved high scores in image class accuracies for both learnable tokens
and patches, while also maintaining a high reconstruction accuracy. However, it’s worth
noting that the decision in this case is not as straightforward as for the other models, since
the results are generally somewhat similar among these models. That is, other models
may have been as good a choice for further training.
36
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:47==
M
T
Cor
Sacc
S: p­val
Cl
Cacc
C: p­val
Cl
Iacc
I: p­val
Cl
Pre
U
0.32
98.06 ± 1.11
N/A
L1
15.0 ± 3.09
N/A
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
N/A
L1
R
U
0.59
89.17 ± 2.97
6.1e­03
L1
15.0 ± 4.76
1.0e+00
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
1.0e+00
K4
S
S
0.59
100.0 ± 0.0
2.5e­02
K1
13.89 ± 3.51
7.1e­01
K10
2.5 ± 1.04
7.0e­01
K25
C
C
0.55
67.78 ± 6.66
7.8e­04
L1
16.94 ± 4.06
5.6e­01
L001
6.11 ± 2.42
9.0e­02
L01
I
U
0.59
95.83 ± 0.88
3.5e­02
L01
15.28 ± 1.52
8.5e­01
L1
3.06 ± 1.62
8.1e­01
L0001
SC
S
0.55
100.0 ± 0.0
2.5e­02
K1
14.17 ± 3.87
7.6e­01
K50
3.89 ± 1.04
9.9e­02
K4
SC
C
0.55
73.33 ± 5.0
5.2e­04
L1
19.44 ± 6.27
3.9e­01
L01
6.39 ± 3.36
1.2e­01
L001
SI
S
0.57
100.0 ± 0.0
2.5e­02
K1
13.61 ± 3.77
4.1e­01
L001
2.22 ± 0.68
3.7e­01
K10
CI
C
0.57
72.78 ± 6.06
6.4e­04
L1
18.06 ± 4.03
4.1e­01
L01
6.39 ± 1.88
7.0e­03
L1
A
S
0.58
100.0 ± 0.0
2.5e­02
K1
14.17 ± 2.04
5.0e­01
K50
1.94 ± 1.11
3.0e­01
K25
A
C
0.58
81.94 ± 2.32
3.5e­04
L1
18.61 ± 1.42
8.1e­02
K10
4.72 ± 2.58
1.1e­01
L1
Pre
P
0.32
97.5 ± 1.04
N/A
L1
13.89 ± 2.48
N/A
L1
2.22 ± 1.42
N/A
L1
R
P
0.59
100.0 ± 0.0
8.6e­03
L1
15.28 ± 5.2
7.2e­01
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
5.9e­01
L1
S
P
0.59
100.0 ± 0.0
8.6e­03
L1
15.83 ± 3.12
3.1e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.88
1.0e+00
L1
C
P
0.55
87.5 ± 3.62
2.5e­03
L1
16.94 ± 3.09
3.0e­01
L1
3.61 ± 1.42
3.0e­01
L1
I
P
0.59
45.28 ± 4.86
4.4e­05
L1
11.11 ± 0.88
1.7e­01
L1
0.83 ± 1.11
2.3e­01
L1
SC
P
0.55
99.17 ± 1.11
1.4e­01
L1
16.11 ± 6.19
5.3e­01
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
3.7e­01
L1
SI
P
0.57
74.72 ± 10.33
8.6e­03
L1
13.61 ± 2.04
9.0e­01
L1
0.56 ± 0.68
1.4e­01
L1
CI
P
0.57
69.72 ± 7.05
8.6e­04
L1
13.89 ± 2.64
1.0e+00
L1
3.06 ± 2.22
6.1e­01
L1
A
P
0.58
43.89 ± 8.08
1.3e­04
L1
12.5 ± 4.21
6.8e­01
L1
1.94 ± 1.42
8.4e­01
L1
Table 5.3: Table displaying the relevant results of the masked autoencoders initialized with
the pretrained model and trained for 100 epochs. See Table 4.2 and 4.3 for information
about the abbreviations.
5.1.4
Final models
The results of further training the three selected models are presented in Table 5.4. There
is no model that clearly outperforms the others, although it is notable that the small model
is achieving a low correlation. However, it seems to have the highest image class accuracy
among the three.
Extending the training duration seems to have a mixed impact on the performance of
the models. While it generally leads to a decrease in image class accuracy, it tends to
increase the correlation of the chosen models. However, subject accuracy appears to
decrease if the models are not specifically trained with subject contrast. Given that the
pretrained initialized model tends to exhibit poorer performance across various metrics
when trained for 500 epochs, the model trained for 100 epochs is included in the further
analysis.
In Figure 5.6, t­SNE plots of the learnable token are shown. The points are colored accord­
ing to the image class. For the pretrained initialized model, only the latent representation
related to the token trained to learn image classes is shown. The t­SNE plots generally
indicate that when the models are trained with image class contrast, clusters are formed
based on the image classes. However, in the test set only a few image classes appear
to be clustered together, making it difficult to distinguish them clearly.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
37
==PAGE:48==
M
T
Cor
Sacc
S: p­val
Cl
Cacc
C: p­val
Cl
Iacc
I: p­val
Cl
Pre
U
0.32
98.06 ± 1.11
N/A
L1
15.0 ± 3.09
N/A
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
N/A
L1
SC
C
0.13
49.72 ± 3.22
3.6e­06
L10
21.94 ± 1.04
1.7e­02
K25
5.83 ± 3.33
1.7e­01
L1
PreSC
S
0.52
100.0 ± 0.0
2.5e­02
K1
16.67 ± 3.17
6.0e­01
L0001
2.5 ± 1.84
8.4e­01
K25
PreSC
C
0.52
39.44 ± 6.0
4.7e­05
L1
17.78 ± 6.54
5.3e­01
L01
5.0 ± 2.58
1.2e­01
K50
NCI
C
0.46
25.56 ± 5.46
6.5e­06
NN
18.33 ± 4.6
2.6e­01
L1
4.72 ± 2.26
1.1e­01
K25
Pre
P
0.32
97.5 ± 1.04
N/A
L1
13.89 ± 2.48
N/A
L1
2.22 ± 1.42
N/A
L1
SC
P
0.13
29.72 ± 2.99
2.5e­06
L1
15.56 ± 2.83
3.7e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.11
1.0e+00
L1
PreSC
P
0.52
83.61 ± 6.99
1.3e­02
L1
11.39 ± 3.77
3.6e­01
L1
1.11 ± 1.62
3.4e­01
L1
NCI
P
0.46
20.28 ± 7.06
2.4e­05
L1
11.94 ± 3.89
5.3e­01
L1
3.33 ± 1.88
4.1e­01
L1
Table 5.4: Table displaying the relevant results of the masked autoencoders trained for
500 epochs. M specifies the nature of the model, denoted as either small (S), pretrained
initialized (Pre), or normal (N). The subscript provides information regarding the applica­
tion of contrastive loss similar to earlier tables. See Table 4.2 and 4.3 for more information
about the abbreviations.
Figure 5.6: The figure displays t­SNE plots for the final models, including the pretrained
model. The plot highlights the latent representations associated with the learnable to­
kens, and when multiple learnable tokens exist, only the one related to the image class is
visualized. The colors reflect the image class categories.
To examine whether the models exhibit superior performance in predicting specific classes,
confusion matrices are provided in Figure 5.7, A.9, A.10, A.11, and A.12. Notably, models
trained with contrastive learning seem to excel in classifying class 7 (ball player) and class
8 (ear).
38
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.7: Confusion matrix of the pretrained initialized model trained with subject and
image class contrast for 100 epochs.
Finally, to illustrate the diverse performance of different subjects in the image class clas­
sification task, the precision, recall, and F1 scores related to the confusion matrix in Fig­
ure 5.7 are computed and shown in Table 5.5.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
All
Precision
0.14
0.25
0.24
0.14
0.1
0.17
Recall
0.14
0.31
0.19
0.13
0.09
0.17
F1
0.14
0.25
0.21
0.13
0.09
0.17
Table 5.5: The table displays the precision, recall, and F1 scores of the pretrained initial­
ized model after training with subject and image class contrast for 100 epochs. These
scores are computed for individual subjects as well as for all subjects collectively.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
39
==PAGE:50==
5.2
Generative model
Due to the substantial computational demands of training the generative model, a decision
was taken to impose a time limit of 24 hours for training each model. For the same reason,
only a select few models from the masked autoencoder phase were designated to serve
as initializations for the fMRI encoder and trained further in the generative model. In light
of this, the chosen models included the small model trained with image class contrast loss
for 500 epochs, SC, along with the pretrained initialized model trained with subject and
image class contrast for 100, PreSC−100 and 500 epochs, PreSC, respectively.
M
Tokens used
Accuracy
Training time (h)
Training steps
All subjects
SC
Patch
3.42
24
172 (96)
SC
Both
3.3
24
214 (103)
PreSC
Patch
5.01
24
208 (108)
PreSC
Ltok
2.03
24
164 (159)
PreSC
Both
4.74
24
209 (190)
PreSC−100
Patch
5.28
24
180 (101)
PreSC−100
Both
5.99
24
144 (124)
Pre
Patch
2.75
24
198 (108)
Pre
Ltok
2.19
24
220 (211)
Pre
Both
2.82
24
143 (43)
Finetune subject 3
Pre
Patch
13.93
24
286 (259)
Pre
Ltok
3.20
24
383 (15)
Pre
Both
4.48
24
328 (327)
Table 5.6: Table displaying the accuracy results of the models fine­tuned for the gener­
ative task. The model nomenclature specifies the nature of the initialized fMRI encoder,
denoted as either small (S) or pretrained initialized (Pre). The subscript provides informa­
tion regarding the application of contrastive loss similar to earlier tables and the number
of epochs trained if deviating from 500. The training steps indicate a number in parenthe­
sis which refers to the number of training steps that achieved the best and thus reported
accuracy.
In order to facilitate a comparison with the pretrained model, the latter was also employed
to initialize the fMRI encoder of the generative model. This approach was applied to both
fine­tuning for a single subject and to training across all five subjects, thereby showing
the absence of generalizability in this configuration.
The models are trained, employing either only the patch representations from the fMRI
encoder, the learnable token Ltok, or both. In models featuring a subject token, this com­
ponent is completely omitted. Particularly intriguing is the investigation into whether the
model’s ability to generalize improves when the explicit representation of the subject is
leveraged to remove the subject­related variability prior to image generation.
The accuracies of various models and configurations, as well as their corresponding train­
ing times and the number of training steps conducted within those timeframes, are pre­
sented in Table 5.6. The reported accuracy reflects the best achieved accuracy, and may
not necessarily correspond to the model after the total number of training steps. It is
40
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:51==
noteworthy that the pretrained models exhibited a rapid ability to achieve relatively high
accuracy when fine­tuned for a single subject. Nevertheless, when extended to training on
all five subjects, the accuracy fell significantly. Additionally, it became evident that optimal
results were obtained by entirely excluding Ltok when fine­tuning for a single subject.
The results indicate that the model achieving the highest accuracy across all subjects is
one that has been trained using contrastive losses, namely PreSC−100. To illustrate, an
instance of a generated image depicting a duck is showcased for this model in Figure 5.8,
and similarly for the pretrained model in Figure 5.9. These figures exhibit five generated
images for each subject, with each row corresponding to a distinct subject.
Additional examples are available in the supplementary material, specifically in Figure A.14
and A.15. Furthermore, examples of the pretrained model fine­tuned to a single subject
are showcased in Figure A.13. These figures provide further insight into the models’
capabilities, demonstrating that the model fine­tuned to a single subject is capable of
generating more semantically accurate images.
Figure 5.8: The figure displays images that were generated using the pretrained initialized
masked autoencoder, trained with subject and image class contrast as the initialized fMRI
encoder. The input for generation is derived from brain stimuli obtained when a subject
viewed the ground truth image of a duck, which is depicted in the leftmost image. Five
images have been generated to showcase the consistency of the generation process.
Each row corresponds to a distinct subject.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.9: The figure displays images that were generated using the pretrained masked
autoencoder as the initialized fMRI encoder. The input for generation is derived from brain
stimuli obtained when a subject viewed the ground truth image of a duck, which is depicted
in the leftmost image. Five images have been generated to showcase the consistency of
the generation process. Each row corresponds to a distinct subject.
42
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:53==
6
Discussion
This thesis aimed at generalizing MindVis to be able to generate images that were se­
mantically similar to the visual stimuli that a subject was presented with without the need
to finetune the model to a specific subject.
The focus was mainly on improving the guidance of the pretext task ­ in the form of the
masked autoencoder ­ to more explicitly learn a relevant representation of the brain activity
during the visual stimuli. This was done through training the masked autoencoder with
contrastive learning to learn explicit representations of the subject, the image class, and
the image ID.
6.1
Results
6.1.1
Initial findings
The results depicted in Figure 5.1 indicate that the pretrained model does not appear
to learn a more distinct representation of image classes, as the classification accuracy is
approximately similar to that of the raw data. Training a model with only the reconstruction
loss leads to a minimal improvement in accuracy. Contrastive learning tends to yield better
results compared to models without it. Notably, the small model surpasses other models in
performance. However, it’s observed that after a certain number of epochs, the accuracy
begins to decline, suggesting the possibility of overfitting.
Upon examining Figure 5.2, it becomes evident that subject detection is a relatively simple
task in this scenario. However, this observation must be understood within the context
of the GOD dataset containing only five subjects. The utilization of contrastive losses
appears to almost perfectly distinguish between subjects, even achieving perfect sepa­
ration when fine­tuning the pretrained model. When classifying solely on the raw data, it
becomes apparent that even without any explicit representation learning, subject classi­
fication can attain a high accuracy provided an appropriate classifier is employed. Fur­
thermore, using contrastive losses with a model of the pretrained model’s size appears to
only perform well when initialized from the pretrained model.
Subject classification on the HCP dataset results in lower accuracies compared to the
GOD dataset as shown in Figure 5.3. It’s important to note that the validation is conducted
on 17 subjects (compared to 5 in GOD), which contributes to the increased difficulty of the
task. Various other factors are at play as well, and these will be addressed in later discus­
sions. Notably, the best accuracy is attained by a small model trained for 2500 epochs.
Similarly to the subject detection task using the GOD dataset, employing contrastive loss
in a model of normal size appears to only yield good outcomes when initialized from the
pretrained model.
The reconstructions from Figure 5.4 suggest that utilizing only the contrastive loss during
training, either from scratch or on a small model trained for only 500 epochs, results in
problematic reconstructions. This observation implies that emphasizing the contrastive
loss might negatively impact reconstruction performance. Notably, it’s important to men­
tion that this analysis is based on a single reconstruction example and serves as a prelim­
inary exploration. Additional examples of reconstructions for the pretrained model can be
found in the supplementary material within Figure A.1 and A.2. These supplementary fig­
ures provide more insight into the pretrained model’s reconstruction capabilities, revealing
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
43
==PAGE:54==
variations in reconstruction quality across different instances. It is easy to imagine that
other models show the same behavior.
6.1.2
Learning process
The pretrained model exhibits rapid convergence across all its loss functions, indicating
that it possesses a strong initial representation of the data as shown in Figure 5.5. In
contrast, the other models do not show the same swift convergence. Particularly, for
the very small and normal­sized models without pretraining, only the reconstruction loss
seems to decrease. Notably, the small model is the sole model with a diminishing loss
progression without having a pretrained starting point. This suggests that the very small
model is potentially too small and that a normal­sized model needs to be trained on a
more substantial dataset or a longer training period.
The reconstruction loss and the correlation exhibit parallel progressions. Evidently, the
small and very small models rapidly converge to a point that is notably distinct from the
capabilities of larger models, as illustrated in Figure 5.5. Interestingly, the larger models
showcase a monotonically decreasing trend (and conversely for the correlation), which
may be attributed to the learning rate schedule depicted in Figure 6.1. As the training
approaches the 500­epoch mark, the loss progression gradually levels off, corresponding
to the diminishing learning rate. Additionally, the loss will inevitably converge at some
point, which is likely a contributing factor.
Figure 6.1: Learning rate of models trained for 500 epochs.
The behavior of the subject contrastive loss progression depicted in Figure 5.5 could be
attributed to the models learning to distinguish between the HCP and GOD datasets.
This can be observed when examining Figure A.3, where the datasets are being clearly
separated after only a few epochs. Following this initial separation, the pretrained initial­
ization experiences rapid convergence towards zero, while the small model appears to
learn more rapidly compared to the other two models. This could be explained by the
pretrained model already having a good representation of the subjects in the data and
that it only needed to adjust the model to only work on GOD data.
These loss progressions are worth examining alongside the t­SNE plots that elucidate
the learning process, as presented in section A.3. It is apparent that the pretrained ini­
44
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:55==
tialized model tends to exhibit overfitting tendencies to the training data. Consequently,
despite the loss progressions depicted in Figure 5.5, the model with the lowest loss does
not necessarily guarantee superior performance on the validation set. It’s worth noting
that the reconstruction task incorporates substantial regularization (75% masking), likely
rendering its influence on this aspect negligible.
In general, the results of the loss progression suggest that all the contrastive losses can be
effectively trained together. However, it’s possible that the models need to initially acquire
a solid representation of the data before being able to fully grasp and learn potential
contrasts.
6.1.3
Effect of model size
In contrast to the small models, there’s a noticeable improvement in the correlation metric
for the normal­sized models, particularly when trained for 200 epochs. This improvement
is evident not only from the results presented in the initial models but also from Table A.2,
5.1, A.3, and 5.2. This observation suggests that a reduction in model size may lead
to information loss. This reduction could be due to the smaller embedding dimension,
which decreases the representation’s capacity to hold information, or it might stem from
the decreased number of transformer blocks and attention heads, which limit the model’s
ability to capture complex patterns.
In contrast, subject accuracies tend to be higher in the smaller models. This also agrees
with the findings from the initial model presented in Figure 5.2 which demonstrate that a
small model is capable of perfectly predicting the subject. At the same time, it also shows
that the normal­sized model does not appear to be able to learn this contrast with this data
set even with 500 epochs. This could be an issue with the size of the data set compared
to the size of the model. As discussed earlier, the number of learnable parameters in a
normal­sized model is higher than the number of data points in the training set.
Same as with the subject accuracy, the image class accuracy appears to be comparable
or even higher in the representations of tokens trained with image class contrast in the
small models when compared to the normal­sized models. This is particularly evident
for the representations of the models with the contrastive loss; T : C. Similar to the
subject accuracy, some of the same considerations apply, and further investigation would
be needed to fully understand the underlying factors.
6.1.4
Effect of pretraining
Utilizing a pretrained model for initialization offers a significant advantage by providing the
model with a strong foundation for learning effective representations. This is particularly
evident when evaluating the reconstruction capabilities of these models, as highlighted in
Table 5.3. Regardless of the training objective, the models consistently exhibit a relatively
high correlation.
In this particular context, the subject contrast demonstrates exceptional performance by
consistently achieving a subject accuracy of 100% in all instances. This accuracy sur­
passes that of other model configurations. Nevertheless, there is no clear evidence sug­
gesting that subject information is being disentangled from the patch representations, as
these representations also display relatively high subject accuracies within this setup.
This will be further discussed later.
An important observation is that the effectiveness of pretraining can lead to a situation
where the model easily overfits the data. This is evident in the behavior of the model
trained with subject and image class contrast, which demonstrates varying performance
when trained for 500 epochs compared to 100 epochs shown in Table 5.3 and 5.4 as SC
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
45
==PAGE:56==
and PreSC, respectively. This discrepancy is likely a consequence of this phenomenon.
Furthermore, it’s notable that for most metrics, extended training leads to worsened per­
formance. For instance, the correlation coefficient decreases from 0.55 to 0.52, the class
accuracy in the class representation declines from 19.44% to 17.78%, and the image ID
accuracy in the patch representation drops from 2.78% to 1.11%. While these differences
are not statistically significant, they align with the broader trend, especially when consid­
ered together with the t­SNE plots of the learning process in Figure A.6 and A.4. Here it
seems obvious that the model has overfitted to the training data.
6.1.5
Effect of contrastive learning
Interestingly, in contrast to the results observed with the small models, training a token
specifically to capture subject variability does not appear to lead to an improvement in
subject accuracy in the normal­sized models. In fact, the models that incorporate learn­
able tokens without a specific focus on subject­related information (specifically models R
and I from Table 5.2) achieve the highest subject classification accuracies. The underly­
ing reasons for this observation are not immediately clear, but there are several potential
explanations to consider. It’s possible that initially, the contrastive losses may not produce
complementary gradients that effectively guide the learning process. Another factor could
be that the subject task itself might be more prone to overfitting, leading to lower subject
accuracies initially. However, as the training progresses and the model learns more from
the data, the reconstruction loss could act as a regularizer, especially given the impact of
the high masking ratio used in the reconstruction task. Further investigation is needed to
fully understand these dynamics.
For the pretrained initialized models, the subject contrast consistently yields 100% ac­
curacy in all cases, indicating that the subject­related information is readily accessible
within the data. This is also the only models that significantly improved the subject accu­
racy from the pretrained model. This significant improvement does, however, need to be
considered in the context of the already high accuracy in the pretrained model.
In the representations trained with image class contrast, T : C, there is a tendency for
them to demonstrate improved classification performance in comparison to the pretrained
model. However, statistical significance is observed only in two instances for the small
model: after 100 epochs for the model trained with both image class and image ID con­
trast, CI in Table A.2, and after 200 and 500 epochs for the model trained solely with
image class contrast, C and SC, in Table 5.1 and 5.4, respectively. It is intriguing that the
small model showcases such superior performance despite its smaller size. This sug­
gests that the relevant information is readily present in the data, but contrastive learning
might struggle to capture this information in larger models. This observation raises the
possibility that introducing independent annealing of the losses in the training process or
adjusting the weighting of the losses could be relevant for addressing this issue.
The image ID contrast often entails relatively high uncertainties when compared to the
achieved accuracy. As a result, the impact of this contrastive learning is considered to
be inconclusive. This uncertainty could be attributed to the fact that the image ID is only
present in one sample for each subject, making the classification task particularly chal­
lenging.
In conclusion, the results provide evidence that both subject and image class contrastive
learning have the potential to contribute to more explicit representations of subjects and
image classes. However, while their contribution is noticeable, statistically significant im­
provements were observed only in a limited number of scenarios.
46
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:57==
6.1.6
Effect of explicit subject representation
Establishing an explicit subject representation was accomplished by training a learnable
token to capture subject­related information through contrastive learning. As detailed ear­
lier, this approach exhibited success in certain scenarios. However, it’s important to note
that having a good subject representation does not automatically imply complete disen­
tanglement of the subject­related information from other aspects of the representation.
To assess the effectiveness of disentanglement, it’s crucial to determine whether subject­
related information was effectively isolated from other aspects of the representation. This
evaluation involves investigating whether the subject accuracy declined in those other
parts of the representation.
In a general sense, it becomes apparent that models that explicitly train subject repre­
sentations may not necessarily disentangle subject­related information from the patch
representations. For instance, consider the small model trained with subject contrast (S)
in Table 5.1, which achieves a subject accuracy of 85.83% in the subject representation
and 72.22% in the patch representation. While this may appear as a substantial differ­
ence, a similar disparity can be observed by solely utilizing the reconstruction loss R in
Table 5.1, which attains 58.06% accuracy in its learnable token representation and 49.72%
in its patch representation. Moreover, even the pretrained­initialized models reach 100%
accuracy in the patch representation of S in Table 5.3. This suggests that there’s insuf­
ficient evidence to support the notion that subject contrast alone effectively disentangles
subject­related information from the patch representations.
For models that incorporate both subject contrast and image class contrast in their train­
ing, there seems to be a more noticeable disentanglement of subject­related information
from other representations. This trend becomes evident when examining models like A,
SC, and SI in Tables Table 5.1, 5.2, and Table 5.3, as well as PreSC in Table 5.4 where
the subject accuracy is highest in the subject representation. However, this effect is not
completely consistent, as indicated by the SC model in Table 5.3, where subject accuracy
in the patch representation remains relatively high at 99.17% ­ though only observed in
one case.
In general, the process of subject disentanglement does not appear to significantly dimin­
ish the presence of image class information in the representations of the image class and
patch representations.
Overall, the findings suggest that disentangling subject­related information is achievable
to a certain extent, but it often requires explicit guidance in the other representations of
the model as well.
6.1.7
Generalization to subjects in the generative model
Ultimately, the representations obtained from the masked autoencoder serve as the start­
ing point for initializing the fMRI encoder. This encoder plays a crucial role in conditioning
the denoiser within the generative model to respond to brain activity patterns associated
with observing specific images.
The findings of Table 5.6 suggest that training an explicit representation of both the subject
and the image class in the pretext task might enhance accuracy in a generalizing scenario
involving multiple subjects in the downstream task. Specifically, the pretrained initialized
model trained with subject and image class contrast for 100 epochs, PreSC−100 exhibits
the highest accuracy.
In this scenario, the subject representation was removed completely from the fMRI en­
coder which was hypothesized to remove subject variability.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
47
==PAGE:58==
The duck example showcased in Figure 5.8 for PreSC−100 and Figure 5.9 for the pretrained
model highlights a notable contrast between the pretrained model’s inability to generate
duck­like images and the success of PreSC−100 in capturing some duck­like features in
certain instances. Particularly, subject 5 consistently displays bird­like creatures in all
generated images, while subjects 3 and 4 demonstrate similar features in some images.
It is important to acknowledge that this example was deliberately chosen to illustrate a nice
example of better generalization, hence it can be considered somewhat biased. Never­
theless, when assessing the broader spectrum of generated images in Figure A.14 for
PreSC−100 and Figure A.15 for the pretrained model, there is still a suggestion that the
initial model’s generations exhibit more semantically similar characteristics to the ground
truth compared to the ladder. However, it is crucial to recognize that this assessment is
subjective and may not hold substantial significance in the broader context.
These results are subject to various uncertainties. Notably, the accuracies lack corre­
sponding measures of uncertainty, making it challenging to draw substantial conclusions
based solely on the slight increase in accuracy.
The models trained with contrastive learning were fine­tuned to the GOD dataset, whereas
the pretrained model was initially generalized across both the HCP and GOD datasets. It’s
possible that the pretrained model requires some initial training iterations to adapt to the
GOD dataset, which suggests that extending its training duration could lead to comparable
results as the models trained with contrastive learning. The contrastive learning objectives
used in the pretext task may also be learnable when training the generative model and
as such there is a high probability that the pretrained model can achieve similar results
given an extended training duration.
During the generative model training, an interesting observation was made regarding the
variability of generated images within a subset of the test set. These images exhibited
substantial fluctuations from epoch to epoch, without demonstrating a clear monotonous
improvement over time. This randomness in image generation highlighted a significant
level of uncertainty, reinforcing the notion that the accuracy measurements might be char­
acterized by considerable variability. As a result, drawing conclusions from these obser­
vations remains challenging.
In summary, the outcomes of the study indicated that providing guidance to the pretext
task and eliminating an explicit subject representation from the fMRI encoder in the gen­
erative model could potentially enhance generalization across subjects. However, it’s
important to emphasize that these findings were accompanied by a notable level of un­
certainty, rendering it difficult to draw definitive conclusions. The intricate interplay of
various factors in the models and the inherent variability in the results underscore the
need for further investigation and deeper analysis.
6.2
Issues with datasets
6.2.1
Two different datasets
There were numerous differences in specifications between the two datasets, HCP [28]
and GOD [26]. These differences encompassed various aspects such as the tasks being
different, variations in the scanner­specific setups, differences in pre­processing proce­
dures, and a range of other factors contributing to substantial variation.
The nature of the pretext task posed a challenge for the model, as it had to discern be­
tween the modalities it was operating within due to the distinct specifications of the two
datasets, HCP and GOD. This complexity was compounded by the fact that, even within
48
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:59==
the same modality (fMRI scan with x voxels), the spatial organization of the data points
did not exhibit a direct correspondence between the two datasets. For instance, the rep­
resentation of V1 of the left hemisphere occupied different positions in the array for HCP
and GOD datasets. While the precise alignment of the two datasets remained ambiguous,
a comparison of the general structural patterns in the plotted scans depicted in Figure 2.2
and 2.3 suggested noticeable differences between them.
These disparities introduced two primary challenges in the modeling process. Firstly, the
model needed to differentiate between the datasets and establish a coherent projection
into a common space. Secondly, the positional encoding added to the embedding in the
masked autoencoder might not have held the same significance across the two datasets
due to their varying spatial configurations. This potential misalignment could prove prob­
lematic. It is worth noting that the final generative model was exclusively trained on the
GOD dataset, giving the model an opportunity to adapt to these challenges within this
specific context. This could also offer an explanation for the observed lower correlation
metric in the pretrained model compared to those fine­tuned specifically to the GOD data
in Table 5.3.
6.2.2
Five subjects
A population of five subjects raises significant concerns and limitations both for the mod­
eling process and the interpretation of the results.
Since this thesis set out to generalize a model to multiple subjects, it was evident from the
beginning that this might be challenging due to the limited number of subjects. First of all,
the limited data would make it difficult to disentangle different variability factors but it would
also be difficult to evaluate the generalizability since it would be difficult to evaluate the
model’s ability to generalize to unseen subjects. A choice was made so that no subjects
from the GOD dataset were kept out of the training set since it would make the number
of subjects too low.
Even with a model showing good results in generalizability to five subjects, it may be
difficult to use the results to conclude anything about how the visual cortex works. The
limited diversity in the data makes it impossible to make broad inferences about larger
populations. Despite the limitations, the study offers valuable indications and insightful
suggestions for future research. Also, it can help confirm already hypothesized theories.
In conclusion, while the study may provide valuable insights, the findings should be ap­
proached with caution, and further investigation on a dataset including more subjects is
likely needed before drawing conclusions.
6.2.3
Training/validation/test split
The data splitting into a training, validation, and test split was done rather boldly. The GOD
data set naturally included a training set consisting of 1200 images distributed over 150
classes while the test set included 50 images distributed over 50 classes. The training
set was in this thesis further partitioned into a training and a validation set in a 1104/72
split (140/9 classes) ­ note that one class was removed because it included 24 samples
which did not match the experimental design.
There is no clear guidance on how you choose the optimal ratio of a split but often 20%
or more is used for validation in practice. The choice is a weighting between model fit
and variability of the generalization error. That is, a higher proportion of the data in the
validation set will give a lower variability of the generalization error but a worse model fit
and reversely for a lower proportion of the data in the validation set. [64]
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
49
==PAGE:60==
In this thesis, the data was partitioned into sets with proportions of 90% for training, 6%
for validation, and 4% for testing. This division resulted in a considerable variance in
generalization error, which should be considered before drawing any conclusions.
6.2.4
Quality difference
A better signal will essentially give a better starting point for meaningful modeling of fMRI
data. Some factors that can limit the ability of fMRI to detect meaningful signals are
thermal noise, system noise in the scanner, physiological noise from the subject, non­
task­related cognitive processes, and changes in cognitive strategy over time [65]. Thus,
the signal is affected by many external issues that may not be reoccurring. [66]
To mitigate some of these challenges, the fMRI data from the test set was averaged over
35 instances of the same experiment, in contrast to the single instance used in the train­
ing and validation sets [26]. Averaging over 35 instances can help reduce the impact of
noise arising from various external factors, as it is improbable that these factors persist
across most instances. For instance, in an object identification task on the GOD data, the
accuracy of identification was demonstrated to increase by up to 20% through averaging
over 35 instances [26].
This observation also implies that any comparison between the results related to the gen­
erative model and those from the masked autoencoder should account for this difference.
6.3
fMRI data in this setting
6.3.1
High subject variability in fMRI
As elaborated in chapter 2, extensive preprocessing is essential for analyzing fMRI data
due to the complexity involved. With the inherent individual differences in brain activity,
inter­subject variability becomes a significant factor in the data. This is highlighted by a
study [67], which revealed that a substantial portion (57%) of the variability in their fMRI
data could be attributed to inter­subject differences. This inherent challenge introduces
certain limitations to fMRI research, particularly in settings with a limited number of sub­
jects. In these cases, the modeling of the data can be heavily influenced by inter­subject
variability, as it often outweighs the task­specific variability due to its pronounced nature.
This situation also prompts the question of whether it is wise to deliberately remove the
explicit representation of the subject from the generative model, as in this study. Given
that subject variability constitutes a substantial portion of the overall variation, it might
be relevant to retain the subject representation within the modeling process. Allowing the
model to autonomously learn how to characterize this variability could yield more accurate
and robust results, considering its significant contribution to the complexity of the dataset.
6.3.2
Applications in practice
Although fMRI is a powerful non­invasive imaging technique capable of producing intricate
functional brain images, its lack of portability is a significant limitation. The technology re­
quires a substantial magnet and rigorous shielding, while subjects must remain motionless
within the confined scanner environment [68]. This impracticality makes fMRI challenging
for applications associated with everyday activities.
Research conducted within this context primarily serves as proof of concept. Neverthe­
less, it holds potential for application in dream­related studies where portability is not a
requirement since the subjects would be asleep. However, acquiring prolonged periods
of sleep within an MR scanner can be challenging. Studies pertaining to this often involve
sleep deprivation, which can lead to altered outcomes [69].
50
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:61==
6.4
Related work
In related work [21, 22, 20, 18] trying to solve the image generation problem based on
brain activity, the results are presented of models that are finetuned to a single subject.
Thus, this thesis has introduced a novel evaluation approach to the generated images
that can not be directly compared with results presented in related works.
Due to challenges in reproducing the accuracy metric utilized in previous studies [18],
MindVis employed an alternate metric, as detailed in chapter 3. MindVis’s reported out­
comes encompass the Top­1 50­way accuracies of all the models, as outlined in Table 6.1.
Notably, Gaziv et al. and Beliy et al. pursued optimization of generated images on a pixel
level, leading to the presence of only limited semantically meaningful features in their re­
constructions. This distinction underscores a variance in objectives between their work
and that of MindVis, Ozcelik et al., and this thesis.
While the outcomes for the other models in the table are scenarios without the 24­hour
training limitation and with fine­tuning specific to individual subjects, it is important to ac­
knowledge that this introduces an element of unfairness in the comparison. Nevertheless,
this presentation aims to highlight the potential for generalization to this dataset, providing
insights into the promising prospects of extending model performance to broader contexts.
Ideally, the accuracies for the other models evaluated on all subjects would have been
presented.
Study
This thesis
MindVis
Ozcelik et al. [21]
Gaziv et al. [20]
Beliy et al. [18]
Accuracy
5.99
27.4
19.7
6.2
3.8
Table 6.1: Top­1 50­way accuracies for related work and this thesis. Notice that accura­
cies are fair for comparison given the limitation in training time and evaluation on multiple
subjects in this thesis. Accuracies were obtained from MindVis [22].
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
51
==PAGE:62==
52
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
In conclusion, the findings of this thesis indicate the feasibility of extracting information
related to visual stimuli from the visual cortex by employing a masked autoencoder frame­
work inspired by the MindVis model and guided by contrastive learning. The application
of contrastive learning demonstrated its potential to enhance the explicitness of subject
and image class representations in certain contexts. Nevertheless, definitive conclusions
regarding the efficacy of these approaches remain challenging to establish.
Exploring the explicit representation of subjects also raised the prospect of disentangling
subject­related information from other modalities. Initial findings suggested that establish­
ing a subject representation in isolation did not yield substantial disentanglement of this
information. However, when integrated with guided contrastive learning in other aspects
of the model, indications emerged that subject­related disentanglement might indeed be
feasible. This shows promise for enhancing the model’s capacity to generalize across
multiple subjects.
The explicit representation of subjects and its subsequent removal in the image generation
task exhibited promising outcomes. In a setting with restricted training time and significant
uncertainty, this model demonstrated superior accuracy compared to a pretrained MindVis
model. These results were observed while training and evaluating the model on a dataset
containing five subjects.
The findings should be interpreted cautiously, given the considerable uncertainties and
numerous limitations associated with the dataset. For instance, the inclusion of only five
subjects makes it challenging to draw definitive conclusions about the model’s generaliz­
ability across subjects. Additionally, the constrained validation set introduced limitations
in assessing the performance of the masked autoencoder.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Jamie Enoch et al. “Evaluating Whether Sight Is the Most Valued Sense”. In: JAMA
Ophthalmology 137 (11 Nov. 2019), p. 1317. ISSN: 21686165. DOI: 10 . 1001 /
JAMAOPHTHALMOL. 2019 .3537. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC6777262/%20/pmc/
articles/PMC6777262/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC6777262/.
[2]
Rochester Review :: University of Rochester. URL: https://www.rochester.edu/pr/
Review/V74N4/0402_brainscience.html#:~:text=%E2%80%9CMore%20than%2050%
20percent%20of,brain%20as%20a%20whole%20works.%E2%80%9D.
[3]
Robert J. Barry and Frances M. De Blasio. “EEG differences between eyes­closed
and eyes­open resting remain in healthy ageing”. In: Biological psychology 129
(Oct. 2017), pp. 293–304. ISSN: 1873­6246. DOI: 10.1016/J.BIOPSYCHO.2017.
09.010. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28943465/.
[4]
Melvyn A. Goodale. “Transforming vision into action”. In: Vision research 51 (13
July 2011), pp. 1567–1587. ISSN: 1878­5646. DOI: 10.1016/J.VISRES.2010.07.027.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20691202/.
[5]
Trevor Huff, Navid Mahabadi, and Prasanna Tadi. “Neuroanatomy, Visual Cortex”.
In: StatPearls (July 2022). URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482504/.
[6]
Marianne Cumella Reddan, Tor Dessart Wager, and Daniela Schiller. “Attenuating
Neural Threat Expression with Imagination”. In: Neuron 100 (4 Nov. 2018), 994–
1005.e4. ISSN: 1097­4199. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEURON.2018.10.047. URL: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30465766/.
[7]
Michael Schredl. “Characteristics And Contents Of Dreams”. In: International Re­
view of Neurobiology 92 (C Jan. 2010), pp. 135–154. ISSN: 0074­7742. DOI: 10.
1016/S0074-7742(10)92007-2.
[8]
Lorina Naci et al. “Brain–computer interfaces for communication with nonresponsive
patients”. In: Annals of Neurology 72 (3 Sept. 2012), pp. 312–323. ISSN: 1531­
8249. DOI: 10.1002/ANA.23656. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.
1002/ana.23656%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ana.23656%
20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.23656.
[9]
Felix Putze et al. “Editorial: Brain­Computer Interfaces and Augmented/Virtual Real­
ity”. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 14 (May 2020), p. 543776. ISSN: 16625161.
DOI: 10.3389/FNHUM.2020.00144/BIBTEX.
[10]
Kendrick N. Kay et al. “Identifying natural images from human brain activity”. In:
Nature 2008 452:7185 452 (7185 Mar. 2008), pp. 352–355. ISSN: 1476­4687. DOI:
10.1038/nature06713. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature06713.
[11]
John Dylan Haynes and Geraint Rees. “Predicting the orientation of invisible stimuli
from activity in human primary visual cortex”. In: Nature Neuroscience 2005 8:5 8
(5 Apr. 2005), pp. 686–691. ISSN: 1546­1726. DOI: 10.1038/nn1445. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/nn1445.
[12]
Yukiyasu Kamitani and Frank Tong. “Decoding the visual and subjective contents of
the human brain”. In: Nature Neuroscience 2005 8:5 8 (5 Apr. 2005), pp. 679–685.
ISSN: 1546­1726. DOI: 10.1038/nn1444. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
nn1444.
[13]
Bertrand Thirion et al. “Inverse retinotopy: Inferring the visual content of images
from brain activation patterns”. In: NeuroImage 33 (4 Dec. 2006), pp. 1104–1116.
ISSN: 1053­8119. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2006.06.062.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
55
==PAGE:66==
[14]
David D. Cox and Robert L. Savoy. “Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
“brain reading”: detecting and classifying distributed patterns of fMRI activity in hu­
man visual cortex”. In: NeuroImage 19 (2 June 2003), pp. 261–270. ISSN: 1053­
8119. DOI: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00049-1.
[15]
J. V. Haxby et al. “Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects
in ventral temporal cortex”. In: Science 293 (5539 Sept. 2001), pp. 2425–2430.
ISSN: 00368075. DOI: 10.1126/SCIENCE.1063736/SUPPL_FILE/HAXBYWEB.
PDF. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1063736.
[16]
Thomas Naselaris et al. “Bayesian Reconstruction of Natural Images from Human
Brain Activity”. In: Neuron 63 (6 Sept. 2009), pp. 902–915. ISSN: 0896­6273. DOI:
10.1016/J.NEURON.2009.09.006.
[17]
Athanasios Voulodimos et al. “Deep Learning for Computer Vision: A Brief Review”.
In: Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2018 (2018). ISSN: 16875273.
DOI: 10.1155/2018/7068349.
[18]
Roman Beliy et al. “From voxels to pixels and back: Self­supervision in natural­
image reconstruction from fMRI”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 32 (July 2019). ISSN: 10495258. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02431v1.
[19]
Xiao Liu et al. “Self­Supervised Learning: Generative or Contrastive”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35 (1 Jan. 2023), pp. 857–876. ISSN:
15582191. DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3090866.
[20]
Guy Gaziv et al. “Self­supervised Natural Image Reconstruction and Large­scale
Semantic Classification from Brain Activity”. In: NeuroImage 254 (July 2022). ISSN:
1095­9572. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2022.119121. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/35342004/.
[21]
Furkan Ozcelik et al. “Reconstruction of Perceived Images from fMRI Patterns and
Semantic Brain Exploration using Instance­Conditioned GANs”. In: 2022 Interna­
tional Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) 2022­July (2022). DOI: 10.
1109/IJCNN55064.2022.9892673.
[22]
Zijiao Chen et al. “Seeing Beyond the Brain: Conditional Diffusion Model with Sparse
Masked Modeling for Vision Decoding”. In: (Nov. 2022). DOI: 10.48550/arxiv.2211.
06956. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06956v2.
[23]
Kihyuk Sohn. “Improved Deep Metric Learning with Multi­class N­pair Loss Objec­
tive”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29 (2016).
[24]
Prannay Khosla et al. “Supervised Contrastive Learning”. In: (Apr. 2020). URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.11362v5.
[25]
David C. Van Essen et al. “The WU­Minn Human Connectome Project: An overview”.
In: NeuroImage 80 (2013), pp. 62–79.
[26]
T. Horikawa and Y Kamitani. “Generic decoding of seen and imagined objects using
hierarchical visual features”. In: Nat Commun 8 (2017). DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15037.
[27]
M. Glasser, T. Coalson, and E.and et al. Robinson. “A multi­modal parcellation
of human cerebral cortex”. In: Nature 536 (2016), pp. 171–178. DOI: 10 . 1038 /
nature18933.
[28]
Matthew F. Glasser et al. “The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the Human Con­
nectome Project”. In: NeuroImage 80 (Oct. 2013), pp. 105–124. ISSN: 1095­9572.
DOI: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2013.04.127. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
23668970/.
[29]
“Automatic denoising of functional MRI data: combining independent component
analysis and hierarchical fusion of classifiers”. In: NeuroImage 90 (Apr. 2014), pp. 449–
468. ISSN: 1095­9572. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24389422/.
56
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:67==
[30]
Jia Deng et al. “ImageNet: A large­scale hierarchical image database”. In: (Mar.
2010), pp. 248–255. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
[31]
Stephen A. Engel et al. “FMRI of human visual cortex [5]”. In: Nature 369 (6481
1994), p. 525. ISSN: 00280836. DOI: 10.1038/369525A0.
[32]
M. I. Sereno et al. “Borders of multiple visual areas in humans revealed by functional
magnetic resonance imaging”. In: Science 268 (5212 1995), pp. 889–893. ISSN:
00368075. DOI: 10.1126/SCIENCE.7754376.
[33]
Zoe Kourtzi and Nancy Kanwisher. “Cortical regions involved in perceiving object
shape”. In: The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neu­
roscience 20 (9 May 2000), pp. 3310–3318. ISSN: 1529­2401. DOI: 10 . 1523 /
JNEUROSCI.20-09-03310.2000. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10777794/.
[34]
Nancy Kanwisher, Josh McDermott, and Marvin M. Chun. “The fusiform face area: a
module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception”. In: The Journal
of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 17 (11 1997),
pp. 4302–4311. ISSN: 0270­6474. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-11-04302.1997.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9151747/.
[35]
Russell Epstein and Nancy Kanwisher. “A cortical representation the local visual
environment”. In: Nature 392 (6676 Apr. 1998), pp. 598–601. ISSN: 00280836. DOI:
10.1038/33402.
[36]
Wei CS et al. “Editorial: Inter­ and Intra­subject Variability in Brain Imaging and
Decoding”. In: Front Comput Neurosci (Nov. 2021).
[37]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[38]
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C. Courville, and Pascal Vincent. “Unsupervised Feature
Learning and Deep Learning: A Review and New Perspectives”. In: CoRR abs/1206.5538
(2012). arXiv: 1206.5538. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.5538.
[39]
D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, and the PDP Research Group. “Parallel Dis­
tributed Processing, Volume 1 Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Foun­
dations”. In: A Bradford Book 1 (January 1986 1988), p. 576. URL: https://www.
penguinrandomhouse.com/books/662604/parallel-distributed-processing-volume-1-by-
david-e-rumelhart-james-l-mcclelland-and-pdp-research-group/.
[40]
“Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
2017­December (2017), pp. 5999–6009. ISSN: 10495258.
[41]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short­Term Memory”. In: Neural
Computation 9 (8 Nov. 1997), pp. 1735–1780. ISSN: 0899­7667. DOI: 10.1162/
NECO.1997.9.8.1735. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[42]
Junyoung Chung et al. “Empirical Evaluation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks
on Sequence Modeling”. In: (Dec. 2014). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.3555v1.
[43]
Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. “An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image
Recognition at Scale”. In: (Oct. 2020). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929v2.
[44]
Kaiming He et al. “Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pat­
tern Recognition 2022­June (Nov. 2021), pp. 15979–15988. ISSN: 10636919. DOI:
10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01553. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.06377v3.
[45]
OpenAI. “GPT­4 Technical Report”. In: (Mar. 2023). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2303.08774v3.
[46]
Sébastien Bubeck et al. “Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments
with GPT­4”. In: (Mar. 2023). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712v5.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
57
==PAGE:68==
[47]
Tom B. Brown et al. “Language Models are Few­Shot Learners”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 2020­December (May 2020). ISSN: 10495258.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165v4.
[48]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre­training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Lan­
guage Understanding”. In: NAACL HLT 2019 ­ 2019 Conference of the North Amer­
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies ­ Proceedings of the Conference 1 (Oct. 2018), pp. 4171–4186. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805v2.
[49]
Svetlana Lazebnik, Cordelia Schmid, and Jean Ponce. “Beyond bags of features:
Spatial pyramid matching for recognizing natural scene categories”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog­
nition 2 (2006), pp. 2169–2178. ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2006.68.
[50]
“CORRELATED NEURONAL ACTIVITY AND THE FLOW OF NEURAL INFORMA­
TION”. In: Nature reviews. Neuroscience 2 (8 Aug. 2001), p. 539. ISSN: 14710048.
URL: /pmc/articles/PMC2868968/%20/pmc/articles/PMC2868968/?report=abstract%
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2868968/.
[51]
“Learning Subject­Invariant Representations from Speech­Evoked EEG Using Vari­
ational Autoencoders”. In: ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing ­ Proceedings 2022­May (July 2022), pp. 1256–
1260. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9747297. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.
00323%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9747297.
[52]
Kilian Q. Weinberger and Lawrence K. Saul. “Distance Metric Learning for Large
Margin Nearest Neighbor Classification”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research
10 (9 2009), pp. 207–244. ISSN: 1533­7928. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v10/
weinberger09a.html.
[53]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: Communications of
the ACM 63 (11 June 2014), pp. 139–144. ISSN: 15577317. DOI: 10.1145/3422622.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661v1.
[54]
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. “Large Scale GAN Training for
High Fidelity Natural Image Synthesis”. In: 7th International Conference on Learn­
ing Representations, ICLR 2019 (Sept. 2018). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.
11096v2.
[55]
Jascha Sohl­Dickstein et al. “Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium
Thermodynamics”. In: (June 2015), pp. 2256–2265. ISSN: 1938­7228. URL: https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.html.
[56]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. “Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Mod­
els”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2020­December (June
2020). ISSN: 10495258. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239v2.
[57]
Ali Razavi, Aäron van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals DeepMind. “Generating Diverse
High­Fidelity Images with VQ­VAE­2”. In: Advances in Neural Information Process­
ing Systems 32 (2019). URL: https://github.com/deepmind/sonnet/blob/master/
sonnet/python/modules/nets/vqvae.py.
[58]
Weihao Weng and Xin Zhu. “U­Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image
Segmentation”. In: IEEE Access 9 (May 2015), pp. 16591–16603. ISSN: 21693536.
DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3053408. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597v1.
[59]
Robin Rombach et al. “High­Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod­
els”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vi­
sion and Pattern Recognition 2022­June (Dec. 2021), pp. 10674–10685. ISSN:
10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01042. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2112.10752v2.
58
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:69==
[60]
Abhishek Sinha et al. “D2C: Diffusion­Decoding Models for Few­Shot Conditional
Generation”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (Dec. 2021),
pp. 12533–12548.
[61]
Prafulla Dhariwal, ￿Openai, and Alex Nichol. “Diffusion Models Beat GANs on
Image Synthesis”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (Dec.
2021), pp. 8780–8794.
[62]
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. “Visualizing Data using t­SNE”. In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (86 2008), pp. 2579–2605. ISSN: 1533­
7928. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/vandermaaten08a.html.
[63]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimiza­
tion”. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 ­
Conference Track Proceedings (Dec. 2014). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
6980v9.
[64]
V Roshan et al. “Optimal ratio for data splitting”. In: Statistical Analysis and Data
Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal 15 (4 Aug. 2022), pp. 531–538. ISSN: 1932­
1872. DOI: 10.1002/SAM.11583. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.
1002/sam.11583%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sam.11583%
20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sam.11583.
[65]
Matthew J. Singleton. “Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging”. In: The Yale Jour­
nal of Biology and Medicine 82 (4 2009), p. 233. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC2794501/
%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2794501/.
[66]
Craig M. Bennett and Michael B. Miller. “How reliable are the results from functional
magnetic resonance imaging?” In: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
1191 (1 Mar. 2010), pp. 133–155. ISSN: 1749­6632. DOI: 10.1111/J.1749-6632.
2010.05446.X. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2010.05446.x%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2010.05446.x%20https://nyaspubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2010.05446.x.
[67]
Sergi G. Costafreda et al. “Multisite fMRI reproducibility of a motor task using iden­
tical MR systems”. In: Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging 26 (4 Oct. 2007),
pp. 1122–1126. ISSN: 1522­2586. DOI: 10.1002/JMRI.21118. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/jmri.21118%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/jmri.21118%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmri.21118.
[68]
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). URL: https://www.nibib.nih.gov/science-
education/science-topics/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri.
[69]
Thomas M. Moehlman et al. “All­night functional magnetic resonance imaging sleep
studies”. In: Journal of neuroscience methods 316 (Mar. 2019), p. 83. ISSN: 1872678X.
DOI: 10.1016/J.JNEUMETH.2018.09.019. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC6524535/%20/
pmc/articles/PMC6524535/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC6524535/.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
59
==PAGE:70==
60
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:71==
A
Supplementary material
A.1
More results
Latent trained
Sacc
S: p­val
Best classifier
Cacc
C: p­val
Best classifier
Pre
U
0.532 ± 0.037
N/A
Lin_10
0.036 ± 0.012
N/A
Lin_10
Att Tok
S
0.7 ± 0.118
6.319e­03
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.027
3.116e­01
KNN_4
Att Tok
C
0.53 ± 0.072
4.786e­01
Lin_1
0.05 ± 0.03
3.986e­01
KNN_25
C
C
0.54 ± 0.086
4.263e­01
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.008
8.235e­02
Lin_0001
CI
C
0.73 ± 0.048
1.341e­05
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.029
3.654e­01
RF_50
SC
S
0.56 ± 0.043
1.469e­01
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.013
1.198e­01
Lin_01
SC
C
0.52 ± 0.056
3.484e­01
Lin_01
0.05 ± 0.016
2.024e­01
Lin_0001
I
U
0.53 ± 0.068
4.774e­01
Lin_1
0.03 ± 0.01
4.993e­02
KNN_4
S
S
0.72 ± 0.097
1.197e­03
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.018
1.775e­01
KNN_10
R
U
0.57 ± 0.035
6.281e­02
KNN_1
0.05 ± 0.03
3.986e­01
KNN_1
At
S
0.6 ± 0.068
3.912e­02
RF_25
0.06 ± 0.025
3.520e­01
RF_50
At
C
0.61 ± 0.115
8.964e­02
Lin_1
0.06 ± 0.015
2.299e­01
KNN_10
A
S
0.55 ± 0.037
2.301e­01
Lin_1
0.03 ± 0.01
4.993e­02
Lin_10
A
C
0.51 ± 0.03
1.628e­01
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.015
1.432e­01
Lin_0001
A L PNT
S
0.69 ± 0.06
2.671e­04
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.023
2.564e­01
KNN_1
A L PNT
C
0.65 ± 0.047
6.355e­04
Lin_01
0.04 ± 0.018
1.775e­01
Lin_0001
A L + 1
S
0.7 ± 0.054
9.095e­05
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.029
3.654e­01
KNN_1
A L + 1
C
0.7 ± 0.055
1.051e­04
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.008
8.235e­02
RF_50
A + 1
S
0.8 ± 0.072
1.106e­05
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.027
3.116e­01
KNN_4
A + 1
C
0.82 ± 0.093
3.735e­05
Lin_10
0.04 ± 0.015
1.432e­01
KNN_1
A L RP
S
0.63 ± 0.089
2.322e­02
Lin_10
0.05 ± 0.027
3.539e­01
KNN_50
A L RP
C
0.58 ± 0.061
8.212e­02
Lin_10
0.05 ± 0.02
2.564e­01
Lin_0001
A L
S
0.68 ± 0.067
7.481e­04
Lin_1
0.05 ± 0.01
1.405e­01
KNN_25
A L
C
0.66 ± 0.088
6.692e­03
Lin_1
0.04 ± 0.015
1.432e­01)
Lin_0001
Table A.1: Old models
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
61
==PAGE:72==
M
T
Cor
Sacc
S: p­val
Cl
Cacc
C: p­val
Cl
Iacc
I: p­val
Cl
Pre
U
0.32
98.06 ± 1.11
N/A
L1
15.0 ± 3.09
N/A
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
N/A
L1
R
U
0.04
51.94 ± 5.87
1.2e­04
L10
16.39 ± 3.87
6.5e­01
K50
1.94 ± 1.42
4.3e­01
L10
S
S
0.07
67.5 ± 3.36
1.2e­05
L1
17.22 ± 2.26
4.1e­01
L10
1.94 ± 1.42
2.1e­01
L0001
C
C
0.03
42.78 ± 9.68
3.1e­04
L10
22.5 ± 4.43
6.3e­02
L1
4.17 ± 1.52
2.7e­01
L10
I
U
0.06
43.89 ± 3.36
6.6e­06
R
15.28 ± 4.65
9.4e­01
K25
3.89 ± 2.39
3.7e­01
L10
SC
S
0.03
68.89 ± 4.18
1.3e­04
L10
15.28 ± 2.64
7.0e­01
K10
3.06 ± 1.04
6.2e­01
K10
SC
C
0.03
54.17 ± 6.21
1.7e­04
L10
20.28 ± 5.02
2.3e­01
L1
3.61 ± 1.67
3.0e­01
R
SI
S
0.11
61.11 ± 4.89
1.1e­04
L10
13.89 ± 2.48
6.2e­01
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
1.0e+00
L10
CI
C
0.10
45.28 ± 3.89
1.0e­05
L10
21.11 ± 1.62
4.6e­02
L1
3.33 ± 2.08
6.9e­01
K50
A
S
0.09
57.22 ± 6.83
2.8e­04
L1
16.11 ± 3.58
7.3e­01
L1
5.0 ± 1.42
7.8e­02
L1
A
C
0.09
51.94 ± 6.0
1.5e­04
L10
19.44 ± 3.04
1.5e­01
K50
3.33 ± 1.88
6.9e­01
L0001
Pre
P
0.32
97.5 ± 1.04
N/A
L1
13.89 ± 2.48
N/A
L1
2.22 ± 1.42
N/A
L1
R
P
0.04
35.0 ± 4.16
2.5e­06
L1
16.11 ± 4.61
4.6e­01
L1
1.39 ± 1.52
5.7e­01
L1
S
P
0.07
54.17 ± 6.33
1.2e­04
L1
13.89 ± 3.17
1.0e+00
L1
2.22 ± 0.68
1.0e+00
L1
C
P
0.03
27.78 ± 2.48
8.3e­07
L1
17.22 ± 2.58
1.2e­01
L1
2.78 ± 2.91
7.9e­01
L1
I
P
0.06
26.39 ± 3.73
3.3e­06
L1
15.83 ± 2.86
4.6e­01
L1
2.5 ± 1.84
8.5e­01
L1
SC
P
0.03
45.83 ± 5.49
3.6e­05
L1
16.11 ± 1.11
1.6e­01
L1
1.39 ± 1.52
5.5e­01
L1
SI
P
0.11
39.72 ± 5.17
1.1e­05
L1
12.78 ± 3.22
6.8e­01
L1
1.94 ± 1.11
8.1e­01
L1
CI
P
0.10
26.67 ± 4.06
2.6e­06
L1
15.28 ± 4.12
6.7e­01
L1
1.11 ± 1.36
4.1e­01
L1
A
P
0.09
39.17 ± 2.69
3.1e­07
L1
15.28 ± 3.62
6.4e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.42
1.0e+00
L1
Table A.2: Table displaying the relevant results of the masked autoencoders with small
size that were trained for 100 epochs. See Table 4.2 and 4.3 for information about the
abbreviations.
62
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:73==
M
T
Cor
Sacc
S: p­val
Cl
Cacc
C: p­val
Cl
Iacc
I: p­val
Cl
Pre
U
0.32
98.06 ± 1.11
N/A
L1
15.0 ± 3.09
N/A
L1
2.78 ± 0.88
N/A
L1
R
U
0.16
61.67 ± 2.72
1.9e­05
L10
15.83 ± 4.08
8.0e­01
R
2.22 ± 1.42
5.9e­01
K4
S
S
0.14
26.94 ± 2.58
9.4e­07
K1
14.17 ± 2.83
7.9e­01
L10
2.5 ± 1.84
7.5e­01
K50
C
C
0.24
38.06 ± 3.47
3.1e­06
L10
18.33 ± 5.15
4.5e­01
L10
3.61 ± 2.42
4.7e­01
L10
I
U
0.25
85.28 ± 4.36
5.1e­03
L10
14.17 ± 2.04
7.4e­01
L0001
2.78 ± 1.96
1.0e+00
L1
SC
S
0.26
31.94 ± 5.05
1.7e­05
R
14.72 ± 3.99
9.3e­01
L10
2.78 ± 1.96
1.0e+00
K25
SC
C
0.26
33.06 ± 5.58
1.7e­05
L10
18.61 ± 3.24
2.6e­01
L10
2.22 ± 1.88
6.5e­01
R
SI
S
0.30
36.67 ± 5.17
2.2e­05
L10
14.72 ± 1.88
8.5e­01
L10
2.78 ± 1.52
1.0e+00
K25
CI
C
0.23
40.0 ± 7.37
1.0e­04
L10
21.67 ± 3.99
1.2e­01
L0001
3.33 ± 1.11
5.4e­01
L0001
A
S
0.28
42.5 ± 5.17
3.2e­05
L10
15.56 ± 4.06
8.5e­01
L1
2.22 ± 1.88
6.5e­01
K4
A
C
0.28
44.44 ± 1.52
5.7e­07
L10
16.67 ± 2.64
5.1e­01
L0001
2.5 ± 1.04
7.8e­01
L10
Pre
P
0.32
97.5 ± 1.04
N/A
L1
13.89 ± 2.48
N/A
L1
2.22 ± 1.42
N/A
L1
R
P
0.16
47.78 ± 3.36
8.6e­06
L1
13.33 ± 2.99
8.0e­01
L1
2.5 ± 2.55
8.6e­01
L1
S
P
0.14
26.94 ± 4.36
8.8e­06
L1
10.0 ± 4.68
3.1e­01
L1
1.11 ± 1.04
3.7e­01
L1
C
P
0.24
24.17 ± 5.87
2.3e­05
L1
14.44 ± 4.18
8.3e­01
L1
2.78 ± 0.0
4.8e­01
L1
I
P
0.25
83.06 ± 5.85
5.8e­03
L1
13.89 ± 3.17
1.0e+00
L1
2.5 ± 1.36
8.0e­01
L1
SC
P
0.26
28.89 ± 4.76
1.2e­05
L1
10.83 ± 2.04
2.2e­01
L1
2.22 ± 2.26
1.0e+00
L1
SI
P
0.30
27.5 ± 5.65
2.1e­05
L1
13.06 ± 2.86
7.4e­01
L1
1.94 ± 1.42
8.3e­01
L1
CI
P
0.23
25.28 ± 2.55
2.0e­07
L1
18.33 ± 1.84
9.4e­02
L1
1.94 ± 1.11
8.1e­01
L1
A
P
0.28
28.33 ± 2.26
1.1e­07
L1
11.39 ± 2.55
8.8e­02
L1
1.11 ± 1.04
3.7e­01
L1
Table A.3: Table displaying the relevant results of the masked autoencoders with normal
size that were trained for 100 epochs. See Table 4.2 and 4.3 for information about the
abbreviations.
A.2
Reconstruction plots
Figure A.1: Reconstructions of the pre­trained model on HCP data
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.2: Reconstructions of the pre­trained model on GOD data
64
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:75==
A.3
TSNE regression plots
A.4
GOD + HCP small model regression plots
Training
Test
Figure A.3: Regression plot with TSNE visualizations of the latent representation related
to the subject token of training and test data, respectively, as a function of the number of
epochs trained. The colors indicate subject id. The model considered is a small model
trained with all of the contrastive losses.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
65
==PAGE:76==
Training
Test
Figure A.4: Regression plot with TSNE visualizations of the latent representation related
to the class token of training and test data, respectively, as a function of the number of
epochs trained. The colors indicate class id. The model considered is a small model
trained with all of the contrastive losses.
66
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:77==
Training
Test
Figure A.5: Regression plot with TSNE visualizations of the latent representation related
to the class token of training and test data, respectively, as a function of the number of
epochs trained. The colors indicate subject id. The model considered is a small model
trained with all of the contrastive losses.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
67
==PAGE:78==
Training
Test
Figure A.6: Regression plot with TSNE visualizations of the latent representation related
to the subject token of training and test data, respectively, as a function of the number of
epochs trained. The colors indicate subject id. The model was initialized as the pretrained
model and trained with all of the contrastive losses.
68
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:79==
Training
Test
Figure A.7: Regression plot with TSNE visualizations of the latent representation related
to the class token of training and test data, respectively, as a function of the number of
epochs trained. The colors indicate class id. The model was initialized as the pretrained
model and trained with all of the contrastive losses.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
69
==PAGE:80==
Training
Test
Figure A.8: Regression plot with TSNE visualizations of the latent representation related
to the class token of training and test data, respectively, as a function of the number of
epochs trained. The colors indicate subject id. The model was initialized as the pretrained
model and trained with all of the contrastive losses.
70
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:81==
A.5
Confusion matrices
Figure A.9: Confusion matrix of the normal­sized model trained with image class and
image ID contrast loss for 500 epochs.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
71
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.10: Confusion matrix of the pretrained initialized model trained with image class
and subject contrast loss for 500 epochs.
72
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.11: Confusion matrix of the pretrained model.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
73
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.12: Confusion matrix of the small­sized model trained with image class contrast
loss for 500 epochs.
74
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:85==
A.6
LDM more pics
Figure A.13: Examples of generated images for the pretrained model finetuned to subject
3 for the generative task.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
75
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.14: Examples of generated images for PreSC−100 trained on all subjects for the
generative task. These examples are all generated from brain activity from the same
subject.
76
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.15: Examples of generated images for the pretrained model trained on all sub­
jects for the generative task. These examples are all generated from brain activity from
the same subject.
Decoding Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging data using Deep Self­supervised Learning
77
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, bld. 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk/
