==PAGE:1==
Server cluster operation load balance and power opti-
mization
Master Thesis - Autonomous Systems
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
Master Thesis - Autonomous Systems
August, 2023
By
Alonso Rapado Guill´en
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads,
Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark along with the help and resources from Motoro-
lasolutions Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Masters degree in
Autonomous systems.
Alonso Rapado Guill´en - s212371
Signature
Date
ii
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis focuses on addressing the inefficiency problem in server clusters related
to high energy waste and low optimization. Caused by servers remaining in IDLE state
for approximately 80% of their operational time. The aim of this research is to identify
and implement effective solutions to optimize power consumption and load balance in
server clusters.
In this case scenario, server operations are scheduled to run for an undetermined continuous
time during non-workload periods, typically at night. However, since these operations are
non-critical, they can be split, delayed, or even skipped based on the overall requirements.
By setting up an optimized distributed system configuration with CI/CD tools,
more operations could be achieved with less power and time consumption.
The research involves analyzing historical cluster data to determine which servers are
executing operations and the time span they are in use.
This data analysis allows us
to predict time and resource requirements for different procedures, allowing for optimal
scheduling within suitable time intervals. Additionally, energy price fluctuations
throughout the day will be taken into account in the proposed solution.
To compare and evaluate different methods, power consumption, server performance statis-
tics, and other relevant metrics will be considered. The ideal solution to this problem is
an autonomous system where the server cluster operates without requiring human in-
tervention.
Keywords: Server cluster, load balance, power optimization, energy waste, distributed
system, scheduling, autonomous systems, CI/CD.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to all the individuals
who have played a significant role in the completion of this thesis.
First and foremost, I extend my heartfelt appreciation to my supervisors at DTU, Kon-
stantin Filonenko, Dominik Franjo, and Peder Bacher, for their unwavering guid-
ance, invaluable insights, and continuous support throughout the research process. Their
expertise and encouragement have been instrumental in shaping this work.
Additionally, I would like to extend my thanks to the entire department at Motorola for
their support and cooperation during the course of this thesis. A special mention goes to
Konstantin Dolgov and Ruslan Asenov for leading the project within the company.
Their mentorship, patience, and collaborative efforts have contributed significantly to the
success of this research.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my friends and colleagues who have provided
valuable feedback, encouragement, and a listening ear during the ups and downs of this
academic pursuit.
iv
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives and goal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Prior work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Data collection and methods
7
2.1
Server Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Jenkins Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Pipeline duration forecasting methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Infrastructure
15
3.1
Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Architecture and design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Implementation
31
4.1
Power saving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Jenkins pipeline time forecasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Scheduler algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Experimental results
53
5.1
Real time measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Optimal time measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Energy consumption measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Discussion
63
6.1
Energy consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
69
A Methodology
73
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
v
==PAGE:8==
A.1 Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 Jenkins API data extracion code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.3 Jenkins pipeline automatic data extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
B Implementation
76
B.1
Linear programming mocked data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
vi
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the current digital era, digital information handled by data centers has in-
creased. It has become the principal infrastructure in many data-driven companies,
not only to store big amounts of data, but to store platforms and network applica-
tions.
While the development of data centers is proven beneficial for businesses and its economy,
it is causing a big impact in the environment. According to the International Energy
Agency, data centers consume approximately 200 terawatt-hours (TWh) of electricity,
or nearly 1% of global electricity demand, contributing to 0.3% of all global CO2
emissions [Kam22]. Several other aspects about data centers harm the environment. The
less efficiently data centers are managed, the more stress will be put into the data center
hardware components.
This leads to a premature disposal of them, causing hardware
waste and profit loss to businesses.
1.1
Objectives and goal
The main goal for the thesis is to design and simulate a task control infrastructure
for the Motorola company which reduces server cluster energy consumption. This
problem concerning for the company, as there is a big amount of servers wasting resources
while not performing any productive activity. This is translated as high quantity of money
spent in electricity bills and the need to replace components more frequently.
The following objectives had to be fulfilled to achieve this goal:
• Data collection Chapter 2
• Hardware and software configuration and implementation Chapter 3
• CI/CD automatizing implementation Section 4.1
• Forecasting and Scheduling algorithm simulation Section 4.2 Section 4.3
• Measuring results Chapter 5
The idea is to implement the most feasible efficient infrastructure with the resources
we have in the department without losing any availability and performance on these
servers.
In addition a simulation on forecasting and scheduler algorithms will be performed, fore-
casting will be used for workload and energy prices to optimize the available resources
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
1
==PAGE:10==
cost. Finally, an algorithm will be developed taking into account servers availability, fore-
casted pipeline duration and workload to distribute and schedule tasks evenly.
By using algorithms and load balance, we aim to develop a system that can au-
tonomously power servers based on real-time workload demands. It would analyze external
and predicted factors and make real-time decisions to optimize power usage while en-
suring that performance remains unaffected.
After the implementation, measurements will be compared to validate if the new system
performs better in terms of efficiency. Furthermore, if the results turn out positively, fur-
ther research would be conducted for this implementation on other departments, achieving
a general approach in the company for this challenge.
1.2
Motivation
Over the past years, Motorola Solutions Denmark has made significant efforts to reduce
environmental footprint related to the operations executed on site. By focusing on
energy efficiency and implementing various green initiatives, we aim to minimize the
environmental impact and contribute to a more sustainable future.
When we use less energy, it means we are using less natural resources to produce
that energy. Many of these energy sources, like coal, oil, and natural gas, release harmful
pollutants and greenhouse gases into the air when they are burned to create energy.
By reducing our energy consumption, we can help combat climate change and its negative
effects. Using less energy means there is less pollution and fewer greenhouse gases released
into the atmosphere. This, in turn, helps to protect the environment. To reduce energy
consumption related to the servers, several measurements have been tried over the years.
• Manual server powering.
• Out of office timer.
• Self-Automated server powering.
While other departments within the company are still stuck on doing manual powering
or setting an out of office timer on their servers, VESTA team has taken the lead and
moved into Self-Automated server powering. The team recognized the importance of
being proactive and pushing the boundaries when it comes to environmental challenges.
It is important to clarify that throughout the document, any mention of de-
partment should be understood as Motorola’s unless the term Autonomous
Systems Department is explicitly mentioned.
2
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Prior work
The environmental challenges of data centers have always been present, with an inter-
est increase since the recently fast growth of the data center amount, the pandemic and
the energy crisis. Some work about it has already been done and some researches have
been conducted. These projects aim for different environmental challenges each, which
combined, could be useful to develop more efficient data centers.
The infrastructure architecture already explored by the department is Lights Out Man-
agement (LOM) architecture. The server cluster has some LOM features such as remote
management, but it works in a hybrid mode, where manual manipulation is required. The
idea is to implement this already researched architecture completely into the servers.
[She22]
Forecasting and algorithm scheduling have a high impact when referring to efficiency.
By knowing the amount of time a task is going to take and the energy production
during the day, an optimal time frame can be scheduled to benefit the environment and
the businesses.
Some research has been done previously about data workload predictions. [Anh16]
[YPY21]
1.4
Research Scope
The research was driven by the need to understand and mitigate the challenges asso-
ciated with load balance and power optimization on the servers.
Even though the focus is on a specific server cluster with a defined infrastructure.
This cluster is placed among other clusters within the Motorola Data Center environment,
which makes it responsible for some of the energy consumed within the environment. The
first thing to research about in general is, How are Data Centers dangerous for the
environment?
1.4.1
Energy consumption
Data centers account for around 2% of all global carbon emissions. In the US alone, 0.5%
of total greenhouse gas emissions are attributed to data centers.[Ezr21] [Sid21]
Quoting The United States Data Center Energy Usage Report: ” In 2014, data
centers in the U.S. consumed an estimated 70 billion kWh, representing about 1.8% of total
U.S. electricity consumption. Current study results show data center electricity consump-
tion increased by about 4% from 2010-2014, a large shift from the 24% percent increase
estimated from 2005-2010 and the nearly 90% increase estimated from 2000- 2005. En-
ergy use is expected to continue slightly increasing in the near future, increasing 4% from
2014-2020, the same rate as the past five years. Based on current trend estimates, U.S.
data centers are projected to consume approximately 73 billion kWh in 2020” [She16]
A more recent study of Data Center energy consumption was published by Statista Inc.
on Sept. 30, 2021. [Aiz20]. This study shows a year-by-year forecast on data center
split in traditional, cloud and hyperscale cloud data centers. Figure 1.1
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Energy demand in data centers worldwide from 2015 to 2021, by type
As it can be seen in Figure 1.1, the traditional Data Centers consumption is
decreasing over time. This is because companies in the need of more computing space,
are moving their local infrastructure to the Cloud.[Kir22] In the project’s context,
a traditional Data Center is being used, without any further plan of moving to a Cloud
infrastructure.
1.4.2
Alternative solutions
It is important to acknowledge the existence of alternative solutions that have been
proposed or implemented by researchers in the field.
These alternative solutions offer
different perspectives and approaches to addressing the problem and can provide valuable
insights for further research.
These alternative approaches are not individual, and can be mixed among other energy
efficient practises on Data Centers
Server Heating
Some companies have implemented innovative strategies to reuse the excess heat gen-
erated by servers in data centers and use it to heat their offices or other facilities. This
approach, known as ”heat reuse” or ”waste heat recovery”, aims to maximize energy effi-
ciency and reduce overall environmental impact.
There are some existing case studies about this topic:
• Microsoft has recently announced an important heat reuse project in Finland: ”In
a unique collaboration with Fortum Corporation, the waste heat produced in the dat-
acenters will be converted to district heating, serving Finland’s second largest city
Espoo and neighboring Kauniainen, and the municipality of Kirkkonummi, in what
to date will be the world’s largest scheme to recycle waste heat from data centers. Dis-
trict heating is a system for distributing heat generated either in a centralized location
with fossil fuels, or as in Fortum’s case, from increasingly emission-free, distributed
heat sources. Heat is transferred to customers through a system of insulated pipes
4
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:13==
for residential and commercial heating requirements such as space and water heating.
The waste heat recycled for district heating, along with other measures, will help the
City of Espoo and the neighboring communities to reach their ambitious CO2 emis-
sion reduction targets, leading among other things to decommissioning of Fortum’s
last coal-fired heat unit in Espoo.” [Mic22]
• Green Datacenter Zurich West waste heat reuse. In Dielsdorf, Green is build-
ing three new high-performance data centers for data and IT systems for businesses
and cloud providers. ”The heat generated during server operation is processed in
a district heating center and distributed via the district heating network. This al-
lows the waste heat to be used by private households and businesses in Dielsdorf and
neighboring communities.” [Tec22]
These heating reuse has two main benefits:
• Replacing fossil heating systems massively reduces CO2 emission.
• Returning cold air to the data center reduces the energy consumption of the
cooling systems.
Cooling
Server rooms typically use one or a combination of cooling technologies to maintain optimal
temperatures and prevent overheating of the servers.
The electricity consumed in
these data centers is mainly by the equipment (50%) and HVAC or computer room
air-conditioners (CRACs) (25%–40%) to maintain the computer room environment.
[Cro07]
The most common way of cooling servers is Computer Room Air Conditioning
(CRAC). They deliver conditioned cool air directly to the server racks or raised floors,
ensuring that the servers receive optimal cooling.
Motorola has already implemented a method to use the cold temperatures outside to
refrigerate their servers.
This innovative approach takes advantage of the natural
cold environment to provide cooling for the servers and reduce energy consumption
and costs associated with traditional cooling systems. The cool air from the outside
transferred to the server room the air distribution mechanisms.
Other cooling optimizations that can be done in order to make a more efficient cooling
are related to the room design, the placement of the servers and the reserved airflow.
• Cold aisle and hot aisle design: This is to recycle your internal air by using a hot
and cold aisle design to cool it. Hot and cold air aisles arrange cabinets and racks in
a line format, with each rack facing the opposing direction. This equipment layout
causes the cold and hot air vents to turn toward each other, creating alternate aisles
of hot and cold air. The CRAC vents the hot air from the hot aisle and pumps in
cool air from the cool aisle.
• Free cooling: Free cooling is a popular, cost-effective method for regions with cold
climates, as it allows facilities to vent hot air and then draw cool outside air into the
facility. This is the method that Motorola already uses during winter times due to
the low temperatures.
[Wat12]
Virtualization
Virtualization is a solution that effectively addresses the power consumption challenges
faced by Data Centers. In essence, virtualization allows a single hardware unit to
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
5
==PAGE:14==
operate as multiple components. By employing different user interfaces, specific hard-
ware elements are isolated, enabling them to function independently as separate entities.
With this approach, multiple servers can be merged into one, which turns the energy
consumption to the minimum, helping to reduce overall energy used for Data Centers.
The energy saved per server would translate into approximately 700 kilowatt-hour per
month which is big with such tremendous potential for energy saving.[Gee20]
1.4.3
Power cycling hardware damage
Implementing power-saving measures, such as turning servers off during periods of inac-
tivity, may raise concerns about potential hardware damage.
The notion that frequent power cycling of a computer causes wear and tear is a myth that
has its roots in historical truths. In the early days of personal computing, it was indeed
true that frequent shutdowns and startups had the potential to harm the hard disk drive.
”For a modern computer, frequent shutdown and startup has a minimal effect on the
computer’s overall life. The truth is that computers aren’t meant to last forever. The
average lifespan of a PC is five to seven years. Modern PCs are built to handle 40,000
on-off cycles before failure. If you shut down your computer at night and start it back up
in the morning, you should be good for the next 109 years.” [Roo23]
1.5
Structure
In this thesis, the overall structure of the document is organized into several sections to
present the findings and solutions in a cohesive manner. Some sections are grouped for a
better understanding.
Chapter 2 and Chapter 3 are dedicated to Background and methodology. In these
sections, the approach used to conduct the research is explained. Overall it contains the
research design, data collection methods, tools and techniques employed in gathering and
analyzing the data. By reading through this sections, the reader understands how the
framework and the processes within this thesis project work.
Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 are dedicated to Results.
In the context of this thesis,
it encompasses both Implementation Results and Simulation Results.
For this
section, the outcomes obtained from the practical implementation of the research and
simulated environment values are analyzed. By presenting both types of the results, the
effectiveness and feasibility of the solution can be demonstrated.
The implementation
results showcase how well the research works in a real-world context, while the simulation
results provide a controlled environment to analyze and understand the behavior under
specific conditions.
Chapter 6 is dedicated to Discussion. Its primary purpose is to analyze and interpret
the findings presented in the preceding chapters, and to provide a comprehensive discussion
and limitations of the results in the thesis context.
6
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Data collection and methods
In this section, we will discuss the data obtained for the project as well as some methods
involved within the project. We will explore how the data is being utilized and its purpose
of inform decision-making, validate hypotheses, measure effectiveness, track progress, and
adapt strategies throughout the project.
2.1
Server Data
To effectively evaluate the insights of the servers, it is imperative that we gather data
pertaining to their specifications. By acquiring detailed information about them, we
gain insights into their processing capabilities and power requirements.
Furthermore, monitoring power consumption and temperature of the servers plays a
critical role in maintaining their health and longevity. Understanding the power require-
ments of the servers helps us manage energy consumption efficiently, reducing costs
and minimizing the environmental footprint. By collecting and analyzing data re-
lated to power consumption, we can implement measures to optimize performance and
enhance reliability.
2.1.1
Server power consumption
Overall, highlighting the quantity, type, and specifications of the servers enables us to
effectively plan and manage the infrastructure to meet the demands of the organization.
Knowing how many servers we have available and how much energy they consume is
essential for this project.
It is relevant to know the environment in which the proper function of the platform can
be ensured. According to its manual ”The server platform is intended to be deployed in
data centers, but has been designed to work over the extended temperature range of -5°C
to +55°C (23°F to +131°F) and to withstand non-condensing humidity levels up to 95%”
Currently, the department has 25 operational servers. For these measurements, it is
important to note that we are assuming maximum and minimum power usage across
all servers. This approach allows us to calculate the highest/lowest possible power con-
sumption scenario and ensures that the infrastructure can handle peak loads without any
issues. In the end, the system power consumption depends on the hardware configuration
and the applications running on it, therefore we can only estimate their average consump-
tion.
It is known that the nominal output power of the server is 850 W. This means the
system must consume less than 850 W at all times during operation.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Server Watts Consumption Server Documentation
As seen in Figure 2.1:
• Minimum output power per server: 335 Watts/h
• Maximum output power per server: 850 Watts/h
• Average output power per server: 592.5 Watts/h
To calculate energy consumption, we need to multiply the wattage by the number of hours
the servers are used in a day. Electricity bill is measured in kilowatt-hours (kWh), so the
equation to calculate the daily consumption is the following:
watts per hour ∗usage hours
1000
= kilowatt per hour
Assuming the servers are running 24 hours everyday, an estimation of the daily
consumption by server can be calculated:
• Minimum daily power consumption per server: 8.04 kW/day
• Maximum daily power consumption per server: 20.4 kW/day
• Average daily power consumption per server: 14.22 kW/day
In order to calculate the monthly consumption of servers, it is important to consider
that servers do not run at 100% capacity throughout the entire day. Servers often
experience periods of lower activity when user demand is lower. To accommodate these
fluctuations, it is common practice to take the average of server usage over a specific
period, usually a month, to determine the overall consumption. By considering the average
8
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:17==
server utilization, we can obtain a more realistic estimation of the energy consumption
required to support the server infrastructure over the long term.
14.22kWh ∗30days = 426.6kWhmonth per server
By taking this estimation, we can gain valuable insights into the estimated total energy
being used by all the servers.
426.6kWhmonth ∗25server = 10.665kWhmonth per server
The total monthly energy consumption of all the servers is measured to be 10.655 kWh.
To calculate the corresponding cost, we need to consider the price of one kilowatt-hour
(kWh) based on the company’s characteristics.
According to Denmark statistics, the
average price per kWh for a company with a consumption between 500 mWh - 1999
mWh the second half of 2022 is 3.0417 DKK. [Den23]
10.665kWhmonth ∗3.0417DKK = 32, 439.7305DKK monthly
Multiplying the energy consumption by the price per kWh, we can determine the monthly
cost. In this case, the total monthly cost of energy for the servers would be approximately
32,439.7305 DKK. This estimation helps us understand the financial impact of the
server energy consumption and highlights the importance of optimizing energy efficiency
to reduce operational expenses while maintaining the necessary computing power and
performance of the server infrastructure.
2.1.2
Time Server Uptime and Downtime
In this section, we will delve into the intricacies of measuring time server uptime and
downtime. It is important to note that before the development of this tools, no mea-
surements related to the servers availability were being taken. We assume that for the
time before the planning of this project, the server availability and operational time
is assumed to be 100%.
Based on the results obtained from the developed monitoring script, valuable infor-
mation can be extracted, allowing us to observe trends and distinguish between different
case scenarios regarding time server uptime and downtime.
This script has been integrated into the project infrastructure and collects data dynam-
ically and automatically every time an request is sent to power the servers. While the
specific details and functionality of the monitoring tool will be explained in-depth later in
the document, here the structure of the data collected will be exposed.
The format that was chosen to store this new data is JSON, as Python is being used
for data processing within this project. Python supports JSON natively and has several
packages that help handle this format.
The data extracted follows this structure:
1
{
2
" Server_cluster ":[{
3
"OFF": {
4
"execution_time ": 64.08500003814697 ,
5
" job_build_number ": "###" ,
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
9
==PAGE:18==
6
"server_result ": "{ SERVER
DATA}",
7
"start_time ": "2023 -06 -16
22:44:09.887366" ,
8
"triggered_by ": "pipeline"
9
},
10
"ON": {
11
"execution_time ": 177.4079999923706 ,
12
" job_build_number ": "###" ,
13
"server_result ": "{ SERVER
DATA }}",
14
"start_time ": "2023 -06 -14
15:13:22.940268" ,
15
"triggered_by ": "Manual"
16
},
17
"duration ": 199846.947098
18
} ,...]
19
.
20
.
21
.
22
}
Listing 2.1: Server uptime and downtime measurements format
The provided JSON Listing 2.1 represents a structure containing information about each
server cluster, including the parameters related to the servers ON and OFF states.
Here’s an explanation of the parameters within the JSON:
• Server cluster: Represents a group of servers.
• ON/OFF: Represents the parameters related to the server powering state.
• duration: Represents the duration of the server being in a powered ON state. It is
measured in seconds.
• execution time: It indicates the time taken for the process to power ON or OFF
the selected cluster. It is measured in seconds.
• job build number: It represents the unique identifier or build number associated
with the job executed.
• server result: It contains the data or result generated by the server.
• start time: It denotes the timestamp when the server transitioned to the required
state.
• triggered by: It indicates the cause or event that triggered the server to transition
to a different state.
However, to derive meaningful insights and draw conclusions from this data, further pro-
cessing and analysis is required.
This measurements script was developed under Motorola’s infrastructure within
the department rules.
2.2
Jenkins Data
In order to assess the usage of the servers within the context of the Jenkins pipelines,
several processes were executed to gather relevant information. Jenkins pipelines are uti-
lized to automate various operations and tasks on the servers, and understanding their
impact on server utilization is important for optimizing resource allocation and perfor-
mance. These metrics provide insights about how much time the servers are being
utilized during pipeline execution.
10
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:19==
In addition, the collected data on server utilization within the Jenkins pipelines will also
serve the purpose of estimating the time required for pipeline execution. By ana-
lyzing the historical server utilization data captured during pipeline runs, we can identify
patterns about each corresponding execution times. This allows us to build predictive
models that can estimate the time it will take for future pipeline executions based on the
observed historical patterns.
For this project, the analysis will focus on four specific pipelines, denoted as A, B, C
and D respectively. These pipelines represent distinct sets of operations and tasks that
are performed in the servers. By examining each pipeline individually, we can gain a de-
tailed understanding of their unique characteristics, resource requirements, and execution
patterns.
2.2.1
Obtained data
See Appendix A.1 for further detail on each pipeline parameters. These pipelines have
common attributes that provide valuable information regarding the timing, characteristics,
and success of the pipeline runs.
• duration: Represents the actual duration of the pipeline execution.
• estimatedDuration: Denotes the estimated duration of the pipeline execution
done by Jenkins.
• number: Represents an identifier or number associated with the pipeline run.
• result: Indicates the outcome or result of the pipeline execution.
• timestamp: Represents the starting date and time of the pipeline execution.
2.2.2
Data extraction source
We will get into the process employed to extract data from the Jenkins environment. It
is crucial to emphasize that the data we obtained had never been collected before,
making this a initiative for the department. The successful extraction of this data marks
a significant milestone in the understanding of the Jenkins pipelines and their impact on
server usage.
Jenkins offers an API, which serves as a powerful resource for extracting data directly
from the pipelines, including pipeline information, build data, and job configurations.
[Jen23]
This Jenkins API provides information in several formats. In order to obtain a better
processing of the data, the JSON format is used.
Thanks to that, we can search for
parameters within one search on the API using the tree argument.
1
JENKINS_URL = https :// $JENKINS_URL /job/JOB_ID/api/json?tree=builds[
actions[parameters[name ,value ]],result ,number ,duration ,timestamp ,
estimatedDuration ]
Listing 2.2: Jenkins API pattern
Arguments explanation for Listing 2.2:
• job/JOB ID/api: Requests are sent to each Job independently to obtain its data.
• json?tree=: The output is formatted in JSON and extra arguments are passed
onto the function.
• builds[actions[parameters[name,value]]: For each Build within the specific Job,
the specific parameters of the pipeline are retrieved as a key, value pair.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
11
==PAGE:20==
• result, number, duration, timestamp, estimatedDuration: Extra arguments
outside the scope of actions of each build.
It is important to note that, because of the department configuration, the Jenkins data is
subject to deletion after a specific period, due to storage limitations. Consequently,
it becomes imperative to proactively extract, analyze and store the data in an efficient
way before it goes to waste.
2.2.3
Data extraction process
The process of extracting data from the Jenkins API is accomplished through the uti-
lization of a Python script. Using the requests library or other API client libraries in
Python, we can make HTTP requests to the Jenkins API endpoints, retrieve the desired
data, and parse the JSON response. The Python library encapsulates the logic required
to authenticate with the Jenkins server, construct the API requests, handle pagination if
necessary, and extract the relevant data from the API responses.
First of all we declare the Jenkins API url Listing 2.2 Then for each Job we create a
reduced size JSON with only the relevant data Listing A.1. Once all the builds in each
job are extracted, we add that data to the reduced size JSON Listing A.2 Finally, we
store this data inside a permanent folder. Listing A.3
Now the data is permanently registered in the computer, removing responsibility from
the Jenkins server and storing a quantitative smaller JSON with the important data.
This Jenkins data extraction script was developed under Motorola’s infras-
tructure within the department rules.
2.2.4
Automatic data extraction process
Recognizing the importance of retrieving information from the Jenkins API, an auto-
mated process run within the Jenkins environment has been developed to ensure
the information retrieval. This automated process is designed to run at regular intervals,
ensuring a consistent and timely extraction of data from the Jenkins API. By
automating the script execution, we eliminate the need for manual intervention, allowing
for a more efficient and reliable data retrieval process.
To execute the previously mentioned script for data extraction automatically and, as we
are using Jenkins for the automated processes, we will create a Jenkins pipeline.
We will create a Jenkinsfile that describes the pipeline’s structure and stages.
This code is executed in a remote Jenkins slave, therefore, we need to setup the slave
appropriately so it is able to access the Jenkins API and get the relevant scripts. List-
ing A.4. Then, the script must be executed in order to retrieve this data. Listing A.5.
Finally, as the script generates multiple JSON files, one for each pipeline, they are gathered
into the main storage unit. Listing A.6
The pipeline is now configured and ready to collect all the information generated by the
script.
To complete the process, we need to schedule the execution of the Jenkins pipeline
at regular intervals. This periodic execution ensures that the pipeline, including the
data extraction script, runs automatically and consistently.
Jenkins provides built-in
scheduling capabilities through the use of cron-like syntax. We can configure the pipeline
to run periodically by specifying the desired schedule in the Jenkinsfile or in the Jenkins
server’s job configuration.
H0 ∗∗0
12
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:21==
This results allow for further monitoring, analysis, and optimization based on the latest
data obtained from the Jenkins environment.
This Jenkins pipeline was developed under Motorola’s infrastructure within
the department rules.
2.3
Pipeline duration forecasting methodology
2.3.1
Introduction
Linear regression is a statistical modeling technique used to establish a relationship be-
tween a dependent variable and one or more independent variables. In the context of
predicting the time it takes for a pipeline to complete, linear regression can be ap-
plied to estimate the duration based on relevant features or factors.
By fitting a linear regression model to historical data that includes both the independent
variables (predictors) and the corresponding pipeline completion times (target variable),
the model can learn the relationship between the predictors and the duration. Once the
model is trained, it can be used to predict the time it will take for a new pipeline, given
the relevant predictor values. [Mes19]
2.3.2
OSEMN
To create predictions for each of the pipelines, the OSEMN Data Science Life Cycle
method will be used
The OSEMN Data Science Life Cycle is a popular framework that outlines the various
stages involved in a typical data science project. OSEMN stands for Obtain, Scrub, Ex-
plore, Model, and iNterpret, representing the sequential steps followed to extract insights
and build predictive models from data.
• Obtain: In this initial stage, the focus is on acquiring the necessary data for analysis.
This involves identifying relevant data sources, collecting data, and understanding
the data collection process.
• Scrub: Once the data is obtained, it often requires cleaning and preprocessing to
ensure its quality and usability. This stage involves handling missing values, dealing
with outliers, addressing inconsistencies, and transforming the data into a suitable
format for analysis.
• Explore: After the data is cleaned, it’s time to explore and analyze it. This stage
involves performing exploratory data analysis (EDA) to understand the underlying
patterns, relationships, and distributions within the data.
• Model: In this stage, predictive models are built using machine learning or statisti-
cal techniques. The cleaned and analyzed data is used to train and evaluate models
to make predictions or draw conclusions.
• iNterpret: Once the models are trained and evaluated, the focus shifts to inter-
preting the results and extracting meaningful insights.
[hot23]
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Infrastructure
The infrastructure serves as the underlying architecture that enables the development,
deployment, and maintenance of software applications developed by the department. It
gathers a multitude of interconnected components, including hardware, software, net-
works, and data storage systems, working together to support the project’s objectives. By
understanding the key components and their interactions, the reader can have a better
overview of the project.
Even thought the infrastructure was already built in, some modifications were done in
different components. These modifications were carried on under the department rules
and involved these components:
• Lights Out Management (LOM): Additional capabilities and remote access were
added to the current server LOM status.
• IPMI: ipmitools was integrated on each of the systems.
• Cloud Manager: CloudManager API was added extra functionality.
• Workflow: An automated and manual workflow was added involving remote power
management.
• Slave load balance: Its capabilities were extended with a load balance plugin.
3.1
Configuration
The configuration of all devices within the project is a fundamental aspect of building
a reliable and efficient infrastructure. In this section we will go through the process of
explaining the backbone of the project from the configuration standards perspective.
3.1.1
Operating systems
In the project environment, a mixed operating system environment is adopted, using both
Linux and Windows. On one hand Windows is on its latest version, on the other
hand, for the Linux devices, we are in the process of migrating to the latest version.
The decision to migrate to the latest Linux version aligns with the department’s objective
of staying up-to-date with the evolving technological landscape.
Migration process
includes testing, compatibility checks, and careful planning to ensure a smooth transition
while minimizing any potential disruptions to the systems and services.
Having the latest versions of the operating systems its important for the project because
of various reasons:
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
15
==PAGE:24==
• Patch security flaws.
Software vulnerabilities enable cybercriminals to access
devices. Malware enables threat actors to take control of computers and steal in-
formation. Malware can also encrypt files, documents and other programs so they
are unusable. Security patches block these open doors in the software to protect a
device from attacks.
• Ensure compatibility. Get the software to be compatible with the latest technol-
ogy and version of the software is being used within the systems.
[Het22]
3.1.2
Network
The project environment we are working with, has some network configuration and stan-
dards as the initial project required. This can be achieved through network segmentation
using subnets, routers, and appropriate network configurations.
Considering we have different systems among the infrastructure, the network has to be
divided into subnets for each of the systems. This means that each system has its
own range of IP addresses within the respective subnet. Then, for each server assigned to
each system, an IP address must be assigned to the server under their respective subnet
or system.
Following the previous step, as the systems need to be able to communicate with each
other, therefore a router is configured. This router has as many interfaces as systems are
in the infrastructure, one for each system. This router interfaces are also assigned an IP
address.
Finally, each server has their default gateway to point to the IP address of the router
interface within its own subnet. This ensures that servers use the respective router as the
gateway to communicate outside their own subnet.
With this network configuration, servers within the same system can communicate
with each other using their assigned IP addresses, but they cannot directly commu-
nicate with servers in any other system. To communicate between systems, servers
would send their traffic to their respective default gateways (router interfaces), which will
route the traffic to the appropriate destination subnet.
This network segmentation provides isolation between the systems, allowing for sep-
arate management, security, and control while enabling controlled communication based
on the defined routing and access control policies.
3.1.3
Protocols
In this section, we will discuss the most frequently used protocols within the project. Pro-
tocols are a set of rules and standards that define how devices communicate and exchange
data over a network. By understanding and using these protocols effectively, we can ensure
seamless communication and interoperability within the project’s infrastructure.
RDP
As part of the remote access plan to the systems, RDP is enabled and available for each
of them. Windows Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) is a proprietary protocol developed
by Microsoft that enables remote access to a Windows-based computer over a network
connection. It allows users to connect to and control a remote computer as if they were
sitting directly in front of it. [Sec22]
The main advantages of using this protocol rather than any other such as VPN are the
following:
16
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:25==
• Easily monitor, control and maintain devices connected to the network.
• Quickly troubleshoot systems using the remote access.
• Define the access rights to files and folders for different categories of users.
[Com22]
SSH
As part of the remote access plan to the servers, SSH is enabled and configured for
each of them. It is important to note, that this access is possible only to the servers from
the system they are under. SSH stands for Secure Shell or Secure Socket Shell. It is a
cryptographic network protocol that allows two computers to communicate and share the
data over an insecure network such as the internet. It is used to login to a remote server to
execute commands and transfer data from one machine to another machine.[Jav22]
SSH supports multiple authentication methods, with key-based authentication being highly
recommended for enhanced security.
With key-based authentication, you generate a
public-private key pair on your local computer. The server stores the public key, while
you keep the private key securely on your local computer.
By using SSH, we can securely manage servers and enable secure tunnels for different
services.
DHCP
As mentioned before, the servers are assigned to an specific system. But, what happens
if we want to move that server to another system for any reason?
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is a client/server protocol that automat-
ically provides an Internet Protocol (IP) host with its IP address and other related config-
uration information such as the subnet mask and default gateway. RFCs 2131 and 2132
define DHCP as an Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) standard based on Bootstrap
Protocol (BOOTP), a protocol with which DHCP shares many implementation details.
DHCP allows hosts to obtain required TCP/IP configuration information from a DHCP
server.
Without DHCP, IP addresses for new servers or servers that are moved from one subnet to
another must be configured manually. Also, IP addresses for computers that are removed
from the network must be manually reclaimed.
With DHCP, this entire process is automated and managed centrally. The DHCP server
maintains a pool of IP addresses and leases an address to any DHCP-enabled client when
it starts up on the network. Because the IP addresses in the servers are dynamic, addresses
no longer in use are automatically returned to the IP pool for reallocation.
The DHCP server stores the configuration information in a database that includes:
• Valid TCP/IP configuration parameters for all clients on the network.
• Valid IP addresses, maintained in a pool for assignment to clients, as well as excluded
addresses.
• Reserved IP addresses associated with particular DHCP clients.
[Ger21]
DHCP offers several benefits, including reliable IP address configuration and re-
duced network administration. It minimizes configuration errors and address con-
flicts, as manual IP address configuration can be prone to mistakes. Additionally, the
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
17
==PAGE:26==
use of DHCP relay agents eliminates the need for a DHCP server on every subnet by
forwarding DHCP messages.
3.1.4
Virtualization
The servers have virtual machines (VMs) that serve multiple purposes. These VMs need
to be operational when requested in order to perform the required actions on the server.
They are configured to automatically start when the server powers on.
Virtual machines are an excellent tool for saving energy as they help reduce the amount
of physical hardware needed. Instead of running multiple servers for different tasks, vir-
tualization allows multiple VMs to coexist on a single physical server.
Overall, virtualization not only provides convenience and flexibility but also contributes
to energy efficiency by optimizing server utilization and reducing the number of physical
servers required. [JBi22]
3.1.5
Lights Out Management (LOM)
Lights Out Management is implemented in all the servers within the project. LOM is
a remote management feature that enables administrators to monitor and control
servers even when they are powered off or experiencing issues. With LOM, we can ac-
cess the server’s management interface over the network, allowing us to perform various
administrative tasks without the need for physical presence in the server room.
Furthermore, LOM enables us to optimize power consumption. We can schedule server
power on/off cycles based on usage patterns, effectively managing energy usage and
reducing unnecessary power consumption during idle periods.
Expanding Lights Out Management (LOM) capacities for the project’s servers has played
a crucial role in minimizing complexity and ensuring smooth operations. Without LOM,
the project’s complexity would have escalated exponentially, requiring more resources and
time to develop a stable and efficient solution.
Intel Remote Management Module 4
In the server infrastructure, the Intel Remote Management Module 4 (Intel RMM4)
is used for its Lights Out Management capabilities on each server. The Intel RMM4 serves
as a dedicated hardware module integrated into the servers, enabling remote access, con-
trol, and monitoring functionalities. With the Intel RMM4, we can perform essential
LOM tasks, even when the servers are powered off or unresponsive. This remote
management capability eliminates the need for physical presence in the server room.
18
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Intel RMM4 Dedicated Management Port Module Component Identification
The Intel Remote Management Module 4 (Intel RMM4) consists of several key components
and features, the ones that concern the project the most are:
• Embedded Web Server: The GUI presented by the embedded web server authen-
ticates users and provides access to all functions according to their privileges and
features the server supports.
• Keyboard, Video, Mouse (KVM) redirection: The firmware supports KVM
redirection over LAN. The systems are prepared with a Java Runtime Environment
(JRE) version 6.0 as a requirement to ruch this feature.
• Remote Console: Following KVM redirection and having JRE configured, the
remote console establishes a TCP connection to the server. This protocol is a unique
KVM protocol and not HTTP or HTTPS.
• Availability: The remote KVM session is available even when the server is powered
off. A restart or re connection is not required when a server is powered on/off.
• Security: The KVM supports multiple encryption algorithms from the OpenSSL
library on the server side, and Java cryptographic library on the client side. The
default one is AES-256.
• Usage: The whole BIOS boot process is shown in the KVM session when powering
on, enabling the client to manage and modify booting options remotely.
[Int20][Int19]
IPMI
To operate with the Intel Remote Management Module 4 (RMM4), we utilize the IPMI
(Intelligent Platform Management Interface) standardized message-based hardware
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
19
==PAGE:28==
management interface. IPMI serves as a communication protocol that enables seamless
interaction between the RMM4 and the server’s management software.
Microsoft Windows supports the Open Systems Adapter (OSA) and Microsoft Windows
Installer (MSI) IPMI device drivers. Initially, the systems we are working with did not
have IPMI, but the hardware was compatible with this feature. After making sure all
hardware is compatible, the software side was configured. This involved setting
up the IPMI management software, establishing network connectivity, and configuring
authentication and security settings.
The Baseboard Management Controller (BMC) provides various interfaces that are needed
for monitoring the health of the system hardware. There are different interfaces for user
channels, monitoring elements (temperature, voltage, fan speed, bus errors, and other
such elements), manually driven recovery (local or remote system resets and power on/off
operations), and logging in without operating system intervention for abnormal or out-of-
range conditions for later examination and alerting.
There are some existing vulnerabilities using IPMI [IBM21b]:
• CVE-2013-4037: ”The Remote Authenticated Key-Exchange Protocol (RAKP),
which is specified by the IPMI standard for authentication, has flaws. Although the
system does not allow the use of null passwords, a hacker might reverse engineer the
RAKP transactions to determine a password. The authentication process for IPMI
requires the management controller to send a hash of the requested password of the
user to the client before the client authenticates. This process is a key part of the
IPMI specification. The password hash can be broken by using an offline brute force
or dictionary attack.” [MIT13b]
• CVE-2013-4031: ”IBM Power Systems and OpenPower Systems are preconfigured
with one IPMI user account, which has the same default login name and password
on all affected systems. If a malicious user gains access to the IPMI interface by
using this preconfigured account, the user can power off or on, or restart the host
server, and create or change user accounts possibly preventing legitimate users from
accessing the system.” [MIT13a]
• CVE-2013-4786:
”The IPMI 2.0 specification supports RMCP+ Authenticated
Key-Exchange Protocol (RAKP) authentication, which allows remote attackers to
obtain password hashes and conduct offline password guessing attacks by obtaining
the hash-based message authentication code (HMAC) from a RAKP message 2 re-
sponse from a BMC.” [MIT13c]
To address these security risks, some measurements have been implemented to ensure the
protection of the servers. First, the default username and password provided by
the tool was modified. By using complex passwords and adhering to password best
practices, we reduce the likelihood of brute-force attacks or unauthorized login attempts.
Additionally, network isolation is implemented within the servers. This means that
we have segregated them from the public network and restricted access to authorized
personnel only. By keeping the servers on a separate, private network, we minimize the
exposure to potential threats from the public internet. This isolation significantly reduces
the attack surface and enhances the overall security posture of the servers.
Moreover, network security measures such as firewalls and access controls to further
exist to safeguard the servers. These security measures control inbound and outbound
20
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:29==
network traffic, allowing only authorized communication and preventing unauthorized
access or malicious activities.
Even though there are security risks associated with using IPMI still exist, other alter-
natives were not as powerful and useful for this use case. Some of them required SSH
connections directly to the server side or hardware upgrades, which is not feasible for the
project. [IBM21a]
3.2
Architecture and design
The equipment architecture is designed to support multiple environments, each consisting
of a Windows system as the primary device. This windows system serves as the
environment brain, providing the needed software, commands and features required. Un-
derneath the Windows system, several Linux servers exist that fulfill various roles and
responsibilities within each environment. These Linux servers offer a robust and reliable
platform for hosting specific services and applications.
This server architecture allow us to create a highly customizable and optimized environ-
ment for the specific needs. We can tailor each Linux server to fulfill specific requirements,
ensuring efficient resource utilization and optimal performance for different workloads.
ENVIRONMENT
SYSTEM
SYSTEM
SYSTEM
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
Figure 3.2: Systems environment
This diagram Figure 3.2 is a high level representation of the environment where the
project is taken place.
3.2.1
Test and Production environment
Now that there is a clear vision of the environment, it’s important to note that there is
a distinction among all the systems. Some of them are used for development/testing
while other are used mainly for production purposes, having the latest release of the
department’s software.
In the testing/development environment, we have systems dedicated to the development
and testing of software, applications, and configurations. These systems provide a con-
trolled and isolated space where developers and testers can experiment, validate, and refine
their work without impacting the production environment.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
21
==PAGE:30==
On the other hand, the production environment consists of systems that host services,
applications, and data as the customer would do in a real time scenario. These systems
are optimized for performance, reliability, and security to ensure smooth and uninterrupted
operations.
ENVIRONMENT
SYSTEM
SYSTEM
SYSTEM
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
TESTING ENVIRONMENT
PRODUCTION ENVIRONMENT
SYSTEM
SYSTEM
SYSTEM
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
Figure 3.3: Testing and production environment split
In this project, the implemented features are valid for both the testing and production
environments. However, there is a distinct approach regarding the integration of these
features between the two environments.
In the testing environment, we are implementing an automated integration process
for the solution. This systems are frequently switching between operating mode and IDLE
mode, so it makes sense to prepare an automated solution for this environment.
On the other hand, in the production environment, the integration of the features
follows a manual approach. Power optimization and load balance is implemented, but it
must be triggered manually by an operator.
22
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:31==
3.2.2
Windows system
In order to develop and test new features, a Windows system is used to provide a controlled
and optimized platform for developers to test and refine product features. These systems
have specific features, which are important within the project context.
In the Windows system that we utilize for testing and development purposes, Remote
Desktop Protocol (RDP) functionality is enabled. In addition to RDP, manual connection
is also enabled on the Windows system, allowing for non-remote capacities in case of a
critical situation or unknown error.
Cloud Manager
CloudManager, developed by the department and extended for the purpose of this
thesis, is a software application implemented on each of the system within the environment.
This application serves as a user interface where users can easily access and monitor
details such as the health of servers and the operational state of virtual machines.
In addition to its user interface capabilities, CloudManager also behaves as a REST API.
This functionality enables CloudManager to serve as a bridge between the system and
the automated testing, facilitating efficient communication and interaction. Through
the REST API, any operations can be performed, enabling automation and streamlined
CI/CD workflows.
Testing environment characteristics
Within the context for this thesis, the testing environment consists of three of this
systems denoted as SYSTEM A, SYSTEM B and SYSTEM C.
It is important to note that, as per the scope of this thesis, there is a restriction in place:
these Windows systems cannot be shut down. This restriction ensures the continuity and
availability of the testing environment, allowing for consistent and uninterrupted testing
and analysis.
SYSTEM A
CloudManager
SERVER
SYSTEM B
SYSTEM C
RDP
SERVER
SERVER
SERVER
SERVER
SERVER
CloudManager
SERVER
RDP
SERVER
SERVER
CloudManager
SERVER
RDP
SERVER
SERVER
Figure 3.4: Testing environment systems in detail
As seen in Figure 3.4 there are slight differences among the servers represented. Each
system its responsible of its own specific testing, therefore different server allocation is
contained in each system to perform such action.
SYSTEM A
SYSTEM A hosts three servers and perform tasks from Pipeline B, C and D.
In the context of SYSTEM A, the Pipeline C and D are executed in parallel. This parallel
execution is designed to simulate real-world communication where the system needs to
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
23
==PAGE:32==
undergo software upgrades or downgrades while being actively used by users. By running
these pipelines concurrently, we can assess the system’s ability to handle these transitions
smoothly, ensuring that user experience remains uninterrupted.
Once the pipelines C and D are completed, Pipeline B process is initiated.
During the project, it is important to note that System A has been under develop-
ment for a significant portion, if not the entirety, of the duration being analyzed.
Consequently, the available data for System A might be relatively limited compared to
other systems, potentially affecting the comprehensiveness of the analysis for this partic-
ular system.
SYSTEM B
SYSTEM B plays a significant role in the testing environment, as it hosts six servers
and is responsible for executing Pipeline A and D. This system runs multiple test
scenarios concurrently.
The pipelines running on SYSTEM B have three different test scenarios: FDMA,
TDMA, and ART. FDMA and TDMA scenarios simulate real world situations and
communications in order to replicate real system behaviour. Additionally, ART scenario
uses RobotFramework to perform UI web testing, verifying the user interface functionality
and consistency.
Simultaneously, pipeline A is executed, ensuring the continuous protection of the testing
environment. This pipeline runs concurrently with the testing scenarios, providing real-
time security scanning and threat detection to safeguard the system against potential
security risks.
This parallel split optimizes resource utilization and reduces testing time.
SYSTEM C
SYSTEM C hosts three servers and it is responsible for Pipeline B and C. The
Pipeline C, which runs twice consecutively, is designed to validate the software’s ability to
upgrade or downgrade successfully. Guaranteeing compatibility and minimizing potential
disruptions.
After both operations have been executed, Pipeline B measures various critical operations
such as rebooting and switchover. By subjecting the system to these tests, we evaluate its
performance under different scenarios and stress levels.
The sequential execution of the pipelines allows for a comprehensive evaluation of the
software’s migration capability and performance aspects.
SYSTEM E
System E played a significant role in the testing and development of the automated power-
saving feature within the pipelines. The graph associated with System E Figure 5.9 in-
dicates that it was primarily utilized for the purpose of testing and refining the automated
power-saving functionality.
The testing conducted within this system allowed for the other systems to implement
the power saving feature based on its capabilities. As seen in Figure 5.10, diverse time
was used to test the automated feature. A pipeline was scheduled every day during the
measurements, which random duration, inside a range from 5 minutes to 5 hours.
By dedicating System E to testing and development of power saving features, the
project team could evaluate the effectiveness of the automated and manual power-
saving feature and ensure its successful integration into the overall system architecture.
24
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:33==
SYSTEM D and SYSTEM F
Since System D and F are dedicated to releases and production tests, their usage is in-
frequent and limited to specific periods. Outside of these planned activities, the graph
Figure 5.12, demonstrates minimal or no power usage, indicating that System F remains
powered off for a significant portion of the time. In this case, no operations occurred
during the measurement of the power saving feature on this system.
3.2.3
Linux server
The Linux servers under the project are a high-performance computing system de-
signed to handle demanding workloads in various industries, such as telecommunications.
They incorporate redundancy features like hot-swappable components, redundant power
supplies, and advanced cooling systems to enhance server availability and reduce the risk
of server failures.
All development relies on these type of servers, which are configured in different ways to
assess multiple scenarios. Main components will be explained within this section.
RMM4
SSH
VM
VM A
VM B
VM C
SERVER
Figure 3.5: Server configuration diagram
The diagram Figure 3.5 represents the setup of the server, illustrating its connection and
components. These servers are connected to the system they are linked to using the SSH
protocol, ensuring secure communication between the systems. Each server contains
multiple virtual machines (VMs) inside. The number and configuration of VMs may
vary depending on the specific needs and tasks assigned to each server.
Additionally, the servers incorporate a remote control module known as the RMM4.
3.2.4
CI/CD
CI/CD is a method to frequently deliver apps to customers by introducing automation into
the stages of app development. The main concepts attributed to CI/CD are continuous
integration, continuous delivery, and continuous deployment. CI/CD is a solution to the
problems integrating new code can cause for development and operations teams.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
25
==PAGE:34==
The final stage of a mature CI/CD pipeline is continuous deployment. As an extension
of continuous delivery, which automates the release of a production-ready build to a code
repository, continuous deployment automates releasing an app to production. Because
there is no manual gate at the stage of the pipeline before production, continuous deploy-
ment relies heavily on well-designed test automation. [Hat22]
Jenkins
”Jenkins is a self-contained, open source automation server which can be used to automate
all sorts of tasks related to building, testing, and delivering or deploying software.” [Jen22]
For this project and the development of the software in the team, Jenkins CI/CD tool is
used. Jenkins is the most utilized CI/CD solution, and the best fit for the organization
and development for multiple reasons:
• Jenkins is absolutely free i.e open-source tool and helps in automating all kinds of
tasks associated with the building, testing, delivering and deploying an application.
• It provides multiple plug-ins for customization, making the life of developers easier.
• Compatibility with multiple platforms and different operating systems.
[Alt22] [Ped23]
Compared to its CI/CD competitors it has some disadvantages. The documentation pro-
vided about the tool is not clear sometimes and you require the community to help you
out sorting problems.
Workflow
Jenkins integration follow the master-slave standard model. Jenkins server acts as the
master and takes care of distributing the jobs to be executed by the slaves and the slaves
acknowledge the master by sending the reports against the task performed. [Arv20]
The configured pipelines act as automated workflows that execute specific tasks such as
building the code, running tests, generating documentation, deploying to staging envi-
ronments, and updating the software. By having separate pipelines, we can effectively
manage and track each operation independently. Appendix A.1
To understand how the Jenkins setup works, we need to go into detail understanding the
two basic workflows the Jenkins environment is meant to perform:
• First case scenario occurs when the pipelines are triggered manually. E.g. Devel-
oper wants to check if the new code pushed to the repository passes all performance
tests. To do so, Pipeline B is invoked by the developer. All the pipelines can be run
in manual mode.
• Second case scenario occurs when the pipelines are triggered automatically by a
scheduler. At an specific time during the day, several pipelines are scheduled to be
started. Then this pipelines invoke the needed processes and services on each system
within the testing environment.
26
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:35==
Master Node
JENKINS MASTER
JENKINS SLAVES
SERVER
SERVER
SERVER
PIPELINE D
PIPELINE A
PIPELINE C
SCHEDULER
PIPELINE  B
Figure 3.6: Jenkins master and slaves diagram
Within the context of this thesis, it is important to note that the Jenkins Mas-
ter node management falls outside the scope of the department’s responsibili-
ties, as it is hosted outside the team. However, it is important to understand
how the automation workflow works.
In Figure 3.6, there is a visual example of how the automatic pipelines dependencies
work inside the master node.
Slave
JENKINS MASTER
JENKINS SLAVES
Server_1
SCHEDULER
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
Server_2
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
Server_3
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
DEVELOPMENT
Pipelines
Figure 3.7: Jenkins slaves configuration architecture
The Jenkins slave configuration forms a crucial part of the overall Jenkins CI/CD setup,
empowering us to effectively manage and manipulate additional systems within the envi-
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
27
==PAGE:36==
ronment.
Slave VM distribution and configuration
The Jenkins slave configuration in the environment utilizes a distributed setup across
three servers, each hosting a set of virtual machines (VMs) that function as individual
slave nodes, visually represented in Figure 3.7. This distributed architecture enhances
the scalability and resource utilization of the Jenkins CI/CD system, enabling concurrent
execution of tasks across multiple VMs.
The first server exclusively dedicates three VMs for development purposes, while the sec-
ond server dedicates three VMs specifically configured to set up a scheduler and unit
testing. The remaining VMs across all servers are allocated for general use, accommodat-
ing a diverse range of jobs and tasks.
Slave load balance
In order to achieve a balanced workload distribution across the servers in the Jenkins
slave configuration, we utilize a specialized Jenkins plugin for load balancing. This
plugin plays a critical role in preventing any single system from being overwhelmed with
an excessive workload, thereby ensuring that each system operates within its optimal
capacity.
The Least Load algorithm is used to balance the load in the Jenkins Slaves. Once the
load values are determined, the algorithm identifies the slave with the maximum available
executors to perform the task. Then, the job is allocated on the slave, ensuring that it
has the most available capacity to handle the workload.
As the workload dynamically changes, the algorithm keeps monitoring and updating the
load values of the slaves. This load balancing mechanism enhances the overall efficiency,
stability, and scalability of the CI/CD environment. It enables us to utilize the available
servers effectively, making optimal use of their resources while preventing any one system
from becoming a bottleneck.
3.2.5
Storage
It is relevant to mention that there is a shared storage server that serves as a cen-
tralized location where backups, logs and other important information is stored. This
storage server is reachable from all the components in the infrastructure. Jenkins
slaves, systems and servers can read or write on this storage server depending on their
requirements.
3.2.6
Overall design
This subsection aims to enhance the understanding and clarity of the infrastructure com-
ponents, their interactions, and overall structure.
28
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:37==
Pipelines
JENKINS MASTER
JENKINS SLAVES
SERVER
SERVER
SERVER
TEST ENVIRONMENT
CloudManager
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SYSTEM F
CloudManager
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SYSTEM A
CloudManager
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SYSTEM B
CloudManager
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SYSTEM C
CloudManager
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SYSTEM D
CloudManager
SERVER
SERVER
1
N
SYSTEM E
PRODUCTION ENVIRONMENT
STORAGE
ENVIRONMENT
JENKINS
Figure 3.8: Overall diagram
As we can see in Figure 3.8, the software infrastructure where the work is developed has
three different main components:
• CI/CD: Jenkins is used as the CI/CD tool. Jenkins CI/CD is a widely-used au-
tomation server that enables continuous integration and continuous deployment of
software applications.
• Systems and servers: The development zone consists of two environments: pro-
duction and testing. Multiple servers are built within the systems for different pur-
pose.
• Storage: As the storage resource, a server is used. It provides access to necessary
data used by either the pipelines or internal processes from the lab.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Implementation
When developing an application or solution, it is crucial to approach the implementation
in a structured manner, addressing various aspects to fulfill the project requirements effec-
tively. In this approach, the project has been decided to be divided in three different areas:
power saving Section 4.1, forecasting Section 4.2, and scheduling Section 4.3.
While the power saving feature was implemented within the systems, forecasting
future events and optimize resource allocation with a scheduler was developed and
tested as a proof of concept under the Autonomous systems department scope.
These last results were simulated to give an overview of what could possible be done.
By exploring these sections deeply, we can gain a better understanding of how they con-
tribute to the overall success of the application.
4.1
Power saving
The power saving section focuses on reducing energy consumption in the systems.
This involves identifying and implementing strategies to minimize power usage with-
out sacrificing performance
These development was done under the department’s rules within their en-
vironment.
All the development explained is the addition or expansion of
already built codebase or creation of new code.
4.1.1
Objective
The power saving objective is mainly to reduce the operating time of the servers in the
testing environment. Doing so, the servers will not be wasting energy during IDLE time
by powering them off, while maintaining availability when the developer requires its
use by powering them on. This involves creating a dynamic approach that efficiently
manages server states based on workload requirements.
4.1.2
Design
The solution implemented involves using Jenkins to create a power saving pipeline.
This pipeline is designed to optimize power consumption by controlling the state of servers
within a system.
• Jenkins Pipeline: Jenkins now contains a pipeline specifically designed for power
saving. Section 4.1.3
• Triggering the Pipeline: The power-saving pipeline can be triggered manually or
automatically. Section 3.2.4.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
31
==PAGE:40==
• Jenkins Slave: The pipeline invokes commands on the respective Jenkins slave(s).
In this case, the commands are executed on the appropriate Jenkins slave(s) respon-
sible for interacting with the servers. Section 3.2.4
• Commands Execution: The commands executed on the Jenkins slave(s) are re-
sponsible for sending a request to a system’s API called CloudManager.
• CloudManager API: It receives the request from the Jenkins slave, which includes
instructions on how to power the servers. Section 3.2.2
• IPMI - Power control: The CloudManager API utilizes IPMI commands to con-
trol the power state of the servers based on the parameters received from the Jenkins
slave. Section 3.1.5
• Data retrieval: CloudManager sends a response about the system status back to
the pipeline. Section 4.1.5
power_saving
JENKINS MASTER
JENKINS SLAVE
SERVER
IPMI
CloudManager
SERVER
SYSTEM
Figure 4.1: Power saving implementation diagram
4.1.3
Development
In this section the development, code and configuration of both ends, Jenkins pipeline and
CloudManager will be explained.
Declarative Pipeline
First of all, a new power saving pipeline needs to be created within the Jenkins environ-
ment.
This new pipeline requires some parameters to run successfully. This parameters must be
filled and they are not optional:
• SYSTEM NAME: Represents the system that wants to be powered ON/OFF.
• POWER STATUS: Represents the status the system needs to transition to.
The power saving pipeline has two key stages:
• Setup: During this stage the pipeline sets up the Jenkins Slave assigned to
perform the power saving task. It clones the relevant repositories, gathers the needed
scripts and gets the required system IP and URL information.
• Power server: During this stage, some information is gathered and it’s sent to the
CloudManager API:
32
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:41==
– Upstream build: For future analysis of the solution, it is important to know
if the pipeline was triggered manually by an operator or if it was automated.
By checking if an upstream build exists or not, this parameter can be identified
easily. The trigger would be ”Manual” if there is no upstream build and would
be ”Automated” in the opposite case.
– Credentials: Jenkins has a feature to create secure credential administra-
tion in the applications.
By using this method, the Intel Remote Man-
agement Module 4 credentials that are stored on the server can be handled
securely.
After collecting the data, it executes a python script previously designed and
implemented by the department to make calls to CloudManager API. Finally,
after the script execution, a response is retrieved from the CloudManager API. In
case the response shows any kind of error or that any server is unreachable, the
pipeline fails, otherwise it succeeds. In case of failure, logging and error location is
exposed to the operator.
Python script
A python script is in charge of communicate and retrieve results from the CloudManager
API. This script receives this parameters from the power saving pipeline Listing 4.1
1
parameters = {
2
"system_name",
3
"status",
4
"RMM4_username",
5
"RMM4_password"
6
}
Listing 4.1: CloudManager API power saving parameters
Then, python requests is used to call the CloudManager API with the previous parameters.
Finally, when the result is retrieved, some actions are performed to track how much
time the servers are being in a powered on state Section 2.1.2. By doing this, we can
independently measure how much each system is up or down and calculate its availability
time and the energy consumption they have during their working hours.
Cloud Manager
The Cloud Manager API implementation communicates between the Jenkins pipeline and
the servers’ Intel Remote Management Module 4 boards.
• As mentioned previously, the API receives two essential pieces of information: the
status indicating the desired transition for the servers (power on, power off), and
the credentials required to access the RMM4 of each server.
• The API relies on software that automatically retrieves the necessary information
about the servers and their RMM4 boards. It identifies the IP addresses and other
network details associated with each server and its RMM4 board, which allows the
API to establish connections and send IPMI commands to the correct destination.
• Before sending the IPMI request to transition the servers, an additional step is
implemented to ensure that the servers are not in the desired status. By performing
a ping status check, the system evaluates whether the servers are already in
the desired status or if a power transition is required.
For example, if the desired status is ”powered on”, the system initiates a ping op-
eration to check if the servers respond to network requests. If the servers respond,
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
33
==PAGE:42==
it indicates that they are already in the desired powered-on state. In such cases, no
further action is taken, and the IPMI request is not sent. However, if the ping op-
eration indicates that the servers are not in the desired status, the system proceeds
with sending the IPMI request to transition them accordingly. The IPMI request is
sent to the respective RMM4 boards assigned to each server.
By incorporating this ping-based status check before sending the IPMI request, the
system ensures that unnecessary power transitions are avoided. It minimizes
the number of IPMI requests sent and optimizes the power management process.
• With the necessary credentials and the destination information obtained, the API
proceeds to send the proper IPMI requests to each required server’s RMM4 board.
To optimize the process of sending IPMI requests to transition the servers, a Python
thread pool approach is employed.
• The final step for this feature is to ensure that all servers have transitioned
to the desired state before proceeding with any subsequent actions. This step is
crucial to guarantee the completion of the power-saving operation and avoid
any potential issues or inconsistencies.
Finally, a response is sent back. This response returns the status of the request, if it
succeeded or not, if any of the servers was unavailable during the process and a detailed
view of all the servers and their power status.
4.1.4
Workflow
Manual trigger
This approach empowers developers to remotely control the power status of systems
based on their needs manually. The primary parameters required for this workflow are
the target system and the desired power state, whether it is to power the system ON
or OFF.
Once the system is powered ON, developers can remotely access and utilize the system for
their tasks. They can work with the system, run applications, perform testing, or carry
out any necessary activities.
When the developers have finished using the system and it is no longer required, they
can initiate the power-off process through the power-saving pipeline. This enables them
to remotely shut down the system and conserve energy when it is not actively in use.
Automated trigger
The idea about the automated trigger is that each pipeline decides whether it needs
to invoke the power saving pipeline or not when they are started. This ensures that
the system is powered on and ready for performing needed tasks when the scheduled task
is about to start.
If there is a time gap between the completion of one pipeline and the start of the next,
the power-saving feature manages this idle period. It automatically powers off the
system after the completion of the first pipeline and powers it back on just
before the next pipeline is scheduled to start. This approach optimizes energy usage
by minimizing the duration that the system remains powered on but idle.
The last pipeline that is executed on each server triggers the power-saving pipeline to
power off the servers. This ensures that the servers are powered down when all scheduled
tasks are completed, preventing unnecessary energy consumption during periods
of inactivity.
34
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:43==
4.1.5
Power saving output
The result of executing the power-saving operation is different for each case scenario.
Overall, this output provides a comprehensive summary of the power-saving operation, in-
cluding the execution status, execution time, server-specific results, availability of servers,
and the desired power state achieved. It serves as valuable feedback for evaluating the
success and effectiveness of the power-saving solution.
• status: This indicates whether the power-saving operation was executed successfully
or it has encountered some errors or failures.
• execution time: Time taken to complete the entire power-saving operation in sec-
onds.
• server result: Specific information about the status of each server involved in the
power-saving operation. It includes details such as the server name, IP address, cur-
rent power state, and additional information about the RMM4 board’s reachability.
• all servers available: This indicates that all the servers within the system are
available, accessible and in an optimal state.
• powered: This represents the desired power state for the servers after the power-
saving operation.
Success
Here’s an example of a successful power saving operation. The status is True, meaning
that all the transition to the OFF status for all servers was successful. In addition to
that, all the servers are available, meaning their RMM4 board is reachable. Finally all the
server status matches the powered state.
1
{’status ’: True , ’execution_time ’: 21.787999868392944 , ’server_result
’: "{’ Server A’: [ ’172.253.76.3 ’ , ’OFF ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]},\n{’Server B’: [ ’172.253.76.6 ’ , ’OFF ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]},\n{’Server C’: [ ’172.253.76.8 ’ , ’OFF ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]}", ’all_servers_available ’: True , ’powered ’: ’OFF ’}
Listing 4.2: Successful power saving operation response
Error
Here’s an example of a failed power saving operation. The status is False, meaning there
was an error while transitioning to the OFF status for all servers.
By evaluating the
output, Server A is still ON after the power saving operation. This gives the developer a
warning about Server A which can be malfunctioning.
1
{’status ’: False , ’execution_time ’: 21.787999868392944 , ’server_result
’: "{’ Server A’: [ ’172.253.76.3 ’ , ’ON ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]},\n{’Server B’: [ ’172.253.76.6 ’ , ’OFF ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]},\n{’Server C’: [ ’172.253.76.8 ’ , ’OFF ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]}", ’all_servers_available ’: True , ’powered ’: ’OFF ’}
Listing 4.3: Failed power saving operation response
Error - RMM4 board not reachable
Here’s an example of a failed power saving operation, in this case because of an unreachable
Intel Remote Management Module 4 . The status is True, meaning that all the
transition to the OFF status for the reachable servers was successful. Even though the
operation was a success for the available servers, all the servers are not available, denoted
by the all servers available parameter, meaning some RMM4 board is not reachable. By
taking a look at the output, it can be seen that the RMM4 board for Server A was not
reachable.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
35
==PAGE:44==
1
{’status ’: True , ’execution_time ’: 21.787999868392944 , ’server_result
’: "{’ Server A’: [ ’172.253.76.3 ’ , ’ON ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: False
}]},\n{’Server B’: [ ’172.253.76.6 ’ , ’OFF ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]},\n{’Server C’: [ ’172.253.76.8 ’ , ’OFF ’, {’RMM4_reachable ’: True
}]}", ’all_servers_available ’: False , ’powered ’: ’OFF ’}
Listing 4.4: Error RMM4 not reachable response
4.2
Jenkins pipeline time forecasting
The forecasting section involves predicting future Jenkins behaviors based on historical
data and patterns. This will be applied specifically to the pipelines involved in the auto-
matic tests. By analyzing past data, statistical models and machine learning algorithms
can be employed to forecast future trends. Section 2.3
The objective of the Jenkins pipeline time forecasting and modeling is to develop and
simulate a predictive model that can estimate how much time a pipeline will take to
complete. By using historical data from previous pipeline executions, the goal is to
create a process that can accurately forecast the duration of a pipeline run.
4.2.1
Data analysis
In order to gain insights and make accurate predictions regarding the pipeline completion
times, we have successfully completed the initial stage of the data science life cycle, which
is the Obtain stage. In the Section 2.2, we carefully identified and acquired the necessary
data from relevant sources.
Pipeline A
First of all, the data obtained from the Pipeline A Appendix A.1 needs to pass through a
cleaning process. Constant variables are removed as they provide no relevant information
for the model. In this case, no NaN values existed so they didn’t need to be removed. In
this case, manual feature selection is justified due to the nature of the business data
and its specific context.
After the data has undergone the cleaning stage, it can be transformed to make it more
readable and interpretable. This transformation enhances the clarity and usability of the
data for analysis and presentation purposes. In this case the pipeline result is transformed
to boolean and the duration are transformed from ms to hour format.
This results provide the following dataframe Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Pipeline A Dataframe
Timestamp
Duration
Result
2023-05-06 17:10:37.084
3.340739
True
2023-05-07 17:11:06.116
6.005957
True
2023-05-08 17:10:30.579
6.006387
True
2023-05-10 17:10:08.558
3.338673
True
2023-05-11 17:10:07.672
3.339713
True
2023-05-12 17:10:06.633
6.006597
True
· · ·
30 rows, 4 columns
36
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:45==
From the previous dataframe Table 4.1, a graph is generated to see how much time
duration the pipeline has taken over time and if the result of it was a success or a failure.
Figure 4.2: Pipeline A duration over time
Based on the previous graph Figure 4.2, we can observe a certain pattern in the data.
Specifically, it appears to be a threshold or range of values within which the pipeline
executions consistently result in success and have an stable duration. Conversely, values
outside this threshold tend to indicate failures. This threshold can be seen as a cutoff
point that separates successful executions from unsuccessful ones based on the duration.
However, it is important to note that there are some successful runs with duration similar
to the failure cases. These instances may be considered outliers or false positives, as their
duration fall outside the expected pattern. These false positives could be attributed to
various factors, such as unexpected system behavior, sporadic network issues, or other
transient conditions that affect the pipeline’s execution.
Figure 4.3: Pipeline A valid threshold range
Based on the provided data and the threshold range indicated by the threshold lines
(between 5.8 and 6.2), it appears that the duration of the pipeline is likely to fall within
this range. The majority of the data points cluster around an average duration of 6 hours,
which aligns with the threshold range.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
37
==PAGE:46==
Based on the observed pattern and the clustering of data points around the average dura-
tion within the threshold range, it is reasonable to assume that future pipeline duration
will also tend to fall within this range with an average of approximately 6 hours.
In the case of this pipeline, it is expected that it always last, on average, 6
hours. This information was already known because of its use case and how it
is programmed.
Pipeline B
First of all, the data obtained from the Pipeline B Appendix A.1 needs to go through
a cleaning process. Constant variables were removed as they provide no additional infor-
mation. For this case, manual feature extraction is justified due to the nature of the
data and the lack of variables within its context.
Once the data has completed the cleaning stage, it can be subjected to a transformation
process that enhances its readability. This transformation serves to improve the clarity
and usefulness of the data, making it more suitable for analysis and presentation purposes.
In this case the pipeline result is transformed to boolean and the duration are transformed
from ms to hour format. This pipeline is run in different systems, therefore an additional
variable SYSTEM NAME is added as a categorical value.
This results provide the following dataframe Table 4.2:
Table 4.2: Pipeline B dataframe
Timestamp
SYSTEM NAME
Duration
Result
2023-05-07 17:43:26.242
SYSTEM C
6.014669
False
2023-05-08 17:42:25.710
SYSTEM C
6.014858
False
2023-05-10 17:43:38.678
SYSTEM C
6.015672
False
2023-05-11 19:16:53.041
SYSTEM C
2.006011
False
2023-05-17 17:59:55.455
SYSTEM C
10.022966
False
2023-05-18 17:57:59.457
SYSTEM C
10.010456
False
2023-05-19 17:57:08.438
SYSTEM C
10.013928
False
2023-05-20 18:03:02.623
SYSTEM C
10.015467
False
...
60 rows, 4 columns
From this dataframe Table 4.2, a graph is created showing the pipeline duration over
time and the result of it as a success or a failure.
38
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.4: Pipeline B duration over time
In the graph Figure 4.4, we can observe that there is a larger amount of data compared
to previous pipeline. This increased data set provides a more comprehensive view of the
pipeline’s behavior and performance. Additionally, by examining the graph, we can iden-
tify certain patterns and trends. One notable observation is the presence of outliers
specifically when the pipeline fails. These outliers represent cases where the duration de-
viates significantly from the expected range, indicating potential issues or anomalies in
the pipeline execution.
In this graph, we can distinguish between two different systems. Figure 4.5
Figure 4.5: Pipeline B system split builds
Builds on System A exhibit a consistent duration pattern, where most of the data
points fall within a certain range. The duration of the builds for this system tend to
be relatively stable and do not deviate significantly from the expected values. This
consistency suggests a reliable and predictable performance for System A.
On the other hand, System C builds display more variability in duration values,
as well as more data. There are instances where the duration extends beyond the usual
range, indicating potential issues or fluctuations in the pipeline execution. Most
of the failed executions lay on System C side.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
39
==PAGE:48==
The important study about this pipeline is done on the successful runs. Therefore, the
outliers, which in this case are strongly associated to failed runs are removed for further
analysis. Figure 4.6
Figure 4.6: Pipeline B system split builds without outliers
Now that the data is processed, a LinearRegression model can be implemented to predict
future outputs.
An instance of LinearRegression model is created.
The model is then trained on the
training data using the fit method with a train and test data split.
The predictions
obtained represent the estimated duration values for the timestamp and system input.
The linear regression equation is obtained:
y = 1.579152 + 0.362014 × systemvalue
Based on previous equation, the following lines are obtained for each system Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Pipeline B regression lines
To evaluate the performance of the Linear Regression model, Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
and Mean Squared Error (MSE) metrics are used:
40
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:49==
1
Mean
Absolute
Error (MAE): 0.051359860651185266
2
Mean
Squared
Error (MSE): 0.0039010890946114657
Listing 4.5: Pipeline B error metrics
Both the MAE and MSE values obtained in this case are relatively low, which indicates
that the model’s predictions are quite accurate and close to the actual values. These
metrics suggest that the model performs well in estimating the duration based
on the given input features.
Pipeline C
Initially, the acquired data Appendix A.1 requires undergoing a cleaning procedure.
As it can be seen, this pipeline contains more data than the previous one. Therefore,
more variables are added into the equation. By transforming this data, the clarity and
readability of it increases.
In this case we have some variables that should be mapped to booleans, the systems as a
categorical variable and the duration is set to hours.
This provides the following dataframe Table 4.3:
Table 4.3: Pipeline C dataframe
Timestamp
SYSTEM NAME
TAKE BACKUP
2023-05-06 17:10:37
SYSTEM C
True
2023-05-06 17:22:12
SYSTEM C
False
2023-05-07 17:11:06
SYSTEM C
True
2023-05-07 17:23:01
SYSTEM C
False
2023-05-08 17:10:30
SYSTEM C
True
...
WITH TRAFFIC
Duration
Result
False
0.190271
False
False
0.338791
False
False
0.196814
False
False
0.338660
False
False
0.189198
False
...
121 rows, 6 columns
From the previous dataframe Table 4.3, a graph is obtained to check how much time
does the pipeline need to complete and if the result of it is a success or a failure.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.8: Pipeline C duration graph
As seen in this graph Figure 4.8, we observe a low variance among the data duration.
This suggests that some of the data exhibit similar characteristics.
However, a trend appears when examining the relationship between the duration and the
occurrence of failures. Specifically, there is a consistent pattern of failures when
the duration is lower than 1 hour. This trend suggests that shorter duration tends to
be associated with failure. Further analysis and investigation can reveal reasons behind
this trend.
This pipeline also runs on different systems Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Pipeline C system split
It can be seen in Figure 4.9 that what seemed to be outliers, are pipeline runs on
SYSTEM D. In addition, most of the failures are associated directly to SYSTEM C.
Almost all the pipelines run before 01-06-2023 on SYSTEM C are failures. As done in
previous analysis, we can remove failed builds, as they don’t provide any information for
our purpose. Figure 4.10
42
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.10: Pipeline C successful builds
Now that we have the desired data, a LinearRegression model can be implemented to
predict future outputs.
In this case, we obtain the following equation:
y = −0.774 + 2.48 × systemvalue + 0.712 × TAKE BACKUP + 1.897 × WITH TRAFFIC
This pipeline provides more parameters that can affect the duration outcome. To evaluate
the performance of the Linear Regression model, Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean
Squared Error (MSE) metrics are used:
1
Mean
Absolute
Error (MAE): 0.4708505668993251
2
Mean
Squared
Error (MSE): 0.3682007755132473
Listing 4.6: Pipeline C error metrics
From this results it can be seen that the predictions will have a variation
within the 30 min range.
Pipeline D
As done in previous analysis, the acquired data Appendix A.1 needs to be cleaned.
Constant variables are removed.
In this case, almost all of the data is categorical, requiring a simple data transformation.
This provides the following dataframe Table 4.4:
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 4.4: Pipeline Dataframe
Timestamp
PROFILE CAPABILITY
PROFILE TYPE
2023-07-06 17:33:46.053
SingleSC
MultiGC-U2U-SDS
2023-07-07 17:16:59.959
MultiSC
Endurance FDMA
2023-07-07 17:28:10.003
SingleSC
MultiGC-U2U-SDS
2023-07-07 23:47:21.038
MultiSC
Endurance TDMA
...
SYSTEM NAME
TEST DURATION
Duration
Result
SYSTEM A
8.0
1.781194
True
SYSTEM B
0.5
3.504183
True
SYSTEM A
8.0
1.492218
True
SYSTEM B
0.5
3.214262
True
...
128 rows, 7 columns
A graph is obtained to check the duration of the pipeline builds and the result of it.
Figure 4.11: Pipeline D duration
In this case Figure 4.11 there is a constant pattern of errors that lay under the 2h mark.
These errors are known because of a specific test that is meant to fail, which in
this case needs to be taken into account.
Figure 4.12: Pipeline D system split
44
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:53==
These test is build on Figure 4.9 SYSTEM B and has a PROFILE TYPE denoted as
ART. For further analysis, a brief study on SYSTEM B tests is performed.
Figure 4.13: Pipeline D ART and Endurance build split
This figure Figure 4.13 represents the three different kind of builds that can be done in
SYSTEM B. It is important to note that the ART and Endurance build duration varies
one from another, so the PROFILE TYPE matters when analysing this data. In addition,
all failed builds are removed except for the ones categorized as ART, as done for previous
pipeline analysis.
After removing the outliers, this is the resulting graph Figure 4.14
Figure 4.14: Pipeline D ready for analysis
Based on this analysis, a LinearRegression model can be used to get future outputs.
We obtain the following equation:
y = 1.6039 + 1.664306 × system encoded −0.104760 × profile encoded
−1.008911 × profile capability encoded + 0.151041 × TEST DURATION
To evaluate the performance of the Linear Regression model, Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
and Mean Squared Error (MSE) metrics are used:
1
Mean
Absolute
Error (MAE): 0.4215635979603778
2
Mean
Squared
Error (MSE): 0.26738372131412447
Listing 4.7: Pipeline D error metrics
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
45
==PAGE:54==
From this results it can be seen that the predictions will have a variation less
than 30 mins.
4.3
Scheduler algorithm
The scheduling section deals with managing and allocating system resources effec-
tively. It involves creating scheduling algorithms or policies that determine how tasks or
processes are assigned to available resources. By optimizing the allocation of resources, the
application can minimize resource contention, and potentially reduce power consumption.
This process was developed as a simulation along with the forecast implemen-
tation.
4.3.1
Objective
The objective of this scheduler is to assign tasks based on their predicted time
duration and the lowest energy price cost hours. In other words, the scheduler
aims to optimize the task assignment by considering the predicted duration of each task
and selecting the less energy cost hours for their execution.
To achieve this objective, the algorithm evaluates various combinations and alloca-
tions to determine the assignment that results in the lowest cost hour schedule. It
takes into account any dependencies between tasks, resource availability, and any other
relevant constraints during the scheduling process.
4.3.2
Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
Linear programming is a mathematical optimization technique that seeks to find
the best solution to a problem with linear relationships, subject to a set of con-
straints.
The algorithm involves formulating a linear programming model that represents the schedul-
ing problem as a set of decision variables, objective function, and constraints. The de-
cision variables represent the assignment of tasks to resources and the timing of task
execution.
The objective function quantifies the desired optimization goal, such as
minimizing the overall completion time or resource usage. The constraints capture the
limitations and requirements of the scheduling problem, such as task precedence relation-
ships, resource availability, and task deadlines.
In the context of task scheduling, linear programming can be utilized to allocate resources
and assign tasks to optimize certain objectives.
Problem formulation
In this linear programming problem, we have a range of X hours, divided into 1-hour time
slots, each associated with a specific price. The goal is to efficiently allocate different
tasks within this X hour range while minimizing the total price allocated for
each task.
The problem requires that the tasks be scheduled consecutively, meaning once a task
starts, it must continue without interruption until completion. This constraint ensures
that the tasks are executed in a continuous manner without any breaks in between.
All tasks together have a duration that is always less than or equal to X, ensuring that
the tasks can be accommodated within the given time range. The objective is to find the
optimal assignment of tasks to time slots that minimizes the cumulative cost associated
with executing the tasks.
46
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:55==
Variables
• X: It represents the total number of hours in the given time range. This variable
defines the overall duration within which the tasks need to be scheduled.
• Time slot: These time slots serve as discrete units for scheduling tasks. Each time
slot represents a specific period of time within the X hour range.
• Price: Each time slot has an associated price, indicating the cost of executing a
task during that specific hour.
• Tasks: Individual units of work that need to be scheduled within the X hour range.
Each task has a specific duration, denoting the time required for its completion.
Objective function
Let’s denote the decision variable for task assignment as Tij, where i represents the task
index and j represents the time slot index. The decision variable Tij takes binary values:
1 if task i is assigned to time slot j, and 0 otherwise.
The objective function, F, to minimize the price allocated for each task can be expressed
as:
F =
X
i

X
j
Tij · Pj


• P
j Tij · Pj represents the summation of the product of the decision variable Tij and
the price Pj associated with time slot j. This term calculates the total price allocated
for executing task i across all time slots.
• The outer summation, P
i
P
j Tij · Pj

, iterates over all tasks i and time slots j,
summing up the prices allocated for each task across all time slots.
By minimizing the objective function F, the linear programming algorithm will seek
the assignment of tasks to time slots that minimizes the cumulative price allocated for
executing the tasks. This ensures an optimal solution that optimizes cost while adhering
to the constraints of consecutive task execution and task duration within the given time
range.
Constraints
• Each task must run for its whole duration without being interrupted.
X
task∈tasks
 
X
comb∈valid combinations
 X
i∈comb
x[task][i]
!!
≤task duration[task] −1
• Tasks cannot overlap, this means they can’t be performed within the same hour time
slot.
X
slot∈time slots
 
X
task∈tasks
x[task][slot]
!
≤1
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
47
==PAGE:56==
MILP solver
In the context of the project the CBC (Coin-or Branch and Cut) solver was used to
address the scheduling problem.
The scheduling problem at hand involved allocating various tasks to limited resources while
considering several constraints and objectives. It was a Mixed Integer Linear Programming
(MILP) problem, as it required decisions for both discrete variables (task assignments)
and continuous variables (resource allocations). Since CBC is explicitly designed to handle
MILP problems, it was a natural fit for this particular scenario.
Furthermore, the scheduling problem in question was relatively small in size, involv-
ing a manageable number of tasks, resources, and constraints. CBC’s branch-and-bound
algorithm and cutting-plane techniques are particularly efficient for solving smaller to
medium-sized MILP problems.
For a small-scale scheduling problem, CBC’s combination of efficiency, open-
source accessibility, and MILP expertise made it an optimal choice. By utilizing
CBC as the solver, the project was able to efficiently allocate tasks to resources while
satisfying constraints and optimizing objectives, contributing to effective decision-making
and resource utilization.
4.3.3
Development
The solution for the task scheduling problem is developed using the Pulp library in
Python. Pulp is a popular open-source library for linear programming and optimiza-
tion problems.
The Pulp library provides a convenient and intuitive interface to define and solve linear
programming problems. It allows you to define decision variables, objective functions, and
constraints in a straightforward manner. [dev23]
By utilizing Python’s object-oriented capabilities, two objects are created: Process and
Task. The goal is to optimize the tasks within a process, as it would be done with our
real systems.
1
class
Process:
2
def
__init__(self):
3
self.tasks = []
4
def
add_task(self , task):
5
self.tasks.append(task)
6
7
class
Task:
8
def
__init__(self , name , estimated_time ):
9
self.name = name
10
self. estimated_time = estimated_time
Listing 4.8: Process and Taks class data objects
The algorithm needs to know some data prior to execute its optimization:
• current api energy prices: Current day energy prices.
• next api energy prices: Next day energy prices.
• available systems: Which systems do you want to get the optimization for.
• day: Day of the week.
In our real case scenario, operations are scheduled from 18:00 till 8:00 the next day. In
order to get the maximum value of the optimization, we need to get the energy prices for
48
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:57==
both days, current and next. Also, some of the servers may be under development or in a
failure state, that’s why the available systems is required as an argument. It is important
that there are different time schedules during workdays and the weekend, current day of
the week must be provided.
Energy prices are a 24 element integer array. Each position represents the price of the
respective day hour. week schedule and weekend schedule represent which and how many
time slots can be taken for the optimization.
The schedule is chosen based on the day of the week.
A new instance of a linear programming problem is instantiated. The first argument, is a
string that specifies the name or title of the problem. The second argument, LpMinimize, is
an attribute provided by the Pulp library, indicating that the problem is a minimization
problem.
1
problem = LpProblem("Task
Scheduling", LpMinimize)
Listing 4.9: Linear programming problem instance
Objects are instantiated, tasks are created and assigned a duration and the time slots
length is defined.
A dictionary of decision variables is created using the LpVariable class from the Pulp
library in Python. The prefix string ”task” is appended with specific task and time slot
indices to create unique variable names. The dimensions (tasks, time slots) specify the
combinations for which decision variables are created. The cat=”Binary” argument sets
the type of the decision variables as binary, allowing them to take values of either 0 or 1.
1
x = LpVariable.dicts("task", (tasks , time_slots), cat="Binary")
Listing 4.10: Task Scheduling problem variables
Coded objective function Section 4.3.2
1
problem += lpSum( current_schedule [slot] * x[task ][ slot] for task
in tasks for slot in time_slots)
Listing 4.11: Task Scheduling problem objective function
In order to create constraints for the tasks to be uninterrupted, PuLP library was not
enabling the construction of OR constraints. A trick had to be implemented instead.
This section of code iterates over each task in the tasks list and generates invalid combi-
nations of time slots for that task using the itertools.combinations() function. The valid
combinations are those where the time slots are not consecutive, which is determined by
using the checkConsecutive() function. For each invalid combination, a constraint is added
to the problem linear programming instance. The constraint states that the sum of the
decision variables on each task for the time slots in the invalid combination should be less
than the task duration.
1
def
checkConsecutive (l):
2
return
sorted(l) == list(range(min(l), max(l)+1))
3
4
# Constraint: Each task must run for its whole
duration
5
for task in tasks:
6
task_comb = list(range(len( current_schedule )))
7
combinations = itertools.combinations(task_comb , task_duration [
task ])
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
49
==PAGE:58==
8
valid_combinations = [c for c in combinations if not
checkConsecutive (c)]
9
for comb in
valid_combinations :
10
problem += lpSum(x[task ][i] for i in comb) <= task_duration [
task] - 1
Listing 4.12: Combination constraint implementation
Another constraint is added to the problem. In essence, as the tasks cannot be run in
parallel in the same time slot and binary variables are being used, the addition of the same
time slot can’t be higher than 1.
1
# Constraint: Tasks
cannot
overlap
2
for slot in time_slots:
3
problem += lpSum(x[task ][ slot] for task in tasks) <= 1
Listing 4.13: Overlap constraint implementation
The problem is solved using: CBC solver. Cbc (Coin-or branch and cut) is an open-source
mixed integer linear programming solver written in C++. It can be used as a callable
library or using a stand-alone executable. It can be used in a wide variety of ways through
various modeling systems, packages, etc. [COI22]
4.3.4
Output
In order to validate the algorithm performance, a simulation is created to assess its
performance and effectiveness. Mock data will represent the problem scenario to test
the algorithm behaviour. A test is run with the following parameters:
• This are the tasks that would be performed, and its estimated times. Listing B.1
• We have current and next day energy prices. Listing B.2
• The test is going to be performed on a Wednesday. Listing B.3
The time it takes for the scheduler to find the optimal solution is also measured:
• SYSTEM A Time (CPU seconds): 1.15
• SYSTEM B Time (CPU seconds): 1.74
• SYSTEM C Time (CPU seconds): 0.03
The result obtained represent the time hours assigned to each task.
1
{" SYSTEM A": {" Pipeline A": [8, 9], "Pipeline B": [10, 11, 12, 13], "
Pipeline C": [5, 6, 7]}, "SYSTEM B": {" Pipeline A": [6], "Pipeline
B": [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], "Pipeline C": [0, 1, 2]}, "SYSTEM C
": {" Pipeline A": [10], "Pipeline B": [8, 9], "Pipeline C": [6,
7]}}
Listing 4.14: Time scheduler result for each System
4.4
Solution
The optimal solution which mixes the three methods used above was not inte-
grated into the department due to concerns regarding its reliability. Therefore,
the power-saving feature was integrated but forecasting and scheduling was analyzed as a
proof of concept.
50
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:59==
The main obstacle that led to this decision was insufficient data. Implementing a
power-saving solution requires accurate and up-to-date data regarding energy consump-
tion and historical time to make proper forecasting. Without accurate data, it would be
challenging to determine the optimal power state transitions for the servers and ensure
that they align with the actual task scheduling and system usage patterns.
While the complete power-saving solution was not integrated within the department due to
the lack of data, it is important to acknowledge that all the necessary components
were developed under both deparments.
With the appropriate data in place, the power-saving solution could effectively analyze
scheduling patterns, task allocation, and idle periods to determine optimal power state
transitions.
It would be capable of dynamically powering on servers before scheduled
tasks and intelligently powering off servers during idle periods, thereby enhancing energy
efficiency and reducing power consumption.
To achieve an optimal solution for power usage, a multi-step process could be done under
optimal conditions. The first step involves obtaining predictions from the Jenkins
pipeline time forecasting. These predictions estimate the expected duration for each
pipeline that is scheduled to run at specific times. By analyzing the forecasted pipeline
durations, we gain insights into the timing requirements for the execution of each pipeline.
Simultaneously, the actual energy prices are collected as an input. These energy prices
reflect the cost of electricity at different times of the day. Incorporating this information
into the solution allows us to factor in the variable cost of energy consumption during
different time periods.
Next, the collected predictions and energy prices are fed into the developed scheduler
algorithm. The algorithm identifies the time slots that offer the lowest energy
prices while accommodating the pipeline execution requirements.
Once the optimal working hours are determined by the scheduler algorithm, the results
can be utilized in the Jenkins pipeline. The pipelines can be rescheduled to align
with the identified optimal time slots, ensuring that the execution of tasks
coincides with the lowest energy prices.
The power-saving pipeline can automatically power on the necessary servers before the
scheduled pipelines start and power them off during idle periods. This ensures that
the servers are operational only when needed, further enhancing energy efficiency and
cost savings.
By following this approach, integrating pipeline time forecasting, energy price information,
and a scheduler algorithm, an optimal solution could be achieved. The resulting optimized
schedule for pipeline execution, along with the power-saving pipeline features, maximizes
cost savings by reducing energy consumption during periods of high energy prices.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Experimental results
The results presented in this section focus on the amount of time each system
remained powered on and their associated costs Section 5.3.
The power-on time directly affects the energy consumption, which in turn in-
fluences the overall expenses incurred. With this information, we can calculate the
energy usage and subsequently estimate the cost of running each system. This estima-
tion becomes particularly valuable when considering long-term or continuous operation
scenarios, as it allows for effective budgeting and resource allocation.
It is important to understand the context prior to the power-saving imple-
mentation. The systems were turned on continuously, running for 24 hours
without any power-saving measurement. By acknowledging the previous state of
continuous operation, we can better appreciate the significance of the changes observed
after the power-saving measures were implemented.
The plots are represented as a step function. A value of 1 indicates that the system
is powered ON, while a value of 0 implies that the system is powered OFF.
The graph visually displays the transitions between the ON and OFF states over time.
The colors used in the graph further highlight the different triggers. The color green
is associated with the automated trigger, indicating that the power-saving feature
was activated automatically. On the other hand, the color red represents the manual
trigger, indicating that the power-saving feature was activated manually by a developer.
5.1
Real time measurements
In this section, the actual measurements of the project that have been collected will be
presented Section 2.1.2.
First, it is important to note that this real measurements have inconsistencies due to the
limitations found during the retrieval of the measurements limitations Section 6.4.
Given these potential sources of inconsistencies, it is essential to approach the presented
measurements with a critical mindset.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
53
==PAGE:62==
5.1.1
SYSTEM A
Figure 5.1: SYSTEM A powered time
As observed in the graph Figure 5.1, it is evident that System A has been powered OFF
for almost the entire duration, with minimal instances of it being powered ON. However,
there are two distinct vertical lines in the graph that deviate from the continuous ON
state. These lines represent specific instances where the power-saving feature was tested
on System A.
5.1.2
SYSTEM B
Figure 5.2: SYSTEM B powered time
The graph Figure 5.2 reveals the power status of System B over time, showcasing the
interplay between automated and manual power-saving measures. The transitions be-
tween the ON and OFF states indicate the activation and deactivation of
power-saving modes within the system.
Within SYSTEM B, there are some existing patterns that must be recognized to under-
stand why and how the power-saving feature performs.
54
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:63==
Optimal performance
Figure 5.3: SYSTEM B power saving optimal performance
As observed in the graph Figure 5.3, an interesting pattern can be observed regarding
the optimal performance of the system. At the beginning of the time period, the system
is initially powered on by a developer who requires access to the system during working
hours. This manual intervention ensures that the system is available when the developer
requires it.
However, as the day progresses, the automated power-saving feature takes control and
intelligently powers off the system when the scheduled pipelines are finished.
The graph also reveals that the subsequent day is a weekend, so the automated power-
saving feature entirely takes control of the process, efficiently managing the system’s power
state to minimize unnecessary power consumption when the scheduled tests are not oper-
ating.
Development duration
Figure 5.4: SYSTEM B development time
In this case it can be seen in Figure 5.4 that the system was powered on manually and
then it was powered off automatically. This pattern represents the case use of a system
being under software development.
While under software development, the automated pipelines on the system are
not triggered. Therefore the system is always powered on unless the developer decides
to power it off manually, which is concerning for the development process.
Until the development is finished, the system status is recorded as the latest status
recorded until the automated pipelines are enabled again.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.5: SYSTEM B development time with power saving triggers
During Figure 5.5 another development process is going on the system. In this case,
the automated pipeline turns on the system and then, the developer gains total control of
it. It can be seen that for most of the development duration, the system remains on. At
the end, the developer ensures that the power saving feature still works and the turns the
system off.
System API error
Figure 5.6: SYSTEM B CloudManager internal error
As seen in Figure 5.6, the power-saving feature was triggered automatically and then it
was manually triggered by a developer.
This instance happens when the API has an error and gets stuck.
If the API is not
reachable, the automated power-saving can’t be used. After the developer solves the issue
within the API, it decides to power off the system as it is not going to be in use anymore.
5.1.3
SYSTEM C
Figure 5.7: SYSTEM C powered time
56
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:65==
The graph Figure 5.7 reveals the power status of SYSTEM C over time with automated
and manual power saving operations. It seems to have a stable pattern, where the system
is powered on and off automatically during more constant periods of time.
Figure 5.8: SYSTEM C powered time patterns
The patterns shown in Figure 5.8, represent a successful and almost optimal powering
during the measurements gathering.
This consistent result means that SYSTEM C is the most stable system, which
little development time on it and with a stable API version within the system.
5.1.4
SYSTEM E
Figure 5.9: SYSTEM E powered time
The usage pattern depicted in the graph showcases intermittent periods of activity where
System e was actively engaged Figure 5.10. These periods correspond to the phases
of testing and development of the automated power-saving feature, where the system
was utilized to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the implemented power-saving
measures.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.10: SYSTEM E testing automated feature
5.1.5
SYSTEM D and SYSTEM F
In this section, we will dive into the performance of SYSTEM D and SYSTEM F
Figure 5.11: SYSTEM D powered time
Figure 5.12: SYSTEM F powered time
58
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:67==
The graphs demonstrate distinct spikes or peaks in power usage during the periods when
the power-saving feature was intentionally activated and tested on System D and
F. These brief instances of usage indicate deliberate efforts to assess the power-saving
capabilities of the system. However, apart from these specific testing periods, System D
and F have inconsistent power ON and OFF duration.
Prior to the implementation of the power-saving measures, it is crucial to note that the
systems under consideration were consistently powered on, consuming a significant amount
of energy over time. However, the introduction of power-saving measures resulted
in a substantial reduction in energy consumption for this systems.
5.2
Optimal time measurements
Due to the inconsistencies present in the actual measurements, some of the data pre-
sented in this study was intentionally generated under the premise of optimal
circumstances. This approach was adopted to assess how the system would ideally per-
form without the influence of external factors that might have introduced variations in
the real measurements.
By generating the data under perfect conditions, a benchmark can be established for
the system performance. This hypothetical data serves as a theoretical standard
against the actual measurements so they can be compared. It allows us to gain
insights about the system capabilities in an optimal scenario.
The purpose of presenting this data is to provide a reference point for comparison and
highlight the potential capabilities of the system under ideal circumstances.
Figure 5.13: SYSTEM OPTIMAL powered time
The data represented in Figure 5.13 is generated over a range of four weeks taking place
in the month of June. This data tries to represent optimal situation during working days
and weekends, where the systems are totally automated.
It assumes that the developer turns the system on at 9:00 in the morning, initiating its
active state, and allows it to run continuously until 2:00 in the morning of the next day
when it is automatically shut down. This defined period of operation can assess the sys-
tem’s behavior under continuous usage during weekdays, which are typically characterized
by regular working hours and activities.
During weekends, the system’s power-saving features are automated and controlled by a
pipeline. This means that the system may enter sleep or low-power mode at specific times
during the weekend when its active operation is not required.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
59
==PAGE:68==
This assumptions made for generating the optimal data are specific to the
testing environment; SYSTEM A, B and C. The optimal approach described above
is tailored to these particular systems and the context in which they are being evaluated.
Other systems that might be present in the broader study are excluded, as they have their
unique operational requirements.
5.3
Energy consumption measurements
To accurately measure the energy consumption in this study, the focus will be solely on
Systems A, B, and C. These three systems have been selected as the primary subjects for
energy consumption analysis due to their particular relevance to the research objectives
or their representative nature within the scope of the study.
Start Time - End Time
System
2023-06-14 - 2023-07-19
SYSTEM A
2023-06-14 - 2023-07-21
SYSTEM B
2023-06-14 - 2023-07-20
SYSTEM C
2023-06-01 - 2023-06-29
SYSTEM OPTIMAL
Table 5.1: Testing environment system measurement time frame
The table presented Table 5.1, contains the time span of the measurements for the specific
systems that will be used in this study. Cost estimations are obtained from Section 2.1.1.
5.3.1
Prior to power saving feature
As mentioned earlier in the study, prior to the implementation of the power saving fea-
ture, the systems under consideration were running continuously. This means that the
servers remained active and powered on throughout the entire day, without
any automatic mechanisms in place to reduce their energy consumption during idle or
low-demand periods.
Before the power saving feature, and for the time this measurements have been taken, the
available time duration for each system would be the following:
• SYSTEM A, 2023-06-14 - 2023-07-19: 840h
• SYSTEM B, 2023-06-14 - 2023-07-21: 888h
• SYSTEM C, 2023-06-14 - 2023-07-20: 864h
• SYSTEM OPTIMAL, 2023-06-01 - 2023-06-29: 672h
Which concludes on the following cost Table 5.2:
System
Server #
Duration (h)
Cost (DKK)
SYSTEM A
3
840
4550.06
SYSTEM B
6
888
10165.18
SYSTEM C
3
864
4682.81
SYSTEM OPTIMAL
3
672
3633.25
SYSTEM OPTIMAL
6
672
7266.5
Table 5.2: Prior to power saving feature cost
60
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:69==
5.3.2
Current power saving results
The introduction of power-saving features aimed to optimize energy usage and reduce the
overall power consumption of the systems. The results obtained demonstrate the
effectiveness of these measures in achieving significant reductions in server
operation time.
System
Server #
Duration (h)
Cost (DKK)
SYSTEM A
3
220.21
1190.59
SYSTEM B
6
525.11
5678.14
SYSTEM C
3
342.7
1852.84
Table 5.3: Current power saving results cost
Based on the results obtained from the analysis Table 5.3, we can conclude that the
information presented in the table reflects the system operation time for each respective
system. Measuring how much time the system is up allows us to calculate the overall cost
of the operational system.
5.3.3
Optimal power saving results
To calculate the optimal power saving cost, the optimal duration will be used as a replace-
ment on each of the systems. After the measurements, the optimal available time over the
time span measured is 476h. Therefore:
System
Server #
Duration (h)
Cost (DKK)
SYSTEM A OPTIMAL
3
476
2573.55
SYSTEM B OPTIMAL
6
476
5147.1
SYSTEM C OPTIMAL
3
476
2573.55
Table 5.4: Optimal power saving results cost
By taking the amount of servers on each system and doing the calculations, the optimal
cost for each system can be calculated as seen in Table 5.4.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Energy consumption
The implementation of power-saving measures in the server systems has yielded notable
reductions in the duration of server operation time. By analyzing the data collected during
the study, we can compare the system operation times before and after the implementa-
tion of the power-saving measures, and estimate the potential cost reduction that can be
obtained.
The introduction of power-saving features aimed to optimize energy usage and reduce the
overall power consumption of the systems. The results obtained demonstrate the
effectiveness of these measures in achieving significant reductions in server
operation time. Table 6.1.
System
Prior Availability (h)
Measured Availability (h)
Optimal Availability (h)
SYSTEM A
840
220.21
476
SYSTEM B
888
525.11
476
SYSTEM C
864
342.7
476
Table 6.1: System availability duration comparison
Based on the result obtained, it can be calculated how much % each system is used now
compared to the data prior to any optimization
SYSTEM A
Comparison (Measured vs. Prior): [220.21
840
× 100 ≈26.20%]
Comparison (Optimal vs. Prior): [476
672 × 100 ≈70.83%]
SYSTEM B
Comparison (Measured vs. Prior): 525.11
888
× 100 ≈59.11%
Comparison (Optimal vs. Prior): 476
672 × 100 ≈70.83%
SYSTEM C
Comparison (Measured vs. Prior): 342.7
864 × 100 ≈39.62%
Comparison (Optimal vs. Prior): 476
672 × 100 ≈70.83%
The substantial reduction in operational time achieved through the optimal approach
demonstrates the efficiency gains and benefits of implementing energy-saving measures or
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
63
==PAGE:72==
performance optimizations.
When the operational time is reduced to around 30 % of its original duration,
it means that the system is consuming significantly less energy overall. This
reduction in energy consumption translates to a corresponding reduction in operational
costs, which is a substantial financial benefit.
6.2
Forecasting
During the study of the project, two primary forecasting approaches were explored to
analyze the time series data effectively and make accurate predictions.
The first method investigated was Linear Regression, which is a widely used statistical
technique for modeling the relationship between a dependent variable and one or more
independent variables. The second method under scrutiny was ARIMA (AutoRegres-
sive Integrated Moving Average), a sophisticated time series forecasting model that
is capable of capturing more complex temporal patterns. ARIMA is designed to handle
data with seasonality, trends, and non-stationary behavior by differencing the series and
incorporating autoregressive and moving average components.
In this project, Linear Regression was chosen over ARIMA as the preferred fore-
casting method for several reasons.
• Lack of Sufficient Data: One of the critical considerations that influenced the
choice of Linear Regression was the availability of data. ARIMA typically performs
well with larger datasets, especially when dealing with time series data that has
complex temporal dependencies. However, the available data we obtained is limited.
Linear Regression, on the other hand, can still produce reasonable forecasts with
smaller datasets, making it a more practical choice.
• Linear pattern in Data: Another factor is the presence of linear patterns in
the analyzed data. If the data exhibits a consistent upward or downward pattern,
as evidenced in the analysis, Linear Regression can effectively capture this linear
relationship. On the contrary, ARIMA is more appropriate for time series data with
seasonality or complex non-linear trends.
By considering these factors, it was determined that Linear Regression offered a practical
and effective approach for forecasting in this project. Its simplicity, ease of interpretation,
and ability to handle smaller datasets and linear patterns in the data made it a suitable
choice.
6.3
Future work
In the context of the project, there was an ambitious objective to implement fore-
casting and using a MILP approach to schedule pipeline build to the lowest cost hour.
Certain limitations and constraints prevented the full realization of these fea-
tures in the production environment.
A proof of concept was developed for forecasting the pipeline duration, aiming to pre-
dict the time required for executing specific tasks in the pipeline. Additionally, the MILP
approach was explored to optimize the scheduling of pipeline builds, aiming to minimize
costs by scheduling builds during periods of lower energy prices or reduced resource uti-
lization. These features held great potential for enhancing efficiency and cost-effectiveness
in the project.
However, two significant challenges stopped the complete implementation of these features:
64
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:73==
• Lack of variable prices: To effectively apply the MILP approach for scheduling
pipeline builds, access to variable energy prices based on time of day is required. This
would allow the algorithm to identify low-cost hours for executing resource-intensive
tasks. Unfortunately, due to the lack of availability of variable pricing data, it was
not possible to incorporate this component into the scheduling model.
• Data limitations: The accurate forecasting of pipeline duration relies heavily on
historical data and patterns. The lack of sufficient historical data or inconsistent
data patterns might have impacted the forecasting accuracy. Insufficient data could
result in less reliable predictions, making it challenging to implement the pipeline
duration forecasting feature with the desired level of confidence.
As a consequence of these challenges, it was determined that the forecasting and MILP-
based scheduling features were not ready for production deployment. Imple-
menting these features without reliable variable pricing data and a robust historical dataset
would be prejudicial for the department.
Despite the limitations, the project successfully developed a proof of concept, demonstrat-
ing the feasibility and potential benefits of forecasting pipeline duration and optimizing
pipeline builds using MILP. The proof of concept serves as a foundation for future devel-
opments, opening opportunities for further research, data collection, and enhancement of
the features when the necessary data becomes available.
While these specific features were not deployed in production, the project still achieved
a significant milestone with the successful implementation of the automated power-saving
feature. By incorporating automated power-saving capabilities, the project could effec-
tively reduce energy consumption during idle periods, contributing to sustainability and
cost savings.
With continued efforts to gather relevant data and address the challenges, these features
may eventually be realized in the future, further optimizing the pipeline operations and
contributing to the project’s optimal success.
6.4
Limitations
In this section, we will dive into the limitations associated with the project. Every project
faces certain constraints and challenges that can impact its scope, implementation, and
outcomes. By addressing these limitations, we can develop a comprehensive understanding
of the project’s boundaries.
6.4.1
Software under development
As the department’s software is still under development, it is common for the char-
acteristics of servers, software versions, and other related aspects to undergo changes over
the course of the project. These changes introduce uncertainties and challenges that
require us to reconsider certain aspects of the project, create hot-fixes or change already
deployed implementations. For example, the modifications in server software ver-
sions interfered with the compatibility of the project source code, leading to
the need for adjustments in project planning and implementation.
6.4.2
Jenkins data collection and forecasting
The integration of the data collection script for Jenkins data occurred rela-
tively late in the project. Initially, it was assumed that the Jenkins data would be
available within the Jenkins environment itself. However, it was later discovered that the
Jenkins data was regularly deleted on a monthly basis to conserve storage space. This
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
65
==PAGE:74==
realization posed a challenge for conducting time series analysis and forecast-
ing estimated times for Jenkins pipelines due to the limited availability of
historical data.
The delayed integration of the data collection script meant that there was a scarcity of data
points for establishing robust time series patterns. Time series analysis typically relies on
a significant volume of historical data to identify trends, seasonality, and other patterns
that can aid in accurate forecasting. With limited data, the complexity of conducting
reliable time series analysis and generating accurate estimations for Jenkins pipeline times
increased significantly.
This awareness will facilitate realistic expectations and the development of strategies that
can still provide valuable insights and estimations
6.4.3
Server maintenance
Several limitations were encountered during the project due to the poor con-
dition of some servers. Testing and validation processes were delayed as these servers
were not in an optimal state and required maintenance and fixes before they could be reli-
ably used. The failures observed were primarily attributed to network issues or outdated
server versions.
Network issues played a significant role in impeding the testing process. Unstable or
unreliable network connections impacted the ability to establish consistent and
secure communication channels with the servers. As a result, testing procedures
had to be postponed or repeated. Furthermore, the presence of outdated server versions
added complexity and introduced compatibility challenges.
Recognizing and addressing these limitations were crucial in ensuring that the project
could progress smoothly and achieve its goals
6.4.4
Real time energy data measurements
Another limitation that was encountered during the project is related to accurately esti-
mating the energy consumption and associated costs specifically for the servers. Due to
the way energy pricing is structured, it becomes challenging to obtain precise and ded-
icated pricing information for the servers alone. Instead, the energy costs are typically
shared among all the building’s electrical devices, making it difficult to attribute a specific
cost to the servers’ energy consumption.
66
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This thesis successfully addressed the issue of excessive energy consumption
within the department servers at Motorola. The initial problem of servers running
nonstop, spending a substantial amount of time in an IDLE state, was analyzed.
Through the research of potential solutions, Lights Out Management (LOM) expansion ca-
pabilities offered a promising approach to tackle the problem. LOM’s remote manage-
ment capabilities and power-saving features presented a viable path towards
optimizing energy usage and improving the overall efficiency of the server cluster.
To develop and implement this theory, an automated solution was created, incorporating
(CI/CD) pipelines to streamline the power saving feature.
This approach not only
simplified the deployment of the new system but also ensured that it could be seamlessly
integrated into the existing infrastructure without modifications.
Building on this research, the impact and feasibility of incorporating CI/CD pipeline
duration forecasting and MILP scheduling was analyzed. While the implementation of
MILP and forecasting was not pursued, the analysis provided valuable insights
into their potential benefits for future endeavors.
The proposed automated system, driven by Lights Out Management princi-
ples, holds the promise of intelligently managing server power, reducing energy
waste during idle periods by nearly 50%, and improving overall efficiency.
While the implementation of MILP and forecasting remains a potential avenue
for further research, this thesis has already made significant progress in the
department’s energy management practices.
In conclusion, this thesis has not only provided a concrete resolution to the
department’s energy consumption challenges but also prepared the path for
a more energy-conscious approach in the broader context of the organization.
Through our dedication to efficiency and environmental responsibility, we have set an
example for others to follow, hosting a culture of sustainability and contributing to a
brighter, greener tomorrow.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[Aiz20]
Jessica Aizarani. Energy demand in data centers worldwide from 2015 to 2021.
2020. url: https : / / www . statista . com / statistics / 186992 / global - derived -
electricity-consumption-in-data-centers-and-telecoms/.
[Alt22]
AltexSoft. CI/CD Tools Comparison. 2022. url: https://www.altexsoft.com/
blog/engineering/cicd-tools-comparison/.
[Anh16]
Tuan Le Anh. Workload prediction for resource management in data centers.
2016. url: https://umu.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:957163/FULLTEXT01.
pdf.
[Arv20]
Arvind. Jenkins Master and Slave Architecture - A Complete Guide. 2020.
url: https://www.edureka.co/blog/jenkins-master-and-slave-architecture-a-
complete-guide/.
[COI22]
COIN-OR. Cbc: A Column Generation Based Branch-and-Cut Code. 2022.
url: https://github.com/coin-or/Cbc.
[Com22]
Comodo. What is Remote Desktop? 2022. url: https://one.comodo.com/blog/
remote-control/what-is-remote-desktop.php.
[Cro07]
Pam Crowley. Energy-Efficient Cooling Control Systems for Data Centers.
2007. url: https://www.energy.gov/eere/iedo/energy-efficient-cooling-control-
systems-data-centers.
[Den23]
Statistics Denmark. Number of banks and branches. 2023. url: https://www.
statbank.dk/20721.
[dev23]
PuLP developers. PuLP: Python Linear Programming Toolkit. 2023. url: https:
//pypi.org/project/PuLP/.
[Ezr21]
Asaf Ezra. Renewable Energy Alone Can’t Address Data Centers’ Adverse En-
vironmental Impact. 2021. url: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/
2021 / 05 / 03 / renewable - energy - alone - cant - address - data - centers - adverse -
environmental-impact/.
[Gee20]
GeeksforGeeks. Virtualization to Promote Green Computing. 2020. url: https:
//www.geeksforgeeks.org/virtualization-to-promote-green-computing/.
[Ger21]
Jason Gerend. Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). 2021. url:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/networking/technologies/
dhcp/dhcp-top.
[Hat22]
Red Hat. What is CI/CD? 2022. url: https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/
devops/what-is-ci-cd.
[Het22]
Amanda Hetler. 5 Reasons Software Updates Are Important. 2022. url: https:
/ / www . techtarget . com / whatis / feature / 5 - reasons - software - updates - are -
important.
[hot23]
Nick hotz. OSEMN Data Science Life Cycle. 2023. url: https://www.datascience-
pm.com/osemn/.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
69
==PAGE:78==
[IBM21a]
IBM. Managing the system by using the IPMI. 2021. url: https://www.ibm.
com/docs/en/power8/8335-GTA?topic=systems-managing-system-by-using-
ipmi.
[IBM21b]
IBM. Risks of using IPMI on IBM Power Systems and OpenPower Systems.
2021. url: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/power8/8335-GTA?topic=ipmi-
risks-using-power-systems-openpower-systems.
[Int19]
Intel. Intel® Remote Management Module 4 (RMM4) - Integrated BMC User
Guide. 2019. url: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/support/us/en/
documents/server-products/intel-rmm4-ibmc-userguide.pdf.
[Int20]
Intel. Intel® Remote Management Module 4 (RMM4) - Technical Product
Specification. 2020. url: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/support/us/en/
documents/server-products/rmm4-tps.pdf.
[Jav22]
JavaTPoint. SSH Meaning. 2022. url: https : / / www . javatpoint . com / ssh -
meaning.
[JBi22]
Stephen J.Bigelow. What is Server Virtualization? The Ultimate Guide. 2022.
url: https://www.techtarget.com/searchitoperations/definition/What-is-server-
virtualization-The-ultimate-guide.
[Jen22]
Jenkins. Jenkins Documentation. 2022. url: https://www.jenkins.io/doc/.
[Jen23]
Jenkins. Remote Access API. 2023. url: https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/
using/remote-access-api/.
[Kam22]
George Kamiya. Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks. September
2022. url: https://www.iea.org/reports/data-centres-and-data-transmission-
networks.
[Kir22]
Paul Kirvan. How much energy do data centers consume? 2022. url: https:
//www.techtarget.com/searchdatacenter/tip/How- much- energy- do- data-
centers-consume.
[Mes19]
Fabrice Mesidor. A Basic Guide Into Time Series Analysis. 2019. url: https://
towardsdatascience.com/a-basic-guide-into-time-series-analysis-2ad1979c7438.
[Mic22]
Microsoft. Microsoft announces intent to build a new datacenter region in Fin-
land, accelerating sustainable digital transformation and enabling large scale
carbon-free district heating. 2022. url: https://news.microsoft.com/europe/
2022/03/17/microsoft-announces-intent-to-build-a-new-datacenter-region-in-
finland-accelerating-sustainable-digital-transformation-and-enabling-large-scale-
carbon-free-district-heating/.
[MIT13a]
MITRE. CVE-2013-4031. 2013. url: https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.
cgi?name=CVE-2013-4031.
[MIT13b]
MITRE. CVE-2013-4037. 2013. url: https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.
cgi?name=CVE-2013-4037.
[MIT13c]
MITRE. CVE-2013-4786. 2013. url: https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.
cgi?name=CVE-2013-4786.
[Ped23]
Priya Pedamkar. Is Jenkins Free? 2023. url: https://www.educba.com/is-
jenkins-free/.
[Roo23]
Dave Roos. Does powering down your computer wear it down? 2023. url:
https://computer.howstuffworks.com/powering-down-computer.htm.
[Sec22]
CI Security. Security Primer: Remote Desktop Protocol. 2022. url: https://
www.cisecurity.org/insights/white- papers/security- primer- remote- desktop-
protocol.
[She16]
Arman Shenabi. United States Data Center Energy Usage Report. 2016. url:
https://eta.lbl.gov/publications/united-states-data-center-energy.
70
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:79==
[She22]
Robert Sheldon. lights-out management (LOM). October 2022. url: https:
//www.techtarget.com/searchdatacenter/definition/lights-out-management.
[Sid21]
Md Abu Bakar Siddik. The environmental footprint of data centers in the
United States. 2021. url: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-
9326/abfba1.
[Tec22]
Green Technology. Data center waste heat for the heating network. 2022. url:
https://www.green.ch/en/business/data- center/sustainable- data- centers/
heating-network.
[Wat12]
Craig Watkins. Six Steps to Increase Data Center Cooling Efficiency. 2012.
url: https://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2012/11/08/six-steps-to-
increase-data-center-cooling-efficiency.
[YPY21]
Mahendra Pratap Yadav, Nisha Pal, and Dharmendar Kumar Yadav. Work-
load Prediction over Cloud Server using Time Series Data. 2021. doi: 10.1109/
Confluence51648.2021.9377032.
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Methodology
A.1
Parameters
Pipeline A Parameters
DELAY IN MINUTES
NUMBER OF REPEATS
SYSTEM NAME
TEST BUILD NUMBER
duration
estimatedDuration
number
result
timestamp
Pipeline B Parameters
AGENT NAME
BACKUP FOLDER PATH
CM XML RESTORE PATH
CM XML STORE PATH
PACKAGE NAME
PERF TYPE
RUNS
SYSTEM NAME
duration
estimatedDuration
number
result
timestamp
Table A.1: Pipeline A and B Parameters
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
73
==PAGE:82==
Pipeline C Parameters
AGENT NAME
BACKUP FOLDER PATH
CM XML RESTORE PATH
CM XML STORE PATH
DEFAULT MIGRATION PATHS
DOWNGRADE TO
IS TAG RELEASE JOB
MIGRATE HOSTS
PACKAGE NAME
RESTORE BACKUP
SYSTEM NAME
TAKE BACKUP
UPGRADE FROM
VALIDATE CONFIG FILES
WITH TRAFFIC
duration
estimatedDuration
number
result
timestamp
Pipeline D Parameters
AGENT NAME
ART STEPS
BACKUP FOLDER PATH
CM XML RESTORE PATH
CM XML STORE PATH
COLLECT ART LOGS
COLLECT ENDURANCE LOGS
ENDURANCE DURATION
IS TAG RELEASE JOB
PACKAGE NAME
PROFILE CAPABILITY
PROFILE TYPE
RESTORE BACKUP
SYSTEM NAME
TAKE BACKUP
TEST DURATION
duration
estimatedDuration
number
result
timestamp
Table A.2: Pipeline C and D Parameters
A.2
Jenkins API data extracion code
1
filepath = os.path.dirname(__file__) + "/" + pipeline + ". json"
2
final_build = {} if not os.path.isfile(filepath) else json.load(open(
filepath))
3
url = JENKINS_URL.format(pipeline)
4
request_json = json.loads(session.get(url).content)
Listing A.1: Jenkins API reduced JSON generation
1
builds = request_json[’builds ’]
2
for build in builds:
3
build_number = str(build[’number ’])
4
final_build[build_number] = {
5
"duration" : build[’duration ’],
6
"timestamp" : build[’timestamp ’],
7
" estimatedDuration " : build[’estimatedDuration ’],
8
"number" : build[’number ’],
9
"result" : build[’result ’]
10
}
11
actions = build [" actions "]
12
for action in actions:
13
if action.get(" _class",None) == "hudson.model. ParametersAction
":
14
parameters = action[’parameters ’]
15
for
parameter in parameters:
16
final_build[ build_number ][ parameter [" name "]] =
parameter [" value "]
Listing A.2: Jenkins API builds addition
74
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:83==
1
try:
2
with open(filepath , "w") as json_file:
3
json_file.write(json.dumps(final_build , sort_keys=True , indent
=2))
4
except:
5
print (" ERROR
WRITING ON FILE {}". format(filepath))
Listing A.3: Jenkins API JSON storage
A.3
Jenkins pipeline automatic data extraction
1
stage (" Setup
Pipeline ") {
2
steps {
3
script{
4
// CLONE
REMOTE
REPOSITORY
5
// STORE
SCRIPT IN LOCAL
SLAVE
MACHINE
6
}
7
}
8
}
Listing A.4: Jenkins pipeline setup
1
stage (" Execute
scripts ") {
2
steps {
3
script{
4
sh "python ${ JENKINS_SCRIPT_PATH }/${ JENKINS_API_SCRIPT
}"
5
// SHELL
COMMAND IS USED TO EXECUTE
THE PYTHON
SCRIPT
6
}
7
}
8
}
Listing A.5: Jenkins pipeline script execution
1
stage (" Retrieve
results ") {
2
steps {
3
script{
4
try{
5
sh "python ${ PIPELINE_FUNCTIONS_SCRIPT_PATH }
run_sudo_command \" sudo cp -a ${
JENKINS_SCRIPT_PATH }/. ${SCRIPT_PATH }\""
6
}catch(err){
7
error "Copying
results
failed"
8
}
9
}
10
}
11
}
Listing A.6: Jenkins pipeline results retrieval
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
75
==PAGE:84==
Appendix B
Implementation
B.1
Linear programming mocked data
1
{
2
"SYSTEM A": {
3
"Pipeline A": 2,
4
"Pipeline B": 4,
5
"Pipeline C": 3
6
},
7
"SYSTEM B": {
8
"Pipeline A": 1,
9
"Pipeline B": 7,
10
"Pipeline C": 3
11
},
12
"SYSTEM C": {
13
"Pipeline A": 1,
14
"Pipeline B": 2,
15
"Pipeline C": 2
16
}
17
}
Listing B.1: System task duration mocked data
1
current_api_energy_prices =
[0 ,1 ,2 ,3 ,4 ,5 ,6 ,7 ,8 ,9 ,10 ,11 ,12 ,13 ,14 ,15 ,16 ,17 ,18 ,19 ,20 ,21 ,22 ,23]
2
next_api_energy_prices =
[0 ,1 ,2 ,3 ,4 ,5 ,6 ,7 ,8 ,9 ,10 ,11 ,12 ,13 ,14 ,15 ,16 ,17 ,18 ,19 ,20 ,21 ,22 ,23]
Listing B.2: Energy prices over two consecutive days mocked data
1
week_schedule = current_api_energy_prices [18:] +
next_api_energy_prices [0:8]
2
week_schedule = [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
Listing B.3: Wednesday time schedule
76
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
==PAGE:85==
Server cluster operation load balance and power optimization
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
