==PAGE:1==
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of
barbiturates discharging to a stream
Nika Bilić
Master’s Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
Master’s Thesis
August, 2023
By
Nika Bilić
s212899
DTU Sustain
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors:
Poul Løgstrup Bjerg, Professor, DTU Sustain
Cecilie Bang Ottosen, Postdoc, DTU Sustain
Danish title:
Nedbrydningsforsøg for at vurdere skæbnen af barbiturater ved udsivning
til et vandløb
ECTS:
35
Education:
Master of Science in Engineering
Field
Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Nika Bilić ­ s212899
Signature
Date
ii
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
9th August 2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Barbiturates, pharmaceutical compounds categorized as emerging contaminants, pose
environmental concerns due to their persistence and toxicity. At the Grindsted site in Den­
mark, they have been found discharging into the stream in high concentration. Ground­
water systems and surface water must be protected from contaminants, as stated in The
Water Framework Directive (WFD). The goal of this project was to investigate the fate
of barbiturates, primarily degradation, by using laboratory batch experiments in form of
microcosms under aerobic conditions to mimic the hyporheic zone of the stream. The
materials used in the degradation experiment were groundwater and sediment, highly
contaminated with barbiturates, collected from the Grindsted site.
Literature findings indicate that barbiturates are generally not prone to volatilization or
sorption, with hydrolysis being the primary degradation pathway. The main two hydroly­
sis pathways were discovered as the barbiturates ring opening and the side chain degra­
dation, while forms of acetic, malonic or malonuric acid, urea and amide were found as
main hydrolytic metabolites. A significant knowledge gap on degradation potential was
observed. The designed degradation experiment discovered that isopropylbarbituric acid
can degrade under aerobic conditions, while other barbiturates remain stable over 60
days. Some of the barbiturates are suspected to potentially degrade over a longer time­
frame. A first­order kinetic model is fitted for the degradation curve of isopropylbarbituric
acid. First­order kinetic rates were estimated in a range of 0.06­0.08 d−1.
The hyporheic zone of the Grindsted stream was identified as an aerobic zone, where
the potential degradation of isopropylbarbituric acid was suggested. However, a conclu­
sion for other barbiturates degradation in this zone requires further investigation. The
presence of anaerobic conditions at the site in the aquifer indicated limited degradation
potential based on existing knowledge. The high concentrations of barbiturates were dis­
covered, particularly on the eastern side of the contaminated area. The center of the
barbiturates plume migrates from the deep aquifer at the central transect to the shallow
aquifer along the stream line. Allobarbital is the dominant compound on the contaminated
area. However, shallow well screens along the stream and well screens with the highest
barbiturates concentration detected more diversity among barbiturates. Monitored natural
attenuation (MNA) is considered as a relevant, but not a viable strategy for barbiturates
remediation at Grindsted site. More research on barbiturates degradation and remedial
techniques is suggested.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Poul Løgstrup Bjerg and Cecilie
Bang Ottosen, for continuous support and guidance throughout the duration of this project.
I would also like to thank Mette M. Broholm for the support and provided advice during
this project. Thank you for putting in the effort for this project and taking the time to help
me navigate the process of learning.
Thanks to Jens S. Sørensen for the organisation of the field campaigns and great com­
pany during the rainy days in Grindsted. Thanks to Mikael Olsson, Hanne Bøggild, Emma
and Kristin for the lab analyses during the project period. Thanks for all of the support dur­
ing the laboratory set up and the rest of the time spent in the laboratory.
Thanks to Maja Skøt Ingerslev for planning and conducting the field campaigns and for
the great company in the cold Grindsted stream.
Thanks to Grégory Lemaire and Josefine Leonora Gram Hansen for the great team work
during the field campaigns and additional support related to this project.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends for always supporting me, not only
during this project, but throughout my education at DTU.
iv
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction and scope
1
2
Assessment of barbiturates fate in the environment
3
2.1
Overview of barbiturates in focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Barbiturates fate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Grindsted ­ Site description
19
3.1
Geology and hydrology at the site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Contamination at the site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Area of investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Degradation experiment ­ Materials and methods
24
4.1
Collection of sediment and groundwater . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Sediment preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Groundwater preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Experimental set up of the microcosms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Microcosm sampling plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Results and discussion
36
5.1
Degradation affecting factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Degradation experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Barbiturates contamination from the factory site towards the stream
. . . . 52
5.4
Barbiturates degradation close to the stream and in the hyporheic zone of
the stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.5
Potential for bioremediation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6
Conclusion
61
7
Recommendations for future investigations
63
References
65
A Appendix
71
A.1 Structural formulas of barbiturates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
B Appendix
73
B.1 Identification of investigation place in Grindsted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
B.2 First field campaign ­ screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
B.3 Second field campaign ­ collection of material for the experimental set up . 75
C Appendix
81
C.1 Sediment cores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
C.2 Sediment analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
C.3 Sampling during groundwater preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
v
==PAGE:8==
C.4 Microcosms set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
C.5 Microcosm sampling schedule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
C.6 Barbiturates analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
C.7 pH measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
C.8 Oxygen measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
C.9 Redox sensitive species analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
D Appendix
92
D.1 Raw experimental data plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
D.2 Comparison of concentration curves for test and control microcosms . . . . 96
E
Appendix
98
E.1 Particle size distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
F
Appendix
101
F.1
Redox sensitive species plots ­ Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
F.2
Chloride and bromide plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
G Appendix
108
G.1 Distribution of barbiturates at 3 provided transects at the Grindsted site
. . 108
H Appendix
110
H.1 Degradation pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
I
Appendix
111
I.1
Electronic attachments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
vi
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction and scope
The Water Framework Directive (WFD) is an EU Directive which is intended for guidance
on protection of water across Europe and its sustainable management. It was introduced
in the year 2000 (European Comission, 2000). The objectives of WFD are to achieve
’good status’ for Europe’s rivers, lakes and groundwater, which includes protection of sur­
face water and groundwater, restoration of the water’s ecosystem, reducing the pollution
in water bodies and guaranteeing sustainable water usage to everyone. Groundwater and
surface water are linked and it is important to protect the groundwater so surface water
would be protected, and vice versa (European Comission, 2000). In Denmark, ground­
water is a water source for 99% of all Danish drinking water (DEPA, 2002). Therefore,
the importance of keeping its groundwater free of contaminants is emphasized. Landfills,
industrial factories, dry cleaning facilities and gasoline stations handle toxic chemicals
which can leak into the soil, thereby becoming a contamination source (Conant et al.,
2004). After the spillage, contaminants from the contaminated area can infiltrate ground­
water, and consequently surface water. Contaminated sites are complex to understand
and a widespread environmental problem.
Barbiturates are pharmaceutical compounds identified as emerging contaminants. They
have been extensively produced and used in the 1960s as anti­depressant drugs, nar­
cotics, sedatives and hypnotics. Due to their abuse, some of them got banned, while a
minority is still in use. They are found to be quite persistent chemicals in the environment
(Peschka et al., 2006) and they are considered as highly toxic pharmaceuticals. When
they are leaked into the groundwater system, these pharmaceuticals are expected to be
found in streams or groundwater decades after the infiltration occurs (Knepper, 2006).
Contaminant transport and fate are dependent on attenuation processes which include
degradation, sorption, volatilization and dilution. Degradation is of importance due to its
capability to reduce mass of original contaminants (Brusseau, 2019). Barbiturates are
considered as resistant to biodegradation (Knepper, 2006), but some studies report the
opposite arguments. Barbiturate attenuation processes are not largely investigated (Bal­
barini et al., 2020), therefore the objectives of this project target to gain knowledge on it.
Water flowing from the stream through the groundwater system and returning to the stream
is referred to as hyporheic water and the area where it occurs as a hyporheic zone (Woess­
ner, 2017). Barbiturates will have different fate in different environmental compartments
depending on the biogeochemical and hydrological factors. Their fate in the hyporheic
zone is of interest due to its attenuation capacity (Weatherill et al., 2018). Correspond­
ingly, Conant et al. (2019) refers to hyporheic zone as a transition zone between surface
water and groundwater systems in which various biogeochemical processes occur (Co­
nant et al., 2019). It is an interesting zone due to alteration of groundwater or surface
water contaminants which might occur governed by processes operating in the hyporheic
exchange system (Conant et al., 2019). One way to investigate the fate of barbiturates
is through laboratory experiments that mimic the field conditions under controlled condi­
tions. Microcosms are simplified ecosystems that are used to simulate and predict the
behaviour of natural ecosystems under controlled laboratory conditions. Microcosms can
be assembled in a form of a batch experiment representing a groundwater system.
Monitored natural attenuation, as the most relevant remediation strategy in this case, is
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
1
==PAGE:10==
a remediation technology which relies on natural processes, such as degradation among
other, to decrease contaminant concentrations in the soil and groundwater. The interest
for monitored natural attenuation (MNA) as an effective remediation technology at sites
contaminated with emerging contaminants has grown (Bjerg et al., 2011). Consequent to
assessment of barbiturates degradation capacity, MNA could possibly provide a solution
for barbiturates contamination.
In 2020, the Danish regions have defined ten of Denmark’s biggest soil contaminations.
The mega contaminations are the most extensive and expensive soil pollutions, which
are often also very complex pollutions. Investigation and clean­ups are expected to be
done by 2025 (Danske Regioner, 2022). Grindsted site is identified as one of them. Bar­
biturates have been found in the area of town Grindsted in South Jutland, Denmark. The
contamination is discharging into the stream in the form of a plume originating from the
old factory in Grindsted. High concentrations of barbiturates have been measured in the
groundwater plume along the Grindsted stream during multiple field campaigns through­
out last few decades (Balbarini et al., 2020). The highest concentrations are found on the
eastern side of the contaminated area starting from the factory and ending at the stream.
16 barbiturates are relevant for the site of Grindsted. Placement of transects on the east­
ern side of the contaminated area helps to investigate and monitor barbiturates plume.
The contamination coming from the plume and occurring in the stream is posing a risk for
the environment. Currently, there is no defined quality criteria from the authorities for bar­
biturate concentrations in the stream water which would define an environmental hazard.
The scope of this project includes thorough assessment of the degradation process of
selected barbiturates by a laboratory batch experiment. Collected groundwater and sed­
iment material from Grindsted is used in the experiment which mimics the system of hy­
porheic zone to analyze and determine relevant attenuation processes.
This project aims to clarify the fate of barbiturates, with the emphasis put on degradation
potential, which are discharging to a stream through the hyporheic zone. Main objectives
of this project are the following:
• Assess the physico­chemical properties and degradation pathways of barbiturates
and site­specific properties of Grindsted area to obtain data on possible contami­
nant transport, transformation and behaviour in the groundwater and through the
hyporheic zone of the stream
• Design and conduct degradation and desorption batch experiments on material col­
lected on the contaminated site in Grindsted to obtain and analyze results on pos­
sible degradation and other attenuation processes of barbiturates under controlled
conditions
• Discuss the expected fate of the barbiturates in relevant environmental compart­
ments at Grindsted by using transects placed on the eastern side of the contami­
nated area and experimental degradation results
• Assess bioremediation as remedial solution for the barbiturate contamination by
applying the obtained knowledge on their fate
2
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:11==
2
Assessment of barbiturates fate in the
environment
This chapter summarizes barbiturates properties and their expected fate in the environ­
ment according to the literature review. It gives a brief introduction to redox conditions,
which are important for determining degradation potential of barbiturates, and the hy­
porheic zone in the streambed, which is a focus of this study.
2.1
Overview of barbiturates in focus
Barbiturates are pharmaceutical compounds which are categorised as a group of drugs
used as sedatives, hypnotics, narcotics, anaesthetics and antiepileptics. During the 20th
century, more than 2500 barbiturates were synthesized and 50 of them were eventually
employed clinically. The peak of their use happened during the 1950s (López­Muñoz
et al., 2005). Due to the risk of overdose, their use has been significantly reduced and
they are replaced with other pharmaceutical compounds during the 1960s (Peschka et
al., 2006). However, they are still in use for some purposes such as general anesthesia,
epilepsy, treatment of migraines and headaches and euthanasia (López­Muñoz et al.,
2005).
Barbiturates are derivates of barbituric acid. Different substituents, usually attached on
the atom C5 (Figure 2.1) change the observed structural formula, therefore determining a
specific barbiturate. Barbituric acid (CAS no. 4390­16­3) is the most simple structure of
a barbiturate, with both substituents being hydrogen atoms.
Figure 2.1: Structure of a barbiturate with substituents R1 and R2 in C5 position and atom
numbering scheme (National Center for Biotechnology Information, 2023).
The analysis package for barbiturates available at ALS Denmark laboratory, based on
the historical overview on the barbiturates relevance at the Grindsted site (NIRAS, 2009),
includes 16 compounds (Table 2.1).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
3
==PAGE:12==
Table 2.1: 16 barbiturates found at the Grindsted site, including their CAS number.
Name of the barbiturate
CAS number
5­Butylbarbiturate
1953­33­9
Aethallymal
2373­84­4
Allobarbital
52­43­7
Allyl­n­butylbarbiturate
3146­66­5
Amobarbital
57­43­2
Barbital
57­44­3
Butabarbital
125­40­6
Butalbital
77­26­9
Butobarbital
77­28­1
Hexobarbital
56­29­1
Isobutylbarbituric acid
42846­91­3
Isopropylbarbituric acid
7391­69­7
Metharbital
50­11­3
Monoethylbarbituric acid
2518­72­1
Pentobarbital
76­74­4
Secobarbital
76­73­3
Eight different barbiturates are a focus of the conducted project due to the availability of
the analysis at DTU laboratory which can identify and quantify those compounds (Figure
2.2).
Figure 2.2: Structure of the eight barbiturates put in focus of this project (National Center
for Biotechnology Information, 2023).
4
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:13==
The structural formulas and molecular weights of all the barbiturates can be found in
Figure A.1 and Table A.1 (Appendix A).
2.2
Barbiturates fate
Barbiturates transport and fate depend on their physico­chemical properties and possible
attenuation processes which occur in the groundwater and the soil. Possible attenuation
processes are: degradation, sorption, volatilization and dilution.
2.2.1
Physico­chemical properties of barbiturates
Physico­chemical properties of barbiturates influence their fate in different environmen­
tal compartments. Main parameters which determine physico­chemical properties of a
compound are Henry’s law constant (KH), water solubility, logKow and pKa (Table 2.2).
Table 2.2: Main parameters affecting physico­chemical properties of the eight barbiturates
in focus found at DTU Food (2023).
Barbiturate
CAS no.
KH,
Pa·m3/mol
Water
solubility,
mg/L
LogKow
pKa
Barbital
57­44­3
5.4·10−10 a
7460
0.65
7.9
Butobarbital
77­28­1
9.3·10−9 a
4880
1.73
7.9
Isopropylbarbiturate
7391­69­7
1.4·10−10 a
5960
­0.02
4.6
Pentobarbital
76­74­4
1.8·10−8 a
679
2.10
7.9
Phenobarbital
50­06­6
2.6·10−10 a
1110
1.47
7.5
Secobarbital
76­73­3
1.9·10−8 a
570a
1.97
7.9
Amobarbital
57­43­2
8.4·10−9 a
603
2.07
7.9
Butalbital
77­26­9
9.3·10−9 a
1700
1.87a
7.9
aNot an experimental value.
Volatilisation
Volatilisation is determined by the Henry’s law constant which is the central parameter that
describes the substance’s tendency to escape from an aqueous solution to the air (Baun
et al., 2017). When KH < 3·10−7 atm·m3/mol (0.03 Pa·m3/mol) is valid, a substance is
considered to be less volatile than water. According to the definition by Baun et al. (2017),
all of the eight barbiturates are not supposed to be prone to volatilisation because their
KH values are less than 3·10−7 atm·m3/mol (Table 2.2).
Sorption, solubility and dissociation
Water solubility of found barbiturates is considered very high, as all of the water solu­
bility values are exceeding 500 mg/L (Hansen, 2022), going up to 7460 mg/L for barbi­
tal (Table 2.2). Barbiturates are considered to show low hydrophobicity (Peschka et al.,
2006). LogKow is a partitioning coefficient which determines whether the compound is
more likely to be found in polar or nonpolar phase. Pentobarbital has the highest logKow
value (logKow=2.10) among all of the eight barbiturates. However, all of the eight barbi­
turates are considered to have low logKow values (logKow<4) according to the definition
by Baun et al. (2017) (Table 2.2). This increases their likelihood to end up in the water
phase, where these compounds are most likely to be found (Peschka et al., 2006).
Adsorption coefficient (Koc) is a partitioning coefficient between the organic carbon con­
tent of the soil and the water phase. Koc is estimated as Koc=0.41·Kow (Karickhoff, 1981).
All of the estimated Koc values for all 8 barbiturates are less than 52. According to Mccall
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
5
==PAGE:14==
et al. (1980), if Koc < 50 then the mobility of a compound in the soil is considered high to
very high. Therefore, barbiturates are not considered as compounds prone to sorption.
However, they can be detected in the groundwater decades later after the contamination
has occured (Peschka et al., 2006). Isopropylbarbiturate and barbital can be considered
as the most mobile compounds out of the eight barbiturates, according to their lowest
logKow values and highest water solubility values (Table 2.2). Pentobarbital, secobarbital
and amobarbital have the highest logKow values and the lowest water solubility values
out of the 8 barbiturates (Table 2.2). Sorption is dependant on the type of soil and other
factors which additionally affect this phenomenon.
A relationship between pKa of a substance and pH determines the degree of dissoci­
ation of a compound in a given pH environment. The dissociation degree of a compound
influences the abovementioned attenuation processes. Nobay and Acquisto (2014) es­
timated a different, but somewhat similar pKa values when compared to pKa values in
Table 2.2 by DTU Food (2023). The authors claim, if pentobarbital is released into soil, a
pKa of 7.8 (Nobay and Acquisto, 2014) indicates that it will exist partially as an anion in
the neutral environment. It is not expected to absorb strongly to soils containing organic
carbon or clays due to the overall negative charge of soil. Phenobarbital (pKa=7.3 (Nobay
and Acquisto, 2014)) is expected to behave in a similar way. Isopropylbarbiturate has a
lower pKa value (pKa=4.6) than other 7 barbiturates. This indicates a slightly higher affin­
ity towards sorption to soils containing organic carbon or clay, but this compound is still
considered as very mobile.
2.2.2
Abiotic and biotic degradation
Barbiturates are known to have the ability of undergoing abiotic degradation. In this case,
hydrolysis and photolysis are considered as abiotic degradation pathways. Biodegrada­
tion (biotic degradation) includes the presence of the microorganisms which perform the
degradation of the substance.
Photolysis
Pentobarbital is considered as not susceptible to photolysis from sunlight as it does not
contain chromophores that absorb wavelengths of light greater than 290 nm, whereas
phenobarbital will be susceptible to photolysis due to existence of the chromophores
(Nobay and Acquisto, 2014). An extensive literature review done by Hofmann et al. (2020)
documents that butobarbital, pentobarbital, butabarbital, butalbital and phenobarbital are
reported as photosenzitising drugs due to becoming active when exposed to the light.
Barton et al. (1982) claims that barbital undergoes photolysis and yields derivates of urea
and biuret. Additionally, Otsuji et al. (1968) found that UV irradiation at 254 nm in an
aqueous alkaline medium degrades barbital. Barbiturates lose their chromophore, which
absorb light, in the strong acidic medium as well as show different pH­dependant UV spec­
tra (Hermann, 1974). This indicates stonger phytolysis in alkaline medium. Photolysis is
not expected in the experimental system that is assessed due to elimination of sunlight
and keeping the experimental set up in the dark to mimic groundwater conditions.
Hydrolysis and hydrolytic metabolites
Hydrolysis potential and suggested formed metabolites are well explained in the literature.
During the hydrolysis of barbital, its metabolite known as diethylmalonuric acid may cyclize
in basic solution to form the parent compound (barbital) (Garrett et al., 1971). Therefore,
hydrolysis of barbital is considered as a reversible process. Two metabolites of barbi­
tal are identified by Dannley et al. (1954) through ultraviolet absorption spectra which
are α­ethylbutyrylurea and diethyl malonuric acid. 50% of degraded barbital is found
as diethylmalonuric acid by Fretwurst (1948) (Gardner and Goyan, 1973). Allobarbital
6
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:15==
degrades by a hydroxyl­ion attack on the undissociated and monoanionic forms, how­
ever the bivalent anion resists hydrolysis. Its metabolites, developed in a NaOH medium
under ambient and reflux conditions as well as at 37◦C, are: N­Diallylacetylurea, α,α­
Diallylmalonuric acid, α,α­Diallylmalonic acid, α,α­Diallylacetic acid (Hermann, 1976).
Mercaldo and Pizzi (2006) demonstrates a by­product of the phenobarbital hydrolysis,
phenylethylacetyl urea, which upon further hydrolysis produces phenylethylacetic acid
and urea. Maximum quantity of urea is produced between 30 and 40 min at a 100◦C
with 2 M NaOH as solvent. Fretwurst (1948) argues that hydrolysis of phenobarbital
to malonic acid at higher base concentration proceeds at a higher rate (73% of identi­
fied products) than an occurring process which leads to formation of acetylurea (Gardner
and Goyan, 1973). According to Tishler et al. (1962), degradation metabolites of phe­
nobarbital are phenylethylacetylurea, phenylethylmalonic acid, phenylethylmalonamide,
α­phenyl­n­butyric acid, α­phenyl­n­butyramide and urea. Phenylethylacetylurea is de­
tected in higher concentration when compared to other degradation compounds via UV
absorbance spectra. Kapadia et al. (1959) confirms separation of decomposition prod­
ucts of phenobarbital, which are phenylethylacetyl urea, phenylethyl acetic acid and urea,
by paper chromatographic method. Phenobarbital is degraded 80% after 60 min of illumi­
nation as reported by Cao et al. (2013). Reactive oxygen species analysis shows that OH
radical is mainly responsible for its degradation. Its degradation rate is reported as 0.012
min−1 at pH=3, and 0.038 min−1 at pH=11. Degradation of phenobarbital to phenylethyl­
malonuric acid is considered as essentially irreversible, as the latter is a very unstable
compound (Tishler et al., 1962). Garrett et al. (1971) explains that all studied barbiturates
(barbital, phenobarbital, amobarbital, metharbital, barbituric acid, butabarbital, pentobar­
bital and secobarbital) were hydrolyzed in strongly alkaline and carbonate buffer regions.
However, an anomalous behaviour was characteristic for all barbiturates when the buffer
was changed at pH range 6.4­8.2. A summary of mentioned metabolites is provided (Ta­
ble 2.3).
On the other hand, hydrolysis of butalbital and secobarbital did not occur within the pH
range from 2 to 12, as reported by Peschka et al. (2006). Nobay and Acquisto (2014) sug­
gests that hydrolysis is not expected to be an important environmental fate process for
pentobarbital and phenobarbital as they lack functional groups that hydrolyze easily. Pen­
tobarbital has been given as an example of short­acting barbiturates, while phenobarbital
is a representative of the long­acting barbiturates. Burke et al. (2014) describes testing
the removal of 27 organic trace pollutants (including phenobarbital) by setting up tank
aeration experiments. Both oxic and anoxic conditions are tested during the 250 days.
Removal of phenobarbital was 16% (start: 1.01 µg/L; end: 0.85 µg/L) in oxic conditions,
whereas it was 26% (start: 1.01 µg/L; end: 0.75 µg/L) in anoxic conditions. Removal rate
constants were respectively fitted to 0.001 d−1 and 0.002 d−1, assuming the first order
kinetics. The used groundwater was identified as having iron reducing conditions.
The most often found metabolites are in a form of an acetic, malonic or malonuric acid,
urea or amide.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
7
==PAGE:16==
Table 2.3: Suggested barbiturates metabolites identified after hydrolysis.
Parent
compound
Metabolite
Reference
Barbital
Diethylmalonuric
acid
Garrett et al. (1971), Dannley et al.
(1954), Fretwurst (1948)
α­Ethylbutyrylurea
Dannley et al. (1954)
Allobarbital
α,α­Diallylacetic
acid
Hermann (1976)
α,α­Diallylmalonic
acid
Hermann (1976)
α,α­Diallylmalonuric
acid
Hermann (1976)
N­Diallylacetylurea
Hermann (1976)
Phenobarbital
Phenylethylacetic
acid
Mercaldo and Pizzi (2006),
Kapadia et al. (1959)
Malonic acid
Fretwurst (1948)
Phenylethylmalonic
acid
Tishler et al. (1962)
Phenylethylmalonuric
acid
Tishler et al. (1962)
α­Phenyl­n­butyric
acid
Tishler et al. (1962)
Urea
Mercaldo and Pizzi (2006), Tishler
et al. (1962), Kapadia et al. (1959)
Acetylurea
Fretwurst (1948)
Phenylethylacetylurea
Tishler et al. (1962), Kapadia et al.
(1959)
Phenylethylmalonamide
Tishler et al. (1962)
α­Phenyl­n­butyramide
Tishler et al. (1962)
Hydrolysis effecting parameters
Two effects of C5 substituents (see atom position in Figure 2.1) on the hydrolytic degrada­
tion are concluded. First, that unsaturated aromatic substituents are responsible for the
increase in the hydrolytic reactivity of barbiturates. Second, the steric effect of C5 alkyl
or cycloalkyl substituents (substituents larger than methyl) cause a decrease by 103­104
times in the hydrolytic reactivity. The second effect predominates (Mokrosz and Palu­
chowska, 1986). Similarly to the first described effect (Mokrosz and Paluchowska, 1986),
steric strain and inductive effect of the substituent are considered to accelerate the hy­
drolysis of the pyrimidine ring (Mokrosz and Paluchowska, 1986).
Similarly to the second effect described (Mokrosz and Paluchowska, 1986), the effect
of substituents on the hydrolysis rate and relationship of reactivity order and the Newman
rule of six is visualized (Table 2.3). Reactivity is correlated with the Newman rule of six
as a measure of steric influence on hydrolysis. Newman rule of six identifies atoms which
are most effective in sterically hindering an addition as a chemical reaction. Order of re­
activity follows the Total ”Six Number”, i.e. the number of atoms in the 6­position where
the carbonyl oxygen is considered number 1. It is seen that hydrolysis occurs at a lower
rate when Total ”Six Number” is higher (Figure 2.3), occurring when the barbiturate has a
more sterically hindering group of atoms attached to the ring (Garrett et al., 1971).
8
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Substituent effect on hydrolysis rate and relationship of reactivity order to the
Newman rule of six as explained by Garrett et al. (1971).
Additionally, Wen and Fulco (1985) ascribes the lack of degradation potential to low lipophilic­
ity (i.e. barbituric acid, 2­thiobarbituric acid, barbital, hydroxylphenobarbital) or to a spe­
cific structural alteration in the barbiturate ring (i.e. 4­meththylprimidone). Similarly, con­
jugation between the substituent and the carbonyl group could hinder the hydrolysis.
For all three tested temperature environments (40, 50 and 60 ◦C), Hasegawa et al. (1958)
argues that hydrolysis in an alkaline region is very much accelerated. Therefore, it de­
pends on the concentration of the hydroxyl ion, pH value and the temperature. Apparent
first­order rate constants were provided by Garrett et al. (1971) for hydrolysis of some
barbiturates at 80◦C. For 11 barbiturates (barbital, phenobarbital, amobarbital, methar­
bital, thiamylal, barbituric acid, vinbarbital, butabarbital, pentobarbital, cyclobarbital and
secobarbital), rate constants are increasing as the pH is rising. The increase in temper­
ature was followed by the increase in the rate constants. The hydrolysis rate­pH profiles
for all 5,5­disubstituted barbiturates are similar, except for barbituric acid and metharbital.
The profile for metharbital shows no curvature at the high pH values which is connected to
hydroxyl­ion attack on the monoanion which happens more easily as explained by Garrett
et al. (1971). The shape of the rate­pH curves indicates hydroxyl­ion­catalyzed degrada­
tion of the unionized and ionized barbiturates. Higher rate of hydrolysis is expected for
higher values of pH. All profiles can be explained by hydroxyl­ion attack on the undisso­
ciated and monoanion forms of the barbiturates, whereas the dianions are unreactive.
The barbiturates reactivity is connected to the steric influence during the hydrolysis. It
is reported that ionic strength effects increase the rate of barbiturates degradation in the
examples of alkaline hydrolyses of amobarbital and phenobarbital (Garrett et al., 1971).
Maurya et al. (2018) summarizes on positive relationship of the hydrolysis rate and ionic
strength, indicating OH­attack on barbiturate monoanion as a primary route of decompo­
sition at certain pH values (pH=11.2 in this case).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
9
==PAGE:18==
A summary of parameters which affect hydrolysis is given in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Summary of all effect and the way they influence the hydrolysis.
Parameter
Impact on hydrolysis
Temperature
Higher temperature increases the rate constants of hy­
drolysis (Garrett et al., 1971).
pH
Alkaline pH increases the rate of hydrolysis (Barton et al.,
1982).
Lipophilicity
Low lipophilicity decreases likelihood of hydrolysis (Wen
and Fulco, 1985).
Steric strain
Steric strain and inductive effect accelerates hydrolysis
(Mokrosz and Paluchowska, 1986).
Conjugation
Conjugation between a substituent and a carbonyl
group hinders the hydrolysis (Mokrosz and Paluchowska,
1986).
Ionic strength
Ionic strength effects increase hydrolysis (Maurya et al.,
2018).
Unsaturation
Unsaturated aromatic substituents increase hydrolytic
reactivity (Mokrosz and Paluchowska, 1986).
Steric effect
Strong
steric
effect
decreases
hydrolytic
reactivity
(Mokrosz and Paluchowska, 1986).
Ring alteration
Structural alteration in the barbiturate ring decreases
likelihood of hydrolysis (Wen and Fulco, 1985).
10
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:19==
Hydrolysis degradation pathways
Hydrolysis pathways are suggested by some authors. Phenobarbital is reported to de­
grade via two photocatalytic degradation pathways. First, the addition of OH radicals to
phenobarbital directly, and second pathway, the cleavage of pyrimidine ring (Cao et al.,
2013). Phenobarbital degradation in aqueous solution was investigated over a pH range
of 6.0­10.5 by Hasegawa et al. (1958). Degradation proceeds by two routes, i.e. degra­
dation in molecular (A) and ionic forms (B), where degradation in ionic form is reported to
be rapid. Phenobarbital is in an ionic form at pH>7.3, whereas it is in a molecular forms
at lower pH values. This can be seen in Figure 2.4. The mechanism in other barbiturates
seems to be quite the same, due to formation of malonuric and malonic acids or malony­
lurea derivatives which are found in alkaline degradation (Aspelund et al., 1955; Ikeda,
1960).
Figure 2.4: Two degradation pathways for phenobarbital degradation: (A) degradation in
molecular form and (B) degradation in ionic form. The six­membered ring of phenobarbital
is separated by the two degradation pathways (Hasegawa et al., 1958).
The dual pathways do not allow the production of the diamide (Figure 2.6 ­ VII) and are
criticized by some authors, one of them being Tishler et al. (1962). The author suggests
different hydrolysis products from the nonionic and ionic form of phenobarbital as seen in
Figure H.1 in the Appendix H. Degradation by ureide path from the ionic form is assumed
(Tishler et al., 1962). Phenobarbital is seen to degrade faster at pH=9.5 than at pH=8.2,
at temperature of 60◦C.
The hydrolysis is reported as an apparent unimolecular reaction at any fixed pH value,
but itself is a bimolecular reaction catalyzed by hydroxyl ion (hydrolysis) (Hasegawa et al.,
1958). An unimolecular reaction is defined as a reaction in which a molecule rearranges
itself to produce one or more products, whereas a bimolecular reaction involves a reaction
of two molecules. Mokrosz and Paluchowska (1986) found that spirocyclopropane­1’,5­
barbiturate is hydrolysed in two ways, i.e. by pyrimidine ring opening at the 1­6 position
(i.e. as seen in Figure H.1) and by the cyclopropane ring (substituent at C5) opening.
Opening of the cyclopropane ring seems to be bimolecular and involves a significant
steric effect of the R2 substituent (Alder et al., 1971; Mokrosz and Paluchowska, 1986).
Otsuji et al. (1968) found that degradation of barbital in an aqueous alkaline medium
yields 2­ethylbutanoylurea, which indicates ring opening in 1­6 position (Barton et al.,
1982). Mephobarbital ring opening caused by the hydrolysis and having produced 1­[2­
phenylbutyryl]­3­methylurea (a type of acylurea) is additionally supported by Wen and
Fulco (1985). This was done by autoclaving under the hydrolytic conditions.
Gardner and Goyan (1973) proposes a degradative pathway of barbital and phenobar­
bital (Figure 2.5).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: Degradation pathways for barbital and phenobarbital as suggested by Gard­
ner and Goyan (1973). Barbital: R1, R2 = ethyl; phenobarbital: R1 = ethyl, R2 = phenyl.
Unionized form is cleaved at 1,2­position, leading to production of the bisamide (III); or at
1,6­position (equivalent 3,4­position), leading to the ureide (VI). The ionized form cleaves
only at 1,6­position (equivalent 3,4­position), leading to ureide (or malonic acid) exclu­
sively.
Hermann (1976) argues on lack of arguments for formation of different hydrolysis products
from the ionic and nonionic forms, but believes dual pathways of degradation are involved.
Author questions the degradation of ionized barbiturates via the ring opening at the 1­6
or equivalent 3­4 positions (in 5,5­disubstituted derivates) which produces first malonuric
acids, as well as the degradation of unionized forms which split via opening at the 1­2 or
equivalent 3­4 positions and produce carbamic acid derivative, which transforms into a
diamide of malonic acid. Hydrolysis of unionized form of phenobarbital is rejected as a
pathway (Hermann, 1976). Garrett et al. (1971) agrees with reversible system between
the barbiturate and its ring­opened malonuric acid. The author claims, however, that ex­
istance of malonuric acid derivative could be explained as a fraction decomposing via 1­6
position ring opening due to pH change, rather than the unique degradation pathway for
the ionic form of barbiturates. The hydrolysis pathway is seen in Figure 2.6.
Garrett et al. (1971) strongly identifies acetylurea as the major hydrolysis product of both
the ionized and unionized form of the barbiturates. The author argues that 1­6 ring open­
12
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:21==
ing would be favored in all barbiturates and that 1­2 splitting is of minor importance except
when 1­6 opening is sterically hindered by a bulky 5­substituent or the combination of a
5­substituent and a 1­methyl group.
Figure 2.6: Hydrolysis scheme for barbiturates according to Garrett et al. (1971). Two
pathways are explained for an unionized (yielding II, III, IV (and V) and unionized (yielding
VI and VII) form of barbiturate. The unionized barbiturate hydrolyzes via ring opening at
the 1­2 or equivalent 2­3 position. The ionized barbiturate hydrolyzes via ring opening at
1­ or equivalent 3­4 position. The main degradation products are diamide (VII) and acetyl
urea (III), respectively.
Fretwurst (1958) agrees that hydrolysis of the sodium salt of this barbituric acid (i.e. bu­
talbital) in water predominantly at around neutral pH occurs via 1­6 ring opening, while at
higher pH (pH>9.5) some 1­2 ring opening can happen (Maulding et al., 1972). Gardner
and Goyan (1973) explains that chosen ureide path for unionized barbiturates is ham­
pered through steric hindrance by the presence of the phenyl group at the 5 position in
the pH range 8.2­9.5. Additionally, hydrolysis of barbital at pH=6.15, where ureide repre­
sents 84% of the hydrolysis product, is explained by allowing the hydroxide­ion attack at
the 1­6 or 3­4 position, due to no steric hindrance existing. Tishler et al. (1962) argues for
different hydrolysis products from ionic and nonionic forms, due to the fact that the frac­
tion decomposing by the ureide path (1­6 ring opening) was dependent on pH changes
and the concentration of the ionic form. The diamide (1­2 ring opening) was isolated as a
hydrolysis product by Fretwurst (1985) (Garrett et al., 1971). However, Fretwurst (1985)
isolated diamide from alkaline solutions of the ionized barbiturate, and not the nonionized
form.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
13
==PAGE:22==
On the other hand, Peschka et al. (2006) found two possible fragmentation mechanisms
without the ring opening: (A) R­cleavage of the side chain and (B) McLafferty rearrange­
ment followed by α­cleavage (Figure 2.7). Additionally, thermal decomposition and fol­
lowing ionization or simply to alkyl cleavage could occur.
Figure 2.7: Two degradation pathways for butalbital degradation: (A) degradation by R­
cleavage of the side chain and (B) degradation by McLafferty rearrangement followed by
α­cleavage (Peschka et al., 2006).
Decomposition of barbiturate salts in aqueous solution or in the presence of alkali, at
both room and autoclaving temperatures, is reported (Garrett et al., 1971). The author
explains how many questions regarding the alkaline hydrolysis of barbiturates, such as
mechanism, ionic strength effects, rate­pH profiles and structure­hydrolytic activity rela­
tionships are not answered properly. The hydrolytic pathways are difficult to understand
and complex due to their possible alternative routes of sequential hydrolyses of the inter­
mediates.
Biodegradation
The rate of biodegradation of an organic chemical is dependent on its chemical struc­
ture, the environmental conditions, and the types of microorganisms that are present. If
a degradation is not complete, it can lead to formation of metabolites which can be of
environmental concern (Winter et al., 1998). Yu et al. (2006) reports finding no read­
ily biodegradability capacity for secobarbital (70% degraded) during the short­term (50
days) aerobic batch biodegradation tests inoculated with diluted waste activated sludge.
However, during the same test phenobarbital is identified as having readily biodegradabil­
ity potential (80% degraded). BIODEG and MITI linear and non­linear models from the
BIOWIN software (developed by U.S. EPA to predict biodegradation probability) suggest
that secobarbital is not biodegradable, whereas phenobarbital is biodegradable accord­
ing to only both of the BIODEG models (Yu et al., 2006). However, biodegradation is not
expected to be an important environmental fate process for phenobarbital according to
Nobay and Acquisto (2014). Primidone, which produces phenobarbital as its metabolite,
is found to be persistent during the 84 days of both aerobic and anaerobic experiment
with sand and medium loam soils (Lin et al., 2011). Peschka et al. (2006) conducted
biodegradation testing for 6 barbiturates (aprobarbital, pentobarbital, butalbital, secobar­
bital, hexobarbital and phenobarbital) under aerobic conditions in a fixed­bed bioreactor
for 21 and 42 days in the dark to prevent photolysis. All barbiturates were not transformed
by microorganisms present in water and are concluded to be without the biodegradability
capacity. Overall, Peschka et al. (2006) reports barbiturates as rather poorly degradable
within the aquatic environment and strongly persistent.
14
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:23==
Current knowledge level on degradation
A lot of knowledge gaps exist for making a connection between barbiturates and biodegra­
dation, while hydrolysis pathways and metabolites are well explained. Hydrolysis is con­
sidered to be the major route of degradation of some barbiturates (Ikeda, 1960). Informa­
tion of microorganisms which perform biodegradation is limited, as well as effects which
influence biodegradation.
2.2.3
Redox conditions
Redox conditions are determined by redox parameters which essentially represent bio­
geochemical processes occurring in the groundwater. This project considers specific re­
dox sensitive species: oxygen, nitrate, sulfate, iron, manganese and ammonia. Redox
conditions are important to be determined due to their impact on the degradation pro­
cesses in the groundwater and in the soil.
Microorganisms present in the soil perform and participate in biodegradation, which is
often the most important mechanism that attenuates the migration of dissolved organic
contaminants in groundwater (National Research Council, 1993). Their metabolism in­
cludes biochemical reaction which are oxidative in nature (Alvarez and Illman, 2005).
The renewable electron acceptors are available in the ground. Reactions occur depend­
ing on the type of the microorganisms, availability of the electron acceptors and donors
and the conditions in the ground. Bacteria prefer energy yielding processes, so they uti­
lize the electron acceptors in a specific order according to their thermodynamic hierarchy
(Alvarez and Illman, 2005). The hierarchy influences the order in which the available
electron acceptor are utilized in the ground. This order is seen in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Order in which redox reactions would take place in the ground, according to
their capacity of electron acceptors to yield energy for the microbes. The order is the
following: O2­>NO−
3 ­>Mn4+­>Fe3+­>SO2−
4 ­>HCO−
3 (Chapelle et al., 2009, Alvarez and
Illman (2005).
In the case of oxygen depletion, other electron acceptors become a source of energy
during the redox reaction following the order described above. As a result of this, anaero­
bic redox conditions develop and anaerobic microorganisms use other forms of combined
oxygen (nitrate, manganese or ferric iron oxides, sulfate, carbon dioxide and bicarbonate)
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
15
==PAGE:24==
as electron acceptors (Alvarez and Illman, 2005). Both aerobic and anaerobic degrada­
tion of contaminants is possible, but aerobic conditions tends to be very feasible for many
contaminants (Alvarez and Illman, 2005).
Contaminant plumes tend to develop a specific order of redox conditions in the plume
as it is spreading (Figure 2.9).
Figure 2.9: Order in which redox conditions develop inside of the plume (Alvarez and
Illman, 2005).
This phenomenon happens due to high demand for oxygen in the source zone when
contaminants act as electron donors, therefore oxygen gets depleted. Afterwards, other
electron acceptors are sequentially utilized in a specific order until they become depleted
as well (Alvarez and Illman, 2005).
Barbiturates degradation and a connection to redox conditions is not clear. If they show
a degradation potential, it is not known whether they degrade under aerobic or anaerobic
conditions in the groundwater systems. It is believed that many contaminants would de­
grade more easily under aerobic conditions, but it is not understood whether that is the
case for barbiturates.
2.2.4
Environmental compartments
Environmental compartments are parts of the physical environment defined to predict the
fate of the compound. Three zones of a water compartment are interesting to look at:
groundwater, hyporheic zone and surface water. Groundwater is defined as the water
that occurs in the zone of saturation, while surface water is water that occurs on the land
surface as rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands (Woessner, 2020). Groundwater and
surface water can differ greatly in the chemical composition, including nutrients, organic
matter, pollutants, dissolved oxygen concentration, and redox indicators such as iron,
manganese, sulfate or nitrate. Surface water and groundwater exchange water through
the hyporheic zone. The water exchange process is driven by elevation and head dif­
ference between the surface water and the groundwater, the hydraulic properties of the
sides, banks and bottom and the geological composition and structure (Woessner, 2020).
16
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:25==
The hyporheic zone, as a saturated zone beneath and adjacent to the surface water where
groundwater and surface water are actively mixing and being exchanged, is of consider­
able importance for understanding contaminant attenuation (Anibas et al., 2016). It is also
known as the aquifer­river interface. Furthermore, it is considered as a critical pathway
for contaminant discharge to surface water bodies in the groundwater baseflow (Conant
et al., 2004). The system represents a natural bioreactor where both oxic and anoxic bio­
transformation processes take place. A reduction or possible elimination of contaminant
discharge can happen during the biotransformation processes in the hyporheic zone, in­
dicating the attenuation capacity of the zone (Weatherill et al., 2018). However, biotrans­
formation in the hyporheic zone can occur if requisite bacteria, circumneutral pH, nutrients
and electron donors/acceptors are present where contaminant residence time equals or
exceeds its transformation timescale. Hyporheic zone is frequently heterogeneous with
a wide range of saturated hydraulic conductivities and associated solute residence times
(Weatherill et al., 2018). Differences in conductivities and residence time can be seen
in Figure 2.10. Low permeability zones with low conductivity values limit the movement
of exchange waters in subsurface (Woessner, 2020). Similarly, Weatherill et al. (2018)
suggests that for a gaining hyporheic zone, the thickness of the mixing zone adjescent to
the hyporheic zone is greatest with homogeneous high conductivity sediment (e.g. well­
sorted sand or gravel) and reduced groundwater discharge.
Figure 2.10: A conceptual model of groundwater chlorinated ethenes (CE) plume dis­
charging through hyporheic zone sediments. The dashed line represents a boundary be­
tween oxic hyporheic zone and anoxic sediment zone. OM: organic matter, K: sediment
hydraulic conductivity (Weatherill et al., 2018).
A gaining stream receives groundwater discharge and the stream discharge downstream
increases (Woessner, 2020). Grindsted stream is described as a gaining stream (Bal­
barini et al., 2020). If a hyporheic zone of a stream is groundwater­fed, it could present
a potential natural biobarrier for anaerobic and aerobic biological treatment (Weatherill
et al., 2018). Hyporheic zones can modify the surface water chemistry and focus bio­
logical production at locations where hyporheic water discharges to the stream known
as the hot spots (Boulton, 2007).Hyporheic sediment are often rich in complex organic
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
17
==PAGE:26==
matter derived from terrestrial ecosystem (i.e. soil particles) and anthropogenic sources
(i.e. wastewater discharge) (Stelzer et al., 2014). The bedforms formed on the hyporheic
sediment surface might promote biodegradation as they increase the hyporheic flux and
therefore the water volume flowing through the zone (Mueller et al., 2022). Pharma­
ceuticals, among other trace organic compounds, are considered to be attenuated most
efficiently in the upper centimeters of the riverbed. This fact is supported by arguments as
having oxic to suboxic conditions and easily degradable organic matter present (Mueller
et al., 2022). Biogeochemical processes in hyporheic zone appear to be dynamic due to
their sensitivity to temperature changes which occur seasonally (Mueller et al., 2022).
According to Mueller et al. (2022), laboratory batch studies of hyporheic zones have a
high replicability and controllability, but the disadvantage is not having the ability of pre­
senting the high complexity in the batch studies, when compared to the real complexity of
hyporheic zone present in the stream. However, they do provide knowledge on possible
fate processes.
18
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:27==
3
Grindsted ­ Site description
This chapter provides an introduction to the Grindsted site and its specifications. It sum­
marizes its history, as well as hydrological and geological characteristics. It presents the
current known contamination of the site and the area chosen for investigation within this
project.
The town of Grindsted is located in the region of Southern Denmark in Jutland. An old
pharmaceutical factory, which was in operation from 1914 until 1999, is located in the
town of Grindsted (Sonne et al., 2017). The factory has been producing chemicals in the
form of products such as explosives, pharmaceuticals and auxiliaries (enzymes) for food
production over the years (NIRAS, 2009). The production also included sleeping pills
and antibiotics, and grew significantly in magnitude after World War II (Balbarini et al.,
2020). During the 1990s, an investigation started due to suspicion of possible contamina­
tion from chemical discharge into the ground. The factory is identified as a point source
of the large and long­lasting plume consisted of chlorinated ethenes, pharamaceuticals
and BTEX. In Grindsted, there are four primary sources of pollution: the track pit depot,
the factory site, the drainage ditch and the landfill south of the city. However, the mega
contamination, as defined by the Danish regions, only includes the pollution moving from
the factory site. Solid and liquid waste from the factory production of mainly vitamins and
medicinal products have been deposited for decades at the Grindsted town area. The
pollution started spreading through the groundwater over the large parts of the city and
into the Grindsted stream (Danske Regioner, 2022). The transport of the chemicals is
occurring from the factory, which is located 1.5 km north of the Grindsted stream, in a
delineated path towards the stream (Balbarini et al., 2020). Grindsted site can be seen in
Figure 3.1.
3.1
Geology and hydrology at the site
3.1.1
Geology
On the site, an unconfined upper shallow aquifer and a semi­confined deeper aquifer are
found. Near the stream, postglacial freshwater sand and peat deposits are present closest
to the surface. The aquifer found in the first 80 m below ground surface is hydrologically
connected to the Grindsted stream (Maurya et al., 2018). The geology of this aquifer is
described as Quaternary meltwater sand layer with an embedded sand till layer within the
first 10­15 m below ground surface, which is underlain by Tertiary sand formations (Heron
et al., 1998), while Balbarini et al. (2020) described the bottom layer as Miocene sand
layer interbedded with clay and lignite. At the 80 m below ground surface, a thick extended
clay and is found which is part of a regional aquitard (Heron et al., 1998), Balbarini et al.,
2020). A succession of clay and lignite with interbedded sand present between 25­ and
15­m above sea level is 5­m thick close to the stream and gets thinner away from the
stream (down to 0.5 m­thick) (Balbarini et al., 2020). Close to the stream, it separates a
shallow unconfined and a deep semi­confined aquifer which starts at 30­m below ground
surface (Figure 3.2).
3.1.2
Hydrology
Balbarini et al. (2020) developed a numerical groundflow model. Groundwater flow is
directed from higher towards lower hydraulic heads. The density of equipotential lines
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.1: Grindsted site including the factory site, the stream, the wells drilled at the
site and the isopotential lines determining the groundwater flow direction (Lemaire et al.,
2023).
indicates a greater hydraulic gradient in the unconfined aquifer compared to the semi­
confined aquifer (Balbarini et al., 2020). Unconfined aquifer (first 10­15 m bgs) is identified
as having groundwater flowing perpendicular to the Grindsted stream. This means that
the groundwater discharges into the stream at a 90◦C with respect to the stream from the
unconfined aquifer. Groundwater flow in the semi­confined aquifer is directed alongside
the stream. This means that groundwater flows from the semi­confined aquifer towards
the stream, but instead of discharging into the stream, it changes course and continues
along a flow path which is parallel to the stream (Balbarini et al., 2020). Even though
the two aquifers have different flow fields, both of the aquifers have groundwater flow
directed towards the stream (Balbarini et al., 2020). The unconfined aquifer has higher
pore velocity and upward flow towards the stream, while in the deep aquifer pathways are
horizontal and have lower pore velocity. The flow field is identified as nearly horizontal at
the transect CP1, which is at the north stream bank, to nearly vertical at the Transect 2,
which is located at the streambed (Rønde et al., 2017), (Ottosen et al., 2020). There is
an overall groundwater flow towards the Grindsted stream in the western direction (Fred­
eriksen (2017), Draborg (2021)).
The Grindsted stream is a gaining stream which has a catchment area of approximately
200 km2 and the annual flow of 2000 L/s. The stream is 8­12 m wide and 1­2.5 m deep
(Balbarini et al., 2017) and it is flowing westward through Grindsted town (Rønde et al.,
2017). It is a naturally meandering flow with only few modifications (Sonne et al., 2017).
20
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.2: The unconfined and semi­confined aquifers present at the Grindsted site in
the first 80 m below the ground surface seen through two different transects (Balbarini et
al., 2020).
3.2
Contamination at the site
Contaminant concentrations are detected at and around the factory site, along the Grind­
sted stream and in the area connecting the factory site and the stream. The plume has
been changing both in intensity and location over the last 30 years. At this stage, the
source (Grindsted factory) is expected to be depleted and current hotspot is somewhere
between well 1447.1447 (Figure 3.2) and the stream (Balbarini et al., 2020). Found con­
taminant concentrations are higher closer to the stream, therefore the contamination has
been carried from the factory site towards the stream (Balbarini et al., 2020).
Collected groundwater sample and water samples from the hyporheic zone of the Grind­
sted streambed indicate the discharging of groundwater contamination along a 2­km stretch
of the stream (Rasmussen et al., 2016). Sonne et al. (2017), Sonne et al. (2018) found
discharge areas in the stream where high concentrations of benzene, chlorinated ethenes
(mainly cis­CDE and VC) and pharmaceuticals are found within an even bigger 16­km cor­
ridor along the stream. Draborg (2021) described groundwater discharge areas where the
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
21
==PAGE:30==
highest concentrations of contaminants are observed, as seen in Figure 3.3.The chlori­
nated ethenes plume has been described in the process of investigation of their governing
processes (Ottosen et al., 2020). They are mostly found in high concentrations in the dis­
charge areas GWD 5, as described by Rønde et al. (2017) and Ottosen et al. (2020), and
GWD 7 (see Figure 3.3). However, pharmaceuticals are found to enter the stream in high
concentrations over a larger area (Sonne et al., 2017). The GWD 2, GWD 4, GWD 5 and
GWD 7 areas or part of those areas have been identified as hotspots of pharmaceuticals
and chlorinated ethenes, especially discharging through the hyporheic zone.
Figure 3.3: Groundwater discharge areas (GWD) along the Grindsted stream, includ­
ing the contaminant discharge level and the type of contaminant found in specific areas
(Draborg et al., 2021).
3.3
Area of investigation
Pharmaceuticals have been observed in the groundwater and being discharged into the
stream. The majority of the pharmaceuticals found along the stream are identified as
originated from the factory site (Sonne et al., 2017). High barbiturates concentrations are
usually found in the eastern part of the contaminated area between the factory site and
the stream, as can be seen in Figure 3.4.
Therefore, the focus of this project is put on the eastern part of the area between the
factory site and the stream.
22
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: The black area is the factory site, whereas the dark blue line is the stream.
Yellow line present transects where measurements were made. The red line is a flow line
of the contaminant plume identified starting from the factory and ending at the stream.
Concentrations of barbiturates can be seen on the figure, as well as the dashed red line
which could potentially be the barbiturates flow line which is a subject of ongoing research
(Lemaire et al., 2022).
Sum concentration of barbiturates is the highest near the stream at areas GWD 2, GWD
3 and GWD 5 (>2300 µg/L). High concentrations are found in wells: B615 (GWD 2) which
has the highest concentration (2767.3 µg/L), B616 (GWD 3) and B620 (GWD 5). There­
fore, GWD 2 area is chosen as the investigation area.
Figure 3.5: Observed barbiturates concentrations measured in GWD 1 ­ GWD 8 area in
the stream along the 2­km stretch (Lemaire et al., 2022)
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
23
==PAGE:32==
4
Degradation experiment ­ Materials and
methods
This chapter describes the degradation experiments and all of the experimental method­
ology. It provides the descriptions of collection and preparation of sediment and ground­
water, as well as the set up of degradation and desorption tests. It includes the sampling
plan and sample analyses description.
The main objective of this project is to determine degradation potential of barbiturates,
using the groundwater and sediment material from the Grindsted area, by setting up the
degradation experiments in microcosms under aerobic conditions (>1 mg O2/L).
Natural attenuation involves degradation of pollutants by natural microorganisms. Exper­
iments were run in 0.5 L bottles which act as microcosms. Microcosms are artificial, sim­
plified ecosystems that are used to simulate and predict the behaviour of natural ecosys­
tems under controlled laboratory conditions. Total of 10 bottles of microcosms was set up.
Laboratory experiments for testing barbiturates degradation were set up after bringing the
material (sediment and groundwater) from Grindsted. Sediment was collected from the
streambed (hyporheic zone) of the Grindsted stream, while groundwater was collected
from 2 wells (B615 and B616) which are located next to the Grindsted stream.
Main inspiration for designing the experimental set up is found in Hansen (2022) and
Hansen (2023), as well as in Draborg et al. (2021).
4.1
Collection of sediment and groundwater
Two field campaigns were done in collaboration with colleague Maja Skøt Ingerslev, who
identified the investigation area, planned the screening of the area and the positioning of
the transect next to the well B615, all of which is a part of her Bachelor thesis (Skøt In­
gerslev, 2023). A detailed description of identification of investigation area, the transect
from Skøt Ingerslev (2023) and both of the field campaigns is found in Appendix B. Sed­
iment cores and groundwater for the experimental set up were collected from Grindsted
during the second field campaign, while the first field campaign was planned as screening.
Lab results from the first field campaign have shown the highest found sum concen­
tration of barbiturates at the sampling point 4 (665.4 µg/L) of the transect placed in the
streambed next to the well B615 (see Figure B.2 and Skøt Ingerslev (2023)). Sediment
cores have been collected from the area which is surrounding the sampling point 4 as they
are supposed to be a source of bacteria potentially capable of degrading barbiturates in
the microcosms (Figure 4.1). Cores were collected at a depth where the first 40 cm of the
streambed lays since that area was assumed to have aerobic conditions (Weatherill et al.,
2018), which are the preferred conditions for the laboratory set up. Cores were collected
with a core extractor, which is a core liner attached to a long core removal tool. One
has to stand in the stream and insert the core extractor into the streambed until the whole
core liner is in the streambed. Afterwards, without twisting, a core of sediment is extracted
from the streambed until above the water surface is reached in a fast way so the sediment
doesn’t fall out of the liner. A cap is put on the core liner full of the sediment and the core
liner is detached from the core removal tool. 9 sediment cores were collected, but only
24
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:33==
4 of them were used in the experiment. Sediment core in a core liner is seen in Figure 4.2.
Wells B615 (2767.3 µg/L) and B616 (2376.5 µg/L) were identified as wells where the
highest sum barbiturates concentration is measured at depth of 7.5 m near the stream.
Groundwater for the microcosms was collected from wells B615 and B616, in order to gain
knowledge about possible degradation in the GWD 2 area, including the surrounding area
(Figure 4.1). A long plastic tube connected to a pump with a motor was put through the
opening of the well down to the well screen, with the other end of the tube being put in the
plastic bucket. The pump was turned on and started pumping out the water from the well.
First, a couple of liters of water were taken out to purge the well. Afterwards, when clean
water started going out of the tube, 1 L glass bottles with tight red screw caps were used
to collect the groundwater from the wells (Figure B.6 in Appendix B). The bottles were
autoclaved for 1.5 hours at 115◦C prior to the field trip. 5 L of groundwater was collected
from the well B615 and 6 L of water was collected from the well B616, but only 2 L from the
each well were used for the experiment. The parameters such as oxygen levels, pH and
electrical conductivity were measured with a portable Multiparameter Meter 3430 using a
flowcell, to which the groundwater flow from the well was connected in the field.
Figure 4.1: Map of Grindsted stream with wells B615 and B616, including the place in the
streambed where the sediment is collected from. Groundwater is collected from the wells
at depth of 7.5 m, and sediment cores from the first 40 cm of the streambed. GWD2 and
GWD3 are seen as high groundwater discharge areas with high barbiturates concentra­
tion.
Additional reason for collecting groundwater from two wells (B615 and B616) is to have
a comparison of processes occurring in both wells. Both wells were not characterized
with aerobic conditions which were preferred in the lab plan, so it has been decided to
aerate the water before setting up the experiments in order to have the desired conditions.
Additionally, filtration of the water was necessary due to iron precipitation caused by the
aeration.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
25
==PAGE:34==
4.2
Sediment preparation
The sediment was prepared and its properties analyzed prior to experimental set up of
microcosms. A total of 4 sediment cores (Figures C.1, C.2, C.3 and C.4 in Appendix C),
extracted from Grindsted stream above the depth of 40 cm in the streambed, were used
for experimental set up. All cores were photographed and carefully pushed out of the
liners with the help of shaking motion and gravity (Figures 4.2 and 4.3). Each core was
placed on a tray and photographed. First and last 5 cm of a core were removed for the
sake of having a representative sample for the microcosms, as only the middle of the
sediment core is representative of the streambed. 10 g of sediment sample was taken for
determination of the water content and the TOC (total organic carbon) analysis; and 80
g of sediment sample was taken for particle distribution (grain size) analysis as seen in
Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.2: A sediment core in a core liner collected at the Grindsted site.
26
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.3: A sediment core pushed outside of its liner and measured with a ruler.
Figure 4.4: Plastic bottle with a sediment sample for the particle distribution analysis; an
aluminium boat with a sample for TOC analysis and water content measurement; and a
part of the core ready to be homogenized with the other cores.
After all cores have been through this procedure, the sediment was homogenized.
The sediment samples for water content analysis were weighed in an aluminium boat
before they were put in the oven to dry. Small amount of mass (around 2 g) was taken
from the dried sediment samples for TOC analysis which was performed by lab techni­
cians at DTU. 80 g of sediment samples separated for the particle distribution analysis
was mixed with 100 ml of water in a leak proof plastic bottle and put in a vertical rotation
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
27
==PAGE:36==
machine over the night. Afterwards, samples were taken and filtered through a 63 µm
sieve, which is a sieve with the finest mesh of all the sieves that are part of the particle
distribution analysis equipment. The filtrate was kept for laser diffraction of the finest par­
ticles, while particles which were bigger in size than 63 µm were put in the oven to dry
and kept for sieving. Detailed description on sediment analyses is found in the Appendix
C.
4.3
Groundwater preparation
A total of 4 liters of groundwater was used for setting up the microcosms, 2 L of ground­
water from the well B615 and 2 L of groundwater from the well B616. Both of the chosen
wells for extraction of groundwater were characterized with anaerobic conditions, at the
depth of 7.5 m where iron­reducing conditions were assumed according to the available
data (Rambøll, 2023). Aeration of groundwater was performed in order to have aerobic
conditions. Aeration was done in the fume hood by inserting a tube with artificial air flow
directly into bottles with groundwater for approximately 30 min (Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5: Aeration of groundwater in the bottles which were brought from the field taking
place in the fume hood.
During aeration, oxygen from the air causes oxidation of ferrous iron (Fe2+) to ferric iron
(Fe3+) which is an orange­reddish precipitate. Filtration was necessary in order for the
28
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:37==
precipitation to be removed. After aeration, the groundwater was filtered through a 0.2
µm filter (Figure 4.6) into a measuring cylinder, from which 300 ml of the groundwater was
transferred into a microcosm bottle. Oxygen levels, pH and EC (electrical conductivity)
were measured with a portable Multiparameter Meter 3430 which has an pH electrode,
a dissolved oxygen probe and a conductivity probe. In the field, those parameters were
measured through a flow cell, while in the lab a probe was put in direct contact with the
groundwater in the bottles.
Figure 4.6: Filtration of groundwater through a 0.2 µm filter into beakers after which it has
been transferred to the measuring cylinder.
4.4
Experimental set up of the microcosms
Ten bottles of microcosms make up the experimental set up for testing degradation of
barbiturates. Eight bottles were used for the degradation test, while two bottles were
used for the desorption test.
4.4.1
Degradation test
The degradation test was set up in 8 bottles (Table 4.1). Four of the bottles represent
two sets of duplicates with groundwater from two different wells (B615 and B616), while
four other bottles represent two sets of controls for the two sets of duplicates, respectively.
This was done to have the most accurate set up for precise measurements of barbiturates
degradation without it being too complex.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.1: Scheme for the degradation test set up.
Bottle
number
Microcosm
name
Microcosm
type
Sediment
mass, g
Groundwater
volume, ml
1
B615 1
First set of
100
300
2
B615 2
duplicates
100
300
3
B615 1
CONTROL
First set of
100
300
4
B615 2
CONTROL
controls
100
300
5
B616 1
Second set of
100
300
6
B616 2
duplicates
100
300
7
B616 1
CONTROL
Second set of
100
300
8
B616 2
CONTROL
controls
100
300
Two sets of controls have sterile conditions and have been autoclaved for 1.5 hours at
115◦C in order to be sterile. There should be no microbes in those bottles and there is no
expected change of concentrations of barbiturates due to biodegradation.
Prior to setting up microcosms, all of the laboratory equipment that was used was steril­
ized. Ten 0.5 L bottles, including the rubber stoppers and metal caps, were autoclaved for
1.5 hours at 115◦C. Autoclaving is done to ensure sterile conditions and to make sure the
degradation is biotic. Each microcosm consists of 100 g of homogenized sediment and
300 ml of aerated and filtered groundwater. Detailed procedure of setting up microcosms
is found in the Appendix C.
Degradation was observed during a course of 60 days. This is considered to be optimal
time duration, due to previously researched experimental set ups for similar compounds
and time limitation of this project. The change in concentrations of 8 barbiturates that
are currently available for analysis at DTU was observed in time. The 8 observed barbi­
turates are: Barbital, Butalbital, Phenobarbital, Butobarbital, Pentobarbital, Amobarbital,
Secobarbital and Isopropylbarbiturate. Additional measurements of oxygen levels, pH
and redox parameters were obtained during the 60 days of experiment.
4.4.2
Desorption test
The desorption test was set up in 2 bottles (Table 4.2). The desorption test consists of 100
g of sediment and 300 ml of demineralized water. The purpose of the desorption test is to
determine whether barbiturates are desorbed from the sediment into the water phase over
the course of the 60 days of the experiment. This is important to know as it can alter the
overall barbiturates concentration over time. Water from desorption test microcosms was
sampled only for barbiturates analysis accordingly to the plan (Table C.1). The procedure
of setting up microcosms is found in the Appendix C.
Table 4.2: Scheme for the desorption test set up.
Bottle
number
Microcosm
name
Microcosm
type
Sediment
mass, g
Demineralized
water volume, ml
1
D1
Duplicate
100
300
2
D2
Duplicate
100
300
30
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:39==
The whole experimental set up, including degradation and desorption tests, is seen in
Figures 4.7 and 4.8. After all of the microcosms have been set up, they were wrapped in
aluminium foil and placed in a dark 10◦C room in order to imitate the natural environment of
groundwater (primarily the temperature) and to prevent any other type of possible abiotic
degradation (photolysis). Dilution in the microcosms has not been done at any point, so
it is not considered as possible attenuation process.
Figure 4.7: 10 bottles of microcosms in the laboratory.
Figure 4.8: 10 bottles of microcosms in the laboratory, wrapped in the aluminium foil.
4.5
Microcosm sampling plan
Samples of the groundwater were taken from the microcosms in order to be sent for the
analysis of barbiturates concentration at a DTU Sustain laboratory. Samples were taken
regularly from all of the 8 microcosms used for the degradation test. However, samples
were taken only a couple of times from microcosms which were set up for the desorption
test. Additionally, samples were taken on day 0 from the bottles which contained ground­
water from both of the wells (B615 and B616) originating from the site.
The experiment starts on day 0, but equilibrium is assumed on day 2 after 48 hours,
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
31
==PAGE:40==
therefore first samples from the microcosms were taken on day 2. In the beginning of
the experiment, frequent sampling was done during the first 14 days to have a better
overview of the experimental development and to be able to alter the experimental condi­
tions or testing duration if necessary. Samples have been taken every second day. After
the course of the first 14 days, samples were being taken every 3­5 days to be able to
track the change in barbiturates concentration, according to the sampling schedule (Table
C.1). Samples were frozen and stored until they were to be sent for an analysis, in order
to prevent any changes in the sample. The analysis occurred 5 times during the 60 days
of experiment.
Sampling of the groundwater was additionally done for redox sensitive species analy­
sis 4 times during the 60 days of experiment to be able to identify the redox conditions
and whether they change during the experiment. Oxygen levels and pH were identified as
important factors which determine and control the experiment, therefore measurements
of both have been taken as well. Oxygen levels were measured in the headspace of the
microcosms to be able to track and adjust microcosm conditions to aerobic ones. Des­
orption test microcosms were only subject to barbiturates analysis as this is the purpose
of the test. Detailed sampling schedule is seen in Table C.1 in Appendix C.
4.5.1
Barbiturates sampling and analysis
A sampling event is seen on the Figure 4.9 and described down below.
Figure 4.9: Sampling set up in the laboratory. One bottle is handled at a time. On the
right, an oxygen meter is seen. On the left, vials for barbiturates samples are placed in a
vial holder. Behind the bottle, filters can be seen. In front of the bottle is a needle attached
to a syringe which is used for sampling from the microcosms.
Barbiturates were analyzed from groundwater samples taken from the microcosms. This
was done during every sampling event according to the sampling schedule (Table C.1).
Sampling for barbiturates was done by inserting a sterile needle attached to a syringe
through a rubber stopper without opening the microcosm bottles to have a system which
remains closed. Approximately 2­5 ml of groundwater were taken out and 1 ml was filtered
through a 0.2 µm filter, so the sediment particles would be removed, into a dark glass
vial which was then labeled and stored in a freezer (Figure C.8 in Appendix C). 1 ml of
32
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:41==
water sample is a requirement of the LCMSMS analysis. After one sampling event, 2­
4 replicates of barbiturates samples, depending on the day of the sampling plan, were
stored and freezed for later analysis. Testing the accuracy of the analysis by analysing
three barbiturates samples at once and doing the statistical analysis of the results was
done in the second half of the experiment. A sampling event can be seen in Figure 4.9.
The analysis of barbiturates was done on LCMSMS (description found in the Appendix
C).
4.5.2
Oxygen measurements
Oxygen measurements were done using a Profiling Oxygen Microsensor PM­PSt 7 con­
nected to a PreSens Microx 4 portable fiber oxygen meter. The needle part was inserted
through a rubber stopper of the microcosm and the pen­looking case was twisted so the
sensor could come out. The oxygen measurements took place in the headspace of the
microcosm systems.
4.5.3
pH measurements
Measurements of the pH were done occasionally, approximately during every second
sampling event. Whatman indicator paper pH 4.5­10 was used for measuring pH. 3­5
drops of a sample taken from the microcosm and filtered through a 0.2 µm filter, were put
on one of the indicator papers. The colors on the paper change automatically and pH was
measured accordingly to the set of 3 colors found on the paper.
4.5.4
Redox sensitive species analysis
Redox sensitive species were analyzed from water samples taken out of the degradation
test microcosms. They determine the redox parameters of the system. The measured
species were: iron, manganese, sulfate, phosphate, ammonia, nitrate and nitrite. Addi­
tionally, chloride, bromide and fluoride were measured. Sampling for redox species was
done by taking a groundwater sample from the microcosm with a needle and a syringe
and filtering it through a 0.2 µm filter into a Falcon tube and a small plastic vial. 10 ml
of groundwater was taken every time samples were being collected for redox parameters
analysis. They were refrigerated until analyzed. 10 ml was shared among 3 different type
of redox species analysis, which are: SKALAR, IC­MS and IC. At the end, a sample of
10 ml from each degradation microcosm is taken for NVOC (non­volatile organic carbon)
analysis.
A detailed description of oxygen and pH measurements, including the redox parame­
ter sampling is found in the Appendix C, along with Figures showing the procedure and
descriptions of redox parameters analyses.
Microcosm handling
Weighing was done prior to every sampling event and after every sampling event to track
the changes in mass of the microcosms. One bottle was handled at a time, so the time of
the microcosms being exposed to the light (not covered by the aluminium foil) is minimal.
After taking groundwater samples, the air was injected into the microcosms with the same
needle attached to a syringe which was used for sampling. This was done to ensure a
balanced system in the bottles. The volume of air that was injected is equal to the volume
of groundwater that was extracted out of the microcosms. Bottles were rolled after every
sampling event to have oxygen replenishment of the sediment and to prevent microcosms
turning into systems with anaerobic conditions. After every sampling event, bottles were
re­wrapped into aluminium foil and put back in the dark 10◦C room. Sampling events are
assumed to be short in time, therefore temperature of groundwater in the microcosms is
not excessively changing during the sampling events.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
33
==PAGE:42==
4.5.5
Data treatment
Degradation and desorption tests results
Phenobarbital is available for analysis at DTU Sustain, however it is not found at the
Grindsted site. Therefore, it is excluded from a detailed discussion. The other seven bar­
biturates are further discussed, however pentobarbital and amobarbital are measured as
a sum of compounds and therefore discussed in the same manner.
Results of days 12, 26, 28 and 40 are removed from all concentration­time plots due
to being identified as outliers. Raw data plots are found in Appendix D (Figure D.1, D.2
D.3 and D.4).
The normalized concentration (C/C0) change is plotted in time for all of the degradation
test microcosms and specific barbiturates. Point 1 on y­axis (C/C0=1) is considered as
the starting normalized concentration of all barbiturates. This is equivalent to their actual
starting concentration. Microcosms with groundwater from B615 are referred to as B615
system and microcosms with groundwater from B616 are referred to as B616 system.
Controls of both systems are plotted starting at the experiment day 2, due to consider­
able decrease in concentration of almost all barbiturates after being put in the autoclave
for sterilization on day 0. Butalbital is the only barbiturate whose initial concentration is
preserved after the autoclaving, but it is plotted in the same way as the other barbiturates
for easier comparison.
First­order degradation kinetics was fitted by using Excel exponential trendline. Half­life
is calculated using the following equation:
DT50 = ln(2)
k
(4.1)
DT50: half­life [day]
k: first­order rate constant [d−1]
Oxygen head space measurements were taken with temperature settings of 20◦C. Mi­
crocosms were held at 10◦C, therefore a conversion is made using the PreSens Oxy­
gen Calculator software provided by the company which produces the oxygen meters.
Henry’s law is used to estimate the oxygen concentration dissolved in water from the
known headspace concentration according to the following equation (Bjerg, 2002):
KH = pa
Cw
(4.2)
KH: Henry’s law constant at 10◦C [atm·L·mol−1]
pa: partial pressure of oxygen in the air [atm]
Cw: oxygen concentration in water phase [mol/L]
Oxygen concentration is plotted starting at the experiment day 2, due to consideration
of established equilibrium.
Desorption results include a comparison of desorbed amount of barbiturates from the des­
orption microcosms with the actual barbiturates concentration found in test microcosms.
34
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:43==
In this case, an actual barbiturates concentration in the test microcosms is considered to
be initial concentration in the groundwater at experiment day 2.
A mass balance for the water phase in microcosms is carried out to understand whether
measured redox and other species are coming from the pore water in the sediment into the
groundwater of the microcosm system. This is done with desorption results to estimate
the barbiturates desorption percentage from the sediment. The mass balance equation
is the following:
Ctotal · Vtotal = Csediment · Vsediment + Cgroundwater · Vgroundwater
(4.3)
Ctotal: total measured concentration of barbiturates in groundwater at the end of the ex­
periment [µg/L]
Vtotal: total volume of groundwater, Vtotal=Vsediment+Vgroundwater [L]
Csediment: calculated concentration of barbiturates in the pore water in the sediment [µg/L]
Vsediment: volume of pore water in the sediment, calculated from the water content of the
sediment [L]
Cgroundwater: initial measured concentration of barbiturates in groundwater [µg/L]
Vgroundwater: initial volume of groundwater [L]
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
35
==PAGE:44==
5
Results and discussion
This chapter offers a discussion of the results obtained from the degradation experiments.
Additionally, a discussion on the existing levels of barbiturates and their distribution in the
area from the factory site towards the stream is provided. An overall understanding of the
hyporheic system of the stream is suggested, including the bioremediation potential.
Degradation and desorption tests are executed for two systems, B615 and B616, and
compared in the following sections. The concentration of barbiturates is high in both of
the systems, but slightly higher in B615 system. The sum concentration of the 7 barbitu­
rates in focus at the start of the experiment is 620 µg/L and 420 µg/L, for B615 and B616
systems respectively. The sum concentration of all 16 existing barbiturates in both sys­
tems is expected to be around 4­5 times higher based on the field results. The sediment
is from the same place in both systems. Changes in concentration are tracked in time to
determine the degradation potential of seven compounds.
5.1
Degradation affecting factors
5.1.1
Sediment analysis
The sediment collected for the experiment is described as medium sand with a small por­
tion of gravel particles and a portion of silty particles. 18% of the analyzed homogenized
sediment put in all microcosms are fine particles (d<0.063 mm) identified via laser diffrac­
tion, which could be silty particles (Larsen, 2000) (Figure E.1 in Appendix E). The four
cores used for homogenized sediment have a fine particle content in the range of 14­
18%. Around 2% of the particles (d>2 mm) could be identified as gravel particles (Figures
E.2, E.3, E.4 and E.5 in Appendix E). The big portion of fine particles could indicate a
lower porosity and conductivity, as well as low velocity of pore water in some parts of the
sediment.
The water content of the homogenized sediment is 7.4%, whereas for sediments used
for the homogenized sediment it varies in a range of 4.4­7.6% (Table 5.1). Total carbon is
measured and assumed to be total organic carbon (TOC). It varies for all four sediment
cores. TOC of the homogenized sediment is 0.11% (Table 5.1). High TOC values could
increase sorption affinity (Barriuso, 2008, Hansen (2022)). Possible long­term sorption of
barbiturates could be supported by this fact, but it is not known how much sorption would
contribute to the overall fate of the barbiturates discharging to the stream.
Table 5.1: Water content and TOC of all sediment cores used for the homogenized sedi­
ment, including homogenized sediment itself, for microcosms set up.
Sediment sample
Water content, %
TOC, %
1
7.50
0.015
2
7.57
0.131
4
4.37
0.076
6
5.67
0.009
homogenized sediment
7.40
0.113
36
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:45==
5.1.2
Desorption of barbiturates
A desorption test is done to assess whether the desorption of barbiturates occurs from the
sediment or whether sediment pore water is contributing to overall barbiturates concen­
tration. Results from the desorption test and the mass balance show that no significant
desorption from the sediment occurs for all of the 7 barbiturates for both B615 and B616
system (Tables 5.2 and 5.3).
Table 5.2: The amount of desorbed barbiturates for B615 system. The initial concentration
is the concentration in the groundwater (degradation test), while the desorbed concentra­
tion is the pore water concentration (desorption test).
B615 system
Initial
concentration,
µg/L
Desorbed
concentration,
µg/L
Desorbed
barbiturates,
%
5­Isopropylbarbituric
acid
13.58
0
0
Barbital
181.57
0.14
0.08
Butobarbital
118.44
0
0
Butalbital
171.40
5.08
2.96
Pentobarbital
+Amobarbital
124.11
0.92
0.74
Secobarbital
7.87
0
0
Table 5.3: The amount of desorbed barbiturates for B616 system. The initial concentration
is the concentration in the groundwater (degradation test), while the desorbed concentra­
tion is the pore water concentration (desorption test).
B616 system
Initial
concentration,
µg/L
Desorbed
concentration,
µg/L
Desorbed
barbiturates,
%
5­Isopropylbarbituric
acid
6.22
0
0
Barbital
90.81
0.14
0.15
Butobarbital
83.66
0
0
Butalbital
89.94
5.08
5.65
Pentobarbital
+Amobarbital
136.24
0.92
0.68
Secobarbital
8.20
0
0
Desorbed concentration coming from the pore water of the sediment is compared to initial
concentration of barbiturates in the groundwater in the microcosms.
Mass balance shows the highest concentrations which are found in the pore water of
a sediment come from butalbital (228 µg/L) and the sum of pentobarbital and amobarbital
(42 µg/L). Barbital concentration (6 µg/L) in the pore water is very small, whereas the other
barbiturates are not found in the pore water of the sediment. High concentrations coming
from the pore water, estimated from the mass balance, can be confirmed by field concen­
trations. The sum of barbiturates is found in the highest concentration in GWT2 at the
depth of 40 cm where sediment is collected for the experiment. Pentobarbital is found in
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
37
==PAGE:46==
high concentrations (151 µg/L) in the transect and is expected to be found in the pore wa­
ter of the sediment. Barbital and butobarbital (265 µg/L and 221 µg/L, respectively) are
found in high concentrations as well, but desorption test shows no desorption from the
sediment for both of the compounds. 5­isopropylbarbituric acid and secobarbital are not
found in high concentration at sampling point GWT2 which corresponds to the obtained
results of desorption test and the mass balance. No analysis for butalbital and amobar­
bital was available when samples from the transect were analyzed. However, butalbital
concentration is noticeable in the well B615 right next to the transect so it is expected that
high concentrations are found at the transect as well.
The results could indicate that concentration of the 7 barbiturates in the microcosms are
realistic concentrations and that degradation is neither underestimated nor overestimated,
which would be the case if significant desorption was occurring.
5.1.3
Redox conditions in microcosms
During the microcosms set up, aeration of groundwater and mixing of groundwater and
sediment occurs. Aeration of groundwater caused high oxygen concentration (aerobic
conditions) and iron precipitation due to a chemical reaction. Iron is removed by filtration
from the groundwater, therefore low iron concentration in the groundwater is expected.
After mixing the groundwater with the sediment, release of pore water from the sediment
happens. If the pore water is rich in dissolved redox sensitive species, it will contribute
to the overall groundwater concentration of those species. In the opposite case, it would
only dilute the groundwater and lower the concentrations of the measured species. The
water content of the sediment is 7.4%, therefore in both cases it would not change the
overall concentration of the species significantly.
Oxygen, as a redox sensitive species, is tracked during the experiment so aerobic condi­
tions could be maintained and monitored to satisfy the experimental requirements. Other
redox species are tracked to understand the system conditions. Redox species which are
considered important for biogeochemistry in the microcosms, thus governing the fate of
barbiturates, are plotted (Figures 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3; Figures F.1 and F.2 in the Appendix F).
Two y­axes are noted for different species for easier observation. The field concentration
is the concentration measured in groundwater on day 0 prior to groundwater preparation
(aeration and filtration) for the microcosms.
Figure 5.1: Oxygen concentration plotted in time for B615 and B616 systems.
38
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:47==
Aerobic conditions are fulfilled since the concentration of oxygen in the groundwater is
above 1 mg/L, in this case the average concentration is 8.7 mg/L for all 8 microcosms. It
is stable in time, but there is a slight decrease observed during the 60 days of experiment.
This could occur due to mixing with atmospheric air over time which has a lower oxygen
concentration despite the closed system set up. It could also occur because of possible
degradation, in which case the microorganisms consume the oxygen. Oxygen solubility
at 10 ◦C is 11.4 mg/L which is a limiting factor for oxygen levels measured in microcosms.
Nitrate, as well as ammonia, is not present in high concentrations (<0.5 mg/L and <4.5
Figure 5.2: Redox sensitive species (nitrate, iron, manganese, sulfate and ammonia)
plotted in time for B615 system. Controls plot found in Appendix F.
mg/L, respectively). However, there is slightly less nitrate in B616 system than in B615,
but no nitrate concentration is significant. Ammonia concentration follows the same trend
of being lower in concentration in B616 system. This is in compliance with the trends
observed in the field concentrations where well B616 (0.42 mg/L) has a lower concen­
tration of ammonia than well B615 (1 mg/L). A slight increase in ammonia over time is
seen, however it is negligible due to its low concentrations. This could be explained by
having collected the sediment, which is placed in the microcosms, from the streambed
next to well B615, where Skøt Ingerslev (2023) found ammonia concentrations of up to
10.3 mg/L. Additionally, the ammonia concentration is found to be slightly higher in both
B615 and B616 control systems, when compared to their respective duplicate systems.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.3: Redox sensitive species (nitrate, iron, manganese, sulfate and ammonia)
plotted in time for B616 system. Controls plot found in Appendix F.
Iron and manganese concentrations usually follow each other in trends of an increase
or a decrease in groundwater systems in the field. Manganese is the first one to increase
due to reduced groundwater conditions and iron is the following one. Iron concentration
is very low when compared to its field concentration due to aeration which had been con­
ducted prior to setting up the microcosms. Aeration and filtration remove iron from the
groundwater, therefore leaving the iron concentration close to zero. Iron remains close to
zero in concentration for the whole duration of the experiment indicating oxic conditions.
The manganese concentration is higher than the iron concentration. It is between 3.6
mg/L and 10.2 mg/L, depending on the microcosm. This corresponds to concentrations
in Skøt Ingerslev (2023) which are found for manganese at the location where sediment
is taken from, as well as it is backed up by the field concentrations from Rambøll (2023).
Manganese concentration decreases in time due to oxidation occurring because of the
aerobic conditions in the microcosms. It needs longer time to decrease when compared
to iron because of the slower oxidation reaction rate. Manganese precipitation on the
sediment surface can occur (Bjerg et al., 2011), therefore water sample analysis would
not detect it. The control systems are higher in concentration of manganese than the
duplicates, except for data from experiment day 2 which show the opposite. Iron follows
the same trend. Iron is found to be in lower concentrations in B616 system, which corre­
40
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:49==
sponds to the trends in the field, where iron concentration is lower in well B616 (25 mg/L)
than in well B615 (35 mg/L). However, this is negligible since the iron concentration in
microcosms is extremely low.
The sulfate concentration increases over time. It is a proof of stable aerobic conditions
since sulfate concentration is high in oxic conditions. However, it could also be a sign
of sulfate release from the sediment sulfate minerals oxidation. Sulfate concentration is
higher in B616 system than in B615. This is in compliance with the field concentrations
where sulfate is higher in well B616 (46 mg/L) than in well B615 (38 mg/L). Sulfate is
present in lower concentrations in control systems than in duplicate systems.
Overall, all redox sensitive species confirm aerobic conditions kept in the microcosms.
The biggest change occurs by aerating the groundwater prior to microcosms set up, while
all other changes are noticeable, however relatively small.
NVOC results indicate the same concentration for B615 system and a slightly higher con­
centration of NVOC for B616 system than what is found at the field site for B615 (8 mg/L)
and B616 (3.7 mg/L) wells. This is a sign of potentially present organic matter. There­
fore, degradation should not be limited by the existance of organic donor (Ottosen et al.,
2023). Autoclaved controls are 4­6 times higher in NVOC concentrations than the test
microcosms. The difference between controls and test microcosms could point out the
degradation occurring in the test microcosms (Broholm and Arvin, 2000) (Table F.1 in Ap­
pendix F).
Chloride and bromide are measured additionally as they are considered tracers for con­
taminants at the field site.
The concentration of both chloride and bromide does not
change significantly over the course of 60 days, with taking their concentration range
in consideration. They are mostly stable with a slight decrease of bromide concentration
in six microcosms (5­23% decrease) which could be due to dilution by pore water coming
from the sediment (Figures F.3, F.4, F.5 and F.6 in Appendix F).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
41
==PAGE:50==
5.2
Degradation experiment
5.2.1
Barbiturates degradation
Plotted curves of normalized concentration in time are shown for all 8 microcosms. Pairs
of controls and duplicates for both B615 and B616 systems are plotted (Figures 5.4, 5.5,
5.6 and 5.7). These are referred to as concentration curves of systems B615 and B616,
respectively. Aerobic conditions are preserved during the whole experiment duration as
well as relatively neutral pH, thus all details discussed and provided explanations are
made with respect to an aerobic system with a neutral pH.
Figure 5.4: Concentration curves for all seven barbiturates after 60 days of degradation
experiment, shown as change in normalized concentration over time. Two plots represent
duplicates of a system B615.
42
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.5: Two plots represent duplicates of controls of system B615.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.6: Concentration curves for all seven barbiturates after 60 days of degradation
experiment, shown as change in normalized concentration over time. Two plots represent
duplicates of a system B616.
44
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.7: Two plots represent duplicates of controls of system B616.
The concentration in the control microcosms is not supposed to change due to biotic
degradation as microcosms have been autoclaved and the microbes are eliminated from
the system with the process. Non biological processes would occur in the duplicates and
in the controls, whereas biological processes would occur only in the duplicate micro­
cosms. If a decrease from the initial concentration is observed in a control microcosm, it
can occur due to desorption/sorption, analytical variation or abiotic degradation. A con­
centration decrease in a test microcosm, when compared to a control microcosm (whether
a decrease in control microcosm happens or not), is a sign of biotic degradation involving
microorganisms.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
45
==PAGE:54==
A concentration change is observed in time for 5­isopropylbarbituric acid, which indicates
degradation. This is clearly seen for both sets of the duplicates microcosms for both
B615 and B616 systems. Comparison for isopropylbarbituric acid of both systems to their
controls systems is seen in Figure 5.8. Clear distinguishment between a concentration
(degradation) curve and control curves is seen on the plot confirming biotic degradation.
An observed decrease in controls is not attributed to desorption or sorption, because iso­
propylbarbituric acid is not prone to any of them. This suggests that abiotic degradation
occurs simultaneously alongside biotic degradation. Peschka et al. (2006) describes a
side chain degradation, which is assumed in this case. Isopropylbarbituric acid has one
of the most simple substituents at C5 position (propyl). Propyl, due to its simple structure,
is supposed to degrade more easily than other complex substituents. Due to the fact that
no clear degradation of any other barbiturates is seen, ring opening as a pathway could
be potentially eliminated in this case. However, this is unclear and cannot be confirmed
via analysis.
Figure 5.8: A concentration curve for isopropylbarbituric acid after 60 days of degradation
experiment for both B615 and B616 systems and the comparison with their respective
control systems.
Both B615 and B616 systems show on average stable curves for all other compounds. In
the B616 system, the stable curves are slightly more scattered than in the B615 system
and mostly from contribution of butalbital concentration increase.
In the B615 system around the 20th day, concentrations of secobarbital and butobar­
bital start becoming more than 20% lower than their starting concentration. Butobarbital
concentration curves vary in the same manner in both test and control microcosms, which
could indicate an analytical variation due to analysis inaccuracy (Figure D.6 in Appendix
D). There is no difference in concentration observed in test and control microcosms, there­
fore biotic degradation for butobarbital is ruled out. This contradicts arguments from Kim
and Fulco (1983). For secobarbital, slightly different kind of variation in concentration
is observed between test and control microcosms (Figure 5.9). This could indicate that
some form of degradation might be occurring which could have potentially been seen if
the experiment had run longer. This is not in accordance with Peschka et al. (2006), who
claims neither hydrolysis nor biodegradation of secobarbital occur, and Yu et al. (2006),
who suggests secobarbital is not readily biodegradable. However, experiments described
46
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:55==
by Peschka et al. (2006) were of shorter duration (21 and 42 days). The BIOWIN software
predicts the same biodegradability result as both authors.
In the B616 system, one microcosm shows the same trend for both secobarbital and buto­
barbital, whereas another one shows that secobarbital remains above 80% of its starting
concentration. This suggests the same explanation for butobarbital as in the B615 sys­
tem, whereas situation of secobarbital is not clear.
The increase of butalbital in the B616 system when compared to its controls (Figure 5.10)
could occur due to slightly different conditions and composition of the groundwater, since
the sediment is the same in both systems. It is not clear why does it happen in B616
system, but not in B615 system. The starting measured concentration of butalbital is two
times higher in B615 when compared to B616 system. This ratio is the same for all other
compounds. The desorption is not considered as significant when it comes to butalbital.
The comparison of concentration curves to their control curves for butalbital and sec­
obarbital for both systems indicates a change in concentration (Figures 5.9 and 5.10).
Secobarbital experiences a slight decrease in concentration from the start of the exper­
iment in both systems when compared to their controls. Butalbital experiences a slight
increase in concentration, from the start as well, only in B616 system when compared
to its controls (Figures 5.9 and 5.10). The case of butalbital is not clear because it hap­
pens only in B616 system. No evidence of butalbital being a metabolite of degradation is
noticed in the literature, which would be an interesting assumption when referring to the
slight increase in the concentration over time. However, the slight increase in concentra­
tion could also be due to analysis variation and analytical inaccuracy. It is interesting to
notice that butalbital is the only compound whose concentration did not decrease signifi­
cantly after the autoclaving, which could indicate a resistance to heat and pressure.
The results of secobarbital do not clearly show degradation, but a sign of possible degra­
dation if longer timeframe is considered or a higher pH environment. This is suitable for
the barbiturates degradation according to the literature findings (Barton et al., 1982). Gar­
rett et al. (1971) found first­order degradation rate constants for secobarbital among other
barbiturates at pH range 10.5­11.5, which would support the provided argument.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.9: A comparison of concentration curves and control curves for both B615 and
B616 systems for secobarbital.
Figure 5.10: A comparison of concentration curves and control curves for both B615 and
B616 systems for butalbital.
For barbital, there is a slightly different kind of variation between concentration curves in
test and control microcosms and a decrease in test microcosms is observed (Figure D.5
in Appendix D). However, the decrease is not more than 15% so it is not considered as
significant or relevant. Barbital is structurally one of the most simple barbiturates of all 7
discussed barbiturates. Therefore, it could be potentially susceptible to degradation. In
the case of a possible degradation, a biotic one would be assumed due to the difference
seen between the test and the control microcosms. However, this finding is not significant
enough due to a small concentration change to make such a conclusion.
There is no sign of either abiotic or biotic degradation for pentobarbital and amobarbital,
as the concentration curves are the same and stable in test and control microcosms. This
is in agreement with Nobay and Acquisto (2014) and Peschka et al. (2006), who claims no
degradation is observed under aerobic conditions. Nobay and Acquisto (2014) claims that
48
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:57==
pentobarbital lacks functional groups that hydrolyze easily. However it contradicts argu­
ments from Garrett et al. (1971) and proposed argumentation from Skøt Ingerslev (2023).
This is expected due to strong alkaline conditions in experiments reported by Garrett et al.
(1971) and low oxygen concentration in the field as described by Skøt Ingerslev (2023),
which are different conditions than in the degradation experiment.
A slight change (more than 20%) in B616 control microcosms and one B615 control mi­
crocosms is observed for 5­isopropylbarbituric acid and butobarbital. Isopropylbarbituric
acid experiences abiotic degradation, whereas changes in butobarbital concentration is
considered to be due to analytical variation as explained above.
Most literature point out the hydrolysis as the main pathway of the barbiturates degrada­
tion, therefore the abiotic degradation which could be occuring is hydrolysis. The isopropy­
lbarbituric acid is considered to be degrading and degradation could be partly occurring
due to the hydrolysis. Given the drop (more than 20%) in concentration of secobarbital
in duplicates of both of the systems and B615 control microcosm, degradation can be
assumed to happen during a longer period of time.
A comparison of concentration curves and control curves for both B615 and B616 sys­
tems for barbital (Figure D.5), butobarbital (Figure D.6) and sum of pentobarbital and
amobarbital (Figure D.7) is found in Appendix D.
5.2.2
Estimated first­order degradation kinetics
According to the shape of the isopropylbarbituric acid concentration curve from the ex­
perimental data, first­order kinetics degradation is assumed and the model is manually
fitted for both B615 and B616 systems. This is seen in Figures 5.11 and 5.12 for B615
and B616 systems, respectively.
Figure 5.11: Fitted first­order kinetics curves are the full blue lines for the isopropylbar­
bituric acid in system B615. Other barbiturates concentrations are plotted as scattered
dots. A full black horizontal line is an average of all concentrations of all barbiturates, ex­
cept for isopropylbarbituric acid, used for the concentration curves (no data from control
curves is used). Two dashed grey lines are standard deviation for the given average.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.12: Fitted first­order kinetics curves are the full blue lines for the isopropylbar­
bituric acid in system B616. Other barbiturates concentrations are plotted as scattered
dots. A full black horizontal line is an average of all concentrations of all barbiturates, ex­
cept for isopropylbarbituric acid, used for the concentration curves (no data from control
curves is used). Two dashed grey lines are standard deviation for the given average.
The first order kinetics curves fit well the experimental results which construct the concen­
tration curves of isopropylbarbituric acid for both B615 and B616 systems. For both of the
systems, the two fitted curves representing duplicates are relatively similar and confirm
the coherent first­order fit. Similarly, this is confirmed by the R2 values being higher than
0.93 for all fits. The standard deviation from the average line (0.84 for B615 and 0.92 for
B616) representing all stable barbiturates is 0.13 and 0.18 for B615 and B616 systems,
respectively. When compared to an average concentration of all stable barbiturates (black
line on the Figures 5.11 and 5.12), the concentrations are expected to deviate 15.5% and
20.3% from the average concentration for B615 and B616 systems, respectively. This is
identified as the analytical variation.
The results describe that within less than 60 days of experiment, more than 90% of iso­
propylbarbituric acid is removed. No lag phase is observed for both of the systems. Fits
identify 0.08 d−1 as the first­order rate constant for B615 system, whereas for B616 system
a rate constant is estimated to be 0.06­0.07 d−1. This indicates a slightly faster degrada­
tion in B615 system than in B616 system. Half­lives are estimated to be around 9 days
for B615 system and between 11 and 13 days for B616 system (Table 5.4).
Table 5.4: Half­lives and first­order rate constants for B615 and B616 systems.
Microcosm
B615 1
B615 2
B616 1
B616 2
k, d−1
0.08
0.078
0.055
0.067
DT50, day
8.66
8.89
12.60
10.35
For phenobarbital, rates of 0.001­0.002 d−1 are reported by Burke et al. (2014) and rates
of 17­55 d−1 (depending on pH) are reported by Tishler et al. (1962), both of which are
not in compliance with the estimated rate constants. Garrett et al. (1971) reports a range
of 21­700·109 d−1 for barbituric acid, phenobarbital, amobarbital and barbital at pH range
50
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:59==
6­8, which is a range kept during the experiment, at 80 ◦C. The temperature increases the
reaction rate exponentially, thus at 10 ◦C the reported rate constants are not expected.
It should be taken into consideration that isopropylbarbituric acid is a different compound
than the ones which are mentioned. The range of provided rate constants is too large and
the data is limited, therefore the estimated rate constants cannot be confirmed.
A good first­order kinetics fit for isopropylbarbituric acid and the stable curves for the
rest of the compounds indicate that the experimental set up is suitable and well designed
for assessing the barbiturates degradation by using the batch microcosm experimental
set up.
Degradation of isopropylbarbituric acid and stable nature of other tested barbiturates can
be assumed only for aerobic systems under neutral pH (6­8) since those were the exper­
imental conditions. All of the differences between B615 and B616 systems are confirmed
by the same trends observed in the data from the field. This set up seems to act as a
representative design of a B615 and B616 groundwater system. However, a difference in
sediment at the field site needs to be kept in mind since the sediment from the microcosms
makes them likely to correspond better with the real system found around well B615 than
around well B616.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
51
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Barbiturates contamination from the factory site towards
the stream
Barbiturates are found on contaminated area in Grindsted (Figure 3.4). The highest con­
centrations are found on the eastern side of the contaminated area and described in
Lemaire et al. (2022) and Draborg (2021). The eastern part has not been thoroughly
investigated prior to this study, so the focus is put solely on the eastern side of the con­
taminated area, covering the area from the factory site, the pathway towards the Grindsted
stream, as well as the discharge into the stream.
Firstly, discussion on the distribution of barbiturates from the factory towards the stream
and along the stream is provided including the three chosen transects; central transect
(wells B601 and B603), transect along the stream (wells B620, B619, B618, B616 and
B615) and transect connecting both of the mentioned transects.
5.3.1
Plan view of the contamination
A plan view of the barbiturates contamination on the eastern side of the area is seen in
Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: The eastern part of the contaminated area including 7 wells with sum con­
centration of barbiturates, where at least one well screen depth measures higher than 550
µg/L, are seen (B620, B619, B618, B616, B615, B601 and B603). The color­coded sum
concentration of barbiturates represents sum concentration of all screens at all depths of
different wells. Distribution of specific barbiturates is identified for each well. Data from
Rambøll (2023).
Allobarbital dominates in all 7 wells, while barbital is second most present compound.
More diversity among different barbiturates is seen where the highest sum concentration
is found. This, however, is a plan overview which identifies the guidance for determining
the barbiturates plume. Looking at concentrations at specific depths gives a detailed
overview of the plume positioning in both the shallow and the deeper aquifers.
52
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:61==
5.3.2
Central transect
Wells B601 and B603 are shown in a transect in Figure 5.14, as they represent wells with
highest concentrations of barbiturates on the eastern side on the central path between
the factory site and the stream.
Figure 5.14: Central transect (red line on the smaller figure in the corner) with two wells,
B601 and B603 observed from the west to the east, where barbiturates are found. The
color­coded sum concentration of barbiturates represents sum concentration at different
depths. Distribution of relevant specific barbiturates is identified for each screen (Rambøll,
2023).
It seems that high concentrations of barbiturates are located in the upper part of the aquifer
in the first ca. 40 m bgl. In well B601, allobarbital dominates where lower concentration
is found, whereas in the highest concentration point barbiturates diversity is observed.
Barbital, isobutylbarbiturate and 5­butylbarbiturates are other three most relevant com­
pounds found in well B601.
Allobarbital dominates in barbiturates distribution when both of the wells in the center
of the contamination are observed, however its percentage tends to be lower at depths
where the sum concentration of barbiturates is the highest (Table G.1 in Appendix G). At
depth of 36 m, where the highest sum concentration occurs at this transect, most relevant
barbiturates are almost equally distributed when compared to other depth levels. The
share of allobarbital contributes less to the total concentration of barbiturates in well B601
which has higher barbiturates concentrations, when compared to the well B603 with lower
barbiturates concentrations, where it usually makes around 90­100% of the total barbitu­
rates concentration.
According to these results, the barbiturates plume is passing through the well B601, while
its outskirts could be found in B603. But there is not enough data to conclude on this and
it should be viewed in a bigger picture including flow parameters.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
53
==PAGE:62==
5.3.3
Assessment along the Grindsted stream
Wells B620, B619, B618, B616 and B615 are identified as hotspots of highest concentra­
tions of sum barbiturates found along the stream on the eastern part of the contaminated
area. Six drive points (DP3TF, DP05, DP04, DP03, DP02 and DP01) installed next to or
between those 5 wells are assessed to provide a better understanding of the location of
the barbiturates plume, additionally to the wells. All 5 wells and 6 drive points are illus­
trated in Figure G.1 in Appendix G.
Five wells of the transect located along the stream is seen up close on the Figure 5.15.
The chainage on the x­axis and level on the y­axis are adjusted for better observation.
Figure 5.15: Transect located along the stream (red line on the smaller figure in the cor­
ner) on the eastern side of contaminated area with five wells , observed from the west to
the east, where the highest concentrations of barbiturates are identified. The color­coded
sum concentration of barbiturates represents sum concentration at different depths. Dis­
tribution of relevant specific barbiturates is identified for each screen (Rambøll, 2023).
The results could indicate that the center of the plume, where the highest concentration
is detected, as one moves from the factory towards and closer to the stream, is located at
shallow depths (7.5­9.5 m bgl.). The center of the plume which flows through the central
transect is located between 29 m bgl. and 36 m bgl., with noticeable concentration at
18 m bgl., while the plume center along the stream is located between 7.5 m bgl. and
9.5 m bgl., with noticeable concentration at 17.5­18.5 m bgl. Noticeable concentration is
assumed to be around 500 µg/L and above.
Allobarbital is a dominant compounds when it comes to distribution of specific barbiturates
(Table G.2 in Appendix G). This is characteristic for areas with the highest concentrations
found in the wells along the stream. At shallow depths along the stream, more diversity
is seen among specific barbiturates and lower share of allobarbital is observed.
Six drive points (DP3TF, DP05, DP04, DP03, DP02 and DP01) of the transect located
along the stream is seen up close on the Figure 5.16. The chainage on the x­axis and
level on the y­axis are adjusted for better observation.
The results suggest that the center of the plume along the stream is located between
6 m bgl. and 9.5 m bgl, including the assessment of the well concentrations. Again, more
54
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:63==
shallow depths are characterizes with more diverse barbiturates being present in larger
shares, as well as around depth 16.5 m bgl. Isobutylbarbituric acid, 5­butylbarbiturate and
barbital tend to have bigger shares in total barbiturates concentration in the first 5.5 m bgl.
and deeper than 8.8 m bgl (Table G.3 in Appendix G). Allobarbital dominates where the
center of the plume is thought to be.
Allobarbital is confirmed as a dominant compound in the field, however it is not included
in the analysis conducted during the lab experiment.
Figure 5.16: Transect located along the stream on the eastern side of contaminated area
with six drive points , observed from the west to the east. The color­coded sum concen­
tration of barbiturates represents sum concentration at different depths. Distribution of
relevant specific barbiturates is identified for screen (Rambøll, 2023).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
55
==PAGE:64==
5.3.4
Transect connecting the central transect and the transect along the
stream
A transect following isopotential lines is placed to connect the well B601 at the central
transect with the well B615 at the transect along the stream. Both of the wells are identified
with the highest total concentration of barbiturates in both transect. This is seen in Figure
5.17.
Figure 5.17: Transect connecting the central transect and the transect along the stream
on the eastern side of contaminated area with two wells, observed from the north­east to
south­west. The color­coded sum concentration of barbiturates represents sum concen­
tration of all well screens at different depths. Distribution of relevant specific barbiturates
is identified for each well screen depth (Rambøll, 2023).
Well B601 is part of the semi confined aquifer (>18 m bgl.), while well B615 is part of
the unconfined aquifer (<10 m bgl.). The center of plume could be migrating from the
semi­confined (deep) aquifer to the unconfined (shallow) aquifer as it is moving from the
factory site to the stream. This is confirmed by highest concentrations of barbiturates
found at 36 m bgl. in well B601 and at 7.5 m bgl. in well B615. Close to the stream,
a succession of clay and lignite with interbedded sand separates a shallow unconfined
and a deep semi­confined aquifer, while the deep aquifer stays connected hydrologically
to the stream (Balbarini et al., 2020). Among other factors, this could be the reason of
plume transfer from the deep to the shallow aquifer closer to the stream.
5.3.5
Redox conditions at the site
Redox conditions at the transect along the stream are shown in Figure 5.18. There is
a combination of iron, manganese and sulfate reducing conditions close to the stream,
including the methanogenesis. Therefore, strongly reducing conditions are present at the
site. At wells B615 and B616, where the highest concentration of barbiturates is found
(7.5 m bgl.), iron­reducing conditions are identified due to elevated iron levels when com­
pared to the background level (Ottosen et al., 2023).
56
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.18: Prevailing redox conditions identified at a transect located along the stream
from GWD5 to GWD1, observed from the west to the east (Ottosen et al., 2023).
Degradation experiments are run in aerobic conditions, therefore it is important to notice
that those results are applicable only to the hyporheic zone of the stream and not to the
whole field site area. Connecting barbiturates fate and anaerobic redox conditions is
unclear.
5.4
Barbiturates degradation close to the stream and in the
hyporheic zone of the stream
The Eastern side of the contaminated area at Grindsted site is considered and the em­
phasis is put on the interpretation of barbiturates fate in close vicinity of the stream and in
the hyporheic zone of the stream. Experiments are run with groundwater from wells B615
and B616, thus explanations are directed towards the area around wells B615 and B616.
More attention is paid to area around well B615 due to the fact that sediment used in the
experiments is taken from that area. Additionally, the latest investigation on barbiturates
was conducted at the transect placed in the stream around well B615.
The degradation experiment have proven the degradation of isopropylbarbituric acid un­
der aerobic conditions and possible degradation potential of secobarbital, however this is
not clearly seen due to short duration of experiments. Aerobic conditions can be found in
the hyporheic zone, which is assumed to be first 40 cm of space underneath the stream­
bead of Grindsted stream (Weatherill et al., 2018). Aerobic conditions are possible due
to mixing of the fresh stream water, which bears oxygen, and the groundwater. Sediment
used in the experiment is taken from the first 40 cm of the transect next to well B615.
Degradation of isopropylbarbituric acid on the field site is assumed to take place in the
hyporheic zone of the transect next to the well B615. Degradation of other barbiturates
cannot be confirmed, but only discussed as a possible scenario. Additionally, degradation
of isopropylbarbituric acid could be occurring in the hyporheic zone of the stream close to
the well B616 as confirmed by the experiment. However, this statement is questionable
due to the fact that sediment in the streambed could be different close to the well B616.
Biotic degradation could be expected as proven by the experiments as well as abiotic
degradation, but it is unclear what type of microorganisms are responsible for degrada­
tion.
It is not known how deep the hyporheic zone exactly is in the Grindsted stream, as anaer­
obic conditions, which might differ locally, are discovered very close to the surface of the
streambed (at 20 cm depth in the streambed) (Skøt Ingerslev, 2023). It is possible the
degradation could be occurring in the few centimeters of space below the streambed due
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
57
==PAGE:66==
to anaerobic conditions present at deeper depths and generally at the field site. Reducing
conditions (iron and manganese reducing) found at the site confirm this.
Surface stream water was tested for barbiturates and showed no barbiturates concen­
trations found. Surface water samples were taken between wells B615 and B616. This
indicates, after mixing of groundwater and surface water, no barbiturates is observed in
the stream. This could be due to dilution, but also partly due to degradation. Barbitu­
rates degradation is not known whether to be expected at places where the anaerobic
conditions exist. No evidence of this is found. Anaerobic conditions are found at wells
B615 and B616, as well as on the streambank and below the surface of the streambed
underneath the hyporheic zone. It is important to emphasize that only few of the wells at
Grindsted site are aerobic. These show no barbiturates concentrations (<10 µg/L).
5.5
Potential for bioremediation
The investigation of potential for bioremediation is of importance due to barbiturates con­
tamination at the Grindsted site which poses an environmental risk, therefore a solution is
needed. Natural attenuation processes, such as volatilization, sorption, degradation and
dilution, fall under the category of monitored natural attenuation. Monitored or enhanced
natural attenuation can be discussed in this study mostly with reference to degradation
potential of contaminants. Monitored natural attenuation is a process of natural degra­
dation which is monitored over the years, while enhanced natural attenuation includes
enhancement to the natural process such as addition of electron donors or acceptors.
Microbial potential, availability and activity is very important to determine the bioremedi­
ation potential, as well as conditions found at the field site (National Research Council,
1993).
Microbial information is missing when it comes to barbiturates, since it is not known if types
of microbes found at the site degrade barbiturates, nor whether barbiturates degraders are
present at the site. This is due to not being familiar with bacteria that potentially degrade
barbiturates. Bacillus megaterium ATCC 14581 is one type of bacteria found to degrade
barbiturates (Kim and Fulco, 1983). It is mostly an aerobic bacteria (Bocchi et al., 2020).
It is not measured or identified whether this bacterium is present in the sediment during
the experiment. Furthermore, it is not known whether it exists at the Grindsted site. How­
ever, the degradation experiment confirmed the presence of bacteria which can degrade
one of the barbiturates, even though that bacteria were not identified. Finding metabolites
is a crucial parameter for bioremediation potential. Barbiturates metabolites are found for
hydrolysis pathways in the literature (Tishler et al., 1962), (Hermann, 1976), but these are
not measured in the field. It is not understood whether metabolites are stable.
The degradation experiment shows degradation of isopropylbarbituric acid in aerobic con­
ditions. This could indicate that aerobic conditions would be a suitable environment for
degradation of one or potentially more barbiturates, but there is no literature evidence.
A report by GeoSyntec (2006) on successful chemical oxidation, but unsuccessful biore­
mediation included barbiturates.Literature suggests hydrolysis of barbiturates is likely to
occur, especially under aerobic conditions (Gardner and Goyan, 1973), (Garrett et al.,
1971), (Hasegawa et al., 1958), (Tishler et al., 1962), (Maulding et al., 1972). Hydrolysis,
as a chemical reaction, is a part of biodegradation process, which could indicate a poten­
tial for bioremediation.
One of the factors which contribute positively to the bioremediation potential is availability
58
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:67==
of the contaminant to the microorganisms, i.e. being available in high concentrations (Na­
tional Research Council, 1993). This is a positive indicator when it comes to Grindsted
site due to high concentrations of barbiturates. They do not have a high sorption affinity,
therefore they should be available to the bacteria. However, presence of other contami­
nants might serve as a more suitable electron donor, therefore being selectively utilized
before the barbiturates (National Research Council, 1993).
Hydraulic conductivity greater than 10−6 m/s is a key characteristic for successful engi­
neered bioremediation (National Research Council, 1993). According to Rambøll (2023),
Grindsted aquifer would be suitable for bioremediation due to its high conductivity. The
natural attenuation is suitable for sites with consistent groundwater flow throughout the
seasons (National Research Council, 1993), which is a characteristic of Grindsted area.
This is a key parameter since the site can be monitored in places where a known con­
taminant flow occurs and the performance of bioremediation can be assessed, whether it
happens at a satisfactory level and rate. However, factors such as seasonal variation of
a water table or regional flow trajectory are not known which make a site more suitable
for bioremediation(National Research Council, 1993).
Monitored natural attenuation (MNA) often can take more time and does not allow for
clean up to reach desirable goals which can be reached by using invasive methods (Søn­
dergaard and Owsianiak, 2018). Draborg (2021) argues a main argument against MNA
is a plume found in high concentrations of contaminants close to the stream as it com­
poses a severe environmental risk. Natural attenuation rates, when possible, should be
enhanced in order to reduce monitoring timeframe (Henry, 2010). It is important to notice
the degradation rates, which are proven to be fast for isopropylbarbituric acid (0.06­0.08
d−1), however they vary for other barbiturates from 0.001 (Burke et al., 2014) to 55 d−1
(Tishler et al., 1962), which is relatively fast but cannot be discussed since the range is
too big and not many articles are found to back up the rate constants.
In conclusion, essential knowledge is lacking for barbiturates even after the discovery
of isopropylbarbituric acid degradation. It is unclear whether other barbiturates would de­
grade in case of bioremedial actions and how long it would take them. Bioremediation
can occur in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. It is not known whether barbiturates
degraders could be aerobic or anaerobic bacteria. It is important to consider that iso­
propylbarbituric acid is found in very small concentrations at the field site and therefore,
its degradation findings are relevant as well for possible degradation of other barbiturates.
However, capacity and timeframe of their degradation is unknown.
Factors such as confirmed aerobic degradation of isopropylbarbituric acid, possible aero­
bic degradation of other barbiturates and understanding their metabolites and degraders
are positive when it comes to discussing potential bioremediation. In a scenario where
existing degraders and metabolites at Grindsted are confirmed, MNA would probably be
a viable solution. However, timeframe, which varies a lot among literature findings, pro­
vides a level of uncertainty.
With all findings taken into account, it is too early to conclude that either monitored or
enhanced natural attenuation would be a suitable remedial strategy. More research is
needed on all mentioned factors to confirm bioremediation would be a viable strategy of
satisfactional level. Furthermore, there is a need for quality criteria in order to evaluate
the effect of any remedial strategy.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:69==
6
Conclusion
The fate of barbiturates, primarily degradation, was investigated in this project. The pur­
pose of this project was to investigate the barbiturates fate via the literature findings and
the degradation experiment designed with material from the Grindsted site. Laboratory
batch experiments were conducted with groundwater from the two wells, B615 and B616,
on the eastern side of the contaminated area; and the sediment collected next to the well
B615. All materials were highly contaminated with barbiturates. Under aerobic condi­
tions, experiment was run for 60 days in 10 microcosms. Results were interpreted as
relevant for the viscinity of the stream and the hyporheic zone of the Grindsted stream
as an aerobic environmental compartment for fate investigation. Bioremediation potential
of barbiturates at the field site was discussed in the form of a future perspective of this
project.
Literature findings characterized barbiturates as generally not prone to volatilization nor
sorption. Degradation is most likely to happen in form of a hydrolysis when it comes to
barbiturates. Barbiturate ring opening or side chain degradation are the two main hy­
drolysis pathways. Forms of acetic, malonic or malonuric acid, urea and amide are main
identified hydrolytic metabolites. Higher temperature and pH, as well as increase in steric
strain and ionic strength, among other factors, increase hydrolysis rate. Biodegradation
is not recognized as a relevant process in literature when referring to barbiturates. How­
ever, the literature is found to have big knowledge gaps.
The designed batch degradation experiment was a respresentative laboratory method to
use for investigation of barbiturates degradation under stable aerobic conditions and neu­
tral pH. Seven barbiturates were discussed with reference to their fate: barbital, isopropy­
lbarbituric acid, butobarbital, butalbital, secobarbital and a sum of pentobarbital and amo­
barbital. After 60 days of experiment, isopropylbarbituric acid is found to fully degrade,
whereas the other six barbiturates stay mostly stable. Degradation of isopropylbarbituric
acid gains from simultaneous contribution of both hydrolysis and biotic degradation. A
first­order kinetics model was a suitable fit for the degradation curve of isopropylbarbituric
acid. A first­order rate constant of 0.06­0.08 d−1 is estimated. Secobarbital is thought to
have a degradation potential over a longer time period due to its concentration decrease
of more than 20%. Barbital, butalbital, butobarbital and a sum of pentobarbital and amo­
barbital are barbiturates which have not degraded over a course of 60 days under the
given conditions. Long­term sorption could occur due to the sorption capacity of the sed­
iment governed by high TOC values.
The hyporheic zone of the Grindsted stream is an aerobic zone which was presented
in the experimental results. It is concluded that isopropylbarbituric acid can degrade in
the hyporheic zone, even if it is only a couple of centimeters deep since relatively fast
degradation occurs. The fate of other barbiturates can only be discussed and not con­
cluded with respect to the hyporheic zone. Anaerobic conditions, which are mainly found
at the site, are not identified as suitable for degradation of barbiturates based on literature
with limited knowledge. Aerobic conditions are identified as suitable for degradation of
isopropylbarbituric acid and possibly other barbiturates in a longer timeframe.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
61
==PAGE:70==
A plume of barbiturates with its highest concentrations is considered to be located on
the eastern side of contaminated area in Grindsted. High concentrations are found start­
ing at the central transect and continuing towards the stream. The center of the plume
seems to be migrating from the deep aquifer at the central transect (29­36m bgl.) to the
shallow aquifer along the stream line (6­9.5 m bgl.). Allobarbital is a dominant compound
at all of the wells where barbiturates are found. The well screens along the stream at shal­
low depths detect more diversity among different barbiturates as well as screens which
detect the highest barbiturates concentrations of all concentrations observed. Other rele­
vant barbiturates found on site are barbital, isobutylbarbituric acid and 5­butylbarbiturate.
Redox conditions at the site are manganese to iron reducing, partially including methano­
genesis at some locations. No degradation of barbiturates could be discussed in the
plume area. Monitored natural attenuation (MNA) is considered as a relevant, but not
a viable strategy for remediation of barbiturates at Grindsted site at this moment. More
research is needed on barbiturates degradation and remedial strategies.
Overall, barbiturates contamination is highly relevant for the contaminated site of Grind­
sted. They are pharmaceuticals found in high concentration, considered to be non biodegrad­
able which is an environmental threat. This project helped understand barbiturates fate
and behaviour under aerobic conditions which resulted in a positive outcome with respect
to degradation. This outcome can be used when planning a remediation strategy or further
assessing degradation potential of other barbiturate compounds in different (i.e. anaero­
bic) conditions and timeframes. It is highly valuable to recognized that isopropylbarbituric
acid degrades at a relatively fast rate in aerobic conditions. However, scientific findings
are lacking and there is a lot of knowledge gaps when it comes to the barbiturates fate.
In this context, a set of recommendations for future research is given.
62
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:71==
7
Recommendations for future
investigations
After the conducted project, it is clear that knowledge gaps exist and further research is
necessary to be able to confirm some of the statements made and explain some of the
findings which were unclear. The following list of recommendations is given for the future
research:
• Using the same experimental batch set up with microcosms during a longer period
of time. Longer timeframe is suggested due to possible degradation of secobarbital
and other barbiturates. The timeframe which is suggested is 180 days or more.
• Collecting information on possible microbial degraders of barbiturates by conduct­
ing an experiment in aerobic setting with microbes which are suitable for degrading
other pharmaceuticals, such as sulfonamides, as they have a potential of being suit­
able for similar pharmaceuticals as well, such as barbiturates. Additionally, testing
the sediment used for the degradation experiment for microbial communities to as­
sess what type of bacteria is found in the sediment which proved to be effective in
degrading one barbiturate.
• Analysis of barbiturates metabolites which are found in the literature would be useful,
both in the experimental set up and at the field site. This could extend the knowl­
edge of existing metabolites and could strengthen the conclusions on bioremedia­
tion potential, as well as the degradation potential itself. Additional assumptions on
metabolites from specific barbiturates according to the found metabolites from other
barbiturates could lead to a discovery of metabolites from all of the relevant barbi­
turates, assuming they degrade via similar pathways. Similarly, assessing whether
sequential degradation is a possible pathway of barbiturates degradation.
• Testing or analyzing for possible long­term sorption would add value to assumptions
made in this project, since it is not proven, but it is suggested as a possibility due
to parameters which point out the sorption capacity of the sediment used for the
experiments.
• Testing barbiturates degradation in anaerobic conditions, as those are found at the
site and microbes operating in those conditions are assumed to also be present at
the site. However, this step is proposed to be conducted after all of the previous
steps since less knowledge is available on anaerobic degradation than on aerobic
degradation. Firstly, aerobic degradation is proposed to be assessed before the
anaerobic one.
• Closely monitoring distribution and concentration of barbiturates at the field site at
the three transects which are presented in this project. This would give an insight
into any changes occurring and could help to interpret new or similar findings on
attenuation, mainly related to degradation.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:73==
References
Alvarez, P. J. J. and Illman, W. A. (2005). “Bioremediation and Natural Attenuation”. In:
Bioremediation and Natural Attenuation. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.
1002/047173862X.index.
Anibas, C., Schneidewind, U., Vandersteen, G., Joris, I., Seuntjens, P., and Batelaan, O.
(2016). “From streambed temperature measurements to spatial­temporal flux quantifi­
cation: using the LPML method to study groundwater–surface water interaction”. In: Hy­
drological Processes 30.2, pp. 203–216. ISSN: 1099­1085. URL: https://onlinelibrary-
wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1002/hyp.10588.
Balbarini, N., Boon, W. M., Nicolajsen, E., Nordbotten, J. M., Bjerg, P. L., and Binning,
P. J. (2017). “A 3­D numerical model of the influence of meanders on groundwater
discharge to a gaining stream in an unconfined sandy aquifer”. In: Journal of Hydrology
552, pp. 168–181. ISSN: 00221694. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0022169417304456.
Balbarini, N., Frederiksen, M., Rønde, V., Møller, I., Sonne, A. T., McKnight, U. S., Peder­
sen, J. K., Binning, P. J., and Bjerg, P. L. (2020). “Assessing the Transport of Pharma­
ceutical Compounds in a Layered Aquifer Discharging to a Stream.” In: Ground water
58.2, pp. 208–223. ISSN: 1745­6584. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
31081137.
Barton, H., Bojarski, J., and Mokrosz, J. (1982). “Photochemical ring opening of barbi­
tal”. In: Tetrahedron Letters 23.20, pp. 2133–2134. ISSN: 00404039. URL: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0040403900872809.
Baun, A., Nyholm, N., and Kusk, K. O. (2017). Environmental Risk Assessment of Chem­
icals.
Bjerg, P. L. (2002). Water­air equilibrium.
Bjerg, P. L., Tuxen, N., Reitzel, L. A., Albrechtsen, H.­J., and Kjeldsen, P. (2011). “Natural
Attenuation Processes in Landfill Leachate Plumes at Three Danish Sites”. In: Ground
Water 49.5, pp. 688–705. ISSN: 0017467X. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1111/j.1745-6584.2009.00613.x.
Bocchi, M. B., Perna, A., Cianni, L., Vitiello, R., Greco, T., Maccauro, G., and Perisano,
C. (2020). “A rare case of Bacillus megaterium soft tissues infection”. In: Acta Bio Med­
ica : Atenei Parmensis 91 (Suppl 14), pp. 1–5. ISSN: 25316745. URL: /pmc/articles/
PMC7944702/%20/pmc/articles/PMC7944702/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7944702/.
Boulton, A. J. (2007). “Hyporheic rehabilitation in rivers: Restoring vertical connectivity”.
In: Freshwater Biology 52 (4), pp. 632–650. ISSN: 00465070.
Broholm, M. M. and Arvin, E. (2000). “Biodegradation of phenols in a sandstone aquifer
under aerobic conditions and mixed nitrate and iron reducing conditions”. In: Journal of
Contaminant Hydrology 44 (3­4), pp. 239–273. ISSN: 0169­7722.
Brusseau, M. (2019). “Physical Processes Affecting Contaminant Transport and Fate”. In:
Environmental and Pollution Science. Elsevier, pp. 103–112. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780128147191000070.
Burke, V., Richter, D., Hass, U., Duennbier, U., Greskowiak, J., and Massmann, G. (2014).
“Redox­dependent removal of 27 organic trace pollutants: compilation of results from
tank aeration experiments”. In: Environmental Earth Sciences 71.8, pp. 3685–3695.
ISSN: 1866­6280. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s12665-013-2762-8.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
65
==PAGE:74==
Cao, H., Lin, X., Zhan, H., Zhang, H., and Lin, J. (2013). “Photocatalytic degradation ki­
netics and mechanism of phenobarbital in TiO2 aqueous solution”. In: Chemosphere
90 (4), pp. 1514–1519. ISSN: 0045­6535.
Conant, B., Cherry, J. A., and Gillham, R. W. (2004). “A PCE groundwater plume discharg­
ing to a river: influence of the streambed and near­river zone on contaminant distribu­
tions”. In: Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 73.1­4, pp. 249–279. ISSN: 01697722.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0169772204000555.
Conant, B., Robinson, C. E., Hinton, M. J., and Russell, H. A. (2019). “A framework for
conceptualizing groundwater­surface water interactions and identifying potential im­
pacts on water quality, water quantity, and ecosystems”. In: Journal of Hydrology 574,
pp. 609–627. ISSN: 00221694. URL: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii /
S0022169419303907.
Council, N. R. (1993a). “In Situ Bioremediation: When Does it Work?” In: In Situ Bioreme­
diation.
Council, N. R. (1993b). “In Situ Bioremediation: When Does it Work?” In: In Situ Bioreme­
diation.
Cremeans, M., Devlin, J., Osorno T.C., McKnight, U., and Bjerg, P. (2020). “A Compar­
ison of Tools and Methods for Estimating Groundwater­Surface Water Exchange”. In:
Groundwater Monitoring & Remediation 40.1, pp. 24–34. ISSN: 1745­6584. URL: http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20662945.
Dannley, R. L., Weschler, J. R., and Jackson, G. R. (1954). “Ultraviolet Absorption Spectra
of the Hydrolysis Products of Diethyl Barbituric Acid”. In: Analytical Chemistry 26 (10),
pp. 1661–1662. ISSN: 15206882. URL: https://pubs-acs-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/
abs/10.1021/ac60094a041.
Danske Regioner (2022). Danmarks generationsforureninger. URL: https://storymaps.
arcgis.com/stories/2279b5b1b2d746428fda77a84c8a82ae.
DEPA (2002). Drinking Water. URL: https://www2.mst.dk/udgiv/publications/2001/87-
7944-519-5/html/kap07_eng.htm.
Draborg, H. (2021). Degradation of Pharmaceutical Compounds in the Grindsted Factory
Plume­Tools and Assessment. Tech. rep.
Draborg, H., Ottosen, C., Broholm, M. M., and Bjerg, P. L. (2021). Note om indsivningsom­
råder for forureningskompo­nenter til Grindsted Å. Tech. rep. URL: www.onlinedoctranslator.
com.
DTU Food (2023). Danish (Q)SAR Database. URL: https://qsardb.food.dtu.dk/db/index.
html.
Ebba Cederberg Schnell (2023). Laser diffraction, wet samples (Primary wet soil). Tech.
rep. DTU.
European Comission (2000). Water Framework Directive. URL: https://environment.ec.
europa.eu/topics/water/groundwater_en.
Gardner, L. A. and Goyan, J. E. (1973). “Mechanism of Phenobarbital Degradation”. In:
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 62.6, pp. 1026–1027. ISSN: 00223549. URL: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022354915410597.
Garrett, E. R., Bojarski, J. T., and Yakatan, G. J. (1971). “Kinetics of Hydrolysis of Barbituric
Acid Derivatives”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 60.8, pp. 1145–1154. ISSN:
00223549. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022354915380175.
GeoSyntec (2006). LABORATORY TREATABILITY TESTS OF CHEMICAL OXIDATION
AND BIOREMEDIATION TECHNOLOGIES FOR GROUNDWATER REMEDIATION
KÆRGÅRD PLANTAGE (Grindstedværkets gruber).
66
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:75==
GEUS (2023). Indberetning af boringer, skemaer og vejledninger. URL: https://www.geus.
dk/produkter-ydelser-og-faciliteter/arkiver/borearkivet/indberetning-af-boringer-skemaer-
og-vejledninger.
Hansen, J. (2022). Assessment of Biodegradation of Chloridazon and Desphenylchlori­
dazon from Point Sources. Tech. rep.
Hansen, J. (2023). Nedbrydningsforsøg ­ sulfadiazin, sulfanilsyre og sulfanilamid. Tech.
rep.
Hasegawa, J., Ikeda, K., and Matsuzawa, T. (1958). “Studies on Decomposition and Sta­
bilization of Drugs in Solution. I. Chemical Kinetic Studies on Aqueous Solution of Phe­
nobarbital”. In: 6 (1).
Henry, B. M. (2010). BIOSTIMULATION FOR ANAEROBIC BIOREMEDIATION OF CHLO­
RINATED SOLVENTS.
Hermann, T. (1974). Kinetics and mechanism of degradation of some 5.5 diallylbarbituric
acid derivatives. Part 1: log k pH profile for 5.5 diallylbarbituric acid solvolysis. URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/18752041_Kinetics_and_mechanism_of_
degradation_of_some_55_diallylbarbituric_acid_derivatives_Part_1_log_k_pH_profile_
for_55_diallylbarbituric_acid_solvolysis.
Hermann, T. (1976). Kinetics and mechanism of degradation of some 5 allylbarbituric acid
derivatives. II. Mechanism of 5,5 diallylbarbituric acid degradation as a function of pH.
URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/23124041_Kinetics_and_mechanism_
of_degradation_of_some_5_allylbarbituric_acid_derivatives_II_Mechanism_of_55_
diallylbarbituric_acid_degradation_as_a_function_of_pH.
Heron, G., Bjerg, P., Gravesen, P., Ludvigsen, L., and Christensen, T. (1998). “Geol­
ogy and sediment geochemistry of a landfill leachate contaminated aquifer (Grindsted,
Denmark)”. In: Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 29.4, pp. 301–317. ISSN: 01697722.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0169772297000284.
Hofmann, G. A., Gradl, G., Schulz, M., Haidinger, G., Tanew, A., and Weber, B. (2020).
“The frequency of photosensitizing drug dispensings in Austria and Germany: a corre­
lation with their photosensitizing potential based on published literature”. In: Journal of
the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology 34 (3), pp. 589–600. ISSN:
1468­3083. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jdv.15952%20https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jdv.15952%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/jdv.15952.
Ikeda, K. (1960). “Studies on Decomposition and Stabilization of the Drugs in Solution.
IV. Effect of Dielectric Constant on the Stabilization of Barbiturate in Alcohol­Water Mix­
tures.” In:
Innovatech Labs (2023). Ion Chromatography (IC Analysis). URL: https://www.innovatechlabs.
com/materials-analysis-ic/.
Kapadia, A., Goyan, J., and Autian, J. (1959). “Separation of Decomposed Products of
Phenobarbital Sodium by Paper Chromatographic Technique”. In: Journal of the Ameri­
can Pharmaceutical Association (Scientific ed.) 48 (7), pp. 407–409. ISSN: 0095­9553.
Karickhoff, S. W. (1981). “Semi­empirical estimation of sorption of hydrophobic pollutants
on natural sediments and soils”. In: Chemosphere 10 (8), pp. 833–846. ISSN: 0045­
6535.
Kim, B. H. and Fulco, A. J. (1983). “Induction by barbiturates of a cytochrome P­450­
dependent fatty acid monooxygenase in Bacillus Megaterium: Relationship between
barbiturate structure and inducer activity”. In: Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 116.3, pp. 843–850. ISSN: 0006291X. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0006291X83802198.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
67
==PAGE:76==
Knepper, Thomas P. (2006). Barbiturates Are Detectable In The Environment 30 Years
After Use Peaked. URL: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2006/10/061030120701.
htm.
Larsen (2000). Geological grain size classification.
Lemaire, G., Ottosen, C., Broholm, M. M., and Bjerg, P. L. (2023). Strømningsforhold i
Grindsted.
Lemaire, G., Ottosen, C., Hansen, J., Broholm, M. M., and Bjerg, P. L. (2022). Grindsted
statusmøde December 2022.
Lin, K., Bondarenko, S., and Gan, J. (2011). “Sorption and persistence of wastewater­
borne psychoactive and antilipidemic drugs in soils”. In: Journal of Soils and Sediments
11 (8), pp. 1363–1372. ISSN: 14390108. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.
1007/s11368-011-0421-9.
López­Muñoz, F., Ucha­Udabe, R., and Alamo, C. (2005). “The history of barbiturates a
century after their clinical introduction”. In: Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment 1
(4), pp. 329–343.
Maulding, H., Nazareno, J., Polesuk, J., and Michaelis, A. (1972). “Investigations of Hy­
drolytic Products of Butalbital”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 61.9, pp. 1389–
1393. ISSN: 00223549. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S002235491538655X.
Maurya, P. K., Balbarini, N., Møller, I., Rønde, V., Christiansen, A. V., Bjerg, P. L., Auken,
E., and Fiandaca, G. (2018). “Subsurface imaging of water electrical conductivity, hy­
draulic permeability and lithology at contaminated sites by induced polarization”. In:
Geophysical Journal International 213.2, pp. 770–785. ISSN: 0956­540X. URL: https:
//academic.oup.com/gji/article/213/2/770/4816733.
Mccall, P. J., Swann, R. L., Laskowski, D. A., Unger, S. M., Vrona, S. A., and Dishburger,
H. J. (1980). “Estimation of Chemical Mobility in Soil from Liquid Chromatographic Re­
tention Times”. In: Bull. Environm. Contain. Toxicol 24, pp. 190–195.
Mercaldo, D. E. and Pizzi, E. A. (2006). “AUTOMATED COLORIMETRIC METHOD OF
ANALYSIS FOR PHENOBARBITAL, USING THE AUTOANALYZER”. In: Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 130.2, pp. 550–557. ISSN: 00778923. URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1965.tb12597.x.
Mokrosz, J. L. and Paluchowska, M. H. (1986). Hydrolysis of Barbituric Acid Derivatives.
Part 6.’ Hydrolysis of Spirocyclopropane­and Spiro­2’­methylcyclopropane­I ’5barbituric
Acids.
Mueller, B. M., Schulz, H., and Lewandowski, J. (2022). “Hyporheic Zone and Processes”.
In: Encyclopedia of Inland Waters (Second Edition). Ed. by T. Mehner and K. Tockner.
Second Edition. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 301–311. ISBN: 978­0­12­822041­2. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128191668001031.
National Center for Biotechnology Information (2023). PubChem Compound Summary.
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
NIRAS (2009). Redegørelse over anvendte kemikalier på Grindstedvaerket og deres po­
tentielle trussel i forhold til miljøet. Tech. rep.
Nobay, F. and Acquisto, N. M. (2014). “Barbiturates”. In: Encyclopedia of Toxicology: Third
Edition, pp. 363–367.
OI Analytical (2010). “Total Organic Carbon Analysis of Solid Samples for Environmental
and Quality Control Applications”. In:
Otsuji, Y., Kuroda, T., and Imoto, E. (1968). “Photochemical Hydrolysis of Barbitals”. In:
https://doi.org/10.1246/bcsj.41.2713 41 (11), pp. 2713–2718. ISSN: 00092673. URL:
https://www.journal.csj.jp/doi/10.1246/bcsj.41.2713.
Ottosen, C., Lemaire, G., Bjerg, P. L., and Broholm, M. M. (2023). Redoxforhold i Grind­
sted.
68
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:77==
Ottosen, C. B., Rønde, V., McKnight, U. S., Annable, M. D., Broholm, M. M., Devlin, J. F.,
and Bjerg, P. L. (2020). “Natural attenuation of a chlorinated ethene plume discharging
to a stream: Integrated assessment of hydrogeological, chemical and microbial interac­
tions”. In: Water Research 186, p. 116332. ISSN: 00431354. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S004313542030868X.
Pacific BioLabs (2023). LC­MS and LC­MS/MS. URL: https://pacificbiolabs.com/lc-ms/.
Peschka, M., Eubeler, J. P., and Knepper, T. P. (2006). “Occurrence and fate of bar­
biturates in the aquatic environment.” In: Environmental science & technology 40.23,
pp. 7200–6. ISSN: 0013­936X. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17180967.
Radboud University (2023). ICP­MS. URL: https : / / www . ru . nl / science / gi / facilities -
activities/elemental-analysis/icp-ms/.
Rambøll (2023). “Videregående forureningsundersøgelse Undersøgelser i Grindsted”. In:
1.4. URL: https://dk.ramboll.com.
Rasmussen, J. J., McKnight, U. S., Sonne, A. T., Wiberg­Larsen, P., and Bjerg, P. L.
(2016). “Legacy of a Chemical Factory Site: Contaminated Groundwater Impacts Stream
Macroinvertebrates”. In: Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 70.2,
pp. 219–230. ISSN: 0090­4341. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00244-015-
0211-2.
Rønde, V., McKnight, U., Sonne, A., Balbarini, N., Devlin, J., and Bjerg, P. (2017). “Con­
taminant mass discharge to streams: Comparing direct groundwater velocity measure­
ments and multi­level groundwater sampling with an in­stream approach”. In: Journal
of Contaminant Hydrology 206, pp. 43–54. ISSN: 01697722. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0169772217302073.
Skalar (2023). SKALAR METHODS. Tech. rep.
Skøt Ingerslev, M. (2023). Feltundersøgelser af transport, spredning og skaebne af bar­
biturater ved udsivning til Grindsted Å. Tech. rep.
Søndergaard, G. L. and Owsianiak, M. (2018). LCA of Soil and Groundwater Remediation.
DTU.
Sonne, A. T., McKnight, U. S., Rønde, V., and Bjerg, P. L. (2017). “Assessing the chemical
contamination dynamics in a mixed land use stream system”. In: Water Research 125,
pp. 141–151. ISSN: 00431354. URL: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii /
S0043135417306930.
Sonne, A. T., Rasmussen, J. J., Höss, S., Traunspurger, W., Bjerg, P. L., and McKnight,
U. S. (2018). “Linking ecological health to co­occurring organic and inorganic chemical
stressors in a groundwater­fed stream system”. In: Science of The Total Environment
642, pp. 1153–1162. ISSN: 00489697. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0048969718321958.
Stelzer, R. S., Scott, J. T., Bartsch, L. A., and Parr, T. B. (2014). “Particulate organic matter
quality influences nitrate retention and denitrification in stream sediments: Evidence
from a carbon burial experiment”. In: Biogeochemistry 119 (1­3), pp. 387–402. ISSN:
1573515X. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10533-014-9975-0.
Tishler, F., Sinsheimer, J. E., and Goyan, J. E. (1962). “Mechanism of Phenobarbital
Degradation”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 51.3, pp. 214–216. ISSN: 00223549.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022354915334511.
Tishler, F., Worrell, L. F., and Sinsheimer, J. E. (1962). “Analysis of phenobarbital in relation
to its degradation products”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 51 (7), pp. 645–
648. ISSN: 15206017.
Weatherill, J. J., Atashgahi, S., Schneidewind, U., Krause, S., Ullah, S., Cassidy, N., and
Rivett, M. O. (2018). “Natural attenuation of chlorinated ethenes in hyporheic zones: A
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
69
==PAGE:78==
review of key biogeochemical processes and in­situ transformation potential”. In: URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.10.059.
Wen, L. P. and Fulco, A. J. (1985). “Induction of a cytochrome P­450­dependent fatty acid
monooxygenase in Bacillus megaterium by a barbiturate analog, 1­[2­phenylbutyryl]­
3­methylurea”. In: Molecular and cellular biochemistry 67 (1), pp. 77–81. ISSN: 0300­
8177. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3927150/.
Winter, T. C., Harvey, J. W., Franke, O. L., and Alley, W. M. (1998). “Ground water and
surface water: A single resource”. In: Circular. ISSN: 2330­5703.
Woessner, W. W. (2020). Groundwater­Surface Water Exchange.
Woessner, W. W. (2017). “Hyporheic Zones”. In: Methods in Stream Ecology, Volume
1. Vol. 1. Elsevier, pp. 129–157. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
B9780124165588000081.
Yu, J. T., Bouwer, E. J., and Coelhan, M. (2006). “Occurrence and biodegradability stud­
ies of selected pharmaceuticals and personal care products in sewage effluent”. In:
Agricultural Water Management 86 (1­2), pp. 72–80. ISSN: 0378­3774.
70
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:79==
70
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:80==
A
Appendix
A.1
Structural formulas of barbiturates
Figure A.1: A list of 16 barbiturates with their respective structural formulas (National
Center for Biotechnology Information, 2023).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
71
==PAGE:81==
Table A.1: 17 barbiturates, including their CAS number and molecular weight.
Name of the barbiturate
CAS number
Molecular weight,
g/mol
5­Butylbarbiturate
1953­33­9
184.19
Aethallymal
2373­84­4
196.20
Allobarbital
52­43­7
208.21
Allyl­n­butylbarbiturate
3146­66­5
224.26
Amobarbital
57­43­2
226.27
Barbital
57­44­3
184.19
Butabarbital
125­40­6
212.25
Butalbital
77­26­9
224.26
Butobarbital
77­28­1
212.25
Hexobarbital
56­29­1
236.27
Isobutylbarbituric acid
42846­91­3
184.19
Isopropylbarbituric acid
7391­69­7
170.17
Metharbital
50­11­3
198.22
Monoethylbarbituric acid
2518­72­1
156.14
Pentobarbital
76­74­4
226.27
Phenobarbital
50­06­6
232.23
Secobarbital
76­73­3
238.28
72
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:82==
B
Appendix
B.1
Identification of investigation place in Grindsted
Assessing the degradation of barbiturates is done by an experimental set up with material
from the Grindsted site. Interesting areas for investigation of barbiturates have been cho­
sen while discussing all available information with the research group at DTU currently
working on Grindsted project. The summarized report ’Advanced pollution investigation;
Investigations in Grindsted’ finished in May 2023 by Rambøll has been provided as the
main guidance on identifying barbiturates concentrations and measured field parameters
such as electrical conductivity, pH, oxygen concentration and parameters of redox condi­
tions. Field campaigns have been executed in collaboration with a colleague Maja Skøt
Ingerslev, who identified the investigation area, planned the screening of the area and
the positioning of the transect next to the well B615, all of which is a part of her Bachelor
thesis (Skøt Ingerslev, 2023). Groundwater discharge (GWD) areas and wells along the
stream are seen in the Figure B.1 (Rambøll, 2023).
Figure B.1: Well names in GWD 1­GWD 5 area (Rambøll, 2023).
As seen in Rambøll (2023), high concentration of barbiturates is identified as the sum con­
centration measured above 2000 µg/L. Wells which were identified as having the highest
measured concentration of barbiturates in Grindsted area are: B601 (at 36 m depth),
B615 (at 7.5 m depth), B616 (at 7.5 m depth) and B620 (at 8.5 m depth). There are, ad­
ditionally, drive points which are identified with high concentrations of barbiturates: DP02
(at 7 m depth), DP03 (at 6.6 m depth) and DP04 (at 6.7 m depth). This can be seen in
Table B.1 (Rambøll, 2023).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
73
==PAGE:83==
Table B.1: Barbiturates concentrations in the wells (Rambøll, 2023). DGU is an identifi­
cation number of the well, while drive points don’t have one (GEUS, 2023).
DGU
Well/drive point name
Sum concentration of barbiturates, µg/L
114.3901
B601
3108.1
114.3981
B615
2767.3
114.3985
B616
2376.5
114.3998
B620
2580.7
DP02
3909.62
DP03
2397.85
DP04
3184.13
Well B601 is not located near the stream, but north of the stream on the line towards the
factory. However, well B620 is located near the stream, but no other wells around it have
high concentrations of barbiturates so it is not considered. Therefore, it was concluded
that investigation should be conducted either around well B615 or B616. A closer look is
taken into both of the wells whilst considering the change of barbiturates concentration
following the change in well depths (3.5, 7.5, 12.5 and 18.5 m). Barbiturates concentration
is observed in the shallow part of B615 at depths of 3.5 m and 7.5 m. However, for well
B616 barbiturates concentration is observed at depths of 7.5, 12.5 and 18.5 m. This led
to conclusion that barbiturates plume could potentially be located more shallow around
well B615, which has been chosen for the first screening campaign in the GWD 2 area
(see Figure B.1). This choice was made due to the fact that all field work and sampling
were planned to be done at shallow depths in the hyporheic zone of the stream and on
the stream bank (Skøt Ingerslev, 2023).
B.2
First field campaign ­ screening
First field campaign is intended for screening and sampling of groundwater which are to
be sent to the lab at DTU Sustain for the analysis of barbiturates. The main objective of
the first field trip was to gather data on barbiturates concentration and field parameters in
the area with high barbiturates concentration; so decision on where the transect should
be placed for further investigation can be made. The area that was being investigated is
surrounding the well B615. 14 piezometers were placed in the streambed at the depth
of 40 cm in a decided pattern (can be seen in Figure B.2) in order to cover the whole
area around the well. Piezometer coverage includes 60 m wide stretch equally divided in
the upstream and downstream directions from the B615 well. Piezometers were installed
8.5 m apart from each other. Temperature spear was used to measure temperature of
groundwater in the streambed at the depth of 20 cm before placing the piezometers in
order to identify exact points where groundwater is emerging from the streambed, as­
suming the groundwater temperature is around 10◦C which can vary as seasons change
(Cremeans et al., 2020). Piezometers have been installed and left for a day to stabilize,
after which hydraulic head in the piezometers was measured with a meter. After that,
groundwater samples were taken into 40 ml glass vials from the piezometers with a small
pump connected to a motor. A tube was inserted into a piezometer until it reached the
bottom and groundwater was pumped out with the help of a pump. Oxygen levels, hy­
draulic conductivity and pH were measured using a flowcell by connecting the tube which
was delivering groundwater to the flowcell. Flowcell was connected with a portable Mul­
tiparameter Meter 3430. Temperature and water depth measurements were taken in the
stream as well, including the GPS coordinates. Surveying was done as a final step of
the first field campaign to make sure to have the exact position of piezometers in a valid
74
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:84==
reference system. More detailed description can be found in Skøt Ingerslev (2023).
Figure B.2: Measurements and piezometer placement in the first field campaign (Skøt
Ingerslev, 2023).
B.3
Second field campaign ­ collection of material for the
experimental set up
After receiving lab results of the analysis of groundwater samples from the first screening
campaign, a second field campaign was planned and organized so the material for the
experimental set up for testing the barbiturates degradation can be collected. Detailed
laboratory experiments have been designed accordingly, which can be seen in chapter 4.
Sediment cores from the streambed and groundwater from the well have been decided
as necessary for the set up.
Lab results from the first field campaign show the highest found sum of concentration
of barbiturates is at the sampling point 4 (see Figure B.2).
Barbital, Butobarbital and Pentobarbital are single barbiturates found in the highest con­
centrations at that sampling point. After reviewing the literature and seeing the lab results,
it has been decided to place the transect where sampling point 4 is located in the stream,
which is just next to the B615 well as seen in Figure B.3 (Skøt Ingerslev, 2023).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
75
==PAGE:85==
Figure B.3: Positioning of transect in the stream next to the well B615. Piezometers were
placed in the streambed. GWT 1, GWT 2, GWT 3, GWT 4 and GWT 5 were names of the
piezometer placements (Skøt Ingerslev, 2023).
The process of field investigation was almost the same as in the first field campaign.
Additional piezometers have been placed in order to have 5 sampling points at the transect
where piezometers were placed 1.5 m apart from each other at 4 different depths: 20 cm,
40 cm, 60 cm and 80 cm. It was assumed that this specific location could potentially be
a source of barbiturates discharging to the stream due to barbiturates being measured in
such high concentrations. Transect with 5 stations including 17 piezometers installed at
4 different depths is seen in Figure B.4.
Figure B.4: Transect next to the well B615 with all of the installed piezometers.
76
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:86==
Two additional drive points were installed into the ground using a hammer on the north
and south banks from the transect in order to get sufficient measurements at different
depths and to be able to distinguish depth profiles. This can be seen in Figure B.3. This
time, groundwater samples were collected including the samples for determining redox
conditions in the field. 3 different vials were used for collecting groundwater which is
to be tested for redox conditions. A plastic test tube was used for sulfate and nitrate
testing, a small plastic test tube was used for chloride and bromide testing and a small
plastic vial was used for iron and manganese testing. Groundwater was collected in all
of the abovementioned tubes/vials in the same was as it was collected for barbiturates
sample analysis with addition of filtration. Samples for sulfate and nitrate; and chloride and
bromide testing were filtered through a 0.2 µm filter in the field. Whereas samples for iron
and manganese testing were filtered through a 0.45 µm filter and preserved with addition
of HNO3 (4 M) before they were inserted into test tubes/vials. Additionally, oxygen levels,
hydraulic conductivity and pH were measured as field parameters. All of the equipment
for barbiturates and redox parameters sampling, including the flowcell and meters for field
parameters measurements can be seen in Figure B.5.
Figure B.5: All equipment used in the field for obtaining samples and field parameters.
On the left, two portable meters are used for pH, oxygen levels and EC measurements.
They are connected to the flowcell which is seen on the bottom next to the pump which
is pumping the groundwater out of the drive point. On the right, barbiturates and redox
parameters sampling station is seen. All of the vials which are described in the text above,
including filters, the acid and a syringe used for sampling.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
77
==PAGE:87==
Temperature, hydraulic head and water depth measurements were obtained in the stream.
GPS coordinates were determined and surveying was done as the last step. All of the
groundwater samples (barbiturates and redox conditions analyses) and field parameters
are obtained from all of the piezometers, two drive points and the well B615. Detailed
description can be found in Skøt Ingerslev (2023).
Sediment cores have been collected from the area which is surrounding the sampling
point 4 as it is to be used as a source of barbiturates enrichment in the lab experiments.
Cores were collected at a depth where the first 40 cm of the streambed lays since that
area was assumed to have aerobic conditions (Weatherill et al., 2018), which are preferred
conditions for the laboratory set up. Cores were collected with a core extractor, which is a
core liner attached to a long core removal tool. One has to stand in the stream and insert
the core extractor into the streambed until the whole core liner is in the streambed. After­
wards, without twisting, core of a sediment is extracted from the streambed until above
the water surface is reached in a fast way so the sediment doesn’t fall out of the liner.
A cap is put on the core liner full with the sediment and core liner is detached from the
core removal tool. 9 sediment cores were collected, but only 4 of them were used in the
experiment. Sediment cores in the core liners can be seen in chapter 4 in Figure 4.2.
Groundwater material for the lab set up was collected at two different wells, B615 and
B616, in order to gain knowledge about possible degradation in the GWD 2 area, including
the surrounding area, since they were identified as wells where the highest barbiturates
concentration is measured near the stream. A long plastic tube connected to a pump with
a motor was put through the opening of the well down to the well filter, with other end of
the tube being put in the plastic bucket. Pump was tuned on and started pumping out
the water from the well. First, couple of liters of water were taken out to purge the well.
Afterwards, when clean water started going out of the tube, 1 L glass bottles with tight
red screw caps were used to collect the groundwater from the wells. The bottles were
autoclaved for 1.5 hours at 115◦C prior to the field trip. 5 L of groundwater was collected
from the well B615 and 6 L of water was collected from the well B616, but only 2 L from the
each well were used for the experiment. The parameters such as oxygen levels, pH and
electrical conductivity were measured with a portable Multiparameter Meter 3430 using a
flowcell, to which the groundwater flow from the well was connected in the field. Pumping
groundwater out of the well into the bottles can be seen in Figure B.6.
78
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:88==
Figure B.6: A plastic tube inserted into a well B616, which is connected to a pump with
a motor. Groundwater is being pumped out of the well into the black bucket until clean.
Afterwards, it is pumped into the 1 L glass bottles. In the bottom, a flowcell connected to
the tube and attached to the portable meter is seen. Field parameters are obtained by
pumping groundwater through a flowcell, which is aligned with the portable meter.
When the plan was being made, Lab at DTU Sustain was able to provide analysis for 6
barbiturates: Barbital, Phenobarbital, Butobarbital, Pentobarbital, Secobarbital and Iso­
propylbarbiturate. Having the analysis detection limit in mind and available data provided
by Rambøll, these two wells show the greatest potential in having the groundwater which is
rich in barbiturates, but additionally has single barbiturates in concentrations high enough
that they can be detected during the lab analysis even after they have been potentially
90% degraded. This can be seen in Table table B.2.
Table B.2: Barbiturates concentrations in wells B615 and B616 (Rambøll, 2023), including
the detection limit.
Concentration, µg/L
B615 (7.5 m depth)
B616 (7.5 m depth)
Detection limit
Barbital
340
640
50
Phenobarbital
­
­
100
Butobarbital
47
23
50
Pentobarbital
12
16
50
Secobarbital
5.6
5.6
100
Isopropylbarbiturate
31
28
10
Sum of barbiturates
2767.3
2376.5
­
Additional reason for collecting groundwater from two wells (B615 and B616) is to have
a comparison of processes occurring in both wells. Both wells were not characterized
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
79
==PAGE:89==
with aerobic conditions which were preferred in the lab plan, so it has been decided to
aerate the water before setting up the experiments in order to have the desired conditions.
Additionally, filtration of the water is necessary due to iron precipitation caused by the
aeration.
80
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:90==
C
Appendix
C.1
Sediment cores
Figure C.1: Sediment core (1) used for the homogenized sediment.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
81
==PAGE:91==
Figure C.2: Sediment core (2) used for the homogenized sediment.
Figure C.3: Sediment core (3) used for the homogenized sediment.
82
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:92==
Figure C.4: Sediment core (4) used for the homogenized sediment.
C.2
Sediment analysis
The water content of the sediment samples is done by weighing the samples in an alu­
minium boat before they were put in the oven at 60◦C over night to dry. After that, the
samples were taken and weighed again. The difference in weight is converted as water
content of the sample during data treatment and analysis. Results are reported in water
mass (g) and water percentage (%) of a sample.
TOC (Total Organic Carbon) analysis of solid samples is a technique that introduces the
sample into a furnace for combustion. The resulting combustion gases are swept by a
carrier gas stream from the furnace directly into a detector for measurement of CO2 and
calculation of the carbon content (OI Analytical, 2010). It was used for dried sediment
sample analysis. This analysis was done by DTU technician. Results were reported in
TC concentrations (mg/kg).
Sieving was done through 9 sieves whose mesh sizes range from the coarsest to the
finest mesh in a following way: 2000 µm, 1000 µm, 600 µm, 355 µm, 250 µm, 180 µm,
125 µm, 90 µm and 63 µm, with the addition of a last container which holds all particles
smaller than 63 µm. Before sieving, all sieves were weighed separately. After sieves
have been put together, the dry sediment sample was weighed and added to the sieves
and put on a sieve shaker for 10 min at an oscilation amplitude of 1.60 mm. After sieving,
all sieves with distributed particle samples were weighed and these weighing results were
imported in an Excel sheet which produces a particle distribution analysis results. This
was repeated for all 5 sediment samples (4 sediment cores + homogenized sediment).
Sieving equipment can be seen in Figure C.5.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
83
==PAGE:93==
Figure C.5: All sieves put together and placed on a sieve shaker.
Laser diffraction is used to measure the size of the particles. A laser beam is shot at the
sample and the beam scatters due to the particles in the sample. The scattered light is
detected by the photodetectors. The way the light is scattered is correlated with the size
of the particle. This was used to determine particle distribution of sediment samples. The
device that was used is Mastersizer 2000 and Hydro 2000SM (Ebba Cederberg Schnell,
2023). Approximately 80 ml of the filtrate that was kept for laser diffraction was separated
and mixed with 0.005 M sodium pyrophosphate and well shaken. Software was started.
Firstly, stirrer that is attached to the laser device was washed 3 times by rinsing with
water and turning up stirring to 3000 rpm for 10 sec while the water is in. After it has
been washed, water had been put in and stirring was set to 1600 rpm. The program is
aligned with the machine. Following this, drops of prepared sample were added to the
stirrer until laser obscuration was around 5% (Ebba Cederberg Schnell, 2023). After that,
the program identified the particle distribution from the device measurements. The results
were obtained in the form of particle distribution curves in PDF and Excel. Data is treated
and analyzed. Laser diffraction equipment is seen in Figure C.6.
84
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:94==
Figure C.6: Stirrer in front of the laser diffraction machine, including the plastic bottle with
a wet sediment sample.
C.3
Sampling during groundwater preparation
Samples of groundwater (replicates of 1 ml) were taken from bottles which contained
groundwater from the field (Grindsted site), but also from those same bottles after the
groundwater has been aerated. Additionally, samples (replicates of 1 ml) were taken
after the water has been filtered and before it has been dispensed into microcosm bottles
in order to test whether some quantity of barbiturates can adsorb to the filter.
C.4
Microcosms set up
Each of the 8 microcosms used for degradation test consists of 100 g of homogenized
sediment and 300 ml of aerated and filtered groundwater. The procedure of setting up
each microcosm is the following:
1. Empty 0.5 L glass bottle is weighed
2. 100 g of prepared homogenized sediment is added to the bottle
3. Bottle filled with sediment is weighed
4. 300 ml of prepared groundwater is added to the bottle with the sediment
5. Bottle filled with sediment and groundwater is weighed
6. Bottle is tightly closed with a rubber stopper and a metal cap
7. Bottle filled with sediment and groundwater and closed with rubber stopper and a
metal cap is weighed
8. A name is given and written with a marker on a bottle
Figure C.7 shows a laboratory situation in the middle of the experimental set up.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
85
==PAGE:95==
Figure C.7: Setting up the microcosms in the bottles according to the abovementioned
procedure for both degradation and desorption (see subsection 4.4.2) tests. 6 of the
microcosms are set up, while 4 of the bottles are in the process of the set up being filled
with just the sediment. Homogenized sediment is seen in the deep tray. This picture is
taken in between the weighing of the bottles.
The procedure of setting up microcosms for desorption test was the same as seen for
degradation test in subsection C.4, except for few changes. As mentioned, demineralized
water was used instead of groundwater to have a starting concentration of contaminants
set as 0 µg/L to be able to quantify the barbiturates concentration desorbed from the
sediment. Additionally, bottles were only closed with a metal cap.
86
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:96==
C.5
Microcosm sampling schedule
Sampling schedule is seen in Table C.1.
Table C.1: Schedule for the groundwater sampling for barbiturates and redox parameters,
including the oxygen and pH measurements.
Experiment
day
Microcosms
Samples / measurements
0
Bottles with groundwater
from the field
(2 L from well B615 +
2 L from well B616)
Barbiturates and
redox parameters sampling +
pH and oxygen measurementsa
2
10 microcosms
(degradation + desorption tests)
Barbiturates and
redox parameters sampling +
pH and oxygen measurements
4
8 microcosms (degradation test) +
1 microcosm (desorption test)
Barbiturates sampling +
oxygen measurement
6
8 microcosms
(degradation test)
Barbiturates sampling +
pH and oxygen measurements
8
8 microcosms
(degradation test)
Barbiturates sampling +
oxygen measurement
10
Same as day 6
Same as day 6
12
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
14
Same as day 6
Same as day 6
17
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
20
Same as day 6
Same as day 6
23
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
26
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
28
Same as day 6
Same as day 6
32
8 microcosms
(degradation test)
Barbiturates and
redox parameters sampling +
pH and oxygen measurements
35
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
40
Same as day 6
Same as day 6
44
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
48
Same as day 6
Same as day 6
50
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
53
Same as day 6
Same as day 6
55
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
57
Same as day 8
Same as day 8
60
Same as day 2
Same as day 2
a pH and oxygen measurement were taken with portable Multiparameter Meter 3430 in the water phase in
the bottles with the groundwater from the field, whereas all other pH and oxygen measurements were taken
from the microcosms as described in the sampling plan. pH was taken from a water sample, while oxygen
measurements were taken in the headspace of the microcosms.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
87
==PAGE:97==
C.6
Barbiturates analysis
Barbiturates are stored in a container in a freezer before the analysis (Figure C.8). The
analysis of barbiturates was done on LCMSMS which is a HPLC (High Performance Liquid
Chromatography) with two mass spectrometry detectors. The liquid chromatography part
of LCMSMS separates compounds within a sample and the mass spectrometers provide
particular mass to charge ratio with further ion fragmentation which is detected and can
provide structural identity of the compound (Pacific BioLabs, 2023). The lab results were
reported in a form of 6 barbiturates concentrations (µg/L) present in all of the samples.
Figure C.8: Barbiturates samples stored in a sample container which is put in the freezer
until the analysis.
C.7
pH measurements
Measurements of the pH were done occasionally, approximately during an every second
sampling event. Whatman indicator paper pH 4.5­10 was used for measuring pH. The
indicator paper consists of 3 differently coloured parts. By putting water drops on those
3 differently coloured parts of the paper, the colors change correspondingly to the pH of
the water sample. Every pH unit has a unique set of 3 different colors which identify a
sample with a specific pH unit. 3­5 drops of a sample taken from the microcosm and
filtered through a 0.2 µm filter, were put on one of the indicator papers. The colors on
the paper change automatically and pH was measured accordingly to the set of 3 colors
found on the paper. The result was identified in pH units in the range of 4.5­10.
C.8
Oxygen measurements
Oxygen measurements were done using a Profiling Oxygen Microsensor PM­PSt 7 con­
nected to a PreSens Microx 4 portable fiber oxygen meter. It is essentially a sensor con­
structed as a firm fiber thread which is inside of a pen­looking protective case which has a
needle top, where the sensor can come out. The needle part was inserted through a rub­
ber stopper of the microcosm and the pen­looking case was twisted so the sensor could
88
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:98==
come out. The oxygen measurements took place in the headspace of the microcosm
systems. The response time of the device is couple of seconds. Oxygen concentration
(mg/L) was measured, including the temperature. Oxygen measurement can be seen in
Figure C.9.
Figure C.9: Oxygen sensor attached to a oxygen meter, inserted in a bottle. Measure­
ments take place in the headspace.
C.9
Redox sensitive species analysis
Redox sensitive species were analyzed from water samples taken out of the microcosms.
They determine the redox parameters of the system. Redox sensitive species that are
observed in the form of dissolved ions in the groundwater are: iron, manganese, chloride,
bromide, sulfate, phosphate, ammonia, nitrate and nitrite. Sampling for redox species was
done by taking a groundwater sample from the microcosm with a needle and a syringe
and filtering it through a 0.2 µm filter into a Falcon tube and a small plastic vial. 10 ml
of groundwater was taken every time samples were being collected for redox parameters
analysis. They were refrigerated until analyzed. 10 ml was shared among 3 different type
of redox species analysis, which are: SKALAR, IC­MS and IC. The critical parameter is
nitrate/nitrite which has to be analyzed within 24 hours of taking the samples. Redox
sampling equipment is seen in Figures C.10 and C.11.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
89
==PAGE:99==
Figure C.10: All of the vials and tubes used for sampling events when sampling for redox
parameters is occurring. On the left, dark glass vials for barbiturates samples and trans­
parent plastic vials for redox parameter testing in a vial holder are seen. Above them,
Falcon tubes with red caps are seen. On the right, 0.2 µm filters are seen. 1 ml of water
is collected in each of the small vials, whereas a 9­10 ml of water is collected in a Falcon
tube.
Figure C.11: Two of the vial types and a Falcon tube mentioned and described in Figure
C.10.
SKALAR instrument is a Segmented Flow Analysis (SFA). It is an automated spectropho­
tometric analysis that measures how much a chemical substance absorbs light (Skalar,
2023). It was used for phosphate, ammonia, nitrite and NOx analysis. ICP­MS (induc­
tively coupled plasma­mass­spectrometry) is a technique to determine low­concentrations
(µg/L) and ultra­low­concentrations (ng/L) of elements. Atomic elements are lead through
90
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:100==
a plasma source where they become ionized and sorted on account of their mass (Rad­
boud University, 2023).
It was used for iron and manganese analysis.
The IC (Ion
Chromatography) is performing separation and quantification of anions and cations us­
ing HPLC and a conductivity detector (Innovatech Labs, 2023). It was used for fluoride,
chloride, bromide, sulfate, phosphate and nitrate analysis. Analyses were performed by
DTU lab chemists and technicians. The results were reported as concentrations (mg/L or
µg/L) of all of the redox sensitive species.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
91
==PAGE:101==
D
Appendix
D.1
Raw experimental data plots
Figure D.1: Seven barbiturates normalized concentration from raw experimental data plot­
ted in time.
92
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:102==
Figure D.2: Seven barbiturates normalized concentration from raw experimental data plot­
ted in time.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
93
==PAGE:103==
Figure D.3: Seven barbiturates normalized concentration from raw experimental data plot­
ted in time.
94
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:104==
Figure D.4: Seven barbiturates normalized concentration from raw experimental data plot­
ted in time.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
95
==PAGE:105==
D.2
Comparison of concentration curves for test and control
microcosms
Figure D.5: A comparison of concentration curves and control curves for both B615 and
B616 systems for barbital.
Figure D.6: A comparison of concentration curves and control curves for both B615 and
B616 systems for butobarbital.
96
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:106==
Figure D.7: A comparison of concentration curves and control curves for both B615 and
B616 systems for sum of pentobarbital and amobarbital.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
97
==PAGE:107==
E
Appendix
E.1
Particle size distribution
Figure E.1: Particle size distribution of homogenized sediment. The curve is achieved by
combining sieving and laser diffraction results.
Figure E.2: Particle size distribution of first sediment core used for the homogenized
sediment. The curve is achieved by combining sieving and laser diffraction results.
98
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:108==
Figure E.3: Particle size distribution of second sediment core used for the homogenized
sediment. The curve is achieved by combining sieving and laser diffraction results.
Figure E.4: Particle size distribution of third sediment core used for the homogenized
sediment. The curve is achieved by combining sieving and laser diffraction results.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
99
==PAGE:109==
Figure E.5: Particle size distribution of fourth sediment core used for the homogenized
sediment. The curve is achieved by combining sieving and laser diffraction results.
100
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:110==
F
Appendix
F.1
Redox sensitive species plots ­ Controls
Figure F.1: Redox sensitive species plots of B615 system controls.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
101
==PAGE:111==
Figure F.2: Redox sensitive species plots of B616 system controls.
102
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:112==
Table F.1: Non­volatile organic carbon (NVOC) for 8 microcosms from degradation test.
Microcosm
NVOC, mg/L
B615 1
8.00
B615 2
7.52
B615 1 CONTROL
36.21
B615 2 CONTROL
36.71
B616 1
6.03
B616 2
5.92
B616 1 CONTROL
35.44
B616 2 CONTROL
34.17
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
103
==PAGE:113==
F.2
Chloride and bromide plots
Figure F.3: Chloride and bromide concentration plotted in time. Note the two y­axes are
different.
104
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:114==
Figure F.4: Chloride and bromide concentration plotted in time. Note the two y­axes are
different.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
105
==PAGE:115==
Figure F.5: Chloride and bromide concentration plotted in time. Note the two y­axes are
different.
106
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:116==
Figure F.6: Chloride and bromide concentration plotted in time. Note the two y­axes are
different.
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
107
==PAGE:117==
G
Appendix
G.1
Distribution of barbiturates at 3 provided transects at the
Grindsted site
Table G.1: Distribution of main 4 barbiturates found at 5 depths of wells B601 and B603
at the central transect (Rambøll, 2023).
Well
Depth,
m bgl.
Allobarbital
Barbital
Isobutylbarbituric
acid
5­Butylbarbiturate
B601
18
39%
9%
19%
14%
29
49%
9%
19%
14%
36
26%
1%
27%
42%
43
71%
6%
10%
7%
54.5
36%
21%
21%
17%
B603
17.5
91%
6%
31
100%
38
100%
45
100%
52.3
100%
bgl. = below ground level
Table G.2: Distribution of most relevant barbiturates found at all depths of wells B620,
B619, B618, B616 and B615 (Rambøll, 2023). The wells represent a transect along the
stream.
Well
Depth,
m bgl.
Allobarbital
Barbital
Pentobarbital
Amobarbital
B620
3.5
46%
16%
10%
7%
8.5
89%
6%
17.5
62%
12%
5%
4%
B619
3.5
50%
5%
13%
9%
6.5
81%
9%
1%
1%
16.5
75%
13%
2%
2%
B618
3.5
69%
5%
7%
6%
9.5
88%
10%
18.5
80%
11%
1%
1%
B616
7.5
67%
27%
12.5
91%
5%
18.5
95%
2%
B615
3.5
7.5
79%
12%
bgl.=below ground level
108
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:118==
Table G.3: Distribution of most relevant barbiturates found at all depths of drive points
DP3TF, DP05, DP04, DP03, DP02 and DP01 (Rambøll, 2023). The drive points are
assessed to have a clear understanding of the transect along the stream.
Drive
point
Depth,
m bgl.
Allobarbital
Barbital
Isobutylbarbituric
acid
5­Butylbarbiturate
DP3TF
1.7
35%
5%
12%
3.5
35%
14%
2%
11%
5
7%
31%
20%
33%
6.1
15%
29%
41%
8.8
93%
1%
1%
16.5
30%
3%
30%
16%
DP05
5.1
19%
3%
30%
29%
DP04
6.7
75%
6%
4%
6%
DP03
6.6
58%
7%
11%
13%
DP02
7
56%
5%
11%
13%
DP01
5.5
63%
6%
10%
10%
bgl. = below ground level
G.1.1
Transect along the stream
Figure G.1: Transect located along the stream on the eastern side of contaminated area.
Five wells (B620, B619, B618, B616 and B615) and six drive points (DP3TF, DP05, DP04,
DP03, DP02 and DP01), observed from the west to the east, where the highest concen­
trations of barbiturates are identified (Rambøll, 2023).
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
109
==PAGE:119==
H
Appendix
H.1
Degradation pathways
Figure H.1: Two degradation pathways for phenobarbital degradation: (1) degradation of
the nonionic form and (2) degradation in ionic form as presented in Tishler et al. (1962).
Degradation by ureide path from the ionic form is assumed (Tishler et al., 1962).
110
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
==PAGE:120==
I
Appendix
I.1
Electronic attachments
1. Results
2. Calculations in degradation experiment
3. Concentration curves
4. Redox plots
5. Transects
Degradation experiments to assess the fate of barbiturates discharging to a stream
111
==PAGE:121==
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
