==PAGE:1==
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy
map flow estimation
—
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electric Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
—
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Xavier Burrull Allan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis covers the development of a occupancy map based collision avoidance system
developed for an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) equipped with a depth camera.
The camera has an additional RGB feed and IMU which are used for Visual Inertial Odom­
etry (VIO) using publicly available ROS packages running onboard. An occupancy map
is generated from a point cloud generated from the camera’s depth feed, and it’s cells are
extended with the additional data of an offset of the contained points, and displacement
relative to the previous occupancy state. This data is then used for collision avoidance
through repulsion forces which account for the relative speed of cells on the occupancy
grid.
The implementation is tested both in simulation and on physical hardware in a controlled
environment (ASTA, the Autonomous Systems Test Arena). All these systems are run on
board, with only the visualization running off board.
ii
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis documents the results of the project Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy
map flow estimation by Xavier Burrull Allan. The project was carried out at DTU Electrical
Engineering, during the period from January to August 2023 and represents a workload
of 32.5 ECTS.
I would like to thank my supervisors Manuel Jesus Fernandez Gonzalez and Matteo Fu­
magalli for their help and guidance throughout the project. I would also like to thank the
fellow students in building 326, for their support and help. Finally a big thank you goes to
family and friends for their moral support during the process.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Abreviations
• UAV : Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
• IMU : Inertial Measurement Unit
• ROS : Robotics Operating System
• VO : Visual Odometry
• VIO : Visual Inertial Odometry
iv
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
UAV dynamic collision avoidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Occupancy map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
System setup
5
3.1
Initial testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Flow estimation
11
4.1
Algorithm overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Technical breakdown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4
Resulting data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Collision avoidance
20
5.1
Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2
Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Results
22
6.1
Testflights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7
Conclusions
26
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Bibliography
29
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
3.1
Stereo cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Latte Panda Delta V3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
UAV used in testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.1
Flow estimation diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Kernel distribution compensation diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Cell edge noise diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4
Grid edge noise screenshot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.5
Large object velocity estimates diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.6
Example flow estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.1
Collision avoidance graph, abrupt approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Collision avoidance only with proximity graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
Collision avoidance with velocity estimate graph
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
vi
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Collision avoidance encompasses a series of systems that enable a vehicle donned with
some degree of autonomy to avoid colliding with obstacles. These systems require in­
formation from the environment, such to ascertain the location of the vehicle relative to
potential obstacles.
For UAVs in particular, this can range from simpler proximity sensors, to complex mapping
setups. In addition, the mobility in 3D space allows for more complex evasive maneuvers,
which also require further consideration of the environment.
1.1
Motivation
Additional complexity arises when obstacles are dynamic, both making them an unreliable
reference, and adding further dimensionality with the obstacles velocity.
The two main approaches used with UAVs are to identify dynamic obstacles and their
velocity, or to ignore velocity and avoid obstacles in a safety volume, regardless of their
dynamic nature.
Both are viable, but an intermediate possibility that is less explored is forgoing dynamic
obstacle segmentation, and instead using the flow of the occupancy map for a more con­
tinuous and obstacle agnostic approach. Not having to identify dynamic obstacles, and
roughly estimating flow would be a possible way of gaining the benefits of having a sense
of obstacles’ velocity, without having to accurately identify and model these obstacles.
1.2
Problem statement
In this thesis, I propose a middle ground of the aforementioned strategies: avoiding ob­
stacles without identifying them, while accounting for their velocity when avoiding them,
estimating velocities from an occupancy map’s flow.
This, alongside VIO and a higher­level collision avoidance strategy all running onboard
the UAV, so that in autonomous or pre­programmed missions where external localisation
is unreliable, the UAV can avoid dynamic obstacles by leveraging occupancy mapping,
lowering overhead in a scenario where mapping was already being carried out.
1.3
Objectives
The key objectives will be as follows:
1. Obtain a local occupancy map with relatively low latency utilising a depth camera.
The low latency is essential for obstacle avoidance, as any latency reduces the time
left for the UAV’s to maneuver in time.
2. Estimate sub­voxel flow for smoother estimations of slower velocities. In all cases
except speeds that are multiples of the grid resolution, movement will be sub­voxel.
It is of interest to get detailed estimates of obstacle velocity so that evasive maneu­
vers are contextually appropriate.
3. Test the viability of predicting future occupancy, as this could greatly improve con­
sistency by planning trajectories across time.
4. Use the results to plan or adjust trajectories, successfully avoiding collisions. Ideally
carry out test on real hardware, and not just in simulation.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
2.1
UAV dynamic collision avoidance
For UAVs, most collision avoidance of dynamic obstacles consist of:
• Being given the obstacle’s position and velocity from an external source, and op­
timizing the avoidance trajectory, with the primary use case being avoiding other
UAVs in a swarm[1].
• Avoiding or targeting one very particular obstacle, through neural image recogni­
tion[2].
• Through the use of event cameras, detect and avoid high speed obstacles[3], by
compensating for motion by using the IMU, projecting an interval of events into an
image, and then estimating flow on it with a kernel.
These each have their issues, with the general trend being context dependency, such as
the need for external or relative positioning as input, or neural models trained on specific
targets. In the last case, an event camera specific algorithm is used, which while obstacle
agnostic, can only be applied with event cameras. More generalised occupancy map
based UAV collision avoidance setups don’t tend to consider dynamic obstacles, focusing
instead on the mapping of the environment.
It is worth noting though, that during the last stages of writing this thesis, a very recent
article was found working with collision avoidance using occupancy maps generated from
depth cameras and detecting dynamic obstacles, though it still segmented these obstacles
for further application of kalman filtering and stochastic sampling[4].
2.2
Occupancy map
Occupancy maps have the advantage that they can be generated from a variety of sen­
sor types.
Additionally, it is not an uncommon approach to use occupancy maps to
predict motion, particularly in older articles working with autonomous cars. Here, the
common approaches use lidar or radar to populate an occupancy map, optionally seg­
ment objects[5][6][7], extensively use deep learning to predict motion[6][8] or particle fil­
ters[5][7][9], and generate a Bayesian distribution of future occupation[7][9].
These methods can be grouped into 3 main approaches:
• Object driven, where objects are segmented and further represented with a proba­
bilistic distribution of their occupancy and velocity estimate.
• Particle based predictions, where individual cells contain distribution information,
and prediction consists on spawning particles based on the position and velocity
distributions, moved a time­step, and then updating the cells they land on.
• Neural based approaches, where a neural model predicts the flow and/or the future
state. This leads to typical issues of neural models: Heavy on computation, and
biased towards training sets.
The key issues that arise are computation cost ( multiple particle filters, deep learning),
and predictions heavily influenced by the type of obstacle (object segmentation, machine
learning biases). While this is applicable in a the specific context of driving with known
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
3
==PAGE:12==
obstacles (other cars, pedestrians) and weight for additional computation power is a rel­
atively small issue, these cannot be easily generalized nor viable for UAVs.
The gap between heavy­compute combined with mapping of autonomous driving and the
highly particular UAV approaches leaves room for a simplified motion predictor based on
occupancy grids, regardless of sensor or scenario. Particularly for UAVs, a solution based
on light­weight and common sensors, with lower computation cost, and generalized to the
wide variety of possible obstacles is of interest.
This leads to the proposed depth/stereo camera for localization and point cloud generation
in one sensor, leveraging existing libraries that are already mapping, reducing calculation
to a local map with simple kernels, and an object agnostic occupancy flow approach.
4
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:13==
3
System setup
The setup varied throughout development, but the primary distinct setups were the devel­
opment setup, for rapid iteration and debugging, and the test setup for evaluating perfor­
mance on real hardware.
3.1
Initial testing
3.1.1
Software
Initially both ROS, ROS2, and a custom implementation where considered. Due to the
complexity of a custom implementation and higher familiarity with ROS as opposed to
ROS2, the first implementation to be tested was ROS.
In particular, the package ”octomap_mapping” was used in order to evaluate performance
and gauge the need to use a custom implementation or a different package under ROS2.
It was verified that ”octomap_mapping” not only updated the map at a high frequency,
but it also facilitated implementation with utility functions from the octomap library it used,
such as ray casting through cells.
Because of this, the option of developing a custom implementation was discarded, and
initial development of the flow estimator was started on ROS Noetic running on Ubuntu
20.04, which allowed access to the wide range of ROS packages.
While performance was a key point of improvement throughout development, it never
warranted looking into upgrading to ROS2.
3.1.2
Cameras
Initial testing revealed that the ZED mini stereo camera (figure 3.1) heavily depends on
CUDA compute, using a neural model for depth estimation running off the camera, with a
noisy output when registering the resulting point cloud, which would lead to higher latency
for changes to register when filtering noise. Aside from this, localization was more than
satisfactory when tested indoors, with the initial upwards direction being corrected on
startup using the onboard IMU.
Testing the Intel realsense D455 (figure 3.1) revealed a lack of built in localization from
the SDK for the given model of camera, with only the re­projected camera feed on to the
depth feed, and no point cloud. Aside from this, the depth input was noticeably less noisy,
and with lower latency as there was no need for a neural model, but the lack of out­of­the­
box functionality of the SDK meant it was not optimal for rapid testing required in initial
development.
3.2
Development
Development was primarily carried out on an MSI laptop with a 12th generation Intel
12700H and an RTX 3070 Laptop GPU. This more than sufficed for simulation and devel­
opment, with the benefit of the GPU’s tensor cores aiding in running the ZED mini stereo
camera’s SDK.
3.2.1
Stereo camera
Due to the ease of getting point­clouds, VIO, and vertically corrected initial position, the
ZED mini stereo camera (pictured in figure 3.1) was used during initial development as it
allowed to more quickly begin iterating on the flow estimation.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
5
==PAGE:14==
The ZED mini stereo camera is intended as an easy to use multipurpose stereo camera.
It’s SDK provides ample utility, and optional modules for computer vision, plane recogni­
tion, and photo scanning. Though only a small portion of these feature would be used,
the fact that it was as user friendly as it was made it a strong contender to use in the final
setup, if not for the fact that most functionality comes from the SDK running some deep
learning models on compatible CUDA devices outside the camera.
While StereoLabs offers the ZED box for this purpose, a small computer with built in
NVIDIA Jetson or NVIDIA Xavier, this went against the intent of making a general purpose,
non­neural compute algorithm.
Figure 3.1: (left) ZED mini stereo camera, used during development phase. (right) Intel
RealSense D455, used during testing phase.
3.2.2
Simulation
For the testing phase, a simulation running on Gazebo­classic simulating an Iris quad­
copter with a depth camera and PX4 autopilot controlled via mavros. This only required
slight modifications (loading the Iris model with a depth camera instead of the default Iris
model), but allowed to quickly troubleshoot issues with auto pilot communication through
mavros, along with simulating remote controlled flight.
While a more elaborate simulation for collision avoidance would be ideal, the fact that the
simulator added significant latency, and the low familiarity with gazebo outside of loading
in pre­made models, meant that it’s use was limited to rough testing on a very minimalist
setup:
• The default iris drone was switched out for the model variation including a depth
camera, which was one of the provided models, though loading it in particular re­
quired some hard­coding, as the model name was also used to load a PX4 config­
uration file.
• A transform publisher taking the drone inertial odometry as input was created, using
the ROS package odom2tf and extending it to also publish a fixed frame from the
camera to the drone, due to the gazebo joint state publishing causing issues, and
the camera frame being rotated relative to the drone’s frame.
6
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:15==
• As opposed to moving obstacles, objects were spawned in front of the drone, to
gauge reaction. Moving obstacles would be implied to work from here, as they are
functionally treated as prioritized obstacles.
These limitations led to some mixed results. On one hand, the drone was correctly up­
dating it’s target position. On the other hand, the rushed reference frame setup and slow
update time lead to the drone drifting between positions, appearing to stagger as way
points were updated.
This would lead to relying on testing by holding the camera connected to the actual hard­
ware for performance tests ahead of controlling an actual drone, and relegating simulation
for more qualitative experiments, such as tunning collision avoidance and user input fu­
sion.
3.2.3
Mapping
For the occupancy mapping, the octomap_mapping ROS extension was used. This ex­
tension uses the octomap library to generate and optimize a 3D occupancy grid stored on
an oct­tree by ray casting a given point cloud from a sensor origin, and marking cells as
occupied or free accordingly, grouping or splitting nodes as necessary.
This extension was forked, modifying it between the ray cast results and the map update,
adding an additional local grid. This local grid would be used for flow estimation. By
using the available data from the already calculated ray­casts, the compute overhead
was reduced.
3.3
Testing
Testing was carried out on a latte panda delta V3 (see figure 3.3), running Ubuntu 20.04
server with ROS Noetic, connected to a hotspot hosted on the laptop used for develop­
ment. This allowed to quickly access the onboard computer through ssh, and to connect
both ROS instances to allow remote visualization on rviz.
No additional processing was done on the laptop, as the solution was intended to be run
completely onboard. Additionally, using a server version of the operating system led to
some driver issues (no wifi drivers), but switching to a different kernel version (5.5 to 5.15)
partially fixed this issue. A final issue was that powering off the late panda from it’s power
switch would at times lead to issues such as failing to mount the NVME drive.
3.3.1
Depth camera
Once the flow estimation algorithm was developed, performance was the main priority as
opposed to accessibility. Because of this, the Intel RealSense D455 camera was revisited.
After digging through online forums, it was discovered that the SDK included a launch
file for an ”open source localisation” SLAM stack, which was not explicitly mentioned on
the SDK’s page. This launch file started a stack, that while not exactly optimal, was
significantly faster (20fps on average, as opposed to the ZED mini 10fps when running
on the development hardware), but not as of yet viable, as on the real hardware it ran
at 2fps at best when not using any visualization, halving when visualizing the resulting
occupancy map data.
Taking a more nuanced look at the launch file, it appeared that it used the ROS package
rtabmap, and would call a mapping and localisation stack with deprecated configuration.
So in addition to the flow estimation using octomap_mapping, the VIO stack was carrying
out it’s own mapping and outputing a heavily filtered point cloud.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.2: Latte Panda Delta V3, used during testing phase. The light weight and high
computational power given the power consumption made it optimal for UAVs.
On top of this, it would end up being significantly unreliable, with initial orientation ignoring
the IMU for a correct vertical orientation, and visual odometry failing frequently.
This would later be remedied by installing necessary dependencies that weren’t explicitly
mentioned by the SDK’s manual (imu_filter_madgwick for IMU integration, and robot_localization
for odometry fusion), modifying the provided configuration (which had disabled IMU input
by default, and was using the IMU odometry as a source for position and acceleration as
opossed to only acceleration).
Given that modern rtabmap implementation leveraged the fragmentation into modules
to increase performance, the launch file was further customized, made to run the bare
necessary: VO using the RGBD rectified output of the camera, and a depth to point cloud
converter, along with better configured IMU and VO integrators. This would lead to a
marked performance gain ( 6 fps without visualization on the latte panda), as there weren’t
multiple mapping setups, with various types of filtering.
A more aggressive decimation of the input depth cloud (that was currently unfiltered and
significantly more detailed than the used occupancy grid) would further improve perfor­
mance back to initial conditions (10fps+) while maintaining consistent behaviour. No fur­
ther filtering was carried out on the point cloud.
This was a critical step in viability, as without the modular aspect of rtabmap, it would
result in significant additional work to achieve the necessary performance for obstacle
avoidance.
Despite all this, the VIO stack had a glaring issue: abrupt motion caused it to lag, or
even crash in extreme cases. This was deduced to be an issue of the depth camera, as
being intended for depth and not tracking (and the manufacturer having tracking specific
products) would lead to believe that the shutter speed of the RGB camera isn’t sufficient
to get a clear image when in motion, thus making feature tracking impossible.
3.3.2
UAV
The UAV used for testing purposes was a Holybro 500x v2 (see figure 3.3), a lightweight
quad copter of which there were several available at the DTU Elektro lab, with depth
cameras already mounted. The Frame of the UAV is made primarily of carbon fiber (twill,
8
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:17==
arms, landing gear) and fiber reinforced nylon connectors.
The autopilot control board was a Pixhawk 6X Autopilot Flight Controller, running PX4
software. The UAV had a GPS antenna, though it was disabled throughout testing, as
the UAV used would typically be used with a motion capture setup, with infrared markers
placed on the UAV for this purpose.
Figure 3.3: Holybro 500x v2 with Latte Panda Delta V3 mounted along with Intel Re­
alSense D455. Some IR markers remain from other projects, and the propellers are re­
moved outside of test flights.
For testing, this external tracking was not used, relying entirely on the VIO stack.
For telemetry purposes, the app QGround control was used, which allowed for configu­
ration and setup of the controller and how it interpreted RC input. The app offers exten­
sive features, of which a limited selection was used, such as simulating an RC controller
through a gamepad within a simulated environment.
3.3.3
LattePanda
The onboard computer being used was a LattePanda Delta V3. While this is a very capa­
ble miniature computer, it presented some glaring flaws when it came to driver compati­
bility, making it problematic to work with:
• The power button would power off the board without letting the operating system
shutdown properly. While hardware­wise this wasn’t an issue, this would at times
cause issues with the drive not being correctly unmounted, and failing to boot, or
the BIOS detecting multiple unsafe power­offs and attempting to recover windows,
which was no longer installed.
While shutting down from a terminal was possible, similar issues occurred regard­
less, though at a much more limited frequency.
• The wifi chip on the board had multiple driver and firmware issues. While this may
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
9
==PAGE:18==
partly be attributed to the older version of Ubuntu being used, the fact that only some
kernel versions worked (and not always the latest), inconsistently, and with varying
resulting configurations led to an excess of hours lost trying to get the wifi chip to be
recognised and usable in a consistent manner.
• The onboard voltage/power regulator has a maximum voltage, which is not men­
tioned in the manual or website of the product, and does not appear on surface level
web searches, to the point that it was found via practical means to be somewhere
above 13.5V.
The response of the board when presented with higher voltages is to switch to the
higher voltage source regardless, and then shut down. This lead to having to power
off the board, carry out flights to discharge UAV batteries before being able to re­
connect the controller, then booting it and repeating setup, as opposed to setting it
up ahead of time, connecting the battery to the UAV and board, disconnecting the
external power, then flying.
While an external voltage regulator/DC­DC converter could be used, some indica­
tion of this upper limit would’ve been appreciated ahead of time to better prepare for
the testing phase.
10
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:19==
4
Flow estimation
4.1
Algorithm overview
The ideated algorithm takes a series of assumptions on which to build off of:
• When a point cloud is traced onto cells, the final cell containing the point is generally
marked as occupied (figure 4.1 top left), discarding the information of the point’s
position.
Assuming the average of all the points within a cell (figure 4.1 top center) corre­
sponds to the cells sub­position allows to preserve some of this information, which
can be used for smoother flow estimation.
While these points would also imply additional distribution information, this is dis­
carded, as it would lead to much higher data density per cell.
• This sub­cell position can be read before rewriting it in the next update (figure 4.1
top right), providing some temporal information.
Assuming the change in sub­position corresponds to the contained obstacle mov­
ing, we can estimate speed without large changes to the occupancy grid, where
traditional occupancy grids wouldn’t register this change.
• When a cell is newly marked as occupied, we don’t have a previous sub­position
(figure 4.1 bottom left).
Assuming that the obstacle in the cell moved from a neighbouring location, a vicinity
kernel can be used to sample the surroundings (figure 4.1 bottom right), estimating
a previous position and velocity from the vicinity kernel.
If no close previously occupied cells are found, then a zero speed can be used as
a default.
Based of these assumptions, and occupancy grid containing every cells state, sub posi­
tion, and velocity would be used. This would be more data intensive than typical occu­
pancy mapping:
1 ∗4 bytes(int) + 6 ∗4 bytes(float) = 28 bytes per cell
A map wide model would be inadvisable. Thus, a localized grid, centered around the UAV
but aligned with the map reference frame was chosen.
Keeping the grid aligned with the map grid allows to load in map data during movement,
enabling the usage of the local grid beyond what is currently visible.
This grids efficiency could’ve been further refined by centering it in the direction of the
depth camera, as that’s where the input point cloud would be located, and flow detection
could take place.
This optimization wasn’t warranted at the time, and would lead to issues when it came to
accounting for previously seen obstacles behind the UAV combined with the cubic shape
of the grid accentuating these issues due to the lack of radial symmetry of the volume
being considered.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: Left to right, top to bottom: Cells are marked as occupied or unoccupied giving
higher priority to occupied. A cell’s points are averaged to get the average cell position
(light green). Taking the previous average position (light blue), a velocity can be calculated
(red). When no previous average is available due to recent state change, velocity can’t
be directly calculated. A kernel can be used to sample neighbouring previous averages
to imply a local previous average position (cyan).
This type of grid led to the following requirements:
• When the UAV moves over a cell’s threshold into the next cell, the grid would jump
one unit in that direction. This would require scrolling the grid, so it’s content is still
valid.
• Scrolling a 3D grid optimally with only one instance is complex, having to account
for the direction it’s traversed when choosing how the algorithm iterates over the
grid. Thus, two instances of the grid would be used, switching their references each
iteration.
This also has the benefit of facilitating the implementation of the vicinity kernel, as
the previous state was distinct from the current state, and thus the current state
could be updated without considering the order in which it was updated.
12
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:21==
• As the grid scrolls, new cells scroll in. These can be used by the vicinity kernel, so
reading from the octomap to populate these cells after scrolling with the right occu­
pancy state, and empty sub­positions and velocities can improve kernel sampling
(also visualization).
Once current occupancy, offsets, and speeds are known for the local grid, a repulsion
force based collision avoidance system can be used, with a higher weight for approaching
obstacles.
4.2
Technical breakdown
4.2.1
Raycast
Octomap mapping has a node called ”octomapServer”, which handles the oct­tree. Specif­
ically, the function of interest for modification is:
insertScan(const tf::Point& sensorOrigin, const PCLPointCloud& ground,
const PCLPointCloud& nonground);
This function works with three unordered sets of node keys, one for empty cells, one for
occupied cells (with the occupied cells having precedence over the empty ones), and a
final set of node keys for ray cast output.
These are populated by going over the point cloud, and ray tracing from the sensor origin
to each point, obtaining the traversed cell’s keys, and taking the endpoint and converting
it into a cell key to obtain the occupied cell’s key:
#pseudo code
for(point in pointCloud){
if(minMaxRangeCheckFails()){
continue;
}
raycast(origin, point, rayTracedKeys);
freeCells.insert(rayTracedKeys);
occupiedCells.insert(pointToKey(point));
}
This practically remains unchanged, except the occupied cells unordered set is replaced
with an unordered map, where node keys are the index, and the content is a custom
struct:
struct PointWeight{
float x;
float y;
float z;
int count;
};
This struct contains the count of points and the sum of their coordinates, which are later
divided by the number of points, and then have the cell’s position subtracted to get the
sub­cell position observed from the point cloud.
This unordered map can similarly be iterated over like the unordered set when it comes
to updating the oct­tree, maintaining it’s functionality, but now having the average offset
of the points within the cell.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
13
==PAGE:22==
4.2.2
Scrolling
As previously mentioned, scrolling the local grid is a requirement, and to reduce code
complexity at the cost of memory, two local grids are used as buffers. These were easily
switched around by interchanging their pointers before scrolling. Additionally, the two
grids are used when comparing scrolled previous occupancy and current occupancy.
The first part for scrolling is finding where the new grid’s origin will be, which is done by
offsetting the sensor origin (close enough to the UAV center) by half the length of the side
of a grid cell, as an even length edge is used.
Having the previous grid position, an offset is calculated, and proper scrolling can begin:
#pseudo code
for(x){
if(x<offsetX || x >= gridSizeX + offsetX){//not in previous grid
for(y,z){
octomap.isNodeOccupied(x,y,z);
}
}else{
for(y){
if(y<offsetY || y >= gridSizeY + offsetY){
for(z){
octomap.isNodeOccupied(x,y,z);
}
}else{
for(z){
if(z<offsetZ || z >= gridSizeZ + offsetZ){
octomap.isNodeOccupied(x,y,z);
}else{
newgrid[x,y,z] = oldgrid[(x,y,z)-offset]
}
}
}
}
}
}
This code is far from optimal, but it is trying to limit repeating condition evaluation as op­
posed to testing all cells’ coordinates, though this leads to nested branching, with the most
common case (previous grid still contains the cell) is the case that is the most branches
deep.
A more sophisticated pre­calculation of bounds could be faster, but more complex to im­
plement and less legible. As there were better places to optimise performance, this area
of improvement was neglected.
4.2.3
Local grid update
Once the grid has been shifted, and an unordered map of node keys to their sub­positions
has been populated from the ray cast function, the local grid can be updated.
The local grid is stored in a one dimensional array, which means indexes need to be
calculated, but fetching cells from it should have better performance than nested pointer­
s/multidimensional arrays.
14
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:23==
Cells viewed as occupied will have their positions updated and speed recalculated if they
were already occupied, otherwise a kernel will sample the vicinity, taking the average
position of neighbouring cells, and calculating speed from this average:
#pseudo code
for(gridCell){
if(gridCell in occupiedCells){
previousCell = previousGrid[gridCell];
if(previousCell was occupied){
gridCell.correctPostion(occupiedCells);
}else{//sample kernel
kernel.clear();
for(cellNeighbour){
kernel.add(cellNeighbour);
}
if(kernel is empty){
kernel = 0;
}else{
kernel.avergae();
}
gridCell.correctPosition(kernel);
}
}else{//not seen occupied
gridCell.decaySpeed();
}
}
Free cells are simply cleared by iterating over the set of free keys and checking if their
keys are present in the occupied cell set, thus not clearing the recently populated cells.
4.2.4
General issues
The initial implementation had several issues leading to a noisy result. With testing, these
where narrowed down:
• The average of the points within a cell looses distribution information, with an av­
erage centered on the cell resulting both from a single point in the center and from
multiple points at the edges.
This led to cross­cell transitions to estimate speed from a kernel that sampled the
center of the neighbouring cell, leading to an average minimum of 0.5 cells of dis­
tance.
This was reduced by taking a conservative approach, and projecting the sub­positions
of cells sampled by the vicinity kernel to the edge closest to the sampling cell. See
figure 4.2:
• The average of the points is also quite grainy due to the discreet selection of points
within the cell and the inherent noise of those point (see figure 4.3).
Thus, a stationary object would have elevated and noisy velocity that averaged to
0, and moving objects would have spikes in velocity.
Because of this, the previous velocity and new estimate where averaged with re­
spective weights, reducing noise at the cost of response time.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.2: Left: sampling from the average of previous points when a single point went
over a cell edge leads to excessive computed displacement with a kernel applied to the
average. Right: projecting the average to the cell’s closest edge to the sampling cell takes
a conservative estimate, with the order of magnitude of the estimate being at least closer
in this edge case.
Figure 4.3: The content of the bottom left cell has shifted, resulting in a point landing
outside the cell. The average position jumps from 4 samples to 3, with a noticeable dis­
placement.
• This reduced response time and noise filtering where hard to balance so that sta­
tionary cells appeared as such, and moving cells responded in reasonable time, so
a variable weight was used, calculated based on the speed:
Weight of previous velocity = 0.2 + 0.6 ∗min(1, speed2 ∗K)
This allows for slow moving cells to have higher inertia, dampening noisy input, but
as consistent movement is observed, the cells become more responsive to the input,
lowering the latency to displaying accurate velocity at the cost of precision due to
reduced noise filtering.
The constant K was manually adjusted, finding that making it inversely proportional
to cell size worked best, especially for further cells which had more sparse points,
as seen in figure 4.4.
With these issues remedied, the resulting velocity estimates appeared usable, and pre­
dicting future occupancy was tested.
4.3
Prediction
Predicting future occupancy could be useful for long­term path planning, as a path cut off
in the future by a moving obstacle could be avoided if the corresponding cells are marked
as occupied on the map for planning packages such as ”moveit”.
16
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.4: Visualization of the grid with noise filtering. Despite this, further cells still have
enough noise to overwhelm the filter (these are also sparser because of this). Grey cells
are stationary, coloured cells appear to be moving, in this case due to unmitigated noise.
The red arrow indicates the target pose
Despite prediction being abandoned in place of a more ”stateless” approach, the initial
implementation was structured as such:
• Cells with velocity over a threshold would be marked for predicting, so that grainy or
not sufficiently significant movements wouldn’t clutter predictions. This was checked
with a simple dot product of the velocity with itself against a threshold.
• The cells selected for predicting would have the velocity multiplied by a set number
of time steps, and the corresponding cell would be found.
If said cell was empty or unseen, it would be marked as predicted, and given corre­
sponding sub­position and speed, though it would be ignored by the vicinity kernels
as it wasn’t currently occupied yet.
These predicted cells had lower precedence than any other known obstacle (includ­
ing recalled from octomap), so they only served to remove confirmed unoccupied
or unknown volume.
• While this predicted cells could be used locally, the idea was to be compatible with
other packages using octomap, so these predictions were additionally marked as
occupied on the map, with the idea that future scans would clear these trajectories
once the dynamic obstacle had moved past.
This, in theory, should lead to once obstacles move past a certain speed, the map would
get marked on their future positions, avoiding planing in front of moving obstacles.
In practice, the grainy nature of the speed on edges of obstacles and initially seen cells
lead to the map being ruined by fuzzy predictions on most of the map.
As this was not a useful prediction, it was abandoned, with a new proposed use for the
resulting data being force based collision avoidance.
4.4
Resulting data
Before discussing the final use of the data for collision avoidance, it’s important to establish
the qualitative nature of the resulting flow estimation.
While quantitative data, such a speed derived from the time between samples, the current
algorithm had been developed without accounting for time, so it was purely estimating on
a time step basis.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
17
==PAGE:26==
While this would be later remedied, there were some issues that limited the usability of
quantitative data:
• Cell occupancy was grainy, for better responsiveness, but a surface close to the
edge between cells, would appear on either side in an alternating pattern, with the
sub­position masking it in visualization, but being very apparent when trying to work
with the data.
• Given that it was developed with a stereo camera, edges could flicker between
slopes, voids, and hard edges, leading to very noisy data.
This was somewhat mitigated with the depth camera, though hard edges still pre­
sented this issue, as the occasional sample moving over one cell would lead to a
high speed estimate by the vicinity kernel.
• Due to the use of a variable weight for velocity averaging over time, once a relevant
velocity emerges, its precision is sacrificed for accuracy, so quantitative speed and
direction wouldn’t be consistent enough, though the general direction and magnitude
can be used.
• the rear side of a moving object, where cells are actively cleared, is not estimating
flow currently. This could be implemented, but is not as intuitive (cleared cell applies
velocity to void or to still occupied neighbours?). Fortunately, due to the way the map
is populated, objects only get their outer shell marked as occupied, and thin shells
aren’t as affected, see figure 4.5 for better visualization of the case of large and fast
obstacles.
Movement tangent to the view direction is either approaching and thus presents a
front edge of movement to be seen, or in the case of an object leaving, the fact that
only a shell perpendicular to the view direction is seen, leads to the front and back
edges of the shell to match on the same cells (though it’s also a movement away
from the UAV,and thus less critical).
Figure 4.5: Black shell of obstacle seen moving from previous grey shell of same obstacle.
Red lines indicate predominant kernel sample of previous shell. Left: movement tangent
to view direction, with loss of velocity and change of direction on camera facing side. back
side of obstacle samples previous shell (hollow obstacle). Middle: movement towards the
camera, edges loose velocity magnitude and some direction. Right: movement away from
camera presenting discontinuities at edges, though movement away from the UAV is a
minor concern.
Because of this, direct prediction isn’t possible, with other flow predicting models segment­
ing objects and calculating distributions of position and speed, or using particles combined
with per­cell distributions to obtain more precision for speeds, or accurately model their
distribution.
18
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:27==
Both of these require either higher computation cost, or previous knowledge of obstacles.
But these prediction based models aren’t present in UAVs outside of swarms with accurate
trajectory information of each UAV or a single target UAV that is specifically identified.
Since a method that’s indifferent to obstacle type that can run onboard is the goal, these
solutions aren’t applicable.
In the end, obstacle agnostic, accurate but imprecise flow is estimated with relatively good
responsiveness as seen in figure 4.6:
Figure 4.6: Visualization of the grid with an approaching obstacle with velocity that is
negative on the x axis (grey[static] ­ red[x axis] = cyan). Despite the obstacle being thin
and close to the detection edge, the algorithm clearly captures it’s motion outside of a
couple noisy cells. The grey cells at the bottom are the floor, not currently seen but loaded
in from the octomap.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
19
==PAGE:28==
5
Collision avoidance
There are many collision avoidance methods[10], the one more appropriate to the ob­
tained flow estimate is potential field or repulsion force based:
• The grainy nature is further filtered by time and cell integration of forces.
• the sub­position can be used for more accurate force origin/orientation.
• the speed magnitude and orientation relative to cell position can be used to weight
the force, with faster and oriented towards the vehicle increasing the weight.
From here, a mock­up of the repulsion equation was drafted:
−(1 −min(
⃗
∆pos · ⃗v ∗k1, 0)) ∗
⃗
∆pos
|
⃗
∆pos|4
∗k2
• The dot product of the speed of a cell (⃗v) with the relative position to the drone (
⃗
∆pos)
scaled with k1 would give a higher value when the cell was observed moving away
from the drone’s position, and lower when moving toward.
This is capped at 0, as otherwise cells moving away can have less repulsion, or even
pull the UAV towards them, and this behaviour is excessively aggressive outside of
trying to incorporate into a flow.
• To keep the direction of the vector, −
⃗
∆pos is multiplied by the previous factor. This
leaves a vector which scales with the relative position quadratically, when for a re­
pulsion force, we want it to be lower when said displacement is larger.
Because of this, the resulting vector is divided by the magnitude of the displacement
to the power of 4.
• The resulting magnitude is inversely proportional to the square of the distance to
the drone, and proportional to the speed of the obstacle, with the magnitude to the
power of four being easily computed with the dot product squared.
• An additional constant is used to scale the resulting repulsion force, for fine tuning.
5.1
Integration
Repulsion forces previously calculated are added up, and is then multiplied by a constant,
and added to the UAV’s current position, and set as the target for the PX4 autopilot. Some
nuance on frames of reference is required, as ROS extrapolates TF reference frames for
smoother output, so the target position should be set in the map frame, otherwise, strange
behaviour can emerge as the target position gets dragged by predictions of the UAV’s
frame.
When accounting for user input, the target position in world coordinates has an offset
added calculated off of the RC remote input:
• The target position from collision avoidance and the VIO pose are stored in a buffer
which is updated as they’re received, so that the latest position and target are avail­
able, without the library tf trying to extrapolate and failing.
20
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:29==
• The received input for the topic /mavros/rc/in is a set of values ranging from 982 to
2006. These are normalised to the [­1,1] range through the linear transformation
x/512 −2.918 and are the stored in a buffer in a similar fashion, though at a much
higher frequency.
• The normalized values are added to the target position in meters and radians, so
when no collision avoidance is taking place, the target position will be within a 2m
cube centered around the drone, and a relative orientation of +/­ 1 radian, and are
published at a frequency of 30Hz. This is required by mavros , otherwise off board
mode is disabled.
• This setup can lead to bounce­back on slow frame rates, where the target is offset
relative to the previously received UAV position in world space, so when user input
ceases, the UAV returns to the last received target position.
While this setup allows for high user responsiveness, it is limiting user input to the afore­
mentioned 2m cube centered on the last target position, so if a large displacement of the
target position occurs due to collision avoidance, and said displaced target takes longer
than usual to be updated, user input wont be able to fight the UAV as it races to said
target, with the pilot only being able to adjust within that 2m cube of user input around the
target.
5.2
Refinement
The aforementioned setup would be further refined by adding a collision avoidance zone
around the UAV:
Two distances were set, a close range and a far range, with the intent being that obstacles
outside the far range where ignored, as opposed to continuously avoiding them until they
were out of sensor range, and obstacles within the close range had full collision avoidance.
The purpose of two ranges was so a smooth transition was possible, and not to have
abrupt target changes due to an obstacle going over a threshold.
The dot product of the obstacles velocity and it’s relative position to the UAV was used to
offset these ranges: faster moving obstacles, moving towards the UAV, would not have
their corresponding repulsion dampened until a much farther range.
This balanced out the issue of avoiding minor obstacles that were 3 meters away, while
having enough of a volume considered to detect moving obstacles well in advance.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
21
==PAGE:30==
6
Results
6.1
Testflights
6.1.1
UAV control
The first test flight served to gain more insight into the UAV’s control as opposed to col­
lision avoidance itself. The ROS topic that had been read within simulation (/mavros/­
manual_control/control) wasn’t populated outside of simulation, making it apparent that
the game­pad control through the app QGroundControl was uniquely written to said topic
when no RC remote was connected.
In addition, the varying frame rate and autopilot led to different responses from the colli­
sion avoidance and how the UAV responded to a target position within real hardware as
opposed to within simulation.
Because of this, collision avoidance parameters were recalibrated for the live testing sce­
nario, and control scripts where re­written to read from the topic mavros/rc/in, which wasn’t
a conveniently normalized vector, but rather an array of unsigned integers.
6.1.2
Collision avoidance
The second test flight allowed the first control of the drone while collision avoidance was
active. Here, the drone took off in position mode, switched to off­board mode (onboard
collision avoidance), while taking input from the RC remote.
It was observed that the UAV avoided colliding with thin obstacles, moving away from them
once input towards the obstacle ended (simulated repulsion force), and was responsive
enough that the pilot didn’t feel any difference in control, outside of the response scale
relative to position control.
Additionally, the pilot didn’t switch back to position mode when landing, displaying a glar­
ing flaw in the design: takeoff and landing require being close to an obstacle, the floor,
which is predominantly seen in front before the environment is further mapped, leading to
aggressive upward and backwards jerking as the floor abruptly comes into view.
A minor issue was switching modes didn’t carry over the UAV’s current orientation, leading
to a harsh jerk to the uninitialised orientation of the collision avoidance.
From the qualitative results, collision avoidance was further refined, adding a zone around
the drone outside of which the repulsion force of obstacles was scaled down, so that
only nearby obstacles had an effect. This zone was offset by obstacle speed, so that
approaching obstacles didn’t get their repulsion force dampened.
Yaw was changed from an off­board state to a quaternion relative to the current orientation,
adding some snap­back at he end of turning, but eliminating jerking on mode switch.
6.1.3
Dynamic collision avoidance
The third test flight worked with dynamic collision avoidance. This was tested with a long
beam (5mx2cmx10cm), and swinging it towards the UAV.
It was observed that while movement registered, triggering a response from further than
static obstacles when moving towards the UAV, the response time was excessive for the
task. A more aggressive set of parameters was tested, to see if this could compensate,
but this didn’t help with the high latency.
22
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:31==
When a dynamic obstacle was allowed to approach the UAV significantly, this led to a
target position for collision avoidance at a significant distance from where the UAV was
located, leading to erratic and overly aggressive behaviour that regardless was too late
to avoid a collision.
At the end of the test, this aligned with a momentary performance loss, leading to a crash,
where the UAV continued to travel to an out of bounds target which did not update quickly
enough once the obstacle was out of range, and the delayed response time led to a loss
of control. This delay is hard to explain, as it extends well past the frame rate of target
updates, and user input from the RC controller appears to register at a much lower latency.
It was theorized that the communication between the collision avoidance target pub­
lisher and the node combining this position with user input was being heavily delayed
or buffered, leading to responsive target position updates not registering in time, and user
input registering right before the combined set point is sent to the autopilot. In the next
test flight this would be discarded as a possibility.
Slower movements were tested, with appropriate responses relative to the velocity, though
hardly a dynamic collision avoidance, so much as dynamic obstacle awareness: a more
aggressive proximity avoidance without the latency issue would suffice as a replacement,
while being significantly less complex. Though since the latency is present between target
setting and actual execution by the flight controller, it would be safe to assume that a bare
bones proximity avoidance would still have this issue.
For a graph of the data on a dynamic obstacle approach, see figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Left: position over time when a fast approach (swing beam towards UAV)
occurs. Right: maximum observed speed (typically noise), distance of highest speed
observation (proximity of fastest dynamic obstacle), maximum speed towards the UAV,
and distance to closest obstacle. Note the smooth segment from 1.1s to 1.5s on the
position, where VIO lagged, and the corresponding lack of map data from 1.2s to 2.2s. A
sharp decline in proximity of fastest point is observed as soon as the swing starts at 0.4s,
and the maximum speed towards the UAV rises to match the highest observed speed
of around 1.75m/s. Note that the UAV position only begins to change at 1.1s, giving a
latency of 0.6 seconds.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
23
==PAGE:32==
6.1.4
Latency mitigation and comparison
The final test flight used a modified code base that had less sets of publishers/subscribers,
looking to reduce the latency. This proved fruitless though, as no significant improvement
was observed. While the root cause hasn’t yet been established, due to time constraints,
this issue would not be further analyzed.
In addition to latency tests, a series of tests were carried out disabling the estimated flow’s
contribution to the repulsion force. This served as a comparison with a more classical
approach.
The first test consisted of presenting an approaching obstacle outside of the collision
avoidance zone. As was to be expected, without velocity estimates, the approaching
obstacle can’t be considered without also considering every viewable obstacle outside
the safety volume.
The second test was to approach at a consistent speed, and find what pace could the
collision avoidance maintain. This was much slower than a walking pace, both due to the
latency and without the extra weight of the velocity estimates. In comparison, avoiding a
walking­speed obstacle wasn’t an issue with the velocity estimates in use. See figure 6.2
for graphs pertaining to no velocity estimate, and figure 6.3 for the graphs using velocity
estimates.
These tests allowed to establish that while not applicable for fast obstacles, slower ob­
stacles, in the range of human walking (peak speed around 1.5­1.75 m/s), where avoided
without issue while maintaining control.
Figure 6.2: Left: position over time when a slow approach (holding a beam towards UAV)
occurs, without using the velocity estimates. Right: maximum observed speed (typically
noise), distance of highest speed observation (proximity of fastest dynamic obstacle),
maximum speed towards the UAV, and distance to closest obstacle. Note the steps in the
position graph, as VIO fails sporadically (or potential data recording issues) with the pre­
vious measurement delayed, leading to near horizontal steps before the abrupt update of
position leading to a vertical step. Despite these discontinuities in VIO, map data appears
to still be updated, unlike previous experiments, though with significantly noisier velocity
peaks in the range of 0.8 and 0.2m/s while maintaining a distance of 0.5m to the closest
obstacle (though using VIO in it’s calculation, this is unstable). It would be safe to assume
that an average velocity of approach was around 0.5 m/s, with the UAV only maintaining
a distance of 0.5m from the approaching obstacle.
24
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.3: Left: position over time when a continuous approach (holding a beam towards
UAV) occurs, using the velocity estimates. Right: maximum observed speed (typically
noise), distance of highest speed observation (proximity of fastest dynamic obstacle),
maximum speed towards the UAV, and distance to closest obstacle. Note the gap of ve­
locity data between 2.5s and 3.5s as once more, UAV acceleration leads to temporary VIO
loss. Additionally, a response time of around 1s can be observed, where initial approach
speed starts to be observed at 1.7s, and position starts to change at 2.7s. An approach
speed around 1m/s is avoided with a minimum distance of 1m. A significant improvement
over no velocity estimates. Finally, the gap in map data leads to velocity estimates drop­
ping to 0. This is due to the kernel missing the previous cells as a larger gap in time, and
thus position has occurred. In 3­4 iterations velocity estimates are recuperated, though
obstacle approach was slowing at that point
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
25
==PAGE:34==
7
Conclusions
Despite not being able to fully pinpoint the cause of the large latency, some conclusions
can already be drawn. The initial intent of this thesis was to verify the viability of rough
flow estimation on occupancy maps for the purpose of onboard collision avoidance. This
required the design and implementation of this rough flow estimation, which in of itself, was
viable from a qualitative perspective: It’s resulting flow values weren’t accurate, but they
could be used: stationary obstacles would appear as such, and moving obstacles would
progressively get more precise velocity estimates. Both larger (walls) and thin obstacles
(beams) where correctly detected, so the obstacle agnostic aspect was also successful.
When it came to implementing collision avoidance with the resulting flow map, there was
one key issue: latency. Regardless of how accurate a dynamic obstacle’s velocity and
position is measured, if the response time is too high for said velocity, it can’t be used.
As of writing, despite best efforts to reduce this response time, there hasn’t been a clear
answer as to how. The flow estimation and repulsion force calculation where taking less
than 0.100 ms, but response time fell between half a second (see figure 6.1) and one
second (see figure 6.3).
It should be noted that, even if this latency was further reduced, the fact that mapping
and flow estimation can only be run at slightly over 10 fps means that dynamic collision
avoidance was limited anyways to a 100+ms response time. This delay can lead to abrupt
motion even with relatively slow obstacles.
In addition, while having a flow estimate on an occupancy map aided with the repulsion
force based collision avoidance, it could potentially be better leveraged for trajectory plan­
ning (such as moving out of the way of incoming obstacles), which wasn’t being used in
this thesis.
Looking at the recent article on collision avoidance using an event camera[3], a simple 2D
view with depth information can suffice to ascertain what is close and moving towards the
camera. This means that simply taking the depth image, re­projecting the previous depth
using IMU readings, and applying a kernel for flow estimation could lead to comparable
results, without ray casting and key checking, at the cost of not getting a local map of the
environment, and thus only being aware of what the camera is currently seeing, and not
what has been seen (static obstacles). Wither this trade­off is worthwhile would depend
on the use case.
7.1
Future work
As this was intended to test viability, a lot of further improvements are left out of scope.
From simpler code optimisations for performance and better repulsion force calculations,
to prediction and trajectory planning. The main points of interest for future work that would
improve the quality of results are as follows:
• Floor filtering: Currently, the floor is seen like any other obstacle, leading to take
off and landing being practically impossible to pull off safely. A simple height check
when calculating the repulsion force of neighbouring cells, comparing with the UAV’s
height on initialisation would remedy this. Implementation would require to set a
height cut­off, translate this height to the local grid as the drone moves, and check
26
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:35==
every iteration if cells are past that threshold, or set up loop bounds so that said
cells are skipped entirely.
While this would open the issue of the UAV not being initialised on the ground,
or being initialised above the lowest point the the flight volume, for straightforward
scenarios it would be a significant improvement.
• Better repulsion force: The way repulsion was implemented was by calculating the
total of each cells repulsion. this leads to issues when one cell is seen on one side
of the UAV, and many have been seen on the other, pushing the UAV towards the
single cell, with a lower contribution. A more nuanced approach, that in addition
establishes cells as limiting constraints would allow for this particular scenario (tight
enclosed spaces) to be plausible.
Alternatively, something closer to common collision avoidance systems, would be a
potential field based approach, where movement is slowed in proportion to potential,
but a stationary UAV is not pushed away from obstacles, just not allowed to further
approach them.
These are all nice features for particular scenarios or preferences, but they did not
immediately improve results in the set scope.
• Better avoidance: Currently the UAV simple moves away from incoming obstacles.
While this is the simplest course of action, moving tangentially from incoming obsta­
cles’ trajectories can be more beneficial, particularly when straying from the current
position should be minimized, or when the obstacle cannot be outpaced.
While this is solvable for a single dynamic obstacle, for an arbitrary amount of obsta­
cles, it becomes more vague, with averaging approaches having issues with oppos­
ing lateral motions cancelling out, and cumulative approaches having issues with
the response being proportional to obstacle count.
• Better user input: As it stands, a glaring issue is abrupt performance drops from the
collision avoidance leading to user input being constrained within a volume around
the previous target.
Some form of user input integration that gets reset on target update would allow the
pilot to fight undesired extreme responses, such as the one that lead to a crash.
• Relative velocities: The implemented setup only accounted for absolute velocities,
not relative. This could be an issue when flying in a formation, or approaching a
static obstacle at high speeds.
This was out of scope for the project, but would be a straight­forward improvement
to consider for future iterations.
• Velocity filtering improvement: A notable shortcoming was the distance based den­
sity of points from the point cloud constructed from a depth image. This would nor­
mally be reduced with a voxelization filter, but this would remove the sub­position
data which is being used.
Experimenting with voxelization with a finer grid size than the one used for occu­
pancy in order to preserve some of the sub­position data, or modifying the current
velocity filter to also account for sensor distance could improve velocity estimates
at detection edge.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
[1]
Jung­Woo Park, Hyon­Dong Oh, and Min­Jea Tahk. “UAV collision avoidance based
on geometric approach”. In: 2008 SICE Annual Conference. 2008, pp. 2122–2126.
DOI: 10.1109/SICE.2008.4655013.
[2]
Elia Kaufmann et al. Deep Drone Racing: Learning Agile Flight in Dynamic Envi­
ronments. 2018. arXiv: 1806.08548 [cs.RO].
[3]
Davide Falanga, Kevin Kleber, and Davide Scaramuzza. “Dynamic obstacle avoid­
ance for quadrotors with event cameras”. In: Science Robotics 5.40 (2020), eaaz9712.
DOI: 10.1126/scirobotics.aaz9712. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/
scirobotics.aaz9712. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/scirobotics.
aaz9712.
[4]
Zhefan Xu et al. “A real­time dynamic obstacle tracking and mapping system for
UAV navigation and collision avoidance with an RGB­D camera”. In: 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2023, pp. 10645–
10651. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10161194.
[5]
Dominik Nuss et al. A Random Finite Set Approach for Dynamic Occupancy Grid
Maps with Real­Time Application. 2016. arXiv: 1605.02406 [cs.RO].
[6]
Aishwarya Unnikrishnan et al. “Dynamic Semantic Occupancy Mapping Using 3D
Scene Flow and Closed­Form Bayesian Inference”. In: IEEE Access 10 (2022),
pp. 97954–97970. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3205329.
[7]
Radu Gabriel Danescu. “Obstacle Detection Using Dynamic Particle­Based Occu­
pancy Grids”. In: 2011 International Conference on Digital Image Computing: Tech­
niques and Applications. 2011, pp. 585–590. DOI: 10.1109/DICTA.2011.104.
[8]
Reza Mahjourian et al. “Occupancy Flow Fields for Motion Forecasting in Autonomous
Driving”. In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7.2 (Apr. 2022), pp. 5639–5646.
DOI: 10.1109/lra.2022.3151613. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/lra.2022.3151613.
[9]
Sascha Steyer, Georg Tanzmeister, and Dirk Wollherr. “Grid­Based Environment
Estimation Using Evidential Mapping and Particle Tracking”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Vehicles 3.3 (2018), pp. 384–396. DOI: 10.1109/TIV.2018.2843130.
[10]
Jawad N. Yasin et al. “Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs): Collision Avoidance Sys­
tems and Approaches”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 105139–105155. DOI: 10.
1109/ACCESS.2020.3000064.
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
==PAGE:39==
Collision avoidance through 3D occupancy map flow estimation
31
==PAGE:40==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
