==PAGE:1==
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recov-
ery from data-centers for district-heating
A spatial approach for Denmark
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
A spatial approach for Denmark
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Simon Christoph Martin
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Section for Energy Economics and Modelling, De-
partment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
in the field of Sustainable Energy, in the study line Energy Systems Analysis
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of energy economics
and district-heating systems.
Simon Christoph Martin - s210381
Signature
Date
ii
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
10.08.2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The burgeoning demand for data centers in Nordic countries, driven by an attractive cli-
mate, clean energy, and low electricity prices, poses both opportunities and challenges.
In Denmark, the electricity demand from data centers is anticipated to surge to 8.8 TWh,
constituting 10% of the total projected demand by 2030. Integrating the daya centers into
our energy systems is inevitable.
Academic research on waste-heat recovery from data centers is gaining traction, with
many studies underscoring the significance of location. However, key knowledge gaps
persist, notably the necessity of aligning waste-heat recovery with existing systems. This
thesis adopts a spatial approach, to identify optimal locations for data centers of varying
sizes within Denmark, anchored on existing infrastructure. It recognizes that an under-
standing of the cost structure of waste-heat recovery can only be obtained by respecting
the current source-portfolio, the prospective data center size, and its geographical place-
ment. It thereby investigates the correlation between these variables in a detailed case-
study for Copenhagen. The findings propose policy recommendations to incentivize the
development of data centers in strategic locations and for specific network characteristics.
The study serves as a robust base for research on feasibility and the tangible potential
of integrating waste-heat into existing systems. Furthermore, it provides concrete policy
insights for sustainable data center development in Denmark.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Simon Christoph Martin, MSc Sustainable Energy - Energy Systems Analysis, DTU
I want to thank Claire Bergaentzlé and Juan Jesús Jerez Monsalves for the opportunity
of writing the thesis with them and the continuous support during the thesis. Without their
knowledge, understanding and the unconditional help, this thesis and all the connected
learnings would not have been possible. Diving into this new and to me very unknown
topic, has been an indispensable learning. I am grateful for all my fellow students who
i worked with in the past two and a half years. Thank you for being part of the energy
transition, may we meet again along our ways. I want to thank my team at European
Energy A/S, who was always flexible with my schedule and supported me along my way
whenever questions arose. It’s been a great journey as a student assistant and I’m looking
forward to further push the energy transition with you full-time. I want to thank my family
who supported me during my Master’s degree and encouraged me to do this step initially,
without your unconditional support, I wouldn’t be were I’m at. And a big gratitude goes out
to my old friends from Switzerland who are so far away, but still always there whenever I
need them. And my sincere appreciation to all my new friends in Denmark, there’s only
so much I can say: you make Denmark home.
iv
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acronyms
vi
Color Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Executive Summary
1
2
Introduction
2
3
Literature Review
4
4
Methodology
9
4.1
Case Study - Greater Copenhagen district heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Optimization Model for District Heating Source Allocation
. . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Technical-economic data and main assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4
Investigated Scenarios - Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Results Case-Study greater Copenhagen district heating
23
5.1
Justification case-study Copenhagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Results optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Discussion
42
6.1
Optimization of source-dispatch in Copenhagen’s district heating . . . . . . 42
7
Conclusion
45
7.1
Potential for Waste-Heat-Recovery (WHR) from Data Centers (DCs) in Den-
mark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
Spatial approach to DC-development in Denmark - Main research question
45
8
Implications and Perspective
48
Bibliography
49
A Additional Tables and Figures
55
B Project Details & Logistics
69
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
v
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms
CHP
Combined Heat and Power. 25, 35, 41–44,
46, 47
COP
Coefficient of Performance. 13, 20, 22, 30,
38, 39, 42, 43, 45
DC
Data Center. v, 1–9, 12, 16, 18–22, 24, 25,
28–31, 33–35, 37–48
DEA
Danish Energy Agency. 9, 14, 18
DH
District Heating. 1, 3–5, 8, 9, 11, 17, 21–24,
27, 35, 37, 38, 42, 45–47
DHN
District Heating Network. 1, 3–5, 7–12, 19,
21–23, 25, 29, 33, 34, 39–46, 48
GHG
Greenhouse-Gases. 8, 21, 42
HOP
Boiler Source. 46
HP
Heat Pump. 1, 3, 5–8, 11–13, 18–20, 22, 29,
30, 35, 37–39, 42, 43, 45–48
LTDH
Low Temperature District Heating. 5, 6, 39,
42, 48
PPA
Power-Purchase-Agreement. 8, 21, 22, 35,
42, 48
RES
Renewable Energy Sources. 4, 42, 43
VRE
Variable Renewable Energy. 43, 48
WHR
Waste-Heat-Recovery. v, 1, 3, 4, 6–9, 12, 16,
18, 19, 22, 24, 25, 31, 38, 39, 41, 42, 44, 45,
47, 48
WtE
Waste-to-Energy. 1, 5, 11, 12, 14, 16, 18, 21,
23, 25–29, 37, 41, 42, 45
vi
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:9==
Color Code
The following color code is used throughout the report in plots and graphs to describe
types of sources, monetary- and emission-descriptions:
Monetary descriptions
Emissions descriptions
Data center sources
WtE-sources
Wood-chips sources
Wood-pellets sources
Wood and biomass WtE
Biogas sources
Natural gas sources
Gas oil sources
Fuel-oil sources
Existing electricity sources
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:11==
1
Executive Summary
The demand for data-computing and storage is steadily increasing across the world. To
accommodate this demand, Data Centers (DCs) are built, with Denmark as well as other
Nordic countries being prime-locations due to their favourable climate, access to sustain-
able energy and well-established infrastructure.
This development happens simultaneously with the urgent need for an energy transition
and decarbonization of the sector. Hence, researchers, the industry and policy-makers
are investigating the integration of DCs into out energy systems both from an electricity
and heat-perspective to make DCs an asset rather than a burden during said transition.
A DC may offer flexible demand, balancing services and the waste heat can be recovered
to heat our homes.
This thesis focuses on the potential for Waste-Heat-Recovery (WHR) from DCs in Den-
mark and conducts a case-study on the District Heating Network (DHN) of greater Copen-
hagen. The potential is assessed with a for this thesis developed optimization model for
heat dispatch in District Heating (DH). Assessing the potential taking spatial considera-
tions, existing infrastructure and local demand patterns into account has deemed nec-
essary. By first modelling a base-case without DC, the business-as-usual scenario and
consequently adding DCs of various sizes and in various distances to the source-portfolio,
the potential in terms of cost- and emissions-savings can be quantified. Several scenarios
are investigated: A small-, medium- and large-DC with Heat Pump (HP)-capacities of 3,
50 and 150MW respectively at various distances to the DHN.
The results shows the highest potential for a medium sized data-center with a connected
HP of 50MW, offering the most stable business-case from both a public and private-
economic viewpoint. A single 50MW HP may reduce total costs and emissions by 5%
over the year, corresponding to 8 M€ and 24’000 tons of CO2. It is evident that this po-
tential is dependent on the current source-mix in a DHN. The waste-heat from DCs is
more expensive per unit of delivered heat compared to Waste-to-Energy (WtE) and solid
biomass-sources such as wood-chips and -pellets. In Copenhagen, with a high share
of solid biomass, waste-heat from DCs can substitute fossil fuel boilers during the high-
demand winter months, lowering their respective emissions. It is evident that the biggest
potential lies in DHN with a high share of fossil fuels.
The analysis makes clear that distance to the DHN, does not impact the feasibility of WHR
to a large degree, since the heat-pump investment overshadows the investment for trans-
mission infrastructure. This flexibility in terms of location for new DC-infrastructure offers
a big opportunity for decarbonizing DHNs across the country, while the focus must lie in
high-demand urban areas with a generally higher carbon-intensity and fewer availability
of other alternatives such as geothermal-HP, solar district heating or WHR from industrial
sources.
Policy-makers must commit to the integration of data-centers into energy-systems and
mandate development and usage of renewable energy for the DC. If future DC-development
is done uninformed, does not take the local, spatial and environmental considerations into
account, DC-development may pose a dangerous obstacle in the energy transition. But
if done right, DCs may be an asset on the path to a carbon-neutral world.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
In response to the escalating climate crisis and the commitments stipulated in the Paris
Agreement of 2015, nations worldwide are embracing greener policies, and Denmark
is at the forefront of these efforts. Pledging to transition its electricity supply entirely to
renewables and a 70%-reduction of CO2-emissions by 2030, Denmark’s ambitious goals
necessitate the rapid decarbonization of various sectors, including electricity, heating, and
transportation [1].
Heating is responsible for a large share of global emissions, one major technology that
plays a crucial role in decarbonizing this sector is district heating, which currently accounts
for 8% of global heat demand [2]. In Denmark, a country with a long history with district
heating, more than 55% of all residential and service sector buildings have access to
district heating, derived primarily from waste and biomass, with a declining share of fossil
fuels [3]. However, to meet the nation’s stringent climate goals, further decarbonization of
this sector is indispensable. Efforts in this direction have been primarily focused on the use
of wooden biomass, most often imported from the Baltic countries and North America. The
questionable carbon footprint of this primary biomass calls for the exploration of alternative
technologies to decarbonize heating [4].
Simultaneously, Denmark is experiencing burgeoning development in the data center in-
dustry. DCs accommodate the demand for data-processing and storage and their global
demand has risen to 220 - 320 TWh or approximately 1% of final energy demand [5].
Global tech giants, such as Google, META, Microsoft, and Apple, are making substan-
tial investments in data center development in the Nordic countries, attracted by the high
shares of renewable electricity, low average temperatures, and a stable economy. While
the total electricity-demand of DCs remained stable, thanks to efficiency improvements, it
is unclear how long these can keep up with the ever growing demand for data-processing
and -storage. [6, 7] It is estimated that DCs in Denmark will be responsible for 10% of
the electricity-demand by 2030 and up to 16% by 2035. [7] Hence, a strategy to integrate
the DCs into the energy systems, making them part of the energy transition rather than a
burden, is inevitable.
Nearly all electricity used in a data center is dissipated as heat, presenting an opportunity
for waste-heat recovery from these DCs for district heating. This waste-heat is low-carbon,
locally produced and can reduce demand for foreign biomass and gas, ultimately fostering
energy independence. This opportunity, however, is not without its challenges. High initial
investments in waste-heat recovery systems and varying stakeholder investment horizons
with uncertain returns necessitate effective policy frameworks [6]. To date, waste-heat
recovery from DCs occupies a minor role in Danish district heating. However, a notable
exception is the showcase project, the META data center in Odense, which has drawn
considerable media attention, in part due to its co-developed waste-heat recovery system.
In another case, Apple launched a hyperscale data center in Foulum, Jylland, in 2020.
Initial plans included connecting this data center to the network of Viborg, which is about 8
km away, but these plans did not materialize, and the data center remains unconnected.
Currently, there is an announced connection set for 2024, four years after the opening of
the data center, launching a public debate on DC-development. [8, 9].
This thesis addresses these challenges and opportunities and critically examines the po-
tential for waste-heat recovery from DCs in Denmark, based on a quantitative analysis
2
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:13==
on Copenhagen’s DHN. To fulfill this objective, the research investigates the following
questions:
• What are the Danish district heating areas, specific locations, in which data center
waste-heat recovery should be prioritized, based on potential carbon displacement
and the local infrastructure?
• How does the potential for carbon offsetting vary through the Danish DHNs, based
on the heat sources displaced by data center waste heat?
• How does the distance to the district heating network and the size of the data center
affect the carbon offsetting potential from waste-heat recovery?
• How can policies incentivize the development of DCs in certain locations and the
displacement of current district heating sources, based on cost and emission crite-
ria?
A case study on the DHN of greater Copenhagen examines current cost and emissions
using an optimization model. The model optimizes the dispatch of various sources in a
DHN by minimizing cost. By adding the waste-heat from DCs to the portfolio, the model
examines the dispatch and ultimately the cost and emission savings when integrating
DC-waste-heat. By investigating various policies, and reviewing their impacts from both a
cost- and emission-perspective, the thesis aims to furnish actionable insights and recom-
mendations to policymakers and authorities, so they can make informed decisions about
the future development of DC-development in Denmark.
Chapter 3 offers an examination of the current research on data center integration, the
DH-landscape of Denmark, decarbonization efforts and in the process identifies gaps in
existing knowledge. Furthermore, the importance of the DC-location is emphasized. 4
introduces the spatial approach, the case-study on Copenhagen and the optimization
modeling, ensuring a clear understanding of the research design. Technological data on
DCs, waste-heat sources and HPs used in the analysis is presented, demonstrating the
research’s foundation. Chapter 5 reports the findings of the study and examines the sensi-
tivity of the results to various parameters of the model. Chapter 6 discussed the limitations
of the models and elaborates on its implications, contributing to a broader understanding
of the study. The conclusion in chapter 7 summarizes the main findings, recommenda-
tions and and discusses the direct implications of the results. The last chapter 8, looks
further ahead and discusses the broader implications of the results, gives perspective and
proposes a focus for future research on this topic.
Through this multi-dimensional analysis, this research strives to provide an insight into
the prospective opportunities for WHR from DCs in Denmark. This will contribute to a
broader dialogue on sustainable energy management, and provide recommendations on
maximizing the utility of DCs in the context of Denmark’s green transition.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
3
==PAGE:14==
3
Literature Review
In recent years, there has been a growing focus on two concurrent trends: the escalating
demand for computing power and the shift towards renewable energy sources (Renew-
able Energy Sources (RES)). This has necessitated the integration of DCs into energy
systems and prompted concerted efforts to mitigate the negative impacts arising from in-
creased energy consumption. This literature review first looks into DC-categorization and
the research done on increasing energy-efficiency of a DC, exploiting a knowledge gap
in the potential for waste-heat recovery from said DC. Secondly, efforts and research on
decarbonizing DH are assessed, focusing on Nordic countries and in particular Denmark,
showcasing the necessity of alternative sustainable heat-sources. Thirdly, research re-
garding WHR from DCs and it’s economic viability is reviewed, revealing a significant
knowledge gap in the importance of spatial considerations and existing infrastructure.
Lastly the literature review exposes economic and technological challenges for the WHR,
stressing the importance of informed policy making.
DC-development and categorization
DC-development is surging in the Nordics, with
various sizes being developed and operated [8, 10, 11]. DCs can broadly be categorized
into three sizes [12]. Enterprise DCs of a small capacity, typically less than 2 MW, offer a
level of flexibility in terms of location. Given their small footprint, these can be situated in
a variety of areas including industrial, commercial, or even residential zones. These lo-
calities allow the generated heat to be utilized in the proximity of the DC, thereby reducing
connection and transmission costs associated with DHNs. Co-location DCs, which can
span several thousand square meters, represent a larger class of DC-infrastructure [13,
12]. The establishment of a hyper-scale DC is contingent not solely on land availability
but also on the capacity of the local electricity grid. Owing to the substantial electricity re-
quirements of these facilities, they necessitate direct connections to the transmission grid
and the construction of dedicated high-voltage stations, both of which further contribute to
land use. Consequently, such hyper-scale infrastructures are typically situated at some
distance from urban areas and DHNs due to their extensive land requirements. In con-
trast, co-location DCs can be positioned closer to cities owing to their relatively modest
footprint [12, 14].
Research on efficiency-measures
More efficient cooling systems, reducing electric-
ity consumption as well as the provision of flexibility services have been the main focus
in the literature. In their case study, Jouhara and Meskimmon [15] assert that the imple-
mentation of heat pipe-based free cooling systems can yield up to 75% in energy savings,
underpinning the potential efficacy of this approach in optimizing energy use in DCs. Sim-
ilarly, Bergaentzle and Madsen [16] highlight the crucial role of integrated cooling systems
in DC-efficiency. They suggest novel performance indicators to gauge not only the effi-
ciency of DCs but also their integration with the electrical grid. On a different note, Cioara
et al. [17] delve into the possibilities of DCs providing flexibility within different electricity
market contexts. Their analysis offers vital insights into data center operation strategies
under varying market conditions. They conclude that, the prospect of exploiting waste
heat from DCs in heating applications has not been extensively enough explored, indicat-
ing a significant gap in the existing body of literature.
4
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:15==
Decarbonization of district heating
While Nordic countries have led the way in miti-
gating emissions from DHNs, a substantial number of these initiatives has been geared
towards biomass, other industrial waste heat, and large-scale HPs [18, 3]. Remarkably,
biomass acts as a pillar in Denmark’s quest to decarbonize district heating, constituting
over 40% of the total fuel use in district heating. Given its perceived carbon neutrality
within Danish carbon accounting parameters, biomass benefits from fiscal incentives in
the form of exemptions from fuel taxes. However, the Danish Energy Agency raises con-
cerns over biomass’s carbon neutrality [3, 4]. Notably, waste contributes to 10% of fuel
usage and is deemed sustainable within the waste-to-energy paradigm [3]. With this ap-
proach for waste-management instead of waste-prevention, Denmark’s energy-systems
are dependent on waste-production. With decreasing amounts of waste, the necessity
to import waste from abroad to sustain the all WtE plants, and the burning of potentially
recyclable waste, underscore the necessity for more alternative sustainable heat sources
for district heating [19, 20, 21].
In the 1990s, the aim was to facilitate the expansion of decentralized combined heat and
power (CHP) by converting existing installations to co-generate heat and electricity sup-
ply, increasing the use of natural gas and environmentally friendly fuels, and enhancing
the energy produced by CHP plants. These initiatives, coupled with compelling policy in-
centives, have resulted in Denmark having one of the largest proportions of co-generation
of heat and power in Europe. [18]During this period, new district heating (DH) plants were
established in several larger villages that previously did not have DH. To stimulate the de-
velopment of small-scale co-generation of heat and electricity based on natural gas and
renewable energy, subsidies for electricity production were introduced in 1992. For larger
installations, these subsidies were cut back in 1997. By 2003, new regulations had en-
abled small-scale and industrial CHP generation to enjoy tax reductions. Renewable en-
ergy, especially biomass, emerged as a priority for heat supply in the 1990s. Goals were
established for increased use of biomass in centralized and small-scale plants, and the
use of biomass was encouraged by policies and financial subsidies. The district heating
sector in Denmark is regulated under the heating supply law. Municipalities bear the re-
sponsibility for heat planning and ensuring that DH system expansions and modifications
adhere to the law. The Danish Energy Regulatory Authority supervises the DH sector and
manages general complaints, while the Board of Appeal within the energy area handles
complaints from private consumers regarding heat purchase and delivery [3, 18].
More recent efforts in the decarbonization of district heating focused on various other
approaches. Solar district heating which forms a critical component of over 100 DH net-
works in Denmark, supplying on average 20% of local DH demand. They find that solar
DH has a lot of potential in rural areas with limited heat-demand and land [22]. Buhler et al.
quantified the amount of industrial waste heat theoretically available for district heating in
Denmark by evaluating the fuel distribution across 22 significant industrial sectors and the
temperature levels in respective processes [23]. Their findings suggest a 40% average
energy efficiency, indicating a high potential for waste-heat recovery. In a subsequent
study, Buhler et al. examined the feasibility of using industrial excess heat, excluding
DCs, for district heating in Denmark and discovered a potential of 1.36 TWh, which could
fulfill 5.1% of the current heat demand [24]. Surprisingly, more than half of this potential
could be utilized without increasing heat temperatures. The limitations of these efforts
underscore the necessity of additional alternative sources for heat production.
Looking into the future, Low Temperature District Heating (LTDH) will be implemented in
local networks. LTDH is a system of heating buildings that operates at lower tempera-
tures than traditional district heating. Whereas traditional district heating systems operate
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
5
==PAGE:16==
at temperatures of around 70-90°C, LTDH systems typically operate at temperatures of
50-70°C [25, 26, 27] have more energy-efficient heating systems, so they require less
heat than older buildings. Although studies show that even the existing building stock
of Denmark can be supplied with supply temperatures as low as 50°C most of the year.
Only at times in winter, the temperature would need to rise to 60°C. With better insulated
windows, a supply temperature of 50°C has been shown to be sufficient. By using lower-
temperature district heating systems, the energy demand can be better matched to the
actual needs of the buildings, resulting in more efficient energy use and reduced energy
waste. For the waste-heat-recovery from data-centers, LTDH offer the chance to limit the
use of HPs in the system, enhancing the economic viability strongly. [3, 28, 29] The future
outlook of LTDH, indicates a bigger potential for WHR due to smaller temperature gaps
between heat-source and -sink for the connected HPs.
Research on Waste-Heat-Recovery from data centers
A 2017 report by the Danish
Energy Agency on the regulation and planning of district heating does not mention DCs’
potential, revealing the nascent stage of research in this area [3]. However, a more recent
report, the 2021 ’Varmeplan Danmark’ acknowledges the potential of harnessing waste
heat from DCs as a means to replace fossil fuels and mitigate biomass combustion in
Denmark’s district heating [27]. According to Petrovic et al., the latent potential is signifi-
cant, suggesting that up to 27% of the heat in Danish DH networks could be supplied by
waste heat from DCs by 2040 [30]. However, the ’Varmeplan Danmark’ estimates this
potential to be less than 10% [27], indicating considerable uncertainty surrounding the
extent of this potential. An investigation by Lu et al. into a 500 MW DC postulated that if
waste-heat recovery were implemented, the data center could supply space heating and
warm water to over 30,000 homes [31]. This case underscores how strategically placing
even a single data center could potentially heat a small town. In a comparative study of
DCs across Europe, Depoorter et al. [32] discovered that the CO2 emissions from a data
center in Sweden could be up to 30 times less than that of a data center in London, mainly
due to the low-carbon energy-mix in Sweden. Several other studies have corroborated
the significance of location in realizing the theoretical potential of waste-heat recovery [30,
33, 32, 6]. Notably, the environmental impact of a new data center is greatly influenced by
factors such as its location, the local climate, and the carbon intensity of the local energy
mix [33]. This finding underlines the importance of location in minimizing the environmen-
tal impact of DCs. To quantitatively assess the environmental impact and the potential
for carbon displacement in Denmark’s DH networks, a spatial approach that factors in the
local infrastructure is beneficial. Jerez Monsalves et al. examined regulatory frameworks
and business models for DCs across different markets [6]. They emphasized the cru-
cial role of location and proposed that location decisions should be prioritized early in the
project development phase. Yet, despite this widespread acknowledgment, the literature
does not provide comprehensive spatial approaches for data center development based
on waste-heat recovery.
Spatial investigations on Waste-Heat-Recovery
Spatial investigations into district heat-
ing in Denmark have been more prevalent.
One such study, conducted by the con-
sultancy ’Planenergi’, examined the feasibility and land-use requirements for ground-
mounted solar-heating systems in the country [22]. In another study, Lund et al. [34]
mapped potential heat sources for large scale HPs in Denmark, encompassing low-temperature
industrial heat, wastewater treatment plants, supermarkets, and various water sources
such as groundwater, lakes, rivers, and sea water. However, their study did not explicitly
identify whether DCs were considered within the scope of low-temperature industrial heat
6
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:17==
sources. Their findings revealed potential heat sources in 398 out of 403 DH networks,
with groundwater standing out as the source with the most geographical and volumet-
ric potential. However, their study also highlighted a mismatch between available heat
sources and DH demand, particularly in larger cities where the volume of available heat
per unit of heat demand is substantially lower than in rural areas. This implies a height-
ened need for heat sources, such as DCs, in densely populated areas. A GIS-based
analysis targeting district heating in Denmark was carried out by Nielsen and Moller [35],
with the objective of evaluating the economics of supplying areas with district heating.
Their approach involved building a GIS model designed to incorporate production, distri-
bution, and transmission costs in DH networks. They concluded that areas with high heat
demand and good access to existing DH infrastructure were prime candidates for expan-
sion. Although they identified potential for DH expansion in Denmark, they stressed that
production and distribution costs are critical for expanding the existing grid and enabling
new locations to be feasible. However, their study did not factor in waste-heat from DCs.
Therefore, a spatial approach with a focus on the greater Copenhagen DHN with high
heat-demand and a extensive infrastructure to future data-center development, is novel.
This research aims to quantify the impact of size and location of new DCs on the potential
for WHR DHNs where the WHR is sustainable and economically viable.
Economic viability
Various research groups have delved into the economic viability
of waste-heat recovery from DCs [36, 37, 30]. An examination of the private economic
feasibility was conducted by Parssinen et al. [36]. Their economic investment assess-
ment for waste heat utilization from DCs evaluated three different scales of DCs (0.2, 2,
20MW), and concluded that the utilization of waste-heat in district heating from medium
to large data-centers could be remarkably viable, with a median NPV of 16M€ for the
largest one. Crucially, their study demonstrates that the feasibility is greatly influenced by
the size of the data center, thereby necessitating the consideration of different scales of
DCs in any spatial approach. Wahlroos et al. [38] underscores the significant advantage
provided by the stable load profile, particularly during high-demand winter months. Their
simulated network saw a reduction in total operational costs ranging from 0.6%-7.3%.
However, these economic assessments did not factor in local challenges and infrastruc-
ture. It should be noted that the cost composition for waste heat depends on distribution
costs, which in turn are influenced by access to the DH network [35]. Despite numerous
studies indicating a plausible business case and potential reductions in operational costs,
the standard practice does not include waste-heat recovery in DCs. Several reasons
have been put forth to explain this discrepancy. Firstly, the low enthalpy heat requires
upgrading to higher temperatures using HPs, which not only increase the electricity con-
sumption, but also represent a substantial capital expenditure [36]. Secondly, there exists
a substantial knowledge gap and differing investment horizons between DC and DH oper-
ators, leading to uncertainties in investment [6, 38]. The discount rate plays a crucial role
in determining the economic feasibility of energy projects as it directly influences the net
present value of investment costs and operational profits. [36, 39] Lower discount rates
generally make long-term, capital-intensive investments such as heat pump installations
more attractive. Conversely, higher discount rates favor solutions with lower upfront costs
but potentially higher operational expenses. Generally public infrastructure investments
require lower discount rates compared to private investments. An investigation of the im-
pacts of the discount rate is crucial to assess the economic feasibility from a private and
public stand-point [40, 39]. Assessing the potential in terms of cost- and emissions sav-
ings, taking spatial considerations and current infrastructure into account, is necessary
and is new to this study.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
7
==PAGE:18==
Challenges and Policy-frameworks
One major problem for the widespread implemen-
tation of waste-heat-recovery systems are viable access to heat demand (spatial consider-
ations), adequate quality of heat supply and the economic viability. [34, 35] Furthermore,
the interests of DH-operators and data center developers must be aligned for successful
implementation. A legal, technical and economical framework must be in place [6]. Topics
include but are not limited to the ownership of the installations, price of the waste-heat,
share of profits and responsibility for operation and maintenance. DC-operators can ben-
efit from a greener public image and support by local communities1. Cost-sharing for the
investments regarding th WHR between DH- and DC-operator is a barrier only little inves-
tigated [6]. For DC operators, these uncertainties must be mitigated through a dedicated
supportive regulatory framework. Such policies should incentivize the integration of DCs
into electricity and heat grids, especially during the planning phase [6]. For their electric-
ity consumption, DC-operators are usually entering Power-Purchase-Agreements (PPAs)
to protect themselves from volatile electricity markets and to achieve a higher planning-
security. [6] A PPA ensures constant electricity prices for the operation and reduces un-
certainties and can also be contracted for the operation of the HP in the DC. By mitigating
the risk of fluctuating electricity-prices, operators could be more incentivized to invest in
waste heat recovery systems. This arrangement, in case of a low-carbon PPA offers
additionally low Greenhouse-Gases (GHG)-emission from the electricity-consumption.
Given that district heating in Denmark is subject to extensive regulation [18, 6, 3], it is
essential that this regulatory framework recognizes the potential contribution of DCs and
manages the planning procedure accordingly. Hence, testing policies and providing tan-
gible policy recommendations based on spatial results is necessary.
Contribution to the literature
This literature review indicates that WHR will be indis-
pensable in the process to decarbonize district-heating in Denmark. Data-centers offer a
spatially flexible source for WHR. Academic research on waste-heat recovery from data-
centers is increasing, many researchers emphasize the importance of location from vari-
ous perspectives. Key knowledge gaps include i) the necessity of integrating the waste-
heat into existing systems, since most existing case studies are hypothetical and do not
take local challenges, such as existing heat-demand, land-availability or the current heat-
source portfolio, into account. ii) Quantification of potential cost- and emission savings in
existing DHNs and iii) Necessary policies that help decision-makers to steer future DC-
development sustainable.
Investigating the true potential of WHR from DCs can only be done when respecting the
current DH source portfolio, the potential DC-size and its location. Hence, this thesis aims
to investigate the correlation between size, location and cost and quantifies the potential
with a case-study for Copenhagen. With policy recommendations to incentivize the devel-
opment of DCs in optimal locations and for the right networks and prioritization based on
cost and emission criteria can ensure that WHR is cost-effective and emissions-reducing.
1When the Apple-DC was announced, connection to the local DH-network was promised, leading to back-
ing of the project by the local communities. This support is gone since the DC is still not delivering waste-heat
to the homes [8]
8
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:19==
4
Methodology
This study aims to assess the feasibility and potential of waste-heat recovery from DCs
from within the context of Denmark’s existing infrastructure, the scale of the DCs, and
the present CO2-intensity of district heating DHNs. First, the carbon-intensity of Den-
mark’s DHNs is assessed using production data from all Danish DHNs from 2021. [41,
42] By leveraging this data, we aim to facilitate a more profound understanding of the
spatial dimensions related to DH. Secondly, an optimization model is developed to as-
sess the economic viability and potential of waste-heat recovery from DCs. Based on
technological-economic assumptions [42, 43], the optimization model aims to minimize
total cost of heat production under the constraints of currently installed infrastructure. Us-
ing the optimization model, the impact of fuel cost, size, distance to and other parameters
are evaluated. The potential cost- and emission savings, dependent on the data center’s
location in respect to the DHN are assessed. This will encompass considerations of in-
vestments in WHR-infrastructure. A case-study based on greater Copenhagen’s DH and
its demand [44] applies the optimization model to an exisiting DHN and helps to draw
conclusions on the potential and the feasibility of WHR from DCs.
4.1
Case Study - Greater Copenhagen district heating
Greater Copenhagen’s district heating network is, based on its heat-supply, the largest
DHN in Denmark. [44, 41] To assess the potential for cost- and emissions savings from
WHR, a case-study on greater Copenhagen’s DHN is conducted, based on the 2021
hourly demand profiles of the Greater Copenhagen DHN. The DHN is split into the re-
spective sectors CTR and VEKS and their demand profiles have been procured and are
publicly available on Varmelast [44]. The respective demand-profiles can be seen in figure
4.1.
4.1.1
Estimation of carbon-intensity and costs across Denmark’s District
Heating
To explore the potential for WHR from DCs in Denmark, this study analyzes current costs
and emissions in the country’s DHNs, relying on data from the Danish Energy Agency
(DEA) [41]. The 125% method, recommended by the Danish Energy Agency, is used to
allocate costs and emissions between heat and electricity, enabling a detailed analysis of
emissions across Danish DH networks. The CO2 emissions are calculated based on the
fuel consumption and emission factors provided by the Danish ministry of Energy [45].
This analysis, results can be found in chapter 5.1, shows the value of a case-study con-
ducted on Copenhagen’s DH. With a high carbon-intensity, a large number of sources, a
high variety and being the biggest Network in Denmark, a case-study on this DHN can
offer insights into the potential and the feasibility of WHR from DCs.
4.1.2
Demand and source-portfolio in Copenhagen’s DH
Heating demand underlies high seasonal, weekly and daily variability. While in the warm
summer months, district heating just has to cover the demand from warm water, in winter
the heating load of households and buildings is added. The warm water demand in sum-
mer is approximately 8% of the total demand in winter. Daily patterns show peaks in the
morning and evening, likely due to the rising demand of warm water for showers.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: Demand Curve in Greater Copenhagen’s district heating
The demand is split into the two parts of the DHN of Copenhagen. The CTR sector spans
over the inner city of Copenhagen, down to Amager and up north to Gentofte. The VEKS-
sector covers Copenhagen’s west, all the way to Roskilde and down to Køge. A map
of the two sectors can be found in Appendix A.The DHN of Copenhagen operates very
centralized with a few plants producing most of the heat. Figure 4.2 shows the installed
capacity and production by source in 2021.
(a) Installed capacity in Copenhagen by source
(b) Production in Copenhagen by source
Figure 4.2: Installed capacity and production in Copenhagen by source and main fuel,
Color Code can be found in © Simon Martin 2023
The heat-source portfolio of Copenhagen’s CTR and VEKS network shows following in-
stalled capacities by fuel source and source-type1. District heating in Copenhagen is to
large extent based on waste-energy and biomass-sources, fossil fuel sources act as peak-
and reserve-plants. Table 4.1 shows the installed capacity in the respective networks by
source-type.
1Sources with no Production in 2021 are omitted
10
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:21==
Type
Capacity Heat CTR
[MWth]
Capacity El CTR
[MWel]
Capacity Heat VEKS
[MWth]
Capacity El VEKS
[MWel]
WtE - CHP
190
62
238.8
72.1
Wood Chips - CHP
400
150
53
15
Wood Pellets - CHP
251
64
936.5
805.6
Wood Pellets - HOP
-
-
33
-
Natural Gas - CHP
377.2
65.2
36
5.9
Natural Gas - HOP
725.3
-
382.2
-
Gas Oil - HOP
492.2
-
347
-
Electricity - HOP
120
-
0.2
-
Electricity - HP
17.5
7.7
-
Table 4.1: Installed capacity in Copenhagen’s DH-network by source-type [41]
4.2
Optimization Model for District Heating Source Allocation
As elaborated in the literature review 3, the DH-operators have to minimize the cost of
heat for the consumers. To achieve this, low-cost heat sources are prioritized. The heat
sources used are determined by the merit order of production cost, unlike in electricity
markets the price of heat is ultimately not determined by the most expensive producer
which is needed to meet the demand, but by the sum of the costs of the used sources
divided by the total production. If a new (cheaper) source is added, the most expensive
producer falls out or can only produce at limited capacity.
This chapter presents an optimization model designed to allocate district heating sources
efficiently and at lowest cost. The model aims to minimize the total cost of heat production
both areas (CTR & VEKS), in each hour of the year by allocating sources based on their
marginal cost.
4.2.1
Mathematical Formulation of optimization problem
This section articulates the mathematical formulation of the optimization problem, the ob-
jective function, it’s sets, parameters and decision variables.
Sets
The Sets in this model represent the different categories of data used to simulate
and analyze the integration of data center waste heat into DHNs.
• A: Two DH-areas VEKS and CTR
• H: Hours of the year
• Ω: Existing Heat-Pump sources
• Θ: Electric Boiler sources
• Λ: Traditional sources (WtE, Wood-
Chips, Wood-Pellets, gas-oil)
• Υ: Natural gas sources
• ∆:
Heat-Pumps connected to data
center
Set A consists of the two District Heating (DH) areas, VEKS and CTR, that the model
will consider. H represents the hours of the year, serving as the time-based dimension
in the analysis. Ωdenotes the existing heat pump sources while Θ refers to the electric
boiler sources in the model. Λ stands for all the traditional sources of energy that the
model takes into account. Υ represents natural gas sources, and ∆signifies data center
HPs, which are specialized devices used for capturing and recycling waste heat from data
center operations.
Parameters
The Parameters are crucial elements that drive the computations and in-
fluence the outcomes in the model.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
11
==PAGE:22==
• ymax Max. heat-capacity [MW]
• COM Variable O&M cost [€/MWh]
• CF Fuel cost incl. Taxes [€/MWh]
• D: Demand [MW]
• w: Emission factor [kgCO2/MWh]
• p: Hourly electricity price [€/MWh]
• a: Hourly grid emissions [kgCO2/MWh]
• g: Hourly gas price2 [€/MWh]
• η: Fuel efficiency / COP [–]
• τ: Profit binary (1 for CHP, 0 for HOP)
• cb: cb-coefficient [MWel/MWth]
• i:
Inv.
costs
HP-infrastructure
[€/MW]
• r: Discount rate [-]
• n: Lifetime of infrastructure [yrs]
• d: Distance of DC to DH-network [m]
• t: Piping costs [€/m/MW]
ymax is the maximum capacity of the source, COM refers to variable operation and main-
tenance O&M-costs, CF is the cost of fuel including taxes, D represents the heat demand
within the district heating areas. W refers to the carbon emission factor, p is the hourly
electricity price, and g denotes the hourly gas price, both of which significantly impact
the economic feasibility of the system. η signifies the fuel efficiency, while τ is a binary
variable used for profit determination (1 for co-generation, 0 for boilers). cb stands for
the co-generation efficiency coefficient, i is for the investment costs associated with heat
pump infrastructure, r signifies the discount rate, n represents the expected operational
lifetime of the infrastructure, d is the distance of the data center to the DHN, and t denotes
the piping costs for heat transmission.
Decision Variables
Decision Variables are the variables that the model optimizes. These
values can change within the given constraints to find the optimal solution for the system.
• yH: Heat-generation capacity
• yEL Electricity-generation capacity3
yH represents the heat generation capacity of each source, which is the potential output
of the waste heat recovery system. yEL represents the electricity generation capacity of
each source. The electricity generation capacity is fixed to the heat generation capacity
over the cb coefficient.
Objective Function and Constraints
The objective function of the optimization model
is defined as:
Min
!
a∈A
!
h∈H
[
!
s∈Ω,∆
CHP +
!
s∈Θ
CEB +
!
s∈Λ
CT +
!
s∈Υ
CNG] + CIN
(4.1)
Where CHP represent the term for the cost of HPs (4.2), CHP the term for electric boilers
(4.3), CT traditional sources such as WtE, wood-chips and -pellets (4.4), CNG is the term
for natural gas sources (4.5) and finally CIN the investment cost for new infrastructure for
the WHR from the DC (4.6).
The constraints are defined as following:
2The hourly gas prices are derived from monthly gas prices in 2021
3The Electricity-generation capacity is fixed to the heat-generation capacity over the cb-coefficient
12
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:23==
s.t.
!
s
yH
a,h,s = Dh,a,
∀h ∈H, ∀a ∈A, ∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
yH
a,h,s ≤ymax,
∀h ∈H, ∀a ∈A, ∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
!
s∈Υ
yH
s,h × Cbs = yEL
s,h ,
∀h ∈H, ∀s ∈τ == 1
ys = 0.2 × yMax
s
,
∀s ∈Λ, type == WtE
ys ≥0,
∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
The objective function minimizes the total cost of the system, which is the sum of the cost
of each source multiplied by the allocated capacity. The first term:
CHP =
!
s∈Ω,∆
((pEl
h × yH
a,s
ηs
) + COM
a,s × yH
a,s)
(4.2)
handles all HPs in the network, η represents the Coefficient of Performance (COP) of the
heat pump. The second term:
CEB =
!
s∈Θ
((pEl
h + COM
a,s ) × yH
a,s
ηs
)
(4.3)
accounts for the electricity boiler sources followed by
CT =
!
s∈Λ
((CF
a,s × yH
a,s
ηs
+ COM
a,s × ya,s −τs × yEL
a,s × pEl
h )
(4.4)
The Λ-sources include all traditional sources running either on wood-chips, wood-pellets,
waste or gas-oil. The τ makes the distinction as a binary variable for co-generation (1) or
boilers (0).
The next term:
CNG !
s∈Υ
(((CF
a,s + gh) × yH
a,s
ηs
+ COM
a,s × ya,s −τs × yEL
a,s × pEl
h )
(4.5)
is solely for natural-gas sources where the fuel price CF
a,s + gh consists of the monthly
gas-prices plus the associated taxes. The last term:
CIN =
!
s∈∆
((ymax ∗(is + ts ∗ds) ∗
r(1 + r)n
(1 + r)n −1))
(4.6)
Adds the annuity of the heat pump investment and the associated infrastructure including
substations and transmission pipes, depending on the heat-pump capacity ymax.
The demand constraint:
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
13
==PAGE:24==
!
s
yH
a,h,s = Dh,a,
∀h ∈H, ∀a ∈A, ∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
(4.7)
ensures that the total allocated capacity in each hour and area matches the heat demand
in said hour and area.
The capacity limit constraint:
yH
a,h,s ≤ymax,
∀h ∈H, ∀a ∈A, ∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
(4.8)
ensures that the allocated capacity for each source does not exceed its maximum capac-
ity.
The relationship between heat and electricity generation is simplified in the co-allocation
constraint where the electricity-capacity is directly linked to the heat-capacity via the Cb-
coefficient and the constraint:
!
s∈Υ
yH
s,h × Cbs = yEL
s,h ,
∀h ∈H, ∀s ∈τ == 1
(4.9)
The priority constraint:
ys = 0.2 × yMax
s
,
∀s ∈Λ, type == WtE
(4.10)
for WtE-sources always assigns 20% of the full capacity of waste-incineration sources to
meet the demand before allocating capacity from other sources.
Share heat & electricity
The optimization model accounts for the profits made from
electricity production by co-generation plants. The variable production costs for heat and
emissions are based on the 125% method as recommended by the DEA.
The heat total for all co-generation sources is calculated as following:
QH
s =
!
h∈H
yh
1.25,
∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
(4.11)
The corresponding electricity total is derived as following:
QEL
s
=
!
h∈H
yh
ηs
−yh
1.25 =
!
h∈H
yh
ηs
−QH
s ,
∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
(4.12)
which represents the fuel consumption subtracted by the total heat-production.
The share-heat factor is then calculated by dividing the heat total with the sum of heat
and electricity, respectively the electricity total divided by the sum for the share-electricity
factor:
qH
s =
QH
s
QH
s + QEL
s
,
∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
(4.13)
qEL
s
=
QEL
s
QH
s + QEL
s
,
∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
(4.14)
14
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:25==
The costs corresponding to heat are therefore calculated by multiplying the share-heat
factor with the total cost:
CH
heat = qH
s ∗
!
h∈H
Cs,
∀s ∈Ω, Θ, Λ, ∆, Υ
(4.15)
The total emissions are therefore:
!
s∈S
CH
heat
(4.16)
To calculate the emission associated with heat-production, the share-heat factor is multi-
plied with the total emissions, for boiler sources, the share-heat factor is always 1:
W H
s = qH
s ∗wH
s ∗
!
h∈H
ys
ηs
,
∀s ∈Υ, Λ
(4.17)
For sources running on electricity the emissions are calculated as following:
W H
s =
!
h∈H
ah
ys
ηs
,
∀hinH
∀s ∈∆, Θ, Ω
(4.18)
The total emissions are therefore:
!
s∈S
W H
s
(4.19)
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
15
==PAGE:26==
4.3
Technical-economic data and main assumptions
This sub-chapter aims to explore the various technical-economic data necessary for as-
sessing the potential for waste-heat recovery in Danish DCs. Key considerations include
the variable heat production costs of the current sources, investment costs associated
with WHR from DCs and the production costs for the waste-heat from DCs.
Fuel Costs
Fuel costs are, apart from WtE and natural gas sources based on the fuel-price statistic.
[46] The explicit fuel and carbon taxes are based on OECD-data from 2019 [47] Table
4.2 shows the fuel costs including taxes, a full and more detailed overview of the fuel-
costs and the cost-components for all fuels and source-types can be found in appendix
A. Electricity for heating purposes, including priming of DC-waste heat, are tax exempt
based on [48, 49]
Source
Fuel costs. incl Taxes
Unit
Source
Natural gas
39.6*
€/MWhf
[47]
Gas Oil
79
€/MWhf
[43, 47]
Biogas
27
€/MWhf
[43, 47]
Waste***
-19.65
€/MWhf
[50]
Wood Pellets
31.98***
€/MWhf
[46]
Wood Chips
21.9***
€/MWhf
[46]
Table 4.2: * Includes only taxes ** Waste is subject to a process tax for non-renewable
waste of 4.5DKK/GJ or 1.85 DKK/GJ with 59% renewable waste share *** Wood Pellets
and Wood Chips prices are averages of quarterly prices 2021
Monthly gas-prices were used to assess the costs of gas-fired power plants. The monthly
costs for gas increased from below 20€/MWh in the first months of 2021 to over 100€/MWh
in December 2021. [51] The gas prices without taxes can be found in appendix A and are
depicted in figure 4.3. Hourly day-ahead electricity prices in the grid for the electricity-
market zone DK2 are based on Energinet [52]. The model takes profits from electricity
generation by co-generation plants into account. The hourly electricity-prices are used
both for selling and consumption of electricity. A plot of the gas and electricity prices for
2021 is shown in figure 4.3
Figure 4.3: Monthly gas and hourly electricity-prices 2021 [€/MWh] [52, 51]
16
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:27==
Investment costs
Investment costs for the installed sources in the DH-portfolio are not taken into account,
since the optimization model aims to allocate the sources based on their current costs to
provide the heat with an existing plant-portfolio.
Operation & Maintenance cost
Operation and Maintenance cost based on the fuel source whereas the variable cost are
dependent on the operation and include usage of auxiliary materials, outages and waste
disposal. For the optimization model only the variable production costs are considered,
assuming that the plants in the network are kept operational in any case.
Source
Var. Operational cost
Unit
Natural gas / Biogas CHP
0.35
€/MWhel
Natural gas / Biogas HOP
1.1
€/MWhth
Gas Oil HOP
2.5
€/MWhth
WtE CHP (back pressure)
25.28
€/MWhel
WtE HOP
7.38
€/MWhel
Wood Pellets CHP (back pressure)
1.86
€/MWhel
Wood Pellets HOP
1.96
€/MWhth
Wood Chips CHP (back pressure)
4.49
€/MWhel
Wood Chips HOP
2.7
€/MWhth
Electric boiler
0.8
€/MWhth
Heat pump (excess heat)
2.19
€/MWhth
Table 4.3: Variable O&M cost 2020 [€/MWh]
Co-Generation Plants
The cb-coefficients for co-generation plants are based on [42]. All co-generation plants
are assumed to be back-pressure plants. Peaker sources, particularly natural gas and
gas-oil fired co-generation plants, focus more on electricity production and have a higher
Cb-coefficient. In contrast, waste-to-energy (WtE) sources and wood-based sources pri-
oritize heat production, featuring a lower Cb-coefficient. The specific coefficients for dif-
ferent fuel types are shown in table 4.4:
Source
Cb-Coefficient
Unit
Natural gas CHP
0.95
MWel/MWth
Biogas CHP
0.86
MWel/MWth
WtE CHP
0.3
MWel/MWth
Wood Pellets CHP
0.46
MWel/MWth
Wood Chips CHP
0.37
MWel/MWth
Table 4.4: Cb-Coefficients of Sources
Thermal efficiency - Fuel consumption
Thermal efficiencies are based on the technology data catalogue by the DEA. [42] The
thermal efficiency is used to assess the fuel consumption of each source. For primar-
ily electricity-producers e.g. natural-gas co-generation plants, the thermal efficiency is
derived by formula 4.20 from [42]:
ηth = ηel
cb
(4.20)
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
17
==PAGE:28==
Where ηel is the annually average electrical efficiency from different back-pressure tech-
nologies and cb is the back-pressure coefficient assumed to be constant. This assumption
is discussed in chapter 6.1. Table A.7 shows the corresponding thermal efficiencies by
source.
Source
Thermal Efficiency
Unit
Natural gas / Biogas CHP
45
%
Natural gas / Biogas HOP
103
%
Gas Oil HOP
103
%
WtE CHP
80
%
WtE HOP
106
%
Wood Pellets
69
%
Wood Chips
83
%
Table 4.5: Thermal Efficiency of Sources [42]
Emissions
Emissions by fuel-consumption for the natural-gas, gas oil and WtE-sources are based
on the emission factors published by the DEA.[41] Biomass combustion is reported as
zero-emission as by [4], this regulation is discussed in chapter 6. For electricity-powered
sources, the emissions are based on the hourly carbon-intensity of the electricity in the
grid. [52]
Source
Emission factor
Unit
Natural gas
199.7
kgCO2/MWhf
Gas Oil
266.8
kgCO2/MWhf
Waste
153
kgCO2/MWhf
Table 4.6: Emission factor of fuels
4.3.1
Integration of data center
The heat generated by DCs is typically of low-grade and requires priming via HPs to be
compatible with the operational temperature of the district heating system. This need
for temperature regulation culminates in substantial infrastructural investment. An inte-
gral part of the process of integrating WHR from DCs involves addressing the associated
investment costs, including heat pump installation, maintenance, necessary infrastruc-
ture, and the expansion of the district heating (DH) system. The analysis also takes into
consideration the operational costs of HPs and other associated components, which are
essential to understand the economic feasibility of such projects.
To assess the potential cost-savings, decarbonization and the shift in the allocation of
sources from DC-integration, a virtual DCs, respectively their connected HP are added
to the source portfolio. As explored in the literature review in chapter 3, DCs can be
broadly categorized into three sizes; Enterprise, co-location and hyperscale DCs. Each
data center size as well as a multi-DC scenario are investigated. 4.7 shows the investi-
gated capacities of HPs connected to virtual DCs.
18
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:29==
Scenario
Heat Pump Capacity
Unit
Small
3
MW
Medium
50
MW
Large
150
MW
Multi
209
MW
Table 4.7: Investigated capacities of heat pumps connected to data center
As shown in the literature review in chapter 3, DCs have spatial constraints in the location
based on their footprint. In short, the bigger the data center, the larger the footprint,
hence the distance to the DHN will generally grow with size. The investigated distances
are shown in table 4.8:
Scenario
Distances
Unit
3 MW - HP
0, 1000, 2500, 5000, 10000
m
50 MW - HP
0, 1000, 2500, 5000, 10000
m
150 MW - HP
2500, 5000, 10000, 12500, 15000
m
Table 4.8: Investigated distances to DH-network of heat pumps connected to data center
Investment cost
The successful implementation of waste-heat recovery systems from
DCs significantly hinges upon several financial factors, including the costs associated with
heat pump investments, pumping and distribution substations, and transmission pipes.
The most considerable expenditure incurred during this process is attributable to the in-
stallation of HPs and the associated infrastructure. These costs serve as critical param-
eters in evaluating the economic viability of waste-heat recovery. The investment costs
for the WHR-infrastructure are based on the technology catalogue [42, 53]. An overview
based on size can be found in table 4.9. The relative costs per MW of capacity decrease
with an increase in size. A comparative analysis with the estimated investment costs for
the heat pump used in the META data center on Fyn substantiates these figures [54]. In
determining the required size of a heat pump for waste-heat recovery, factors such as
heat load, waste heat temperature, and desired heat recovery efficiency are taken into
consideration.
Small DC 3MW-HP
Medium DC 50MW-HP
Large DC 150MW-HP
Investment Cost
Heat Pump [€/MW]
860’000
670’000
500’000
Investment Cost
Single Line [€/MW]
25
25
12
Investment Cost
Substation 1 [€/MW]
115’000
0 if d<=2500
115’000
0 if d<=1000
115’000
Investment Cost d>10000m
Substation 1 [€/MW]
-
-
230’000
Investment Cost
Substation 2 [€/MW]
105’000
105’000
105’000
Investment Cost d>10000m
Substation 2 [€/MW]
-
-
210’000
Table 4.9: Investment Costs for WHR-infrastructure based on HP-size
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
19
==PAGE:30==
The total investment is composed of the investment for the heat-pump, the necessary
sub-stations based on the distance as well as the transmission distance as shown in table
4.9. All factors are dependent on the heat pump’s capacity. To account for the costs of
additional investment in the associated infrastructure in the model, the concept of annuity
is utilized. This concept allows for the systematic distribution of the cost of an investment
over its operational life or a specific time frame. The annuity is computed based on the
initial investment cost, the discount rate, and the operational life of the investment, using
the following formula:
A = C ∗
r(1 + r)n
(1 + r)n −1
(4.21)
where A is the annuity, C represents the initial investment cost, r is the discount rate, and
n is the operational lifetime of the investment.
Electricity costs
Electricity costs are calculated the same as for other electricity sources
as elaborated on in 4.3, the electricity is tax-exempt.
Operation & Maintenance cost
Operation and maintenance cost for the heat-pumps
is based on the technology catalogue [42] and are shown in table 4.10. The technology
catalogue does not cover HPs larger than 10 MW, the value for 10MW heat pump is used
for the larger capacity HP.
Discount rate
For the base case, a discount rate of 5% and an operational lifetime of
25 years is assumed. Although the expected and designed lifetime of district heating
infrastructure is typically 40 years [42], a uniform lifetime of 25 years is considered due
to shorter investment horizons for DCs and the design-lifetime for HPs. Chapter 4.3.1
describes a sensitivity analysis on this parameter.
Size
Var. O&M-cost
Unit
3MW - HP
2.19
€/MWhth
50MW - HP
1.69
€/MWhth
150MW - HP
1.69
€/MWhth
Table 4.10: Operation and Maintenance cost of different HP sizes
Coefficient of Performance (COP)
Efficiency is enhanced when the temperature gap
between the waste-heat and the desired DH temperature is minimized. As such, lower
supply temperatures in the district heating, in conjunction with highly insulated piping, can
substantially improve the efficiency of HPs and the recovery potential of waste heat from
DCs. A heat-pump operates at a higher COP the lower the temperature gap between heat-
source and heat-sink is assuming no inefficiencies or irreversibilities the COP is defined
based on the first law of thermodynamics as:
COPheating = |Qcold| + W
W
=
TH
TH −TC
(4.22)
As a simplification, a COP of 4.5 is assumed and the parameter is investigated using a
sensitivity analysis as described in chapter 4.3.1.
20
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:31==
Policy implementation
As explored in the literature review 3, policies can help to optimize the potential of the
integration of waste-heat-recovery from DCs in DH. By implementing various potential
policies for the development of DC waste-heat-recovery in the optimization model, the
impact of said policies can be assessed. The impact is assessed on both a cost and
emission basis. The assessment includes a PPA for the electricity consumption and a
prioritization of waste-heat from DCs, similar to the priority of WtE-plants.
Power Purchase Agreements
As explained in the literature review in 3, a PPA is a
common measurement used by large electricity consumers to protect themselves from
volatile market-prices. The impact on costs, emissions and the allocation of sources by
PPAs for the electricity consumption is therefore assessed with the optimization model.
For the assessment of impacts by power purchase agreements, a 50 MW heat pump is
considered with different PPA-prices. The prices considered are range between 30€/MWh
and 70€/MWh in steps of 10€/MWh. According to this PPA market-report from 2020 a
suitable range [55]. Based on a mix of solar and wind-energy, the emissions from the
PPA are assumed to average 5kg/MWh. [56]
Equation 4.2 changes to:
!
s∈Ω,∆
((PPAEl
h × yH
a,s
ηs
) + COM
a,s × yH
a,s)
(4.23)
Prioritization of DC-waste heat
By giving priority to the waste heat from DCs, similar
to the prioritization of WtE-plants, energy authorities can enable enhanced waste heat
recovery and build up a more stable business case. The given priority gives planning
certainty for DCs as well as DH-operators.
The prioritization is implemented identical to the prioritization of WtE-plants in the model.
The corresponding cost-savings, changes in dispatch-patterns and reduction in GHG-
emissions are assessed. Additional constraints to the model:
ys = 0.8 × yMax
s
,
∀s ∈∆
(4.24)
Sensitivity Analysis
A sensitivity analysis on various parameters is performed to assess the robustness of de-
cisions derived from models, given the uncertainties inherent in several model parameters
as discussed in 6.1. For a model that examines heat pump integration into DHNs, the fol-
lowing factors could significantly impact the results and are considered in a sensitivity
analysis.
Discount Rate
The discount rate is a crucial factor to determine the economic attrac-
tiveness of a infrastructure project as explored in chapter 3. The discount-rate is only de-
picted as an annuity in the cost-function of the optimization, a change will not impact the
dispatch of the heat-pump. Energinet suggests a discount rate of 4% for energy projects
[57]. For private companies discount rates vary depending on the size of the company
and the risk of the project between 10 and 30%, where the upper end represents high-risk
or start-up environments.[40]. Hence assuming DC-development by larger coorporations,
the sensitivity analysis is conducted on discount rates from 2.5% to 15%.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
21
==PAGE:32==
Coefficient of Performance (COP)
Chapter 3 elabrates on the importance of the COP
in regards of the feasibility of WHR-projects. A sensitivity analysis on this parameter can
help evaluate the impact of technological advancements, changes in external temperature
conditions or required heat-sink temperatures, and potential operational issues on the
system’s performance. The META-DC in Odense showed in 2022 consistently a COP of
above 4, disregarding a low-production month in July. The technology catalogue suggests
depending on the size, a COP between 4.2 and 5.2 for heat-pumps, using excess heat
as a heat-source. The analyzed COP ranges between 2.5 and 6.5 in steps of 0.5.
Fuel Prices
The prices of fuel and electricity directly influence the relative attractive-
ness of HPs compared to alternative heating solutions, hence the dispatch order. The
correlating nature of fuel-prices decreases the relative benefit of a classical sensitivity
analysis. Hence a tool is developed to investigate the impact of varying fuel prices on the
dispatch order by the DH-operator. The tool offers the possibility to set fuel prices and
other parameters to a certain level and shows the relative dispatch order based on gas-
and electricity prices, two major price-pillars in the cost function. This application can pro-
vide a more comprehensive understanding of the factors that might influence the viability
and performance of heat pump integration into DHNs, hence supporting more robust and
informed decision-making.
4.4
Investigated Scenarios - Summary
First the base-case or business-as-usual scenario is investigated. Followed by an inves-
tigation based on the on the size of DCs. The dispatch, operation costs and emissions
will be investigated on following scenarios, in minimum distance to the DHN, in table 4.11:
Small
Medium
Large
Multi-DC
Unit
Network
CTR
CTR
CTR
CTR
-
Installed HP-capacity
3
50
150
209
MW
Distance to DH-network
0
0
2500
div.*
m
COP - HP
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
-
O&M-cost HP
2.19
1.69
1.69
div*
€/MWhth
Total Investment
2.925
44.5
112.5
165.775
M€
Discount rate investment
5
5
5
5
%
Annuity of Investment
0.207
3.158
7.982
11.761
M€
Table 4.11: Scenarios based on size of the data center at minimum distance
On the small, medium and large scenario, the impact of distance to the DHN will be in-
vestigated on the distances shown in table 4.8. Furthermore, the impact of a PPA and
the priotization investigated on medium-scenario. The sensitivity analysis on the discount
rate is conducted on the distance scenarios and all sizes of the DC. The sensitivity anal-
ysis of the COP focuses on the impact on dispatch of the heat-pump in the medium and
large scenario.
22
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:33==
5
Results Case-Study greater
Copenhagen district heating
5.1
Justification case-study Copenhagen
Danish district heating consists of more than 360 individual networks of varying size. The
assessment of emissions based on the reported data by DH-operators shows varying
CO2-intensities.
Generally large networks have a higher GHG-intensity compared to
small networks, the 2021 data shows following trends:
0
250
500
750
1,000
1,250
1,500
1,750
2,000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Capacity of Network [MW]
Emissions [kgCO2/GJ]
Figure 5.1: Correlation between size and emission in DH-networks
Smaller networks often operate on only a few heat-sources, in many cases operated on
bio-energy, the more recent development of solar-DH in more rural networks contributes
to the trend of lower emissions in small networks. The map in figure 5.2, shows all DHNs
in Denmark and their respective emissions.
Copenhagen’s district heating system is to a large extent based on biomass (59.9%) and
WtE (29.9%). The biomass is almost exclusively coming from likely imported, as elabo-
rated in chapter 6, wood chips (24.5%) and pellets (34.7%). Copenhagen has an installed
WtE-heat capacity of 429MW (+134 MW Electricity) over three plants with five turbines in
total. These produced over 11’000 TJ of heat in 2021 in addition to 2605 TJ (720 GWh) of
electricity. This centralized layout indicates that transmission is not necessarily a limiting
factor in DH.
The highest intensity can be found in the small network in Kyndby, Zealand which pro-
duces all of its demand using oil. Other high intensities can be found in the Nyborg-
network aswell as the network at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), with emis-
sions of 48kgCO2/GJ and 43kgCO2/GJ respectively1. Looking at the bigger networks, the
network of Aalborg and Esbjerg have the highest carbon-intensity. Both cities meet more
than two-thirds of their demand using fossil fuels. More than 170 DHNs have associated
emissions of less than 5 kgCO2/GJ.
1The calculated carbon-intensities might vary from the official reporting by DH-operators due to the usage
of different data-sources and reporting differences. The values still provide clear trends and only vary slightly
from the reported declared emissions.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.2: Emissions in Danish District Heating, © Simon Martin 2023
Following these trends, it is evident that the highest potential for the waste-heat recov-
ery from DCs in terms of emission savings is in bigger networks with a generally higher
carbon-intensity per unit of heat delivered. Small networks in more rural areas are often
based on biomass, biogas or solar-DH, leading to a low carbon footprint. Additionally,
as explored in 5, waste-heat from data center cannot compete with biomass-sources in
terms of cost per unit of heat delivered nor on emissions. Hence implementing WHR from
DCs would lead to increasing costs and emissions. These findings justify the choice of the
case-study on the DH of greater Copenhagen, with a relatively high carbon-intensity per
unit of delivered heat, a high variety of sources and being the largest network in Denmark.
24
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Results optimization
The optimization model, described in chapter 4.2 allocates the available heat sources2
from the current district heating portfolio in each hour to meet the demand at lowest pos-
sible cost. This chapter elaborates on the results of the optimization and characteristics
of Copenhagen’s DHN without WHR from potential DCs.
5.2.1
Business-as-usual - Heat dispatch, cost and emissions without
DC-integration
As shown in figure 5.3, the CTR-area shows high dependency on gasoline-boilers in the
winter months, while during the summer the demand can be met with WtE-sources and
natural gas. Natural gas sources are additionally allocated during peaks in the winter
months. The heat demand in the VEKS-area can be covered to the largest extent by only
WtE-sources aswell as wood-pellets. The corresponding graph as from the CTR-network,
for the VEKS-network can be found in Appendix A. Due to the source-structure in the
VEKS-part of the network, these results focus on the CTR-part. The results show
a clear trend in the rules of allocating sources, the base-load can always be matched
with WtE-sources as well as wood-chips and -pellets. As figure 5.3 shows, during the
high-demand winter months fossil boilers are needed to match the demand. In the CTR-
network, the WtE-source (190 MW capacity) runs almost at 100% capacity all year, repre-
senting the cheapest source in the CTR-network, covering 26% of the total demand. The
largest share of the demand is covered by one wood-chips (400MW capacity) and one
wood-pellets (251MW capacity) co-generation plant in the system, covering 39% and 17%
respectively. These sources combined can meet the demand more than half of the year
while fossil sources cover the peaks in the winter months. Combined Heat and Power
(CHP)-sources dominate the system due to their cost-structure and returns from electric-
ity co-generation. The mentioned base-load plants are all CHP-sources while the peaking
capacity is dominated by boilers.
2Sources with unknown fuel have been omitted, only for sources with no production in 2021 the fuel is
unknown.
Figure 5.3: Allocation of sources based on their fuel (CTR)
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.5: Variable Production Cost and Emisson
w/o DC(CTR)
In the CTR-network,
the vari-
able production costs of heat, as
depicted in figure 5.53 are low-
est and negative4 in the sum-
mer months.
Due to the high
prices for natural-gas and elec-
tricity in the end of 2021, the
costs are rising towards the end
of the year.
The emission pro-
file exhibits, due to the dispatch
of fossil-fuel sources, high emis-
sions per unit of produced heat in
winter months and low emissions
in the seasonal transitions. In the
winter months, the fossil fuel boil-
ers offer the peaker-capacity, leading to high emissions.
During the summer months
where waste-sources dominate the production, the emissions per unit of heat rise again
but the absolute emissions are lower. Table 5.1 shows the average heat production cost
and emissions in the networks.
3The corresponding graph for the VEKS-network can be found in appendix A
4WtE-sources have a negative production price due to offtake-profits for waste
Figure 5.4: Load duration and dispatch of sources (CTR)
26
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:37==
The base-case, the DH-source dispatch in the CTR-network of Copenhagen, as modelled
for 2021, shows following emissions and costs:
Heat Production [GWh]
El. Production [GWh]
Revenue CHP [M€]
CTR-Network
6566
2008
203.75
VEKS-Network
2466
855
81.04
Total:
9032
2863
284.79
Total Cost [M€]
Cost Heat [M€]
Cost Heat [€/MWh]
CTR-Network
196.73
138.54
21.10
VEKS-Network
1.59
5.02
2.03
Total:
198.32
143.56
15.9
Emissions [mtCO2]
Emissions Heat [mtCO2]
Emi. Heat [kgCO2/MWh]
CTR-Network
615127
461822
70.34
VEKS-Network
309146
198016
80.31
Total:
924273
659838
73.06
Table 5.1: Overview over the business-as-usual (CTR+VEKS)
5.2.2
Impact of DC-integration
Evidently there is a compelling correlation between gas-, electricity prices and the heat
production costs in energy systems. Figure 5.6 shows the production costs of sources,
taking the profits from electricity sales into account. Evidently, WtE-have the lowest cost
and will therefore be dispatched first, followed by wood-chips cogeneration plants up to
an electricity price of 271€/MWh where wood pellets become cheaper due to their higher
cb-coefficient and the corresponding higher profits. When adding a data center to the
network, the data-center is adding capacity to the base-load, being one of the cheapest
sources in the system at costs of 15-18 €/MWh of heat. Even when electricity prices are
rising towards the end of the year, the heat-pump from the data center remains being
a base-load. Biomass-sources become cheaper as soon as electricity-prices go higher
than 66 €/MWh where the cogeneration plants profit from their electricity production. This
is depicted in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Costs including profits from electricity sales based on electricity price
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
27
==PAGE:38==
(a) Costs including profits from electricity sales
based on electricity- and gas prices
(b)
View
interactive
plot:
Click
https://tinyurl.com/8n4ev6za
Figure 5.7: 3D-plot of variable production costs of different sources
Figure 5.8: Average daily heat production costs of different sources [€/MWh] (CTR)
When comparing the costs of the waste-heat from datacenters to peaker sources, its clear
that heat from DCs is preferred in most combinations of gas- and electricity prices. With
rising electricity prices, gas-fired cogeneration plants will become cheaper due to rising
costs for the heat pump and the profits from electricity generation. Gas-fired boilers can
only compete with the DC-waste-heat due to hours with high electricity and low gas-prices,
an unlikely combination.
Following these dispatch rules, waste-heat from data-centers will first replace fossil-fuel
sources, reducing their corresponding emissions, before replacing bio-energy sources.
WtE-sources will always be before DC-sources in the dispatch-order. Figure 5.8 shows
the variable production costs of different sources over the year.
28
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.9: Allocation of sources based on their fuel including DC 50MW (CTR)
The distortions on the energy-market towards the end of the year lead to less dispatch of
DC-waste-heat due to high electricity-prices and following high costs for the HP-operation
and high profits from electricity-sales by co-generation plants less impacted including
wood-chips, -pellets and WtE-sources. The source allocation depicted in 5.9, with the
added DC to the DHN plant-portfolio, shows how the HP from the data center operates
over the year. During the transitional periods in spring and fall, the dispatch of the heat-
pump is highly dependent on the hourly electricity-price while this correlation decreases
in the high-demand months where the electricity-driven HP are decreasing the usage of
natural gas sources.
The allocation-plots of the 3MW-scenario and 150MW-scenario with the allocation of
sources can be found in appendix A.
Size Scenarios
The size of a data center and the corresponding heat pump has evidently the biggest
impact on costs and emission savings from the implementation of waste-heat-recovery.
Figure 5.10 quantifies the production-displacements from the different HP-scenarios
With increasing installed capacity of DC-heat-pumps, the displacement of base-load plants
like wood-pellets and -chips increases. The electricity consumption in the heat produc-
tion increases drastically. A Hyperscale data center with a installed 150 MW heat pump,
consumes up to 140.5 GWh, assuming a COP of 4.5. To put into perspective, this is the
electricity generated from 7 wind turbines of 5 MW capacity 5.
The displacement of fossil fuel boilers and Co-generation plants leads to large cost-
savings across the scenarios. Figure 5.12 shows the cost-savings by fuel-type, a hy-
perscale data center can save up to 22 million Euros over the course of a year, reducing
the total production costs by 16%. The electricity costs for the operation of this data center
accumulates to 10.6 million euro if paying market prices.
5Assuming a 2200 full-load-hours of the wind turbines
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.10: Changes in production in different DC-size scenarios (CTR)
As figure 5.9 shows, the dispatch from waste-heat reduces mainly the dispatch of fossil-
fuel sources. Hence, as table 5.2 shows, the average capacity factor does not decrease
significantly with increase in installed capacity, suggesting a large potential for HPs in the
system.
Small
Medium
Large
Multi
Unit
Avg. Capacity Factor HP
0.50
0.50
0.48
0.46
-
Table 5.2: Results Capacity factor of heat pump
DC-production behaviour based on size
Based on figure 5.9, it is clear that the waste-
heat is dispatched in most high-demand periods6. The increasing electricity prices to-
wards the end of the year decrease the dispatch hours of the data center. A graph of
the DC dispatch compared to the hourly electricity-price can be found in appendix A. The
general dispatch patterns do not change when increasing the size of the data center. It
has to be noted that all scenarios are modelled with a stable COP. A larger heat pump
generally operates on a higher COP, hence changing dispatch rules slightly. This is dis-
cussed in 5.2.2. Overall, the medium DC can cover 2.5% of the total yearly production as
shown in figure 5.11 and 7.3% with the 150MW HP - the corresponding plot can be found
in appendix A.
6Corresponding plots for the other size-scenarios can be found in appendix A
30
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.11: Distribution of production by source with medium DC >1% (CTR+VEKS)
Following the displacement of fossil-fuel boilers and co-generation plants, a hyperscale
data center could potentially displace 65’000 tons of CO2-emissions from the CTR-network,
reducing the emissions by more than 14% as depicted in figure 5.13. The additional elec-
tricity consumed by the heat pump leads to emissions of almost 22 mtCO2, when the
hourly grid-emission factor is used. Table 5.3 shows the respective cost savings based
on the size.
Basecase
Small
Medium
Large
Multi
Unit
Total production costs
138.5
138.04
130.53
116.55
109.53
M€
∆production cost
-0.36
-5.78
-15.87
-20.94
%
Annuity of Investment
0.207
3.158
7.982
11.761
M€
∆total cost
-0.18
-3.47
-10.09
-12.43
%
Total Emissions
659’837
658’345
635893
593’957
573’114
Mt
∆total emissions
-0.3
-5.2
-14.3
-18.8
%
Table 5.3: Size scenarios Results (CTR&VEKS)
Taxes from fossil fuel sources
It has to be noted, that the decrease in production from
natural gas and gas-oil sources will lead to a substantial decrease in tax-revenues for the
state. This is enhanced by the more recent decision on tax-free electricity for DCs-WHR.
The quantification of these changes in tax-revenues exceeds the scope of this case-study.
This should be part of further research into the topic as discussed in chapter 6.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.12: Cost savings [M€] in different DC-size scenarios (CTR)
Figure 5.13: Change in emissions from various fuels in different DC-size scenarios (CTR)
32
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:43==
Distance Scenarios
As research has shown, as elaborated in chapter 3, the location, in particular the distance
of the DC has a big impact on the feasibility of waste-heat recovery. With longer distances
to the DHN, costs for transmission and ultimately the total investment costs increase dras-
tically. The impact has been evaluated for three different DC-sizes and various distance
measurements. Since the investment costs are added as a separate cost-point in the
optimization as an annuity, the additional investment costs do not impact the dispatch of
the heat-pumps from DCs. The results show that the transmission distance and the cor-
responding costs for transmission infrastructure are not the main driver for the costs. The
heat-pump investment and the investments in necessary substations for pumping and
distribution is the larger share of the investment, hence increasing distance does not lead
to exploding costs as shown in tables 5.4,5.55.6. The number of needed substation is a
matter of large uncertainty and depends on the available local infrastructure and spatial
heat demand as discussed in chapter 6.
Figure 5.14: Composition of Investment costs for different scenarios
Small - 0m
Small - 1000m
Small - 2500m
Small - 5000m
Small - 10000m
Unit
Annuity of Investment
0.207
0.213
0.243
0.256
0.283
M€
∆total cost
-0.183
-0.178
-0.157
-0.147
-0.128
%
Table 5.4: Cost-savings compared to business-as-usual Results Small-DC - CTR
Medium - 0m
Medium - 1000m
Medium - 2500m
Medium - 5000m
Medium - 10000m
Unit
Annuity of Investment
3.157
3.246
3.379
3.601
4.044
M€
∆total cost
-3.48
-3.41
-3.31
-3.15
-2.83
%
Table 5.5: Cost-savings compared to business-as-usual Results Medium-DC - CTR
Large - 2500m
Large - 5000m
Large - 10000m
Large - 12500m
Large - 15000m
Unit
Annuity of Investment
7.982
8.301
8.940
11.601
11.920
M€
∆total cost
-10.09
-9.85
-9.39
-7.47
-7.24
%
Table 5.6: Cost-savings compared to business-as-usual Results Large-DC - CTR
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
33
==PAGE:44==
Large data-centers which must be placed outside of the cities require more investments in
substations and transmission pipes, which can make up half of the total investment costs
if the data center is placed 12-15 km away from the DHN.
Figure 5.15: Potential areas for large-scale DC-development,© Simon Martin 2023
Figure 5.15 shows potential areas for large-scale DC-development around the CTR-network,
urban-areas, forests and water-bodies are defined as unsuitable. It is clear that most
areas are more than 5 kilometres away from the DHN, and are located to the west and
north of the city. Potential areas lie also on Amager, where already many large-scale heat
sources are located. Further considerations regarding land-availability are discussed in
chapter 6.
34
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:45==
Impact of tested policy-measures
Policies can change the feasibility of waste-heat-recovery and change their dispatch pat-
terns. This chapter elaborates on the impacts of various policies implemented in the
optimization model.
The results show that entering a PPA has a moderate impact on the dispatch of waste-
heat from DCs, due to the dispatch rules. Figure 5.16 shows the horizontal plane in the
dispatch order from the PPA. When comparing the dispatch plot, it is evident that PPAs
do not change the dispatch-order in many scenarios of gas- and electricity-prices. So
even with the rising electricity prices towards the end of the year, the dispatch-rules for
DC-waste-heat do not change substantially.
(a) Dispatch w/o PPA
(b) Dispatch PPA=60€/MWh
Figure 5.16: 3D-plot of variable production costs of different sources
While being cheaper than natural gas boilers across all combinations of gas- and elec-
tricity prices, these combinations with low-gas prices and very high electricity prices are
unlikely to occur in the real-world. Due to these negligible additonal costs, entering a PPA
is likely favourable for the DH-operator to minimize exposure to the electricity market,
benefitting from low-carbon electricity while not sacrificing any benefits from waste-heat-
dispatch. It is evident that PPAs impact the dispatch of base-load plants, in particular the
wood pellets CHP more than fossil fuel peaker sources. If the heat-pump operates on
market-prices with the associated carbon-intensity in the grid, the emissions by the heat-
pump accumulate to 7500 tons of CO2, when operating on a PPA, this number decreases
to 240-270 tons of CO2.
Base Case
Market Price
PPA 30€/MWh
PPA 40€/MWh
PPA 50€/MWh
PPA 60€/MWh
PPA 70€/MWh
Unit
Total cost of operation
138.5
130.53
127.72
128.6
128.95
129.52
130.07
M€
∆production cost
-5.78
-7.78
-7.32
-6.89
-6.48
-6.09
%
Total Emissions
461821.6
437’877.39
429’163.03
429’129.14
429’214.06
429’311.88
429’363.44
tCO2
∆total emissions
-5.18
-7.07
-7.07
-7.06
-7.04
-7.03
%
Table 5.7: Impact of PPA on cost and emissions compared to base-case 50MW HP - CTR
Figure 5.17 and 5.18 show the production compared to the market-price scenario and
the cost compared to the base-case for the medium-case. The production dispatch from
the HPdecreases if the PPA-price is over 70€/MWh, the total cost savings are still higher
compared to the market-price scenario. This is due to higher substitution of natural-gas
sources and less substitution of wood-pellets.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.17: Difference of PPA on total production compared to market-price scenario [%]
50MW-HP - CTR
Figure 5.18: Difference of PPA on total cost compared to base-case scenario [M€] 50MW-
HP - CTR
36
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:47==
Prioritization of waste-heat
Prioritizing waste-heat from data-centers is implemented
by allowing the DC to always dispatch 90% of the the HP-capacity. The prioritization leads
to the DC being a baseload-plant comparable to WtE and the DC can profit from increased
usage especially in the transitional periods and in summer.
Figure 5.19: Fuel allocation with Prioritization 90% (50MW-HP), CTR
Base Case
no Prio
Prio 90%
Unit
Total cost of operation
138.5
130.53
132.28
M€
∆production cost
-5.78
-4.49
%
Total Emissions
461821.6
437’877.39
437’483.83
tCO2
∆total emissions
-5.18
-5.28
%
Table 5.8: Impact of Priotization on cost and emissions 50MW-HP - CTR
Figure 5.20:
Impact of Prioritization 90% on total
production compared to base-case scenario [MWh]
50MW-HP - CTR
As figure 5.20 shows, the pri-
oritization impacts the dispatch
of low-cost wood-pellet and -
chips plants significantly more
than fossil-fuel sources.
This
leads to increasing cost com-
pared to the ’free-market’ dis-
patch. The substitution of WtE in
the summer months leads overall
to decreasing emissions. These
trends are observable for all sizes
of DCs when implementing prior-
itization. It has to be noted that
both, the increase in cost and
the decrease in emissions, com-
pared to the base-case are in-
significant. Hence a prioritization
could enhance the feasibility and
strengthen planning security of the DH- and DC-operator at low additional cost.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
37
==PAGE:48==
Sensitivity Analysis
The sensitivity analysis is conducted on three parameters, the discount-rate for the HP-
investment, the COP of the heat pump as well as the fuel prices.
Discount rate
The discount rate is varied between 2.5% and 15%, following a range
of public and private discount-rates used for infrastructure projects, as explored in the
literature review in chapter 3. The break-even points for different distance-scenarios are
depicted in figure 5.21.
(a) Total cost of heat [M€] depending on discount
rate and distance 3MW-HP
(b) Total cost of heat [M€] depending on discount
rate and distance 50MW-HP
(c) Total cost of heat [M€] depending on discount
rate and distance 150MW-HP
Figure 5.21: Sensitivity Analysis on Distance and Discount rate
The small-scenario in figure 5.21a, shows increasing costs at high discount rates and
distances and the cost-savings become insignificant across all scenatrios at high discount
rates. The 50MW heat-pump in figure 5.21b offers the biggest cost savings along the
range of investigated discount rates. Onlt the 10000m-scenario shows increasing costs
at a discount rate if 13.5%. The hyperscale-case shows increasing costs compared to the
base-case when increasing the distance to more than 12500 m at a discount-rate of 7.5%
and in all cases at a discount rate of more than 12.5%. It has to be noted, that 7.5% is
an average discount-rate from a private-economic perspective. Evidently, the most stable
business-case across all discount-rates and distances is offered by the 50-MW heat pump.
These results indicate that WHR from a medium-sized DC is a profitable investment both
from a public and private-economic perspective. For the small- and large-scenario, a
cost-sharing scheme between DC- and DH-operator and/or subsidies are inevitable.
38
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:49==
Coefficient of Performance (COP)
The second investigated parameter is the COP of
the heat-pump of the DC. The COP is primarily dependent on the temperature difference
between heat-source, in this case the temperature of the waste heat from the DC, and
the heat sink, the operating temperature of the DHN. The sensitivity analysis examines
how variations in this key parameter impacts the overall performance and the dispatch of
the heat in the network. The dispatch rules of the DC-operator lead with a higher COP
to decreasing cost per unit of heat delivered. Due to the nature of the dispatch-rules, the
impact is much greater on the dispatch-decision between fossil peaker-sources and the
COP. Figure 5.22 shows how changes in the COP change costs and emissions in the
medium- and large-scenario.
(a) Total Production by Coefficient of
Performance (COP)
(b) Total Emission by Coefficient of Per-
formance (COP)
(c) Total Cost Heat by Coefficient of
Performance (COP)
(d) Total Cost Heat DC by Coefficient of
Performance (COP)
Figure 5.22: Sensitivity Analysis on COP of DC-heat pump - CTR
The trends are the same for all sizes of HPs, the results from the smallest sized DC have
been omitted and the numbers do not take annuity costs of investment into account. While
total-production, or the amount of dispatch-hours and the correlating emissions flatten out
with increasing COP, the total cost per unit of heat decreases steadily, indicating a large
dispatch potential for DCs in the network. The results indicate a bigger potential for WHR
in LTDH, since the resulting higher COP, decreases the cost per unit of heat.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
39
==PAGE:50==
Fuel prices
Fuel prices are a matter of high uncertainty in the optimization model, the
tax-structure of fuel-consumption in district-heating has a complicated nature. Additionally
2021 was a year of high uncertainties in global supply-chains of various goods. Future
market prices for gas-, electricity and other fuels are hard to predict, being impacted by the
energy-transition, global conflicts and local policies. Many fuel-prices are connected to
each other such as natural gas, fuel- and gas-oil prices show a high degree of correlation.
Instead of assessing the sensitivity of the model on fuel prices, the potential impacts are
assessed by re-evaluating the dispatch order based on various fuel prices. The 3D-plot
5.7a is made interactive so the impacts on the dispatch order of various sources based
on their fuel prices can be assessed.
Figure 5.23 shows the variable-production costs of various sources. Increasing the price
of wood-chips and wood-pellets to 55 €/MWh (from 22 €/MWh) and 65 €/MWh (from 32
€/MWh) respectively, does only change the dispatch order insignificantly. The dispatch
of waste-heat from DCs will be preferred in a larger range of low electricity-prices, addi-
tionally if gas-prices are lower than 40 €/MWh natural gas boilers become cheaper than
the biomass-sources.
Figure 5.23: Dispatch-order with increasing Biomass prices
This indicates a low-sensitivity of the production costs and emissions when biomass-
prices increase. The general dispatch-order will stay the same even with a major increase
in prices or taxes on biomass. Solid biomass, such as wood-chips and wood-pellets cover
a high share of heat in Danish DHNs with a installed capacity of 2.7 GW and 2.3 GW re-
spectively. As explored earlier, Copenhagen’s DHN is highly dependent on this solid
biomass. These results indicate a high degree of technology lock-in7 in certain DHNs.
The implications for this technology lock-in are discussed in chapter 6.
7Technology lock-in refers to a situation where a specific technology becomes so dominant or entrenched
within a system or market that it’s difficult to change to or adopt alternative technologies.
40
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:51==
The by far cheapest source in the dispatch is WtE. With the offtake profits, WtE plants
have negative variable production cost.
When decreasing the offtake profit by WtE-
producers, the dispatch order is only affected in hours with a high electricity-price where
co-generation plants running on wood-pellets and chips become cheaper due to their
lower O&M-costs and higher Cb-coefficients. If electricity-prices are low, WHR from DC
may become cheaper in a few hours.
Figure 5.24: Dispatch-order with decreasing waste-offtake profit prices
It can be concluded that the dispatch-order of the various sources is not very sensitive to
fuel-prices and is generally only affected by extremes in gas- and electricity-prices. With
waste-heat from data-centers being a comparatively cheap source, this underlines the
potential for WHR from data-centers. The high investments are mitigated by high cost-
savings in the operation, lowering emissions from natural gas sources in the process.
This insight is crucial to understand the potential of WHR from DCs and underlines the
initial hypothesis that the potential is constrained by the location and the current situation
in a particular DHN. In a DHN which can only operate on WtE and solid biomass, like the
VEKS-network, waste-heat from DCs can not compete. But in DHNs with large shares
of fossil fuel sources, whether those are boiler sources of CHP-plants, the relatively low-
emission and low-cost waste-heat from data centers can displace said carbon-intensive
sources. Hence, DC-development should be focus on those spatial and technological
constraints of WHR from DCs.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
41
==PAGE:52==
6
Discussion
6.1
Optimization of source-dispatch in Copenhagen’s district
heating
6.1.1
Findings
The results show a substantial potential for WHR from DCs in Copenhagen and other
DHNs with a high share of fossil-fuels. Cost-savings can be achieved across the size-
scenarios and distances, limited by the cost-sharing between public and private entities.
The results indicate that the transmission distance is not the limiting factor in the potential
of WHR. Since heat-pump costs are over-proportionally higher compared to cost in trans-
mission infrastructure. Cost savings can be achieved in all scenatios on all distances
up to a discount-rate of 7.5%, for the medium scenario, a DC with a 50 MW HP, cost
savings persist across all distances and a discount rate of 13%, representing the most
solid business-case along the investigated sizes. Future outlooks in DH, see the imple-
mentation of LTDH as a necessity for implementation of more low-carbon heat-sources
[26, 25]. With LTDH, the COP of a HP will increase due to the smaller temperature gap
to overcome. The results show a decrease in costs from 18€/MWhth to 14€/MWhth
when increasing the COP from 4 to 6. This indicates, an even better business-case for
WHR in the future, due to a change in the dispatch-rules. The quantitative analysis in the
case-study on the greater Copenhagen DHN offers more insights on the dispatch-rules of
waste-heat from data-centers and consequently the potential in other DHNs based on their
source-portfolio. These insights are important for DC- and DH-operators alike, showcas-
ing a solid business-case for WHR. It is clear that waste-heat from DCs can outcompete
fossil-fuel sources, but can not compete with cheap WtE or solid biomass CHP. This is
especially true with higher electricity costs, ad shown in figure 5.8. Electricity markets
are highly uncertain as we’ve seen in recent years. The energy transition, the climate
crisis and global conflicts make predictions on future electricity prices highly uncertain.
Hence it is wise for a DH-operator to opt for PPAs to protect themselves from distortions
in the energy-markets. PPAs have been investigated on various sizes of HPs and they
show only a small decrease in cost-savings and a high reduction in GHG-emissions, if
the PPA is contracted with RES. To further increase planning security for stakeholders, a
prioritization of waste-heat has been tested. Due to the nature of the model, the prioritiza-
tion substitutes primarily solid biomass sources and WtE, leading to insignificant emission
savings in the process.
The results underscore the initial hypothesis on the importance of the location and lo-
cal constraints, as elaborated in the literature review in chapter 3. The case-study on
Copenhagen shows clearly where DC-development has the biggest potential, namely in
urban, high-demand areas identified by Lund et al. [34] as areas with a lack of waste-heat
sources. Furthermore, the results of the optimization on cost-savings align with other re-
searchers. As mentioned in the literature review in chapter 3, Wahlroos et al. found
operational cost savings of 0.6-7.3% for 20-60 MW of waste heat in the investigated sys-
tem. This aligns with the simulated medium-scenario which reduces operational costs by
5.78%. Generally this thesis underlines the found potential for WHR from DCs by other
literature [36, 30].
42
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:53==
6.1.2
Assumptions & Limitations
As with any optimization model, there are inherent limitations, assumptions and simplifi-
cations that could potentially impact the accuracy of the predictions made by this model.
Understanding these limitations is crucial in interpreting the results and further enhancing
the model.
The model’s simplifications and key assumptions include:
• Plant Location and Operations: The exact plant locations are ignored, with all
sources assumed to be flexible back-pressure plants. Extraction vs. back-pressure
processes are not differentiated.
• Transmission losses: Transmission losses are not implemented in the results, a
short simplified study on this assumptions showed an insignificant impact compared
to the investment costs.
• Environmental Factors: Weather impacts on heat-demand and Variable Renew-
able Energy (VRE) production are not accounted for. The constant COP of the
DC-heat pump is set at 4.5, ignoring seasonal variations.
• Operational Constraints: Plants are modeled without minimum running capacity
or regulation/ramping constraints, assuming short start-up times for gas engines
and boilers and reasonable ramping capabilities.
• Data and Market Dynamics: The model uses 2021 data from Copenhagen’s DHN,
reflecting a highly distorted energy-system year. The electricity market is simplified,
ignoring the complex decisions made on these markets.
• Cooling Technologies in DC: The type of cooling technology in data centers and
its impact on the COP is not considered, ignoring the implications of air-based and
liquid-based cooling systems.
• Co-generation Simplifications: Using fixed cb-coefficients simplifies the dynam-
ics of CHP, ignoring constraints that might affect flexibility in balancing heat and
electricity production.
• Dispatch Optimization: The model optimizes energy sources based on cost min-
imization, overlooking technical considerations, environmental goals, and strategic
or policy considerations in dispatch decisions.
• Emission Considerations: Emissions are linearly related to fuel usage, ignoring
specific technologies and operational parameters. Only CO2 emissions are consid-
ered, excluding other gases and particles.
The model does not account for variations in the technical performance of heat sources
over time, i.e., it assumes constant efficiencies and assumes a fixed Cb-coefficient regard-
less of the type of co-generation plant. In reality, the efficiency of heat sources, especially
for those dependent on external factors such as HPs, varies with operating conditions
and the temperature gap between the waste-heat and the heat-sink temperature from the
network. The approach towards co-generation plants does not consider decisions made,
based on the electricity market. While the dispatch and the availability of RES is partly
represented in the electricity price, the model does not consider the role of natural-gas
peaker plants in the electricity market. Those co-generation plants are needed as a back-
up source, for balancing services as well as a reserve. The model on the other hand
allows for a shut-down of these sources, which is unlikely in the real world. To mitigate
this limitation, a stochastic or robust optimization approach might be needed, which would
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
43
==PAGE:54==
significantly increase the complexity of the model.Further cost-considerations include the
loss in tax-revenues from fossil-fuel sources, which increases with an increasing share of
waste-heat in the network. Another limitation lies in the incorporation of DCs. The model
does not consider fluctuations in the waste-heat availiability of DCs, which could fluctuate
based on the workload of the servers and outside temperatures if free-cooling is available.
The acknowledgment of these limitations highlights areas for further investigation and
improvement.
By building upon this model and addressing the limitations, future re-
search can foster a more comprehensive and realistic perspective on the intricate in-
terplay between DCs within the energy systems, including electricity grid considerations.
With further development and refinement, the models validity would increase, making the
results more robust. This further development should focus on the implications by market-
decisions made on the electricity market and take operational constraints of the various
sources into account.
6.1.3
Digression - Reporting of Biomass emission
The results show a technology-lock-in on solid biomass. In 2018, 64% of the total re-
newable energy consumption in Denmark came from solid biomass, 48% from Wood.
Denmark has seen a steady increase of imported wood pellets, often from the Baltics and
North America. [4]
Emissions from biomass-sources can be reported as zero if the fuel used is sourced ac-
cording to the rules of in executive order no. 1619 of 15 December 2016. This is made to
avoid double-counting in emission reporting. Biomass comes from the LULUCF1 sector, if
accounted for it in this sector, another counting in the energy sector would lead to double-
counting of emissions. The practice of zero-emission reporting of biomass-sources is
questionable if looking on global emissions. For example wood pellets and chips, sourced
in the Baltics, are accounted for as net-removals in the respective LULUCF-sector of
the country, but burning biomass can lead to increasing global emissions if the removed
biomass reduces the carbon stock of a country. Some countries, including the US and
Russia, do not include the LULUCF-sector in their mitigation-targets (2020) which may
lead to false mitigation claims on a global level. Additionally, emissions from international
shipping of the biomass are not accounted for when burning the biomass in Denmark.
Emissions from burning of biomass is only reported as a memo-item to the UNFCCC and
the respective emissions increased in Denmark from 4.4 million tonnes CO2e in 1990 to
18.8 million tonnes CO2e in 2017. [4]
This carbon-accounting practice in Denmark has large implications for the further de-
carbonization of DHNs and the potential for WHR from DCs. A realistic approach, and
therefore including emissions from biomass in accounting, would likely increase the cost
of biomass and would decrease the relative advantages from zero-emission reporting. A
DC, respectively the heat-pump, running on green electricity might have lower absolute
emissions per MWh of heat compared to a biomass CHP-plant. But with current emis-
sion reporting standards, the WHR seems more carbon-intense compared to biomass.
To properly account for emissions from primary woody biomass, regulations Denmark
could opt to source biomass only in countries which include LULUCF-emissions in their
mitigation strategies.
1Land use, land-use change, and forestry greenhouse gas inventory
44
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:55==
7
Conclusion
7.1
Potential for WHR from DCs in Denmark
Past decarbonization efforts in the realm of district heating focused on biomass incinera-
tion. Large-scale HPs, whether they’re using groundwater, air or heat from DCs as a heat-
source, HPs have barely been proven on a DH-level in Denmark. But recent development
in heat-pump technology makes them more efficient, cheaper and low-maintenance. The
results of this thesis indicate a large potential for WHR from DCs in Copenhagen.
7.1.1
Potential for WHR in Copenhagen - Case-Study
The greater Copenhagen DHN is the biggest district heating network in Denmark. With a
large share of biomass-sources, in particular wood-chips, the reporting emissions are low
compared to other big networks as shown in figure 5.2. With the given source-portfolio,
the demand can be met more than 50% of the time solely with WtE, wood chips and
wood-pellets. While WtE-plants can meet the total demand in the summer months, where
heat-pumps would theoretically have the highest COP, a sufficient dispatch of waste-heat
from DCs in the winter months and during the transition periods is clear. During the winter
months fossil sources cover the peak demand. And during this time, the potential for
waste-heat recovery from DCs is the greatest. DCs can shave of the peaks, leading to
overall less emissions and costs for the DH-operator. Considering the investments in
the additional infrastructure, multiple small- and medium-sized DCs offer comparatively
a bigger cost-saving and more solid business case compared to a hyper scale DC. The
almost inevitable future development of DC-infrastructure can offer cost and emission
savings but the additional electricity consumption, by the DC itself and the connected heat-
pump, must be watched carefully. Without a proper integration into the energy systems,
the DC development may pose as a burden to the energy-transition.
7.2
Spatial approach to DC-development in Denmark - Main
research question
To integrate new DCs into energy systems in Denmark, whether it is from a heat or elec-
tricity perspective, a spatial approach must be taken. The potential for WHR and decar-
bonization varies nationwide. Large DCs can provide significant amounts of heat which
limits the potential in small networks with a low demand. Furthermore, small networks with
a high share of WtE, biomass, biogas or solar-DH would see no benefit in terms of cost-
and emissions savings when supplied by DC-waste-heat. Due to the cost-structure and
emission-reporting rules, WHR from DCs is currently more expensive and more carbon-
intensive compared to solid biomass, and more expensive than WtE. DC-development
must take these limitations into account.
Small DCs can be integrated into the DH-network at low-cost and cost-competitive to other
sources. DCs with a size smaller than 2 MW could provide the heat for small networks,
but the potential for decarbonization is limited due to a high degree of biomass and/or
solar sources in these networks. But small-networks which still rely on fossil-fuels, as
a reserve or peaker, might be able to profit from the low-cost waste-heat from a DC.
In larger networks, small data-centers have a high potential to cover newly developed
housing-areas, with a lower heat-demand compared to the existing building stock.
Medium-sized (co-location) DCs with a limited footprint can be placed in proximity to
DH-networks. Transmission and distribution cost decrease and in the process increase
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
45
==PAGE:56==
the cost-competitiveness of the waste-heat. Medium-sized DCs can provide substantial
amounts of heat to a DH-network and can shift production patterns. This category of
DCs can still be connected to the distribution grid1 which increases the suitable area for
the development. The business-case is most solid for this size of data-center across all
investigated distances and suitable areas are more likely to be found compared to the
hyperscale-DC.
A large data center with a HP-capacity of 150 MW, can provide substantial amounts of
heat to a DHN and lower operational costs drastically. But a DC of this size requires a lot of
land. These land requirements can generally only be found outside of urban areas, which
leads to high transmission costs for waste-heat-usage in district heating and depending
on the discount-rate and distance cost-savings vanish. DCs of this size are not suitable
for more rural DHNs due to the limited demand in these networks. If a suitable location
can be found in proximity to a DHN with high share of fossil fuels, the cost- and emission
savings can be substantial.
Taking these spatial considerations into account it is evident that the small to medium-
sized DCs offer the biggest potential for waste-heat-usage in DHNs.
The respective
marginal costs of heat when taking transmission and distribution into account make them
more cost-competitive compared to large-scale DCs.
Answering the main research question: It is evident, that the potential for decarbonization
in district heating lies in larger networks like Aalborg, Esbjerg, Odense or the greater
Copenhagen area. Smaller networks show generally low carbon intensities due to high
usage of solar and biomass-sources. This confirms the assessed potential for small and
medium-sized DCs which can be developed in or in proximity to these larger DH-networks.
Industrial and commercial areas, empty storage facilities offer places where DCs could be
developed while minimizing cost for transmission. A well developed electricity distribution
network in the cities leads to lower additional investments for high-voltage substations,
needed for hyperscale DCs. The potential in smaller networks is limited due to current
regulations on district heating and emission-reporting from bio-energy.
7.2.1
Impact of source-portfolio - Subquestion 1
When looking at the dispatch-order of source-types depending on the hourly electricity
price and the gas-price, it is evident that the role of DC-waste-heat is shaving of the
peaks by adding to the transition between base- and peak-load. In most common com-
binations of electricity and gas-prices, the waste-heat from the DC will be more expen-
sive than wood-pellets and wood-chips CHP, but cheaper than fossil-sources (CHP and
Boiler Source (HOP)). This shows the cost-savings potential depending on the current
source-portfolio of a DHN. Networks which cover their demand predominantly by the use
of bio-energy, will not profit monetarily from the integration of waste-heat from a DC. On
the other hand, networks with a high share of fossil-fuels can experience high cost- and
emissions savings from said integration.
7.2.2
Impact of Distance - Subquestion 2
Surprisingly the impact of distance to the network is rather low. The gap between heat-
pump investments and investment in associated infrastructure is to big, being the heat-
pump making up more than two-third of the investment. While proximity to the DHN in-
creases cost-savings, the cost-savings are negligible when comparing them to the cost-
savings during operation. In the case of a hyper-scale DC, the operational savings per
year accumulate to 17.5 M€, while the difference in annuity per year between a 5000m
1From an electricity-standpoint
46
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:57==
distance and 15000m distance is only 4M€. Hence it is evident, that the size and the
current fuel-mix in the connected DH network is more important compared to the actual
distance of the DC to the network.
If decarbonization of Danish DH is the goal, decision-makers must in the short-term focus
on the most polluting networks namely networks with large amounts of coal-, natural gas-
and oil-sources in their portfolio. While some co-generation capacity must be kept in the
system to ensure energy security, the most polluting and inefficient CHP-plants must be
substituted.
7.2.3
Policy recommendations for Danish district heating - Subquestion 3
It is critical to acknowledge that while DC expansion can be optimized to minimize envi-
ronmental impact, it does not negate the absolute increase in electricity consumption and
related emissions. Hence, alongside DC-specific policies, efforts must continue towards
renewable energy expansion, grid decarbonization, and energy conservation to ensure a
sustainable future. Based on the results from Denmark’s DH-analysis and the case-study
on greater Copenhagen’s network, developed in this study, several key policy recommen-
dations can be drawn for sustainable DC development in Denmark. The expanding digital
economy will inevitably drive an increase in electricity consumption, exacerbating envi-
ronmental concerns. Policymakers should prioritize the promotion of energy efficiency
standards and innovative cooling technologies for DCs to limit additional energy demand.
Energy-saving incentives, such as tax credits or subsidies, can be provided for DCs that
meet or exceed energy efficiency benchmarks or indicators as proposed by [16].
In alignment with Denmark’s renewable energy commitments, policy measures should en-
courage the direct integration of DCs into local energy systems. The optimization model
clearly shows the viability of this approach in reducing CO2 emissions and reliance on
non-renewable sources. For instance, regulations could mandate a certain percentage
of energy usage to be sourced from on-site renewable energy and investments into ad-
ditional renewable energy. There is considerable potential for harnessing the waste heat
generated by DCs for DH-systems, as indicated by our model. Unfortunately recent DC-
development shows a lack of commitment by the DC- and DH operators and DCs operate
without delivering promised waste-heat to the local cities. A policy framework should be
established that encourages, or even obligates, the utilization of waste heat.
Changing the reporting scheme on biomass could significantly change future decarboniza-
tion efforts in Denmark. Currently there is no incentive for DH-operators to switch from
bio-energy to heat-pumps. This limits the potential for WHR in smaller, more rural net-
works, contradicting the availability of space for DC-development. The flexible operation
of HPs allows them to operate as base-load power plants as well as peaking sources.
From an electricity perspective, regulatory bodies must consider integrating DCs into de-
mand response programs or allow for dynamic electricity pricing that incentives off-peak
operation.
In conclusion, the growth of DC-development presents both opportunities and challenges
for Denmark. By proactively addressing these challenges through well-crafted policies
and regulations, Denmark can ensure that its digital transformation proceeds in an envi-
ronmentally responsible and sustainable manner.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
47
==PAGE:58==
8
Implications and Perspective
The worldwide digitalization and the accompanying increased demand for data processing
and storage have led to a rise in the number of DCs worldwide, especially in the Nordics.
The high energy demands of these DCs, for processing and cooling purposes, not only
impact electricity networks but also generate a large amount of waste heat. Integrating
this infrastructure into our energy systems is needed to reduce the overall environmental
impact.
The implementation of waste heat recovery from DCs can offer a promising way to both re-
duce their environmental footprint and contribute to a more efficient and sustainable heat
supply, especially within the framework of district heating systems, such as in Denmark.
By redirecting the waste heat from DCs to nearby DHNs, the case-study and dispatch-
optimization shows great potential to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels for heat pro-
duction and thereby significantly decrease CO2 emissions. By optimizing the operation
of DCs and DHNs, it is possible to achieve a highly efficient utilization of the waste heat,
resulting in significant cost and emission reductions.
From an electricity system perspective, the integration of DCs and district heating can
be beneficial, if done right. DCs can offer demand-response, a consistent waste-heat
source and even flexibility provision. These characteristics can increase the robustness
of an energy systems running on mostly VRE. On the other hand, DCs and the HPs
consume vast amounts of electrical energy. During a much necessary energy-transition
to low-carbon electricity from wind or solar, an increasing speed in the build-out of DCs
could mitigate the efforts made in the transition. Even if the large tech-companies who
are usually operating the large-scale DCs enter PPA’s for green energy, it can not be
guaranteed that this additional green energy capacity wouldn’t have been build otherwise,
substituting fossil fuels in the process. Hence, local decision-makers have to carefully plan
and coordinate the permitting of DCs, especially when working with multi-national tech-
companies. An unsupervised build-out of DCs could hinder the energy-transition. Not
integrating DC’s into our energy-systems is irresponsible in light of the climate crisis.
However, considering the significant potential for cost and emission reductions, and the
possible contribution to a more efficient and sustainable energy system, the implemen-
tation of waste heat recovery from DCs presents a compelling opportunity. As the opti-
mization model demonstrates, with careful planning and operation, the integration of DCs
into district heating systems can offer significant benefits for both the electricity and heat
sectors, and contribute to the decarbonization of the energy system. The roadmap to
carbon-neutrality in Danish district heating is based on switch to renewable energy, a
shift to flexible DH-systems and LTDH. The transition to 4th-generation district heating
systems offer great potential for heat-pumps and WHR from DCs.
Future research on the topic should always take spatial considerations into account and
must focus on the inherent connection between the electricity transition and the decar-
bonization of heating systems. Using synergies in these systems can benefit the ultimate
goal of reducing overall emissions in the energy-sector. Future development of DCs must
be carefully supervised by policymakers and communes, to harness the potential and
eliminate the burden which is posed by DCs.
48
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
DenmarkDK. Green energy | The Danish solutions are at front. en. URL: https :
//denmark.dk/innovation-and-design/green-solutions (visited on 03/13/2023).
[2]
IEA (2022). District Heating – Analysis. en-GB. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/
district-heating (visited on 02/14/2023).
[3]
Danish Energy Agency and COWI A/S. Regulation and planning of district heat-
ing in Denmark. German. June 2017. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/
Globalcooperation/regulation_and_planning_of_district_heating_in_denmark.pdf
(visited on 01/30/2023).
[4]
Danish Energy Agency. Biomass Analysis. English. Tech. rep. Danish Energy Agency,
May 2020. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Bioenergi/biomasseanalyse_final_
ren_eng.pdf.
[5]
Global trends in internet traffic, data centres workloads and data centre energy use,
2010-2020 – Charts – Data & Statistics. en-GB. URL: https://www.iea.org/data-
and-statistics/charts/global-trends-in-internet-traffic-data-centres-workloads-and-
data-centre-energy-use-2010-2020 (visited on 08/02/2023).
[6]
Juan Jesús Jerez Monsalves, Claire Bergaentzlé, and Martijn Backer. Regulatory
Frameworks and Business Models for Data Centres Integrated to the Energy Sys-
tem. en. Tech. rep. Technical University of Denmark, 2022. DOI: 10.11581/DTU.
00000242. URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/regulatory-frameworks-and-
business-models-for-data-centres-integr (visited on 01/30/2023).
[7]
Data centres and energy – from global headlines to local headaches? – Analysis.
en-GB. URL: https://www.iea.org/commentaries/data-centres-and-energy-from-
global-headlines-to-local-headaches (visited on 08/02/2023).
[8]
Allan Nisgaard, Henrik Moltke, and Marcel Mirzaei-Fard. Techgiganters datacentre
kan varme massevis af danske huse, men gør det ikke: ’Det er helt tosset’. da-
DK. June 2022. URL: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/viden/teknologi/techgiganters-
datacentre - kan - varme - massevis - af - danske - huse - men - goer - det - ikke (visited on
06/27/2023).
[9]
COWI A/S. “DATACENTER OG NY HØJSPÆNDINGSSTATION VED FOULUM”.
da. In: ().
[10]
Arizton Advisory & Intelligence. Denmark Data Center Market Size, Trends, Fore-
cast 2022-2027. en. URL: https://www.arizton.com/market-reports/denmark-data-
center-market-investment-analysis (visited on 05/09/2023).
[11]
Mikko Wahlroos et al. “Future views on waste heat utilization – Case of data centers
in Northern Europe”. en. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 82 (Feb.
2018), pp. 1749–1764. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.10.058. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032117314314 (visited on
01/30/2023).
[12]
COWI A/S. TEMAANALYSE OM STORE DATACENTRE. Danish. Feb. 2018.
[13]
Dan Swinhoe Comment. Hyperco to build two 50MW data centers in Helsinki, Fin-
land. en. Dec. 2022. URL: https://www.datacenterdynamics.com/en/news/hyperco-
to-build-two-50mw-sites-in-helsinki-finland/ (visited on 06/27/2023).
[14]
Beth Whitehead et al. “Assessing the environmental impact of data centres part 1:
Background, energy use and metrics”. en. In: Building and Environment 82 (Dec.
2014), pp. 151–159. ISSN: 0360-1323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.08.021. URL:
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
49
==PAGE:60==
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S036013231400273X (visited on
02/21/2023).
[15]
Hussam Jouhara and Richard Meskimmon. “Heat pipe based thermal management
systems for energy-efficient data centres”. en. In: Energy 77 (Dec. 2014), pp. 265–
270. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2014.08.085. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544214010500 (visited on 02/21/2023).
[16]
Claire Bergaentzlé and Theis Utoft Madsen. New performance indicators for fully
integrated and decarbonised data centres. Report. Publication Title: New perfor-
mance indicators for fully integrated and decarbonised data centres. Kgs. Lyngby:
Technical University of Denmark, 2021. DOI: 10.11581/DTU:00000112.
[17]
Tudor Cioara et al. “Optimized flexibility management enacting Data Centres par-
ticipation in Smart Demand Response programs”. en. In: Future Generation Com-
puter Systems 78 (Jan. 2018), pp. 330–342. ISSN: 0167-739X. DOI: 10.1016/j.
future . 2016 . 05 . 010. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0167739X16301200 (visited on 01/30/2023).
[18]
Katinka Johansen and Sven Werner. “Something is sustainable in the state of Den-
mark: A review of the Danish district heating sector”. en. In: Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews 158 (Apr. 2022), p. 112117. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: 10.
1016/j.rser.2022.112117. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1364032122000466 (visited on 01/30/2023).
[19]
Z. W. E. Staff. A Danish fiasco: the Copenhagen incineration plant. en-GB. Nov.
2019. URL: https://zerowasteeurope.eu/2019/11/copenhagen- incineration- plant/
(visited on 03/20/2023).
[20]
Denmark’s ‘devilish’ waste dilemma. en. Sept. 2020. URL: https://www.politico.eu/
article/denmark-devilish-waste-trash-energy-incineration-recycling-dilemma/ (visited
on 08/05/2023).
[21]
TheCopenhagenPost. The Copenhagen Post. en-GB. June 2022. URL: https://
cphpost.dk/2022-06-13/news/danes-produce-the-most-waste-in-the-eu-but-theyre-
the-best-at-dealing-with-it/ (visited on 08/05/2023).
[22]
Daniel Trier et al. Solar District Heating Trends and Possibilities: Characteristics of
Ground-Mounted Systems for Screening of Land Use Requirements and Feasibility.
en. Tech. rep. IEA SHC Task 52, Mar. 2018. DOI: 10.18777/ieashc-task52-2018-
0003. URL: http://www.iea-shc.org/Data/Sites/1/publications/SDH-Trends-and-
Possibilities-IEA-SHC-Task52-PlanEnergi-20180619.pdf (visited on 03/20/2023).
[23]
Fabian Bühler, Tuong-Van Nguyen, and Brian Elmegaard. “Energy and exergy anal-
yses of the Danish industry sector”. en. In: Applied Energy 184 (Dec. 2016), pp. 1447–
1459. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.02.072. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261916302094 (visited on 03/20/2023).
[24]
Fabian Bühler et al. “Industrial excess heat for district heating in Denmark”. en. In:
Applied Energy 205 (Nov. 2017), pp. 991–1001. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: 10.1016/
j.apenergy.2017.08.032. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261917310449 (visited on 03/09/2023).
[25]
Henrik Lund et al. “The status of 4th generation district heating: Research and re-
sults”. en. In: Energy 164 (Dec. 2018), pp. 147–159. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: 10.
1016/j.energy.2018.08.206. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360544218317420 (visited on 02/20/2023).
[26]
A. M. Jodeiri et al. “Role of sustainable heat sources in transition towards fourth
generation district heating – A review”. en. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 158 (Apr. 2022), p. 112156. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2022.
50
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:61==
112156. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032122000843
(visited on 03/13/2023).
[27]
Mathiesen, Brian Vad et al. “Varmeplan Danmark 2021”. Danish. In: Aalborg Uni-
versity (Oct. 2021). URL: https : / / www . energyplan . eu / varmeplandk/ (visited on
01/30/2023).
[28]
Marek Brand and Svend Svendsen. “Renewable-based low-temperature district
heating for existing buildings in various stages of refurbishment”. en. In: Energy
62 (Dec. 2013), pp. 311–319. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2013.09.027.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544213007780 (visited
on 06/29/2023).
[29]
Dietrich Schmidt et al. “Low Temperature District Heating for Future Energy Sys-
tems”. en. In: Energy Procedia. 15th International Symposium on District Heating
and Cooling, DHC15-2016, 4-7 September 2016, Seoul, South Korea 116 (June
2017), pp. 26–38. ISSN: 1876-6102. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2017.05.052. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876610217322592 (visited on
06/29/2023).
[30]
Stefan Petrovic and Kenneth Bernard Karlsson. “Danish heat atlas as a support tool
for energy system models”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 87 (2014),
pp. 1063–1076. ISSN: 0196-8904. DOI: 10.1016/j.enconman.2014.04.084.
[31]
Tao Lu et al. “Investigation of air management and energy performance in a data
center in Finland: Case study”. en. In: Energy and Buildings 43.12 (Dec. 2011),
pp. 3360–3372. ISSN: 0378-7788. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . enbuild . 2011 . 08 . 034. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778811003847 (visited on
03/09/2023).
[32]
Victor Depoorter, Eduard Oró, and Jaume Salom. “The location as an energy effi-
ciency and renewable energy supply measure for data centres in Europe”. en. In:
Applied Energy 140 (Feb. 2015), pp. 338–349. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: 10.1016/
j.apenergy.2014.11.067. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261914012367 (visited on 01/30/2023).
[33]
Arman Shehabi et al. “Data center design and location: Consequences for electricity
use and greenhouse-gas emissions”. en. In: Building and Environment 46.5 (May
2011), pp. 990–998. ISSN: 0360-1323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2010.10.023. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S036013231000315X (visited on
03/12/2023).
[34]
Rasmus Lund and Urban Persson. “Mapping of potential heat sources for heat
pumps for district heating in Denmark”. en. In: Energy. Special issue on Smart
Energy Systems and 4th Generation District Heating 110 (Sept. 2016), pp. 129–
138. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2015.12.127. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544215017727 (visited on 03/20/2023).
[35]
Steffen Nielsen and Bernd Möller. “GIS based analysis of future district heating
potential in Denmark”. en. In: Energy 57 (Aug. 2013), pp. 458–468. ISSN: 0360-
5442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2013.05.041. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0360544213004581 (visited on 01/30/2023).
[36]
Matti Pärssinen et al. “Waste heat from data centers: An investment analysis”. en.
In: Sustainable Cities and Society 44 (Jan. 2019), pp. 428–444. ISSN: 2210-6707.
DOI: 10.1016/j.scs.2018.10.023. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2210670718314318 (visited on 01/30/2023).
[37]
Eduard Oró, Paolo Taddeo, and Jaume Salom. “Waste heat recovery from urban air
cooled data centres to increase energy efficiency of district heating networks”. en.
In: Sustainable Cities and Society 45 (Feb. 2019), pp. 522–542. ISSN: 2210-6707.
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
51
==PAGE:62==
DOI: 10.1016/j.scs.2018.12.012. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2210670718314082 (visited on 03/12/2023).
[38]
Mikko Wahlroos et al. “Utilizing data center waste heat in district heating – Impacts
on energy efficiency and prospects for low-temperature district heating networks”.
en. In: Energy 140 (Dec. 2017), pp. 1228–1238. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: 10.1016/
j.energy.2017.08.078. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360544217314548 (visited on 01/30/2023).
[39]
Charles Geffroy et al. “Techno-economic analysis of waste-heat conversion”. en.
In: Joule 5.12 (Dec. 2021), pp. 3080–3096. ISSN: 2542-4351. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j .
joule . 2021 . 10 . 014. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2542435121004918 (visited on 08/07/2023).
[40]
What is a Discount Rate and How to Calculate it? en-US. URL: https://eqvista.com/
company-valuation/discount-rate/ (visited on 08/07/2023).
[41]
Klima-, Energi og Forsyningsministeriet. Data: Oversigt over energisektoren. da.
Aug. 2016. URL: https://ens.dk/service/statistik- data- noegletal- og- kort/data-
oversigt-over-energisektoren (visited on 08/06/2023).
[42]
Teknologikataloger. da. Aug. 2016. URL: https://ens.dk/service/fremskrivninger-
analyser-modeller/teknologikataloger (visited on 06/27/2023).
[43]
Socio-economic assessments. en. Aug. 2016. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-services/
projections-and-models/socio-economic-assessments (visited on 08/02/2023).
[44]
Varmelast - Planlægning varmeproduktion til fjernvarmeforsyning. da. URL: https:
//www.varmelast.dk/ (visited on 08/02/2023).
[45]
Energistyrelsens. Standardfaktorer for brændværdier og CO2-emissionsfaktorer til
brug for rapporteringsåret 2021. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/CO2/
energistyrelsens_standardfaktorer_for_2021-25-01-2022.pdf (visited on 06/07/2023).
[46]
Mikkel Lysgaard. Brændselsprisstatistik. da. URL: https : / / danskfjernvarme . dk /
viden-vaerktoejer/statistik/braendselsprisstatistik (visited on 08/02/2023).
[47]
OECD. taxing-energy-use-denmark.pdf. English. 2019. URL: https://www.oecd.
org/tax/tax-policy/taxing-energy-use-denmark.pdf (visited on 06/15/2023).
[48]
Danish Climate Agreement for energy and industry etc. 2020 of 22 June 2020 (only
EE dimension) – Policies. en-GB. URL: https://www.iea.org/policies/12139-danish-
climate- agreement- for- energy- and- industry- etc- 2020- of- 22- june- 2020- only- ee-
dimension (visited on 08/08/2023).
[49]
Corinna Barnstedt. Danish Parliament cuts taxes on excess heat. en-GB. Jan. 2021.
URL: https://www.emb3rs.eu/danish-parliament-cuts-taxes-on-excess-heat/ (visited
on 08/08/2023).
[50]
Anvendte FFH50 forudsætninger, potentialer og prognoser - Varmeplanhovedstaden.
URL: https://varmeplanhovedstaden.dk/publikationer/anvendte-ffh50-forudsaetninger-
potentialer-og-prognoser/ (visited on 06/30/2023).
[51]
Energinet. Energinet Gas TSO. en. URL: https://www.energidataservice.dk/organizations/
tso-gas (visited on 08/02/2023).
[52]
Energinet. Energinet Electricity TSO. en. URL: https://www.energidataservice.dk/
tso-electricity/Elspotprices (visited on 08/02/2023).
[53]
Technology Data for Transport of Energy. en. Mar. 2018. URL: https://ens.dk/en/
our- services/projections- and- models/technology- data/technology- data- transport-
energy (visited on 08/02/2023).
[54]
Dansk Fjernvarme, Casper Andersen, and Fredslund, Alex. “Dansk Fjernvarme
Alex Fredslund afr@danskfjernvarme.dk”. en. In: ().
[55]
Maryssa Baron et al. LevelTen-Energy-European-Q42020-PPA-Price-Index.pdf. En-
glish. Tech. rep. LevelTen Energy, 2020. URL: https://windeurope.org/wp-content/
52
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:63==
uploads/files/about-wind/campaigns/2020-successes/levelten/products/LevelTen-
Energy-European-Q42020-PPA-Price-Index.pdf (visited on 08/04/2023).
[56]
Michaja Pehl et al. “Understanding future emissions from low-carbon power sys-
tems by integration of life-cycle assessment and integrated energy modelling”. en.
In: Nature Energy 2.12 (Dec. 2017). Number: 12 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group,
pp. 939–945. ISSN: 2058-7546. DOI: 10.1038/s41560- 017- 0032- 9. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41560-017-0032-9 (visited on 07/31/2023).
[57]
Energinet. Finding your cheapest way to a low-carbon future - LCOE-calculator.
URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/contents/material/file/vejledning_lcoe_
calculator.pdf (visited on 08/07/2023).
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:65==
A
Additional Tables and Figures
Map CTR & VEKS
Figure A.1: District heating area in greater Copenhagen
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
55
==PAGE:66==
Variable Production Cost VEKS
Figure A.2: Variable Production Cost w/o DC [€/MWh] (VEKS)
56
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:67==
Source Allocatioon
Figure A.3: Allocation of sources based on source-type w/o DC (VEKS)
Figure A.4: Allocation of sources based on source-type incl. DC 3MW (CTR)
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.5: Allocation of sources based on source-type incl. DC 150MW (CTR)
Figure A.6: Electricity Price vs Total Usage of Electricity Sources
58
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.7: Distribution of production by source >1% - Large DC (CTR+VEKS)
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
59
==PAGE:70==
PPA Scenarios
60
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:71==
Emission Factors
Figure A.8: Emission Factors in Danish District Heatinf
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
61
==PAGE:72==
Fuel Costs
Source
Fuel cost
Unit
Heating value
Unit
Fuel cost
Unit
Taxes
Unit
Fuel costs. incl Taxes
Unit
Source
Coal
-
-
6.9
MWh/ton
13.89
€/MWh
36
€/MWh
49.89
€/MWh
[43]
Natural gas CHP
0.6
€/Nm3
11
kWh/Nm3
monthly
€/MWh
-
€/MWh
54.95
€/MWh
[46, 47]
Natural gas HOP
0.6
€/Nm3
11
kWh/Nm3
monthly
€/MWh
39.6**
€/MWh
94.55
€/MWh
[46, 47]
Gas Oil HOP
35.07
€/MWh
27
€/MWh
79
€/MWh
[43]
Biogas
0.24
€/Nm3
10*
kWh/Nm3
24
€/MWh
3
€/MWh
27
€/MWh
Waste***
-60.4
€/ton
2,94
MWh/ton
-20.54
€/MWh
0.89
€/MWh
-19.65
€/MWh
[50]
Straw
86.71
€/ton
4.1
MWh/ton
21.52
€/MWh
-
€/MWh
21.52
€/MWh
[46]
Wood Pellets
156.77
€/ton
4.9
MWh/ton
31.98
€/MWh
-
€/MWh
31.98
€/MWh
[46]
Wood Chips
57.05
€/ton
2.6
MWh/ton
21.90
€/MWh
-
€/MWh
21.9
€/MWh
[46]
Table A.1: *Based on Awe 2018. ** Waste is subject to a process tax for non-renewable
waste of 4.5 DKK/GJ or 1.85 DKK/GJ with 59% renewable waste share. A.: Taxes include
explicit carbon taxes and fuel excise taxes.
62
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:73==
Gas Prices
Month
Gas Price [DKK/kWh]
Gas Price [€/MWh]
2021-01
0.1474
19.7852349
2021-02
0.1359
18.24161074
2021-03
0.1333
17.89261745
2021-04
0.1549
20.79194631
2021-05
0.1876
25.18120805
2021-06
0.215
28.8590604
2021-07
0.2657
35.66442953
2021-08
0.3254
43.67785235
2021-09
0.4725
63.42281879
2021-10
0.652
87.51677852
2021-11
0.6169
82.80536913
2021-12
0.832
111.6778523
Table A.2
Investment Cost
Source
Nominal Investment
Unit
Lifetime
Coal CHP
1.9
M€/MW_e
25
Natural gas CHP (back pressure)
0.95
M€/MW_e
25
Natural gas HOP
0.06
M€/MW_h
25
Biogas CHP (back pressure)
0.95
M€/MW_e
25
Biogas HOP
0.06
M€/MW_h
25
WtE CHP (back pressure)
9.02
M€/MW_e
25
WtE HOP
1.84
M€/MW_i
25
Biomass CHP (back pressure)
3.54
M€/MW_e
25
Straw CHP (back pressure)
3.57
M€/MW_e
25
Straw HOP
0.88
M€/MW_h
25
Wood Pellets CHP (back pressure)
3.01
M€/MW_e
25
Wood Pellets CHP (extraction)
2.5
M€/MW_e
25
Wood Pellets HOP
0.71
M€/MW_h
25
Wood Chips CHP (back pressure)
3.01
M€/MW_e
25
Wood Chips CHP (extraction)
2.5
M€/MW_e
25
Wood Chips HOP
0.49
M€/MW_h
25
Electric boiler
0.07-0.15
M€/MW_h
25
Heat pump 1 MW (excess heat)
1.24
M€/MW_h
25
Heat pump 3MW (excess heat)
0.86
M€/MW_h
25
Heat pump 10 MW (excess heat)
0.67
M€/MW_h
25
Table A.3: Nominal Investment cost 2020 [2015-MEUR/MW]
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
63
==PAGE:74==
Variable O&M cost
Source
Var. Operational cost
Unit
Coal CHP
2.9
€/MWh_e
Natural gas CHP (back pressure)
5.4
€/MWh_e
Natural gas HOP
1.1
€/MWh_h
Biogas CHP (back pressure)
7.5
€/MWh_e
Biogas HOP
1.1
€/MWh_h
WtE CHP (back pressure)
25.28
€/MWh_e
WtE HOP
7.38
€/MWh_e
Biomass CHP (back pressure)
Straw CHP (back pressure)
2.1
€/MWh_e
Straw HOP
2.11
€/MWh_h
Wood Pellets CHP (back pressure)
1.86
€/MWh_e
Wood Pellets CHP (extraction)
1.1
€/MWh_e
Wood Pellets HOP
1.96
€/MWh_h
Wood Chips CHP (back pressure)
4.49
€/MWh_e
Wood Chips CHP (extraction)
2.6
€/MWh_e
Wood Chips HOP
2.7
€/MWh_h
Electric boiler
0.8
€/MWh_h
Heat pump 1 MW (excess heat)
2.69
€/MWh_h
Heat pump 3MW (excess heat)
2.19
€/MWh_h
Heat pump 10 MW (excess heat)
1.69
€/MWh_h
Table A.4: Variable O&M cost 2020 [2015-MEUR/MW]
64
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:75==
Fixed O&M cost
Source
Fix. Operational cost
Unit
Coal CHP
31000
€/MW_e/yr
Natural gas CHP (back pressure)
9750
€/MW_e/yr
Natural gas HOP
1950
€/MW_h/yr
Biogas CHP (back pressure)
9750
€/MW_e/yr
Biogas HOP
1950
€/MW_h/yr
WtE CHP (back pressure)
262000
€/MW_h/yr
WtE HOP
78000
€/MW_h/yr
Biomass CHP (back pressure)
Straw CHP (back pressure)
143000
€/MW_e/yr
Straw HOP
50800
€/MW_h/yr
Wood Pellets CHP (back pressure)
124000
€/MW_e/yr
Wood Pellets CHP (extraction)
55000
€/MW_e/yr
Wood Pellets HOP
32700
€/MW_h/yr
Wood Chips CHP (back pressure)
149000
€/MW_e/yr
Wood Chips CHP (extraction)
69000
€/MW_e/yr
Wood Chips HOP
42000
€/MW_h/yr
Electric boiler
1070
€/MW_h/yr
Heat pump 1 MW (excess heat)
2000
€/MW_h/yr
Heat pump 3MW (excess heat)
2000
€/MW_h/yr
Heat pump 10 MW (excess heat)
2000
€/MW_h/yr
Table A.5: Fixed O&M cost 2020 [2015-MEUR/MW]
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
65
==PAGE:76==
Cb and Cv-coefficients
Source
cb-coefficien
cv-coefficient
Coal CHP (extraction)
0.84
0.15
Natural gas CHP (back pressure)
0.95
1
Biogas CHP (back pressure)
0.86
1
WtE CHP (back pressure)
0.3
1
Biomass CHP (back pressure)
0.3
1
Straw CHP (back pressure)
0.46
1
Wood Pellets CHP (back pressure)
0.46
1
Wood Pellets CHP (extraction)
0.59
0.17
Wood Chips CHP (back pressure)
0.37
1
Wood Chips CHP (extraction)
0.45
0.14
Table A.6: Cb and Cv-coefficients for co-generation plants
66
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:77==
Electrical and heat efficiency
Source
Thermal Efficiency
Unit
Natural gas / Biogas CHP
45
%
Natural gas / Biogas HOP
103
%
Gas Oil HOP
103
%
WtE CHP
80
%
WtE HOP
106
%
Wood Pellets
69
%
Wood Chips
83
%
Table A.7: Thermal Efficiency of Sources [42]
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
67
==PAGE:78==
Illustration extraction and backpressure co-generation plants
(a) Process of back-pressure steam-turbine
(b) Proces of extraction steam-turbine
68
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:79==
B
Project Details & Logistics
Title English:
Potential for carbon displacement utilizing waste-heat recovery from data centers in district-
heating - A spatial approach for Denmark
Title Danish:
Potentiale for kulstoffortrængning ved at udnytte spildvarmegenvinding fra datacentre i
fjernvarme - En rumlig tilgang for Danmark
Student Name: Simon Christoph Martin
Student Number: S210381
Supervisor: Claire Bergaentzlé
Supporting PhD-Student: Juan Jesús Jerez Monsalves
Project Relations: Cool-Data Denmark
Department: DTU Management
ECTS: 30 Credits
Period: 20.02.2023 - 10.08.2023
B.0.1
Supervision
In the first half of the thesis, a weekly meeting will be held with the Co-Supervisor, Juan
Jesús Jerez Monsalves. When in need, by request but at least once a month, supervisor
Claire Bergaentzlé will join the meeting. The meeting is set up to discuss the progress and
milestones, evaluate performance, receive feedback on conducted work and to resolve
any questions or uncertainties.
B.0.2
Learning goals
1. Apply district-heating concepts to develop a tool for analyzing and implementing
decarbonization strategies in Danish district heating systems.
2. Apply energy economic knowledge and regulatory frameworks to conduct feasibil-
ity analyses and develop recommendations for policy makers to incentivize decar-
bonization in the energy sector.
3. Analyze the impact of district heating energy consumption and emissions, and eval-
uate potential solutions for reducing the climate impact.
4. Analyze the impact of data center development on electricity consumption and emis-
sions, and evaluate potential solutions for reducing their climate impact.
5. Evaluate how data centers can offer a solutions for decarbonization of district heat-
ing and how they can be integrated into energy systems
6. Create a GIS-tool for screening analyses to assess the potential of renewable en-
ergy projects
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
69
==PAGE:80==
B.0.3
Project Plan
70
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
==PAGE:81==
Potential and feasibility of waste-heat recovery from data-centers for district-heating
71
==PAGE:82==
The burgeoning demand for data centers in Nordic countries, driven by an attractive climate, clean
energy, and low electricity prices, poses both opportunities and challenges. In Denmark, the elec-
tricity demand from data centers is anticipated to surge to 8.8 TWh, constituting 10% of the total
projected demand by 2030. Integrating the daya centers into our energy systems is inevitable.
Academic research on waste-heat recovery from data centers is gaining traction, with many studies
underscoring the significance of location. However, key knowledge gaps persist, notably the neces-
sity of aligning waste-heat recovery with existing systems. This thesis adopts a spatial approach,
to identify optimal locations for data centers of varying sizes within Denmark, anchored on existing
infrastructure. It recognizes that an understanding of the cost structure of waste-heat recovery can
only be obtained by respecting the current source-portfolio, the prospective data center size, and
its geographical placement. It thereby investigates the correlation between these variables in a de-
tailed case-study for Copenhagen. The findings propose policy recommendations to incentivize the
development of data centers in strategic locations and for specific network characteristics.
The study serves as a robust base for research on feasibility and the tangible potential of integrating
waste-heat into existing systems. Furthermore, it provides concrete policy insights for sustainable
data center development in Denmark.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
