==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Local socio-economic impact study of DTU's 
wind energy test center Høvsøre
Koen Schrijver
DTU Wind-M-0701
August 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0701 
August 2023
Project period:
Februar - August 2023
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science 
Supervisor(s):
Ulrich Elmer Hansen
Tyler Hansen
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author(s):
Koen Schrijver
Title:
Local socio-economic impact study of 
DTU's wind energy test center Høvsøre
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Abstract
This thesis investigates the local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre. A
definition of the term ’local’ is defined and motivated. Local expenditure data from various
stakeholders has been quantitatively and qualitatively analysed by conducting fieldwork
and interviews. It is found that a significant portion of the expenditure is done locally.
Almost half of the expenditure, both OPEX and CAPEX combined, is expected to have
been done locally over a period of 25 years. Expenditures are distributed over different work
sectors, namely general work, skilled work and services, and geographical regions, namely
local, regional, and national. A comparison between the expenditure of a conventional wind
farm and DTU’s test center Høvsøre is made and especially a relatively higher OPEX of
the test center is discovered. Additionally, the social impact on the surrounding villages
is investigated, namely the broader community acceptance. More work should be done to
trace the supply chain of wind projects in more detail and to determine how local economic
impact studies could become valuable assets in the wind energy planning and development
process.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Acknowledgements
The work performed during this thesis would not have been possible without the help and
support of my supervisors Ulrich Elmer Hansen and Tyler Hansen. They provided me with
several new insights and always tried to nuance my direct Dutch approach. I could not even
hide from Ulrich in the harbour of Helsingør, where without my knowledge I was not only
witnessing the sailing match of my friends, but also of my own supervisor!
The collaboration within the wind energy department of DTU was in general very smooth.
I would like to thank Peter Hjuler Jensen, Allan Vesth and Christian Henriksen for their
help on the project. Not only did they provide meaningful explanations of the operations
at the test center and made all economic data available, they also made sure that I did not
include any confidential information of any stakeholder inside the thesis. Without them, I
would probably be in trouble with some NDA’s by now. With this, I deeply thank Vestas
as well for providing a detailed overview of their expenditure at the test center.
A special thanks goes to the site manager of Høvsøre, Anders Vestergaard. The day I visited
Høvsøre he was not only the site manager, but also my personal Danish translator and the
local tour operator of the area. He not only showed me around the test centre, but also
made sure that I got some fresh air on the beautiful beach of the west coast of Jutland.
Last but not least, I would obviously thank my family and friends who have kept me moti-
vated throughout the thesis. I especially want to give a shout out to my roommate Douwe,
who was simultaneously writing his own thesis and probably cannot hear the word Høvsøre
and local economic impact for the rest of his life.
I truly enjoyed working on the thesis over the last six months and the collaboration with
everyone involved in the project. I hope that one day the local economic impact analysis of
wind energy will become an integrated part of the planning and development process.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Economic impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Power of the locals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Local economic impact: DTU’s test center Høvsøre
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
State of the art
6
2.1
The socio-economics of wind energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Acceptance factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Societal acceptance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Economic impact studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
An overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Economic impact; key studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Danish case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Dutch case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
State of the art general findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Case study
14
3.1
An overview of the test center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Activity at the test center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Technical University of Denmark - Department of Wind Energy . . .
16
3.2
Area surrounding Høvsøre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
The operations of a test center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Methodology
20
4.1
Quantitative data: Economic expenditure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.1
DTU’s expenditure at the test center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.2
The center users expenditure: Vestas and SGRE
. . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Qualitative data: Field work approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
The definition of ’local’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Local impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.2
Regional and national impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.3
Exclusion of international expenditure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.4
Overview of the different regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Processing of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.1
Geographical distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.2
Sector distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.3
Comparison to a conventional wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Assumptions and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5.1
General assumptions and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
v
==PAGE:6==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
4.5.2
Remark on confidentiality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Results
29
5.1
Economic breakdown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
The local expenditure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Rebuild 2023 and OPEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.2
Lifetime local and non-local expenditure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Sector distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Regional and national impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Høvsøre compared to a conventional wind farm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Social impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6.1
Field work findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6.2
Socio-economic impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
41
6.1
Discussion of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Socio-economic impact analysis for community acceptance
. . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Conclusion
44
List of figures
I
List of tables
II
Nomenclature
III
References
IV
Appendices
VI
vi
==PAGE:7==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
1
Introduction
Wind energy has emerged as a vital and rapidly growing source of renewable energy. As
mankind strives to reduce its dependence on fossil fuels and mitigate the adverse effects of
climate change, wind power has gained immense importance in recent years. The use of wind
energy has proven to be an effective and sustainable solution to generate clean electricity
while reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Wind energy is expected to reach the milestone
of a total of one TW of installed capacity this year [1]. The Global Wind Energy Council
stated in their ’Global Wind Report 2023’ that the so-called ’Wind energy revolution’ will
only accelerate in the coming years. In Figure 1 the drastic increase of installed capacity per
year is shown, of which the majority (around 80%) will still be onshore.
Figure 1: Worldwide installations outlook 2022-2027
1.1
Economic impact
The economic impact of wind energy extends beyond its environmental benefits. The im-
mense increase and growth of the wind energy sector creates jobs in the entire supply chain
around the world. From manufacturing and construction to operations and maintenance, the
Page 1 of 44
==PAGE:8==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
wind energy sector has the potential to increase economic development at the local, regional,
and national levels.
Zooming in on Denmark it can be seen in Figure 2 that the wind energy sector is present
in all corners of Denmark [2].
Almost half of the Danish economic output is generated
in the capital region of Denmark, but production sites of, for example, Vestas and Bladt
industries are located in the more rural regions of Jutland and Fyn [3]. In total, the entire
wind energy sector, from the foundation manufacturers to the developers, generates 85,000
jobs in Denmark alone [2].
Figure 2: Cities in Denmark active in the wind energy supply chain [2]
Besides having a direct impact on the economy, economic activities in wind energy also have
an indirect impact on various other sectors, as can be seen in Figure 3. Every 1000 euros
invested in the wind energy sector indirectly generated another 250 euros of economic ex-
penditure [2]. A significant portion of this indirect impact is taken up by contractors and
construction companies that provide electrical equipment and other services to the wind
sector. One could think, for example, of the construction and maintenance of the immense
electrical facilities needed for wind energy. However, hospitality services in Denmark are also
Page 2 of 44
==PAGE:9==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
among the sectors that benefit from the wind sector. All employees working and maintaining
the wind farms regularly book hotel stays and restaurants for their employment - especially
in smaller towns in Denmark, this influence should not be disregarded.
Figure 3: Indirect impact of wind energy per e1000 directly invested [2]
1.2
Power of the locals
General public perception of wind energy is quite positive and surveys show, in general,
strong public support for wind power [4]. However, concrete wind development projects
tend to suffer from high resistance from locals, the so-called Not-in-my-backyard (NIMBY)
syndrome. Surveys in Sweden show that over the years, as more wind projects have been
developed, the positive view of wind energy among the population has decreased from 74 %
to 65 % from 2009 to 2019 [5].
It is exactly the locals that need to be on your side when planning a new wind project. Local
residents living in the proximity of the farm can make or break your project. Many onshore
wind projects have been and are still cancelled today due to local resistance. It is estimated
that in The Netherlands, around 15% of the generation of onshore wind development is lost
due to local opposition [5]. A Swiss developer, the energy group BKW, even told Reuters
Page 3 of 44
==PAGE:10==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
in an interview that, according to them, "public acceptance was the biggest risk for future
developments" [6].
An important note in the acceptance debate is that resistance is not only limited to NIMBY.
Haggett states that relationships with developers and outsiders and the role of public par-
ticipation in decision making play a role [7]. Moreover, Haggett also mentions that the lack
of tangible benefits for the locals creates opposition. Employing local people in the industry
and by creating monetary investment in local communities, a developer can show that he is
working with the people, rather than against or in spite of them [7].
1.3
Local economic impact: DTU’s test center Høvsøre
To quantify the tangible and economic benefits of wind energy development in local commu-
nities, an intensive case study will be carried out on the local economic impact of the test
center Høvsøre of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) on the west coast of Jutland.
DTU’s test center Høvsøre consists of, in total, seven test pads, where international compa-
nies can test their turbines and collect data from the tests carried out. By doing these tests,
turbine manufacturers are able to document safety, turbine performance and noise emissions
to be able to meet international requirements and deploy turbine concepts elsewhere [8].
The construction, operation and maintenance and all other activities have an impact on the
local economy of the region surrounding Høvsøre. In 2019 and 2023, a rebuild of the test
center by DTU also heavily increased the site’s expenditure. The main users of the test center
are Vestas and Siemens Gamesa. Their testing activities, construction, and decommissioning
of the turbine concepts also have an economic impact on the region.
Figure 4: Overview of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Page 4 of 44
==PAGE:11==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
1.4
Thesis motivation
The study in this thesis hopes to identify key economic findings regarding the expenditure
at DTU’s test center Høvsøre. By identifying the local economic impact that wind energy
has on surrounding communities, the benefits of these wind farms to these communities can
be quantified. These communities also experience the negative effects on a daily basis and
have great influence in the development process of wind energy. Broad community support
can significantly benefit and accelerate the development process, while community resistance
can lead to delays or even cancellations of projects.
1.5
Thesis outline
Following the introduction, section 2 provides an overview of the literature study conducted,
providing an overview of the research done in this field. A more in-depth look of DTU’s test
centre Høvsøre is given in section 3.This is followed by an explanation of the methodology
used to obtain the results in section 4. The results, their analysis, and any other findings are
in section 5. All these findings and how to interpret them are discussed in section 6. Finally,
the conclusions drawn from the investigations and the recommended further work are given
in section 7.
Page 5 of 44
==PAGE:12==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
2
State of the art
This chapter gives an overview of the research already done in the field of socio-economic
impact of wind energy. First, subsection 2.1 describes how the socio-economic impact of
wind energy influences the general acceptance of wind energy projects. More specific case-
studies are discussed in subsection 2.2. Then some numbers regarding local economic impact
are discussed in subsection 2.3. Finally, subsection 2.4 summarises the key findings of the
literature study and presents the current knowledge gap regarding the local socio-economic
impact of wind energy.
2.1
The socio-economics of wind energy
To be able to understand the local socio-economic impact of wind energy and more specif-
ically the economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre, one should first have a general
understanding of the total social-economic impact that wind energy has. As already men-
tioned in the introduction, social acceptance is a very important issue for wind energy and
can limit the amount of wind resources that can be used. Societal acceptance is influenced
by a wide range of factors - it is important to understand what role local economic impact
plays in these so-called acceptance factors.
2.1.1
Acceptance factors
One of the strongest aspects connected to the acceptance of renewable energy are scientific
aspects as well as the general public view towards the energy transition. Moreover, the
acceptance of wind energy development is not only limited to economic factors. The Bun-
desamt für Naturschutz, the German federal agency for nature conservation, has identified
five key acceptance factors shown in Figure 5 [9].
• Economic factors: Economic aspects mainly compose the economic effects on agri-
culture, tourism, real estate prices, and other local businesses. The general finding as
one could expect is that the more beneficial the developments are economically, the
more favourably locals see the development.
• View on energy transition: On a country-level, as more on a regional level, the
support for wind energy development is highly dependent on the general public view
on climate change and the energy transition. Obviously, the more concerned people
are with these topics, the more favourably they will look towards wind energy.
• Trust in stakeholders: The relationship people have with stakeholders and the com-
munication from developers also plays a great role in the acceptance of wind energy.
Hagget often mentions that the role of public involvement has a huge effect on the
public view of development [7]. Also, the more local stakeholders are actively involved
in wind energy development, the more trust there is in these stakeholders.
Page 6 of 44
==PAGE:13==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
• Effect on nature and locals: The more the wind energy development affects the
local communities (think of visual impact, noise, etc.), the lower the acceptance of the
development. Here, the participation of the public in the planning and development
process can also have a great influence.
• Social norms: The more positive the general public view on the energy development,
the more likely it is that an individual is also more positive about the development.
Quite often, the acceptance of renewable energy developments is underestimated by
individuals; it is assumed that the majority of the public will be against or unfavourable
of it. However, it turns out that in Western Europe most people have a favourable
view of the development of renewable energy [9].
Figure 5: The five key acceptance factors as described by the Bundesamt für Naturschutz
[9].
2.1.2
Societal acceptance
All these acceptance factors combined, together with project-specific factors, such as project
landscape, property value, etc. form the basis of the societal acceptance of wind energy.
Fear of infrasound has been identified as a significant negative influence on the acceptance
of wind energy in Germany. However, studies conducted in Portugal and Sortelha indicate
a positive interest in wind energy among a significant percentage of the population [9]. The
Page 7 of 44
==PAGE:14==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
perception of turbines in motion as more aesthetically pleasing than static turbines demon-
strates the impact of economic and ecological factors on wind energy attitudes.
Additionally, the social acceptance of wind energy encompasses both positive attitudes to-
wards technology and local-level decision-making. Socio-political acceptance, on the other
hand, refers to acceptance among major interest groups and political decision makers. Stake-
holders and policymakers involved in renewable energy policy discussions play a crucial role
in resolving project concerns and facilitating community participation initiatives.
Addressing the complexities of social and socio-political acceptance requires more signifi-
cant reforms in the interaction between the energy system and communities. Meaningful
engagement with stakeholders at the national level can help mitigate opposition and ensure
a transparent examination of trade-offs. Active involvement of end users in energy produc-
tion, whether for private energy supply or financial investment, is crucial for future energy
systems. The successful outcome of wind projects, in terms of acceptance or resistance,
depends on careful consideration of local attitudes during the design and implementation
phases.
Figure 6: The triangle of social acceptance [10]
2.2
Economic impact studies
The economy of a region is significantly influenced by the development of wind energy. The
societal acceptance of wind energy in a particular region is closely tied to its economic impact.
Therefore, it is crucial to understand how wind energy development affects the economy and
to identify the potential benefits that can be derived. This subsection aims to provide an
in-depth analysis of the economic impact, considering various factors, and examining rele-
vant case studies. By gaining a comprehensive understanding of the economic implications,
policy makers can make informed decisions and improve the policies on wind energy in the
Page 8 of 44
==PAGE:15==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
region.
There is a limited amount of case study-based methodologies on the local economic impact
of wind energy available in the literature. Most of the literature is focused more on the
regional or national output of wind energy and does not focus on the communities that
surround them. The literature suggests that, in general, wind energy development has a
positive impact on regions, but an in-depth project-specific analysis is often lacking. An
overview of the most important and relevant case study findings will be given in the follow-
ing section. In addition to case studies, some local governments have made forecasts of the
possible economic impact that wind energy development can have on their region.
Important note that will be described in more detail in section 3 is that all these case-
studies and economic prediction studies focus on conventional wind farms. DTU’s test centre
Høvsøre obviously makes use of the same supply chains as these conventional wind farms,
but expenditure during the lifetime of the project significantly differs from conventional wind
energy projects.
2.2.1
An overview
Estimations of job creation and economic impact in wind turbine manufacturing vary due
to different calculation methods and details. Most studies describe economic impact either
by giving absolute investment numbers or by estimating the job creation of specific projects.
Job creation is not limited to direct jobs created by the development of wind energy, but also
includes indirect and induced job employment in the region. Most socio-economic impact
studies have been conducted in the United States of America and Europe, with some studies
from other countries.
An overview of the key findings of each case study literature evaluated is given below. The
literature is ordered by studies on national, regional, and more local case studies. The studies
included the impact on employment and / or economic impact.
• Moldvay et al [11]: The effect that local manufacturing of wind turbines for wind
farms in South Africa would have on the community is investigated. The main focus
of the study was the job creation associated with the full localisation of the supply
chain of the wind energy sector. It was found that there is a huge potential for direct
employment by applying the ’full turbine manufacturing’ model rather than the ’tur-
bine assembly’ model in South Africa. Having a developed national supply chain in the
wind energy sector has the potential to positively benefit the economy of a country.
• Kahouli et al [12]: This paper investigates the employment impact the 500 MW wind
farm of Saint-Brieuc in Brittany has on the economy in France. The results imply that
up to 66% of wealth generation and 51% of job generation will be captured by the
region of Brittany. However, in general, the project only weakly impacts the region,
increasing the GDP of Brittany by 0.09%.
Page 9 of 44
==PAGE:16==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
• Brunner et al [13]: By using commercial wind energy data that range over a 25-year
period, the impact of wind energy installations in counties in the United States has
been examined. A positive effect on the local economy was found, with increasing
benefits at a higher rate of installed capacity per capita.
Rural communities with
multiple wind farms and thus a higher amount of wind energy per capita benefit the
most.
• Black et al [14]: This research mainly focusses on how financial incentives at the state
level in the western United States can influence wind development. In particular, the
state of Idaho recently removed these beneficial incentives, resulting in not only a loss
of employment and income in the region, but also lower tax income for the state itself.
• Copena et al [15]: Diving into the regulatory framework of municipalities in Galicia in
Spain, it was discovered that the local ownership of wind farms can positively influence
the development in rural regions. Copena also argues that the transfer of wind policies
to local authorities may generate opportunities to encourage local development through
public expenditure.
• Greene et al [16]: A mixed-method approach was used to investigate the socio-
economic impact on a small city when a wind farm was built nearby.
The three
methods used are a survey, in-depth interviews, and an economic analysis. Wind farm
development was found to have a positive effect, especially on construction companies
in the area. The amount of goods and services purchased locally will have the greatest
impact on a community during the construction of the wind farm. The interviews taken
during the study show that the community’s view toward wind energy was shifted to
a more positive view.
• Schallenberg-Rodriguez et al [17]: By doing an analysis of the value chain of a 200
MW floating wind farm was carried out in the tourist-led region of Gran Canaria, the
impact on the regional and national economy was estimated. It is found that around
half of the 680 million euros generated from the project will contribute to the regional
economy of Gran Canaria.
• Slattery et al [18]: A Jobs and development Impacts model was used to estimate the
state and local economic impacts of the development of wind energy in western Texas.
The term "local" in this study is defined as the area within a 160-kilometre radius
around the wind farm. The total economic benefit to the local community was found
to be equal to around half a million euros per MW of installed capacity over a lifetime
of 20 years.
• Connolly et al [19]: This study uses two modelling methodologies, input-output (IO)
and compute general equilibrium (CGE), to assess the potential economic impacts of
constructing and operating offshore wind capacity in Scotland between 2018 and 2025.
It was found that the planned developments will bring economic benefits to Scotland;
however, the timing and magnitude of this impact differ critically dependent on the
model used.
Page 10 of 44
==PAGE:17==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
• Collins et al[20]: In this paper, the local economic impact of two different methods of
energy development, pure coal mining and the combination of underground mining and
wind energy, were compared. The study was carried out at the county level. Although
marginal, the local socio-economic impact of the scenario including wind energy was
more positive than that of the pure mining scenario. When the externality cost was
subtracted from the local earnings, the pure mining scenario had a net negative impact
on the local community.
2.3
Economic impact; key studies
Two case studies that are found to be the most related to the local socio-economic impact
of DTU’s Test center Høvsøre are a study on the economic impact of wind energy in the
community of Billund in Denmark [21] and a study by the province of North Holland on the
economic contribution of offshore wind in that province [22].
The Danish paper obviously stands out due to the fact that it entails a case study in Den-
mark.
The Dutch study in Noord-Holland not only gives absolute numbers of regional
economic benefits of wind energy development, but also compares regional expenditure to
total expenditure, estimating what percentage of investment is locally in the region.
2.3.1
Danish case study
The university of Aalborg has, with the support of the Danish energy agency, investigated
the impact of all onshore wind energy development in the municipality of Billund [21]. Key
findings from the study in Billund are the following [21]:
• Wind energy development has the ability to effect the local economy. It is important
that construction and maintenance works are carried out as much as possible by local
parties, to not only experience the direct, but also the indirect economic impact.
• Having an open conversation about the planning and development process with locals
at an early stage greatly increases communal support for wind energy. This includes
investigations into the possible positive local economic effects that the project can
have.
• The municipality plays an important role in the planning and development process.
Municipalities often act as an intermediary between wind farm developers and locals.
Research has shown that the (partial) ownership of wind projects by the municipality
can have a positive economic effect on locals.
• Local ownership of wind projects can also potentially have a positive impact on local
expenditure and profit in communities from the development of the project.
• The energy generated by the wind farm should be used locally in the future energy
system. By using energy more locally, for example, by applying heat pumps and other
Page 11 of 44
==PAGE:18==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
storage methods, the cost of energy for the users in the community will be lowered.
This not only benefits the energy costs for the locals but also reduces costs with respect
to the transport of electricity.
2.3.2
Dutch case study
The Dutch province of Noord-Holland, in combination with industry partners such as the
port of Amsterdam, estimated the potential economic contribution of all wind farms to
be built during the period 2020-2030. A minimum (’low scenario’) and maximum (’high
scenario’) of potential direct revenues were estimated, which are shown below in Figure 7.
(a) Low scenario
(b) high scenario
Figure 7: Low and high scenario of economic Contribution in Noord-Holland [22]
It is evident that most of the revenues generated by regional companies is in the Operation &
Maintenance stage followed by the installation stage. Especially the development of turbines
has a very low contribution to the regional revenue of the province of Noord-Holland. Unlike,
for example, in Denmark, there are no turbine manufacturers located in The Netherlands,
which is clearly visible in the numbers.
Given that the figures mentioned are absolute values, it is interesting to examine the mag-
nitude of regional contributions in relation to the overall expenditure on offshore wind. In
Table 1 the revenue by stage, including the regional expenditure for the ’Low’ and ’High’ sce-
nario are given. Again it shows how much potential the operation and maintenance (O&M)
stage has in regional expenditure in the province of Noord-Holland. In the most optimal
scenario, half of the O&M expenditure can be done locally. Another major advantage of the
expenditure in the O&M stages to the other stages is that they are spread over a local time
period. The numbers for O&M stages shown in Table 1 will be done annually over a period
of 25-30 years. This makes the total revenue coming from the O&M stage approximately
equal to the total revenue generated in the other stages, which explains why it also takes up
so much of the regional expenditure in both scenarios shown in Figure 7.
Page 12 of 44
==PAGE:19==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Table 1: Revenue by stage from Offshore wind power in Noord-Holland(millions of euros)
[22]
.
Development
Turbine
Balance of Plant
Installation
O&M(annual)
Total revenue
1064
8200
5128
5900
694
’High’ scenario
343 [32%]
82 [1%]
167 [3%]
475 [8%]
347 [50%]
’Low’ scenario
112 [11%]
0 [0%]
78 [2%]
164 [3%]
92 [13%]
2.4
State of the art general findings
All the evaluated literature suggests that there is generally a positive economic impact of
wind energy development, but where and how much they add to the local economy differs
significantly per project. Specific project case study based methodologies are lacking, and
the definition of ’local’ differs significantly per paper. Some studies even consider the local
impact as the impact on the entire country’s economy. Most studies use national or re-
gional IO modelling or economic modelling, which requires large amounts of data and draws
conclusions from statistical analysis. Both methods can estimate the economic impact on
a plain level, but lack the ability to trace down the economic impact of a specific project
on the local community. In light of this existing knowledge gap, an extensive case study is
carried out that examines the geographical distribution of the economic advantages derived
from the Høvsøre Test Center in Denmark is carried out.
The insights from the literature study will be used as a basis to fill the existing knowledge
gap regarding local economic impact of wind energy. Below is a short list of insights from
the literature review:
• Most analyses use a too wide of a definition of the word ’local’. Many studies are done
at a regional or even national level. Especially studies from the United States often
define areas larger than Denmark as local, having a 160-kilometre radius surrounding
the farm defined as local [18].
• Statistical economic data are used to estimate the economic impact, lacking the ability
to track where the economic impact exactly occurs.
• Revenue generation and job creation are very dependent on the location and size of
the projects. Especially in Denmark, the type of ownership often has an influence on
economic impact factors [21].
• It is often mentioned that economic impact is more than just numbers (socio-economic
impact), but research on how this impacts local communities also on a social level is
very limited.
Page 13 of 44
==PAGE:20==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
3
Case study
This chapter presents a comprehensive presentation of the Høvsøre test center at DTU.
First, subsection 3.1 offers an overview of the objectives and activities of the testing center.
Subsequently, subsection 3.2 explores the areas directly affected by the test center.
An
overview of the various stakeholders involved in the operations of the test center is given in
subsection 3.3 . Lastly, subsection 3.4 explains how the operations of the test center differ
from the operations of a conventional wind farm.
3.1
An overview of the test center
The Høvsøre Test Center is a cutting-edge facility focused on advancing wind energy technol-
ogy. It is part of the Department of Wind Energy of the Technical University of Denmark,
which has its headquarters in Risøclose to Copenhagen. The center’s main purpose is to
give manufacturers in the industry the ability to test and improve the performance of their
wind turbines. Situated in a perfect location near the North Sea, the Høvsøre Test Center
benefits from strong and consistent wind conditions. The researchers and engineers at the
center conduct extensive tests to understand how wind turbines perform and find ways to
make them more efficient and especially reliable. The findings and data from the Høvsøre
Test Center are valuable resources for industry professionals and others involved in the wind
energy sector.
Page 14 of 44
==PAGE:21==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 8: Overview of DTU’s Test center Høvsøre [23]
An overview of the test center is given in Figure 8. After a major rebuild in 2019, the
test center consists in total of seven test pads that can be leased by the wind turbine
manufacturers.
Every test pad is accompanied by a met mast standing a few hundred
metres west, the dominant wind direction of the test pads. Wind turbine manufacturers’
test engineers have an office at the entrance of the test center, and a small visitor centre is
also located here. In 2023, another rebuild of the test center will reduce the number of test
pads to five slightly larger test pads. However, after the rebuild, it will be possible to test
slightly taller turbines. Before the rebuild it was possible to test turbines up to a tip height
of 165 metres, and after the rebuild the maximum tip height will increase to 200 metres.
3.1.1
Activity at the test center
Currently two manufacturers are leasing test pads from DTU at the test center. These are the
German/Spanish wind turbine manufacturer Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy (SGRE)
and their Danish counterpart Vestas. SGRE and Vestas are currently the two largest wind
turbine manufacturers, combined onshore and offshore, in the world. An overview of the
turbines they are currently testing, including the duration of their lease contract, is given in
Table 2.
As can be seen in Table 2, SGRE is leasing in total three test pads and Vestas two. The size
of the turbines of SGRE tested at Høvsøre is also slightly bigger than the Vestas turbines.
Page 15 of 44
==PAGE:22==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Two of the test pads are currently not leased by any company. These test pads will also
disappear after the rebuild of 2023, leaving the occupancy of the test center at 100%.
Table 2: Overview of the pad lease at the test center [8]
Stand
Manufacturer
Turbine type
Rated power[MW]
End of rental period
1
Vestas
Unknown
Unknown
01.10.2027
2
Vestas
Vestas V116
2.0
30.09.2024
3
SGRE
SG
5.0
31.10.2024
4
-
5
-
6
SGRE
SG
Unknown
28.02.2025
7
SGRE
SG
6.0
31.07.2026
3.1.2
Technical University of Denmark - Department of Wind Energy
The Department of Wind Energy at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) is a leading
institution dedicated to wind energy research and the owner of the test center. In addition
to Høvsøre, another even bigger test center is owned in the north of Jutland, Østerild with
multidisciplinary expertise and state-of-the-art facilities, the department drives advances in
wind turbine technology, wind farm design, and integration of wind energy into the grid.
3.2
Area surrounding Høvsøre
Høvsøre is located in the for European standards sparsely populated western part of Jutland
in Denmark, around a four hour drive from the capital Copenhagen. The villages closest to
the test center are Fjaltring and Bøvlingbjerg, both located around three kilometres from
the test center. A map highlighting the location of Høvsøre is shown in Figure 9. A more
detailed map of the municipality of Lemvig, in which Høvsøre is located, is shown in Table 7
(Figure 10). Høvsøre test center is surrounded by relatively well-developed supply chains for
important materials for construction, including concrete.
Page 16 of 44
==PAGE:23==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 9: Overview of area surrounding DTU’s Test center Høvsøre [24]
The municipality of Lemvig covers a total area of around 517 square kilometres and is inhab-
ited by around 21,000 people. With a population density of around 40 per square kilometre,
it is a very rural, not urbanised, region. In a radius of five kilometres surrounding the wind
farm live only 1250 people - this includes the villages of Fjaltring and Bøvlingbjerg. And
the area in a radius of ten kilometres surrounding the wind farm has a population of just
over 4000 people [25].
Lemvig is located in the bigger administrative region Midtjylland, which is one of the five
regions of Denmark.
The region Midtjylland, shown in Figure 10, has over 1.3 million
inhabitants and an area of approximately 13,000 square kilometres, which is around 30% of
the total area of Denmark [26]. The second largest city in Denmark, Aarhus, is located in
the east of the region, which is more than 150 kilometres from Høvsøre.
Page 17 of 44
==PAGE:24==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 10: Region Midtjylland and its municipalities. Lemvig municipality is in the North-
west [26].
3.3
Stakeholders
Various stakeholders are involved in the operation of DTU’s Test center Høvsøre and this is
not limited to the main stakeholders DTU, SGRE and Vestas. In addition to the main stake-
holders, various subcontractors play an essential role in the operations and maintenance of
DTU’s test center Høvsøre. These subcontractors offer specialised services, technical exper-
tise, and support to ensure the facility’s smooth functioning. Subcontractors, for example,
include engineering firms, maintenance and repair companies and service providers. Not only
should the wind turbines of Vestas and SGRE should be maintained, but also the cables
connecting the test center to the grid, the roads towards the test center, etc.
The socio-economical impact of the test center is not limited to the wind industry alone,
but is highly impactful to the wider community. It is important to recognise the role of
all stakeholders impacted by the test center. In this case study, the stakeholders affected
will be limited to the stakeholders that are mainly affected economically. Therefore, we, for
example, ignore the environmental impact that it has on nature and animals living in the
area.
3.4
The operations of a test center
There is a significant difference in the operation of the test center Høvsøre compared to
that of a conventional wind farm. First, a conventional wind farm has today an operational
lifetime of around 25 years. However, the turbines at the Høvsøre however, are normally
in operation for a maximum of two years before being decommissioned and replaced by a
newer model [27]. This results in increased activity at the test center during its lifetime,
and thus also a relatively higher operational expenditure (OPEX) compared to conventional
wind farms. Thus, the lease contract shown in Table 2 is not necessarily the lifetime of the
Page 18 of 44
==PAGE:25==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
turbine currently present at the site, as multiple turbines could be tested during that time.
The higher expenditure at the test center does is not only due to the higher activity and
shorter lifetime of the turbines.
Høvsøre test center and test centers in general have a
completely different purpose than conventional wind farms. A conventional wind farm seeks
to produce power at the lowest levelised cost of energy (LCOE) possible, aiming to minimise
the amount of maintenance required and thus benefiting from a lower OPEX. The main goal
of the test center is not cost reduction, but rather making the turbines ready for the market
and, therefore, not limiting the costs required to do so.
Page 19 of 44
==PAGE:26==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
4
Methodology
This chapter focusses on the methodology used to assess the local socio-economic impact
of DTU’s test center Høvsøre. First, it gives an overview of the economic data available
for the test center in subsection 4.1. The field work approach adopted for the case study is
then presented in subsection 4.2. Next, subsection 4.3 dives into the definition of the term
’local’ in this context. Then in more detail, it is assessed how the findings will be processed
and adopted into quantitative economic results in subsection 4.4. Finally, an overview of
the assumptions and limitations encountered during the study is provided in subsection 4.5,
concluding the chapter.
4.1
Quantitative data: Economic expenditure
The study of DTU’s test center Høvsøre uses a combination of quantitative and qualitative
data to estimate the local socio-economic impact. The quantitative data consists of economic
expenditure figures of DTU and the main users Vestas and SGRE. The qualitative data
consists of field work at and around the test center and interviews with stakeholders from
both DTU and industry. An overview of what data are available will be presented here in
more detail.
4.1.1
DTU’s expenditure at the test center
As the owner of the test center, DTU is responsible for providing a well-functioning test
facility for users. DTU owns the test pads, met masts, and other service buildings. In addi-
tion to this, they are also responsible for maintaining the gravel road to the test center and
between the different tests pads.
As already described shortly in subsection 1.3, DTU did a major rebuild of the test center
in 2019 and is doing another major rebuild in 2023. Data of both rebuilds has been made
available for the local economic impact study.
In 2019, with the support of the Danish
Government, the test center expanded from five to seven test pads while also increasing the
maximum turbine size able to be tested at the site [8]. However, in 2023, the test center will
be reduced to five test pads, with an increasing size of the test pad area [28]. During both
rebuilds, the met masts used during the tests at the center will be modernised as well. The
construction works during the rebuild in 2019 and 2023 at Høvsøre are almost identical. An
overview of the works is given in Table 3. Besides the activities shown in Table 3, cleaning,
worksite preparation and extra costs are also included in the economic data of the rebuilds.
Page 20 of 44
==PAGE:27==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Table 3: Different types of works during the rebuild of test center Høvsøre in 2019 and 2023
Work type
Different type of operations included
Grid connection
Installation works, grounding, technical kiosk
Cabel Works
36kV cables, 0.4kV cables, technical kiosk
Met mast
Mast construction, obstacle lights installation, hoist platform works
Site preparation
Ground works, Cable diggins, Test pads fundaments
Besides the capital expenditure (CAPEX) of the two rebuilds, annual OPEX data from DTU
were also made available. Although DTU’s OPEX is minor compared to the CAPEX and
the yet to be presented OPEX of SGRE and Vestas, it is important to be included for a
complete overview.
DTU’s OPEX includes but is not limited to the following operations and activities:
• Maintenance of the gravel roads at the test center
• Maintenance of the test pads
• Maintenance of the office building and visitor center
• Cleaning of the office building and visitor center
• Food and grocery expenditure
• Hotel stays of visiting non-permanent DTU personnel
4.1.2
The center users expenditure: Vestas and SGRE
The wind turbine manufacturers Vestas and SGRE are, as the main users of the test cen-
ter Høvsøre, the most active at the site. Vestas, currently using two of the five test pads
(only five available after the 2023 rebuild of the test center by DTU), has made both their
OPEX and CAPEX economic data available for the local economic impact study. SGRE,
currently using three of the five test pads, has not made data available, but after discussions
with DTU’s responsible actors of Høvsøre, it has been decided that the available data from
Vestas can also be used on behalf of SGRE as well [28].
The economic data of SGRE will be scaled with the data of Vestas according to the number
of test pads used by both. Since SGRE uses one test pad more than Vestas (three compared
to two) the expenditure of SGRE will be scaled with a factor 1.5 with the Vestas expen-
diture, both for OPEX and CAPEX data. This is a very conservative scaling, since the
activities and operations per test pad of SGRE are higher than Vestas [28]. DTU employ-
ees estimate that the expenditure of SGRE per test pad is at least 30% higher than Vestas,
but due to missing data this estimation will not be used during the processing of the findings.
Page 21 of 44
==PAGE:28==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
CAPEX of Vestas and SGRE is a bit different compared to the CAPEX of DTU and that
of conventional wind farms. Due to the nature of the test center, where the turbines are
tested in a rather short period of time, the CAPEX of Vestas is done every 4 years. An
overview of the works is shown in Table 4. The CAPEX includes purely installation and
decommissioning of the turbines; turbine costs themselves are excluded, since this is done
internally at Vestas.
Table 4: Overview of CAPEX operations of Vestas
Work type
Different type of operations included
Fundaments
Construction of fundaments for newly installed turbines
Decommissioning
Decommissioning of the turbines
Transport
Transport of turbines and test equipment to the site
The main expenditure from Vestas comes from the OPEX. Very detailed annual OPEX
figures have also been made available. Vestas’ OPEX includes the following expenditure:
• Municipality allowance from Lemvig Kommune for tests at the center.
• Site preparation of the test pads for, for example, installation of test equipment.
• Met masts expenditure and maintenance. Different sensors are placed for several tests.
• Expenditure on Test Instruments and possible reparation costs on instruments.
• Excavation works at the site.
• Rent of cranes used to install, for example, test instruments.
• Food & Bread for employees working on the site.
• Small necessities, for example, batteries needed for the tests.
• Transport of equipment and personnel from an to the test center. Several company
vans are used daily by the permanent and non-permanent employees at the center.
• Gasoline expenditure of the company vans.
• Expenditure on external electricians used over the year for maintenance and repair of
equipment.
• Hotel stays for non permanent employees in the test center. This could be employees
who are working on tests at the site or who are working on the installation/decommis-
sioning of the turbines.
Page 22 of 44
==PAGE:29==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
4.2
Qualitative data: Field work approach
Obtaining the economic expenditure figures of the main actors at the test center is only half
of the work needed to estimate the local economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre.
Interviews with the actors and subcontractors used by the main stakeholders and a site visit
to the test center and its surroundings give the total socio-economic impact Høvsøre has on
the local community.
To understand how much of the economic expenditure stays local, interviews have been
conducted with DTU and employees of other main stakeholders. An overview of the stake-
holders interviewed is shown in Table 5.
Table 5: Overview of stakeholders interviewed/approached during research and site-visit
Name/occupation
Company/institution
Main occupation
Peter Hjuler Hensen
DTU
Senior Executive Officer
Allan Vesth
DTU
Test Center Manager
Anders Ramsing Vestergaard
DTU
Site Manager Høvsøre
Christian Henriksen
DTU/self-employed
Former DTU employee, advisor
Jesper Aagaard
Vestas
Senior specialist
SGRE test engineer 1
SGRE Gamesa
Test engineer of one of the test pads
SGRE test engineer 2
SGRE Gamesa
Test engineer of one of the test pads
Supermarket employee
go-on Bøvlingbjerg
supermarket employee
Contractor - DTU
Christsen Entrepenør
Contractor from Bøvlingbjerg
Blacksmith - Bøvlingbjerg
smed Bøvlingbjerg
Repairs of test equipment
Local - Bøvlingbjerg
-
Living around Høvsøre
Local - Fjaltring
-
Living around Høvsøre
Interviews and meetings with actors from DTU were conducted either online or in-person.
DTU’s expenditure data and the general functioning of the test center Høvsøre were dis-
cussed and explored. A good understanding of the expenditure and activities of DTU at
the test center was obtained. Unfortunately, since SGRE and Vestas, were not available
for interviews and only data was given by them, the processing and understanding of the
data was also done in co-operation with the responsible actors from DTU. Due to the con-
fidentiality of the data, transcripts of interviews and meetings cannot be shared in the report.
During the site visit, several contractors, locals, employees of SGRE and service providers
have been spoken to and interviewed about the operation of the test center. Due to the
spontaneous and unplanned nature of many of these conversations, only field work notes
with key findings were taken.
The discussions and conversations with local contractors,
business owners, and locals focused more on the socio-economic impact of the test center
Høvsøre rather than the pure economic impact. This was not necessarily planned, but for
many locals a more important topic to talk about. Feelings towards the test center play a
Page 23 of 44
==PAGE:30==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
large role on the public’s opinion regarding it, although these are often influenced by the
economic impact it has on themselves.
4.3
The definition of ’local’
As seen in all the previously discussed literature in section 2, the term ’local’ is rather sub-
jective. In some studies, the local economic impact describes the economic impact of entire
countries, where most studies, like the ones done in the United States, consider subdivisions,
like counties. In this study, a more detailed definition of ’local’ will be given and motivated.
4.3.1
Local impact
Looking at the noise and visual impact a wind farm has on its surroundings, one can get
an idea of how local this impact is. The noise impact from wind turbines is greatest up to
500 metres. There are clear industry guidelines for noise [29]. Visual impact, as shown in
Table 6, has an effect on a larger region. The foreground, the area in which wind turbines
cause the biggest visual impact and are prominently visible on the horizon, reaches up to
eight kilometres from the turbine. In this area around Høvsøre there are around 2,600 people
living, which includes the towns of Bøvlingbjerg and Fjaltring. The background, where the
turbines are still visible, but less prominently and disturbingly, extends up to 24 kilometres
from the turbine. This region around Høvsøre has a population of around 27,000 and includes
Lemvig.
Table 6: Impact zones of a wind farm [29]
Visual impact zones Høvsøre
distance [km]
population [25]
area [km2]
Foreground
0-8
2,600
201
Background
8-24
2,7000
1,810
Seldom seen
24+
-
-
The definition of "local" for the economic impact study will be defined as such to only in-
clude the surroundings that also experience the negative effects of the test center Høvsøre,
roughly equal to the combined foreground and background zone as shown in Table 6. In
this way it can be studied how positively the test center might impact the region that also
experiences the noise, visual impact, and other negative effects from the test center. This
local region will be defined as the municipality of Lemvig, with a focus on the impacts on
the surrounding villages Fjaltring and Bøvlingbjerg. Obviously, the impacts on those two
villages are greater than those on the farther placed Lemvig, but despite this everything
within the municipality is categorised as local.
Page 24 of 44
==PAGE:31==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
4.3.2
Regional and national impact
Besides local impact, the study will also define the regional and national economic impact.
The regional impact, as seen inTable 7, is defined as the impact on the Region Midtjylland in
Denmark. This region includes the bigger towns of Holsterbro, Herning and Brande, where
many stakeholders working on the test center are located. People working and living in
this region are probably not in need of, for example, a hotel stay when going to Høvsøre
and might be familiar with the surroundings. Companies might not specifically only go the
Lemvig municipality for work at Høvsøre, but could have other customers there.
The region classified as national is the rest of Denmark, excluding the Midtjylland region.
These are likely companies and people specifically travelling to the area only for work at
Høvsøre.
Hotel stays are probably required, and stakeholders are not familiar with the
surrounding area. However, the work is still done by Danish companies, which might be of
interest to policy makers.
4.3.3
Exclusion of international expenditure
Not all expenditures that result directly and especially indirectly from Høvsøre is coming
from within Denmark. To give an example, the raw metals used to construct the turbines,
met masts, and other testing material are neither extracted nor processed inside Denmark.
However, this indirect impact of costs will be neglected during the study. The focus here is
on the direct expenditure of DTU, Vestas and SGRE, all located within Denmark, and their
subcontractors.
It was found during the study and field work that the first two lines inside the supply chain,
the three main stakeholders, and their direct subcontractors are located within Denmark.
An overview of the location of the stakeholders active at Høvsøre is shown in Table 8.
Additionally, unlike a conventional wind farm, the expenses associated with purchasing wind
turbines are not included in the study, as this is done internally within Vestas and SGRE.
SGRE is mostly located outside Denmark, but the Høvsøre departments are within Denmark.
If one would include the more indirect economic expenditure resulting from Høvsøre (e.g.
raw materials) an impact internationally will also be noticed.
4.3.4
Overview of the different regions
A quick overview of the geographical regions is shown in Table 7. The location of the offices
of the most prominent stakeholders is given in Table 8.
Table 7: Overview of the different regions used in the study
Region
Classification
size [km2]
population (1st of January 2023)
Lemvig municipality
Local
508.2
19,371
Midtjylland
Regional
13,053
1,333,245
Denmark
National
42,943
5,935,619
Page 25 of 44
==PAGE:32==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Table 8: Geographical classification cities and villages with stakeholders active at Høvsøre
City/Village
Classification
Distance to Høvsøre [km] straight line
Fjaltring
Local
2.7
Bøvlingbjerg
Local
3.3
Lemvig
Local
14
Holsterbro
Regional
30
Herning
Regional
61
Brande
Regional
82
Vejle
National
120
Risø
National
259
4.4
Processing of findings
Having obtained the economic data on both CAPEX and OPEX from DTU and manufac-
turers, it is now possible to connect the specific expenditure to all subcontractors and form
a definition of the geographical regions, with subsequent processing and graphical visualisa-
tion of the relevant findings. To give a complete overview on how the expenditure is done,
different ways of showing the data have been processed, which will be explained in more
detail here.
4.4.1
Geographical distribution
The most important distributions shown are the geographical distributions of economic ex-
penditure.
These are both distributed locally and non-locally, but the non-local part is
also classified in more detail as regional and national if deemed necessary. The focus here
obviously lies on the local expenditure.
4.4.2
Sector distribution
Also a sector distribution of the expenditure will be made. In this way, the confidential data
can be shown in a bit more detail. The classified sectors are the following:
• General work sector: This sector comprises all general work that can be done by
standard contractors. This includes but is not limited to maintenance works to the
gravel roads, site preparation works, grounding works, and electricians.
• Skilled work sector: This sector comprises the most skilled work related to wind
turbine technology. Companies with more specific expertise are needed to perform
these tasks. These works include but are not limited to grid connection works, met mast
works, decommissioning of the turbines, and the work regarding the test instruments.
• Service sector: All the non-engineering/manufacturing expenditure is included in this
sector. Consider costs such as transport, gasoline, and small necessities (like batteries)
bought locally. But it also includes hotel stays and any expenditure in the food sector,
mainly at supermarkets.
Page 26 of 44
==PAGE:33==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
4.4.3
Comparison to a conventional wind farm
A comparison will be made between the expenditure of DTU’s test center Høvsøre and a
conventional wind farm. Both OPEX and CAPEX are considered in the comparison. The
data for the conventional wind farm expenditure is obtained from Bloomberg [30].
The
general assumptions made in the comparison are the following:
• The lifetime of the wind farm is 25 years. With year 0, in which the CAPEX expen-
diture is done, being 2023. The first operational year is therefore 2024.
• The key parameters of the comparison are shown in Table 9 and the more extensive
economic data from Bloomberg are shown in Table 12.
• The size of the conventional wind farm is equal to the maximum possible capacity of
the test center Høvsøre, consisting of 5 turbines of each 6 MW.
• The CAPEX of Høvsøre is a combination of the 2023 rebuild and the expenditure of
SGRE and Vestas, which is done every 4 years [31].
Table 9: Key parameters used in comparison
Parameter
Value
Høvsøre capacity (MW)
30
Currency conversion rate $ to Dkk (June 2023)
6.77
CAPEX nominal 2023 ($/kW)
1591.77
4.5
Assumptions and limitations
Several assumptions are made during the study and some limitations to the available data
have been encountered, including confidentiality of data and stakeholders. All these consid-
erations will be summarised here.
4.5.1
General assumptions and limitations
The obtained data of both the rebuild and OPEX limit itself mainly to direct impact from
the test center, as much indirect impact coming from, for example, subcontractors is not
known. Direct impact of the test center includes, expenditure related to operations directly
taking place at the test center. This include the works on the rebuild and the maintenance
of the test instruments or the gravel roads. The indirect impact that is included in the anal-
ysis is, for example, the expenditure on gasoline, hotels, and food from Vestas and SGRE.
However, subcontractors working on Høvsøre also have the same expenditures - most likely
locally - but data regarding those is missing.
A general assumption in the economic analysis of the data, considering all the different
distributions shown in the results, is that every different type of expenditure is placed fully
Page 27 of 44
==PAGE:34==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
in one certain category. For example, imagine that certain expenditures on cable works are
done. The company that does the cable work is located in Lemvig. Then the full expenditure
regarding the cable works is classified as ’local,’ even if the employees or materials might not
be local. The same goes the other way around; imagine certain expenditure from a company
from Holsterbro, which is classified as regional as seen in Table 8, this full expenditure is
classified as ’regional’.
However, the employees or materials might have been purchased
locally in the Lemvig municipality. It is assumed that these balance each other out, and it
would require unfeasible large amounts of research and confidential information from all the
different stakeholders to trace exactly where every øre1 is spent.
4.5.2
Remark on confidentiality
To protect the privacy and confidentiality of all stakeholders who provide interviews and
economic numbers in the case study, the names of stakeholders, including subcontractors,
will not be given in this report. The names and occupations of all stakeholders involved
are known to the author and DTU. In addition to this, economic contracts regarding the
rebuild and operational expenditure will not be shared due to confidential information in
these contracts. All of these contracts were also made available to the author. Economic
expenditure figures are grouped together in several ways to still show the local impact re-
sults as effective as possible without breaking any non-disclosure agreements (NDA’s) and
privacy of any stakeholder involved. Relative shares of expenditure, rather than absolute
numbers, are visualised, to still get an indication of how much the contribution locally of
certain expenditure is.
Besides this, some economic expenditure figures from the main stakeholders SGRE and
Vestas regarding the exact investments in their turbines are not known nor were shared.
This includes mainly CAPEX costs regarding the development of turbines, including material
costs, etc. However, this is not considered problematic, as this expenditure is likely not to
be done locally around Høvsøre.
1Danish equivalent of a penny
Page 28 of 44
==PAGE:35==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
5
Results
In this chapter the results from the case study regarding DTU’s test center Høvsøre will
be presented. First, in subsection 5.1 an overview of the economic breakdown of the test
center will be shown. Then, the local and non-local expenditure figures will be presented
in subsection 5.2. Subsequently, a more detailed overview of the expenditure focused on
the sectors and geographical distribution will be given in subsection 5.3 and subsection 5.4.
A comparison between Høvsøre and the expenditures of a conventional wind farm is made
in subsection 5.5. The chapter is concluded by giving an insight into the socio-economic
findings during the study in subsection 5.6.
5.1
Economic breakdown
The total expenditure done at the test center Høvsøre is a combination of the expenditure of
DTU, SGRE and Vestas. All three different actors have CAPEX and OPEX and activities
going on over the year. An overview of the total expenditure at the test center Høvsøre is
shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Total expenditure including all stakeholders over 25 year operational period at
Høvsøre. Year 0 is taken as the rebuild year 2023.
The 25 year period is equal to the average lifetime of a conventional wind farm. It is evident
that the high CAPEX in year 0, resulting from the rebuild by DTU, is significantly higher
than the CAPEX of Vestas and SGRE. Vestas has CAPEX every 4 years, while SGRE is
more active in this sense and has it every 2 years [27]. The cost of OPEX slowly decreases
over time due to the use of aggregated expenditure levels here. The discount factor used to
obtain these figures is shown in Table 12 in Table 7.
Page 29 of 44
==PAGE:36==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 12: Total CAPEX and OPEX over 25-year operational period
From Figure 13 it follows that the expenditure of the wind turbine manufacturers and DTU
are of a different nature. Where the OPEX of DTU only counts for 1% of the total annual
expenditure, almost two thirds of the CAPEX is spended by DTU. The CAPEX expenditure
here is the total lifetime CAPEX expenditure over a period of 25-years as shown in Figure 11.
DTU’s CAPEX is fully done in 2023, comprising only the rebuild. As one could expect, the
users of the Test center, SGRE and Vestas, are far more active at the site during the year
and therefore have an immense share in the OPEX.
(a) Share of annual OPEX per stakeholder
(b) Share of CAPEX per stakeholder
Figure 13: Expenditure stakeholder share
These expenditure shares of OPEX and CAPEX will be taken into account for the in-depth
economic research. The focus here for DTU lies on the rebuild 2023 expenses and tracing
down the local expenditure there, where for SGRE and Vestas the focus is on OPEX.
Page 30 of 44
==PAGE:37==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
5.2
The local expenditure
Having obtained the total expenditure of the test center, one can focus now on the local
expenditure at the site. A relative share and estimates of the total lifetime local expenditures
will be presented.
5.2.1
Rebuild 2023 and OPEX
A distinction will be made between OPEX and Rebuild 2023. In Figure 14 only the rebuild
2023 is shown in more detail. This is due to the fact that the local CAPEX for SGRE and
Vestas was found to be minimal to non-existent and assumed to be zero.
(a) Høvsøre rebuild expenditure by DTU
(b) Annual opex expenditure of all stakeholders
Figure 14: Local versus non-local expenditure of Rebuild and OPEX
It can be seen that for both the rebuild and the OPEX half of the cost is spent locally.
Again, for the CAPEX of SGRE and Vestas nothing was spend direcly locally.
5.2.2
Lifetime local and non-local expenditure
A complete overview for the yearly local and non-local expenditure over the assumed lifetime
of 25 years is shown in Figure 15. These are again aggregated economic results taking into
account the discount factor. Local and non-local expenditure is distributed fairly even over
the years. The slightly higher non-local expenditure in the even operation years comes from
the CAPEX expenditure of SGRE and Vestas.
Page 31 of 44
==PAGE:38==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 15:
Annual local and non-local expenditure over 25 year operational period at
Høvsøre. Year 0 is taken as the rebuild year 2023.
If we include the total CAPEX cost, rebuild, Vestas and SGRE expenditure, only around
32% of the CAPEX is locally spent as seen in Figure 16. This is purely coming from the
rebuild expenditure of DTU. Adding OPEX and CAPEX together results in that a bit less
than half of the total lifetime expenditure at Høvsøre is done locally.
Figure 16: Overview of the total lifetime local and non-local expenditure share of DTU’s
test center Høvsøre
Showing the local and non-local expenditure in absolute numbers, as seen in Figure 17, one
can conclude that around 310 million Dkk are spent locally and just over 350 million Dkk
are spent non-locally over the years.
Page 32 of 44
==PAGE:39==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 17: Total local and non-local expenditure at Høvsøre
5.3
Sector distribution
Interesting findings result from dividing the expenditures at DTU into the three different
sectors; services, skilled work and general work.
An overview of the share of each sector in the OPEX and rebuild expenditure is given in
Figure 18. The service sector only accounts for a very small amount of total expenditure,
just over 1%. Most likely, many of the service expenditure is indirect and therefore lacking
in the Data. However, even if this indirect service expenditure was quantified and included,
still the vast majority of the expenditure comes from the general works and skilled work
sector. As can be seen in Figure 18b, there is no service sector expenditure included in the
rebuild expenditure numbers, most likely this will indirectly not be equal to zero either due
to indirect expenditure from subcontractors. DTU, however, does not have direct service
sector expenditure.
(a) OPEX sector distribution share
(b) 2023 rebuild sector distribution share
Figure 18: Comparison of the sector distribution share
Page 33 of 44
==PAGE:40==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
A clear trend is visible in Figure 19 with respect to the shares of local and non-local ex-
penditure in each of the sectors. Where the share of local expenditures for the services and
general work sector is high, all over 75%, the skilled work sector has barely any local ex-
penditure. The specialised companies needed to perform the tasks in the skilled work sector
are simply not located in the vicinity of Høvsøre test center. Again, the services sector for
the rebuild in Figure 19b is lacking due to the fact that DTU does not have any direct
services sector expenditure; however, the rebuild most likely indirectly impacts the services
sector also. Stakeholders working on the rebuild also need to fill up their vans with gas
and provide themselves with a lunch and / or hotel stay if coming from far. The share of
expenditure from the services sector will still be negligible compared to expenditure from
the other sectors, as shown in Figure 18a.
(a) OPEX Local and non-local
(b) 2023 rebuild local and non-local
Figure 19: Local and non-local expenditure per sector overview. There is no service sector
expenditure for the rebuild.
5.4
Regional and national impact
Investigating more specifically where the non-local expenditure is done, dividing it into the
prescribed regional and national, a more detailed overview of the geographical distribution
can be formed.
The same expenditure shares shown in Figure 14 are presented in Figure 20, with now the
non-local part separated in a regional and national share. It can be concluded that the
majority of the non-local expenditure is done regionally, especially for the OPEX.
Page 34 of 44
==PAGE:41==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
(a) Geographical distribution of OPEX
(b) Geographical distribution of 2023 rebuild.
Figure 20: Overview of the geographical distribution of expenditure
The difference in expenditure, relative to the geographical distribution, between the expen-
diture in the services sector for OPEX and the skilled work sector of the 2023 rebuild of
the test center can be seen in Figure 21. It is clear that services expenditure is done very
locally, the regional part of the expenditure mostly comes from hotel stays just outside the
municipality of Lemvig. More skilled personnel and specialised companies are rarely found in
the Lemvig municipality, which is why many skilled work expenditures cannot be exploited
locally.
(a) Service sector OPEX.
(b) Skilled work 2023 rebuild expenditure.
Figure 21: Comparison between services sector and skilled work expenditure geographical
distribution.
5.5
Høvsøre compared to a conventional wind farm
To understand how the expenditure of DTU’s test center Høvsøre differs from that of a
conventional wind farm, a lifetime expenditure comparison has been made. The focus here
lies purely on the expenditure, not on whether it is done locally or not locally.
Key assumptions, as stated in subsection 4.4, are a lifetime of 25 years of the wind farm
and a capacity of 30 MW for the conventional wind farm. Aggregated economic expendi-
tures, including the discount factor shown in Table 12 in Table 7, are used. An overview
of the comparison of CAPEX and total expenditure is shown in Figure 23. The OPEX
Page 35 of 44
==PAGE:42==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
comparison is displayed in Figure 22. For Høvsøre the decrease in expenditure over time
here is purely due to the discount factor, but for the conventional wind farm the decrease
in OPEX forecast is also taken into account (the OPEX forecast numbers shown in Table 12).
Figure 22: Comparison between the OPEX of Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm [30],
year 1 is 2024
It is evident that the CAPEX of the conventional wind farm is approximately three times
higher than for Høvsøre. This is partly caused by the fact that turbine expenditure, planning
& development cost is included for the the conventional wind farm. Also, the CAPEX for
the conventional wind farm is done completely before the start of operation in year 0, while
for the test center it is partly spread over time as seen in Figure 11.
Page 36 of 44
==PAGE:43==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
(a) Comparison between total CAPEX of Høvsøre
and a conventional wind farm [30]
(b) Comparison between total expenditure of
Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm [30].
Figure 23: Expenditure comparison between Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm
The OPEX of the test center Høvsøre is so much higher than that of a conventional wind
farm that the total expenditure over its lifetime is, in the end, around 50% higher. Annual
OPEX is more than three times higher for Høvsøre than the conventional wind farm. Assum-
ing that a similar amount of expenditure is made locally, the local expenditure and impact
on the local community of a test center are much larger. Looking at the shorter running
time of the turbines, activity at the sites during tests, and all other extra operations and
visits at the test center the far higher forecasted operational cost are not surprising. Where
the CAPEX cost has a big influence on the local expenditure for a short period of time, high
OPEX means a high local expenditure over the entire lifetime of the test center.
To have a clear overview of how much is spent on OPEX compared to CAPEX an overview
for both the test center Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm is shown in Figure 24. Of
the total expenditure of Høvsøre, which is already higher than the conventional wind farm,
83% of the expenditure is expected to come from the OPEX. This number is expected to be
only 28% for the conventional wind farm. One can conclude that the local economic impact
over the lifetime of the test center Høvsøre is likely much higher than a normal conventional
wind farm.
Page 37 of 44
==PAGE:44==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
(a) OPEX-CAPEX share Høvsøre
(b) OPEX-CAPEX share conventional farm [30].
Figure 24: Comparison between the OPEX-CAPEX share of total expenditure of test center
Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm
5.6
Social impact
Besides the pure economical impact Høvsøre has on the local community, the social impact
on the surroundings is almost of the same significance. Key findings during fieldwork and
interviews will be summarised and recommendations on how to increase the discernibility of
the social impact on the local surrounding will be given.
5.6.1
Field work findings
During the field work, local businesses and residents were interviewed in both Fjaltring and
Bøvlingbjerg. Furthermore, to better understand the figures, some employees of SGRE were
interviewed and asked about the use of local businesses during their daily operations.
The presence of the test center in the local communities is very obvious. This is not only
due to the sheer population surrounding the test center, but also due to the high activity
at the center. The center was visited during a normal operation day in May and several
stakeholders were active. As can be seen in Figure 25a, SGRE employees at the center drive
around in company service vans. This makes it obvious to local residents that their presence
in their community is purely caused by the test center Høvsøre.
SGRE employees stressed during the interview that they feel quite connected to the local
surroundings. They know the local retailers in Bøvlingbjerg personally and make great use
of the services in the area. It was mentioned that at some point the local blacksmith in
Bøvlingbjerg was used so much that he "asked us to stop giving him so much work". Al-
though the exact spending numbers at the blacksmith in Bøvlingbjerg (Smed Bøvlingbjerg)
are lacking, one can imagine that the activities at the test center Høvsøre have a positive
economic impact on him.
Page 38 of 44
==PAGE:45==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
(a) SGRE service vans parked at Høvsøre
(b) Christensen entreprenør doing ground works
Figure 25: Images taken during the field work at Høvsøre in May 2023
Another contractor working on the site is Christensen entrepenør. He is responsible for many
works during the rebuild of the 2023 by DTU as well as other maintenance works. The works
of one of the new test pads by Christensen can be seen in Figure 25b. The two-man company
gets around half of their total work from the test center according to Christensen himself.
Not surprisingly, he was very fond of the presence of the test center. Furthermore, some
works, the transport of grind and other construction materials, are sub-contracted by Chris-
tensen to local companies in and around Bøvlingbjerg. The exact names of these mostly
self-employed contractors are unknown, but the local economic and social impact is surely
present to some extent.
Figure 26: Local supermarket located in Bøvlingbjerg
Talking to local residents of Bøvlinbgjerg and an employee of the supermarket, it is evident
that the test center has a significant impact on the village. In the supermarket "Copenhagen
Page 39 of 44
==PAGE:46==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
people" are directly recognised as visitors of the test center. The local supermarket, shown
in Figure 26, is according to the employee, is visited daily by people working at Høvsøre.
All SGRE, Vestas and DTU employees walking around the test site are often wearing their
company clothes and, therefore, easily recognisable is coming from Høvsøre.
During decommissioning, installation and major tests a few dozen employees of either SGRE
or Vestas comes over to Høvsøre, significantly increasing the activities at the test center for
up to a couple of weeks. These employees coming over for these operations, however, are not
stationed full-time at the test center and sometimes not Danish. Due to the rural character
of the region and the lack of knowledge of English, the connection between locals and these
temporary employees is much less than with the full-time employees of the test center. This
might seem insignificant, but during the field work it was noticed that locals are much
more open when speaking with them in Danish than in English. This extra connection, by
speaking their mother tongue, is not to be underestimated.
5.6.2
Socio-economic impact
It was found during the field work that the economic impact is highly connected with the
social impact on the local surroundings and one cannot just look at the statistical economic
numbers to estimate the impact it has on the society. Therefore, it is considered preferential
to couple these and view the socio-economic impact instead.
The stakeholder that was found to be one of the most positive about the presence of DTU’s
test center Høvsøre and its economic impact on their business was the local supermarket in
Bøvlingbjerg. Looking purely at the economic figures shown in Figure 18a this might come
as a surprise, since only a very small share of expenditure is done in the services sector. The
majority of the expenditure here is done at hotels, even further decreasing the expenditure
possibly done at the local supermarket.
This emphasises the connection between the social and economic impact of the test center
Høvsøre. The supermarket is one of the businesses that sees the most expenditure on the
test center. Every expenditure done at the supermarket, as small as a few dozen kroner, is
done obviously by people either visiting or working at the test center and therefore adding
this extra social connection. Although it being a very small expenditure, the expenditure
might feel way larger than a large expenditure just being transferred to a bank account
without having this in-person interaction. This could be due to psychological factors outside
the scope of this study. Social interaction makes the expenditure feel more significant even
though this is not reflected in the actual magnitude of the expenditure.
Page 40 of 44
==PAGE:47==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
6
Discussion
In this chapter the results of the socio-economic impact study of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
will be discussed and further elaborated on. First, the economic results of the case study will
be discussed in subsection 6.1. Then the practical implementation of socio-economic impact
studies for community acceptance is elaborated in subsection 6.2. Finally, subsection 6.3
presents possible future work that could be done after this thesis.
6.1
Discussion of results
The economic impact study of DTU’s test center Høvsøre has clearly shown that a significant
portion of the expenditure is done locally inside the municipality of Lemvig, with many of
the expenditure even staying more local in the neighbouring village of Bøvlingbjerg. Further-
more, the expenditure for the test center is expected to be higher than that of a conventional
wind farm, with the OPEX especially being around three times that of a conventional wind
farm. Meaning that the test center Høvsøre most likely has a greater local economic impact
than a conventional wind farm of the same size.
Compared to the economic impact study of the Dutch province of Noord-Holland, one can
conclude that the findings at Høvsøre are comparable to the described "high scenario", as
shown in Figure 7b. However, the geographical region in which the study has been car-
ried out is closer to the region defined as regional, Midtjylland, in the case study regarding
DTU’s test center Høvsøre. The study also looks at the economic contribution of offshore
wind energy, of which supply chains are somewhat similar to onshore wind, but it is difficult
to compare them. More specialised companies are used to install foundations and perform
site maintenance compared to onshore wind energy. Where at Høvsøre, foundations are in-
stalled by local contractors, in case of offshore wind this is done by specialised installation
and dredging companies such as Van Oord or Heerema. If we look at the economic impact
results and the distribution of the skilled work sector for the 2023 rebuild in Figure 21b, one
can see that the total regional contribution is 50%, which is comparable to the contribu-
tion in the ’high scenario’ of the economic impact study of the province of Noord-Holland.
One can conclude that all kinds of wind energy development have a positive contribution to
the local economy, but how extensive and how local this contribution is very case dependent.
Besides being hard to compare with other studies, many limitations exist in the case study
regarding Høvsøre. One major factor missing from the supply chain in this case study, is the
source of the raw materials used at the test center. Subcontractors are likely to have their
own subcontractors for these materials, and there is a high probability that these contractors
are not located locally, especially for metals for turbines and test equipment. In this study
we went one step further into the supply chain, going from the main contractors (DTU,
SGRE, Vestas) to their subcontractors. To get a full overview of the end destination of the
money flow, one should go even further into the supply chain. However, due to confidentiality
constraints and other competitive advances, stakeholders might lose by revealing their supply
chain, this sensitive business information is quite hard or even impossible to achieve.
Page 41 of 44
==PAGE:48==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
6.2
Socio-economic impact analysis for community acceptance
The use of socio-economic impact studies for community acceptance should be considered a
great addition. Where in townhall or community meetings for new upcoming wind energy
projects, the focus is solely on the possible negative noise and visual impact it could have
on the community, the possible positive economic contribution to the area has so far been
completely neglected.
This thesis might be the first step in using local socio-economic analysis for community ac-
ceptance. Due to the unique specifications of each wind project, a separate local economic
impact study is likely to be required for each case. When a noise or visual impact analysis is
done, this is also always a case-specific analysis. There are certain general standards and re-
quirements for noise and visual impact. In the future, one could think of a similar framework
regarding the local economic impact of wind energy. Including the local economic impact
analysis (EIA) inside the environmental impact analysis and having it to meet certain ’eco-
nomic standards’. These standards could include, for example, requiring a minimum certain
amount to be spent locally. Obviously, clear standards of what is meant by ’local’ should
also be set. The recommendation of this study is to also include the area that is negatively
affected by the wind farm and include the locals who will visit these community meetings
on wind projects.
By including the economic contribution of a wind project in the affected region and also
showing the positive economic effects, community acceptance might increase.
Positively
influencing community acceptance can best be done not just by showing numbers, but more
by emphasising the positive effect on local businesses and contractors. Locals possibly have a
personal connection with these local companies and possibly even know employees or owners
of these companies. If, for example, in the case of Høvsøre, at a community meeting in
Bøvlingbjerg it is shown that your local supermarket and blacksmith gets a lot of work and
expenditure from the test center, locals actually understand the economic impact that the
test center has on their community.
6.3
Future work
Much research still needs to be done on the local economic impact of wind energy, and this
case study analysis of DTU’s test center Høvsøre is just the mere beginning.
To further improve the economic analysis of wind energy, as already stated, one should go
further down the supply chain and track exactly where every Øre ends up. Tracking down
subcontractors of subcontractors where possible and having detailed overviews of expendi-
ture of all of them. It is also important to understand what economic contribution results
locals and their communities would like to see - along with presenting these local economic
impact analysis studies in the community meetings. The questions asked by locals, who do
not have a good understanding of the activities on a wind farm, could give insight on what
to focus on in terms of research, time, and other resources.
Page 42 of 44
==PAGE:49==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
By doing multiple case studies regarding local economic impact, some general trends could
be discovered and examples of how to improve local expenditure could arise. In this way,
certain standards regarding minimum required local expenditure can be formed and a more
standard definition of ’local’ for the socio-economic impact can possibly be given. At the
end of the day, the socio-economic impact analysis can truly be a great addition to the
community acceptance of wind energy overall and an integrated part of the planning and
development of wind energy projects.
Page 43 of 44
==PAGE:50==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
7
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to explore the local socio-economic impact of DTU’s Test center Høvsøre.
A literature study was conducted, the geographical ’local’ region for Høvsøre was defined
and based on quantitative and qualitative data several conclusions can be drawn on this
socio-economic impact.
The total local economic contribution of DTU’s test center Høvsøre over a set lifetime of 25
years is expected to be around 47% of the total expenditure. This includes both CAPEX
and OPEX from the three main contractors DTU, Vestas and SGRE. In absolute terms, this
is equal to around 309 million Dkk of total local expenditure. Zooming in to the different
sectors, it was found that the highest local expenditure is expected to be done in the services
and general work sector. In particular, local expenditure in the skilled work sector is ex-
pected to be minimal, with only about 9% of the expenditure to be done locally. Looking at
the more detailed geographical distribution of the expenditure, it becomes clear that most of
the non-local expenditure stays regional. Only 7% of the OPEX is done outside the region
of Midtjylland and for the 2023 rebuild of the test center this is a bit higher bit still low at
18% of the expenditure. The expenditure in the service sector is more local, with 78% of
the expenditure done locally and the other 22% done regionally.
Comparing the expenditure at DTU’s test center Høvsøre to that of a conventional wind
farm of similar size, it can be seen that the expenditure over a lifetime of 25 years signif-
icantly differs. While the CAPEX of the conventional wind farm is about three times as
high, the total expenditure at Høvsøre is about 50% higher. This is due to the OPEX of
Høvsøre being annually over three times higher than that of the conventional wind farm.
Looking at the share of the OPEX in total expenditure, only 28% of the expenditure of the
conventional wind farm is OPEX, but for Høvsøre this is around 83% of the expenditure.
Field work and interviews with locals and local businesses show that DTU’s test center
Høvsøre has a great socio-economic impact on the surrounding community of Bøvlingbjerg.
People are generally positive about the presence of the test center near their village and the
impact it has on their local businesses. Some local contractors receive up to half of their
work from the activities at the test center and also the service sector, such as supermarkets
and gas stations, is used heavily by people working and visiting the test center.
It can be concluded that DTU’s test center Høvsøre has a positive socio-economic impact
on the local communities and there is significant local expenditure. Research into the local
economic impact of wind energy has the potential to further improve the acceptance by
the community of wind energy projects and become an integrated part of the planning and
development of wind projects.
Page 44 of 44
==PAGE:51==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
List of Figures
1
Worldwide installations outlook 2022-2027 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Cities in Denmark active in the wind energy supply chain [2] . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Indirect impact of wind energy per e1000 directly invested [2] . . . . . . . .
3
4
Overview of DTU’s test center Høvsøre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
5
The five key acceptance factors as described by the Bundesamt für Naturschutz
[9]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6
The triangle of social acceptance [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
7
Low and high scenario of economic Contribution in Noord-Holland [22] . . .
12
8
Overview of DTU’s Test center Høvsøre [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
9
Overview of area surrounding DTU’s Test center Høvsøre [24]
. . . . . . . .
17
10
Region Midtjylland and its municipalities.
Lemvig municipality is in the
Northwest [26].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
11
Total expenditure including all stakeholders over 25 year operational period
at Høvsøre. Year 0 is taken as the rebuild year 2023.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
12
Total CAPEX and OPEX over 25-year operational period
. . . . . . . . . .
30
13
Expenditure stakeholder share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
14
Local versus non-local expenditure of Rebuild and OPEX . . . . . . . . . . .
31
15
Annual local and non-local expenditure over 25 year operational period at
Høvsøre. Year 0 is taken as the rebuild year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
16
Overview of the total lifetime local and non-local expenditure share of DTU’s
test center Høvsøre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
17
Total local and non-local expenditure at Høvsøre
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
18
Comparison of the sector distribution share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
19
Local and non-local expenditure per sector overview.
There is no service
sector expenditure for the rebuild. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
20
Overview of the geographical distribution of expenditure
. . . . . . . . . . .
35
21
Comparison between services sector and skilled work expenditure geographical
distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
22
Comparison between the OPEX of Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm [30],
year 1 is 2024 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
23
Expenditure comparison between Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm
. .
37
24
Comparison between the OPEX-CAPEX share of total expenditure of test
center Høvsøre and a conventional wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
25
Images taken during the field work at Høvsøre in May 2023 . . . . . . . . . .
39
26
Local supermarket located in Bøvlingbjerg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
27
Correlation between acceptance factors as describe by the Budesamt für Naturschutz
[9]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
28
Detailed map of municipality of Lemvig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
29
Revenue from offshore wind power in the province of Noord-Holland by stage
(in millions of euros)[22] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII
Page I of XI
==PAGE:52==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
List of Tables
1
Revenue by stage from Offshore wind power in Noord-Holland(millions of
euros) [22] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Overview of the pad lease at the test center [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Different types of works during the rebuild of test center Høvsøre in 2019 and
2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Overview of CAPEX operations of Vestas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Overview of stakeholders interviewed/approached during research and site-visit 23
6
Impact zones of a wind farm [29]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Overview of the different regions used in the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8
Geographical classification cities and villages with stakeholders active at Høvsøre 26
9
Key parameters used in comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
10
Stakeholders active at Høvsøre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
11
Key economic data Høvsøre
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
12
Overview of economic data obtained from Bloomberg[30] . . . . . . . . . . .
XI
Page II of XI
==PAGE:53==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Nomenclature
CAPEX
Capital expenditure
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
IO
Input-output
LCOE
Levelised cost of energy
NDA
Non disclosure agreement
NIMBY
Not in my backyard
O&M
Operation and maintenance
OPEX
Operational expenditure
SGRE
Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy
Page III of XI
==PAGE:54==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
References
[1] M. Hutchinson and F. Zhao, GLOBAL WIND REPORT 2023. GWEC, 2023.
[2] A. Mbistrova and I. Pineda, Local impact, global leadership: The impact of wind energy
on jobs and the EU economy. Wind Europe, 2017.
[3] G. Floater, P. Rod, and D. Zenghelis, Copenhagen Green Economy Leader Report. Lon-
don School of Economics and Political Science, 2014.
[4] M. Wolsink, Wind power and the NIMBY-myth: institutional capacity and the limited
significance of public support. London School of Economics and Political Science, 2000.
[5] I. van Halm, “How developers can overcome local opposition to onshore wind
projects.”
https://www.energymonitor.ai/finance/corporate-strategy/
how-developers-can-overcome-local-opposition-to-onshore-wind-projects/,
2022. Accessed: 16-06-2023.
[6] L.
Karagiannopoulos
and
N.
Adomaitis,
“Norway’s
public
backlash
against
onshore
wind
threatens
sector
growth.”
https://www.energymonitor.ai/
finance/corporate-strategy/how-develophttps://www.reuters.com/article/
us-norway-windfarm-politics-idUSKBN1WA177, 2019. Accessed: 16-06-2023.
[7] C. Haggett, Understanding Public Responses to Offshore Wind Power. The University
of Edinburgh, 2011.
[8] Technical university of Denmark, “Test centre høvsøre.” https://wind.dtu.dk/
facilities/hoevsoere. Accessed: 16-06-2023.
[9] G. HĂźbner, AkzeptanzfĂśrdernde Faktoren erneuerbare Energien.
Bundesamt fĂźr
Naturschutz, 2020.
[10] C. Lago, A. Prades, Y. LechĂłn, and C. Oltra, “Wind energy - the facts part v environ-
mental issues.” https://wind-energy-the-facts.org/images/chapter5.pdf, 2009.
[11] J. Moldvay, R. Hamann, and J. Fay, “Assessing opportunities and constraints relate to
different models for supplying wind turbines to the south african wind energy industry,”
Development Southern Africa, 2013.
[12] S. Kahouli and J. C. Martin, “Can offshore wind energy be a lever for job creation in
france? some insights from a local case study,” Environ MOdel assess, October 2017.
[13] E. J. Brunner and D. J. Schwegman, “Commercial wind energy installations and local
economic development: evidence from u.s. counties,” Elsevier, 2022.
[14] G. Black, D. Holley, D. Solan, and M. Bergloff, “Fiscal and economic impacts of state
incentives for wind energy development in the western united states,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2014.
Page IV of XI
==PAGE:55==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
[15] D. Copena, D. Perez-Neira, and X. Simon, “Local economic impact of wind energy
development: Analysis of the regulatory framework, taxation, and income for galician
municipalities,” sustainability, 2019.
[16] J. S. Greene and M. Geisken, “Socioeconomic impacts of wind farm development: a case
study of weatherford, oklahoma,” Energy, Sustainability and Society, 2013.
[17] J. Schallenberg-Rodriguez and F. Inchausti-Sintes, “Socio-economic impact of a 200 mw
floating wind farm in gran canaria,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2021.
[18] M. C. Slattery, E. Lantz, and B. L. Johnson, “State and local economic impacts from
wind energy projects: Texas case study,” Energy Policy, 2011.
[19] K. Connolly, “The regional economic impacts of offshore wind energy developments in
scotland,” Elsevier, 2020.
[20] A. R. collins, E. Hansen, and M. Hendryx, “Wind versus coal: Comparing the local
economic impacts of energy resource development in appalachia,” Energy Policy, 2012.
[21] K. Sperling and B. V. Mathiesen, Landvindmøllernes lokale økonomiske effekter i Bil-
lund Kommune. Aalborg University, 2015.
[22] K. Sperling and B. V. Mathiesen, The Economic Contribution of Offshore Wind in the
Province of North Holland. Port of Amsterdam, 2020.
[23] Ministerium: Social-, Bolig- og Ældreministeriet, “Bekendtgørelse af lov om testcentre
for store vindmøller ved høvsøre og østerild,” 2018.
[24] Google Inc., “Google maps.” https://www.google.nl/maps. Accessed: 16-06-2023.
[25] Free Map Tools,
“Find population on map.”
https://www.freemaptools.com/
find-population.htm. Accessed: 02-07-2023.
[26] Region
Midtjylland,
“Hvad
er
regionen.”
https://www.rm.dk/om-os/
hvad-er-regionen/. Accessed: 02-07-2023.
[27] K. Schrijver, May 2023. Field work notes from DTU’s Test center Høvsøre.
[28] A. Vesth, June 2023. Personal communication.
[29] R. G. Sullivan, “Wind turbine visibility and visual impact threshold distances in western
landscapes,” 2012.
[30] BloombergNEF, “2023 levelized cost of electricity update,” 2023.
[31] J. Aagaard, May 2023. Expenditure Data Høvsøre Vestas.
Page V of XI
==PAGE:56==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 27:
Correlation between acceptance factors as describe by the Budesamt für
Naturschutz [9]
Page VI of XI
==PAGE:57==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 28: Detailed map of municipality of Lemvig
Page VII of XI
==PAGE:58==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Figure 29: Revenue from offshore wind power in the province of Noord-Holland by stage (in
millions of euros)[22]
.
Page VIII of XI
==PAGE:59==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Table 10: Stakeholders active at Høvsøre
Company name
type
location
region classification
Christensen Entrepenør
contractor
Bøvlingbjerg
Local
Caverion
contractor
Herning
Regional
Jyskenergi
TSO
Vejle
National
go-on Bøvlingbjerg
Tankstation
Bøvlingbjerg
Local
J C Løkkes Maskinfabrik A/S
machine factory
Bøvlingbjerg
Local
Fjaltring Købmandsgaard Aps
Supermarket
Fjaltring
Local
Dagli’Brugsen Bøvlingbjerg
Supermarket
Bøvlingbjerg
Local
Smed Bøvlingbjerg
Black smith
Bøvlingbjerg
Local
Hotels
Hotels
Lemvig/Holsterbro
Local/Regional
Jensen
contractor
Lemvig
Local
lb G
contractor
Lemvig
Local
Page IX of XI
==PAGE:60==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Table 11: Key economic data Høvsøre
Year
CAPEX[1000 Dkk]
Local Capex[1000 Dkk]
OPEX[1000 Dkk]
Local OPEX[1000 Dkk]
2023
79200
37263
35010
17397.5
2024
0
0
35010
17397.5
2025
3900
0
35010
17397.5
2026
0
0
35010
17397.5
2027
6500
0
35010
17397.5
2028
0
0
35010
17397.5
2029
3900
0
35010
17397.5
2030
0
0
35010
17397.5
2031
6500
0
35010
17397.5
2032
0
0
35010
17397.5
2033
3900
0
35010
17397.5
2034
0
0
35010
17397.5
2035
6500
0
35010
17397.5
2036
0
0
35010
17397.5
2037
3900
0
35010
17397.5
2038
0
0
35010
17397.5
2039
6500
0
35010
17397.5
2040
0
0
35010
17397.5
2041
3900
0
35010
17397.5
2042
0
0
35010
17397.5
2043
6500
0
35010
17397.5
2044
0
0
35010
17397.5
2045
3900
0
35010
17397.5
2046
0
0
35010
17397.5
2047
6500
0
35010
17397.5
2048
0
0
35010
17397.5
Page X of XI
==PAGE:61==
Local socio-economic impact of DTU’s test center Høvsøre
Table 12: Overview of economic data obtained from Bloomberg[30]
Year
Fixed Opex $/kW/yr
WACC
Total Opex Høvsøre in DKK
CAPEX Høvsøre
2015
120.3
6.81
20,770,833
0
2016
96.9
5.48
16,728,937
0
2017
78.7
5.17
13,592,538
0
2018
79.4
4.86
13,713,550
0
2019
70.1
3.51
12,093,763
0
2020
70.1
3.06
12,106,300
0
2021
70.3
3.46
12,138,134
0
2022
68.8
3.98
11,885,136
0
2023
55.2
4.81
9,528,184
274,794,720
2024
53.6
4.77
9,256,517
0
2025
52.0
4.75
8,982,850
0
2026
50.5
4.72
8,716,515
0
2027
49.1
4.69
8,468,925
0
2028
47.8
4.66
8,243,478
0
2029
46.5
4.64
8,030,940
0
2030
45.4
4.61
7,833,172
0
2031
44.3
4.59
7,649,175
0
2032
43.3
4.57
7,476,593
0
2033
42.4
4.55
7,315,120
0
2034
41.5
4.53
7,163,775
0
2035
40.7
4.51
7,021,561
0
2036
39.9
4.49
6,887,883
0
2037
39.2
4.47
6,762,043
0
2038
38.5
4.45
6,643,418
0
2039
37.8
4.43
6,531,492
0
2040
37.2
4.41
6,425,759
0
2041
36.6
4.41
6,325,770
0
2042
36.1
4.41
6,231,120
0
2043
35.6
4.41
6,141,433
0
2044
35.1
4.41
6,056,369
0
2045
34.6
4.41
5,975,616
0
2046
34.2
4.41
5,898,887
0
2047
33.7
4.41
5,825,918
0
2048
33.3
4.41
5,756,469
0
2049
33.0
4.41
5,690,317
0
2050
32.6
4.41
5,627,255
0
Page XI of XI
==PAGE:62==
DTU Wind & Energy Systems 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems  
 
DTU Risø Campus 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
 
Interview Guide for Master’s Thesis: “Local economic impacts of Testcenter Høvsøre” 
 
Project Description 
Wind energy development generates significant levels of spending and job creation via, e.g., turbine and project 
design, sourcing of raw materials, manufacturing and transportation of components, construction and assembly 
of turbines, connection to the grid, and operations and maintenance. Where these benefits occur, however, 
matters. Of particular importance are the local economic benefits, the share of the benefits and spending that 
flow to the communities directly surrounding the wind farms. 
 
These surrounding communities are the ones that also experience the negative side effects of wind farms, like 
noise and visual pollution. And have huge influence in shaping the development process. Community support 
can streamline projects, leading to a fast and smooth development process, whereas community resistance can 
lead to long delays or even project abandonment. 
 
Goals of Interview 
Therefore, this interview aims to explore the local economic impact of Testcenter Høvsøre on the surrounding 
communities, including the job creation and other economic indicators. The interview also seeks to understand if 
any local subcontractors are used during the activities at Testcenter Høvsøre, or if any of these activities are 
exploited locally. Finally, the interview aims to explore the potential for Testcenter Høvsøre to continue 
contributing to the local economy and any plans for expansion or new projects that could generate additional 
economic benefits for the community. 
Core Questions 
 
Can you describe the spending activities of your company at Testcenter Høvsøre, including any direct 
or indirect spending on materials, services, or employment? 
 
How many jobs has your company created at Testcenter Høvsøre, both directly and indirectly, and 
what are any local subcontractors used? 
 
How does your company plan to further increase its spending activities and job creation at Testcenter 
Høvsøre in the future? 
For more information, contact: 
Koen Schrijver, Student 
+316 21144312 
s203210@dtu.dk  
Tyler Hansen, Postdoctoral Researcher 
+45 31 83 39 83 
tylha@dtu.dk 
Ulrich Elmer Hansen, Senior Researcher 
+45 93 51 16 22 
Uleh@dtu.dk 
 
