==PAGE:1==
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with
Blockchain
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
Master’s Thesis
August, 2023
By
Vince Biró
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of cybersecurity and de­
centralized technologies.
The structure of the project was as follows.
Firstly, I studied the literature regarding
Internet­of­Things and blockchain­related papers and their corresponding technologies.
I assessed the available literature and selected the relevant studies. Then, I compared
the existing studies and looked for places to improve. I also worked with blockchain and
its deployment models. After selecting the blockchain framework, I planned the architec­
ture of the system. Furthermore, I researched the following areas: distributed file storage
systems, security and scalability aspects of the system, and the financial feasibility of the
solution. Finally, I implemented a Proof­of­Concept and tested it. The project’s plan can
also be found in Appendix A.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Internet­of­Things (IoT) devices have become a prevalent part of everyday life, making
the need for IoT firmware security greater than ever. Firmware dispatch systems play a
crucial role in maintaining the secure operations of IoT devices. Therefore, it is essential
to have robust solutions for such systems.
With the advent of blockchain and Web3 technologies, there are new ways of tackling
security­related challenges. Blockchain provides a tamper­proof, secure, and distributed
protocol, making it an excellent choice for firmware dispatch systems.
This thesis explores the existing blockchain­based solutions for distributing IoT firmware
updates. Furthermore, it proposes a secure firmware dispatch system for IoT devices
using Ethereum. The system employs Web3.Storage, a hosted implementation of the In­
terPlanetary File System, a peer­to­peer hypermedia protocol. The proposed architecture
is a fast, reliable, and scalable system offering a firmware integrity validation protocol. It
can benefit a wide range of manufacturers who intend to increase the security of their IoT
devices.
This work introduces a client application of the aforementioned architecture. It presents
the implementation steps in detail and assesses the related technologies. Finally, an
analysis is provided on the system from a security and performance perspective.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
This thesis marks a significant milestone in my academic journey. I want to express my
gratitude to Dr. Weizhi Meng and Wei­Yang Chiu from the Technical University of Den­
mark. Their support and invaluable insights shaped my research in the right direction.
My appreciation extends to my professors at the Technical University of Budapest, where
I established my foundational understanding of Computer Science. I must give special
mention to Imre Kocsis from the same institution, whose efforts piqued my interest in
blockchain development, a field that is at the core of this research.
Finally, I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to my family. Their unwavering support
throughout my studies makes me forever indebted to them.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Comparison of existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theoretical background
5
3.1
IoT challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Current firmware update architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Blockchain technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Distributed file storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Client technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Proposed scheme
14
4.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Publication protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Data retrieval and verification protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Implementation
19
5.1
Development environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Smart contract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Client application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Discussion
31
6.1
Key benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Limitations and challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Security and privacy analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.4
Performance analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Conclusion
34
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Bibliography
35
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
v
==PAGE:7==
Appendix
A Project plan
37
B Smart contract
38
C Updates API endpoint
44
D Performance tests
47
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Acronyms
ABI Application Binary Interface
API Application Programming Interface
CAR Content­Addressed Archive
CID Content Identifier
dApp Decentralized Application
DoS Denial­of­Service
DAG Directed acyclic graph
ETH Ether
EVM Ethereum Virtual Machine
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
IoT Internet­of­Things
IPFS Interplanetary File System
MITM Man­in­the­Middle
NPM Node Package Manager
OTA Over­the­Air
P2P Peer­to­Peer
PoC Proof­of­Concept
PoS Proof­of­Stake
PoW Proof­of­Work
SC Smart Contract
TLS Transport Layer Security
TPM Trusted Platform Module
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In 2019, the Taiwan­based tech giant ASUS was believed to have had its update server
compromised by hackers. Researchers estimated half a million affected devices in the
incident. To worsen the situation, the incident remained undiscovered for over a month.
The infected devices received malicious firmware, which allowed the adversaries to in­
stall a backdoor. [1] The same incident happened in 2021 to Gigaset, a German smart­
phone manufacturer. The attackers were able to install arbitrary software on the devices.
[2] These incidents highlight the importance of firmware security and verifiability when it
comes to Internet­of­Things (IoT) devices.
In recent years, IoT devices have become an essential part of everyday life. While being
connected to the Internet provides many opportunities for users, it also comes with a
greater need for cybersecurity. According to a survey from 2021 made by The Open
Web Application Security Project (OWASP), firmware integrity failures are one of the top
ten vulnerabilities in applications. [3] In 2018, OWASP concluded that insecure update
mechanisms are one of the most common issues with IoT devices. [4]
Keeping the firmware of IoT devices up to date is vital to security, although, as the ASUS
and Gigaset cases showed, this can also be a vulnerability. Therefore, it is essential to find
ways for reliable and secure IoT software updates. To achieve this, the verifiability and
immutability of the updates are crucial. This is where blockchain, an emerging distributed
network technology, comes in, which promises to solve these requirements in an effective
and secure way.
Blockchain technology is becoming increasingly popular, and its use cases are far be­
yond its original application in cryptocurrencies. The technology has seen widespread
adoption, with the most popular applications being financial services, supply­chain man­
agement, intellectual property, governmental and healthcare services. According to Coin­
MarketCap, the current crypto market capitalization is over 1 trillion USD. [5] Blockchain
offers several benefits, including security, transparency, immutability, and decentraliza­
tion, all backed by solid cryptographic fundamentals. On the other hand, the technology is
still new, posing challenges like scalability, operational cost, complexity in development,
and the evolving regulatory landscape.
Decentralized Applications (dApps) are applications built on top of a blockchain network
that offer all the benefits of blockchain while providing some services just like traditional
applications. dApps are prone to censorship and are generally considered more secure
and transparent than conventional applications. However, as previously mentioned, the
technology is still relatively new, and some non­trivial challenges might occur while imple­
menting blockchain­based systems. Thus, this paper focuses on implementing a secure
and verifiable blockchain­based firmware dispatch system and provides an overview of
the relevant technologies and their challenges.
1.1
Motivation and contributions
IoT firmware dispatch systems are designed to distribute and manage firmware updates.
They are essential in maintaining the functionality and security of the ubiquitous IoT de­
vices. Given the increasing number of firmware­related attacks, choosing a secure and
reliable firmware dispatch system is crucial.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
1
==PAGE:10==
With the advent of decentralized applications, firmware modification attacks in IoT devices
can be addressed with a new approach. The decentralized approach and the verifiability
and immutability of blockchain are auspicious ways of tackling these challenges. On the
other hand, there are also challenges stemming from the fact that blockchain is a new and
ever­changing field. This can be problematic when a project gets to the implementation
stage, where the integration to other services might not be seamless just yet.
In light of the recent developments within blockchain technology, some research focused
on firmware updates. However, most of these did not cover implementation, nor did they
provide an implementation­specific analysis but rather just a high­level assessment of the
available solutions.
To fill this gap in the available research and to address these challenges, this thesis makes
the following contributions:
• It proposes a secure firmware dispatch system for IoT devices using blockchain.
• It provides a protocol for verifying firmware integrity in a cryptographic way.
• It gives a highly practical approach by implementing the proposed system with a
dApp and a Proof­of­Concept (PoC) client application.
• It also involves the assessment of the chosen technologies.
• Finally, it analyses the implementation from a security and performance point of
view.
1.2
Outline
The remainder of this thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 provides an overview of
related work and compares them. Chapter 3 introduces the theoretical background of the
project. Chapter 4 presents the proposed scheme, its requirements, and the assumptions
made during the design of the system. Chapter 5 describes the implementation of the
project and its capabilities, and it validates the chosen approach. Chapter 6 discusses
the key benefits of the project, and an evaluation is given of the implementation, including
the limitations and challenges stemming from the chosen technologies. Furthermore, a
security and performance analysis is conducted. Finally, Chapter 7 summarizes the key
takeaways of the thesis and presents possible future work.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
This chapter contextualizes the thesis within blockchain­based firmware update research
and surveys the related work for possible solutions.
I performed a literature review of the existing work to get an overview of the current solu­
tions and to get possible inspiration for the architecture of my system. I utilized DTU Findit,
a service by DTU Library, which aggregates search tools like IEEE Xplorer, ACM Digital
Library, Scopus, and many more. [6] When selecting the papers, I used the following
search query:
“Blockchain” AND “IoT” AND “Firmware”
I searched in articles and theses in English. Since this area is rapidly evolving, I only
included papers from the year 2020 onward. In the following sections, I briefly present
the most relevant papers.
2.1
Related work
Bettayeb et al. [7] proposed a HyperLedger­based architecture where the manufacturer
stores the firmware update in a centralized manner. The network consists of vendor and
gateway nodes. The vendor nodes are responsible for managing the firmware updates,
and the gateways communicate with the IoT devices. The paper also involves the im­
plementation of a client application with AngularJS and a REST API to demonstrate the
system’s capabilities.
Sey et al. [8] demonstrated a solution where the nodes are in a permissioned blockchain
consortium. It employs the Interplanetary File System (IPFS) for decentralized storage
of the firmware updates. It proposes a key­generation service that manages keys with
the possibility of revoking them. These keys are used to encrypt the updates sent by the
server towards the IoT devices, which then can decrypt the update using their private key.
The paper does not cover blockchain­specific details.
Yohan and Lo [9] also proposed a blockchain­based firmware update framework where
the updates are stored in a centralized manner. It provides a way to support both push
and pull update mechanisms. The solution utilizes the Ethereum Mainnet, and it supports
multiple roles: device manufacturers and third­party firmware brokers. The paper also
gives a thorough performance and security analysis of the system.
Projjal [10] outlined an Ethereum­based solution for firmware updating using IPFS. The
paper does not clarify whether the proposed solution uses the Ethereum Mainnet or a pri­
vate network. The solution utilizes IPFS via Infura, which provides an API and a dedicated
gateway to access the IPFS network. Although, the document lacks specific details con­
cerning the integration with Infura and IPFS. An additional layer of security is introduced
through the utilization of MultiSig wallets. The paper describes a local deployment using
Ganache and Truffle for testing purposes. It provides a detailed overview of the hard­
ware implementation aspect of the project, including a crypto co­processor to maintain
the integrity of the system. Finally, it provides a performance test with the implemented
hardware while having a Smart Contract (SC) deployed to the Ropsten Test Network.
Tsaur et al. [11] proposed a blockchain­based multi­node firmware verification process.
Before the update is saved, the system checks the update file with antivirus. The solution
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
3
==PAGE:12==
employs a distributed storage; however, it does not go into specifics. They used Ethereum
Swarm as the distributed file storage and a private Ethereum network for testing. The
solution only saves some information about the file on­chain and references the saved
file from the decentralized storage. The IoT devices download the updates directly from
the decentralized database.
Krejci et al. [12] presented an architecture for IoT devices, providing a firmware integrity
channel and a real­time channel for processing the data collected from the devices. It
utilizes Ethereum and Solidity for the SC. The solution only stores a hash of the updates
on­chain. The actual files are stored in a storage client, and the authors suggest using
IPFS.
2.2
Comparison of existing solutions
In summary, there have been several research studies utilizing blockchain and Ethereum.
When it comes to file storage, there are examples of both centralized and decentralized
solutions. In the latter, IPFS and Swarm technologies are used. The architecture of these
systems usually includes a gateway to free the IoT devices from the burden of communi­
cation with the blockchain network.
This thesis proposes a scalable, performant, and secure architecture by utilizing a hosted
IPFS solution and a private Ethereum network. The proposal differs from the existing
studies because it involves a unique approach to the file storage implementation. The
solution offers decentralized storage with a fast HTTP IPFS gateway without needing
dedicated infrastructure, yet it can guarantee all the benefits of IPFS.
Table 2.1: Comparison of existing solutions
Blockchain
Storage
Deployment
Notable feature
Bettayeb et al.
Hyperledger
Centralized
Permissioned
Client app
Sey et al.
Not specified
IPFS
Permissioned
Key generation service
Yohan and Lo
Ethereum
Centralized
Public
Performance analysis
Projjal
Ethereum
IPFS
Not specified
MultiSig wallets
Tsaur et al.
Ethereum
Swarm
Private
Antivirus check
Krejci et al.
Ethereum
IPFS
Not specified
Combines IoT integrity
and real­time channels
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
4
==PAGE:13==
3
Theoretical background
In this chapter, I provide an overview of the theoretical background of the project. Some
knowledge about cybersecurity, blockchain, and web development is assumed from the
reader.
3.1
IoT challenges
The increasing use of IoT devices is an undeniable trend. While they provide tremendous
benefits to their users, they also pose particular threats. These threats can be categorized
into two major categories: internal threats arise from the nature of its technology, while
external threats come from how users utilize these devices. [13] I focus on internal threats:
these challenges are mainly security and privacy­related.
Privacy concerns typically stem from centralized solutions. Whoever has control over the
centralized server is also in control of the data collected by the devices. Decentralized
solutions could potentially resolve these issues.
Regarding security­related concerns, a good balance in the following cybersecurity con­
ditions has to be maintained: confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
Confidentiality
means securing the data and incoming and outgoing communications. A typical attack
on confidentiality is the Man­in­the­Middle (MITM) attack, where attackers can read the
data passed towards the server from the client. Integrity means tamper­free data, which
is one of the main goals of this research. Firmware modification is a common type of
attack against integrity. Cui et al. [14] made a report on how destructive and aggressive
these attacks can be. Finally, availability requires the device to be accessible at all times.
Availability concerns most commonly arise from Denial­of­Service (DoS) attacks.
The firmware of an IoT device is the key to fulfilling the aforementioned principles. These
principles also have to be considered when designing the architecture of a firmware dis­
patch system for IoT devices. Therefore, these aspects of my proposed architecture will
be assessed in the evaluation part.
3.2
Current firmware update architectures
This subsection provides a brief overview of the current centralized approach to firmware
updates. The current centralized approach is commonly referred to as Over­the­Air (OTA)
updates, where the update is transmitted typically over the Internet in a client­server ar­
chitecture. IoT devices might directly communicate with the update server; however, a
gateway can be used to handle this part. Using a gateway device can eliminate the bur­
den of downloading the update for IoT devices that sometimes do not have the resources
to perform this operation. Furthermore, gateway nodes can be responsible for controlling
the updates of one or more IoT devices. On the other hand, the gateway introduces a
single point of failure into the system.
The following figure shows an OTA architecture with a gateway and two units, with one
unit having just one device and the other a fleet of IoT devices. In this scenario, the
gateways are responsible for downloading the firmware and then forwarding it towards
the IoT devices.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Gateway to Cloud Architecture in OTA Service [15]
3.3
Blockchain technology
In 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto proposed a Peer­to­Peer (P2P) electronic cash system called
Bitcoin, eliminating the need for a central authority. [16] It utilizes digital signatures as
a proof of ownership. The P2P network is responsible for maintaining a public history
of transactions using a Proof­of­Work (PoW) consensus mechanism, meaning voting is
based on one’s computing power. Transactions are grouped into blocks, and blocks are
linked to each other, forming a chain of blocks. Participants in the P2P network are in­
centivized to calculate the next block of transactions correctly. Once a block is added to
the chain, changing its content is computationally very hard. Hence, the concept of mak­
ing a chain of blocks ensures the integrity and immutability of the system. This concept
is called blockchain, and Bitcoin was the first implementation of it. The average block
time is around 10 minutes, meaning the network produces a new block roughly every 10
minutes, creating the ever­growing blockchain representing the latest state.
Figure 3.2: Blocks in Bitcoin [17]
3.3.1
Ethereum
Ethereum is another open­source blockchain­based technology initially published by Vita­
lik Buterin in 2014 with the intent of creating an alternative protocol for dApps. [17] Since
then, the technology has evolved thanks to its rapidly growing community. The use of de­
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
6
==PAGE:15==
centralization, blockchain, and dApps is commonly referred to as the decentralized web
or Web3.
The advent of Ethereum brought a new time to the blockchain community by introducing
a new level of functionality and application. Ethereum is not only a digital currency but
also a Turing­complete programming language that runs on a blockchain. [18] This en­
ables developers to build and deploy dApps on the platform. These applications can be
implemented through SCs, which are executed by the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM)
on­chain as part of the Ethereum protocol. SCs act as autonomous agents that always
execute a specific piece of code. Contracts can communicate with each other by means
of messages which are similar to user­initiated transactions.
The platform’s main internal cryptocurrency is Ether (ETH), which is used to pay transac­
tion fees. Transaction fees are necessary against DoS attacks and to incentivize transac­
tion validators. Ethereum’s fee system is based on a computational unit called gas. The
gas fee is proportional to the amount of resources the transaction uses. Each transaction
contains the gas price and the number of computational steps it can make, preventing
infinite loops.
The Ethereum network consists of three types of nodes. [19] A light node only downloads
minimal information, enabling it to verify the transactions. This allows light nodes to effi­
ciently communicate with the network without the need for high network bandwidth and
large storage. Full nodes store the entire blockchain state, and it can verify any transac­
tion, whereas light nodes might need to ask a full node to get more information about a
specific transaction. Archive nodes go one step further, and they store everything, even
entries that have already been verified. This way, the state for each block is preserved,
and one can gain historical insights about the chain.
The technical details of the protocol can be found in the Ethereum Yellow Paper. [20]
It presents the protocol and its underlying technologies. Furthermore, it describes the
system in a formal manner using precise notation and mathematical formulas. The paper
serves as a reference and as a formal specification for the Ethereum community.
Proof­of­Stake and scalability
Ethereum was originally built on a PoW consensus similar to Bitcoin’s. However, it is
currently in the process of transitioning to a Proof­of­Stake (PoS) approach, which is also
called Ethereum 2.0. PoS is intended to improve the scalability, security, and sustainability
of the network.
The new consensus mechanism is considerably better compared to the now­deprecated
PoW system. [21] Sustainability had a lot of impact on its development, and as a result,
PoS eliminated the need to use lots of energy on computations. This also means reduced
hardware requirements for validators, leading to more participants securing the network.
It involves penalties for validator misbehavior, which makes attacks exponentially more
costly.
Scalability is a commonly mentioned concern regarding Ethereum and blockchain tech­
nologies because every transaction needs to be processed by the nodes. This makes
these technologies inferior to traditional payment processing solutions (like Visa and Mas­
terCard) when it comes to transaction throughput.
The main goal of Ethereum scalability is to increase transaction speed (faster finality)
and throughput while also keeping the decentralized and secure properties of the system.
There are already some notable scaling solutions, like sharding and Layer 2 solutions,
which are expected to be used more frequently in the near future. However, the research
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
7
==PAGE:16==
and testing of these emerging solutions are still underway, and as of now, they are con­
sidered immature. [22]
While PoW­based systems have a probabilistic block time, the arrival of PoS allows
Ethereum to have fixed twelve­second units, where each unit enables the addition of a
new block. Assuming there is always a new proposed block to be added, the block time
is practically 12 seconds using PoS, which can also be seen in the following figure.
Figure 3.3: Ethereum average block time [23]
Private and public Ethereum
Public Ethereum refers to the open and decentralized blockchain network that anyone can
join, called the Ethereum Mainnet. While it provides many benefits, there are also some
shortcomings of using this solution, like the aforementioned scalability issues. A private or
permissioned network can be the solution for scalability and privacy­related challenges;
however, it can lead to losing the decentralization aspect of the system. Therefore, the
public network is ideal for dApps where open participation is desired. In contrast, private
networks are typically used by businesses where privacy, access control, speed, and
scalability are essential.
A private network consists of multiple Ethereum nodes that can connect to each other
only. An Ethereum node runs an Ethereum client that has multiple implementations, the
most popular being Geth, written in Go. [24] Private networks can be substantially faster
compared to the Mainnet, however, this comes with a price. The operators of the private
network have to invest in high­performance nodes and maintain them. Some analyses
show that this investment is more significant compared to using the Mainnet and paying
gas fees. [25]
Table 3.1: Comparison of private and public Ethereum networks
Accessibility
Consensus Mechanism
Speed
Security and Privacy
Public
Anyone can join
Transitioning to PoS
Slower
Transparent
Truly decentralized
Private
Restricted
Operators define it
Faster
Enhanced privacy
Can be less secure
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
8
==PAGE:17==
Smart contracts
A smart contract (SC) is written in low­level bytecode language, referred to as EVM code.
It has access to a temporary memory only available at runtime and to a long­term stor­
age unit. A SC is always immutable and deterministic. Each contract is identified by its
Ethereum address, which can be used to call the contract. When it comes to the devel­
opment of SCs, they are typically written in a high­level language and then compiled into
EVM code.
In Ethereum, an Application Binary Interface (ABI) is used to define the functions and their
parameters in a SC for the EVM. A SC’s ABI is defined in JSON format, and the JSON
contains an array of function descriptors.
The most popular language for Ethereum SCs is Solidity. [18] It is an imperative program­
ming language with a similar syntax to JavaScript and C++. It was explicitly created for
writing SCs within a decentralized environment of Ethereum. The core element of Solidity
is its compiler called solc, which is responsible for converting programs from Solidity to
EVM bytecode. Additionally, solc is used to produce the ABI for the SC.
Given the nature of blockchain, all SCs are public, and any user can call them. If an
attacker finds any exploit in the system, it becomes almost impossible to recover losses.
Therefore, it is essential to keep best practices in mind and adhere to the thoroughly tested
design patterns.
It is important to keep in mind the immutable property of SCs. Immutability means that
once they are deployed, they cannot be changed or updated. There is a strategy for
making contracts updatable called the proxy pattern [26], where the logic is split into two
SCs. The first SC is responsible for delegating calls to the second SC, containing the
implementation part. The address of the implementation contract can be updated, allow­
ing developers to deploy new versions. However, the first SC is still immutable. As a
consequence, it is essential to have it bug­free. On the other hand, the proxy pattern
goes against the immutability principle of blockchain. Hence, it should only be used if it is
necessary.
3.4
Distributed file storage
A core element of any firmware dispatch system is its file storage. This component is
responsible for storing the firmware in a secure way and for ensuring its availability for
retrieval. Decentralized file storage is becoming a go­to solution for several use cases. It
has excellent protection against data censorship, and its decentralized network is more
resilient against DoS attacks as there is no single point of failure in the system. Addition­
ally, decentralized solutions often utilize cryptography to make tampering with the files
impossible.
3.4.1
IPFS
One of the most popular decentralized file storage solutions is IPFS, an open­source P2P
network for content addressing. Similarly to Ethereum, it is a set of protocols that has
many implementations. [27] These protocols solve challenges like verifiability, centraliza­
tion, and resilience.
Content addressing
On IPFS, data is addressed by its content rather than a location address in centralized so­
lutions. This address is called the Content Identifier (CID), which contains a cryptographic
hash of the addressed file and a codec that holds information about the interpretation of
the data. The newest version is called CID v1, which contains the content hash, the
encoding, the version, and the codec.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
9
==PAGE:18==
For example, there is a file called satoshi.txt with the following content:
Satoshi
Then, the CID v1 identifier for this file is the following:
bafybeihl3eu3so6rfyxz5qixusksqstjshjtqgecz35czhb62uua5wtfuu
This identifier contains the following information: the content hash, the encoding (base32),
the version (cidv1), and the codec (dag-pb).
When adding a file to IPFS, the file is split into chunks. Then, the chunks are structured
into a Merkle Directed acyclic graph (DAG), where the root is the CID for the file. IPFS
uses Content­Addressed Archive (CAR) files, which are serialized Merkle DAGs.
IPFS challenges
IPFS faces some challenges when keeping a file available on the network. Other nodes
in the network will only keep a specific file if it is in high demand. In order to keep files
on the network, one has to run enough nodes to pin the files on IPFS. This comes with
overhead on cost and operations, making it hard to scale up or down on demand. It is also
required to run a node to retrieve files. There are several solutions that help overcome
these challenges.
Filecoin
One of the solutions for making the use of IPFS easier is Filecoin, a blockchain protocol.
It was made by Protocol Labs, the same company that maintains IPFS. The solution
facilitates data storing and retrievals and financially incentivizes Filecoin nodes (storage
providers) to keep data pinned to IPFS. When a user wants to store a file, a storage
deal is created between the user and a storage provider. Once the file is stored, the
client receives verifiable proof of this fact (called Proof of Replication), and the deal gets
added to the Filecoin blockchain. [28] Once the data is stored, the user can get a proof
of storage similar to the Proof of Replication. This is called Proof of Spacetime, which
ensures the file is stored over time. Both of these proofs employ strong cryptography with
zero­knowledge proofs to ensure storage deals are fulfilled. [29]
Web3.Storage
Protocol Labs launched Web3.Storage for a simplified way of using decentralized file
storage. It provides an API for developers to store and retrieve files. Under the hood, it
utilizes Filecoin and IPFS, which means it has all the benefits these technologies provide.
It has a free tier, which is an excellent way to get started and test an application. It only
requires a Web3.Storage account and an API token to start storing and retrieving data
through Filecoin.
The upload process with Web3.Storage is the following. [30] First, the client has to gen­
erate a CAR file, which is essentially the uploaded file in chunks. This generation is done
client­side, producing a CID. Thus, the client can later verify the CID, making sure that
the CIDs are identical, meaning the file stored on the network has not been modified
(otherwise, the CID would be different). Once the CAR file is uploaded to the server, it
gets stored immediately in two places. One of these is an IPFS instance that interacts
with the public IPFS network. The other is w3link, an HTTP Gateway for IPFS developed
by Web3.Storage, which can cache files on the edge while having all the advantages of
IPFS. The uploaded file is immediately available in w3link over HTTP, while IPFS needs
a few seconds to process the upload. Lastly, to secure the long­term storage (cold stor­
age) of the upload, Web3.Storage creates Filecoin deals with storage providers to pin the
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
10
==PAGE:19==
file. Pinning the file can take up to 3 days. The following figure presents Web3.Storage’s
architecture.
Figure 3.4: Overview of Web3.Storage’s architecture [30]
To show how easy it is to use w3link, I test it with satoshi.txt from the previous example.
After uploading the file with Web3.Storage, I take the CID from the previous example and
retrieve the file using the HTTP gateway in the following way (the CID is shortened for
space) using the command line tool curl:
$ curl https://bafyb[...].ipfs.w3s.link/satoshi.txt
Web3.Storage provides a JavaScript API Client to use their services, which I am utilizing in
my client application. To illustrate the API Client’s simplicity, I present the upload process
in some simple steps. First, I import and initialize the client with my API token:
1 import { Web3Storage } from 'web3.storage';
2 const client = new Web3Storage({ token: API_TOKEN });
Then I pack the desired file (for example, from an HTML input element) into a CAR and
upload it to Web3.Storage:
1 const cid = await client.put([myFile]);
Once client.put returns a response, the upload is done (or failed). More information
about the Filecoin deal can be requested by sending the following:
1 const info = await client.status(cid)
Finally, to retrieve the files based on the CID, I call the following operations:
1 const res = await client.get(cid);
2 const files = await res.files();
This summarizes the upload and retrieval process in Web3.Storage and the convenience
of its usage for developers. On top of its ease of use, its pricing policy is also highly
appealing. It offers several subscription tiers with differing sizes in storage, allowing its
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
11
==PAGE:20==
users to pay a fixed monthly price in USD. If they run out of storage, the additional usage
costs a fixed amount (per Gigabyte). These make the platform easy to plan with since
there is no need to worry about changing storage deal prices. Web3.Storage eliminates
the need for cryptocurrencies, which can also account for its faster adoption.
3.5
Client technologies
The project also implements a PoC application with a user interface to showcase the main
functionalities of the project. In this section, I present the core technologies used for the
application that have not already been covered in this chapter.
3.5.1
NodeJS
The project is primarily written in JavaScript/Typescript, and the files are run in the Node.js
runtime environment. I chose this environment as it is one of the most popular ones. It
has an active and ever­growing community, and new Web3 projects will likely support it.
Node.js comes with a built­in package manager called Node Package Manager (NPM).
However, I chose to utilize Yarn instead, a package manager offering fast, secure, and
reliable package management.
3.5.2
Web3.js
Web3.js is a package that allows interaction with an Ethereum network over HTTP (and
others). [31] I utilize Web3.js to set up a connection to my local Ethereum network and to
interact with the network. It allows the creation and deployment of a SC using a compiled
bytecode. Furthermore, it provides a way to call the deployed SC and to retrieve data
from it.
3.5.3
Ethereum development network
To test the contract, I run a local Ethereum development network, which acts similarly to
the Mainnet. I employ Hardhat to simplify the start of the network. Hardhat is a package
for Ethereum development and comes with a built­in Hardhat Network. [32] The following
code block illustrates how easy it is to run a Hardhat network from the command line:
$ npx hardhat node
This call almost instantly starts an HTTP and WebSocket JSON­RPC server on the lo­
cal network, allowing any client to start making transactions to the Ethereum network.
Hardhat also provides 20 accounts to use for testing, allocating 10000 ETH for each.
Hardhat enables the network configuration through a file called hardhat.config.js in the
project’s root. Among many settings, one can configure the network and Solidity­related
settings.
3.5.4
Svelte
Finally, my framework for developing the client is Svelte, known for its performance and
productivity features. It is a tool for building web applications having a similar approach
to other UI frameworks since it allows building declaratively with components. What dif­
ferentiates Svelte from some of the other popular UI frameworks (like React) is that these
components get compiled into JavaScript modules ­ and Svelte is not needed to operate
at runtime. [33] This means the library does not get shipped with the application, which
makes it faster. It directly manipulates the browser’s DOM as opposed to some other
frameworks that rely on a virtual DOM. This results in less runtime overhead for Svelte
while not compromising on speed. An overview of the differences between Svelte and
React can be seen in Figure 3.5.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
12
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.5: Svelte’s diffing compared to React’s [34]
SvelteKit
I use SvelteKit for building my Svelte files. SvelteKit plays an essential role in the applica­
tion as it provides a set of tools like routing and Server­Side Rendering and even allows
the creation of API routes on the server. It uses a file­based routing, which means the
file structure determines the application’s routes, similar to another popular framework,
the React­based Next.js. It also has a built­in development server, enabling a fast and
convenient development experience. [35]
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
13
==PAGE:22==
4
Proposed scheme
In this chapter, I present the proposed scheme by first analyzing the requirements. Then,
I introduce the system model addressing all the requirements and show a high­level
overview of the architecture. Finally, I define what assumptions I made while designing
the system.
Before I delve into the details of this chapter, I define the three primary actors of the
system. These are operators, vendors, and IoT devices grouped into units. The operators
are responsible for operating and maintaining the system. A vendor is an IoT device
manufacturer. Vendors can publish firmware updates for the third type of actors, the IoT
devices. Finally, the notion of a unit means a group of IoT devices. A unit could mean
one physical location where the group forms a fleet of IoT devices.
4.1
Requirements
I provide an overview of the requirements of the system to show the motivation behind
some of the design decisions I made in the system model. As mentioned in the previ­
ous chapter, the system generally has to meet the following three security conditions:
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (commonly referred to as CIA conditions).
4.1.1
Confidentiality
Confidentiality is about securing the data from unauthorized actors. When it comes to
firmware updates, a vendor might want to protect their update from the public. How­
ever, in some other cases, this is not important as long as the update’s integrity is pre­
served. Since blockchain is a public ledger, everything is accessible to the public by
default. Therefore, it is crucial to address the question of confidentiality for the specific
use case. The framework presented in this thesis is a general­purpose firmware dispatch
system; hence, it must provide a way to ensure the confidentiality of the firmware update.
4.1.2
Integrity
The most crucial aspect of any firmware dispatch system is the integrity of the updates
distributed with it. It is vital to provide a way for integrity checks when firmware is being
distributed. To fulfill this requirement, there is a need for cryptographic proof that the file
has not been tampered with and that the distributed update is identical to what was initially
uploaded. Similarly, the IoT devices need a way to verify the integrity of the downloaded
files.
4.1.3
Availability
While securing the confidentiality and integrity of the data are essential, it is of no use if
the data is unavailable. Therefore, the proposed system model must be highly available.
It must also be resilient against attacks targeting the system’s availability, typically called
DoS attacks, where intruders try to disrupt the service by overwhelming the network with
traffic. DoS attacks might be distributed if the attack is not performed from a single source
but rather from a network of computers.
4.1.4
Scalability and performance
There are some other requirements for a general case firmware dispatch system. One
of these is the scalability of the system. To make a future­proof system, one needs to be
able to scale up (or down) both the storage and the blockchain nodes of it. Furthermore,
it must provide a seamless experience regarding the speed of uploads and downloads.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
14
==PAGE:23==
Some blockchain and storage solutions might take some time to finalize transactions and
distribute the files. Therefore, it is essential to assess this property of the system and to
guarantee the speed and the feasibility of the proposed solution.
Another requirement stemming from the generality of the system is that the performance
metrics of the IoT devices must be taken into consideration. One cannot assume that an
IoT device can act as an active node in the network as it might not have the networking
and computing capabilities to participate in it. This might be caused by a limitation in
bandwidth, computing power, or some other characteristics of the device.
4.2
System architecture
I propose a secure firmware dispatch system using Ethereum and a distributed file storage
solution, which provides a way for firmware integrity verification. Figure 4.1 shows an
overview of the proposed scheme.
Figure 4.1: Proposed System Architecture
The architecture consists of four main components: a network of nodes, a network of dis­
tributed file storage nodes, and, for each unit, a gateway node and a fleet of IoT devices.
The system utilizes an Ethereum­based private blockchain network where the operator
maintains the network nodes.
4.2.1
Network nodes
The network nodes are full Ethereum nodes, and they are responsible for verifying and
maintaining the blockchain. A SC is deployed to the network, which is responsible for
keeping track of the firmware updates and the users of the system. Regarding the number
of nodes, more independent nodes always mean more security for the system. Therefore,
it should always be adjusted to the requirements of the use case and its budget.
4.2.2
File storage nodes
I chose Web3.Storage for storing the files, which employs IPFS under the hood and elimi­
nates the need to self­maintain storage nodes. As a consequence, the nodes for file stor­
age are managed by Web3.Storage, and the two systems communicate over the public
Internet via HTTPS.
4.2.3
Gateway and IoT fleet
Each unit involves a fleet of IoT devices, which must be controlled. These devices are not
directly connected to the firmware dispatch system but through a gateway device. The
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
15
==PAGE:24==
gateway device acts as a dispatcher by downloading the updates and then forwarding
them to the IoT devices. The gateway is also an Ethereum node as part of the private
network since it retrieves information from the blockchain. For performance reasons and
cost­effectiveness, these gateway devices are light Ethereum nodes, as they are only
used for communicating with the SC. Since the gateway handles the aforementioned
operations, the IoT devices are only required to accept the connection from the gateway
and perform the update.
4.2.4
Deployment of the network
The proposed model uses a private deployment model for the blockchain network. All par­
ticipants connect to the same blockchain and use the same SC. If the use case requires
storing additional information, like the manufacturer of the IoT device or other information,
then the SC would facilitate this feature. When a new participant joins the network, an
administrator would register this information about the devices, and then they could start
using the system.
Using a private network was a design decision, and the benefits of it will be addressed
in detail later in this paper. It is important to note that the architecture is not restricted
to a private blockchain. Everything could be used as is for a public deployment on the
Ethereum Mainnet. For example, if an operator does not wish to maintain a network of
nodes but instead prefers the Ethereum Mainnet, they could utilize the solution proposed
in this project.
4.3
Publication protocol
In this section, I present the process of publishing a firmware update in the proposed
system. The following figure shows the sequence diagram of the publication protocol
where the CID returned from the server is denoted as CID(server).
Figure 4.2: Firmware update publication protocol
Vendors can publish new firmware updates, which they can do through a client application.
The client communicates with the rest of the system. The client is also a node in the
blockchain network, which is located at the vendor’s site. When the vendor initiates the
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
16
==PAGE:25==
publication of a new update, the client packs the update into a CAR and calculates the
CID. Then, it uploads the file to Web3.Storage and verifies the CID from the server’s
response. If the two CIDs are identical, the file has not been tampered with, and the
desired file is being distributed via IPFS. Once Web3.Storage finishes the upload, the
client calls the SC to create a new update and sends the CID of the file with the metadata
of the firmware update, which concludes the publishing process.
4.4
Data retrieval and verification protocol
The retrieval process is always initiated by a client. It does it by querying the SC for
available updates. Then, it chooses an update and constructs the download URL from
its CID. It downloads the update using the HTTP IPFS gateway w3link. Once the file is
retrieved, the client needs cryptographic proof of the integrity of the update, which is why
there is a need for an integrity verification protocol.
The integrity of the files is based on CIDs, which were introduced in the previous chapter.
CIDs are created by hashing a representation of the file uploaded to the storage and by
some additional information as a prefix. This process results in a unique CID for each file,
which can be used later as proof of being tamper­free. Since IPFS and Web3.Storage
use CIDs for addressing the files, the integrity is preserved by definition at the storage
level. When the server transmits the file to the client, it can locally calculate the CID for
the downloaded file and compare it with the received CID from the SC. Hence, the client
has a cryptographic proof of integrity if the two CIDs are identical. The firmware integrity
verification flow can be seen in the following figure.
Figure 4.3: Firmware integrity verification flow
4.5
Assumptions
It was necessary to make some assumptions during the design and development of the
proposed system. Certain aspects are out of this project’s scope due to the complexity
of this area. Hence, the application and interpretation of this thesis should consider the
following context­specific simplifications and approximations.
4.5.1
Secure communications
Each network participant is assumed to use secure communication channels using some
form of encryption, for example, HTTPS communication with TLS 1.3. The networks
used in the architecture are also presumed to be as restrictive as possible, which means
external communication is only allowed if needed.
4.5.2
Secure runtime
The proposed architecture and the implementation of the system are expected to be run
as is without modification. Therefore, it is assumed that the hardware executing the code
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
17
==PAGE:26==
can guarantee secure runtime and is protected against physical and software­based at­
tacks. One potential solution is to utilize a Trusted Platform Module (TPM), a specialized
chip. Although the details about TPM and its implementation go beyond the scope of
this research, in essence, it enables secure boot, hardware­level encryption, and system
integrity checks.
4.5.3
Gateway­specific implementation
The architecture assumes that the gateway knows when to pull an update and can se­
curely distribute it to the desired IoT device. It is also expected to handle network and
other types of failures, for example, when an IoT device is unreachable.
4.5.4
Access control
The final assumption is access control regarding the client application, which the vendor
manages. The implemented SC introduces the notion of roles, but the distribution of ac­
cess to specific roles is assumed to be done correctly by the operator and the vendor.
Since each transaction made by the client is associated with a wallet address (an ac­
count) on Ethereum, the proper distribution of these accounts is also expected. As a con­
sequence, it is assumed that no unauthorized actor can access the distributed Ethereum
accounts of the network.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
18
==PAGE:27==
5
Implementation
In this chapter, I present the development environment, the implementation of the SC,
and the client application (named Waffle). Then, I validate the chosen approach.
The source code of the project is available at github.com/codingbiro/waffle. It contains
the SC, the network scripts, the compilation scripts, the deployment scripts, and the client
application.
5.1
Development environment
A well­chosen development environment is essential for productivity. To create the fun­
damentals of a PoC, I needed a development network, a SC, and a convenient way to
test and validate both.
5.1.1
Hardhat setup and script
I set up a local Ethereum development network using Hardhat. I configured the network
using Hardhat’s configuration file (hardhat.config.js), where I set the Solidity version
to 0.8.19. Then, I created a script in package.json to start the network with a node and
saved the output in a file located at scripts/target/network.init. The mkdir command
makes sure that the directory exists.
"network:start": "mkdir -p scripts/target && npx hardhat node >
scripts/target/network.init"
Saving the output of the command helped me automatize the process later on. The output
contains information like the network’s address on localhost and the default accounts.
5.1.2
Remix
Remix is an IDE for Ethereum SC development, which can be used in a browser. Remix
provides an editor based on the same fundamentals as Visual Studio Code. It supports
linting, compiling, and deploying SCs written in Solidity. It allows switching between So­
lidity versions conveniently, and then it can export the compiled file to IPFS, Swarm, or
the host machine.
Remix offers a variety of test networks. By default, it uses a sandbox network that is cre­
ated by Remix. The sandbox network gets cleaned on each reload, allowing a seamless
developer experience. On the other hand, it can also fork the Mainnet if the SC requires
access to Mainnet SCs. Since I have Hardhat running a local network, I chose an exter­
nal HTTP provider which allows Remix to connect to a remote node. All I had to do was
configure the External HTTP Provider Endpoint, which was http://127.0.0.1:8545 in
my case. Then, I could deploy the SC using the UI of Remix to my local network and start
interacting with the SC from the same interface.
Remix also allows to load SCs deployed by an external source on the network. I had
to input the SC’s address and compile the SC in the editor (it must know the ABI of the
SC). Figure 5.1 shows the Remix IDE with a custom environment set to the local Hardhat
network and an existing SC loaded from a given address.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.1: Remix IDE overview
5.2
Smart contract
I developed an Ethereum SC using Solidity. The SC is responsible for keeping track of
the available updates with some metadata attached to them. In this section, I present the
main features and their implementation. The final version of the SC’s source code can be
found in Appendix B.
5.2.1
Management features
SCs are immutable: once one deploys them to the blockchain, they cannot be changed.
Therefore, it is vital to implement any management feature that might be required in the
future.
The system has three user groups: the owner, the updaters, and the regular users. The
owner is set in the SC’s constructor based on whoever deploys the SC. The updaters are
people with access to firmware update creation and editing. Regular users have access
to the blockchain and can call the unrestricted public functions of the SC.
One standard management­related method is the transfer of ownership. The owner of
the SC is a unique role since only the owner can add new updaters to the system. Hence,
it is crucial to have access to this role. Firstly, I persist the owner and the array of users
with updater rights in the SC, which are both private. I can do this in the following way in
Solidity.
1 address private owner;
2 address[] private updaters;
I utilize function modifiers to restrict access or to force some constraints before executing
a function. In Solidity, modifiers are used to modify function behavior. For example, to
only allow a function to be called by the owner, I created an ownerGuard modifier. The
implementation of this modifier is as follows.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
20
==PAGE:29==
1 modifier ownerGuard
2 {
3
require(msg.sender == owner, "Caller is not the owner.");
4
_;
5 }
The function body is inserted where the special symbol _ (placeholder statement) is used.
With the help of ownerGuard, I implemented the transferOwnership function. It takes the
new owner’s address as an input parameter. Firstly, it removes the current owner from
the updaters, then adds the new one as the owner and as an updater.
1 function transferOwnership(address newOwner) public ownerGuard()
2 {
3
int index = isUpdater(owner);
4
if (index > -1)
5
{
6
delete updaters[uint(index)];
7
}
8
owner = newOwner;
9
index = isUpdater(newOwner);
10
if (index == -1)
11
{
12
updaters.push(newOwner);
13
}
14 }
Similarly, I created two methods for removing and adding a new updater, removeUpdater
and addUpdater respectively. These methods are protected by the ownerGuard. Addi­
tionally, I created a new guard for updaters called updaterGuard.
5.2.2
Updates
This section describes how firmware updates are stored in the SC. The SC keeps the
following information for each update: the hash of the firmware (the CID), an id (to have
a shorter identifier), the name of the firmware, the version of the firmware, the preferred
filename of the upload (used when downloading), the timestamp of the creation, the up­
loader of the firmware, and finally to bool variables: one for enabling it, the other is for
marking it as a stable release. The representation of an Update and the array of updates
in Solidity can be seen in the following code extract.
1 struct Update
2 {
3
string hash; // CID
4
uint64 id;
5
bool isEnabled;
6
bool isStable;
7
string name;
8
uint256 timestamp;
9
address uploader;
10
string version;
11
string filename;
12 }
13
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
21
==PAGE:30==
14 Update[] private firmwareUpdates;
Function modifiers can take arguments, too, allowing more complex logic within the mod­
ifier. When creating firmware updates, it is essential not to have version collision. There­
fore, I defined a version guard which checks for version uniqueness. It also takes an ad­
ditional id parameter to allow invoking this function when editing an update (and it would
collide with itself).
1 modifier uniqueVersionGuard(string calldata firmwareName, string calldata
version, int64 id)
2 {
3
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
4
{
5
if
6
(
7
safeStringEquality(firmwareUpdates[p].name, firmwareName) &&
8
safeStringEquality(firmwareUpdates[p].version, version) &&
9
id != int64(firmwareUpdates[p].id)
10
)
11
{
12
revert("Update version must be unique.");
13
}
14
}
15
_;
16 }
Having defined the structure of the updates, the updater guard, and the version guard,
I present the method for creating updates, called createFirmwareUpdate. It takes the
following information about the new firmware update: the hash of it (the CID), the filename,
the two bool values, and the corresponding name and version. If the guards allow the
function execution, it adds a new update to the array of updates. This can be seen in the
following code.
1 struct CreateUpdateInput
2 {
3
string hash; // CID
4
bool isEnabled;
5
bool isStable;
6
string name;
7
string version;
8
string filename;
9 }
10
11
12 function createFirmwareUpdate(CreateUpdateInput calldata update) public
13
updaterGuard() uniqueVersionGuard(update.name, update.version, -1)
14
{
15
firmwareUpdates.push(Update(
16
{
17
id: uint64(firmwareUpdates.length),
18
version: update.version,
19
uploader: msg.sender,
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
22
==PAGE:31==
20
hash: update.hash, // CID
21
name: update.name,
22
filename: update.filename,
23
isEnabled: update.isEnabled,
24
isStable: update.isStable,
25
timestamp: block.timestamp
26
}
27
));
28
}
Updaters can edit information about the firmware updates in case there was a mistake at
the time of creation. The function editFirmwareUpdate takes the identifier of the update
and the updated values as input. The editable fields for each update are name, version,
filename, isEnabled, and isStable. Finally, the function returns the edited update with
its new values. This sums up the functionalities provided by the SC.
1 struct EditUpdateInput
2 {
3
bool isEnabled;
4
bool isStable;
5
string name;
6
string version;
7
string filename;
8 }
9
10 function editFirmwareUpdate(uint64 id, EditUpdateInput calldata newValues)
11
public updaterGuard()
12
uniqueVersionGuard(newValues.name, newValues.version, int64(id))
13
returns (Update memory firmwareUpdate_)
14 {
15
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
16
{
17
if (firmwareUpdates[p].id == id)
18
{
19
firmwareUpdates[p].isEnabled = newValues.isEnabled;
20
firmwareUpdates[p].isStable = newValues.isStable;
21
firmwareUpdates[p].name = newValues.name;
22
firmwareUpdates[p].filename = newValues.filename;
23
firmwareUpdates[p].version = newValues.version;
24
return firmwareUpdates[p];
25
}
26
}
27 }
5.2.3
Compilation
Initially, I used Remix to compile the SC while developing it. To automate the creation of
the network and the compilation and deployment of the SC, I wrote a script to handle all
of these called compile.js. I use solc via NPM to compile the SC, a Solidity compiler
for JavaScript. The output of solc is a JSON object from which I can retrieve the EVM
bytecode and the ABI of the SC. After successful compilation, the compile script writes
the bytecode and the ABI to the file system so other scripts can use them as inputs.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
23
==PAGE:32==
5.2.4
Deployment
Next, I deploy the SC to the local network using Web3. First, I retrieve the compiled
bytecode and the ABI; then, I deploy the SC to the network using the default account from
the network. Finally, I persist the deployed SC’s address to the file system, which the
client will utilize later.
5.2.5
Linting
I utilize an NPM package called solhint for linting my Solidity code. This package pro­
vides security and style guide validations. I configured solhint to extend their shareable
configuration called solhint:recommended. I also overrode some rules:
1 {
2
"avoid-suicide": "error",
3
"avoid-sha3": "warn",
4
"compiler-version": "off",
5
"reason-string": "off",
6
"func-visibility": [
7
"warn",
8
{ "ignoreConstructors": true }
9
]
10 }
This configuration provided me with a solid base for writing coherent and secure SCs. To
solhint my project, I run the following command (requires solhint to be already installed)
while having my SCs in a directory called contracts.
$ solhint 'contracts/*.sol'
5.3
Client application
I used Svelte to implement the PoC client application. Svelte enabled me not only to build
the frontend but also the backend of the application.
The goal for developing a PoC was to show the capabilities of the proposed solution
from a vendor’s perspective. Therefore, the main features of the client application are
the following: create an update, list updates, view and edit an update’s information, and
retrieve an update file.
The client is assumed to be running on a machine only available for authorized users. As
a consequence, there is no user authentication in place.
The main parts of the application can be found in the src folder.
The client runs at
localhost:5249 as defined in package.json.
5.3.1
Backend
The backend endpoints are available at /api/*, and they are defined in a directory called
src/routes/api. To create an API route in Svelte, I created a +server.ts file inside a
folder. The folder’s name determines the route for the endpoint, just like with frontend
routes. Overall, I created three different REST API routes: one for updates (called Up­
dates endpoint), one for a specific update (called Update endpoint), and one for getting
the system information (like the wallet address and network address). The implemented
routes and methods can be seen in Table 5.1.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
24
==PAGE:33==
The core functionality is implemented in the Updates and the Update endpoints. The Up­
dates endpoint can return all updates (or an empty array). It also enabled new firmware
creation by accepting a CreateUpdateInput (defined in the SC) with Method='POST',
which creates a new firmware update if the input is valid. The Update endpoint resides at
/updates/[id], where id is a dynamic parameter. The dynamic parameter here refers
to the id of a firmware update; for example, a firmware with id=10 would be available at
GET /updates/10. This route is also used to edit updates with the PUT request method,
where the input is expected to be of type EditUpdateInput (also defined in the SC).
I employ two helper functions that enable me to utilize Web3 and Web3.Storage, named
web3Helper and web3storageHelper respectively. The first one creates a Web3 HTTP
instance, a Contract instance, initializes the default account, and handles relevant errors.
The second one creates a Web3.Storage instance. I can avoid code duplication and
optimize memory usage by utilizing these helpers.
I present the Updates endpoint in detail since it contains the most essential parts of the
backend. To retrieve all updates, it uses web3Helper to call the SC’s getFirmwareUpdates
method and returns them in a JSON response (or throws an error). When creating a new
firmware update, the endpoint expects a POST request with an input in a FormData object.
If the input is valid, it calls a function which handles the upload. The upload handler uses
web3storageHelper to upload the file to Web3.Storage. Before uploading it, it builds the
CAR locally and saves its CID. Once the upload is done, it compares the local CID with
the one returned from Web3.Storage. If they match, it returns the CID; otherwise, it throws
an error. Next, the update has to be saved to the blockchain. To achieve this, the input is
prepared for it, and the gas cost of the operation is estimated utilizing web3Helper. Then,
it calls the SC’s createFirmwareUpdate method through web3Helper. Finally, it returns
the CID unless there is an error. The source code of the Updates API endpoint can be
found in Appendix C.
Table 5.1: API endpoints of the application
Path
Method
Input Type
Description
/updates
GET
­
Returns all firmware updates
/updates
POST
CreateUpdateInput
Creates a new firmware update
/updates/[id]
GET
­
Returns a firmware update and its
download URL
/updates/[id]
PUT
EditUpdateInput
Edits an update and returns the new
object
/information
GET
­
Returns all system information
5.3.2
Frontend
The frontend of the application consists of three routes. Route / has a permanent server­
side redirect to the second route /dashboard. The Dashboard page is where the core
functionality lies. Finally, route /information displays the system information.
The dashboard page facilitates the CRUD operations for updates. It displays all updates
in a table with all of their details, which can be seen in Figure 5.2. Each row is clickable,
which allows users to view the details of an update in a modal. Users can download and
edit the firmware via the modal. The download feature uses w3link to retrieve the file.
The modal for firmware editing can be seen in Figure 5.3. The dashboard incorporates
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
25
==PAGE:34==
the creation of a new update. It is done through a similar modal to Figure 5.3, but it also
lets the user input the file. Once all fields are filled out, and the user clicks save, it performs
the firmware update process creation and refreshes the list of updates.
Figure 5.2: Firmware updates listed in the client application
As it is a PoC, some error messages might not be descriptive. For example, if the SC
modifier uniqueVersionGuard fails in createFirmwareUpdate, the frontend only displays
a generic error message.
Figure 5.3: Editing a Firmware update
5.3.3
Running the application
The client depends on some variables from the process of network and SC deployment
(and compilation). These are the deployed contract address, the compiled ABI, and the
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
26
==PAGE:35==
network’s port. While these could be provided as constants in a production environment,
it was convenient to write a script for development and testing purposes. The script takes
the required values from scripts/target/*, where the previous scripts already prepared
these values. The ABI has to be modified when copying it since TypeScript cannot infer
a JSON’s type by default. Therefore, I had to move its content to a TypeScript file to an
object and export it as a const.
Once the configuration is initialized, I run the application with yarn dev in its root folder.
To test the build and preview it, I run yarn build && yarn preview, which imitates how
a production build would run.
5.4
Evaluation
This section presents the results of the implementation, validates the approach, and eval­
uates the performance.
5.4.1
Results
In summary, I implemented a firmware dispatch system that consists of the following com­
ponents: a SC, a network setup script, and a client application for vendors. The implemen­
tation enables its users to store and retrieve firmware updates in a decentralized manner,
utilizing blockchain and IPFS. Thanks to the network and the file storage implementation,
it allows fast and reliable firmware updates while keeping the operational tasks relatively
easy. The simplicity and speed of the system did not compromise security and privacy,
and the integrity of the files was guaranteed. The decentralized approach ensures that
the system is resilient against DoS attacks and provides high availability.
By developing the system, I also showcased the current state of the stack regarding Web3
applications. The community around Ethereum is undeniably growing and progressing
towards more resilient and easy­to­use solutions.
Finally, the PoC client application presented the system’s capabilities in a practical way
from a vendor’s point of view. It enables interaction with the proposed system through a
web interface, and it also acts as an assessment of the available technologies that enable
Web3 applications in a browser.
5.4.2
Validating the proposed approach
I validate the proposed approach by first showing that there is no way one can change
an update after publishing a firmware update. Then, I show that a client can always get
proof of integrity when retrieving an update.
As presented in Figure 4.2, when a user initiates a new firmware update publication,
the client locally builds the CAR and saves the file’s CID. Then, it uploads the CAR to
Web3.Storage and retrieves its CID. At this point, the client application has two CIDs:
one calculated locally and one received from the server. The client compares these two
and only continues the execution if they are identical. Then, it finalizes the update by
adding its details to the blockchain, providing an immutable record. The CID of a file is
always based on its contents, and any change in the contents of it will result in a different
CID. Hence, if someone tries to change the firmware later on, that will mean the CID of
the file also changes on IPFS, and it will never match with the value from the blockchain
network.
Subsequently, if a client wants to ensure the integrity of a retrieved firmware update, it can
get proof of it in some simple steps. First, it queries the blockchain for information about
one update containing the CID and the file URL. Then, it retrieves the update through
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
27
==PAGE:36==
Web3.Storage. Finally, it calculates the CID of the retrieved file locally, and if it does not
match what it received from the blockchain, it discards the file.
5.4.3
Performance tests
I run two tests to test the application’s performance and benchmark the storage provider.
In both tests, I benchmark the upload and distribution speed. The distribution speed
means retrieving the uploaded file from a different device. Then, I test the download
speed. I run these tests three times with differing file sizes. The file sizes are 2 MB, 11
MB, and 48 MB.
Figure 5.4: Output of performance tests
I utilized Playwright, a powerful testing tool that provides reliable end­to­end testing. I
wrote a Playwright test to cover the first case. The test consists of creating a new firmware
update through the user interface. Then, it tries to retrieve the uploaded firmware. The
output of the first test can be seen in Figure 5.4. The upload and download times for the
files can be seen in the following table.
Table 5.2: Tests for firmware uploads and downloads
File size (MB)
Upload speed (ms)
Download speed (ms)
2
3378
693
10.7
4226
827
48
7028
1682
After the first test, I manually tested the distribution times with two separate devices con­
nected to different networks. I concluded that there is no difference in distribution times.
The new files are practically instantly available through w3link regardless of where the re­
quest is coming from. As a consequence, the chosen approach to test the retrieval times
on one machine is adequate.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
28
==PAGE:37==
I performed additional tests on six firmware updates from the computer networking com­
pany Ubiquiti. [36] The file sizes ranged from 8 MB to 403 MB. I ran the same Playwright
test with the six new firmware updates. I repeated this twice; hence, I had results from
three runs in total. Then, I calculated the average upload and download times for each
case. Figure 5.5 presents the average download and upload speeds for each file.
7
8
11
18
81
101
127
403
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
12,500
15,000
17,500
20,000
22,500
25,000
27,500
MB
ms
Upload
Download
Figure 5.5: Average upload and download speeds per file
Additionally, I compared the time differences in each case between the runs since the
CID is the same on the second and third tries. I wanted to highlight the consequences
of this; therefore, I measured the difference between runs in upload/download speeds. I
summarized these changes in Table 5.3, where the change in percentages between the
first and second run and between the second and third run are shown. I highlighted the
outstanding changes with red (more significant differences) and orange. The file size for
each case and the first run’s times are also presented.
The source code for the performance tests can be found in Appendix D. The entire Play­
wright setup and files from the first test are available in the project’s repository under the
tests directory.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 5.3: Changes in upload (⇑) and download (⇓) speeds between runs per file
File size
1. test results
values in ms
1. test vs 2. test
values in %
2. test vs 3. test
values in %
7 MB
3246 ⇑|
1434 ⇓
­1 ⇑| ­72 ⇓
8 ⇑|
12 ⇓
8 MB
3181 ⇑|
1428 ⇓
3 ⇑| ­63 ⇓
­3 ⇑| ­12 ⇓
11 MB
3497 ⇑|
1695 ⇓
6 ⇑| ­69 ⇓
­4 ⇑|
16 ⇓
18 MB
3920 ⇑|
1880 ⇓
1 ⇑| ­58 ⇓
1 ⇑|
10 ⇓
81 MB
8053 ⇑|
4006 ⇓
0 ⇑| ­30 ⇓
­ 4 ⇑|
1 ⇓
101 MB
8390 ⇑|
4676 ⇓
3 ⇑| ­34 ⇓
3 ⇑|
­1 ⇓
127 MB
9201 ⇑|
5541 ⇓
16 ⇑| ­27 ⇓
­14 ⇑|
6 ⇓
403 MB
27221 ⇑| 11298 ⇓
0 ⇑| 27 ⇓
­3 ⇑| ­18 ⇓
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
30
==PAGE:39==
6
Discussion
This chapter discusses the key benefits of the project, and an evaluation of the imple­
mentation is given, including the limitations and challenges stemming from the chosen
technologies. Furthermore, a security and performance analysis is conducted.
6.1
Key benefits
In conclusion, the architecture provides the following benefits:
• Firmware integrity: The uploaded file cannot be altered once published, and the
protocol allows for proof of integrity upon retrieval.
• Decentralized architecture: The architecture provides high availability, and the core
of the system does not have a single point of failure.
• Fast and reliable file distribution: The files are stored with Web3.Storage, providing
a simple and robust way of interacting with IPFS.
• No operational tasks for storing files: The files are stored and kept pinned on IPFS
via Filecoin, requiring no infrastructural operations on the client’s side.
• Secure by design: The system lays on solid cryptographic fundamentals, providing
fast access to the updates without compromising security.
The proposed architecture provides a fast and reliable way to manage updates. It uti­
lizes blockchain technology to store records of the updates in an immutable way while
also being highly available. The files are stored in a decentralized storage, achieving
similar advantages to blockchain. Files are uploaded through Web3.Storage, a scalable
cloud­native implementation of IPFS. Both blockchain and IPFS are resilient against DoS
attacks.
The system is recommended to any IoT manufacturer looking for a simple, resilient, and
secure way of distributing firmware updates without significant operational overhead. De­
pending on the specific use case, companies can either choose to use the Ethereum
Mainnet or maintain a private blockchain network. Both solutions are supported by the
proposed architecture.
6.2
Limitations and challenges
The Web3 community is evolving, and one can find many resources available. However,
I faced certain challenges while working on the project. There are dozens of emerging
technologies to choose from, however, these are typically not battle­tested. When choos­
ing new technologies for a project, it requires effort and research to assess each solution
to ensure it aligns well with the rest of the project. New technologies often lack proper
documentation, and it can generally take more time to find answers to specific questions.
In some cases, I had to find the answers on my own by searching in the source code of
the package.
In one library, I was getting an unexpected error. To resolve it, I had to debug the package
itself. This was quite time­consuming, and eventually, I fixed it by downgrading one of
its peer­dependencies. The details of this error can be seen on the peer­dependency’s
GitHub page.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
31
==PAGE:40==
Web3.Storage also had a minor bug while running some tests with it. In this case, I was
able to find a GitHub issue for it and eventually it got fixed. In the meantime, I had to
downgrade the Web3.Storage package.
While there were some challenges during the project, I could overcome them without
serious compromises. Overall, the developer experience working with Web3 technologies
was excellent.
The project also has specific limitations which were out of the project’s scope. An up­
loaded firmware can be malicious, which cannot be checked by the system, and it is
going to be distributed as is. Prior to the implementation, there were some assumptions
made regarding who can access the system. Since access control is entirely handled by
the vendor, the system is prone to internal attacks. If a vendor suffers from an internal
breach, attackers might gain access to a client, where the system has no way of detecting
the unauthorized access.
Finally, it is essential to mention that data deletion is also a limiting factor of the system.
An update can be disabled, which makes it disappear from public queries. However, the
data might be distributed on IPFS perpetually since one cannot guarantee that all copies
of the file are gone from the IPFS network. Hence, one should keep in mind to only share
files that could potentially be shared publicly forever.
6.3
Security and privacy analysis
In this section, I assess the system from a security and privacy point of view. I cover the
following aspects: user authentication, upload encryption, integrity verification, blockchain
deployment type, and network attacks.
• User authentication: Keys are pre­distributed for the clients, and access to the client
is managed by the vendor. The security can be enhanced by utilizing MultiSig wal­
lets and key revocation. MultiSig wallets are enhancing security by requiring more
than one signature on each transaction. Consequently, attackers need to obtain all
signer keys to succeed, making the attack a lot more complex. Key revocation can
be helpful when a key is compromised. The two solutions combined can fulfill the
security requirements for high­risk applications.
• Upload encryption: Content is addressed with CIDs in the system; therefore, one
has to know the CID of a file to retrieve it. Retrieval becomes hard without know­
ing the CID. This level of obscurity is enough for many use cases. On the other
hand, a company might want to further enhance the privacy of the files. Privacy en­
hancement can be done by encrypting the files before uploading them, which could
be a simple step before creating the CAR on the server. For example, CryptoJS,
a JavaScript library, could be utilized to encrypt and decrypt the files with the AES
standard and a pre­distributed secret without adding much overhead to the system.
Encryption would increase the privacy aspect of the system, making unauthorized
access to the contents of the files practically impossible.
• Verifying a file: A protocol for ensuring file integrity was validated previously in Sec­
tion 5.4.2. The process provides a secure and straightforward approach to get cryp­
tographic proof of data authenticity. Hence, participants of the system have a reli­
able and performant way to verify files.
• Blockchain deployment type: It is a security, privacy, and performance consider­
ation whether the blockchain network is a private or public deployment. Private
networks provide great scalability options, and they offer strong privacy. Whereas
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
32
==PAGE:41==
public networks are harder to scale, and it is harder to maintain privacy since they
are accessible by anyone. However, they can provide more security as they are
larger networks.
• Network attacks: The proposed system assumes the use of secure communication
channels with strong encryption like TLS. TLS ensures data integrity and confiden­
tiality and protects against MITM attacks like spoofing. However, in the case where
a client suffers from DNS pollution when retrieving a file from IPFS, and as a result,
it gets a modified file, the file integrity protocol would still be able to detect the modi­
fication. The hash value of the received file would not match with the one on­chain.
Hence, the client would discard the file.
6.4
Performance analysis
The performance metrics of the system’s upload and download speeds can be seen in
Section 5.4.3. The upload speeds were between 3 and 27 seconds, while the file sizes
ranged between 7 MB and 403 MB. After running numerous tests, the system proved to be
reliable and fast for managing updates. The average download speeds ranged between
0.5 and 13 seconds for the same files. Figure 5.4 shows a clear correlation between file
size and the speed, which is unsurprising.
When testing file retrievals three times in a row, there was an increase in the speed of
downloads after the second try. However, the third retrieval was similar to the second
one. Table 5.2 summarizes the changes between retries.
The performance tests indicate that Web3.Storage offers a robust solution for file storage.
The service is highly scalable, and it is constantly being improved. Among other excit­
ing projects, the team behind Web3.Storage is currently working on a new API, called
w3up-client, that will offer better performance for uploads.
6.4.1
Comparison to related solutions
Finally, I compare the performance of the proposed solution to similar ones introduced in
Chapter 2. The proposed architecture utilizes a gateway device that forwards updates to
the IoT devices. Using a gateway is considerably better compared to having IoT devices
connect directly to the blockchain network since these devices may not fulfill the minimum
requirements to use the network reliably. Additionally, the gateway device can reduce
bandwidth requirements in the IoT devices, perform pre­processing on the updates (such
as decryption), and reduce latency.
Regarding the file storage solution, Web3.Storage offers several advantages.
It is a
highly scalable, cloud­native implementation of IPFS with solid performance and reliabil­
ity. When it comes to other hosted IPFS solutions, Web3.Storage stands out by involving
an IPFS HTTP gateway that is at least 2­3 times faster than other gateways. [37] Further­
more, with the help of Filecoin deals, Web3.Storage users can ensure that their files are
being stored on IPFS by the desired number of replicates.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
33
==PAGE:42==
7
Conclusion
IoT devices have become prevalent in everyone’s day­to­day life. Consequently, there is
an increased need for IoT security, in which firmware dispatch systems play a crucial role.
This thesis has looked at blockchain­based firmware dispatch solutions to provide a more
reliable and secure architecture for IoT updates.
The research of this paper can be summarized as follows. Firstly, I provided an overview
of existing blockchain­based firmware dispatch systems and conducted a comprehensive
analysis of the background theory of the project. Next, I proposed a secure firmware dis­
patch system architecture and defined the assumptions made during its design phase.
I then implemented the proposed scheme through an Ethereum SC and a PoC client
application. The solution utilizes Web3.Storage, a fast, reliable, and scalable hosted im­
plementation of IPFS. The implementation is followed by the validation of the system’s
approach. Then, a discussion is provided on the design decisions and takeaways of the
project. Finally, I analyzed the solution from a security and performance perspective.
Overall, this research contributes to the field of firmware security, and it assesses the
current Web3 solutions regarding file storage and IoT security. The proposed scheme
provides a fast, reliable, and secure firmware dispatch system for various use cases.
7.1
Future work
Given the time limitations of the project, there is some space for improvement in the sys­
tem.
Firstly, I could implement authentication to strengthen the security. For example, the sys­
tem could ask users to input their wallets when they start the client application. I could
further enhance security by combining authentication with MultiSig wallets. In essence,
the system could require multiple signatures before publishing a firmware update by uti­
lizing MultiSig wallets.
Secondly, I could assess the previously mentioned advancements of the Web3.Storage
project. Their new API, w3up-client, promises better performance for managing files,
which could be beneficial for this project.
Overall, these potential enhancements could improve the security and performance of the
application.
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
34
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Kim Zetter. Hackers Hijacked ASUS Software Updates to Install Backdoors on
Thousands of Computers. 2019. URL: https://www.vice.com/en/article/pan9wn/
hackers - hijacked - asus - software - updates - to - install - backdoors - on - thousands - of -
computers (visited on 07/20/2023).
[2]
Ravie Lakshmanan. Pre­Installed Malware Dropper Found On German Gigaset An­
droid Phones. 2021. URL: https : / / thehackernews . com / 2021 / 04 / pre - installed -
malware-dropper-found-on.html (visited on 07/20/2023).
[3]
OWASP. OWASP Top 10 2021. 2021. URL: https://owasp.org/Top10/A08_2021-
Software_and_Data_Integrity_Failures/ (visited on 08/06/2023).
[4]
OWASP. OWASP­IoT­Top­10­2018. 2018. URL: https : / / owasp . org / www - pdf -
archive/OWASP-IoT-Top-10-2018-final.pdf (visited on 08/06/2023).
[5]
CoinMarketCap. Global Cryptocurrency Market Charts. 2023. URL:
https://coinmarketcap.com/charts (visited on 07/20/2023).
[6]
DTU Findit. About DTU Findit. 2023. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/about/introduction
(visited on 07/24/2023).
[7]
Meriem Bettayeb, Qassim Nasir, and Manar Abu Talib. Implementation of Hyper­
ledger­Based Secure Firmware Update Delivery for IoT Devices. 2021. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-030-75107-4_8.
[8]
Collins Sey et al. Firmblock: A Scalable Blockchain­Based Malware­Proof Firmware
Update Architecture with Revocation for IoT Devices. 2021.
DOI: 10.1109/ICCWAMTIP53232.2021.9674092.
[9]
Alexander Yohan and Nai Wei Lo. FOTB: a secure blockchain­based firmware up­
date framework for IoT environment. 2020. DOI: 10.1007/s10207-019-00467-6.
[10]
Projjal Gupta. A decentralized approach towards secure firmware updates and test­
ing over commercial IoT Devices. 2020.
[11]
Woei Jiunn Tsaur, Jen Chun Chang, and Chin Ling Chen. A Highly Secure IoT
Firmware Update Mechanism Using Blockchain. 2022. DOI: 10.3390/s22020530.
[12]
Simon Krejci, Marten Sigwart, and Stefan Schulte. Blockchain­ and IPFS­Based
Data Distribution for the Internet of Things. 2020. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-44769-
4_14.
[13]
Le Trung Kien, Phan Duy Hung, and Kieu Ha My. Evaluating blockchain IoT frame­
works. 2020. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-15-2780-7_95.
[14]
Ang Cui, Michael Costello, and Salvatore Stolfo. When Firmware Modifications At­
tack: A Case Study of Embedded Exploitation. 2016.
[15]
Julia Borgini. 3 OTA architectures for IoT devices. 2020. URL: https://www.techtarget.
com/iotagenda/feature/3-OTA-architectures-for-IoT-devices (visited on 08/12/2023).
[16]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer­to­Peer Electronic Cash System. 2008.
[17]
Ethereum. Ethereum Whitepaper. 2023. URL: https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/
(visited on 07/28/2023).
[18]
Merunas Grincalaitis. Mastering Ethereum. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2019. ISBN:
9781789531374. URL: https://github.com/ethereumbook/ethereumbook.
[19]
Alchemy. What is an Ethereum node? 2022. URL: https://www.alchemy.com/
overviews/what-is-an-ethereum-node (visited on 07/29/2023).
[20]
Gavin Wood. Ethereum Yellow Paper. 2022. URL: https://ethereum.github.io/
yellowpaper/paper.pdf (visited on 07/29/2023).
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
35
==PAGE:44==
[21]
Ethereum. Proof­of­Stake (PoS). 2023. URL: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/
docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/ (visited on 07/29/2023).
[22]
Ethereum. Scaling. 2023. URL: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/
(visited on 07/29/2023).
[23]
Etherscan. Ethereum Average Block Time Chart. 2023. URL: https://etherscan.io/
chart/blocktime (visited on 08/10/2023).
[24]
go­ethereum. go­ethereum docs. 2023. URL: https://geth.ethereum.org/docs (vis­
ited on 07/30/2023).
[25]
EY. Total cost of ownership for blockchain solutions. 2019. URL: https://github.com/
EYBlockchain/fundamental-cost-of-ownership/blob/master/EY%20Total%20Cost%
20of%20Ownership%20for%20Blockchain%20Solutions.pdf (visited on 07/30/2023).
[26]
Ethereum. Upgrading smart contracts. 2023. URL: https : / / ethereum . org / en /
developers/docs/smart-contracts/upgrading/#proxy-patterns (visited on 08/08/2023).
[27]
IPFS. What is IPFS? 2023. URL: https://docs.ipfs.tech/concepts/what-is-ipfs (visited
on 07/31/2023).
[28]
Sarah Thiam. The Filecoin Virtual Machine Explained. 2023. URL: https://filecoin.
io/blog/posts/the-filecoin-virtual-machine-explained/ (visited on 07/31/2023).
[29]
ProtoSchool. Verifying Storage on Filecoin. 2023. URL: https : / / proto . school /
verifying-storage-on-filecoin (visited on 07/31/2023).
[30]
David Choi. Web3.Storage architecture. 2022. URL: https://blog.web3.storage/
posts/web3-storage-architecture (visited on 07/31/2023).
[31]
Web3.js. Web3.js Documentation. 2023. URL: https://docs.web3js.org/ (visited on
08/01/2023).
[32]
Hardhat. Hardhat Network Documentation. 2023. URL: https://hardhat.org/hardhat-
network/docs/overview (visited on 08/01/2023).
[33]
Alex Libby. Practical Svelte. Apress Media LLC, 2022. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4842-
7374-6.
[34]
aceinfoway.com. Svelte Vs React: Which is the Best for Web App Development?
2022. URL: https://www.aceinfoway.com/blog/svelte-vs-react (visited on 08/10/2023).
[35]
Svelte. SvelteKit Documentation. 2023. URL: https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/introduction
(visited on 08/01/2023).
[36]
Ubiquiti. Software Downloads. 2023. URL: https://www.ui.com/download/releases/
firmware (visited on 08/10/2023).
[37]
w3link. Software Downloads. 2023. URL: https://web3.storage/products/w3link/
(visited on 08/12/2023).
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
36
==PAGE:45==
A
Project plan
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
37
==PAGE:46==
B
Smart contract
1 // SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
2
3 pragma solidity >=0.7.0 <0.9.0;
4
5 /**
6
* @title FirmwareUpdates
7
* @dev Implements a firmware dispatch system for IoT devices
8
*/
9 contract FirmwareUpdates
10 {
11
address private owner; // Owner of the contract
12
address[] private updaters; // Users with uploader rights
13
14
struct Update
15
{
16
string hash; // CID
17
uint64 id; // id of the update
18
bool isEnabled; // whether the firmware is enabled
19
bool isStable; // whether the firmware is a stable release
20
string name; // name of the firmware
21
uint256 timestamp; // time of the creation of the update
22
address uploader; // uploader of the firmware
23
string version; // version of the firmware
24
string filename; // preffered filename
25
}
26
27
// Input struct for creating an update
28
struct CreateUpdateInput
29
{
30
string hash; // CID
31
bool isEnabled; // whether the firmware is enabled
32
bool isStable; // whether the firmware is a stable release
33
string name; // name of the firmware
34
string version; // version of the firmware
35
string filename; // preffered filename
36
}
37
38
// Input struct for editing an update
39
struct EditUpdateInput
40
{
41
bool isEnabled; // whether the firmware is enabled
42
bool isStable; // whether the firmware is a stable release
43
string name; // name of the firmware
44
string version; // version of the firmware
45
string filename; // preffered filename
46
}
47
48
Update[] private firmwareUpdates; // Firmware updates
49
50
event Debug(string info); // For debugging
51
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
38
==PAGE:47==
52
/**
53
* @dev init
54
*/
55
constructor()
56
{
57
owner = msg.sender; // Set the owner to the sender of the message
58
updaters.push(msg.sender); // Add owner as updater
59
}
60
61
/*
62
* Modifier and util functions
63
*/
64
65
// Modifier to check if caller is owner
66
modifier ownerGuard
67
{
68
require(msg.sender == owner, "Caller is not the owner.");
69
_;
70
}
71
72
/**
73
* @dev Util function checking if address is updater
74
* @param updater the updater
75
* @return idx index of the updater if found, otherwise -1
76
*/
77
function isUpdater(address updater) private view returns(int)
78
{
79
for (uint p = 0; p < updaters.length; p++)
80
{
81
if (updaters[p] == updater)
82
{
83
return int(p);
84
}
85
}
86
return -1;
87
}
88
89
// Modifier to check if caller is updater
90
modifier updaterGuard()
91
{
92
require(isUpdater(msg.sender) > -1, "Caller is not an updater.");
93
_;
94
}
95
96
/**
97
* @dev Util function comparing 2 strings for equality with different
data location
98
* @param string1 storage string
99
* @param string2 calldata string
100
* @return true if string1 is equal to string2
101
*/
102
function safeStringEquality(string storage string1, string calldata
string2) private pure
103
returns(bool)
104
{
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
39
==PAGE:48==
105
return keccak256(bytes(string1)) == keccak256(bytes(string2));
106
}
107
108
// Modifier to check if update version is unique based on the name of the
firmware
109
modifier uniqueVersionGuard(string calldata firmwareName, string calldata
version, int64 id)
110
{
111
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
112
{
113
if
114
(
115
safeStringEquality(firmwareUpdates[p].name, firmwareName) &&
116
safeStringEquality(firmwareUpdates[p].version, version) &&
117
id != int64(firmwareUpdates[p].id)
118
)
119
{
120
revert("Update version must be unique.");
121
}
122
}
123
_;
124
}
125
126
/*
127
* Management functions (for the owner only)
128
*/
129
130
/**
131
* @dev Transfer ownership of the contract
132
* @param newOwner the address of the new owner
133
*/
134
function transferOwnership(address newOwner) public ownerGuard()
135
{
136
int index = isUpdater(owner);
137
// If previous owner is updater, remove them
138
if (index > -1)
139
{
140
delete updaters[uint(index)];
141
}
142
owner = newOwner;
143
index = isUpdater(newOwner);
144
// Add new owner as updater, unless it is already one
145
if (index == -1)
146
{
147
updaters.push(newOwner);
148
}
149
}
150
151
/**
152
* @dev Adds an updater
153
* @param newUpdater the updater
154
*/
155
function addUpdater(address newUpdater) public ownerGuard()
156
{
157
require(isUpdater(newUpdater) == -1, "User is already an updater.");
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
40
==PAGE:49==
158
updaters.push(newUpdater);
159
}
160
161
/**
162
* @dev Remove an updater
163
* @param updater the updater to be removed
164
*/
165
function removeUpdater(address updater) public ownerGuard()
166
{
167
int index = isUpdater(updater);
168
require(index > -1, "User is not an updater.");
169
delete updaters[uint(index)];
170
}
171
172
/*
173
* Getter functions for updaters
174
*/
175
176
/**
177
* @dev Returns all firmware updates (for updaters only)
178
* @return firmwareUpdates all firmware updates
179
*/
180
function getFirmwareUpdates() public view updaterGuard()
181
returns (Update[] memory)
182
{
183
return firmwareUpdates;
184
}
185
186
/**
187
* @dev Returns a firmware update (for updaters only)
188
* @param id of firmware update
189
* @return firmwareUpdate_ the requested firmware update
190
*/
191
function getFirmwareUpdate(uint64 id) public view updaterGuard()
192
returns (Update memory)
193
{
194
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
195
{
196
if (firmwareUpdates[p].id == id)
197
{
198
return firmwareUpdates[p];
199
}
200
}
201
revert("Update not found");
202
}
203
204
/*
205
* Public getter functions
206
*/
207
208
/**
209
* @dev Returns a firmware update if available
210
* @param id of firmware update
211
* @return firmwareUpdate_ the requested firmware update
212
*/
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
41
==PAGE:50==
213
function getAvailableFirmwareUpdate(uint64 id) public view
214
returns (Update memory)
215
{
216
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
217
{
218
if (firmwareUpdates[p].id == id && firmwareUpdates[p].isEnabled)
219
{
220
return firmwareUpdates[p];
221
}
222
}
223
revert("Update not found");
224
}
225
226
/**
227
* @dev Returns available firmware updates
228
*/
229
function getAvailableFirmwareUpdates() public view
230
returns (Update[] memory firmwareUpdates_)
231
{
232
uint availableCounter = 0;
233
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
234
{
235
if (firmwareUpdates[p].isEnabled)
236
{
237
availableCounter = availableCounter + 1;
238
}
239
}
240
firmwareUpdates_ = new Update[](availableCounter);
241
uint counter = 0;
242
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
243
{
244
if (firmwareUpdates[p].isEnabled)
245
{
246
firmwareUpdates_[counter] = firmwareUpdates[p];
247
counter = counter + 1;
248
}
249
}
250
}
251
252
/*
253
* Create/Edit functions (for updaters only)
254
*/
255
256
/**
257
* @dev Creates a firmware update
258
* @param update input of type CreateUpdateInput
259
*/
260
function createFirmwareUpdate(CreateUpdateInput calldata update) public
261
updaterGuard() uniqueVersionGuard(update.name, update.version, -1)
262
{
263
firmwareUpdates.push(Update(
264
{
265
id: uint64(firmwareUpdates.length),
266
version: update.version,
267
uploader: msg.sender,
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
42
==PAGE:51==
268
hash: update.hash, // CID
269
name: update.name,
270
filename: update.filename,
271
isEnabled: update.isEnabled,
272
isStable: update.isStable,
273
// solhint-disable-next-line not-rely-on-time
274
timestamp: block.timestamp
275
}
276
));
277
}
278
279
/**
280
* @dev Edits a firmware update's enabled status
281
* @param id id of edited update
282
* @param newValues new values of type EditUpdateInput
283
* @return firmwareUpdate_ the edited firmware update
284
*/
285
function editFirmwareUpdate(uint64 id, EditUpdateInput calldata newValues)
286
public updaterGuard()
287
uniqueVersionGuard(newValues.name, newValues.version, int64(id))
288
returns (Update memory firmwareUpdate_)
289
{
290
for (uint p = 0; p < firmwareUpdates.length; p++)
291
{
292
if (firmwareUpdates[p].id == id)
293
{
294
firmwareUpdates[p].isEnabled = newValues.isEnabled;
295
firmwareUpdates[p].isStable = newValues.isStable;
296
firmwareUpdates[p].name = newValues.name;
297
firmwareUpdates[p].filename = newValues.filename;
298
firmwareUpdates[p].version = newValues.version;
299
return firmwareUpdates[p];
300
}
301
}
302
}
303 }
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
43
==PAGE:52==
C
Updates API endpoint
1 import { error, json, type RequestHandler } from '@sveltejs/kit';
2 import type { CIDString } from 'web3.storage';
3
4 import type { FirmwareUdpdate } from '$src/types/firmware';
5 import { web3Helper, web3storageHelper } from '$src/helpers';
6 import { parseUpdate } from '$src/utils';
7 import config from '$config/index';
8
9 function parseResponse(input?: Record<string, bigint
boolean
string>[]) {
10
// Invalid response
11
if (!input) {
12
return [];
13
}
14
15
const returnArray: FirmwareUdpdate[] = [];
16
for (const i of input) {
17
const update = parseUpdate(i);
18
// Get all valid updates
19
if (update) {
20
returnArray.push(update);
21
}
22
}
23
24
// Return valid updates
25
return returnArray;
26 }
27
28 /**
29
* @returns All FirmwareUdpdates
30
*/
31 export async function GET() {
32
try {
33
const { defaultAccount, firmwareUpdatesContract } = await web3Helper();
34
35
// Get available updates again
36
const updates = parseResponse(
37
await firmwareUpdatesContract.methods.getFirmwareUpdates().call({
from: defaultAccount })
38
);
39
40
// Return JSON response with Updates
41
return json(updates);
42
} catch (e) {
43
console.log(e);
44
throw error(500, 'Could not get firmware updates');
45
}
46 }
47
48 /**
49
* @description Uploads a file to Web3.Storage
50
* @param file file to be uploaded
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
44
==PAGE:53==
51
* @returns CID of uploaded file
52
*/
53 async function handleUpload(file: File) {
54
const client = web3storageHelper();
55
56
// Save local CID
57
let localCid = '';
58
// This gets triggered before the CAR is uploaded to the server
59
const onRootCidReady = (cid: CIDString) => (localCid = cid);
60
61
// Upload file to Filecoin
62
const serverCid = await client.put([file], { wrapWithDirectory: false,
onRootCidReady });
63
64
// Verify CID from server
65
if (localCid !== serverCid) {
66
throw new Error('CID mismatch');
67
}
68
69
// Return CID
70
return serverCid;
71 }
72
73 /**
74
* @description Creates a new firmware update
75
* @returns CID of uploaded file
76
*/
77 export const POST: RequestHandler = async ({ request }) => {
78
try {
79
// Get values from request's formData
80
const values = await request.formData();
81
const file = typeof values.get('file') === 'object' ?
82
(values.get('file') as File) : undefined;
83
const filename = typeof values.get('filename') === 'string' ?
84
(values.get('filename') as string) : '';
85
const isEnabled = values.get('isEnabled') === 'true';
86
const isStable = values.get('isStable') === 'true';
87
const name = typeof values.get('name') === 'string' ?
88
(values.get('name') as string) : '';
89
const version = typeof values.get('version') === 'string' ?
90
(values.get('version') as string) : '';
91
92
// Validate input
93
if (!version
!file
!name) {
94
throw new Error('Invalid input');
95
}
96
97
const { defaultAccount, firmwareUpdatesContract } = await web3Helper();
98
99
// Upload file
100
const hash = await handleUpload(file);
101
102
// Smart contract's CreateUpdateInput
103
const input = {
104
hash,
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
45
==PAGE:54==
105
isEnabled,
106
isStable,
107
name,
108
filename,
109
version
110
};
111
112
// Estimate TX gas cost
113
const gas = await firmwareUpdatesContract.methods
114
.createFirmwareUpdate(input)
115
.estimateGas();
116
117
// Save update with smart contract
118
await firmwareUpdatesContract.methods.createFirmwareUpdate(input).send({
119
from: defaultAccount,
120
gas: gas?.toString() ?? config.DEFAULT_GAS
121
});
122
123
// Return CID
124
return json({ cid: hash }, { status: 201 });
125
} catch (e) {
126
console.trace(e);
127
throw error(500, 'Could not create firmware update');
128
}
129 };
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
46
==PAGE:55==
D
Performance tests
1 import { test, expect } from '@playwright/test';
2 import { info } from 'console';
3
4 // Files retrieved from https://www.ui.com/download/releases/firmware
5 const test2Files = [
6
'5916-UNVR-3.1.14-47633012-2988-43d6-bf38-e3dc693a152f.bin',
7
'BZ.mt7621_6.5.28+14491.230127.2313.bin',
8
'BZ.qca956x_6.5.28+14491.230127.1612.bin',
9
'ER-e300.v2.0.9-hotfix.5.5554172.tar',
10
'OLT.xgs.v4.5.3.ea4948f.230801.1125.bin',
11
'UF-OLT.v4.5.3.5672.230801.1406.tar',
12
'US.mt7628_6.5.32+14509.230207.0929.bin',
13
'US2.bcm5334x_6.5.32+14509.230207.0931.bin'
14 ];
15
16 const APP_ROOT = 'http://localhost:5249';
17
18 // Loops through all Test 2 cases
19 for (const file of test2Files) {
20
// Tests a case
21
test('Performance testing: ' + file, async ({ page }) => {
22
// Random version to avoid version collision
23
const version = Math.floor(Math.random() * 100000) + file.substring(0,
5);
24
25
// Navigate to dashboard and open createmodal
26
await page.goto(`${APP_ROOT}/dashboard`);
27
await page.getByTestId('createbutton').click();
28
await expect(page.getByTestId('createmodal')).toBeVisible();
29
30
// Fill out createmodal form
31
await page.getByPlaceholder('Firmware').fill('Unify TestOS');
32
await page.getByPlaceholder('Version').fill(version);
33
await page.getByTestId('filename').fill(file);
34
await page.getByTestId('isenabled').check();
35
await page.getByTestId('firmware').setInputFiles('tests/files/' + file);
36
37
// Start timer1
38
const start1 = performance.now();
39
40
// Promise for awaiting API request for creating the firmware is
resolved
41
let responsePromise = page.waitForResponse(
42
(response) => response.url() === `${APP_ROOT}/api/updates` &&
response.status() === 201
43
);
44
// Submit form
45
await page.getByTestId('publish').click();
46
// Await Promise after submitting
47
await responsePromise;
48
// Modal should be closed after promise is resolved
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
47
==PAGE:56==
49
await expect(page.getByTestId('createmodal')).toBeHidden();
50
51
// End timer1
52
const end1 = performance.now() - start1;
53
info('Upload speed (ms): ' + end1);
54
55
// Promise for awaiting API request for querying the update
56
responsePromise = page.waitForResponse(
57
(response) =>
58
response.url().startsWith(`${APP_ROOT}/api/updates/`) &&
response.status() === 200
59
);
60
// Click the update in the table
61
await page.getByText(version).click();
62
// Await Promise after clicking
63
await responsePromise;
64
65
// Start timer2
66
const start2 = performance.now();
67
68
// Promise for download event
69
const downloadPromise = page.waitForEvent('download');
70
// Start download
71
await page.getByTestId('download').click();
72
// Await Promise for download
73
const download = await downloadPromise;
74
// Await download.path to finish = download done
75
await download.path();
76
77
// End timer2
78
const end2 = performance.now() - start2;
79
info('Download speed (ms): ' + end2);
80
});
81 }
Secure IoT Firmware Dispatch System with Blockchain
48
==PAGE:57==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
