==PAGE:1==
Project Cost Analysis
Understanding Cost Overrun Trends
Master Thesis
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Project Cost Analysis
Understanding Cost Overrun Trends
Master Thesis
August, 2023
By
Aníta Gunnarsdóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
EJ Yao, 2017
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been conducted as the final assignment of the program Master of Science
degree in Industrial Engineering and Management at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU. The study is credited to 30 ECTS for its author and was carried out from February
6th to August 11th. The study was composed in collaboration with the Danish building
and property agency, Bygningstyrelsen, Carsten Niebuhrs Gade 43, 1577 København V,
Denmark.
Aníta Gunnarsdóttir ­ s212523
Signature
Date
ii
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis seeks to assess the feasibility of categorizing projects based on total cost over­
run by analyzing project cost data from Bygningsstyrelsen. The study’s scope includes
approved budgets and spending data from various construction projects over a number
of years. The research will take an exploratory approach with the goal to gain data­driven
insights into cost overrun trends in construction projects, in order to inform more effective
project cost management and thus benefit project managers. The research provided valu­
able insight into budget management and project performance and shed light on the chal­
lenges the industry faces. The research reveals interesting trends such as a decline in the
frequency of budget adjustments leading to greater budget accuracy in recent years. Sea­
sonal trends are identified as well as trends regarding project types. Bygningsstyrelsen’s
overall successful project management methods are highlighted in the report. However,
the report also emphasizes the potential for improvement to further enhance their project
management strategies.
Project Cost Analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my advisor, Christian Thuesen, for his
invaluable guidance and support during this journey. His expertise and guidance have
been instrumental in shaping this thesis. I would also like to express my appreciation to the
team at the Danish building and property agency, Bygningsstyrelsen, for their cooperation
and for providing the necessary data for this thesis. Their contribution was crucial in
conducting the analysis of financial data. I want to recognize Andreas in particular for his
help and guidance which was vital to the process of this research.
On a personal level, I am deeply thankful to my family and friends for their love, support,
and understanding throughout my academic journey. Their constant encouragement has
given me the strength I needed for the duration of my academic journey.
Lastly, I am grateful to DTU for providing me with the opportunity to pursue my M.Sc. in
Industrial Engineering and Management.
Aníta Gunnarsdóttir, MSc Industrial Engineering and Management, DTU. Creator of this
thesis template
iv
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview of construction cost overruns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
3
Literature Review
7
4
Theory
11
4.1
Earned Value Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Statistical Methods and Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Classification Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
Model Evaluation Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5
Data
19
5.1
Data Collection Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3
Data Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.4
Data Pre­Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.5
Data Formatting and Organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
6
Results
23
6.1
Data Analysis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Analysis by Execution Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.3
Analysis by Project Duration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.4
Analysis by Project Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.5
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7
Conclusion and Future Work
47
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Bibliography
49
A Appendix
51
A.1 Project Specific Learning Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Project Cost Analysis
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
6.1
Cumulative Cost of Construction Building Over Time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.2
Cumulative Cost of Construction Building Over Time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.3
The Average Amount per Step and the Expenses for 186 Projects. . . . . . 27
6.4
Boxplot of the Budget Steps and the Expenses for 186 Projects.
. . . . . . 28
6.5
Cost Variance from the Tender Budget for 186 Projects. . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.6
Mean Positive and Negative Budget Adjustments on a Yearly Basis. . . . . 34
6.7
Cost Variance from the Tender Budget for the Time Intervals. . . . . . . . . 36
6.8
Positive and Negative Budget Adjustments for Different Durations. . . . . . 38
6.9
Cost Variance for Different Durations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.10 Positive and Negative Budget Adjustments for Different Cost Ranges. . . . 43
6.11 Cost Variance for Different Cost Ranges.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
vi
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
6.1
Summary Statistics for Expenses.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Corrections Description. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
Quarterly Summary Table. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.4
Budget Adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.5
Budget Adjustments ­ Project Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.6
Budget Statistics ­ Stepwise Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.7
Project Budget Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.8
Correlation Analysis with Projects Going Over Budget. . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.9
Correlation of Customers with Projects Going Over Budget. . . . . . . . . . 30
6.10 Correlation of Postal Codes with Projects Going Over Budget. . . . . . . . . 31
6.11 Number of Projects by Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.12 Summary Statistics for Expenses on a Yearly Basis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.13 Budget Statistics ­ Stepwise Comparison on a Yearly Basis . . . . . . . . . 33
6.14 Project Budget Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.15 Budget Statistics for Two Time Intervals ­ Stepwise Comparison. . . . . . . 35
6.16 Number of Projects by Duration.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.17 Summary Statistics for Expenses for Different Duration. . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.18 Budget Statistics for Different Durations ­ Stepwise Comparison. . . . . . . 39
6.19 Project Budget Analysis for Different Durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.20 Cost Distribution of Construction Projects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.21 Summary Statistics for Expenses on Different Cost Ranges. . . . . . . . . . 41
6.22 Budget Statistics for Different Cost Ranges ­ Stepwise Comparison. . . . . 42
6.23 Project Budget Analysis for Different Cost Ranges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.24 Results from the Logistic Regression.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.25 Results from the Decision Tree. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Project Cost Analysis
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Overview of construction cost overruns
A construction project cost overrun occurs when the actual cost of a construction project
exceeds its estimated or allocated budget. In other words, it happens when the cost of
completing a project is more than the project managers, contractors or other stakehold­
ers anticipated. Construction cost overruns represent substantial issues for organizations,
resulting in financial loss, project delays and diminished stakeholders’ trust. As an impor­
tant component of the modern world, project management plays a critical role in tackling
these difficulties. Project management has evolved over time to adapt to the changing
landscape of business, including shifts in technology, industry trends, and stakeholder
expectations. Project management is the art of using specific knowledge, abilities, tools,
and approaches to deliver something of value to people. The merger of two organizations,
the development of a new process, and the construction of a building are all examples of
a project that needs a project manager [1].
Within the realm of project management, cost management holds a fundamental position
and serves as an important instrument for controlling and improving project cost perfor­
mance. The construction industry, like many other sectors, operates in a dynamic and
complex environment where effective cost management plays a crucial role. As high­
lighted by Potts and Ankrah in their book, Construction cost management, the industry has
witnessed remarkable advancements and transformations in recent decades [2]. Many
factors have contributed to the construction industry’s transformation. For example digi­
talization, growing interest in partnering and alliancing, and the increased importance of
supply chain management. Although the environment has changed it is argued that the
same fundamentals apply, the client expects their project to finish within budget and on
time [2]. As a result, project expenses need to be well­managed and well­thought­out.
Effective cost management is important to the successful completion of any project. How­
ever, it is still common that project experience cost overruns. These overruns occur when
projects exceed their planned budget or the planned duration which often results in finan­
cial loss for the organization and compromised stakeholders’ trust. Understanding the root
causes and effects of cost overruns is critical for businesses looking to enhance project
performance while reducing financial risks. By investigating the factors and trends in cost
overruns, organizations can learn valuable lessons, better their practices and enhance
their project management methods. Several reasons why it is important to study and un­
derstand cost overruns in projects is that the overruns can have various effects on the
projects and their stakeholders. Financial consequences can lead to increased borrow­
ing, reduced profitability or even project abandonment. The reputation of a company and
the trust of its stakeholders are critical components of success in the long run. However,
if a firm frequently faces cost overruns, it not only puts at risk its own financial stability but
also damages the faith and support of its stakeholders. Cost overruns can cause dissat­
isfaction among investors, stakeholders, workers and consumers, which can lead to them
abandoning their support and looking for other options. Finally, cost overruns are often
associated with various risks, such as volatile market conditions, unexpected technologi­
cal hurdles, or insufficient project control. Studying cost overruns can help organizations
understand common risks and improve risk management.
The revenue generated by industrial activities in Denmark in 2020 was 40.159 million eu­
Project Cost Analysis
1
==PAGE:12==
ros. Construction accounts for 99% of that, with building construction accounting for 31%
[3]. The revenue from the construction of buildings has increased by 27% between the
years 2011 til 2020 in the European Union [4]. Although the revenue from the construction
of buildings has increased in the European Union, the Nordic nations that are members
of the EU have experienced even more growth over the same time period. Denmark’s
building construction has increased by 71% over these years, Finland by 55%, and Swe­
den by 53% [4]. With this vast increase in the Nordic countries, there is a need to track
the performance of construction companies.
This thesis will look at the financial data from construction projects and analyze them. The
data is gathered from the Danish building and property agency, Bygningsstyrelsen.
1.2
Aim and Objectives
The study will focus on assessing the component of financial planning within the organi­
zational framework of Bygningsstyrelsen. The aim is to find out how they have performed
in the past, whether they have improved over the years, and if there is any room for im­
provement. The study is based on historical data from the Bygningsstyrelsen accounting
system. To assess the identified problem, the following research questions will be exam­
ined:
Can the analysis of historical data on cost and budget management of con­
struction data be leveraged to optimize overall project performance and inform
decision­making?
These research questions have led to the supplementary research questions:
• Has Bygningsstyrelsen demonstrated improvement in its budget management over
the years?
• How do various factors impact budget performance?
• Do projects that encounter cost overruns share common characteristics?
To answer these research questions the selected research approach is exploratory re­
search. The goal of this exploratory research is to conduct quantitative data analysis with
the hopes of finding trends and patterns in cost overruns across a selected sample of con­
struction projects in Denmark. Exploratory research is well­suited for this study because it
gives the researcher flexibility. The open­end nature of exploratory research enables the
researcher to formulate broad research questions and explore different perspectives on
cost overruns. Answering the research questions will also reflect some learning objectives
specific to this case study defined in Appendix A.1.
1.3
Scope and Limitations
The scope and limitations of the project are addressed in the following section. The scope
of this thesis focuses on construction projects in Denmark. This research will primarily an­
alyze data and information related to the cost of constructing a building. The study will
collaborate with Bygningsstyreksen, the Danish Building and Property Agency. Certain
assumptions will be taken in this research on the accuracy of the data obtained by Bygn­
ingsstyrelsen. Furthermore, while the analysis provided significant insights, it is critical to
recognize the limitations that may impact its reliability and the findings of this research.
Analyzing, organizing and evaluating historical data from numerous construction projects
in Denmark can be quite vast. This procedure can be time­consuming, and since this
2
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:13==
research has a limited time frame and a vast amount of data, it is important to focus on
the most relevant and representative goals that align with the research objectives.
Another significant limitation of the correlation analysis due to the presence of missing
data as well as the inconsistency in documenting crucial information. The dataset con­
tains information about customers as well as locations for the projects. However, the way
these were filled in varied, which poses a challenge for accurate analysis. The absence
of a standardised format for various factors may lead to omissions which can skew the
findings.
An additional limitation is the size of the final dataset. While the available data provides
a fair sample, it can not be considered an entire list of all projects undertaken by Bygn­
ingsstyrelsen. The limited dataset size may limit the scope of the analysis and affect the
ability to generalize the findings across Bygningsstyrelsen’s full project portfolio.
Finally, this study is limited to cost­related data. It, therefore, has limited detailed de­
scriptive information that could be factored into project performance. While quantitative
analysis gives insight into budget and project performance from a financial aspect, quali­
tative and contextual data would be required to investigate their effect on the result of this
research.
1.3.1
Audience
This study is aimed to attract curiosity and encourage academics, practitioners and pro­
fessionals in the fields of Cost Management and Project Management who are interested
in enhancing project performance and reducing cost overruns. It is assumed that the
reader has some prior understanding of the definitions used in Cost Management and
Project Management, as well as some basic knowledge of descriptive statistics. Further­
more, it would be advantageous if the reader possesses a keen interest in the intricate
processes involved in the construction of buildings. By having a genuine curiosity for the
subject matter, the reader will be more likely to fully engage with the thesis and appreciate
the significance of the insights provided.
1.3.2
Structure of the Thesis
The thesis follows a structured format where each chapter builds upon the previous ones.
In the current chapter, Introduction, a brief introduction is made explaining the motivation
for this research, the aim and objectives are stated as well as the scope and limitations
are presented. Additionally, the intended audience is discussed in order to reach a shared
understanding of what is to follow. The chapters that follow are structured as follows.
Chapter 2, Background, gives an introduction to the collaborating company,
Bygningsstyrelsen, and introduces their strategies. It explains their characteristics and
their role in the Danish community. Then their budgeting process is explained as defini­
tions.
Chapter 3, Literature Review, presents a comprehensive review of the existing literature
in the field of successful constructions. It looks into the definition of success, what factors
are most common to affect the success of projects and then the budgeting process.
Chapter 4, Theory, presents the academic theory that will serve as a foundation for ex­
ploratory research. The theory of Earned Value Management will be presented as well as
several statistical methods and techniques that will be used when analysing the data.
Chapter 5, Data, introduces the data. Explains the main characteristics of the data. Ad­
ditionally, it explains how the data is pre­processed and the data formatting process and
the final organization of the data.
Project Cost Analysis
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 6, Results, present the result of the analysis. There the main findings will be
presented and discussed.
Chapter 7, Conclusion and Future Work, will present the conclusion of this research as
well as a brief introduction to potential future advantages of Bygningsstyrelsen with their
historical data.
4
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
Bygningsstyrelsen, the Danish Building and Property Agency, is an official government
agency operating under the Ministry of Transport Building and Housing. The agency is
vital in developing and administrating government­owned buildings around Denmark. Its
key duties include the design, construction, refurbishment and maintenance of public fa­
cilities, such as universities, police stations, courts of law and central administration.
Bygningsstyrelsen’s operations are divided into three primary business areas, they are
construction, facility management and rent. The construction department includes archi­
tects, engineers and project managers that are tasked with the design and implemen­
tation of construction projects. They are involved in every stage of the project lifecycle,
from the creation of the idea and its development to the completion of the project. These
professionals guarantee that the constructions fulfil the appropriate standards, incorpo­
rate innovative design elements and are completed within a predefined budget and time
schedule. Bygningsstyrelsen’s Facility Management section is responsible for maintaining
government­owned assets. This includes overseeing repairs, improvements and renova­
tions to ensure that the construction remains safe, functional and in accordance with all
regulations. Furthermore, the Bygningsstyrelsen Rent department manages the leasing
and renting of government­owned assets. That includes rent collecting, drafting lease
agreements and keeping a good relationship with the tenants.
The Danish Building and Property Agency has a history of both successful and problem­
atic projects. As of June 2023, the agency has ongoing or planned construction projects
resulting in around 5 billion DKK [5]. For example is the Aarhus School of Architecture,
which is being relocated to the Godsbanearealerne in Aarhus. This new structure is in­
tended to become a new creative center for the city. The project entails designing a strong
and adaptable structure that can adapt to future demands and give possibilities for inno­
vation. Another project is the new police college in Vejle, which will serve as a primary
education center for police students in Western Denmark. This project is part of a larger
initiative called ”A stronger police. A safer Denmark” which aims to enhance the police
force in Denmark. This project entails both repair of existing structures and the creation
of new facilities. It is crucial to note, however, that past projects have not been without dif­
ficulties. As can be seen by the property controversy surrounding the Niels Bohr Building
project. The Danish Building and Property Agency had to withdraw from the projects as
well as the director needed to resign [6]. Regardless of the outcome, the accounting data
from the agency can help understand the projects more thoroughly. The data contains
all kinds of information on the projects they have worked on, from simple maintenance
activities to large­scale construction projects. Diving into the accounting data may pro­
vide insight into a variety of topics, such as the quantity of cost incurred and the budgets
approved.
Formally, money may only be used in construction projects if a budget application for the
specified amount has been accepted. Information on the budgeting process is given in
”Budgetansogning”. This process consists of several steps that ensure a comprehensive
and controlled budgeting strategy. The first step in the budgeting process is to get the
advisor budget approved. The advisor budget is used to get external advisors to value
an upcoming project. An example of external advisors are designers, engineers, risk
managers and other experts. These advisors give their expertise on what the budget
should be for the project. The next step of the budget process is the governing budget.
Project Cost Analysis
5
==PAGE:16==
The governing budget combines the budget given by the external advisors with the internal
costs and a contingency buffer. Bygningsstyrelsen’s internal staff examines the estimates
and considers aspects such as project scope, quality standards, legal duties and other
budget constraints. The governing budget then serves as a guide for the contractors when
they make their propositions. After the governing budget has been finalized it is sent for
review and approval. The budget application includes the aggregated cost estimation
for different project stages. When it has been approved, it is the tender budget for that
project. When the project is undergoing construction there might be some unforeseen
challenges or changes in the scope of the project. Then the project has to apply for a
budget adjustment. If the application for budget adjustments is requested after the tender
budget has been finalized, it is called a revised tender budget, which includes the budget
adjustment. Because the projects have a 10% buffer, they do not need to request a budget
increase as long as they do not exceed the 10% limit.
Once the tender budget for a construction project has been approved, a precise break­
down of the budget and expenditure is required. This breakdown allows for precise finan­
cial monitoring and control during the project’s execution. Throughout the project, there
are several ways the expenditures are divided. To begin with, a budget estimate is pre­
pared to provide an overview of the planned cost for the project. This estimate serves
as a guideline for budget planning and decision­making. The planning budget follows,
which includes the projected expenditures for the project’s planning phase. This bud­
get accounts for design development costs, architectural and engineering services, and
other pre­construction expenses. Following that is the governing budget, which is the
authorized budget that incorporates the expected expenditures from the planning phase.
It includes external expenditures as well as internal costs, like management and over­
sight. The governing budget guarantees that the project is funded in accordance with the
agreed amount. Contractors then submit a proposal that outlines their cost estimates for
the project. These proposals go threw a review to ensure they are in accordance with the
governing budget and meet the requirements of the project. When a proposal is accepted
it contributes to the overall financial framework of the project. Finally, the tender budget
includes a detailed breakdown of the expenses connected with the various construction
projects. It guarantees that the funding is properly distributed and spent in compliance
with the tender budget. The projects team can successfully manage and control the finan­
cial components of construction projects by closely following the budget breakdown after
the tender budget approval. This method ensures accountability and effective resource
allocation throughout the project lifecycle.
6
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:17==
3
Literature Review
The construction industry is known for its unpredictable nature and volatility, influenced
by factors like evolving market conditions, regulations, weather, labour availability, and
unforeseen occurrences. The industry is critical for driving economic development and
infrastructural growth, as well as for creating jobs, increasing economic activity, and en­
hancing communities. The main challenges the construction industry faces for example
include cost overruns, schedule delays and quality issues. Therefore, effective and care­
ful management of project performance and project budgeting is crucial for the success of
construction projects. Identifying the key contributors to project success and implement­
ing robust budget planning techniques are critical for project managers and organizations
within the industry.
In order to understand what contributes to the success of a project and how to implement
effective budget planning is vital for project managers and organizations within the con­
struction industry. The concept of project success has been changing over the years and
has moved from only the mere technical criteria to broader objectives such as complet­
ing projects within the budget, relevant timeframe and with the desired level of quality.
To achieve these objectives, a comprehensive understanding of the factors influencing
project performance and budget.
This literature review aims to dive into the existing knowledge surrounding project perfor­
mance and budgeting in the construction industry. By examining relevant research, the­
ories and practices, it is sought to gain insight into how project success can be achieved
and how budget planning can result in favourable outcomes. Furthermore, factors that
can affect their success and the potential factors on projects’ budget control. Additionally,
this literature review serves as a foundation for exploring the budgeting inside the orga­
nizational framework of Bygningsstyrelsen. Historical data, such as project estimation
and actual spending will be examined to evaluate Bygningsstyrelsen’s past performance,
identify areas for improvement and provide ways for improving project cost management
effectiveness.
One of the most debated topics in the world of project management is the idea of project
success. For a project manager to understand what influences his project’s success he
needs to understand success, how to measure it and how to use it to his advantage. In the
article ”A retrospective look at our evolving understanding of project success” by Jugdev
and Muller (2006), the authors talk about the evolving nature of project success and pro­
vide insight into its different dimensions [7]. They talk about how success as a concept
is multifaceted and subjective, differing across individuals and circumstances making it
challenging to establish a universal definition of the success of a project. Over the past
40 years, there has been a shift in the understanding of project success, moving beyond
limited definitions that solely focused on the implementation phase of the project life cycle.
Now, success is looked at in a broader scope, encompassing the entire project and its life
cycle. Ultimately, Jugdet and Muller’s article discusses the importance for project man­
agers to embrace a more comprehensive understanding of project success, acknowledg­
ing its multidimensional nature and extending beyond the implementation phase. Chan,
Scott and Chan (2004) looked into 43 articles with the purpose of investigating what deter­
mined a project’s success and what are the critical success factors [8]. The factors were
identified as human­related, project­related, project procedures, project management ac­
tions and external environment. Where project management factors and project­related
Project Cost Analysis
7
==PAGE:18==
factors are named as fundamental for project success. They developed a new conceptual
framework that includes and regroups their identified variables affecting project success.
In their new framework, human­related factors and project management actions are the
most influential.
There are a lot of aspects that can affect a construction project’s success. Li, Irani and
Love (2000) suggest that the nature of the construction industry is diverse [9]. Several
organizations are temporarily joined to form a brief association to discuss and exchange
information to successfully complete a construction project. A project’s success can mean
different things to different people. Chan, A.P.C. and Chan, A.P.L. go over how projects
are said to be successful and how this has changed over the years. They state that ages
ago it was claimed that a project was successful if it performed as expected. Nowadays
there is more emphasis set on what happens after the project is finished. Shenhar, Levy
and Dvir (1997) said that project success is impacted by four dimensions. Projects effi­
ciency, customer impact, business success and preparing for the future [10]. The precise
content of each dimension, as well as it is relative importance, may alter over time and
are dependent on stakeholders. Atkinson (1999) made a similar definition. He divided
project success into three dimensions [11], the delivery stage, the post­delivery stage:
the process and the post­delivery stage: the system. Tabish and Jha (2012) stated that
it is more often than not that the recognized goals of a construction project are budget,
schedule and quality [12]. In the book ”Project Management: A Systems Approach to
Planning, Scheduling, and Controlling”, Kerzner talks about how in addition to time, cost
and performance projects need to be completed with customer approval, without going
against the organization’s operations, without affecting the company culture and with the
minimal alterations [13]. In a study titled ”A Success Measurement Model for Construc­
tion Projects”, the researcher aimed to determine the most significant success criteria for
a project to be judged as a success [14]. The research was conducted in a way that 21
people with long­term experience in executing construction projects were asked to fill out
a questionnaire about what would be the most important criteria in this case. The top
three were; time performance, cost performance and quality performance. All of these
articles point out various factors to consider when estimating a project’s success.
While numerous reasons have been mentioned and debated, the main ones that consis­
tently emerge are budget, time and quality. These three elements play a fundamental
role in determining the overall success of a project. With budgeting being one of the
key factors, it is vital to carefully manage and allocate financial resources throughout the
project. Effective budgeting ensures that expenses are under control and within its limit.
By focusing on budget management, project managers can reduce financial risk, increase
stakeholder satisfaction and in general contribute to project success.
The action of budgeting a project is to make a financial plan for a specific period or a role.
It gives a good measurement of the expenses that an organization will spend, usually
broken down into categories, to serve as a guide. In the article ”What is a Budget?” True
Tamplin talks about how the easiest form of budget can be as easy as keeping a daily
account of incomes and spending. However for organizations that is rarely the case.
Budgeting can benefit individuals but is a necessity for organizations and governments
as their operations can be complicated. When budgeting a project it is essential to map
out the project’s needs. According to Shim, Siegel, and Shim (2011), the book ”Budgeting
Basics and Beyond” emphasizes the need for group involvement in revising the budget to
benefit from a wide range of knowledge [15]. It should be as close to reality as feasible,
both as a factor in developing confidence with customers as well as a component in fi­
nancial allocation plans. The implementation of effective budget planning is an important
8
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:19==
part of project management companies operating in the construction industry. Nikitina,
Litovskaya, Savinkova, Zinovyeva, and Ponomareva (2017), talk about how construction
projects have unique characteristics and therefore pose challenges to the budgeting pro­
cess [16]. The construction industry is characterized by extensive duration, varying start
and finishing dates, different locations and conditions as well as constant mobilization of
resources. Therefore, construction companies often face difficulties in budget planning.
Aside from the challenges that occur for organizations when budgeting projects, one crit­
ical feature that has gained popularity in recent years is the use of machine learning al­
gorithms to estimate the cost of projects. Numerous studies have been published in the
last 20 years on estimating construction costs using neural networks, regression or other
methods [17]. These methods use data to capture hidden trends in the input­output re­
lationship. They have been utilized for anything from maintaining clients to predicting
characteristics in material engineering [18]. In the construction industry, Machine Learn­
ing has found its purpose in a limited number of applications, for example, forecasting
and reducing risks and labelling safety concerns [19]. Machine Learning offers a data­
driven and systematic way to examine project­related problems and their influence on
budget performance. These algorithms scan the data for patterns and trends that could
be difficult for humans to notice. In complicated sectors such as the construction industry,
budget planning is known to be difficult and therefore the predictive capability of Machine
Learning can be quite valuable.
Project Cost Analysis
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:21==
4
Theory
Construction projects are known for their complexity and the challenges they present in
terms of cost management. The ability to predict and control project costs is very important
for a project’s success. This chapter aims to give a theoretical framework to analyze cost
overruns in construction projects, with a particular emphasis on the use of Earned Value
Management (EVM). Earned Value Management (EVM) is a widely recognized and effec­
tive project management tool that integrates cost, schedule, and work performance data.
EVM gives project managers a structured framework to assess project performance, mon­
itor deviations from planned baseline, and predict future cost and schedule outcomes. In
this chapter, the theory and application of EVM in analyzing cost overruns in construction
projects based on historical accounting data will be discussed. Models for classification,
as well as statistical tools and methodologies, will also be discussed.
4.1
Earned Value Management
Earned Value Management (EVM) gives project managers tools to measure the value of
work completed against the actual cost incurred and planned value [20]. By assessing
these values, project managers can get valuable insight into a project’s performance and
understand where a project is heading. Based on where the project is headed, they can
then take an educated decision to mitigate potential cost overruns. EVM has several key
concepts, metrics and calculations that are important to understanding and applying this
technique. Here below is a discussion of these concepts from the book The Standard for
Earned Value Management [20]:
Planned Value (PV), or budget cost of work scheduled (BCWS), describes the planned
budget to complete a specific assignment within a particular time frame. It is a baseline
for measuring a project’s progress and cost performance.
Actual Cost (AC), also known as the actual cost of work performed (ACWP), describes the
value of expenses incurred up to a certain point. That includes direct and indirect costs
associated with a project.
Earned Value (EV), also known as the budget cost of work performed (BCWP), describes
the value of work completed at a certain point. The EV is determined by the completion
status of a project’s activities, reflecting the project’s actual progress. Earned Value is
defined as:
EV = %Completed ∗PV
(4.1)
These three concepts are the foundation for many measurements and computations in
EVM.
Cost Variance (CV) measures the difference between the EV and AC of the work that has
been performed. It informs management whether the project is under or over budget at a
certain stage. Equation 4.2 shows how the CV is calculated.
CV = EV −AC
(4.2)
Project Cost Analysis
11
==PAGE:22==
Schedule Variance (SV) measures the difference between the EV and PV of the work
performed. It informs management of a project’s status and whether it is behind or ahead
of schedule. Equation 4.3 shows how the SV is calculated.
SV = EV −PV
(4.3)
Cost Performance Index (CPI) compares the EV to AC to demonstrate the cost efficiency
of projects. A CPI value greater than 1 indicates cost efficiency, whereas if it is less than
1 it suggests cost overruns. Equation 4.4 shows how the CPI is calculated.
CPI = EV
AC
(4.4)
Schedule Performance Index (SPI) estimates the schedule efficiency of a project by com­
paring the EV to PV. An SPI value greater than 1 indicates schedule efficiency, whereas
if it is less than 1 it suggests delays in a project. Equation 4.5 shows how the SPI is
calculated.
SPI = EV
PV
(4.5)
These indicators and computations, mentioned here above are critical in EVM analysis
because they give significant insight into cost and schedule performance to project man­
agers. Project managers may monitor the project’s progress, discover deviations and
estimate future cost overruns or underruns by comparing planned, earned, and actual
values, as well as variance and performance indices.
By analyzing these metrics for completed projects you can identify patterns, trends, and
potential areas for improvement.
You may also explore factors that influence project
performance such as project size, complexity, team composition, or external factors like
weather or regulatory changes.
Using historical data for EVM analysis can contribute to the refinement of cost estimation
models the identification of cost drivers and the establishment of benchmarks for future
projects. Furthermore, historical data for EVM analysis allows you to assess a company’s
historical performance, understand the challenges faced and derive lessons for optimizing
future projects.
Although EVM is a good tool for project managers implementing it in construction projects
using historical data can impose certain challenges and limitations. These challenges
and limitations need to be addressed for a successful implementation of EVM. One of the
main challenges is obtaining accurate and reliable historical data. Construction projects
often include various contractors and collecting all the data needed from them can be
challenging. Additionally, the quality and consistency of the data can vary from source to
source, which can affect the accuracy of the EVM calculations. Another limitation comes
from the complexity of construction projects. Construction projects often include a variety
of tasks, parameters and dependencies, making it challenging to match EVM methodolo­
gies with the ever­changing nature of construction. Therefore, adapting EVM principles
to the complicated nature of construction projects might require significant thought and
adjustment. Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is vital to EVM, but developing it can be
difficult due to the dynamic nature of the construction industry. The accuracy of the WBS
and the efficiency of the EVM in properly assessing progress can be affected by changes
12
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:23==
in the project scope, unexpected events, and design adjustments. It can be challeng­
ing to accurately calculate the earned value in construction projects, particularly when
calculating percentages of physical completion. Subjective thinking frequently enters the
picture, generating biases in interpretation and affecting the accuracy of EVM measure­
ments. Subjectivity and interpretation can also generally affect EVM outcomes, therefore
it is important to determine appropriate rules and methods for measurements, estimation
and forecasting. Additionally, it can also be challenging to integrate cost control inside the
EVM framework. Cost management depends heavily on variables like scope changes,
change orders and weather conditions which can have a significant impact on cost man­
agement due to their interdependency. It also takes a lot of time and effort to use EVM
in construction projects. Tasks such as creating baseline plans, defining WBS, gathering
and evaluating historical data, calculating indices, calculating variances and producing
informative reports can be time­consuming. Stakeholders can also pose a challenge to
EVM, stakeholders are often accustomed to traditional project management approaches
therefore hindering EVM implementation. All of these challenges and limitations, and
more, can alter the implementation of EVM, leading to potential issues and discrepancies
in project management.
4.2
Statistical Methods and Techniques
This study employs statistical methods to gain valuable insight into the data. Statistical
methods help uncover trends, understand dependencies between variables, identify pat­
terns and arrive at a meaningful conclusion.
4.2.1
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics is a part of statistics, it provides a good overview of the data in a
helpful way [21]. It allows one to gain a better understanding of the properties and trends in
the dataset. This study will employ descriptive statistics to analyze and present essential
elements of the historical cost data. Averages are numerical measures that are used to
describe the data. There are two types of averages, the one that is insensitive toward
the order or arrangement of the observation and then the one that is sensitive toward it.
The first kind includes the arithmetic mean, geometric mean, harmonic mean and power
mean. The arithmetic mean will be initially used for this study as it put equal weight to all
values. The arithmetic mean is calculated by adding up all the values and diving the total
by the number of observations. The arithmetic average is defined as:
¯x = x1 + x2 + ... + xn
n
(4.6)
Where data points are denoted by x1 to xn, and n is the total number of observations.
The second type of average, known as location averages, is obtained by considering
frequencies on a frequency distribution. The mode is a location average that tells what
value is the most frequent or around which the data is densely clustered. Compared to the
arithmetic mean, which is more abstract, this concept is more concrete and very useful
for understanding the data in practical terms. Another location average is the median,
the median divides the data into two equal parts. When calculating the median firstly the
data is arranged in descending or ascending order, then if the data is an even number the
mean of the two middle numbers is the median. However, if the data is an odd number
the number in the middle is the median.
Additionally, measures like range, variance and standard deviation are used to analyze
the spread within the data. The range explains the difference between the minimum and
Project Cost Analysis
13
==PAGE:24==
maximum values, giving information on the data’s stretch. The range is defined as:
Range = xmax −xmin,
(4.7)
Where xmax is the data point with the maximum value and xmin is the data point with the
minimum value.
The variance defines the average squared deviation from the mean and the standard
deviation is the square root of the variance. The variance is defined as:
s2 =
∑xi −¯x2
n −1
(4.8)
And the standard deviation is defined as:
s =
√∑(xi −¯x)2
n −1
(4.9)
Where xi is the value of the observation, ¯x is the mean value of all observations and n is
the number of observations. These measures make it possible to evaluate the degree of
dispersion around the central tendency as well as the spread within the dataset.
By analyzing these descriptive statistics it is hoped to gain a comprehensive overview of
the data. This analysis helps to summarize the central tendency, variability and distribu­
tion, providing a base for further exploration and a better understanding of the dataset.
4.2.2
Correlation and Regression
Correlation is a statistical technique used to examine the relationship between variables.
This method is crucial to understanding the dependencies and predictive capabilities
within a dataset. Correlation analysis examines the relationship between two variables.
Correlation is denoted by the correlation coefficient, which falls somewhere in the range
of ­1 to +1. In this research, Cramer’s V correlation is used to assess the strength of
the association between different variables [22]. Cramer’s V is based on the Chi­Square
test, which is generally used to test the relationship between two categorical variables. To
perform Cramer’s V, first, the chi­square needs to be conducted to obtain the chi­square
test statistic, X2. Afterwards, the contingency table’s minimum value for the number of
rows and columns is calculated. Equation 4.10 shows how the chi­square test statistic is
calculated.
xc
2 =
∑(Oi −Ei)2
Ei
(4.10)
Where c is the degree of freedom, O is the observed value and E is the expected value.
Equation 4.11 shows how Cramer’s V is calculated.
V =
√
X2
n ∗min(r −1, c −1)
(4.11)
Where X2 is the chi­square test statistic obtained by the chi­square test, n is the total
number of observations, r is the minimum value of rows and c is the minimum number of
columns.
14
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:25==
Correlation can be positive, negative or non­existing. When there is a positive correlation
is when one variable is associated with the other. When the correlation coefficient lies
between 0 and +1 it indicates a positive correlation, the closer it is to +1 the more correla­
tion is between the variables. The correlation is negative when it is between 0 to ­1, and
the opposite goes, when it is closer to ­1 the more negatively correlated the variables are.
When the correlation gets closer to zero, it indicates no correlation.
4.3
Classification Models
Prediction models are machine learning techniques that can be used to predict possible
future outcomes. Organizations are utilizing predictive models and algorithms which sup­
port predictive analytics tools. Predictive model techniques use historical data to build a
model that can make a prediction for new data. One of the most used predictive analytics
models is the classification model. These models analyze historical data categorically.
There are 7 types of classification models and two of them are going to be tested on the
data of this research, Logistic Regression and Decision Tree.
The Logistic Regression predicts the probability that Y is associated with an input variable,
X [23]. Equation 4.12 shows the logistic function.
P(X) =
eβ0+β1∗X
1 + eβ0+β1∗X
(4.12)
The maximum likelihood technique is used to find the parameters β0 and β1. This tech­
nique involves maximizing the function given in equation 4.13.
l(β0, β1) =
Π
l:yi=1p(xi) ∗
Π
l′:yi′=1(1 −p(xi))
(4.13)
If there is more than one input feature, the formula can be generalized. Equation 4.14
shows the generalized logistic function.
P(X) =
eβ0+β1∗X+...+βp∗Xp
1 + eβ0+β1∗X+...+βp∗Xp
(4.14)
Logisitc Regression is a useful method due to its simplicity, which facilitates quick training
and its willingness to handle a large number of features. However, since its output range
is 0 to 1, it is confined to classification tasks. Furthermore, it is only suitable for binary
classification and can struggle to handle multi­class classification.
The Decision Tree classification algorithm divides the dataset into certain segments based
on feature variables [23]. The decision criteria are created by location the optimal split­
ting point for the target variable. The algorithm operates by initially placing all the input
features at the root of the tree and iteratively divides the data into subsets. This process
choices the most influential feature for branching, resulting in internal nodes represent­
ing the decision based on a specific feature threshold. The process is repeated until the
subset becomes highly pure.
To determine the purity of the node, the Gini impurity index is applied. It determines the
probability of mislabeling a random variable, assuming that the random variable is labelled
using the label distribution inside the node’s subset. When the Gini impurity equals zero
it means that all node values belong to one of the target classes. Equation 4.15 shows
how the Gini impurity is calculated.
Project Cost Analysis
15
==PAGE:26==
Gini(p) = 1 −
J
∑
i=1
(pi)2
(4.15)
Where p represents the vector of probabilities for each class at a given node, pi is the
probability of class i at the node and J is the total number of classes.
Decision Tree classification algorithm is a commonly used machine learning algorithm
which offers a structured approach to solving classification problems. Its advantages are
that it provides an uncomplicated representation of the data, resolving in it being easy to
interpret. It mimics the way humans make decisions in everyday life. It has the ability to
handle categorical target variables and the algorithms structure enables it to effectively
handle non­linear data. However, while it is capable of handling complex problems it has
the tendency to overfit the data. Furthermore, its main limitation is that the algorithm is
sensitive to small changes, as well as it is biased towards dominant classes.
4.4
Model Evaluation Metrics
Model evaluation metrics are essential tools to assess the performance of classification
algorithms. These metrics include accuracy, precision, recall, F1­score and confusion
matrix and they provide insight into the model’s ability to capture correct prediction.
The accuracy gives information on how accurate the overall correctness of the model’s
prediction is. Equation 4.16 shows how it is calculated.
accuracy(y, ˆy) = 1
n
n−1
∑
i=0
1(ˆy = yi)
(4.16)
Where n is the total number of data points in the dataset, y represents the actual target
labels of a set of data and ˆy represents the predicted label generated by the classification
algorithm.
Recall, or sensitivity or true positive rate (TPR), denoted the ratio between true positive
predictions to the total number of actual positive instances [24]. While the precision de­
notes the ratio of true positive predictions to the total number of instances predicted as
positive [24]. Equation 4.17 shows how the recall is calculated.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(4.17)
While the definition of precision is demonstrated in equation 4.18.
Percision =
TP
TP + FP
(4.18)
Where TP is true positive, TN is true negative, FP is false positive and FN is false
negative.
The F1­score is the harmonic mean of the recall and precision [25]. It ranges from zero to
one, where the higher it is the better the classification is performing. Equation 4.19 shows
how the F1­score is calculated.
16
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:27==
F1 = 2 ∗
TP
TP + 1
2(FP + FN)
(4.19)
A confusion matrix shows the number of true positive, true negative, false positive and
false negative predictions made by the model. True positives are when the model pre­
dicted a positive outcome and the actual outcome was indeed positive. True negatives
are cases where the model predicted a negative outcome and the outcome was negative.
False positives are cases when the model predicts a positive outcome but the outcome
was negative and lastly, false negatives are cases where the model predicted a negative
outcome and the actual outcome was positive.
Project Cost Analysis
17
==PAGE:28==
18
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:29==
5
Data
5.1
Data Collection Methodology
The data is provided by the Danish company Bygningsstyrelsen and is done so in agree­
ment with the appropriate authority. A non­disclosure agreement was signed, ensuring the
confidentiality of the data provided. This agreement prohibits the sharing or dissemination
of the data to any third parties and established the recipient’s responsibility to maintain
confidentiality. Furthermore, the data is provided on a one­time basis, and therefore its
access is limited to a specific period from the date of receipt.
5.2
Data Sources
The data was received via email as an attached file. The company provided the data
in accordance with the non­disclosure agreement and upon the agreed request. The
attached file contained seven CSV (Comma­Separated Values) files. The files come from
an internal company database that handles all their accounting data. The data is historical
data on completed and ongoing projects, expenses paid, budgeting processes and budget
planning. There is no specific start date and the end date is the day it is received.
5.3
Data Description
The data used for this thesis is historical data from Bygningsstyrelsen, which is the of­
ficial Danish building and property agency. The data contains vast information on the
projects Bygningsstyrelsen has overseen. The data consists of seven files. The first file,
Byggesag, lists all the projects and general information. It contains the project’s unique
id number, description of the project, its status, for which ministry it was executed, the
location, the customer etc. The second file, Byggesagspost, contains all project expen­
diture data. The third file, Byggesagsbudgetpost, contains information about the budget
for each project. The budget estimation, planning budget, governing budget, proposi­
tion and tender budget. The fourth file, Bemyndigelsesoversigt, provides an overview of
the budget lines in each project. The fifth file, Budgetansogning, describes the budget
application process. This file contains 4 stages of budget application processes, advisor
budget, governing budget, tender budget and revised tender budget. The sixth file, Enter­
priseaftele, provides information on the different contracts made in the projeSeveralenth
file, EterpriseartRef, is a reference table for the ”Enterpriseart’s” (type of expenditure),
which should provide a general description of what that ”Entrepriseart” represents.
5.4
Data Pre­Processing
The data received was very extensive and contained a substantial amount of irrelevant
information. To begin with, each dataset was investigated thoroughly, to identify the most
critical and dependable features. The target of the project is to see what history can tell us
and what we can learn from it. The financial information in the data is the most critical data
for the analysis being done on construction projects in this thesis. This includes detailed
information on expenditures, such as dates and what work was being done. As well as
the information on budgeting, both the budgeting process and the budget itself provide a
deeper understanding of the financial operation of construction projects.
Outlier analysis was performed to potentially identify and address any data point that
deviated significantly from the usual pattern. Given the nature of the cost variations in
Project Cost Analysis
19
==PAGE:30==
construction projects, it is crucial to identify outliers that can impact the statistical analysis.
Boxplots and descriptive statistics were used to assess the presence of outliers. Outliers
are values that are significantly higher or lower than the majority of the observations. A
number of outliers were detected and investigated.
Several difficulties had to be overcome when choosing what features would be included
in the analysis.
When looking into the date columns, many entries were marked as
”1.1.1753”, lacking the actual date value. To handle this issue, a systematic approach
was implemented to impute the missing dates using contextual information available in
other columns. The beginning date of the project is denoted as the date of the first pay­
ment and the end date is designated as the date of the last payment. Similarly, there
were instances where the address information was missing. To address this issue, it was
decided to aggregate the information to the postal code, and the postal code was taken
from information on addresses or towns when it was possible. In other cases there was
attempted to the best ability to combine or replace names in order to minimize variations
of the same names that were written differently. This was done since Python is case­
sensitive.
To ensure that different projects in the dataset have comparable scales, normalization
using the min­max scaling technique was performed. This involved normalizing the time
and financial aspects of each project to the range between 0 and 1. The primary objective
of data normalization in this study was to facilitate fair comparison between groups and
explore potential trends based on the progress of the projects.
As a part of the exploratory research, it was decided to split the data based on several
factors. The data will be divided in order to have a better understanding of whether there
are patterns based on categorization. The data was split based on what year their con­
struction started, the duration of payments and how much the construction cost.
5.5
Data Formatting and Organization
In the beginning, the data set includes 4.272 distinct construction projects. Extensive
work was performed to find the optimal construction projects to work with so the results
would be as accurate as possible.
To begin with, all projects that are considered to be ”tests” were eliminated from the
dataset. Test projects were included in the dataset because, in this type of data it is not
possible to delete any actions. The data set contained projects at various phases of their
life cycles. Projects that are not considered finished were eliminated. Bygningsstyrelsen
combined two of its accounting systems in 2012. With this merge a great amount of data
was transformed between systems and therefore their reliability is uncertain. Therefore,
data before 2012 was removed from the dataset. The second dataset, Byggesagspost,
was filtered so it included only actual spending. Then Byggesagspost was compared to
Byggesag so that only projects with actual expenditures were included in the analysis.
All projects where the expenditures were under 1 million DKK were removed from the
dataset.
Since the data was retrieved from an accounting system, as mentioned before, it is im­
portant to note that there is no option for deleting a mistake. Instead, any mistakes must
be credited through a corresponding transaction. In the dataset, Byggesagspost, that
needed to be considered. For every expenditure, if there was another expenditure with
the same amount executed on the same projects just with the opposite sign, it was dis­
carded. As well as all expenditures marked as Overført were excluded. The expenses
20
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:31==
were gathered to determine the total cost of a project. The time between payments was
calculated as well as the time from the first payment til the last.
Budegansogning contains all the information concerning the budget process. There are
four steps, the advisor budget, governing budget, the tender budget and the revised ten­
der budget. It is assumed that if a project does not have a specific tender budget it is
discarded. This is done due to that the tender budget is the main budget step. Further­
more, as a project moves through the budget steps, the amount from previous steps is
added. This means that any budget allocated in previous steps is taken into account.
This approach ensures that the current step considers the total budget amount that has
been assigned to the project so far. Additionally, this dataset gives critical information on
whether or not a project exceeded its allocated budget. That information is combined with
Byggesag in the sense that the tender budget is added to the dataset, and then the binary
variable of whether a project went over budget or not, as well as the cost variance from
the budget, both in DKK and in percentage.
Since Bygningsstyrelsen is the official Danish building and property agency, they build
all Danish official buildings, such as schools, police stations, courts houses etc. Bygn­
ingsstyrelsen’s most standard constructions are schools and office buildings, and the most
challenging are the court houses for they have high demands on security and other as­
pects. Additionally, all columns containing information irrelevant to the budget, such as
the project manager’s name, journal number and insurance start date were discarded.
The final step in the formatting process is to filter all the datasets together and only con­
tinue with the projects that have information in all files.
The final data that will be analyzed consists of 186 projects.
Project Cost Analysis
21
==PAGE:32==
22
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:33==
6
Results
In this result chapter, the comprehensive analysis of 186 construction projects will be
presented. With a close look into Bygningsstyrelsen budgeting performance and cost
performance, the primary objective of this research is to use historical data to shed light
on the number of cost overruns and assess the overall effectiveness of the budgeting
process used in the construction sector. The analyzed dataset includes a diverse range
of construction projects each with its own difficulties and complexity. By looking into such a
broad spectrum, valuable insight is gained into the overall performance of the construction
sector and its financial management.
To begin with, the dataset will be analyzed as a whole. By considering all 186 projects it is
hoped to gain insight into budgeting performance and expenditure patterns across various
stages of the projects. One aspect that will be closely examined is the performance of the
expenditure against the tender budget. The expenditure of the projects will be examined
to understand how allocated funds were utilized at different stages of the project lifecycle.
By analyzing the expenditures over time it is aimed to determine whether there are specific
phases where expenditures increase or decrease significantly. Furthermore, in addition to
examining the spending behaviours, project types, project duration and year of execution
will be looked into.
The analysis will follow a data­driven and unbiased methodology, concentrating on the
analysis of the budget performance and expenditure trends within the 186 construction
projects. Hopefully, this thorough investigation will help project managers make well­
informed decisions and implement effective strategies for future projects.
6.1
Data Analysis Overview
The data analysis overview chapter lays the foundation for a comprehensive understand­
ing of the 186 projects and their budget and cost management. This will then serve as
a base case when looking at the performances of the different categories that will be
investigated.
Table 6.1: Summary Statistics for Expenses.
Minimum
Average
Maximum
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­22,701,020
137,354
225,000,000
Number of Invoices
2
169
1,018
Standard deviation (DKK)
39,141
461,453
7,059,122
In table 6.1 are summary statistics for the invoices paid for the construction projects. The
first row gives information on the invoices, the lowest invoice amount is ­22,701,020 DKK,
which represents a financial transaction such as refunds or credits. The average invoice
amount is 137,354.39 DKK and the maximum invoice amount is 225,000,000 DKK. The
average invoice amount can be used to understand the average invoice amount through­
out the dataset. Additionally, the presence of negative values needs to be further ex­
plored. The number of invoices contains statistical information about how many invoices
projects pay until completion. The minimum number of invoices is 2, the average is 169
and the maximum is 1,018. These numbers help give a better idea of the volume and
Project Cost Analysis
23
==PAGE:34==
distribution of the invoices for the projects. The standard deviation gives information on
the spread from the mean. The minimum standard deviation is 39,141 DKK, the average
standard deviation is 461,453 DKK and the maximum standard deviation is 7,059,122
DKK. The minimum standard deviation indicates that several invoices have relatively little
variability from the mean, while the maximum standard deviation differs significantly from
the average invoice amount. This wide range of standard deviations suggests that there
is considerable diversity.
As can be seen in table 6.1, the minimum value of an invoice is ­22.701.020 DKK. This
negative value refers to a credit invoice. Reasons for an invoice to be credited can be due
to changes in the project’s scope, adjustments in pricing or customer disputes. Accord­
ing to the dataset, there are 1.725 credited invoices. Table 6.2 shows the most popular
definitions for credited bills.
Table 6.2: Corrections Description.
Entry Description
Count
Faktura
698
Rettelse
148
Kreditnota
62
Toqqavik
98
Rabat
53
After analysing the expenditure, they were
categorized after seasonality.
Quarter 1
represents January 1st to March 31st,
quarter 2 represents April 1st to June 30th,
quarter 3 represents July 1st to September
30th and quarter 4 represents October 1st
to December 31st.
Table 6.3 shows the number of bills and
the amount for the entire dataset for each
quarter.
As can be seen, quarter 4 has
both the most bills paid as well as the high­
est total amount. This could be explained due to difficult conditions during the fourth
quarter. Weather is one of the biggest external factors which is uncontrollable. The data
indicates that the second highest number of bills is during the second quarter, while the
second highest total amount is in the third quarter. This disparity can be explained by that
the bills paid in the second quarter have been relatively smaller in amount compared to
the third quarter. This could be explained by the nature of the construction projects and
billing cycles can differ between seasons.
Table 6.3: Quarterly Summary Table.
Quarter
Number of Invoices
Total Amount (DKK)
1
6245
724,204,440
2
7820
1,040,586,858
3
6524
1,191,942,178
4
10928
1,362,169,443
When the bills are collected for each project they represent the actual cost of the con­
struction. Cumulative plots serve as a visual tool that illustrates a good way to see how
the actual cost incurred throughout the project duration.
Having looked at the cumulative plots several characteristics need to be discussed. Fig­
ure 6.1 shows where the spending line follows an increasing curve. This figure shows
a predictable spending pattern. This plot portrays effective budgeting, where the actual
cost aligns with the project expenses. This concludes in stable financial control and reas­
surance to its stakeholders.
24
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.1: Cumulative Cost of Construction Building Over Time.
On the other hand, figure 6.2 reveals a significant dip in the spending line. This illustrates
that it can be difficult to predict fully how the spending line will be.
Figure 6.2: Cumulative Cost of Construction Building Over Time.
Effective budget management is crucial in construction projects to ensure their success­
ful completion. Minimizing the budget adjustment is a certain indicator of accomplished
project management. Table 6.4 shows how often budget adjustments occurred for each
budget step and then the frequency of positive and negative adjustments. In the context
of the management of the construction building budget, the ultimate goal is to limit the
number of occurrences where the project manager needs to ask for budget adjustments.
Frequent budget changes indicate unexpected cost overruns or adjustments to the scope
of the project, which can both affect the financial stability of the project as well as the
project’s duration.
As can be seen in table 6.4 the budget over 186 projects has been altered 1,037 times.
The most adjustment takes place in step 3, the tender budget, both in positive and neg­
Project Cost Analysis
25
==PAGE:36==
Table 6.4: Budget Adjustments
Step
Positive
Negative
Total Altered Count
1 ­ Advisor budget
171
7
178
2 ­ Governing budget
259
21
280
3 ­ Tender budget
341
143
484
4 ­ Revised Tender budget
79
16
95
Total
850
187
1037
ative adjustments. The revised budget was positively adjusted the least amount of times
and the advisor budget was negatively adjusted the least amount of times.
Table 6.5: Budget Adjustments ­ Project Level
Step
Mean
Max
Min
1 ­ Advisor budget
0.95
11
0
2 ­ Governing budget
1.51
12
0
3 ­ Tender budget
2.60
19
0
4 ­ Revised Tender budget
0.51
6
0
Table 6.5 shows the average budget adjustments that the project experience. As can be
seen, most budget adjustments happen in the tender budget and then in the governing
budget. The tender budget also has the largest range going from zero to nineteen. The
revised tender budget has both the lowest mean as well as the shortest range. This
indicates that there is less need for adjustments in the revised tender budget.
Table 6.6 shows the average, maximum and minimum amount of the budget adjust­
ments for every budget step. The governing budget has the highest average amount of
20,019,679 DKK and has the largest range of 420,511,782 DKK. The tender budget has
the second­highest mean of 9,985,501 DKK and a range of 338,254,731 DKK. The advi­
sor budget and the revised tender budget have a relatively low mean and a small range
in comparison with the other two. This shows that the most critical changes to the budget
happen in the governing budget as well as the tender budget. Interestingly the governing
budget is never negative while the tender budget shows a negativity of ­65,574,389 DKK
and the average is decreasing by more than 50%. This can indicate that there might be
instances where the governing budget is initially set at a higher level. This then results in
when moving to the tender budget, the tender budget is forced to adjust the budget back
to reality. This could happen if a project manager does not fully understand the scope of
the project or the project’s actual requirements.
Table 6.6: Budget Statistics ­ Stepwise Comparison
Step
Mean
Max
Min
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
3,433,882
72,317,996
­409,721
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
20,019,679
421,054,782
543,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
9,985,501
272,680,342
­65,574,389
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
2,168,714
19,303,982
­3,136,997
Table 6.7 shows the statistic on the budget status of the 186 projects. As can be seen 99,
26
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:37==
Table 6.7: Project Budget Analysis
Category
Number of Projects
Percentage (%)
Within Budget
105
56.5
10­50% Under Budget
29
15.6
More than 50% Under Budget
9
4.8
10­50% Over Budget
32
17.2
More than 50% Over Budget
11
5.9
Total
186
100.0
or 56.5%, projects are within budget. This is a positive sign, as it indicates that effective
budget management is performed in these projects. Around 20.4% of the projects were
completed under budget and around 23.1% of the projects went over budget.
Cost variance analysis was conducted to assess the difference between all the budgeting
steps and the actual amount spent on projects. The cost variance analysis gives good
insight into how well the budgets are performing against the actual spending of construc­
tion projects. This analysis provides a comprehensive understanding of how well projects
stick to their predetermined budget. Projects with minor cost variances from their pre­
determined budget show effective budget management and resource allocation. On the
other hand, projects with a large cost variance from the budget indicate possible problems
with budget estimates, project execution or other external factors.
Figure 6.3: The Average Amount per Step and the Expenses for 186 Projects.
The histogram that is shown in figure 6.3, explains the average budget steps of all the
construction projects. It consists of multiple bars, each representing a specific budget
step in the budgeting process, and the last one is then the actual spending. The first
shows the average of the initial budget step, otherwise referred to as the advisor budget.
This step displays the lowest average budget, which is to be expected. The second bar
represents the governing budget, which follows after the advisor budget in the budgeting
process. This stage allows Bygningsstyrelsen to carefully review estimates and take into
account various factors such as project scope, quality standards, legal requirements and
Project Cost Analysis
27
==PAGE:38==
financial restrictions. The average of the governing budget is considerably higher than the
advisor budget, which indicates a significant increase in allocated funds for the projects at
this stage. The third bar represents the tender budget. The tender budget is the complete
budget for the projects, it is the budget that contractors use as a guide when presenting
their cost estimates and offers. The average tender budget is again considerably higher
than the advisor and the governing budget. The fourth bar represents the average revised
tender budget, the stage where projects can apply for a budget increase if necessary.
The average value of the revised budget is slightly higher than the tender budget. The
final bar represents the average actual spending over all the construction projects. As
can be seen, it is situated between the average tender budget and the average revised
tender budget. The average tender budget is 23,241,001 DKK while the average actual
spending is 23,219,908 DKK. The actual budget is within the 10% buffer, which indicates
that the average project is considered to be within budget. This suggests that while some
projects experience some fluctuation, the majority of them are within the budget buffer and
that Bygningsstyrelsen manages to effectively financial manage and resource allocation
throughout the project’s lifecycle.
Figure 6.4: Boxplot of the Budget Steps and the Expenses for 186 Projects.
Figure 6.4 shows the boxplot analysis of the average budget distribution across all con­
struction projects. It can be seen that there is considerable fluctuation in the data. Several
factors, such as large­scale projects might cause the fluctuation. Large­scale projects can
be subject to major financial resources due to their magnitude. Another reason for fluc­
tuation can be unique requirements or challenges, leading to higher budget allocation
beyond the average. Such projects can be located in historical locations or environmen­
tally delicate areas. Therefore they might be set out for additional financial resources due
to careful planning and specific methods to minimize the destruction of historical sites
and environmental damage. Other things that can affect such fluctuations can be caused
by market fluctuations, economic conditions, regulations and innovations in construction
buildings.
28
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.5: Cost Variance from the Tender Budget for 186 Projects.
As can be seen in figure 6.5, the cost variance can range from ­72.59% to +262.06%.
Projects that have a cost variance close to or equal to zero indicate a high level of accuracy
in budget estimation and resource allocation. Such projects show the project manager
robust understanding of the project’s scope, risks and potential cost.
On the other hand, projects that experience large positive cost variances from the budget
estimate indicate a large cost overrun. The reasons for cost overruns can simply be
bad cost management however it can also be due to unforeseen challenges, changes
in project scope, delays or inflation causing prices of material and labour costs to be
more expensive. Similarly, projects that experience a negative cost variance indicate
cost savings. However, projects that experience considerable negative cost variance also
show poor cost management or simply a poor understanding of the project’s scope and
challenges.
Correlation analysis is employed to investigate the impact each factor has on the perfor­
mance of the projects. The coefficients measure the strength and direction of the rela­
tionship between the two variables. The closer the correlation coefficient is to 1 indicates
that the factor correlates with a project going over budget. However, if the correlation
coefficient is close to ­1 it indicates the opposite.
Table 6.8 shows several factors that were investigated and their correlation coefficients
with projects going over budget. The highest positive correlation is in customers with a
correlation coefficient of 0.458. That is a positive correlation which implies that specific
customers may have the tendency of impacting projects to go over budget. Postal codes
also show a relatively high correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.189. The highest
negative correlation coefficient is in schools and the number of contractors which indicates
that when building a building for a school and a higher number of contractors it is more
likely that the project stays within budget.
Table 6.9 shows the customers that have the five most positive correlations and the five
most negative correlations with projects going over budget. The correlation coefficients
range between ­0.1987 and 0.2335. Projects done for these customers are more likely
to go over budget when compared to other projects. On the other hand, when customers
have a negative correlation coefficient means that they are less likely to go over budget.
Project Cost Analysis
29
==PAGE:40==
Table 6.8: Correlation Analysis with Projects Going Over Budget.
Feature
Correlation
Execution year
0.006
Customers
0.458
Postal code
0.189
School
­0.316
Courthouse
0.116
Project duration
­0.003
Threshold less than 15m
­0.113
Threshold 15m
0.071
Threshold 100m
0.116
Adjust Count
0.089
Average bill amount
­0.058
Maximum bill amount
0.137
Minimum bill amount
0.105
Number of bills
0.174
Number of Contractors
­0.153
Table 6.9: Correlation of Customers with Projects Going Over Budget.
Customer
Correlation
Udenrigsministeriet
0.2335
Domstolsstyrelsen
0.1824
Miljøstyrelsen
0.1341
Politiet i Grønland
0.1341
Retten i Aarhus
0.1341
Københavns Universitet
­0.1987
Syddansk Universitet
­0.1307
Aalborg Universitet
­0.1237
Aarhus Universitet
­0.0773
Roskilde Universitet
­0.0414
Based on the historical data, Københavns Universitet, Syddansk Universitet, Aalborg Uni­
versitet, Aarhus Universitet and Roskilde Universitet are the customers with the highest
negative correlation coefficient. This complies with table 6.8 where schools have a neg­
ative correlation of ­0.316.
Table 6.9 shows the customers that have the five most positive correlations and the five
most negative correlations.
Table 6.10 shows the postal codes in Danmark that have the five most positive correlations
and the five most negative correlations with projects going over budget. The correlation
coefficients range between 0.1341 to ­0.1084. The postal codes with the highest corre­
lation coefficient are 3900 and 6950, with a correlation coefficient of 0.1341, indicating
that projects executed in that particular area have a significantly higher likelihood of going
over budget compared to the other projects.
On the other hand, postal code 2200 shows the highest negative correlation coefficient
and therefore denotes the neighbourhood with the least likelihood of projects going over
30
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:41==
Table 6.10: Correlation of Postal Codes with Projects Going Over Budget.
Postal Code
Correlation
3900
0.1341
6950
0.1341
4700
0.0665
2620
0.0665
6000
0.0310
2200
­0.1084
9220
­0.1001
8000
­0.0813
5230
­0.0813
3600
­0.0702
budget. Postal codes 9220, 8000, 5230 and 3600 also have a negative correlation coeffi­
cient and are therefore areas where projects are less likely to go over budget. Identifying
areas with negative correlation coefficients is equally essential, as it indicates good prac­
tice and effective budget management strategies.
Another noteworthy correlation is the relationship between projects expenses and its du­
ration. This correlation coefficient was calculated to be 0.5, indicating that as the duration
of a project increases, it is fairly likely that the expenses increase as well.
6.2
Analysis by Execution Year
Delving into the historical cost data on a yearly basis offers a compelling opportunity to
gain valuable insight. A yearly approach could give insight into whether budget manage­
ment has been approved over the years. Project managers and stakeholders can mitigate
financial risk by learning from past years.
Table 6.11: Number of Projects by Year.
Year
Number of Projects
Percentage (%)
2012
14
7.5%
2013
26
14.0%
2014
28
15.1%
2015
25
13.4%
2016
35
18.8%
2017
17
9.1%
2018
20
10.8%
2019
12
6.5%
2020
7
3.8%
2021
1
0.5%
2022
1
0.5%
Table 6.11 shows how many construction projects are started every year ranging from
2012 to 2022. This table shows only finished projects, therefore the low numbers in 2020
to 2022 can be explained by projects not being completed that started construction in
those years. Due to the low numbers in 2020 to 2022, these years will be excluded from
this part of the analysis. The year 2016 has the highest number of construction projects
Project Cost Analysis
31
==PAGE:42==
or 18.8% of the total projects. The years 2013 to 2015 are rather stable. After the peak
in 2016, the number of projects per year go down quite a bit. The years 2021 and 2022
will be disregarded in this part of the analysis since they account for less than 1% of the
total projects.
Table 6.12 shows the summary statistics for invoices paid for the construction projects per
year. The average amount of invoices ranges from 90,619 DKK to 441,914 DKK, while the
maximum amount ranges from 1,727,768 to 225,000,000. In 2012 there was a peak in the
average number of invoices issued, and after that year there are fewer invoices issued.
However, the average amount of invoices does not increase in comparison, meaning that
the invoices are generally higher.
Table 6.12: Summary Statistics for Expenses on a Yearly Basis.
Minimum
Average
Maximum
2012
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­13,326,278
90,619
15,878,784
Number of Invoices
47
330
835
2013
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­5,641,221
83,111
9,369,321
Number of Invoices
44
285
748
2014
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­13,000,000
100,723
225,000,000
Number of Invoices
32
293
1,018
2015
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­3,937,500
145,505
12,986,583
Number of Invoices
16
144
628
2016
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­22,701,020
112,368
10,437,990
Number of Invoices
27
119
350
2017
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­6,784,975
214,910
35,000,000
Number of Invoices
18
113
486
2018
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­2,931,996
441,914
10,220,000
Number of Invoices
3
32
95
2019
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­1,600,000
210,226
21,000,000
Number of Invoices
14
59
120
2020
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­6,800,000
247,384
1,727,768
Number of Invoices
2
33
59
32
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:43==
Table 6.13: Budget Statistics ­ Stepwise Comparison on a Yearly Basis
Year
Step
Mean
Max
Min
2012
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
13,823,223
72,317,996
­409,721
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
33,420,201
46,429,392
9,429,200
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
17,698,047
83,306,280
­198,538
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
3,318,396
5,000,000
514,381
2013
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
2,429,827
7,500,000
150,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
20,809,351
59,909,013
646,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
12,325,598
62,133,358
­8,426,865
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
1,230,243
4,447,016
142,375
2014
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
3,098,640
14,115,300
38,900
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
18,050,536
59,019,875
543,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
25,618,946
272,680,342
­4,594,615
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
1,945,478
5,669,145
­68,955
2015
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
3,082,193
6,889,996
412,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
19,771,173
89,570,130
805,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
8,786,876
116,915,309
­10,972,779
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
6,509,267
19,303,982
465,273
2016
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
1,717,072
6,775,000
95,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
16,401,866
99,150,059
2,095,275
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
5,469,343
72,235,549
­5,268,270
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
3,530,117
14,920,998
119,751
2017
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
4,671,958
23,495,250
93,825
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
44,041,319
421,054,782
1,092,618
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
­5,889,186
2,226,238
­65,574,389
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
2,220,280
10,192,606
120,000
2018
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
1,344,236
4,335,027
635,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
6,233,830
12,442,198
1,314,888
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
4,328,988
35,695,245
­2,267,450
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
74,094
1,064,346
­3,136,997
2019
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
1,955,878
4,664,400
299,901
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
2,492,760
6,944,590
917,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
12,945,456
44,676,363
259,302
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
2,671,042
6,020,395
104,031
2020
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
4,182,120
13,086,251
45,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
4,085,912
6,348,536
1,823,289
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
1,842,387
6,227,152
­1,695,472
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
300,000
300,000
300,000
Project Cost Analysis
33
==PAGE:44==
Table 6.13 shows the statistics for the budget adjustments on a yearly basis. The average
advisor budget peaks in 2012 and after that year it is relatively stable and ranges from
1,344,236 DKK to 4,671,958 DKK. The highest advisor budget adjustment was executed
in 2012, 72,317,996 DKK, while the lowest was in 2012, ­409,712 DKK. The average
governing budget ranges from 2,492,760 DKK to 44,041,319 DKK. Two distinct trends
are evident in the governing budget over the years. The years 2012­2017 experienced a
considerably higher governing budget than the years following. The most substantial ad­
justment to the governing budget happened in 2017 when an amount of 421,054,782 DKK
was allocated for modification. The lowest adjustment happens in 2014. The average ten­
der budget has quite a wide range, ranging from ­5,889,186 DKK to 25,618,946 DKK. In
2017 the average amount of tender budget adjustment was ­5,889,186 DKK, this is the
only average that goes below zero. 2017 also has the highest average of the governing
budget. The tender budget’s largest adjustment happens in 2014, 272,680,342 DKK and
the lowest was in 2017, ­65,574,389 DKK. The revised tender budget is significantly lower
for all the years. It ranges from 74,094 DKK to 6,509,267 DKK with the largest adjustment
accounting for 19,303,982 DKK in 2015 and the lowest in 2018 of ­3,136,997 DKK.
(a) Positive Budget Adjustments.
(b) Negative Budget Adjustments.
Figure 6.6: Mean Positive and Negative Budget Adjustments on a Yearly Basis.
Figure 6.6 shows the mean positive and negative budget adjustments for each year. Gen­
erally, it can be seen that the budget adjustments do decrease with the years, with several
unexpected peaks. The majority of negative adjustments happen in step 3, which is con­
sistent with what was concluded in table 6.4. Nevertheless, there is also a peak in most
positive adjustments, it is simply not as noticeable as in the negative. Every year, except
for 2015 and 2017, experienced an increase in positive budget adjustment between Step
2 and Step 3. Additionally, as can be seen, there are several times when no negative
adjustments take place.
Table 6.14 shows how many projects were under, over and within budget over the years.
2012, 2013, 2015, 2016, 2018 and 2019 have more than 50% projects completed within
budget. The highest proportion of projects that finished within budget was in 2016 and the
second highest was in 2018. However, the lowest ratio of completed within budget was in
2017, whereas 2017 also has the highest proportion of projects going over budget. This
does indicate that there might have been projects that suffered severe budget overruns
that were not manageable. Excluding the data from 2017, it is evident that most of the
projects are being completed within budget. When investigating projects that were com­
pleted under budget there is an extreme peak in 2020. It may be that this is not entirely
accurate or representative of the true situation. There might be projects that were started
in 2020 but have not been finished and are therefore not a part of this analysis. This
34
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:45==
Table 6.14: Project Budget Analysis
Year
Under Budget
Within Budget
Over Budget
Total Projects
2012
3 ­ 21.4%
8 ­ 57.1%
3 ­ 21.4%
14
2013
7 ­ 26.9%
17 ­ 65.4%
2 ­ 7.7%
26
2014
7 ­ 25.0%
12 ­ 42.8%
9 ­ 32.1%
28
2015
3 ­ 12.0%
14 ­ 56.0%
8 ­ 32.0%
25
2016
5 ­ 14.3%
25 ­ 71.4%
5 ­ 14.3%
35
2017
5 ­ 29.4%
4 ­ 23.5%
8 ­ 47.1%
17
2018
0 ­ 0.0%
14 ­ 70.0%
6 ­ 30.0%
20
2019
4 ­ 33.3%
6 ­ 50.0%
2 ­ 16.7%
12
2020
4 ­ 57.1%
3 ­ 42.9%
0 ­ 0.0%
7
could explain the high peak of projects that go under budget in 2020. In 2018 there were
no projects completed under budget while 70% were completed within budget and 30%
were completed over budget. Otherwise, the projects that are completed under budget
vary between 12% to 33.3%. When looking at projects that are completed over budget,
the year 2020 again is not an entirely accurate representation. However, the percentage
of projects that are being completed over their budget range from 0.0% to 47.1%. With
all this information there is no concrete way to see if there have been improvements over
the years or not.
To better investigate whether there has been an improvement over the years, the data
was split up into two, projects that began construction during the years 2012­2015 and
then 2016­ 2020.
Table 6.15: Budget Statistics for Two Time Intervals ­ Stepwise Comparison.
Step
Mean
Max
Min
2012­2015
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
4,176,461
72,317,996
­409,721
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
20,242,521
89,570,130
543,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
16,185,383
272,680,342
­10,972,779
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
2,903,944
19,303,982
­68,955
2016 ­ 2020
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
2,720,425
23,495,250
45,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
19,808,992
421,054,782
917,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
3,649,358
72,235,549
­65,574,389
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
1,487,945
14,920,998
­3,136,997
Table 6.15 shows a comparison of the statistic of budget adjustments for the two­time
intervals. The average amount for budget adjustment for the time interval of 2012­2015
is 4,176,461 DKK for the advisor budget, while it is 2,720,425 DKK for the time interval of
2016­2020. The difference there is 1,456,036 DKK or 34,85%. The governing budget for
both time intervals is fairly similar. The average amount for the adjustment of the tender
budget for 2012­2015 is 16,185,383 DKK while it is 3,649,358 DKK for 2016­2020. There
is a decrease of 12,536,025 DKK or 77,46%. The revised tender budget shows a decrease
of 1,415,999 DKK or 48,74%. This indicates a change in financial trends between the
Project Cost Analysis
35
==PAGE:46==
two­time intervals. The time interval of 2012­2015 has significantly higher mean values
compared to 2016­2020. Both time intervals experience considerable variability which
indicates that the average is not a good measure to compare to. The time interval from
2012­2015 ranges from ­10,972,779 DKK to 272,680,342 while the time interval from
2016­2020 the range from ­65,574,389 DKK to 421,054,782 DKK. This shows that the
amount of budget changes in the latter time interval appears to be greater than in the
earlier interval. The difference between the minimum and maximum values in the time
interval 2016­2020 is substantially larger than the difference in the time interval 2012­
2015. This indicates that there were more significant budget changes or adjustments
during the latter period, possibly reflecting larger financial shifts, policy changes, or other
factors impacting the budget.
(a) Cost Variance in 2012­2015.
(b) Cost Variance in 2016­2020.
Figure 6.7: Cost Variance from the Tender Budget for the Time Intervals.
Figures shown in 6.7 show the cost variance in percentage for both time intervals. As can
be seen in figure 6.7a the deviation goes down to ­67.3% and up to 94,2%. While in 6.7b
it goes to ­72.6% and goes up to 262,1%. There are four projects during the time interval
2016 to 2020 that go more than 94,2% over budget and 1 project that goes more than
­67.3% under budget. This shows that during the time interval of 2012 to 2015, budget
management seems to be more accurate and financial allocation more precise.
6.3
Analysis by Project Duration
This subchapter delves into the analysis of project performance based on their duration.
The projects have a duration ranging from 27 days to 3080 days, which is a little less than
8,5 years. Categorizing these projects into four distinct time intervals, 1 year, 1­2 years,
2­5 years and 5+ years.
Table 6.16: Number of Projects by Duration.
Duration
Number of Projects
Percentage (%)
< 1 Year
29
15.6%
1­2 Years
46
24.7%
2­5 Years
80
43.0%
5+ Years
31
16.7%
Table 6.16 shows the distribution of projects based on their duration. Projects that are
completed within a year account for 15.6% of the total projects. These projects are likely to
36
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:47==
be relatively smaller in scale or involve minimum complexity. Projects that were completed
in one to two years account for 24.7% of the total projects and are categorized as medium­
term. The largest proportion of the projects, 43%, fall within the duration of two to five
years. These mid­to­long­term projects are likely to involve more extensive developments,
institutional buildings or complex infrastructure projects. Projects with a duration of more
than five years account for 16.7% of the total projects. These projects represent the large­
scale infrastructures that Bygningsstyrelsen is a part of. Because of the long durations
these projects experience is it important they receive comprehensive and effective project
management.
Table 6.17: Summary Statistics for Expenses for Different Duration.
Minimum
Average
Maximum
< 1 Year
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­1,447,834
322,607
5,625,000
Number of Invoices
2
33
175
1 ­ 2 Years
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­6,800,000
102,583
3,701,056
Number of Invoices
19
86
419
2 ­ 5 Years
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­22,701,020
146,553
35,000,000
Number of Invoices
29
181
744
5+ Years
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­13,326,278
163,403
225,000,000
Number of Invoices
68
391
1,018
Table 6.17 shows the summary statistics for invoices paid for the construction projects
based on their duration. Overall the average invoice amount increases if a project’s dura­
tion is longer than one year. However, it is highest for projects that are less than one year,
which concludes that the invoices for projects with short duration tend to be higher than
projects with a longer duration. Additionally, it can be seen that the number of invoices
issued increases with a longer duration. This is the case for the minimum, average and
maximum number of invoices. For projects where the duration exceeds five years the
maximum amount is 225,000,000 DKK this is a significant increase from the maximum
amount for projects spanning two to five years.
Project Cost Analysis
37
==PAGE:48==
(a) Positive Budget Adjustments.
(b) Negative Budget Adjustments.
Figure 6.8: Positive and Negative Budget Adjustments for Different Durations.
Figure 6.8 shows the mean count that the budget was changed positively, figure 6.8a,
and negatively, figure 6.8b for different durations. For projects that are executed within a
year the highest mean for positive adjustments is in the tender budget, with the mean of
1.21 times. The advisor budget and the revised tender budget have the same average for
positive adjustments of 0.24. The governing budget was positively changed on average
0.76 times. The advisor and the governing budget have no negative adjustments, the
tender budget has an average of 0.41 negative adjustments per project and the revised
budget has an average of 0.1 negative adjustments per project.
Projects that have a duration of one to two years have a similar trend as observed be­
fore. The tender budget again experiences the highest average positive and negative
adjustments per project. The advisor and the governing budget show a moderate posi­
tive adjustment with mean values of 0.57 and 1.15 times per project. The revised budget
has the same average positive adjustments to the budget but the average negative ad­
justments is zero for projects completed with a duration of one to two years. There is a
slight increase in the times the budget is negatively adjusted in the governing budget for
projects with a duration of one to two years.
Projects with a duration of two to five years experience more budget adjustments, both
negative and positive, for every budget step compared to the other durations. The tender
budget is experiencing the most budget alterations both negative and positive. Addi­
tionally the same can be said for projects with a duration of five years or more. They
experience more frequent budget adjustments than the other different durations, with the
highest averages in the tender budget both for negative and positive adjustments.
This information suggests a positive correlation between project duration and the likeli­
hood of budget adjustments. This means generally that the longer the project’s duration
is the more likely it is to experience budget adjustments. Additionally, the table shows
that the negative budget adjustments are significantly lower than the positive ones. This
indicates that project managers are generally requesting budget adjustments closer to the
actual needed amount, rather than substantially higher than needed.
Table 6.18 shows the statistic for the budget adjustments. For projects with a duration
of less than one year, the average amount of budget adjustments ranges from 282,763
DKK to 3,249,621 DKK. Projects with a duration of one to two years have the average
amount of budget adjustments ranging from 501,946 DKK to 4,942,204 DKK. Projects
with a duration of two to five years have the average amount for budget adjustments
38
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:49==
Table 6.18: Budget Statistics for Different Durations ­ Stepwise Comparison.
Step
Mean
Max
Min
< 1 Year
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
2,194,183
6,500,100
95,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
3,249,621
11,367,830
805,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
1,585,869
9,550,250
­1,095,710
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
282,763
1,064,346
­223,151
1 ­ 2 Years
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
2,010,598
13,086,251
90,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
4,942,204
12,442,198
543,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
1,801,143
12,013,776
­2,267,450
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
501,946
990,944
104,031
2 ­ 5 Years
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
2,506,136
23,495,250
­409,721
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
25,863,961
421,054,782
646,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
8,246,531
72,235,549
­65,574,389
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
1,865,252
14,920,998
­3,136,997
5+ Years
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
6,829,037
72,317,996
440,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
48,728,749
99,150,059
4,066,459
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
33,940,450
272,680,342
­10,972,779
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
4,006,463
19,303,982
40,083
ranging from 1,865,252 DKK to 25,863,961 DKK and projects with a duration longer than
five years have a range of 4,006,463 DKK to 48,728,749 DKK. The mean values show
that projects with longer duration usually have a higher budget adjustment compared to
projects with shorter duration. This could be due to projects with longer durations can be
more complex and can be subjected to a higher risk of encountering an uncontrollable
situation.
The minimum adjustment amount for the tender budget is always below zero. and by
far the highest for projects with a duration of two to five years. The minimum amount
for the revised budget is as well below zero for projects with a duration of less than one
year and then also for projects with a duration of two to five years. There is one instance
where the minimum amount for adjustment is below zero for the advisor budget and that
is for projects with a duration of two to five years. This indicates that the budget has been
over­estimated at some point and actions had to be taken to move the budget closer
to the actual cost. Additionally, the average amount for budget adjustments in projects
that have a duration of longer than 5 years is significantly higher compared to the other
different durations. This highlights the importance of carefully planning the budgets for
these projects.
Table 6.19 shows how many projects were under, over or within budget for different du­
rations. For projects that have a duration of less than one year, 6.9% of them were com­
pleted under budget, 69% within budget and 24.1% over budget. This category has the
highest proportion of projects completed within their budget. Even though the majority of
Project Cost Analysis
39
==PAGE:50==
Table 6.19: Project Budget Analysis for Different Durations
Under Budget
Within Budget
Over Budget
Total Projects
< 1 Year
2 ­ 6.9%
20 ­ 69.0%
7 ­ 24.1%
29
1 ­ 2 Years
10 ­ 21.7%
28 ­ 60.9%
8 ­ 17.4%
46
2 ­ 5 Years
23 ­ 28.7%
37 ­ 46.3%
20 ­ 25.0%
80
5+ Years
3 ­ 9.7%
20 ­ 64.5%
8 ­ 25.8%
31
the categories show that the projects manage to stay within budget. However, it can be
seen that for projects where the duration exceeds two years, the proportion of projects
that go over budget is 25% or greater. This indicates that the longer the project the more
demanding it is to stay within budget.
(a) Less than One Year.
(b) 1 ­ 2 Years.
(c) 2 ­ 5 Years.
(d) 5 Years and More.
Figure 6.9: Cost Variance for Different Durations.
Figure 6.9 shows the cost variance in percentage from the tender budget for the different
durations. Figure 6.9a shows the cost variance for projects with a duration of less than one
year. The cost variance for this duration ranges from ­23.6% to 130% with an average of
9.9%. Figure 6.9b shows cost variance for projects with a duration from one to two years.
Where the cost variance ranges from ­72.6% to 262.1% and with a mean of 3.75%. Figure
6.9c shows cost variance for projects that have a duration of two to five years. Where
the cost variance ranges from ­65.7% to 116.6% with an average of 0.57%. Figure 6.9d
shows cost variance for projects that have a duration of five years and more, where the
cost variance ranges from ­67.3% to 30.9% with an average of ­1.32%. This indicates
40
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:51==
that projects that have a duration of fewer than five years experience relatively high­cost
variance compared to projects that have a duration that exceeds five years.
6.4
Analysis by Project Expenses
Looking into the historical cost data on a project’s total cost offers a compelling opportu­
nity to gain valuable insights. By analyzing different cost ranges it is intended to deter­
mine whether budget management is performing similarly over all cost ranges or whether
certain category is a challenging to budget. The projects were divided into four distinct
cost ranges, projects where the total cost is under 5.000.000 DKK, between 5.000.000 to
15.000.000 DKK, between 15.000.000 DKK to 50.000.000 DKK and then over 50.000.000
DKK.
Table 6.20: Cost Distribution of Construction Projects.
Cost Range (DKK)
Number of Projects
Percentage (%)
< 5,000,000
63
33.9%
5,000,000 ­ 15,000,000
63
33.9%
15,000,000 ­ 50,000,000
41
22.1%
50,000,000+
19
10.1%
Table 6.20 shows the distribution of projects based on their total cost. Projects that have
a total cost of less than 5,000,000 DKK account for 33.9% of the total projects. The same
can be said of projects where the total cost lies between 5,000,000 DKK and 15,000,000
DKK, they also account for 33.9%. This indicates that there is a relatively balanced distri­
bution of projects in the lower to mid­cost ranges. The range of 15,000,000 to 50,000,000
DKK accounts for 22.1% while the range of 50,000,000 DKK is the smallest range and
accounts for 10.0%. This shows that larger and more costly projects are less frequent.
This shows that the majority of projects, or 67.8% of the projects have a final cost of less
than 50.000.000 DKK.
Table 6.21: Summary Statistics for Expenses on Different Cost Ranges.
Minimum
Average
Maximum
< 5,000,000 DKK
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­6,800,000
85,100
2,401,730
Number of Invoices
2
64
317
5,000,000 ­ 15,000,000 DKK
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­13,000,000
202,223
5,625,000
Number of Invoices
3
125
692
15,000,000 ­ 50,000,000 DKK
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­22,701,020
179,523
21,000,000
Number of Invoices
43
252
748
50,000,000+ DKK
Invoice Amount (DKK)
­13,326,278
284,332
225,000,000
Number of Invoices
121
486
1,018
Table 6.21 shows the summary statistics for invoices paid for the construction projects
based on their cost range. It is evident that the average number of invoices paid increases
Project Cost Analysis
41
==PAGE:52==
in a positive correlation with the expenses. Similarly, the average amount of an invoice
also increases with one exception, the range 5,000,000 to 15,000,000 DKK, where it sur­
passes that of the higher cost range. furthermore, it can be observed that the maximum
amount of invoices increases with the increase in expenses. However, the lowest invoice
paid is in the range of 15,000,000 to 50,000,000 DKK. Additionally, both the minimum
and maximum values of the number of invoices per project increase proportionally with
the rise in project expenses.
Table 6.22: Budget Statistics for Different Cost Ranges ­ Stepwise Comparison.
Step
Mean
Max
Min
< 5,000,000
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
1,704,743
13,086,251
­409,721
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
2,759,967
9,573,353
543,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
1,033,083
10,100,000
­1,695,472
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
464,698
1,064,346
­223,151
5,000,000 ­ 15,000,000
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
2,130,712
12,429,994
38,900
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
8,285,466
28,675,725
646,000
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
4,949,250
22,215,271
­6,788,476
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
707,116
4,447,016
­68,955
15,000,000 ­ 50,000,000
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
2,093,494
5,857,000
190,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
26,632,174
59,909,013
1,968,700
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
14,530,582
72,235,549
­8,426,865
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
2,178,339
14,920,998
­3,136,997
50,000,000+
1 ­ Advisor budget (DKK)
10,819,873
72,317,996
440,000
2 ­ Governing budget (DKK)
90,820,326
421,054,782
37,759,449
3 ­ Tender budget (DKK)
45,618,817
272,680,342
­65,574,389
4 ­ Revised Tender budget (DKK)
5,158,489
19,303,982
465,273
Table 6.22 shows the budget statistics for the budget adjustment of different cost ranges.
Projects that have total expenses lower than 5,000,000 DKK show a relatively moder­
ate average compared to the higher cost ranges. The average adjustments range from
464,698 to 2,759,967 DKK, where the highest average being in the governing budget.
However, the tender budget experiences the highest and the lowest adjustments, with the
lowest being ­1,695,472 DKK and the highest 10,100,000 DKK. The range of 5,000,000
DKK to 15,000,000 DKK experiences higher budget adjustments compared to the previ­
ously mentioned range. The average adjustments range from 707,116 to 8,285,466 DKK.
The highest average adjustment can again be seen in the governing budget. The maxi­
mum and the minimum adjustment for this cost range has increased considerably and is
now from ­6,788,478 to 28,675,725 DKK. In the range of 15,000,000 to 50,000,000 DKK all
the averages show a considerable increase except the advisor budget, which has shown
a decrease when compared to the previous range. The maximum adjustments increase
drastically from the previous range and are now 72,235,549 DKK and the minimum de­
creases moderately and is ­8,426,865. DKK. In the range of projects that experience total
42
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:53==
expenses of more than 50,000,000 DKK the average adjustment ranges from 5,158,489
to 90,820,326 DKK. Table 6.22 shows a direct correlation between increases in expenses
and an increase in the spread of invoice amounts. Additionally, the averages also ex­
perience a similar trend, aligning with the rise in expenses. These findings suggest a
proportional relationship between expenses and the magnitude of the adjustments, indi­
cating that with an increase in expenses, the average adjustment and the spread of the
adjustments follow suit.
(a) Positive Budget Adjustments.
(b) Negative Budget Adjustments.
Figure 6.10: Positive and Negative Budget Adjustments for Different Cost Ranges.
Figure 6.10 shows the average number of times that the budget was changed in each
budgeting step for different cost ranges. Figure 6.10a shows how often it was adjusted
positively, while 6.10b shows how often it was done negatively, on average. The general
trend that can be identified is that when the expenses are more the more frequent positive
adjustments are made, except for the revised tender budget. The positive adjustments
tend to increase from step 1 to step 3 across all groups with the projects with expenses
above 50,000,000 DKK highest in every step. That same range also has the highest
average count of negative budget adjustments.
Table 6.23: Project Budget Analysis for Different Cost Ranges
Under Budget
Within Budget
Over Budget
Total Projects
<5M DKK
11 ­ 17.5%
36 ­ 57.1%
16 ­ 25.4%
63
5­15M DKK
20 ­ 31.7%
34 ­ 54.0%
9 ­ 14.3%
63
15­50M DKK
7 ­ 17.1%
24 ­ 58.5%
10 ­ 24.4%
41
50M+ DKK
0 ­ 0.0%
11 ­ 57.9%
8 ­ 42,1%
19
Table 6.23 shows how many projects were under, over or within budget for different cost
ranges. When looking at the projects in different cost ranges the percentage of projects
that are completed within budget is consistently greater than 50%. This indicates that cost
management is effective for all cost ranges. What can also be seen is that in the highest
cost range, 50,000,00+ DKK, no projects are completed under budget. While other cost
ranges experience a fairly stable ratio of projects being completed over or under budget.
Figure 6.11 shows the cost variance in percentage from the tender budget for different
ranges. Figure 6.11a shows the cost variance for projects with total expenses less than
5,000,000 DKK. There the cost variance ranges from ­72.6% to 262.1% with a mean
Project Cost Analysis
43
==PAGE:54==
(a) Less than 5.000.000 DKK.
(b) 5.000.000­15.000.000 DKK
(c) 15.000.000­50.000.000 DKK.
(d) 50.000.000 DKK and More.
Figure 6.11: Cost Variance for Different Cost Ranges.
of 7.9%. Figure 6.11b shows the cost range for projects with total expenses between
5,000,000 to 15,000,000 DKK. There the cost variance ranges from ­67.3% to 103.3%
with a mean of ­5%. Figure 6.11c shows the cost range for projects with total expenses
between 15,000,000 to 50,000,000 DKK. There the cost variance ranges from ­53.2% to
81.3% with a mean of 3.8%. Figure 6.11d shows the cost range for projects with total
expenses of more than 50,000,000 DKK. There the cost variance ranges from ­7.5% to
30.9% with a mean of 6.4%. It is evident that as project expenses increase, the degree
of cost variance decreases.
6.5
Classification
Classification models are a fundamental concept in machine learning and it is used to
categorize data into classes. Classification models learn to recognize patterns and rela­
tionships from so­called training data and then they apply that to test data to predict their
behaviour.
The classification models, Logistic Regression and Decision Tree were employed to see
if the algorithm was able to predict if a project was going to be completed over budget
or not. Class 0 represents projects that did not go over budget while Class 1 is projects
that were completed over their allocated budget. The classification models utilize three
independent variables, postal code, year of execution and the duration, which are incor­
porated to predict the dependent variable, the binary variable whether a project went over
its allocated budget or not.
44
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:55==
Table 6.24: Results from the Logistic Regression.
Precision
Recall
F1­Score
Class 0
0.82
1.00
0.90
Class 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
Macro avg
0.41
0.50
0.45
Weighted avg
0.68
0.82
0.74
Accuracy
0.82
Confusion Matrix:
[14
0
3
0
]
Table 6.24 shows the results from the Logistic Regression and the confusion matrix pre­
sented above corresponds to the performance metrics from the Logistic Regression. As
can be seen, the precision for Class 0 is 0.82, which means that the model is able to pre­
dict correctly 82% of the time for Class 0. However, the precision for Class 1 is 0.00 which
indicates that the model does not make any correct predictions for Class 1. The recall for
Class 0 is 1.00 while it is 0.00 for Class 1. Indicating that the model was able to identify all
instances for Class 0 but none for Class 1. The F1­score is 0.90 for Class 0 and 0.00 for
Class 1 and the overall accuracy of the model is 82%. The confusion matrix shows that
the model correctly predicted 14 instances as true positive, meaning they were correctly
predicted. Three instances were predicted as false negatives, indicating that the model
incorrectly predicted 3 instances as a part of Class 0 that do not belong there. There
were no instances of false positives or true negatives, aligning precisely with the findings
presented in the table, the model never made a prediction associated with Class 1.
Table 6.25: Results from the Decision Tree.
Precision
Recall
F1­Score
Class 0
0.86
0.86
0.86
Class 1
0.33
0.33
0.33
Macro avg
0.60
0.60
0.60
Weighted avg
0.76
0.76
0.76
Accuracy
0.76
Confusion Matrix:
[12
2
2
1
]
Table 6.25 shows the results from the Decision Tree and the confusion matrix presented
above corresponds to the performance metrics from the Decision Tree . The precision for
the Decision Tree is 0.86 for Class 0 and 0.33 for Class 1 which indicates that the model
can correctly predict 86% of instances for Class 0 and 33% for Class 1. The recall for Class
0 is 0.86 and for Class 0 it is 0.33. The F1­score is the is 0.86 for Class 0 and 0.33 for
Class 1 and the overall accuracy of the Decision Tree is 76%. The confusion matrix for the
Decision Tree shows that the model has 12 true positive and 2 false negative, indicating
that the model correctly predicted 12 instances as Class 0 but 2 instances incorrectly
Project Cost Analysis
45
==PAGE:56==
as Class 0. Furthermore, it has 2 false positives and 1 true negative where the model
correctly made one instance correctly predicted as Class 1.
The Decision Tree has a slightly better ability to predict Class 0, however, its accuracy
is slightly lower than the accuracy of the Logistic regression. Both models have high
precision and recall for Class 0, indicating that they are quite good at identifying instances
Class 0. However, the Logistic Regression model completely fails to identify projects that
go over budget. The Decision Tree shows the ability to identify instances of Class 1 but
it is still relatively low. Both cases clearly struggle with Class 1 predictions. This could be
because the data is unbalanced toward Class 1 or the model is in need of tuning. Further
investigation into the dataset and the models is needed to get more comprehensive results
and hopefully a higher precision for Class 1. However, that investigation is outside the
scope of this thesis, and will therefore not be conducted.
46
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:57==
7
Conclusion and Future Work
7.1
Conclusion
The last chapter concludes the study and gathers all the key findings from earlier chapters
with the aim of addressing the research questions set at the start of the thesis. Additionally,
potential future work will be discussed.
The valuable insights gained from looking at the whole data give an idea of the bud­
get management and the project performance of the past. Winters happen to be the
costliest period in the construction industry. This can be explained by uncontrollable cir­
cumstances such as harsh weather conditions. It is important to emphasize that delays
due to uncontrollable situations fall under Bygningsstyrelsen responsibility, protecting the
contractor from bearing the burden of uncontrollable setbacks. The majority of budget
adjustments are made to the governing and the tender budget which indicates their sig­
nificance. The project’s overall performance is commendable, with an impressive 56.5%
of projects completed within its allocated budget. In analyzing the factors that influenced
projects being completed under or over budget, standard offices and school buildings,
tend to be completed under budget when compared to other projects Bygningsstyrelsen
conducted. Additionally, the results show that postal codes with a higher proportion of
school buildings tend to have projects that are more prone to be completed under bud­
get. This observation aligns with the consistency of schools being less prone to budget
overruns. Another observation is that projects performed in Greenland are more prone to
end up going over budget.
After looking at the budget performance and project performance across various cate­
gories, several noticeable findings emerge. There is a general trend of higher invoices
per project when compared to a yearly basis. However, at the same time, the number of
invoices has decreased over time. There is a clear trend that budget adjustments are less
frequent in the years leading to 2020 than in the earlier years of the investigation. This
tells us that the need to adjust the budget has decreased in general and that shows more
accuracy when budgeting the project. While there is no major project performance trend
that can be seen on a yearly basis, dividing the data into two groups 2012­2015 and 2016­
2020 reveals that budget management during 2016­2020 was notably more accurate and
the proportion of projects that were completed within budget increased slightly. Analysing
project durations shows that the times that the budget is adjusted are highly dependent
on the project’s duration. Longer projects tend to require more frequent budget adjust­
ments and the magnitude of adjustment increases alongside the duration. Interestingly,
when looking at the project performance across different durations, their performance is
rather stable. The proportion of projects that are completed within their allocated budget
is similar through all the different durations. There is a clear relationship between project
durations in two ways. The negative cost variance increases with an increase in duration,
however, the positive cost variance decreases in general with an increase in duration.
Interestingly the project with the longest duration shows the lowest range of cost variance
from the tender budget. Suggesting that these projects are in general being completed
closest to their allocated budget than the other durations. When looking at the project
based on its expenses, there is a clear relationship between the increase in expenses
and the rise in the number and the average amount of invoices. The same can be said
for budget adjustments, with increasing expenses there is an increase in budget adjust­
ments as well as an increase in the magnitude of budget adjustments. However, project
Project Cost Analysis
47
==PAGE:58==
performance appears to be the most favourable when looking at it from an expense point
of view. All cost ranges have a very high proportion of project finishing within their allo­
cated budget. Interestingly though in the highest cost range, there are no projects that are
completed under their allocated budget. This shows that projects with expenses of more
than 50.000.000 DKK are difficult to navigate. It can also be concluded that as project
expenses increase, the degree of cost variance decreases.
It can be seen that Bygningsstyrelsen has been successfully managing their projects, both
when it comes to budget management and project performance. It is evident thought that
there is some room for improvement. Bygningsstyrelsen can use the results from this
research to their advantage.
7.2
Future Work
This research has unveiled a great number of potentials for future work. The historical
cost data can be utilized in various settings, with the potential to drive more insights and
innovation for Bygningsstyrelsen. Improving the consistency and clarity of the data can
generally boost the depth and precision of future research. Enhancing the data con­
sistency and clarity could minimize potentially misleading factors and uncertainties. It
would also allow the size of the data that is analyzed to be larger and therefore repre­
sent a greater portion of the whole dataset. This study only scratches the surface of the
numerous ways that historical data can be utilized with advanced computational tech­
niques. As machine learning and other artificial intelligence continue to evolve to better
catch the trends, hidden patterns or optimization. Making these techniques a part of
Bygningsstyrelsen’s decision­making could be profoundly beneficial. Looking ahead the
potential for Bygningsstyrelsen is truly transformative. By improving their data consis­
tency, leveraging machine learning techniques and expanding their data content, a more
data­driven decision can be made. Recognizing these opportunities can result in Bygn­
ingsstyrelsen becoming a leader in data­driven initiatives within its sector.
48
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
What is Project Management | PMI. URL: https://www.pmi.org/about/learn-about-
pmi/what-is-project-management (visited on 04/19/2023).
[2]
Keith Potts and Nii Ankrah. Construction cost management: learning from case
studies. Routledge, 2014.
[3]
Eurostat Data Browser: Turnover statistics for construction (NACE Rev. 2, F). URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/SBS_TURN_CON_R2__custom_
5854458/default/table?lang=en&page=time:2020 (visited on 04/19/2023).
[4]
Eurostat Data Browser: Annual detailed enterprise statistics for construction (NACE
Rev. 2, F). URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/nace_r2_ei_pr/
default/table?lang=en (visited on 04/19/2023).
[5]
Construction ­ Selected projects. https://en.bygst.dk/construction/selected-projects/.
Accessed June 7, 2023.
[6]
Christoffer Zieler. Government agency stripped of Niels Bohr Building control. Nov.
2017. URL: https://uniavisen.dk/en/government- agency- stripped- of- niels- bohr-
building-control/ (visited on 06/07/2023).
[7]
Kam Jugdev and Ralf Moller. “A retrospective look at our evolving understanding
of project success”. In: IEEE Engineering Management Review 34 (3 2006). ISSN:
03608581. DOI: 10.1109/EMR.2006.261387.
[8]
Albert P. C. Chan, David Scott, and Ada P. L. Chan. “Factors Affecting the Success
of a Construction Project”. In: Journal of Construction Engineering and Management
130 (1 2004). ISSN: 0733­9364. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)0733-9364(2004)130:1(153).
[9]
Heng Li, Z. Irani, and P.E.D. Love. “The IT performance evaluation in the construc­
tion industry”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences. 2000, 9 pp. vol.1­. DOI: 10.1109/HICSS.2000.926927.
[10]
Aaron J Shenhar, Ofer Levy, and Dov Dvir. “Mapping dimensions of projects suc­
cess”. In: Project Management Journal 28 (2 1997). ISSN: 8756­9728.
[11]
Roger Atkinson. “Project management: Cost, time and quality, two best guesses and
a phenomenon, its time to accept other success criteria”. In: International Journal of
Project Management 17 (6 1999). ISSN: 02637863. DOI: 10.1016/S0263-7863(98)
00069-6.
[12]
Syed Zafar Shahid Tabish and Kumar Neeraj Jha. “Success Traits for a Construction
Project”. In: Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 138 (10 2012).
ISSN: 0733­9364. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)co.1943-7862.0000538.
[13]
Harold Kerzner. Project Management: A System Approach to Planning,Scheduling,
and Controling. 2009.
[14]
Shahrzad Khosravi and Hamidreza Afshari. “A Success Measurement Model for
Construction Projects”. In: 2011 International Conference on Financial Management
and Economics IPEDR 11 (2011).
[15]
Jae K. Shim, Joel G. Siegel, and Allison I. Shim. Budgeting Basics and Beyond.
2011. DOI: 10.1002/9781118387023.
[16]
Olga A. Nikitina et al. “The use of the budget planning mechanism in construction
companies: Evidence from LLC «Stroytekhnologiya»”. In: Espacios 38 (33 2017).
ISSN: 07981015.
[17]
Abolfazl Jaafari, Iman Pazhouhan, and Pete Bettinger. “Machine learning modeling
of forest road construction costs”. In: Forests 12 (9 2021). ISSN: 19994907. DOI:
10.3390/f12091169.
Project Cost Analysis
49
==PAGE:60==
[18]
N. M. Anoop Krishnan et al. “Predicting the dissolution kinetics of silicate glasses
using machine learning”. In: Journal of Non­Crystalline Solids 487 (2018). ISSN:
00223093. DOI: 10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2018.02.023.
[19]
R. Jafarzadeh et al. “Application of Artificial Neural Network Methodology for Pre­
dicting Seismic Retrofit Construction Costs”. In: Journal of Construction Engineer­
ing and Management 140 (2 2014). ISSN: 0733­9364. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)co.1943-
7862.0000725.
[20]
Project Management Institute. “Practice Standard for Earned Value Management”.
In: PM, March­April (2011).
[21]
Stefan Szulc. Statistical Methods. English. Pergamon, 1965. ISBN: 1322558000,
1483200906, 1483225933, 9781322558004, 9781483200903, 9781483225937.
[22]
StatsTest. Cramer’s V. 2023. URL: https://www.statstest.com/cramers-v-2/ (visited
on 08/06/2023).
[23]
ProjectPro. 7 Types of Classification Algorithms in Machine Learning. 2023. URL:
https://www.projectpro.io/article/7-types-of-classification-algorithms-in-machine-
learning/435#toc-6 (visited on 08/06/2023).
[24]
scikit learn. sklearn.metrics.precisionrecallfscoresupport. 2023. URL: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.precision_recall_fscore_support.
html#sklearn.metrics.precision_recall_fscore_support (visited on 08/07/2023).
[25]
scikit learn. sklearn.metrics.f1score. 2023. URL: https://scikit- learn.org/stable/
modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.f1_score.html (visited on 08/07/2023).
50
Project Cost Analysis
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
A.1
Project Specific Learning Objectives
• Understanding the feasibility of categorizing completed projects based on their cost
data.
• Developing critical thinking and problem­solving skills in relation to project cost per­
formance.
• Analyze financial data using Python.
• Gain expertise in applying statistical methods and techniques to analyze project cost
data.
• Understand how to extract meaningful insights from comparing projects and identify
trends or patterns.
• Improving skills in communication and presentation, through the preparation of clear
and concise results and recommendations.
Project Cost Analysis
51
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk/
