==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Construction and validation of a prototype small scale
machine tool for brick wall maintenance
Group - 3
Name
Student No.
Pawel Krysztofinski
s213222
August 10, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Preface
2
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Automation in construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Health risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Barriers and potential in construction automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Brick repointing and automation goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Numerical control machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
CNC machines control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7
Product and process design in regards to the machine for brick repointing . .
14
1.7.1
Product definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.7.2
FMEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2
Machine layout
23
2.1
Coordinates, axis alignment and workspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2
Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3
Linear module X
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4
Machine control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Subsystems definition
36
3.1
Drives verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
Vision system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3
Electrical part and control system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Material selection for parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Component selection and modelling process
52
4.1
Standard components selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
CAD Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Technical drawings and tolerances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4
Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Implementation of existing vision system
59
5.1
Structure of G code program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
Machine validation
62
7
Results
66
7.1
The way forward
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
I
==PAGE:3==
Construction and validation of a prototype small scale machine tool for brick wall
maintenance
10-08-2023
By Pawel Krysztofinski
@lX@ Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, DTU Construct, 118, Brovej 118, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Den-
mark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
ISSN: [0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN: [000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN: [0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN: [000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, mechanics
and machine design.
Pawel Krysztofinski- s213222
Signature
.......................
10-08-2023
2
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Automation in construction
Robotics and automation in construction (RAC) may be defined as the “technology for
applying robotic systems on the construction field ” technology for applying robotic systems
on the construction field Automation in construction and renovation is recognized as a great
need and challenge. It is because it still constitutes a significant amount of the GDP of the
countries. In developed countries such as Denmark GPD from construction can go as high
as 10 %. For example in the USA it is as high as 12 % It can be not only the presence of the
physical systems on the construction sites or the manufacturing lines but also digitizing op-
erations, logistics, and design. More and more attention gains the Augmented reality, which
exploits human potential and digitizes information about buildings and tasks conducted on
the construction [C1.1].
Despite its being a big point of interest and according to the big construction companies
different forms of automation might increase the productivity and efficiency of the processes,
it’s still not being introduced on the scale, which is required by the market. It can be shown
by comparing another industry to construction - Automotive. Despite automation starting
in both sectors around the same time in 1960 the adoption for the construction has been
significantly slower. To show the scale of how much less productive is construction, the au-
tomotive sector increased productivity six times more then construction industry, which is
one of the main factors, why compapnies are motivated to introduce automation and robotic
system. Construction is labor-intensive therefore it can be significantly profitable to intro-
duce different forms of automation. Especially since labor productivity is declining over time.
Estimated losses because of that phenomena are 1.6 billion dollars [C1.1, C1.2, C1.3, C1.6]
The trends in automation construction can be divided into two main categories - civil
infrastructure and residential/commercial buildings. An example, which is given as good
adoption of RAC is the manufacturing of automated prefabrication manufacturing. Another
interesting sector, which described the project could fit in is drones and vehicles - systems
working on-site. Apart from that there is a development of the exoskeletons which intend
to support the human body in physical tasks. The biggest point of interest in the project
is on-site systems. The most often encountered scenario is the scheme taken from the au-
tomotive sector - a robotic arm performing a simple task, repetitive task - in construction
it has an abbreviation Single Task Construction robots - STCRs. The described project
could be accounted for such type. Often robots are mounted on the scaffolding or mobile
platform, so they can perform the task on the whole building, instead of the known from the
car manufacturing sector stationary solutions. Despite the obvious benefits of introducing
robots, there are a risks connected with that. Among them there are safety risks. Those
systems still have to work parallel to humans on-site, so there are health hazards in case the
system somehow fails and cause the injury. There are also integration issues in the upstream
and downstream construction activities. The idea and trend is to resolve those problems by
buildings factories resembling those from the automotive industry [C1.1].
3
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
1.2
Health risks
Another reason to increase the level of productivity and increase the automation level is
general health issues. Workers on site are exposed to dangerous environments and to media
such as dust, chemicals, and paints not to mention more physical injuries. [C1.4, C1.6] Ac-
cording to the HSE, - Health and Safety Executive construction sector is the most cancerous
industry. In Great Britain, it can be accounted for over 40% of occupational cancer deaths
and cancer registrations. Regarding hazardous substances exposure, there are processes,
which generate dust, fumes, vapors, and gases, and may be cause of the respiratory and skin
diseases. One of the most common causes of cancer is asbestos and silica. Another health
risk related to working in construction is physical injury, which can be back injuries and
upper limb disorders, which are mainly caused by manual handling, which brick repointing
can be accounted for.
There are many reasons for this state of things, one of them being the low level of standard-
ization of work - dynamically changing workspace and the low health and safety regulations
awareness among workers, despite construction sites being strictly regulated. All of these
issues may be solved by introducing robotic systems working alongside with workers or re-
placing them in case of repetitive and strenuous work[C1.1, C1.4].
1.3
Barriers and potential in construction automation
The other sectors has benefited from the introduction of the automation system, in-
creasing productivity, quality, reduced injuries and increased safety, which is crucial in the
brick re pointing process. Although the introduction of such a solutions in comparison to
other industries is slow, there are multiple reasons for that. One of the major recognized by
the construction industry, is involving high risks and costs into the projects, but the most
important is that, the slow adoption process is the nature of the construction environment.
On site construction is by definition not standardized and unstructured [3.0] The objects
manipulated there are heavy, the tolerances are big and precision is low. Despite adapting
the technologies from the manufacturing, seems like a good idea, they are often not robust
enough to implement them in the construction environment as described before. Another
problem pointed out here is that solutions known to manufacturing have to be basically
redesigned to adopt to the different environment. [C2.9].
Another barrier in adapting automation systems in the economics structure of such a projects.
Successful implementation of them, requires a lot of resources in terms of money and time.
It is often also doubted that companies will see any results or return on investment. Because
of that they are reluctant to invest in new technologies innovating the construction field [3.0,
C2.9, C1.1]
As mentioned before construction sites are complex environment for robotic systems. It
is also because how quickly it changes from being chaotic, to the structured, which is initial
4
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
goal of all of the construction tasks, which are performed. In the review of over seventy
five technologies aimed to automate the construction sites, 60 % of them are designed to
perform tasks in non-chaotic environment. Also most of the technologies are designed to
perform single, simple and repetitive task. Only couple of them were capable of performing
different kinds of tasks, and they were mainly the interior finish design tasks [3.0]
The potential in automating construction activities, is that list of materials which are
used is standardized and repetitive. Around 70 % of the materials are used repetitively,
together with potential seen in performing activities on the flat surfaces, it is encouraging
to attempt to solve problems such as the brick repointing. Despite handled materials are
being standardized, it was discovered that used systems requires lot of the customization,
because of the the non standard sizes and dimensions. Another factor which was observed
in the successful implementation of the automation in construction sector is designing the
systems in the way that despite the customization they are not to specific. In example of
the project is that, machine has to be specific enough to perform the task. [3.0]
Another issue noticed in literature and from practice, is that usual need for training,
construction workers in the new designed technologies or machines, who usually reluctant to
learn new technologies. It can be concluded that any machine designed in this field, must be
very simple in use and not require any long training to use them. As it can be told about any
technology introduced in many other fields, particularly in the construction it is important
to keep failure risk as low as possible [C1.6].
This process is no different in the sense, that bricks and the mortar are standardized
and repetitive material, which is often placed at the flat continuous surface. Reasoning from
the work done so far, the difference is that, such a process may be simpler and not requiring
so much of the initial capital investment to go the market and start operations. This was
estimated using prices of parts, softwares etc. Then within gained experience, the design can
be refined to be even better meet the market expectations and optimize the whole process.
The designed system in its final version is supposed to fall in the category of the system which
performs multiple tasks, even if those tasks are within the one process called brick repointing.
These tasks are removing the mortar from the joints, washing the wall and refilling the gaps
with the new mortar layer. It is different then observed trend in successful adoption of the
automation within construction technologies, where automation or mechanization is usually
achieved by designing machine which is used for one task. The reason, why brick repointing
system can be performed in this way, that to the same or similar structure of the machine,
there can be added modules, which are responsible for doing each task and from market
research it is sure that for every module added there will be clients
1.4
Brick repointing and automation goals
The process, which is to be automated by the machine, is called brick repointing, what
seems like a simple process, results in many delays, unhealthy process which is extremely
labour intensive and as pointed out, many of the construction workers, because of either
poor preparation and qualification do not maintain high quality of work and do not follow
5
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
health and safety regulations treating them as the inconvenience in their activities.
This process , can be split into two parts - milling out and refilling mortar. Before that there
is a scaffolding is mounted, which allows workers to reach the wall. From the discussion
with the construction workers, especially problematic are wall segments, which require from
workers to hold their heavy tools sometimes for couple of hours. The current characterstic
of the process is shown in the diagram below together with the vision how it is going to be
changed. 1.
Figure 1: Brick repoiting process transition
The mortar and the brick are indicated in the figure below 2
6
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
Figure 2: Mortar and bricks
The thickness of the join is fairly standardized, which will also simplify the automation
process, and it varies form 12-15 mm. Also the depth of milling is fairly standard. Despite
overall lack of the of following the same methods and parameters among the companies,
among the one company one set of instruction is followed. On the other hand, because
of the variety of challenges within the buildings and equipment failure, often construction
workers need to improvise. As an example it can be given that in case of wall corners, the
exhaust hood cannot fit the geometry of the building and the exhaust hood is replaced with
the industrial grade vacuum cleaner. In terms of safety its not working to advantage of the
workers, who because are pressured with the date of finishing work.
Starting from the top process is extremely segmented, every company does it in the
different way, using their own method and their own equipment. Two major types of the
tools are used are diamond discs tool, either the small more compact version which is steel
hub with number of the tungsten carbide blades on the side. The diamond discs are used in
case mortar is mixed with the stones. Most cases though, the smaller tools is used.
The power tools, which are used for the work are either electrical either pneumatic
supplied such as the grinders and chissers. The waste is suctioned by the either dedicated
exhaust systems, either the industrial vacuum cleaner. After that debris are transported
through elastic pipes to the big bags and transported out of the construction site. This is
also refereed to as the one of the bigger challenges After the mortar is milled out the next
stage is to wash the wall and then mix and refill the mortar. Washing takes place to get rid
7
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
of the residuals wastes and debris. Then mortar is mixed with water, and feed with hose
to the wall. This activity requires at least two or three people. One is feeding the mortar,
second is forming and third is usually cleaning the wall from excess mortar.
Important thing to point out, which underlay the project is how much tools and resources
are used for such a process. Because it is done manually, in some companies one tool lasts
form fifteen to twenty minutes. Power tools are reported to be worn after two to three
days due to the continues use. They are used including breaks (workers performing such a
activity needs to take them more frequently). The bigger building project, can take months
to accomplish, so while scaling up the project, the amount of resources used is getting high.
Despite process looks simple, it can have many delays and complications.
The whole process is not different then others activities in the construction, which means
that is exposing construction workers to hazardous work environment. Mortar raking ac-
cording to HSE is hazardous for health According to the data it produces the silicate, which
is as mentioned before responsible for the plenty of cancer cases. Such a work requires spe-
cialized equipment such as the RPE (Respiratory Protection Equipment) with an protection
factor of 20 (eg FFP3 disposable mask or half mask with a P3 filter) and extraction system
- from practical observation and presence on the construction site it is often replaced with a
vacuum cleaner while reaching the narrow spaces. Introducing system which could replace
the human on site could eliminate the hazard and possible reduce the exposure to the cancer,
standardize and streamline the process [C1.5]
1.5
Numerical control machines
CNC stands for Computerized Numerical Control and it is a computer-based numerical
control system for open and closed loop control for the machine tools. The project will
implement this kind of steering to perform the brick repointing process. Such control systems
were introduced in production machinery in order to ensure that motions are repetitive and
precise. The end goal was to create products, which are consistent in their quality. They
allow to input of all the parameters and information numerically, such as the feed rate, and
spindle revolution per minute and this constitutes the basic idea of the numerically steered
systems. The most important feature of such systems for the project is that they allow for
high resolution and precision motion between the workpiece and the tool. Another advantage
of such a system is that they are capable of processing different additional information such
as the different tool diameters, clamping, etc, in a quick manner. Therefore it makes it a good
choice for this project. Because of the fairly uncomplicated tool paths, a combination of the
linear drives, together with the high processing speed, and relatively simple programming,
has the potential to streamline and simplify the machining of the mortar.
CNC systems require operating system. This constitutes to the two parts:
• Standard software
• Machine specific software
Standard software might be used to data input, display, interfaces, or table management.
Machine specific software is dedicated to specyfic type of machines. It is important that,
8
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
this kind of software is suited for the machine type, because they can be differ in design,
kinematics, etc. Examples of those can be softwares such as the Sinumerik, Heidenhein TNC,
Mazatrol, HAAS automation CNC
One characteristic of CNC machines is the position control loop. This constitutes the
feed drives and position measurement. Many of the sub-modules are well-defined and known
to the industry, so implementing them in the machine for the brick repointing, is a matter
of adapting existing solutions, to the needs of the project. Especially the automatic tool
magazine feature is one worth looking at. It is because the machine defined in the scope
of the project has to be autonomous. Therefore, after the tool will be worn it should be
exchanged for the new one without human intervention. Although in the first version of the
machine, it is planned not to involve the tool magazine.
In order to position tool on the surface, two transnational axes are required. To position
tool in three dimensions three axes are required. Such a set up is typically called Carthesian
coordinate system. In the first version of the machine, it will be equipped with the two
linear axis. especially, during the machining of the mortar depth on the whole wall should
be kept constant. The recommended direction of the axis, is usually done with so called three
finger rule, and in such a set up axis are perpendicular to each other. Since in the beginning
machine will be either two either three axis, the focus will be only on the way the are defined.
This type of machine can be qualified as the one with the horizontal Z axis. According to
the ISO 6938, ones need to imagine, that middle finger is inserted into the spindle. Then
thumb needs to be turned in the direction of the longest axis, which determines the X axis.
Y axis is then automatically indicated by the index finger.
1.6
CNC machines control
Regarding the control of the CNC machines, there are distinguished two main types of
conttrol, which are open loop control and closed loop control. For this types of machine,
typically closed loop control is proven to be the most efficient and accurate one. It is the
type of control, where system has got the feedback on the actual position, and process
parameters. Feedback which is given in CNC machines typically by the lineary or rotary
encoder is free if disturbing influences and by comparing the input parameter, which is
described as the setpoint maintains predominant value. In this case it mainly regards the
position and Spindle RPM. Schematically closed loop control is presented in the figure 3
9
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
Figure 3: Schematic representation of the closed loop control [C2.3]
] This kind of control system, will be implemented in the future in the machine, but
despite being reliable is also more complicated and more expensive then open loop control
system. Such a control is especially used in the cases where stepper motors are implemented.
The difference between the previously described closed loop system is that there is no feed-
back. Obviously such a way of controlling is less accurate but also simpler to design and it
is presented in the figure below 4
Figure 4: Schematic representation of the open loop control [C2.3]
]
As can be seen in the figure above 4, it is simple control process. In the case of the
machine, The position will be given by the setup value given by the vision system. It will
not be measured by any kind of measurment instruments. In future it is planned to control
process by the piezoeletric sensors, which will be measuring the cutting forces in the real
time. CNC machines can be programmed in different ways. One of them, which less and less
popular, due to the avaiablity of CAM softwares, which provide less errors then calculating
every move by hand. The second, more convenient is based on the workpiece geometry.
The structure of the program consists of the discretionary numbers of the blocks. They
describe the entire workflow of the machinery, which is step by step passed to the machine.
In every line there is the adress and numerical value. In the adress there is determined,
10
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
which of the function group is used in the machine. Adress can appear more then once in
the block, with exception of the G and M functions.
It is also crucial to introduce some of the basic terminology, which will make easier to
understand the whole program structure. These are following:
• Character
• Word
• Block
• Program
Character is the smallest unit in the whole CNC program. it can be put in the three different
form
• Digit
• Letter
• Symbol
Important element to notice here, is that every CNC software recognizes the capital
letters but not every system recognizes low case letters. Program word can be defined as the
combination of the alpha numerical characters and it creates the single instruction. Word
can indicate parameters such as position, feedrate, spindle revolutions etc. Two or more
words create the block, which can be treated as the multiple instruction. In the below figure
there is block splited into word and charecters. They way CNC program blocks are created
is presented in the figure below 5
Figure 5: How NC program blocks are created [C2.4]
In the above figure 5 it is visible how NC program block is segmented to the smallest
element. In order to separate blocks in MDI (Manual Data Input) EOD (End of Block) has
11
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
to be used. In case of HMI pannels, EOD will have special marking, but in case inputing code
from keyboard it is as simple as pressing enter key. Important to point that the instruction
from the block are executed simultaneously. As mentioned before programs might differ
depending on the control use, but overall logical flaw is the same. It begins with some kind
of identification such as number. After number there is sequence of blocks, which constitutes
to the program. The code can be also commented in the same way as in other programming
languages - by the % symbol. The overall structure of the program is presented in the figure
below ??7
Figure 6: NC program structure [C2.4, C2.1]
There are couple type of functions, which are available within the programming in the
G-code. The letter, which is called the address determines the meaning of the whole block,
and to maintain correct syntax it must be written first. It can represent:
• N - sequence number
• G - preparatory command
• M - Miscancelouss function
• D or H - offset register
• X, Y, Z coordinate function
12
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
• F - feedrate function
• S - spindle function
• T tool function
In the below figure there is an example of the short program written in G code.
Figure 7: Example of the G code program
The functions used are in order M3 - spindle turn on, F - setting work speed rate at
F1200 m/min, G1 is absolute (absolute position is set by the default) movement to this posi-
tion with the work federate and selection of the tool number five from the tool magazine. All
of those blocks, put in the logical order, creates so called part program. There are multiple
types of letters , which has various functionalities depending on what needs to be executed
within the program, but not all of them will be used in the programming of the machine.
All of them are described in the DIN 66025/ISO 6938 [2.4] Since the machine will be always
machining very similar "parts" which in this case is a brick wall, the program structure will
be always similiar. The only one thing, which will change is the location of the tool path.
Usually such a structure should be thought off before the program runs, because it will mean
the fewer mistakes and increased efficiency. The beginning usually is the program header,
which contains basic information useful for machine operator such as the clear description
of the functions, labels etc.
It is worth noting that apart from the manual programming there is a possibility to
program machine with CAM software
It is crucial that structure of G code is well understood, because its an unusual, because
its neither manually input to the machine neither its created in CAM software. In order for
the machine to be fully functioning it needs program itself. The situation where operator
would have to manually type the location of the mortar even with the predefined program
structure, moving to home positions, would be too time consuming.
13
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
1.7
Product and process design in regards to the machine for brick
repointing
Before and during the master thesis substantial entrepreneur work was done, to make
current and future focus on the activities, which will bring the most value to the project.
One of the main points was to find out what are the key problems within the brick repointing
and what activities apart from designed ones can be done within such a set up. Because the
project is intended to land commercially at some point it is an good idea to structure the
design, and place in the product design cycle. Such a cycle can be defined as the conceptu-
alizing, designing, producing and selling it. It is presented in the figure below 8 [C1.7]
Figure 8: Business development cycle [C1.7]
The current project could be place in the Synthesis phase.
Despite the economical
factor are not described in depth here it is important, to find out how much customers will
be able to pay for the solution that company provide. The amount of profit can be treated
as the reflection of how successful product development is, so it good practice to think about
economical structure of the product since the same beginning. It was noted that product
follow so called S - curve which shows cumulative cash flow and product life cycle, which is
visible in the figure belo 9 [C1.7]
14
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
Figure 9: cumulative cash flow and product life cycle [C1.7]
As can be seen the the peak of the cumulative costs is during end of the production cycle.
The accumulated costs of the machine for brick repointing seems to fit this curve. During
the research phase, the were almost no costs and then during prototyping, costs started to
increase. Apart from the economical factors, there are more features distinguished, which
are characteristics to the products successfully delivered to the market. Those factors are:
• Cost - total cost of developing product and producing it
• Quality - product quality
• Product development time - time from product development to sale
• development of know how - capability to reproduce the results
Especially the last point is interesting, because it influence the efficiency and product devel-
opment time. Organizations, which gain the know how - the knowledge on the process and
products, find it easier to reproduce different products with similar structure, which also
fits into the done project. During market research, first process was done manually, so to
see practical problems and gain knowledge on how it is done today, what are the issues etc.
Besides talking to the workers on the construction also owners of the companies and project
managers were interviewed to get the crucial input, which is currently used to transfer the
this knowledge into the solution. According to the literature, even if company has the sig-
nificant size in terms of sales manpower, etc, it does not help if this important tasks has to
been done prior to establishing the organization. These tasks and activities include market
research, technical capabilities assessment, and sharp product definition, which includes:
15
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
• The outline of the concept
• Attribute list, which are required for the product to function
• Description of potential users and demographic
• Business strategy outline
After the market research then it time to to make the synthesis of the system, design separate
modules and machine layout. The general approach to engineering design is presented in the
figure below 10
Figure 10: General approach to engineering design
16
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
Initial phases until dividing and splitting system into the realizable modules Currently
key modules are developed and the prototype models are being done, which is visible in the
machine layout section. System was split into modules based on the how such a machines
are designed, so the frame, linear modules, supports electronics etc. Although before the
last step of preparing instruction for production, prototype needs to be thoroughly tested,
because the tests will reveal all of the problems, which might appear in the real conditions.
1.7.1
Product definition
The synthesis of all of the information gathered from the market, assessment of technical
capabilities, resulted in the the prototype machine design. Partially it was covered in special
course
1.7.2
FMEA
Some of the problems and risks can be predicted prior to actual production. Widely
used approach in the industry, is FMEA (Failure Mode effect Analysis), especially in the
projects, which are supposed to be introduced to the market, It follows the idea of preventive
avoidance of error instead correcting them. Such a way of early detection and prevention of
errors are popular in the automotive industry, despite coming from aerospace. The general
rule is that preventing errors is way less expensive then correcting them. The important
feature of this activity, is that it can never be done alone. Usually cross functional team
perform such a analysis cross functional team is required [C3.1]
After such a team is gathered, all possible failures are listed during brainstorming session.
After listing possible errors, their severity and occurrence is estimated. These factors, which
are taken into account are occurance (O), severity (S), detection (D). The priority of the
possible errors is determined with the followining formula:
RPN = OxSxD
(1)
RPN is called traditionally risk priority number. In order occurrence is defined as the
frequency of the error or failure, S can be defined as seriousness of occurrence, and detection
is how detectable is failure. Each of the factor is rate on the scale 1-10. Rating is usually given
as in the table below. It is important to notice, that this method is used for the early error
detection and correction and is always aiming to improve the system, so after implementing
correcting actions, FMEA should be recalculated and RPN should be reassessed. Three
components, which are RPN consists of are given in according to the tables given below ??
17
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
Table 1: Traditional ratings for occurrence of a failure mode
Rating
Probability of failure
Possible failure rate
10
Extremely high: failure almost inevitable
1 in 2
9
Very high
1 in 3
8
Repeated failures
1 in 8
7
High
1 in 20
6
Moderately high
1 in 80
5
Moderate
1 in 400
4
Relatively low
1 in 2000
3
Low
1 in 15,000
2
Remote
1 in 150,000
1
Nearly impossible
1 in 1,500,000
Table 2: Traditional ratings for severity of a failure mode
Rating
Effect
Severity of effect
10
Hazardous
without warning
Highest severity ranking of a failure mode, occurring without
warning, and consequence is hazardous
9
Hazardous with
warning
Higher severity ranking of a failure mode, occurring with
warning, and consequence is hazardous
8
Very high
Operation of system or product is broken down without
compromising safe
7
High
Operation of system or product may be continued, but
performance of system or product is affected
6
Moderate
Operation of system or product is continued, and performance
of system or product is degraded
5
Low
Performance of system or product is affected seriously, and the
maintenance is needed
4
Very low
Performance of system or product is less affected, and the
maintenance may not be needed
3
Minor
System performance and satisfaction with minor effect
2
Very minor
System performance and satisfaction with slight effect
1
None
No effect
The traditional rating is given in the way that is presented in the table below 2
18
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
Table 3: Traditional ratings for detection of a failure mode
Rating
Detection
Criteria
10
Absolutely
impossible
Design control does not detect a potential cause of failure or
subsequent failure mode, or there is no design control
9
Very remote
Very remote chance the design control will detect a potential
cause of failure or subsequent failure mode
8
Remote
Operation of system or product is broken down without
compromising safe
7
Very low
Operation of system or product may be continued, but
performance of system or product is affected
6
Low
Operation of system or product is continued, and performance
of system or product is degraded
5
Moderate
Performance of system or product is affected seriously, and the
maintenance is needed
4
Moderately
high
System performance and satisfaction with minor effect
3
High
System performance and satisfaction with slight effect
2
Very high
System performance and satisfaction with slight effect
1
Almost certain
No effect
After it is known how RPN calculated, FMEA procedure is introduced in the below
figure 11
19
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
Figure 11: FMEA procedure
Certain risks, has to be prioritized over others, it can be done according to the figure
below 13
20
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
Figure 12: Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) parameters for the Risk Priority
Number [C3.1]
As can be seen one the first procedures in FMEA is determining the scope of FMEA
analysis and assemble FMEA team. During the project multiple parties were involved in
the process of design and validating of the product - machine for brick repointing, those
parties expressed different risks and possible problems, which may happen during process.
It was worth noting that anticipated failures, are results of combining failures existing in the
manual process, and the elements which may not work in the final design.
The risk assessment was also done for the machine for brick repointing. Part of the sys-
tem, whih risk was evaluated was the machining module. It is important to note that this
method is iterative, and will be repeated in the future as soon as the machine is tested on
the wall. Then the appeared flaws and failures can be compared with the expected one. This
process always aims to improve the process, so action, so its crucial to implement actions as
soon as possible.
The result of the FMEA are visible in the figure below.
Top three risks with highest RPN are collisions, rust and short circuit. The common
problem with FMEA, is that O, S and D are often hard to determined even by the cross
functional team and and the values might be not precise. Since high RPN is coming from
three factors, even small difference in all of them can make a enormous difference in the end.
The figure with CAD model is show in the figure below:
21
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
Figure 13: Support for the X axis
22
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
2
Machine layout
2.1
Coordinates, axis alignment and workspace
As mentioned in the introduction normally the XYZ axis are aligned differently then in
the designed machine. In the figure below it is shown how the axis are set. 14.
Figure 14: Designed machine axis
As can be seen, the Z axis is assigned to the depth, then X and Y create a vertical
plane, where the tool moves. It is set like that because the brick wall can be treated as the
workpiece, so Z axis offset will be treated as the depth of the machining. It is crucial to
keep the depth of the machining constant on the whole wall. This version of the machine
will be equipped with two linear modules. There can be distinguished three points, which
are practically used in CNC machining. One is the home position - it will be located 10 mm
from the limit switches in one of the corners of the machine, which needs the beginning of
the workspace, which can be easier to calculate. Also, the camera might not even "see" the
23
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
home position therefore it needs local reference. It is planned to put the marker on the wall,
which will be located on the perimeter of the camera.
2.2
Frame
Frame was constructed from the aluminium profiles (Rexroth Bosch profile),
These profiles were chosen because of their versatility and overall good flatness and
surface roughness. Dimensional tolerance for this profile comes from the produced document
norms, and for the profile with cross section dimensions 40x40 the tolerance is equal +0.6
mm insert source document from Rexroth, although some supplier claim that the flatness
can be maintained up to 0.05mm. In the figure 15 be seen which dimension is tolerances -
Lmax
Figure 15: Rexroth Bosch tolerance
To achieve higher values of tolerances, such as flatness, surface roughness, and dimen-
sions, the frame would need to be welded and then machined, to provide sufficient flatness
and ensure the alignment of elements such as bearing blocks and guideways. Of course with
the steel frame comes higher weight and lesser capabilities of the changes in design, after final
assembly. That is why also it was decided to use the aluminum profile with this particular
cross-section.
24
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
Figure 16: Frame - CAD model
The overall dimensions are as following - the width including plates is equal to the 1006
mm, the height is equal to the 760mm, and the depth of the frame is equal to 586 mm.
The weight of the frame together with its covers is equal to the 28.9 kg. As can be seen in
the CAD model apart from the outside shape, there are additional structural beams added
to increase rigidity. To maintain this property, also the center of mass should be as low as
possible as well as aspect ratio. In the future there is considered adding modular counter
weight. It is shown in the figure below 17
25
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
Figure 17: Mass center of the frame
The machine is expected to output plenty of vibrations, so it was placed o four machine
feet. For the availability reason, they have been over dimensioned, because they all together
can carry (fill the weight).
The bottom surface is mounted with a layer of gum which
prevents the vibrations from going into the ground. The way they are mounted to the corner
brackets makes it adjustable. it is shown in the fig below. This way it can be ensured that
the machine is level. Also, it is easy and simple to exchange the machine feet on the floating
if needed. 18
Figure 18: Machine feet
26
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
2.3
Linear module X
Despite the high availability of linear modules on the market, with different prices,
accuracy, type of lead screw, etc, it was decided that the more cost-efficient way, also more
suited to the need would be designing the ones from scratch. Most of the parts are standard
such as the profile, bearing blocks, each one on the side, which work in parallel. Each one has
a stepper motor. The exact specification for the design is shown in the section Component
Selection. In the figure below 21 there is a visible linear module both in a separate assembly
and inserted into the machine. The working length of this module is equal to 480 mm. The
drive is directly clutched directly to the lead screw-stepper motor Nema 17 21
Figure 19: Linear X module
As can be seen, bearing blocks are placed on the distance plates. They are designed to
ensure the positioning of the axis of the both support and fixed side. In the first iteration,
they were printed from PLA. Because 3d print dimensions tolerance is nowhere near the
milled metal parts, also in terms of thermal stability, yield strength, structure, etc, it was
ensured that the 3D print was the best quality possible. The distance plates for the bearing
blocks are used in all of the modules. The model visible in the figure below 20
27
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
Figure 20: Distance plate X axis
Another parts, which have been designed are plates for mounting the stepper motors,
which can be seen in the figure below 21 They are the same for both sides of the X axis.
They are mounted to the profiles with two M8x16 8.8 screws. which are placed in the middle
of the cross section of the profile.
Figure 21: Nema 17 mounting plate
In order to cover the stepper motor and the clutch from the dust, instead of using the
28
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
standard mounting brackets. The part is mounted with four M3x30mm screws, the part is
visible below.
Figure 22: Clutch cover
In order to achieve the linear movement linear screw requires support. In this case
support was realized with the separate profile with mounted guide shaft and linear bearing
on it, which can be visible in the figure below. 23. In x axis both the main axis and support
are mounted in pairs.
Figure 23: X axis support
Sometimes support is mounted directly under the lead screw, but in this case it was
decided to mount the support on separate profile. It is because the whole construction would
29
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
be too high. On the support shaft there is a linear bearing, in casing, which the connecting
plate to the X screw will be mounted on. Fixing, shaft come are often used in the one set.
Support shaft fixes are mounted on distance plates, which have pockets, where support is
fixed. It is visible in the figure below 24
Figure 24: Distance plate X axis support
After the X axis is was designed, horizontal axis was drafted. Y axis is placed on rexroth
bosch profile with cross section of 160x40mm. There are two guide shafts, with two linear
bearings on each side.
Figure 25: Y module
Figure 26: Y module interior
30
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
Figure 29: Drive - fixed side
Figure 30: Drive floating side
Figure 27: Flower one.
Figure 28: Flower two.
In terms of kinematics, each axis is designed in the same way. The only difference in
the work length of the modules. All of the lead screws ends were machined for the bearing
surface. They are mounted with two ball bearing on fixed and one on the floating side. This
is shown in the figure below.
To protect the drive from the dust and rain, some measures were taken. One of them is
elastic bellow placed on the both sides of the Y module. Despite applying it to protect the
thread of the lead screw, bearings are still exposed. To cover them bent metal sheet cover
is used.
In order to mount the stepper motor, similar mounting plate is used as the one for the X
axis. The part is mounted with four M8x20 screws, to the aluminium profile. It is important
to know that all the mounting plate were overdimensioned, because they are 3D printed, so
as mentioned before the mechanical properties are lower then metal. The mounting plate is
show in the figure below 31
31
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
Figure 31: Mounting plate Y axis
To create the distance between the mounting plate and the stepper motor, the clutch
cover is used, because of the same stepper motor. The reasoning for such a design is the
same as in case of the X axis - to protect the clutch and stepper motors from the dust and
dirt generated in the process.
This version of machine is equipped only in two axis, therefore tool is able only to move in
the in XY plane. In future there is a plan to add the Z axis, to be able to change depth of
the milling. As can be seen in the overview of the Y axis model, on top of the four linear
bearings there is the mounting plate, which serves for the purpose of placing the spindle,
and in future additional axis. The mounting plate is visible in the figure below.
Figure 32: Mounting plate spindle
As can be seen this time four linear bearings were used on each side. It was done to
provide the equal weight distribution, and to avoid imbalance between the linear bearings
and the and the mounting plate. The main concern is, the planar alignment of parts which
32
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
is requried to minize the resistance of linear movement and vibrations, especially within this
price range, casings lack of the precision, and the tolerances on them can be very wide. In
future this concern can be reduced by using higher quality linear bearings and milling parts
in metal, where the tolerances can be much better controlled.
Support shafts are mounted on the different types of support, because of their more compact
construction, they can be visible in the figure below, together with mounting plate, which is
mounted to to the aluminium profile 33
Figure 33: Y module support
After the mounting plate is fixed, the spindle had to be mounted. There it is important
to note, that there has been prepared variant of Y module to mount dynamometer from
Kistler company. The variation is presented in the figure below 34
33
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
Figure 34: Y module - dynamometer variant
Kistler company has agreed to lend their equipment for the tests and characterizing of
the vibrations and loads which are occurring on the process. therefore another mounting
plates had to be designed. As can be seen in the figure above additional plate was used in
between the dynamometer and the main mounting plate.
On top of the either dynamometer or mounting plate, there is a spindle mounted. In current
version relatively small (0.6 kW of output power) spindle is mounted on the plate sitting on
four linear bearings. It is shown in the figure below 35
Figure 35: Spindle with tool
As can be seen in the figure above, apart from the spindle is already mounted with
the tool for brick repoinitng. Although to mount the tool, because of the different thread
sizes, it requires adapter, which was separately designed. Another considered option, is to
implement the thermal shrinkage adapters, which are mounted with the tools, in the similar
way as the milling tools are mounted. The adapter is visible in the figure below 36
34
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
Figure 36: Adapter
The presented adapter is male type, although there are types of tools, which end with
male type of thread, therefore, especially in the beginning there is a need to produce adapter
for every tool type.
2.4
Machine control
The machine is controlled in open loop. This means that it does not receive any feedback
on position or loads on the process. It was decided to use this kind of control, because it
is easier to implement and more cost efficient. For testing and prototyping purposes this is
a better choice then closed loop system with use of encoders. Brick repointing process also
does not require precision which is provided by this kind of control. The whole control is
realized with following elements:
• Three stepper motor drivers - two for X axis and one for Y
• Spindle driver
• Main board - compatible with Mach 4
• Mach4 control software
The main board is connected to the computer with mach4 by USB (Universal Serial
Bus), so for now the solution is stationary and cannot be moved.
Although it is a big
drawback for the project, it is temporary measure, to prove the effectiveness of the vision
system and possibility of steering machine by it. Control for this specific machine is shown
in the diagram below.
The electrical part is described in detail int he subsystem definition section.
35
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
3
Subsystems definition
In the below section subsystems will be verified in terms of their mechanical properties,
electrical circuit design and material selection. This is done, so after the prototyping stage
is done, preceding further is easier to build more industrial solution, which will have better
performance in terms of federate stability and other properties. As mentioned the biggest
focus was put on the drives selection and verification, material selection for manufactured
parts, which do not have predefined material and designing electrical circuit, which will
control the machine. Those fields were chosen, because they represent the biggest value for
the project and future design. Presented results of the calculation are good starting point
for the further optimization, especially when having more resources for components.
3.1
Drives verification
One of the most important elements in the whole machine, are the drives. In order to
veryfi the correct selection of the lead screw and stepper motor, there has been done follow-
ing calculations. First it was veryfied if the torque generated by the lead screw is enough
to lift the Y module. It is important to note, that there are two stepper motors used on X
axis. It is assumed that the module work in the vertical plane going up and down.
Input to calculations are following:
M = 13 [kg]
F=0 .3
D=16 [mm]
Ld= 4 [mm]
First
Where m - is equal to mass of the Y module, D is equal to the screw diameter, F =
friction coefficient between the screw and nut Ld is equal to Laid distance , which in this
case is equal to the pitch.
First velocity ratio is calculated from the formula below:
V r = Xe
Xr = πD
Ld = π · 16
4
= 12.56
(2)
where Xe is the displacement of the effort and Xl is the displacement of the load. Then
the efficiency was calculated out of following formula:
η =
tan(α)
tan(α + β)
(3)
Where α is slope of each of the thread and α is equal to:
α = tan−1 · ( Ld
πD) = tan−1 · (
4[mm]
π · 16[mm]]) = 4.54°
(4)
36
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
and β is equal to:
α = tan−1(F) = tan−1(0.3) = 16.699
(5)
So then efficiency is equal to:
η =
tan(α)
tan(α + β) = 0.20
(6)
So the efficiency is equal to 20 %
So the mechanical advantage is equal to the efficiency:
MA = V R · η = 2.51
(7)
Ma = Fl
Fe
(8)
Where the Fl is equal to the load of force and then Fe is the effort force
Fe = Fl
MA = 13.22kg · 9.81 m
s2
2.51
= 129.68
(9)
Now it is time to calculate the Torque, which is equal to calculated load multiplied by
the distance to it, which is radius fo the screw in [m].
Tx = Fe · R = 129.68N · 0.008m = 1.03
(10)
The combined torque of two stepper motors Nema 17 is not able to lift the
The same calculation was repeated for the Y axis, they were conducted in the same way
as before until the load on axis was calculated because the weight is different.
Fey = Fl
MA = 6kg · 9.81 m
s2
2.51
= 23.45N
(11)
After Load is calculated again Torque is calculated:
Tx = Fe · R = 23.45N · 0.008m = 0.18Nm
(12)
The value is lower then the torque, which is generated by Nema, so the Stepper motors
are chosen correctly.
Although the generated torque is enough to lift the mass, it is not enough to asses the
working conditions. In order to see what is the torque which is offered at the certain RPM
speed torque characteristic is used. The speed torque curve for the Nema 17 with 0.4 Nm
holding torque is visible below 37
37
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
Figure 37: Speed Torque curve for Nema 17
From this curve it can be inferred what torque is offered with what RPM. The problem
with achieving the high rates of the RPM makes the stepper motor or servo decrease the
offered torque. The curve which is of project interest is marked orange. It can be read from
the graph that, with 0.18 Nm and 0.31 Nm, which offers around 300 RPM and the around
500 RPM. After this was compared criticial speeds of the lead screw needs to be calculated
to avoid whipping phenomena. The critical speed is calculated from following formula:
nc = fc
dr
L2
c
· 107
(13)
where nc is critical speed, fc is factor depending on how the bearing is mounted, Lc is
unsupported lenght of the screw and dr is root diameter of the screw. The input data for
the lead screws in the machine are following - they are taken from the producer site.
drx = 11.500
dry = 11.500
Lcx = 513.5
Lcx = 15.1 - for fixed and support bearing type
Lcy = 15.1 - for fixed and support bearing type
Lcx = 513.5
Lcy = 649 mm
38
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
SO the Critical speed is equal to
ncx = 15.111.500mm
513.5mm2 · 107 = 6585RPM
(14)
and for Y axis
ncy = 15.111.500mm
649mm2 · 107 = 4122RPM
(15)
So for the X axis the critical speed is way beyond even maximum rotational speed for
the Nema 17 as can be read from the figure above, the longer screw is, the lower critical
speed
After the basic characteristics of the drives were verified, the required speed for the final
version of the machine has to be assumed. Even if it is not possible to achieve it with the
current stepper motors and bearings, it is important to benchmark the machining process
to the existing one, which is manual. Companies claim to machine one square meter of wall
takes around 15 min, which is a good estimate. Then the area, which needs to be milled
has to be estimated. A couple of assumptions have been made to simplify the process of
toolpath time estimation. It is assumed that that mortar will be taken out with the one
tool pass. Further tool path strategies will need to be developed in order to provide more
accurate cleaning of the mortar.
Average brick height can be assumed to be 70mm and 220mm long. According to the
contacted companies, the average size of brick joint varies from 12-15 mm, so the average
joint is 13 mm thick. Considering this data, it can be assumed that for every 1000mm long
and 1000m wide segment there are at least 10, 1000 mm joints in 1 square meter of the brick
wall. In terms of vertical segments, it can be assumed that they are as long as the brick
is high, so around 70 mm. If there are at least 4 bricks in one line and in the line below
they are three. Considering the number of bricks in the 1 m segment, they are around 40
vertical segments. The total length of the joint in one square meter is calculated width of
the formula below.
Totallinearlenght = 1000mm · 10 + 70mm · 40 = 12800mm
(16)
According to the calculations in 1 square meter of the brick wall there are around 13 m
of the joints. Considering that, it is done such a length is milled by a person in 15 min, in
order for the solution to be competitive it needs to be a lot faster then that. It is assumed
that the one square meter of the wall should be done in around 3 min. Required seed is
calculated below
V = 12800mm
3min
= 4266[mm
min]
(17)
Of course those parameters are estimated assuming that machining can be done in one
the one run. To this time should be added time for the reaching the start position, tool retract
and then in longer run the tool change, but this can be assessed mainly in practice. In order
to achieve such a speed on linear drives with such a lead screws the stepper motors. They
39
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
would have to reach around 1250 RPM, which is high for such a stepper motor, especially, for
the cheap ones. For example according to the Nema 17 spec sheet in theory it can achieve
such a speed, but it is not recomended. Solution could be to use screws with the higher
pitch, so in one turn the modules move further distance.
3.2
Vision system
3.3
Electrical part and control system
Apart from the mechanics, machine needs to be connected and steered in order to per-
form the machining and movement. As mentioned in the Machine layout, machine is con-
trolled with the open loop system. With the already mentioned elements there was created
the circuit which is suppose to control the machine. To the main board there are connected
three drivers from the stepper motor and one from the spindle. The board is compatible
with Mach4 program and is connected with USB to laptop with program on it.
The stepper motor drivers are supplied with the 0.4A-4A voltage. It was decided to use the
same power supply for the spindle and stepper motors, because power supply has acceptable
voltage by the drivers. Although the voltage fits the spec sheet of the driver, it is in the
higher tolerance of the specification so it was decided to reduce the voltage mechanically by
the transverter, where output voltage can be reduced with the screw
Since equipment is designated to work outside, it needs a sealed casing, where all the com-
ponents will be working safely, without rain and dirt getting inside. Therefore it is placed
in the box, which is designed for the this particular person. Luckily they are available in
the standard sizes and shapes. Those enclosures are equipped with sealing around the edge,
which does not let the water and humidity inside. Apart from this, it is cooled with the fan.
The box is visible in the figure below 38
40
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
Figure 38: Machine control shown schematically
The main board i
In future it is planned to be upgraded by elements such as limit switches, emergency
buttons and overload sensors. For now though basic functionalities are planned to be tested.
Since of one the key requirements is speed it is important not to be stuck with the processing
of image and make it as quick as possible, so machine can proceed to the machining.
When designing the machine it is important to decide the information and signal flow. In
case of the machine for the brick repointing, it may decide on the actual speed or functioning
of the project 39
41
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
Figure 39: Information flow
As can be seen, this is typical case of the open loop control system
3.4
Material selection for parts
At present most parts in the machine are 3D printed. Although in the future they are
planned to be replaced with metal parts. In design process it is important to select the
material, before parts are sent to be produced. Although before its done requirements have
to be formulated. Of course different parts will have different requirements. Although those
parts can be split into groups. For example distance and mounting plates will have the same
material requirements. On the other hand for parts such as the leads screw the requirement
list should be enlarged by long fatigue life
Procedure of material choice is non different from the recommended one. In the initial
stages of the design, and in the initial search, the choice of materials is vast and then by
formulating requirements, and obtaining more data results are narrowed down.
In order to do the material selection, Granta EduPack was used. The approach which
was used is that selection is started from the level first of database and then narrowing down
the list of materials and finally going through second and finishing in the third level. It
is important to note, that despite choosing perfect material for the application it may be
unavailable for sub supplier, in such case material from the same group can be chosen.
First the external conditions, where the machine will work are defined. The most important
are conditions defined. Some of the elements, such as the aluminium profiles support shafts,
lead screws screws have some predefined materials, but it is helpful to narrow the group
down.
The climate zone where the machine will be used in North West Europe, but for the beginning
Denmark is chosen. The average temperature in winter ranges from 0 to 7 degrees and in
summer at average 16 degrees, although the temperature seems not be a problem, throughout
the whole year weather is rainy. Based on this first reqmt for the materials have to corrosion
resistant in such a conditions.
In order to do the material selection, Granta EduPack was used. The approach which was
used is that selection is started from the level first of database and then narrowing down
42
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
the list of materials and finally going through second and finishing in the third level. It
is important to note, that despite choosing perfect material for the application it may be
unavailable in sub-supplier
Apart from the external condition material must be cost effective since the machine will be
mass produced in future. The material index for the the price is visible below:
Price = Cm · ρ
(18)
Where Cm is the price of material per one kg, and ρ is density.
Machine has to be as light as possible, because it will be elevated on the buildings.
Among other factors that is why aluminium profiles are used for the frame. At the same
time stiffness of the material has to be maximied. In order to that following material index
is used
3√
E
ρ
(19)
This material index is considered for the plate model.
Another material index used for the distance and mounting plates is strength limited
design at minimum mass. FOr the plate model material index is given below :
√σf
ρ
(20)
common material index for the all mounting plates is the one derived from strength
limited design for maximum performance, which is given in the formula below.
q
σ3
f
E
(21)
Another important characters tic, which all parts have to have in common are low energy
used to to produce the parts since plenty of clients now a days require the components to
be manufactured in the sustainable way. This is directly related to the mass of the parts.
Obvious material requirement for the such a conditions is that materials are corrosion re-
sistant. Distance plates are done the same way, so another requirement is of course the
machinability. The cover plates, are rolled and cut on laser.
Below there is a full list of material requirements:
• Corrosion resistance
• Minimum mass
• Maximum stiffness
• Maximum strength
43
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
• Minimum cost
• Machinability
• Sustainability
• Hardness
Those material indices were used as the input to create charts in Granta. As stated
above the search is started from the level 1. As the results Granta reduced the amount
materials to the groups which are visible in the figure below.
44
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
(a) Stage 3 - Granta Yield strength - density
(b) Stage 4 - Granta yield strenght, Young modulus
45
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
(c) Stage 1 Price -density
(d) Stage 2 Young modulus vs density
Figure 40: Stage 1 granta material selection for the distance plates
46
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
(e) Stage 5 Machinability vs hardness
It was decided to skip the level first of database and go directly to the second level. As
expected Granta limited the list of materials in five stages. For now list of materials did not
even reach the norms or specific number, but general groups. The reduced list include:
• Low carbon steel
• High carbon steel
• Stainless steel
• Ceramics
• Tungsten Carbide
• Aluminium alloys
• Cast grey iron
• Silicon carbide composites
• Titanium alloys
• Epoxy matrix
• Nickel
47
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
Next the to acquire more accurate results, database was switched to level 3. in below
figure there are results of the search 47
Figure 41: Level three database for all four stages
After switching to level three, Granta gave 1885 materials to choose from, among them
ABS, different steel alloys and tungsten carbides. Since this is still too many materials,
further limits were applied to the materials. Another filter applied is corrosion resistance.
As mentioned before, since Denmark is humid country with almost all the rainfall. Therefore
to current results there was applied excellent water - both fresh and sea resistance. For now
type of corrosion’s such as the stress corrosion cracking and pitting. With use of this filter
there are one hundred twenty five materials left to choose. The results of applying filter are
shown in the figure below 42
Figure 42: Level three database after five stages
48
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
As can be seen the amount of materials narrowed down the reasonable amount. The
list of materials group are following:
• Nickel both clear and alloy
• Stainless steel - austenitic
• Stainless steel - maretnsitic
• Stainless steel - duplex
After that, those materials can be compared in the table to pick the most optimal one,
especially in terms of price and availability. Usually steels within one group have similar
properties so, mentioned before groups can be compared now and the best material can
be chosen. In principal, to reduce costs of the final product, any kind of surface and heat
treatment are avoided.
Austenitic stainless steel is typically used as the structural parts, in food processing
plants, aerospace and others. Those alloys are characterized by the excellent ductility, cor-
rosion resistance and toughness over wide temperature range. In terms of the composition,
0.16-0.26% chromium, is responsible for the mentioned corrosion resistance. Important in
the desired application is here is addition of Mo, which increase resistance against the chloric
and reducing acids. In terms of the machining, austenitic stainless steels are know for thier
low machinabiltiy, which could be the reason to reject those kind of steel. In terms of price
it ranges from the 1.65-1.85 dollar per kg.
Martensitic stainless steel is type of steel with the higher carbon and lower chromium content
in comparison to the standard stainless steel. Unlike austenitic, this type of material can
be hardened. In terms of the application they are similar as in the previous alloys - food
processing, marine aerospace and processing corrosive liquids. Concerning machinability, it
is average and obviously can be done only in the annealed condition.
The last alloy chosen by chosen by Granta is Duplex stainless steel. This type of material
combines the advantages of the ferrtic and austenitic stainless steel, while still being even
more corrosion resistant to the chlorine environment. The micro structure is composed from
50 % ferrite and 50% austenitie and therefore combining properties of the both phases. The
application of duplex is wide among others are cooling coils, shell and tube heat exchangers.
On the other hand they have lower elongation then austenitic [C3.6].
THe nickel alloys were rejected, because of their high price.
From those three groups two alloys from each were chosen, and compared in terms of
the listed properties. 4
49
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
Table 4: Selected material properties chosen for the distance plates
Steel type
Duplex
Austenitic
Martensitic
Steel norm
X2CrNi
MoN25-7-4
X8CrNi
Mo27-5
XCr13
X5CrNi
CuNb17-4
X15CrNiSi
25-21
X1CrNi
MoCu
N20-18-7
Price [$/kg]
11-11.7
5.76-6.12
1.19-1.34
5.76-6.05
4.53-5.21
5.2-6.06
Density [kg/m^{3}] e3
7.75-7.9
7.7-7.9
7.61-7.82
7.79-7.87
7.8e3-8
8e3-8.1
Hardness [HV]
270-297
144-160
150-200
250-460
170-190
230
Yeild strenght[MPA]
530-627
500-600
245-550
1e3-1.1e3
327-363
300-379
Young’s
modulus [GPa]
195-205
189-204
195-205
197-207
196-204
195-200
Machining
speed [m/min]
(Machinability)
14.3
25.6
29.6
13.4
21.6
13.7
Corossion resistance
Fresh and salty water
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
As can be seen in the table above most of the properties are similiar within chosen
groups of steel. In terms of mechanical properties Young modulus ranges from 189 to 205
GPa with some minor differences between the steel types. Despite the differences in the
young modulus are negligible the highest value belongs to the X5CrNiCuNb17-4. Corrosion
resistance is excellent in all six steel type, so steel is rejected by this. Important property
of the material is its price. The highest price 11-11.7 $ - 6.05 $. Almost the same price
has X1CrNiMoCuN20-18-7 with 5.2-6.06 $ per kg. Density, so the weight is similar in all of
the six steels with the highest number belonging again X1CrNiMoCuN20-18-17. From all of
types chosen types material XCr13 seems to be the best fit. It is the cheapest from all of
the types and offers the highest machining speed. As mentioned before its Young Modulus
is not different from any others. Its Yeild strength is bit lower, but the mounting plates are
not heavily loaded parts. Combining decent mechanical properties and corossion resistance
makes it a good match for the manufactured parts.
After material for the main mounting plates, it is valuable to compare the properties, with
the PLA - commonly used filament in 3d printers. The comparison is visible in the table
below 5
50
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis
Table 5: Comparison between PLA and XCr13
Material
XCr13
PLA
Price [$/kg]
1.19-1.34
2.52-3.21
Density [kg/m^{3}] e3
7.61-7.82
1.24-1.27
Hardness [HV]
150-200
17-22
Yeild strenght[MPA]
245-550
50-55
Young’s
modulus [GPa]
195-205
3.3-3.6
Machining
speed [m/min]
(Machinability)
29.6
Corossion resistance
Fresh and salty water
Excellent
Acceptable
The given result were compared to reality. In order to do that Danish workshop JJ
Mechatronics APS was asked about the amiability, price and and practical usage of selected
materials. X2CrNiMoN25-7-4, according to the company, is available within relatively short
amount of time and cost 80-90 DKK per kg, which is similar to what Granta has given,
although, contacted organization claims that they are available only in tubes form, which is
limiting, because the parts need to be milled.
Apart from this they recommend to substitute X8CrNiMo27-5 with 14462. They have con-
firmed most of the properties and, specified that for example X1CrNiMoCuN20-18-7 is used
mostly in offshore industry, so it is good reasoning to reject it for such a application, because
of the high price. The finally chosen material XCr13 is refereed to be simplest chromium
iron alloy, which might be substitute with 1.4016 for better availability.
In the material was selected for the lead screws - one more of the exposed and critical
elements for the machine to function.
51
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis
4
Component selection and modelling process
Machine was deigned with the principle, that as many parts as possible should be
standard, with exception of some connector distance plates and positioning, since those are
not available on the market for such a specific solution. It is important to mention though
that despite wide availability of linear modules it was still decided to design the own ones,
because it might be more sustainable to produce own solution and gain know how within this.
Despite choosing standard limits the complexity, such a approach might not be resilience
to the random events such as the supply chain issues. In this chapter overview on the how
CAD model was created and component selection. Of course for the serial production of the
machine
4.1
Standard components selection
Many of the components, which machine is built from, are selected from the catalogues
of producents. Starting from frame, it is built from the 40x40 aluminium profiles - Rexroth
Bosch. The basic information about this profile is mentioned in the Machine layout section.
They were used because of the slots simplicity of mounting other elements on them and their
versatility. Since they are made in aluminium, so the frame is relatively light.
The next standard element was clutch. Since the part, which goes into clutch on every lead
screw is the same, the three clutches are the same.The specific type of the clutch is called
the claw clutch and is shown in the figure below.
Figure 43: Claw clutch [C4.1]
This type of clutch is often used in DYI CNC machines, because of their price, resilience,
ability to dump the vibrations, and resistance to sudden change of rotation direction. Since
this part consists of three other - one side, second side and polymer connector. They can
also be bought separately, which makes it easier to fix and maintain. Additional advantage
of its implementation is their high efficiency and possibility of application in both high and
low RPM
Next element semi chosen from catalogue are the lead screws. It is described by semi stan-
dard, because the only standard element in the part is the thread, which is done according
to DIN 103 [C4.2]. Without machining, lead screw, could destroy bearings. The good thing
is about the lead and ball screws is that there is variety of materials and pitches available
on the market. The material used to manufacture the lead screw is predefined and the exact
alloys is either A2 or A4, which is equivalent to the AISI 304 and AISI 314, which is group
52
==PAGE:55==
Master thesis
of the austenitic stainless steel [C4.2].
Stepper motors were also chosen from the catalogue - for now Nema 17. These stepper
motors are versatile and available in many different version varying in torque and size. In
this case the version with 0,4 Nm holding torque was selected to test basic kinematics -
but it will have to be changed for the stronger ones in future. Considering the weight of
the modules, stepper motors will be working in the higher range of their capacities, which
may cause problems such as overheating. and The parameters are given in the specification
[C4.4].
Another element chosen from the catalogue - are bearing blocks. Ones which were used
are EK 12 and BF 12. Their names come from the internal diameter of bearings which are
placed the inside the casing. Those casings are presented in the figure below.
Figure 44:
EK 12 - bearing block
[C4.5]
Figure 45: EF 12 bearing block [4.6]
This way of fixing the lead screw was chosen because the so called floating end allows
for compensation of the tolerance of lead screw length and should provide high stability and
higher available RPM without whipping phenomena. In future different type of the bearing
fixing may be tested.
Last standardized element is the spindle. It has 400kW of output power and maximum
RPM reached by it is 12 000 RPM. The whole set up was equipped with power supply and
clamps, potentiometer, driver and ON/OFF switch. All elements ordered within assembly
are shown in the figure below 46
Figure 46: Spindle used in the machine
The clamps, which are visible in the figure above are also standard, and are planned
53
==PAGE:56==
Master thesis
to be used in future, since they are available in the different sizes for different spindles. It
is one of the key elements in the machine, and tool will be eventually mounted on the end.
Since using the spindle for this purpose is relatively new idea, it needs to be tested further.
The screws, which were used to build the assembly are either stainless steel or galvanized
8.8 class screws, which according to ISO 898 means that first number means ultimate tensile
strength divided 100 in MPA. The second number allows to receive the yield strenght in the
following way - 800MPa · 0.8 = 640MPa.
4.2
CAD Models
CAD modelling was done in the way similar to the product architecture. The program
used in the project is SolidWorks. It was split into multiple sub assemblies and then put
together in the one assembly. This way, if one assembly fails or crashes it is possible to save
others, simply by reloading them. The main component tree can be see in the figure below.
Figure 47: Model tree
As can be seen in the figure above the structure of the machine is fairly simple. The
modules are split the same way as in the machine layout. All the assemblies listed in the
tree are :
• X axis module
• X axis support
• Y axis
• Frame
54
==PAGE:57==
Master thesis
The assembly was done to reflect actual kinematics on the machine. In order to achieve
that parts had to constrained in the correct way. In order to achieve that, The screw nuts
were constrained with the concentric constrain and then then parallel constrained to one of
the fixed components. Concentric constrain does not limit the axial movement, and because
the nut and carriage could still rotate para-rel constrained removed that movement. The
supports were constrained in the same way. All of the still elements, were constrained to
each other, so they cannot move. Despite this, only necessary degrees of freedom were taken
from the parts avoiding over constraining, which may result in the project crashing. As
many features as possible were mirrored or generated in the pattern.
In order to make all assembly move, sub assemblies were changed from the rigid to flexible.
This option is shown in the figure below
Figure 48: Flexible assembly
This option allows for treating sub assembly with retaining all the constraints from the
original file - and in result it allows all of the modules to move. It is important to note,
that in SolidWorks, sub assemblies can be mirrored with copy of all the constraints, which
allowed simplify the operation in case of the X axis, which both support and main part are
in mounted in pair. The general rule to provide the stability of the model or assembly is
to have as parent features as possible. For example if the constraints is referenced to the
existing plane in model, there is nothing, which could disturb the constrain from working,
even in case of modifying the file. On the other hand in case of referencing plane belonging
to the part, once deleted, the constraints reference to something, which does not exist, which
further results in error.
Apart from this parts were assemble in the way as they were assembled in reality.
As
mentioned separate linear modules were assembled first and then mounted to the frame.
Some of the models, are over dimensioned, because they will be made in PLA first (3D
printing), but overall the parts are design to maximally optimize manufacturing process of
them. As the example, mounting plates can be given. They are made with simple operations
and shapes, to minimize the price and allow reducing complexity in the future production
process of the machine.
The modular design of the whole machine, allows for simple and easy exchange of the
modules, which was visible in the figure 34. Exchanging just one element of machine, does
not violate the whole construction and still allows the upgrading if necessary. As the example
it can be given Increasing the work length of the axis, or switching the drives to stronger ones.
Despite there is no the one uniform definition of the modular design, it can be said that
the involves splitting the whole system into modules, which have distinguishable interfaces,
are composed from the similar components,which can be interchanged. The modules are
55
==PAGE:58==
Master thesis
based on functions fulfilled in the whole system. In this case it can be said that frame pro-
vide the stability the machine, the linear modules provides the kinematics and the machining
module provides taking out the mortar [C4.0].
Each of them are separate both i CAD and in the real word. When needed to do the mainte-
nance such as changing bearings, or lead screws, it is enough to unscrew first the Y module
from the supporting part, and then take out the bearing blocks. The main point of such a
design here is to avoid expensive and slow maintenance and assembly. Such a design provide
enormous advantage over complicated and not standardized designs, where those processes
are complicated and components are not interchangeable.
The standard component where sourced either from SolidWorks library either from open
source libraries such as the GrabCad [4.8]. If necessary, changes were made in the models.
This allowed to reduce the time of the modeling parts, which are already available in their
digital version.
Many parts were also redesigned because of the manufacturing process. For example
in first iteration. stepper motor was mounted to the module by the four distance bushings,
later they were replaced by a designed part called clutch cover, which provided full cover
for the connection. Also in the first iteration frame was built as the simple cage made out
of profiles. Because the space on the side is not used as the work lenght because its taken,
because of, among others bearing blocks, it was used to reinforce the frame. It is shown in
the figure below.
The adventage of low price and relatively quick pace of 3D prnted parts was used in the
iterative process of of redesining the parts both to fit the process or in case anything omitted
in the CAD model can be fixed, in relatively inexpensive way. In the belows figure there are
shown first and then last version of selected modules from the assembly.
4.3
Technical drawings and tolerances
Since the parts are planned to be milled , technical documentation of them had to
be made. The final specification and tolerances were dictated by the requirements of the
machine and application. Starting from mounting plates there are apart from dimensional
ones, shape tolerances were applied to ensure the alignment of the lead screw axis.
It
is important to limit all the misalignment to reduce the unnecessary loads and using the
torque of the stepper motor to overcome skewness of modules. The two tolerances which
were used to achieve that were parallel and flatness. For pararel As the datum was used
the bottom surface of the part. The flatness tolerance of 0.05 on the surface where bearing
blocks are mounted should limit mentioned earlier missaligment of planes. The difference
between the parallelism and the flatness is, that paralelism does not have a reference datum,
and it refernces to itself. Referencing top the bottom surface and making sure that they are
parallel within the given tolerance.
The overall logic behind the dimensioning was as in the modelling case simplify the machining
process and optimize the production of the parts, which eventually will be mass produced.
Specifically the parts were dimensioned, how they are supposed to be machined. All of the
56
==PAGE:59==
Master thesis
references are measurable in practice and verifiable. This broadens the range of suppliers
which can be chosen for the manufacturing. Of course they tolerances needs to be tested in
practice, and if they do not work out change them accordingly. The base for measurement
was chosen from the fixed, side of the machining jaws. Despite there is no proof in the
literature that it improve the dimensional accuracy and helps the milling machine operator
to program the machine accordingly to the drawing. Another argument which can be used
here is that making reference in the one stable point, may reduce the cumulative errors.
Especially parts which are mounted in pairs, are dimensions in the same way, so tolerances
are working in the same planes and directions is shown in the figure below. Another way to
ensure evenness is to define the surface, is required to be finished with the finishing run on
milling machine resulting in Rz 6.3.
To mount the lead screws in the bearings as mentioned before ends of the elements had to
be machined. The surface, which is contact in bearings, are tolerances with h7 requirement,
also because the the inside diameter of the bearing is made with H7 tolerance. Such a pairing
of tolerance is common within bearings and provide good interference. Formulated surface
requirement is 0.63 and it results of polishing process.
4.4
Manufacturing
Since many parts have been 3D printed, it is a good idea to compare them with CAD
models and technical drawings. Of course it is hard to substitute the 3D printed parts with
machining, but still the parts were attempted to be fit together in the best as possible. In
terms of some components it required many attempts to fit them together. For example
despite that in CAD model, nut placed on the lead screw fitted the casing. The diameter
appeared to be 0.15 mm bigger then in spec sheet which is placed in the appendix. In below
figure there are 3D prints of some of the component 49
57
==PAGE:60==
Master thesis
Figure 49: 3D prints
Parts were printed avoiding as much support structure as possible. All of them were
printed with 60 % of infill or more. High infill is the result of the attempt to increase the
mechanical properties. The nozzle was 0.4 mm size The small part visible on the top, is
suppose to replace the slot connector in aluminium profiles. Despite much worse mechanical
properties they work and mounting plates were successfully fixed to the profile. What was
noticed as the main problem was dimensional inaccuracy. Also 3D printers had notoriously
bad repeatability making it even harder to reproduce the CAD models and fittings. The
whole production process is extended even more by the support structures which had to
removed, almost in all cases, despite attempt to limit them. Like mentioned 3D printing is
excellent measure to prototype, which takes places in case of the machine but not suitable
to print loaded, precise components.
58
==PAGE:61==
Master thesis
5
Implementation of existing vision system
There will be tested three approaches, to obtain the vision system on the machine.
First one is based on the image segmentation, second will be based on the machine learning
and the third is the shadow analysis. Currently the idea is on the concept level, but once
machine is fully set up it will be tested. The image will be transfered form the basic camera
via USB or wi-fi to the computer, and then analyzed and recognize brick and mortar. Based
on that algorythm will create the nodes, which will be transfered to the G - code - instruction
understood by the machine.
Regarding image segmentation, once the image is transferred, it is transformed into the
matrix. Then binary filter is applied based on predifned parameters or being input by the
users. These parameters are related to the colour of the wall, size of the bricks and other
similar things. Based on those parameters black will be applied to the brick and white to
the joint. After this erosion and dilation will be applied to reduce the noise. Once this
process is complete, something, which resembles the toolpath will go into the script, which
will transfer it into the G-code. It is considered to put the marker on the wall, which will
be recognized as the begining of local coordinates and will be a start position for the tool.
Machine learning is sort of continuation of the image segmentation. In future it is planned
to install the sensors on the machine, which will measure the loads on the tool and spindle,
and feed the algorithm, which will reward going through the path of lowest resistance.
The third approach to the problem is shadow analysis. In order to realize this, ring of lights
will be placed around the camera. When lighting on each led. Then the images will be
analyzed to find the difference between the shadows on each image. It will done to find the
difference in step between the brick and the joints and that’s how the joint path will be
found.
5.1
Structure of G code program
Even before the visions systems tests, it is important to plan how the instructions for
the machine will be structured. In another words it is good to propose in the advance how
the G code program will look like. Ideal situation would to create one universal stctur, where
toolpath could be inserted, but rest of the program - tool compensations parameters would
stay the same or defined in the simple way by the user. Below there are is proposed structure
of the G code 50
59
==PAGE:62==
Master thesis
Figure 50: G code structure proposal
Starting from the same top in the header should contain the place, contract number,
the average size of the brick, joint and the depth of the milling. This will allow operator
to verify if the toolpath is valid. Next so called safety line is implemented. Among others
it sets the unit the machine operates to mm (G21), set the XY plane, calls off all the
offsets and tool compensation. After this spindle is turned on and set to the 10 000 RPM
(example parameters) and important line, aquiring the marker location and setting it to the
local reference G54. Then tool goes with rapid movement (G0) to the markers location and
program stops, requiring operator to continue it manually. This measure is taken to verify
if the tool is in the right position to begin milling and if the toolpath covers the joints. If
toolpath is shifted it might be considered to offset the local reference (G54) by the value
which is chosen by the machine operator. After this is done tool plunges to mortar on the
depth, which is agreed previously in the contract. Then toolpath is insereted and actual
60
==PAGE:63==
Master thesis
machining starts.
After tool reaches the end of the toolpath.
it retract the to the safe
position in Z axis and then waits to operator continue program again, making sure that tool
retracted from the material and will not move in the rapid movement mode while still being
engaged.
61
==PAGE:64==
Master thesis
6
Machine validation
One of the things which was measured, was the axial run out of the lead screw, because
this can be major source of resistance and vibration. Before the actual measurement all
of lead screws were mounted in the bearing blocks, in the way there way designed, then
they were mounted in the brackets, which were designed to fix them and the whole set up
was mounted to the alumnium profile. The next step was to find the flat table and the
steel surface to mount the measurement tool. In this case the lead screw was decided to
be measured with the dial indicator. The shaft length was 20 mm long and the changeable
ending had a flat end.
During the measurement the contact was provided between the thread of the lead screw and
the tip of the dial indicator. The difficulty of the measurement comes from the fact that,
that while rotating, it the tip of the dial indicator might fall between the thread pitch, which
in this case is 4 mm. Another difficulty, is to provide set the indicator perpendicular to the
thread. It was made sure that that contact was provided, and during the 360 °turn tip did
not fall of the metal surface. The set up is presented in the figure below:
Figure 51: Measurement set up for
axial runout of lead screw first take
Figure 52: Measurement set up axial
runout lead screw second take
Figure 53: Measurement set up axial
runout lead screw third take
Figure 54: Measurement set up axial
runout lead screw fourth take
62
==PAGE:65==
Master thesis
Axial run out - according to ISO 11001 called circular run out. Assuming the tolerance
value of t, the it is defined as the any cross section perpendicular datum A, is contained
between two cocentric, coplanar, circles with the difference in radii of t. It is presented in
the figure below as the example.
Figure 55: Cocentric runout according to ISO 1101:2017 [C3.7]
In the below figure cocentricity is defined on the lead screw - every lead screw has
cocentricity defined in the same way.
Figure 56: X axis circular run out
After it shown how the circular runout is defined ont the measured element, there are
presented results of the measurements. 6
63
==PAGE:66==
Master thesis
Table 6: Measurment of the axial run out of the lead screw
Lp
Lead screw measurment
1
X axis 1
X axis 2
Y axis
2
0.560
0.300
1.800
3
0.500
0.388
2.100
4
0.643
0.636
2.500
5
0.630
0.783
2.800
6
0.618
0.934
2.738
7
0,656
1.056
2.428
8
0.929
1.000
2.380
9
0.642
1.059
1.668
10
0.680
1.100
1.400
11
0.907
1.203
1.520
12
0.706
0.643
1.196
13
0.740
0.828
1.086
14
0.530
0.928
0.990
15
0.580
0.912
0.660
16
0.300
0.209
0.380
17
0.298
0.201
0.560
18
0.458
19
0.480
20
0.431
21
0.281
Points in the measurment are equivalent to positions on the lead screws starting each
time from the fixed point of the fixing.
Next the average and standard deviation from following formulas were calculated
AvgXaxis1 = 0.640
(22)
AvgXaxis2 = 0.761
(23)
AvgY axis = 1.390
(24)
Next standard deviation was calculated
Next standard deviation was calculated
StdXaxis1 = 0.148
(25)
StdXaxis2 = 0.319
(26)
StdY axis = 0.865
(27)
Next the same procedure was done to measure the spindle run out, which is important
in the process. Despite the producent claims to have a run out of 0.05 mm, it was worth
checking it, since the milling process is done usually in the high RPM range (20k RPM), the
64
==PAGE:67==
Master thesis
higher circular run out, might significantly reduce the life span of the spindle Below there
are the results of the measurement.
Table 7: Measurements of the spindle run out
Lp
Value [mm]
1
0.018
2
0.085
3
0.11
4
0.077
5
0.059
6
0.067
7
0.026
8
0.08
9
0.09
10
0.034
65
==PAGE:68==
Master thesis
7
Results
Despite the machine design and built progress, it still requires a lot of work to be finished
and fully functioning. Currently, it is being assembled from the parts, which were ordered or
manufactured. It is important to remember that, it is designed to eventually commercialize
it and perform actual brick repointing on the wall. There is plenty of useful knowledge,
which was taken from the project, which will be used further on, especially within machine
design, which may need reiteration, especially in terms of the design and sealing of the linear
modules, which is one of the crucial elements. The same concept seems to work, although it
still needs to be verified by buying stronger drives and machined parts to replace 3D prints.
Fitting those parts manufactured in this way together is the hard task itself, and the required
precision and mechanical properties are clearly not achievable by this measure.
Another issue, which appeared on the way was the discovery that the lead screws were
skewed, which was quantified by the axial runout measurement. As shown there might be
multiple reasons for it, one of them might be either primal manufacturing or machining the
ends. For this reason, there might be a need to replace the lead screw with the ball screw,
which typically is manufactured in a more precise way. It is because the machine will be
eventually mass-produced, and such a high rate of rejection is not acceptable. Implementa-
tion of the ball screw implies that the drives need to be sealed and most probably fulfill the
IP rating to prolong their lifespan.
Apart from this the method of programming the machine is being developed. Potentially
the most crucial steps in product development will be implementing the vision system and
testing the concept of the programming method. Still, the principle will be to use it in the
simplest way, so the machine can be used by anyone, even without having any knowledge.
Another thing that has to be evaluated in practice is the materials planned to be used for
the production of some of the parts, although their properties seem to fulfill the assumption
sufficiently. Moreover, those material groups are used in practice and their availability was
confirmed, by the company operating in the manufacturing field.
It can be told that the project is currently at the stage where if more resources are obtained
documentation is ready to improve the quality of the current prototype and build the first
functional proof of concept. Many ideas which were described such as a vision system, to be
tested and validated might take months to fully integrate into the machine.
Selected initially drives appeared to have too little torque for the application although ex-
changing them is not a big issue. Because of the high rotational speed required, it might
be necessary to pair the stepper motor or servo with a multiplicator. Additional upgrades,
which could be applied - increasing the price, but increasing precision and simplifying the
assembly. is the implementation of the Hiwin guides instead of guide shafts? Pairing the
ball screw with Hiwin guides stresses even more the sealing of the drives. But could poten-
tially provide a more compact design of the linear module. Despite the linear modules being
available on the market, it is still important for the project to design its own ones, which
will be modified in an easier way rather than buying the solution closed in a black box and
being dependent on the suppliers. The same goes for the vision system. Supplying it fully
from the external party would mean being dependent on the supplier. Creating the whole
66
==PAGE:69==
Master thesis
system from scratch including tested already methods and technologies, and applying them
in the new field will mean a longer learning curve but once know how is gained, the results
can be reproduced in different ways.
An important part of designing such a product is defining the risks and evaluating them to
take preventive measures. In order to do that FMEA on the machine was conducted, which
gathered the knowledge from the construction companies and experience in machine design
to anticipate the most hazardous outcomes. The biggest issues mentioned, which will have
to be resolved are the frame vibration and general lack of force pushing the machine against
the wall. There are a couple of ideas on how to solve that. Among them are implementing
modular counterweights, which could be inserted into the machine, increasing weight, and
therefore fixing it to the mobile platform, where it will be placed. The next idea is to im-
plement the fixing to the platform with the use of either pneumatic or electric actuators,
which will anchor the machine allowing for machining. Another risk - from a commercial
perspective is the failure of the vision system and control which could imply the big financial
and legal responsibility for the project. In order to reduce this risk the control stops were
introduced in the program, so the operator can make sure that the tool-path is accurate.
7.1
The way forward
The most important in the project is the plan to go forward, adjust the plan according
to the met obstacles and circumstances. For the brick repointing machine it is assumed that
functional machine will be released until the end of fourth quarter of 2024. Until this period
the proof of concept will be released and based on the performance it is planned to acquire
additional resources to finish the project and go to the market and test it. The tasks which
are supposed to be done within this period are following:
In order to further develop the machine and being able to control the machining better,
loads during the process needs to be measured, together with their characteristics. This
allow to choose most suitable components and solutions for example in terms of the vibration
reduction and mounting of the spindle.
Another task is the full adaptation of the vision system. The end goal of this module is to
obtain the G-code instructions from the camera, and performing machining, without major
intervention from the operator. Also the way of controling machine has to be redesigned
Important measure is to design the machine in the legal and secure way. To make sure of
that CE certification will be required, which will involve safety elements and measures. For
example it is locking the work space from outside, so operator cannot get inside the machine
while milling, emergency buttons, acquiring data on dust, noise and vibration generation.
Next in pipeline is designing the fixing system which was mentioned in the risk assessment.
In order to do that also available different types of construction lifts will be evaluated to do
that, because it seems like something which is required from the market.
Developing the automatic tool magazine and tool change. Since the machine is designed to
work on the high altitudes, it can not go down every time the tool wears down. Therefore
solution known from the machining and turning world has to be applied. Although this is
the lower priority then fixing and elevating machine to the wall.
To exist in the business space, it is important to develop network with future and current
67
==PAGE:70==
Master thesis
patterns, which can fill the know-how gaps, potentially invest in project and validate the
company.
Linear modules have to be redesigned, and better quality of the components have to be
implemented for the better performance. Among those it is replacing the skewed lead screws,
implementing more precise rails and sealing of the drives. In below figure there is timeline
put on those tasks
Figure 57: Plan of way forward
68
==PAGE:71==
Master thesis
7.2
Appendix A
Figure 58: Appendix A - bearing block plate
69
==PAGE:72==
Master thesis
Figure 59: Appendix B - Lead scew Y axis
70
==PAGE:73==
Master thesis
Figure 60: Appendix C - X axis mounting plate
71
==PAGE:74==
Master thesis
Figure 61: Appendix D - screw Y axis
72
==PAGE:75==
Master thesis
Figure 62: Appendix E - Y axis support shaft mounting plate
73
==PAGE:76==
Master thesis
Figure 63: Appendix F - Z axis mounting plate
74
==PAGE:77==
Master thesis
Figure 64: Appendix G - Stepper motor mounting plate
75
==PAGE:78==
Master thesis
Figure 65: Appendix I - Support X module BoM
76
==PAGE:79==
Master thesis
Figure 66: Appendix J - Frame assembly
77
==PAGE:80==
Master thesis
Figure 67: Appendix K - Y module
78
==PAGE:81==
Master thesis
Figure 68: Appendix M - Linear module X
79
