==PAGE:1==
Assessment of behavioral effects in connection to tag-
ging technology aiming to discover the European eel
spawning area
Master Thesis
Alitheia-Aliki Kalli
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
DTU Aqua
Cover photo
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Assessment of behavioral effects in connection to tagging technology aiming
to discover the European eel spawning area
Master Thesis
September, 2023
By
Alitheia Aliki Kalli
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Alitheia Aliki Kalli, 2023
Published by:
DTU, DTU Aqua, Kemitorvet, Building 202, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.aqua.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the EEL-HATCH research facility in
Hirtshals, Denmark, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
M.Sc. Eng. in Aquatic Science and Technology.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and program-
ming as well as knowledge related to fish biology and behavior.
Alitheia Aliki Kalli - s213521
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The European eel (Anguilla anguilla) displays intriguing behavioral patterns, particularly
during the initiation of their extensive spawning migration. This master’s thesis delves
into the intricate behavioral dynamics of European eels and the challenges associated with
revealing their elusive spawning area. The study investigates the impact of innovative
technology that combines various PSAT tag sizes with internal pingers, intended to be
spawned alongside the eggs, in an attempt to unravel the long-standing mystery of the
European eel’s spawning location.
It’s important to clarify that this study primarily
examines the impact of PSAT tags in comparison to a control group with no tags, rather
than delving into the outcomes of pinger spawning success or failure.
The findings uncover distinct behavioral patterns in eels, which are closely tied to tag
size and the stage of hormonal maturation. Smaller tags lead to fewer disruptions, while
larger tags have a significant impact on eel behavior in terms of preferred positions and
swimming activity. As the study progresses, eels exhibit altered positional preferences,
potentially influenced by their stage of hormonal maturation.
These findings highlight the importance of optimizing experimental setups to improve
tracking accuracy while preserving the individual identities of the eels.
This research
contributes valuable insights into European eel behavior and the potential of new tagging
technologies to unravel the enigma surrounding their spawning area.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Alitheia Aliki Kalli, M.Sc Eng. Candidate in Aquatic Science and Technology, DTU
Aqua
First, I wish to express my profound gratitude to my thesis supervisors, Dr.Sebastian
Nikitas Politis and Dr.Sune Riis Sørensen, for their unwavering support, expert guidance,
and invaluable mentorship throughout this research journey.
I extend my heartfelt appreciation to Dr.Fan Yang for her valuable assistance in analyzing
the experimental data and her guidance in the production of this manuscript.
My sincere thanks go out to all my colleagues at the EEL-HATCH facility, with special
recognition to hatchery manager Dr.Jonna Tomkiewicz and assistant manager Paraskevas
Koumpiadis, for their unwavering guidance and support throughout this experiment.
A special note of gratitude is reserved for Dr.Kim Aarestrup and Dr.Niels Jepsen, whose
invaluable insights and years of expertise were instrumental in the successful surgical
implantation of tags, a pivotal procedure in this research.
My deepest appreciation goes to my family, particularly my beloved sister, Panagiota
Kalli, for her belief in my abilities, encouragement, and understanding throughout the
highs and lows of this academic pursuit. Your love and encouragement have been my
pillars of strength.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my amazing friends for their constant en-
couragement, humor, and companionship, which brought joy and balance to my academic
endeavors.
This thesis would not have been achievable without the collective support, guidance, and
encouragement of all those mentioned above. Thank you for being an integral part of my
academic journey.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Materials and Methods
9
2.1
Ethical statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Broodstock husbandry and rearing system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Tagging methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Experimental set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Maturation and hormonal treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
The software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Analysis of behavioral tracking data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Results
23
3.1
Analysis for positional data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
ANOVA for movement data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Discussion
31
4.1
Eel Behavior
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Limitations of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
40
A Appendix
43
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The European eel (Anguilla anguilla) is a species that inhabits freshwater, coastal and
oceanic environments. This eel species displays fascinating behavioral patterns in response
to changing environmental conditions and seasons that trigger the initiation of their spawn-
ing journey. As winter approaches, they enter a hibernation-like state to withstand low
temperatures [1]. The daily rhythms of European eels have been studied, revealing in-
triguing behavioral patterns. Eels are highly photophobic and they exhibit predominantly
nocturnal behavior, with more activity during the dark phase, particularly around light
transitions [2][1]. They usually stop moving during daylight hours and sometimes pause
for several weeks if there is an obstacle or when the light level is too high [3]. Furthermore,
European eels, especially the small juveniles, show a preference for complex habitats, in
particular substrates consisting of small pebbles enabling burial behavior and abundant
shelter options[4][5][6].
European eels demonstrate a catadromous life cycle characterized by migration from fresh-
water habitats to oceanic regions for reproduction. This process begins when eels that have
reached a certain stage called silvering, associated with the initiation of their long spawn-
ing journey undertake a long spawning journey (Figure 1.1). The European eel stands
out as the longest migrating anguillid compared to other species of the Anguilla genus
(including 19 recognized species/subspecies within the Anguillidae family)[7]. They are
known to migrate in large groups during narrow specific periods. First they gather from
streams and small river systems in the catchment area of large European river systems [3].
Thereafter, that European eels travel about 5000 to 10000 km, across the Atlantic Ocean
[8].
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: The European eel life cycle: It is hypothesized that hatching happens in the
Sargasso Sea. Larvae become leptocephali before transforming into glass eels near the
European coast. Glass eels can stay in coastal areas or migrate upstream as juveniles, for
4-12 years. Eventually, they develop into silver eels, undergoing a mysterious ”silvering”
transition. Source: Henkel et al.2012 [9].
The hypothesis that European eels spawn in the Sargasso Sea is deducted by the discovery
of recently hatched European eel larvae, with a size of 12 mm or less, in the southern
regions of the Sargasso Sea during the spring of 2014 [10]. Historical records from 1921
to 2007 also reinforce this theory, as they show the collection of small larvae across this
extensive area, demonstrating the continuity of the spawning range over recent decades
[10][11].
Despite a century-long intensification of research efforts, the exact location of the eels’
spawning area is still to be uncovered, leading to an enigma. In fact, neither “adult”
eels carrying gametes nor the earliest life stages (eggs and yolk-sac larvae) have ever been
encountered in nature. Gaining insights into the complexities of the spawning migration,
pinpointing the exact locations of adult eel populations during this reproductive phase,
and uncovering the ideal depth and oceanographic conditions for spawning is essential in
the field of eel research [8][2].
2
==PAGE:11==
Aquatic telemetry
Aquatic telemetry is a technique used to monitor and study the movements and behaviors
of aquatic animals in their natural environments. It involves the use of various tracking
technologies and devices to collect data on the location, depth, temperature, and some-
times other environmental parameters of the tagged animals as they move through water
bodies like rivers, lakes, oceans, and estuaries. This information helps researchers gain
valuable insights into the behavior, habitat preferences, migration patterns, and popula-
tion dynamics of aquatic species.
With the rapid progression of technology in recent decades, a diverse array of electronic
tracking devices, such as acoustic and satellite transmitters, has emerged, enabling re-
mote monitoring of animals within challenging environments. The development of aquatic
telemetry in particular owes itself to advancements in miniaturization, battery engineering,
and software and hardware innovation. These continually evolving miniature devices offer
insights into the spatial-temporal movements of animals. When augmented with sensors,
they can also document an organism’s surrounding conditions and measure behavioral and
physiological states [12].
However, it is worth mentioning that aquatic environments have multiple dimensions in-
cluding depth and important environmental factors. Moreover, time becomes the fourth
dimension that affects how the aquatic space is used and thus data collection for animal
conservation purposes can be a demanding task.
Despite challenges in aquatic resource management, telemetry can provide the means to
bridge this gap, facilitating holistic approaches to global resource management [13]. In
this way telemetry can contribute to aquatic governance, aiding in the development of
comprehensive frameworks for management and conservation.
Tagging technology used in eel research
Within the field of European eel tagging technology and research, various methods have
been employed, each offering unique advancements in comprehending eel behavior and
their interaction with the environment.
One approach involves the use of archival data loggers that can be surgically implanted
3
==PAGE:12==
within the eel’s abdominal cavity to record essential data encompassing variables such as
temperature and depth. These loggers are typically retrieved upon eel capture or through
the deployment of a flotation device, which facilitates their resurfacing in alignment with
the eel’s death [14].
Alternatively, a different methodology, frequently adopted by researchers, entails the ex-
ternal attachment of data loggers, equipped with pre-programmed release mechanisms such
as pop-up satellite archival transmitters (PSATs) and pop-up data storage tags (PDSTs)
[15][14]. Following a predetermined period, these devices disengage and ascend to the
water’s surface and transmit all gathered data to satellites.
Gaps in existing knowledge
The current lack of understanding about important reproductive events not only inhibits
the adoption of effective conservation strategies but also delays the development of hatch-
ery breeding techniques. As a result, identifying the migration route and spawning site of
the European eel becomes crucial. Yet, current methods face challenges due to a combi-
nation of technological and biological limitations.
Among various anguillid eel species, the European eel’s migration pattern is the longest
and most complex [16]. Within this context, using conventional PSATs offers a way to
collect valuable data, however, they are limited by their inability to transmit information
from below the water’s surface. These tags need to be pre-set to detach from the eel and rise
to the surface to transmit data. The unpredictable timing of the spawning process, only
undercores the limitation of traditional PSATs, so far making it impossible to pinpoint the
exact spawning location. Therefore, there’s a clear need for innovative tagging approaches.
Need for innovative advancements in tagging technology
The current status of European eel populations is a matter of concern and according to
IUCN red list 2020 it is assessed as critically endangered [17]. European eels face threats
from exploitation as well as barriers such as dams and other structures that obstruct their
migratory routes and cause habitat degradation [7]. As we expand telemetry infrastructure
and tagging efforts, the prospect of implementing marine resource management becomes
increasingly feasible. These advancements bear particular relevance to endangered species
like the European eel, with applications in determining exact spawning areas in the Sar-
4
==PAGE:13==
gasso Sea. Furthermore, considering that the eel life cycle in captivity is not completed,
the aquaculture for the species is limited. Knowledge about the exact location can provide
insight and increase the understanding on the conditions were spawning and the earliest
life stages off eels occur.
PSAT tags enable researchers to remotely collect data on marine animals, thereby improv-
ing the understanding of their behavior and interactions with the environment. Acquiring
knowledge about migration routes, breeding grounds, and preferred habitats holds sig-
nificant potential for aiding in the protection of endangered species and the sustainable
management of fisheries.
During the attachment and deployment phase, PSAT tags are aﬀixed to animals using
non-disruptive techniques that minimize the impact on their health and natural behavior
[15]. Equipped with mechanisms designed to maintain their attachment for predetermined
periods, these tags gather valuable data throughout the animals’ regular routines. Then,
the data collection encompasses sensors integrated into these tags, capable of capturing
important data. These variables usually are water temperature, depth, light levels, and
salinity. Next, storage and transmission involve the internal storage of data collected by
PSAT tags. Depending on their design, these tags can store substantial information. Their
distinguishing feature, however, is the ability to transmit this stored data to satellites.
Following this, the pop-up and data transmission phase sees the detachment of PSAT tags
from animals at pre-established intervals. This ”pop-up” mechanism sends the tag to the
water’s surface, where it establishes communication with satellites.
This study tests a novel technology designed as a modification of the existing PSATs,
which are already in use. To be more specific, this technology is combined with a pinger
device implanted in the fish. The expectation is that the release of the pinger will be
triggered alongside the release of the fish’s eggs, revealing the exact spawning location by
activating the PSAT. However, before applying this technology in a natural setting, its
potential use needs to be thoroughly investigated in laboratory studies.
1.1
Research Objectives
Considering the unique behavioral characteristics of the European eel described in the
previous section the specific objectives intended to be explored in this project arise:
5
==PAGE:14==
• Considering the how eels would behave normally, can different-sized PSATs have an
effect in swimming? Is it possible to propose an acceptable tag to fish-size ratio?
• Is a different behavior observed in eels carrying the internal pinger compared to
other ones who do not?
• Since European eels have a nocturnal/photophobic relationship with light, can time-
of-day be a factor that influences behavior under different PSAT size treatments?
• Effects of sexual maturation stage on eel behavior; What is the influence of time in
hormonal treatment?
• Is there any difference in behavior on days post handing?
• Are the interactions between different PSAT size treatments with time-of-day, day
and weeks on hormonal maturation on eel behavior?
• Assessment of the open source tracking software and experimental set-up. Advan-
tages and disadvantages of the current approach;
Scope and Limitations
This project’s scope centers on examining the behavioral reactions of eels under tagging
with different-sized PSATs and pingers, focusing on preferred positions, speeds, and accel-
erations. A comparative analysis is performed against the control group, which involves
only fish subjected to hormonal treatment for gonadal maturation. A challenge arises
due to the distinctive behavior of eels, including backward swimming and close group
aggregation, which makes it diﬀicult for tracking software to maintain individual IDs for
separate fish analysis. Consequently, investigating potential escape response directions or
irregular swimming behavior becomes intricate. Within this specific experimental setup,
these aspects were not viable to explore; hence, the study concentrates solely on preferred
positions, swimming patterns, speeds, and accelerations.
Significance and Contribution
With this context in mind, the central inquiry of this thesis emerges: How do different
treatments, in terms of tag size and the presence of pinger, impact the preferred positions,
swimming patterns, speeds, and accelerations of eels? How do these behaviors compare
6
==PAGE:15==
to those of control individuals undergoing hormonal treatment for gonadal maturation?
This master thesis research seeks to investigate the behavioral responses of eels, contribut-
ing to a deeper understanding of their behavior and the potential effects of employing the
presented innovative tagging technology on eels as they journey to their presumed spawn-
ing site in the Sargasso Sea.
7
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Ethical statement
The handling of the fish followed the regulations set by national and EU legislation. More-
over, the experimental protocols underwent approval by the Animal Experiments Inspec-
torate (AEI), Danish Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries (experimental permission
number 2023-15-0201-01361). Efforts were made to minimise animal handling and stress.
All fish were anesthetized by submergence in an aqueous solution of benzocaine (satu-
rated solution of ethyl p-aminobenzoate in ethanol, Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of
20 mg/L prior to initial morphometric measurements,tagging and ovarian biopsies. The
fish were euthanized after spawning by prolonged anaesthesia.
2.2
Broodstock husbandry and rearing system
In early spring 2023, farmed female eels were obtained from a commercial eel farm (Skovsted
Eel Farm, Thisted). The total number of fish obtained was 25, with an average length of
72.06 ± 2.48 cm and an average weight of 783.48 ± 86.10 grams. Further detailed informa-
tion is provided in the Appendix (Table A). After being transported to the EEL-HATCH
research facility in Hirtshals, the fish were used as broodstock and underwent a two-week
acclimatization period. The broodstock was kept in two Recirculating Aquaculture Sys-
tem (RAS) setups, each consisting of triplicate light grey colored tanks (825L in capacity)
with an average diameter of 1.35 cm and an average tank depth of 57.7 cm connected to
water treatment units. These units were composed of a gravel biofilter, a trickle-degassing
filter, and a sump fitted with heating and a filter loop. The water was pumped through
a 1-micron cartridge filter, succeeded by a 36W UV-C lamp. Thereafter, salinity was ad-
justed to 36 psu and temperature to 20°C, mimicking the conditions encountered during
migration towards the oceanic spawning location. The water renewal rate was set up to
934 L/h. The photoperiod regime imitated the natural conditions of the Sargasso Sea,
with a 12-hour light and 12-hour dark cycle, accompanied by 30-minute twilight periods
both in the morning and evening. The average light intensity during the day was 0.6
9
==PAGE:18==
LUX. Furthermore, as eels do not mature instinctively in captivity, they received assisted
hormonal treatments (see section 2.5).
2.3
Tagging methods
2.3.1
Placement of Pop-Up Satellite Archival Tags (PSATs) and
internal pingers
In this experiment, the tagging method employed for PSATs was the Westerberg method
[18]. This technique utilizes the exceptional strength of the European eel’s skin, which
allows the tag to remain attached without the need to penetrate the swimming muscle.
For the purposes of this particular experiment, skilled eel tagging specialists executed
the procedure. As outlined in the study of Økland (2013), the tagging process unfolds as
follows [18]. To initiate the process, a stainless steel wire measuring 0.8 mm in diameter was
twisted into an elongated form, featuring loops at either end. This wire was subsequently
enveloped with heat-shrink tubing. A flexible nylon leader, stemming from a tag, was
threaded through the upward-facing loop. Three parallel hollow needles were positioned
just beneath the skin of the eels’ backs. Through these needles, three separate stainless
steel wires, each with a diameter of 0.8 mm, were threaded and positioned beneath the
skin. The wire nearest to the fish’s head was passed through the eye of the nylon leader
attached to the tag, ensuring secure attachment. The second wire was guided through the
upward-facing loop, undergoing a rotation of up to 90 degrees before being firmly secured.
Lastly, the third wire was passed through the vertical loop and secured in place. As a
result, the Westerberg method involves three attachment points (Figure 2.1), but only one
is primarily responsible for bearing the drag force at any given time. In case the first
attachment point becomes loose, the second attachment point holds the tag in place.
10
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: The Westerberg method for PSAT tagging. Source: Økland et al. 2013.
Figure 2.2: Equipment used in the project: Internal Pingers (Top row) and PSATs (Bottom
row). In the top row, the three sizes of internal pingers are displayed, with lengths of 1.4
cm, 1.3 cm, and 1.1 cm for the large, medium, and small pingers, respectively. The bottom
row showcases the PSATs in varying sizes: 21.5 cm for the large, 19 cm for the medium,
and 17 cm for the small PSAT, from left to right.
Table 2.1: Characteristics of PSATs and fish sizes used for the study. The percentage of
PSAT to fish weight is presented as %.
PSAT
Length(cm)
Width(cm)
PSAT Weight(gr)
No. of Fish
Fish Weight(gr)
%
Small
17
2.6
40.8
6
836±75
4.9
Medium
19
3.2
58.5
5
816.5±106
7.2
Large
21.5
3.3
61.4
3
865.3±99
7.1
11
==PAGE:20==
The pingers were carefully positioned internally, in close proximity to the ovaries by trained
experts. They varied in size, comprising three different categories: small, medium, and
large (Figure 2.2).
Table 2.2: Characteristics of internal pingers used in the study.
Pinger type
Length
(cm)
Width
(cm)
Average
weight (gr)
Number
of
pingers
Small
(circu-
lar)
0.9
0.5
0.43
3
Medium
(cylindrical)
1.3
0.3
0.22
8
Large
(circu-
lar)
1.2
0.8
0.93
6
2.4
Experimental set-up
The experimental setup consists of six replicate tanks (Figure 2.3), where five of them are
used directly in the experiment, each representing a different treatment. The sixth and
last tank was used for spawning. The arrangement is as follows:
• Control Tank: In this tank, the fish were only treated with hormones (i.e no PSATs
or internal pingers).
• Hormone + Internal Pinger Tank: This tank contained fish treated with hormones,
and they also had an internal pinger implanted.
• Three PSAT Tanks: These three tanks contained fish carrying internal pingers and
PSAT tags of different sizes (small, medium, large) separately in each tank (see
Table 2.1). All fish in these tanks were under hormonal treatment as well.
The number of individuals used in the filming phase of the experiment is presented on
Table 2.3). Furthermore the number of fish in each tank continues to vary throughout the
experimental period (from April to June 2023 for 8 weeks) due to various reasons such
unintended loss of the PSAT, jumping out of the tank or spawning.
Treatment type
Pinger
Individuals (initial)
Individuals (filming)
Control
No
5
5
Pinger
Yes
5
5
Small PSAT
Yes
4
4
Medium PSAT
Yes
4
3
Big PSAT
Yes
3
3
Table 2.3: Table indicating the number of individuals in each treatment
12
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the experimental set-up for the TAG-EEL project.
To capture the behavior of eels, a total of six Kurokesu C1 PRO cameras with 2.8-12mm CS
lenses were positioned above the tanks at an average height of 113 ±2 cm above the water
surface. The camera sensor size was 5.63x3.17mm with a field of view (FOV) of 50 degrees
for narrow angle (large zoom) and an equivalent field of view (EFOV) of 6.45. For the
wide angle (small zoom) the FOV was 83 degrees and EFOV was 3.88. The illumination
conditions were managed by employing Phillips Hue lamps positioned above each tank.
These lamps were regulated through a WiFi-connected bridge to execute a consistent
daily photoperiod routine, ensuring uniform light intensity set at 25%∼0.6 LUX at the
tank surface. The video files were obtained simultaneously for each of the five treatments
using Python-based code and OpenCV (Appendix A). Each treatment was recorded for
5 minutes, three times a day (at 9 am, 1 pm, and 5 pm), enabling the investigation of
treatment-related differences as well as day-rhythm-related behavioral patterns.
2.5
Maturation and hormonal treatment
Female broodstock underwent maturation through weekly intramuscular injections of
salmon pituitary extract (SPE) (Argent Aquaculture L.C.C, USA) at a dose of 18.75
mg/kg initial body weight (IBW) for a duration of approximately 16 weeks. The length
of hormonal treatment depended on the response of each female.
Subsequently, when females increased their initials body weight above 5%, ovarian biopsies
13
==PAGE:22==
were obtained to assess oocyte development [19] and received an additional and final
injection as primer. Follicular maturation and ovulation were stimulated by an injection
of 17a,20ß-dihydroxy-4-pregnen-3-one (DHP) at 2 mg/kg (IBW) [20], 24 hours after the
priming injection. After the DHP injection, the females were moved to a separate spawning
tank.
2.6
The software
The tracking analysis for this master’s thesis was conducted using the open-source soft-
ware ”Tracktor” [21]. Notably, ”Tracktor” is a non-GUI (No Graphical User Interface)
application based on Python code. The advantages of using this open-source software for
eel tracking are further demonstrated in the Discussion section (chapter 4).
2.6.1
Principles for tracking and parameter fine-tuning
The software uses an OpenCV library (https://opencv.org) designed for image processing.
The process of tracking can be separated in three steps. First, thresholding helps detect
the objects in the videos by binarizing the image. The underlying principle behind this
process is as follows: an image is first converted into gray-scale, and subsequently, pixels
with intensity above a specific threshold value are set to white, while pixels with intensity
below this threshold are set to black. Furthermore, due to its sensitivity to uneven lighting,
Tracktor employs a technique called ’adaptive thresholding’ to dynamically adjust the
threshold across different image regions. Unlike using a fixed threshold value for the entire
image, adaptive thresholding calculates the threshold value locally, as smaller spatial scales
are more likely to have more even illumination. This is accomplished by determining the
mean pixel intensity within a specified neighborhood (”block size” parameter) and then
adjusting this value by subtracting an offset (”offset” parameter). Both the block size
and offset parameters are user-specified. Selecting appropriate values for them requires
a trial-and-error approach since different video acquisition setups exhibit variations in
lighting conditions and image resolution.
After getting a thresholded image, Tracktor
identifies and outlines the detected objects, which ideally correspond to the observed
animals. However, given the imperfections in filming conditions, adaptive thresholding
may mistakenly capture non-target objects present in the environment, in this present
case, parts of the inlet and outlet of the tanks and/or reflections. To address this, Tracktor
14
==PAGE:23==
implements a size-based filtering mechanism, enabling the exclusion of objects that are
either smaller or larger than the object of interest. The user plays a crucial role in this
process by specifying two size-based parameters, namely ”min area” and ”max area”, which
respectively denote the minimum and maximum allowable areas for the focal object(s).
By setting these parameters, the user can effectively control which objects are considered
relevant for tracking, discarding those that fall below the defined minimum or exceed the
desired maximum area.
Tracktor relies on contrast for object detection, necessitating a noticeably brighter and
uniformly illuminated arena in comparison to the animals under observation. Although
adaptive thresholding can mitigate variations in brightness levels across the arena, sig-
nificant differences in lighting can pose challenges. To overcome this concern, it became
necessary to modify the tanks’ base color. This was accomplished by crafting PVC plastic
covers in a light grey color that fit over each tank as an inner liner, pierced at the bottom to
allow incorporation of the center drains. All stitches from the sewing process were sealed
by a similar colored food graded polymere (Tec-7). By implementing this alteration, the
eels remained visible without the typical black coloration associated with eel rearing, thus
facilitating more effective tracking.
2.6.2
Identity assignment
After identifying the focal objects within a specific frame, the challenge lies in linking these
detections to their corresponding detections in the preceding frame to establish coherent
movement tracks. To address this problem, Tracktor leverages the Hungarian algorithm,
which effectively assigns identities by applying the cost function to minimize the distances
among points in consecutive frames.
2.7
Analysis of behavioral tracking data
2.7.1
Smoothing and filtering
When monitoring multiple individuals, the eﬀicacy of tracking may be compromised, lead-
ing to identity switches, particularly when animals move fast between consecutive frames
and the software is confused by reflections or other objects in the arena with similar size.
Optimal frame rate selection depends on the speed at which the focal individual(s) move.
For this experiment, a frame rate of 10 frames per second (fps) was chosen during filming
15
==PAGE:24==
as fish sizes was suﬀiciently large not to be able to evacuate the acquisition frame within
1/10 of a second and thus escape untracked. This decision aimed to reduce video file sizes
and make the tracking process faster.
A part of the code used for tracking (Appendix A) aims to address noise and fluctuations
in positional data, which can affect subsequent calculations of speed and acceleration Fig-
ure 2.4. The code starts by specifying the smoothing window parameter, which determines
the extent of smoothing applied to the data. After defining the frame rate of the video, the
pxpercm variable is defined in order to calculate the distance in real-world units (centime-
ters) based on the number of pixels in the video. This value is obtained by multiplying the
number of pixels equivalent to one centimeter in the video by a scaling factor, represented
as scaling. This scaling factor is a user-defined value that accounts for the specific setup
and calibration of the video recording system. Together, the fps and pxpercm parameters
allow the code to convert time intervals between frames into seconds and the displacement
of objects (e.g., eels) in pixels to distances in centimeters. This conversion is essential for
analyzing and interpreting the movement patterns of the objects in real-world units, mak-
ing it easier to understand and compare the results with other studies or observations in
different contexts. It then calculates the differences in position (dx and dy) between con-
secutive frames and the second derivatives (d2x and d2y) to obtain speed and acceleration
values.
Moreover, the Savitzky-Golay filter was employed, which functions as a moving average
filter, effectively reducing noise in relation to ID shifting and providing a smoother repre-
sentation of speed and other parameters over time. In Figure 2.4 the initial graphs (left),
both speeds and accelerations exhibit rapid fluctuations.
However, in the subsequent
graphs, noticeable enhancement is observed as a result of applying the moving average
filter. This filtering technique effectively eliminates high-variation measurements caused
by swift identity changes or object mislocations within the setup from the dataset.
16
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.4: The comparison illustrates the contrast in speed and acceleration profiles before
and after the smoothing process, using an example from the ”Small PSATs” treatment.
Additionally, to further enhance data quality, the code addresses potential outliers that
may persist even after smoothing. A function is implemented to remove these outliers
from the smoothed data, ensuring that relevant data points are retained while eliminating
extreme values that could distort the analysis.
17
==PAGE:26==
2.7.2
Data pre-processing
Adjustments for x and y coordinates of tracking points:
Slight variations in camera mounting heights and positions, which arose from equipment
modifications or errors, have had an effect on the coordinate system used by the track-
ing software. Consequently, this has led to some impact on the software’s precision in
determining fish locations within the tanks, and by extension, in calculating their speeds
and accelerations. The data preprocessing steps, as shown in Figure 2.5, adhere to the
sequence of origin, rotation, scaling, and normalization.
Furthermore, within the experimental videos among different treatments, differences in
the positions of water inlets were noticeable. This variability stems from the fact that all
tanks are linked to the Recirculating Aquaculture System (RAS) via fixed water pipes, cre-
ating diﬀiculties in maintaining consistent water flow directions. Consequently, it became
necessary to identify and standardize the coordinates of these inlets, ensuring uniformity
across all tanks for visualizing results and making meaningful comparisons. As a result,
data pre-processing measures were introduced to rectify factors that had an impact on the
outcomes, particularly concerning the locations,speeds, and accelerations.
Centering observation circle for enhanced analysis of the coordinate system:
Before starting the data pre-processing the tank positions (including the center coordinates
and radius) for all treatments should be identified as the basic standard for position
rectification. Thus, the observation circle’s center has been moved to match the starting
point (origin) of the coordinate system (Equation 2.1). This adjustment leads to more
accurate analyses and a better grasp of how the observation circle is positioned within the
coordinate system.
xorigin = xraw −Xcenter
yorigin = yraw −Ycenter
(2.1)
The adjustment is achieved by subtracting the tank’s center coordinates (Xcenter) from
the raw coordinates of the circle’s center (xraw) for the x axis and performing the same
18
==PAGE:27==
way for the y axis.
Rotating:
The aim here is to rotate the coordinates of the water inlet (xorigin,yorigin) to (xrotate,yrotate)
around a central point (x0, y0) by a specific angle (θ) (Figure 2.5). Firstly, the center of
rotation (x0, y0) is established. Then, the initial coordinates (xorigin, yorigin) of the point
to be rotated are given. The rotation angle,signifies the rotation direction. The process
entails using the rotation formula, involving trigonometric functions Equation 2.2. The
new coordinates of the water inlets (xrotate,yrotate) are calculated as follows:
xrotate = x0 + (xorigin −x0) · cos(θ) −(yorigin −y0) · sin(θ)
yrotate = y0 + (xorigin −x0) · sin(θ) + (yorigin −y0) · cos(θ)
(2.2)
Figure 2.5: Working flow example of data pre-processing. The initial and post-processing
position of the water inlet for this example is marked in red.
Scaling
Given an assumed tank radius (R) of 200 pixels (the mean value of radius of all tank
circles) it can be ensured that all tank circles have the same radius and the tracked points
can be compared with each other.
19
==PAGE:28==
xscale = xrotate
(200
R
)
(2.3)
yscale = yrotate
(200
R
)
(2.4)
Normalization
The purpose of linear normalization is to scale the tracked points based on the maximum
and minimum values of X and Y coordinates from the same treatment.
xnorm = xscale −Xmin
Xmax −Xmin
−0.5
(2.5)
ynorm = yscale −Ymin
Ymax −Ymin
−0.5
(2.6)
2.7.3
Sector analysis
In order to assess the swimming behavior of the eels and facilitate comparisons between
different treatments the concept of residence coeﬀicient was investigated using the Equa-
tion 2.7 [22]. This coeﬀicient reflects the extent to which the fish occupy a given sector
relatively to other sectors (Figure 2.6) by taking into account the sizes of the sectors as
well. Sectors 1-4 indicate areas close to the tank walls with each of them being displayed
in order opposite the the counter clock wise direction of the water flow. Sector 5 is the
centre of the tank and its radius is half of the tank area. Here the fish are treated as
eel groups and not as separate individuals. Those groups of different sizes were treated
equally by normalizing the residence coeﬀicient Equation 2.8.
Rc,i = 1
n
tiAtot
Aittot
(2.7)
Rc,i,norm =
Rc,i
5∑
i=1
Rc,i
(2.8)
20
==PAGE:29==
Where ”i” represents the sector number (ranging from 1 to 5), and ”n” stands for the total
number of fish tested. ”ti” denotes the time spent within sector ”i”.
Additionally, ”t,tot” represents the total accumulated time spent across all sectors, ”Ai”
corresponds to the area of sector ”i” measured in square meters, and ”Atot” represents
the cumulative area of all sectors.
A normalized residence coeﬀicient value of 1 indicates that the eel group exclusively oc-
cupied sector ’i’ throughout the observation, whereas a value of 0 indicates that no eel
entered sector ’i’.
Figure 2.6: Schematic diagram for sector division. The water flow direction is counter-
clockwise and the water inlet is located at the top of the observation circle.
2.7.4
Statistical analysis
To gain a comprehensive understanding of eel behavior, the study examined how their re-
sponses varied within each treatment and investigated potential differences in behavioral
patterns across different ”times of the day (TimeofDay)” (morning, afternoon, evening) as
well as between different ”days of the week (Day)”. Moreover, the influence of the ”week
in treatment (Week)” factor on the behavior of the hormonally maturing fish is also ex-
amined. Specifically ”TimeofDay” includes three videos per day (i.e., morning, afternoon,
evening), while ”Day” denotes six days during one week except for the hormone injection
day (Thursday). ”Week” is considered as an influencing factor to investigate how matu-
ration level that increases with weekly hormone injections may affect eel behavior. The
key behavioral parameters included preferred swimming positions in the tank (sectors),
21
==PAGE:30==
swimming speeds and accelerations. First the data was organized for statistical analysis
of variance (ANOVA). The analysis explored the impact of different factors on the sector-
based analysis of the posistional and movement data. Three-way ANOVA was conducted
on the sector coeﬀicients, speeds and accelerations, considering the factors ”TimeofDay”,
”Day”, and ”Week”.
22
==PAGE:31==
3
Results
3.1
Analysis for positional data
3.1.1
ANOVA results
Table 3.1: Three-way ANOVA results for the residence coeﬀicients from the five sectors
in five treatments. P-values lower than 0.05 are marked with an asterisk, indicating a
significant influence.
Treatments
Factors
Sec 1
Sec 2
Sec 3
Sec 4
Sec 5
Control
TimeOfDay
0.668
0.539
0.158
0.221
0.622
Day
0.082
0.510
0.353
0.338
0.282
Week
0.000*
0.050*
0.000*
0.000*
0.000*
Pinger
TimeOfDay
0.154
0.781
0.929
0.258
0.183
Day
0.001*
0.041*
0.245
0.315
0.285
Week
0.000*
0.000*
0.000*
0.000*
0.070
Small-Tags
TimeOfDay
0.333
0.545
0.560
0.084
0.068
Day
0.495
0.498
0.058
0.555
0.445
Week
0.000*
0.000*
0.000*
0.000*
0.000*
Medium-Tags
TimeOfDay
0.379
0.229
0.673
0.919
0.715
Day
0.215
0.011*
0.026*
0.123
0.299
Week
0.000*
0.000*
0.105
0.000*
0.643
Large-Tags
TimeOfDay
0.010*
0.127
0.262
0.547
0.007*
Day
0.512
0.200
0.180
0.944
0.741
Week
0.020*
0.000*
0.112
0.000*
0.146
A small p-value (typically less than 0.05) indicates a significant influence. The observations
regarding significant influences from Table 3.1:
Here, only p-values of single factors were presented since no interactive effects among
factors were found through ANOVA. This means that time-related factors did not signif-
icantly influence each other in terms of the positional response of eels.
Under each treatment, detailed interpretations of ANOVA results were listed as follows.
• For the Control and Small-Tags treatment, the only factor that exhibited a signifi-
cant influence on eel positions was ”Week”, and that is observed for all sectors. This
indicates that the eel groups under the two treatments showed preferred positions
23
==PAGE:32==
only affected from the maturation level that increases with weekly hormonal injec-
tions. Moreover among all eel groups equipped with pingers and tags, only the ones
with small tags present similar behavioral responses as eels without pingers or tags.
• For the Pinger treatment, both ”Day” and ”Week” had significant influences on eel
positions. Specifically, the significant influence from ”Day” was found in sectors 1
and 2, while that from ”Week” was observed in all sectors except for sector 5.
• For the Medium Tags treatment, the factors ”Day” and ”Week” had significant
influences in various sectors. ”Day” was significant in sectors 2 and 3, and ”Week”
was significant in sectors 1,2 and 4. This suggests that both ”Day” and ”Week” had
significant effects on the Medium Tags treatment in specific sectors.
• For the Large Tags treatment, the factors ”TimeOfDay” and ”Week” had significant
influences in various sectors.
24
==PAGE:33==
3.1.2
Influence of time-related factors
To better understand how the significant time-related factors affect eel preferred positions
under different treatments, a data visualization technique called ”heatmaps” was employed
for eel positional data after the normalization step. To obtain the positional heatmaps, the
positions of eel groups were first binned to 20*20 bins using Matlab histogram 2 function
within the range of 0.5, 0.5 for both X and Y coordinates.
The probabilities for eels
appearing in each bin were computed by normalizing bin counts with the total number
of tracking points. In addition, color bars indicating the positional probabilities were also
applied for quantitative comparisons.
Influence of ”Day” in Medium-Tag treatment
Figure 3.1:
Positional heatmaps for different days in 8 experimental weeks for the
”Medium-Tags” treatment. The red line indicates the day of hormonal injection (Thurs-
day). Note that the blank subplots without positional data results from invalid tracking
or computer break-down problems.
25
==PAGE:34==
The influence of different ”Day” on positional preference for the ”Medium-Tag” treatment
can be seen in Figure 3.1 and described as follows:
• In the first week of the filming stage of the experiment a more circular pattern was
observed. After the injection on Thursday a different preference in sectors occurs as
the fish swim less in circles and prefer to be staying close to the inlet.
• The influence of the factor ”Days” to the positional preferences of fish in sectors 2
and 3 seems to be more intense in the first weeks of the experiment. As the weeks
progress and the number of fish in the tank is reduced ( Figure 3.3) the fish seem to
prefer less to swim in circles and mostly stay next to or behind the inlet (sectors 1
and 4).
Influence of ”TimeOfDay” in Large-Tags treatment
Figure 3.2: Positional heatmaps of at different ”TimeOfDay” for the ”Large-Tags” treat-
ment.
The influence of ”TimeOfDay” on the occupation of sectors 1 and 5 can be seen in Fig-
ure 3.2. For more details an error bar plot can be seen in the Appendix (Figure A.1).
• Sector 5 (centre of the tank) seems to be occupied less in the first two weeks. As
time in hormonal maturation progressed, the fish carrying large PSAT tags seemed
to occupy sector 5 more in the afternoon and evening (weeks 4-8).
• This preference was also observed by eye since the fish seemed to be tired of carrying
26
==PAGE:35==
the large PSAT and spent a significant amount of time drifting above the outlet
(sector 5) without active swimming.
• The influence of ”TimeofDay” in the occupation of sector 1 can be seen in some
instances. For example sector 1 seemed to be less occupied in the evenings for weeks
2,5 and 8.
Influence of ”Week” in all treatments
Figure 3.3: Heatmaps representing the influence of time in hormonal maturation for a
period of 8 weeks for the different treatments.
The number of fish in each treatment
varied with weeks and is marked with white.
• Control: The eels in control treatment seemed to have an overall circular swimming
pattern across the 8 weeks. The occupation of sector 5 (centre of the tank) was less
frequent for this group with an exemption for weeks 1, 2 and 5. In week 1, the fish
seemed to stay in all sectors with a preference to sectors 1 and 4 that are located
close to the inlet and sector 3. As the weeks progress the preference remained with
an exemption for week 8 when they tended to stay more in sectors 3 and 4 and less
27
==PAGE:36==
in sector 1. In this specific week the number of fish in the treatment reduced from
5 to 3 due to spawning.
• Pinger: In this particular treatment, the fish exhibited a circular swimming behav-
ior and seem to avoid sector 5, except during weeks 1, 2, and 5, when there was a
slight presence observed in sector 5 as well. Between weeks 1 and 5, the fish showed
a higher presence in sectors 1, 3, and 4. However, a shift occured during weeks 6 to
8, with the fish primarily occupying sectors 1, 2, and 3.
• Small-Tags: On weeks 1 and 2 this treatment appeared to be very similar to the
treatments ¨Control¨ and ¨Pinger¨. On weeks 4 and 5 the fish stayed mostly in
sectors 1 and 2 while also occupied sector 5. On week 6 the fish number in the tank
reduced from 4 to 2 fish and on week 7 there was only one fish left in the treatment.
During these last two weeks, the fish predominantly remained in the area between
sectors 1 and 4, which is near the water inlet, occasionally engaging in a circular
swimming pattern.
• Medium-Tags: During weeks 1 and 2, the fish displayed a circular swimming
pattern, with sectors 1 and 2 being predominantly occupied. By week 3, the fish
expanded their presence to include sectors 1, 2, 3, and 4, while avoiding the area very
close to the water inlet (between sectors 1 and 4). In week 4, there was a notable
shift, with sectors 1 and 4 being primarily occupied, and the fish occasionally swam
around.
However, starting from week 5 through week 8, the circular swimming
pattern disappeared entirely, and the fish remained mainly in sectors 1 and 4. As
the fish number decreaseed to 2 and eventually just 1 fish after week 6, the overall
swimming pattern remained consistent, except for occasional instances in week 7
when the last fish appeared to be in sector 5.
• Large-Tags: In the first week of this treatment, the observed pattern appeared
consistent with the circular movement seen in other treatments, with sectors 1, 2,
and 3 being the primary areas of occupancy. However, as the weeks passed, there
was a noticeable increase in fish presence in sector 5. This shift in behavior aligned
with direct observations, as the fish, tired from carrying the large tag, began drifting
with the water current above the water outlet at the center of the tank.
28
==PAGE:37==
3.2
ANOVA for movement data
Table 3.2: Three-way ANOVA results for speed and acceleration data in five treatments.
P-values that are lower than 0.05 are marked with an asterisk, indicating a significant
influence.
Treatments
Speed
Acceleration
TimeOfDay
Day
Week
TimeOfDay
Day
Week
Control
0.939
0.357
0.000*
0.960
0.269
0.000*
Pinger
0.622
0.287
0.000*
0.673
0.285
0.000*
Small Tags
0.243
0.171
0.010*
0.198
0.210
0.018*
Medium Tags
0.563
0.220
0.000*
0.588
0.230
0.000*
Large Tags
0.941
0.168
0.000*
0.921
0.154
0.001*
The interactive effects between factors ”TimeofDay,” ”Day,” and ”Week,” were tested in
three-way ANOVA were no interactions were found. This indicates that these time-related
factors did not significantly influence each other in terms of the behavioral response in
movements (in this case fish speeds and accelerations). Thus only p-values from a single
factor were listed in Table 3.2, indicating that ”Week” was the only factor that imposed
significant influence on the speeds and accelerations of eel groups in all treatments. In
other words the, maturation level was the only factor that affected eel movements no
matter if the eel groups were tagged or untagged.
Figure 3.4: Weekly speeds and accelerations (mean ± std) for five treatments
29
==PAGE:38==
The statistically significant impact of ”Week” on ”Speed” and ”Acceleration” is presented
in Figure 3.4 and it is observed that:
• Eels from the ”Small-Tags” treatment showed the highest level of activity.
• The treatments ”Large-Tags”, ”Control”, ”Pinger” had similar levels of activity.
• The ”Small-Tags” treatment showed higher activity than the ”Large-Tags” .
• The fish in ”Medium-Tags” were the ones least active.
• Activity levels seemed to decrease with sexual maturation of eels connected to re-
ceiving hormone injections.
30
==PAGE:39==
4
Discussion
The European eel Anguilla anguilla, exhibits fascinating behavioral patterns that respond
to changing environmental conditions and seasonal cues, particularly as they prepare for
their remarkable spawning journey. These behaviors include their preference for nocturnal
activity, avoidance of daylight, and their aﬀinity for complex substrates.
Despite extensive research efforts (spanning a century), the precise location of the Euro-
pean eel’s spawning grounds remains a mystery. This knowledge gap hinders the develop-
ment of effective conservation and breeding strategies. In this regard, aquatic telemetry,
which involves monitoring aquatic animals in their natural habitats using advanced track-
ing technologies, holds the potential to unravel the secrets of the European eel’s spawning
behavior.
As such, this study explored the use of modified pop-up PSATs in combination with inter-
nal pinger devices for their potential future application in identifying the exact location of
the eel spawning area. The research objectives involved examining the impact of internal
pingers and PSAT size as well as their interactions with day, time-of-day and weeks on
sexual maturation on female eel swimming behavior.
4.1
Eel Behavior
4.1.1
Potential explanations for tag removal behavior
Eels equipped with large tags exhibited an abnormal behavior, characterized by increased
inactivity. External tagging has been previously shown to significantly disrupt the be-
havior of eels, as demonstrated by laboratory studies documenting reactions such as head
shaking, tag biting, rolling, backward swimming, panicking burst speeds, and attempts
to dislodge the tag [18]. This disruption of normal behavior might be more pronounced
in eels compared to pelagic fish species due to their preference for hiding and burying
themselves in the substrate [23]. In the study by Jepsen et al. (2015), it is mentioned that
achieving a high retention rate of external tags in adult eels is particularly challenging due
to their unique body shape and flexibility resulting in most eels losing their tags within the
31
==PAGE:40==
initial 3–4 weeks following tagging [15]. Consequently, the eels in this study may might
have chosen to remain relatively motionless in the tank to conserve energy and minimize
unnecessary swimming due to the discomfort associated with their tags.
4.1.2
Effect of Treatments on Eel Behavior
In terms of day and time-of-day
During the first week of the experiment, the eels exhibited a circular swimming pattern.
However, after the Thursday injection, a shift occurred, with fish spending less time in
circular motion and showing a preference for sectors 1 and 2 near the inlet. While the
exact reason for this change remains unclear, it is presumed to be a result of post-stress
fatigue following handling.
The influence of the ”Days” factor on fish’s positional preferences in sectors 2 and 3
appears more pronounced in the early weeks of the experiment. It can be hypothesized
that as the fish acclimated to handling, this factor had less influence. As the experiment
progressed and the fish number decreased, they tended to swim less in circular patterns,
instead favoring sectors 1 and 4, with reduced sensitivity to the ”day” factor.
Sector 5, located in the center of the tank, saw lower occupancy during the initial two
weeks of the study. However, as fish progressed in hormonal maturation, those with large
PSAT tags began to occupy sector 5 more frequently during the afternoon and evening
hours in weeks 4-8. This shift in behavior may be attributed to fatigue towards the end
of the day at the final weeks of the experiment.
Regarding sector 1, there is some evidence of the influence of ”TimeOfDay” on its occu-
pancy. However, drawing firm conclusions from this data is challenging, as there appears
to be a relationship between the time-of-day and treatment type, yet the exact nature of
this relationship remains unclear.
In terms of weeks in sexual maturation
In all treatments, a significant influence of ”weeks” of hormonal treatment was observed.
With a notable impact on the behavior of the fish, particularly in terms of their chosen
positions. Across weeks, the swimming patterns of the fish in the control and pinger groups
were remarkably similar, with a shared tendency to avoid sector 5. While comparing the
32
==PAGE:41==
pinger group to the control group, it’s worth considering that in theory, it might be
reasonable to anticipate that internal tags would be the least disruptive in eel tagging
experiments. This expectation stems from the fact that internal tags do not interfere with
the eel’s natural hiding behavior, as external tags might.
However, in week 6, a noticeable shift in positioning was observed within the pinger group.
During this week, the fish displayed a preference for staying on the opposite side of the
tank, avoiding swimming against the current or in front of the inlet. It is not clear why
that is the case, however considering that the water flow is stronger on the other side,
this might have been a result of fatigue and thus the eels were swimming further from the
water inlet.
During the initial two weeks, the fish in the small tags treatment exhibited behavior
resembling that of the control and pinger groups. However, in weeks 4 and 5, the fish
primarily occupied sectors 1 and 2 while also extending into sector 5. It is possible that
the reduced number of fish in the tank influenced this behavior during the 4th and 5th
weeks of hormonal treatment.
Moreover, according to Burgerhout et al.’s 2013 study
[24], swimming in groups was observed to lower energy expenditure in male eels. Hence,
the reduced fish number in the tank could potentially affect energy consumption, which
might lead to increased fatigue among the eels, particularly when fish congregated in the
center of the tank due to tiredness. However, it’s worth noting that the study in question
specifically focused on male eels, whereas our study involved female eels. Consequently,
further investigation is required to ascertain the implications for female eels in this context.
In the case of the medium tags treatment, the initial weeks mirrored the patterns of the
treatments mentioned above. However, as the weeks of hormonal treatment progressed, a
decline in activity was noted, with the fish avoiding to swim in circles. As the fish number
in the tank was reduced, they became less active, primarily remaining near the inlet, with
an exception observed in week 7, where some presence in sector 5 was evident. Fish in
this specific treatment appeared to be fatigued.
The large tag treatment presented distinct behavior, notably different from the other
treatments, particularly concerning their occupation of sector 5. From the early weeks,
these fish did not actively swim, spending a significant amount of time in a passive state,
33
==PAGE:42==
even sometimes ”drifting” above the outlet. In fact, sector 5 became increasingly occupied
as the weeks progressed. Moreover, time-of-day-related influences were also observed in
this treatment, particularly noticeable in sector 1 (right behind the outlet). After a certain
period in the hormonal treatment, fish displayed distinct patterns, with circular swimming
and proximity to the tank walls in the mornings, and more erratic movement patterns
observed in the afternoon and evening. This can be connected to the behavioral changes
that occur in eels between the light transitions, however it requires more investigation to
form such a conclusion. Though, we confidently conclude that overall, the significantly
disrupted swimming patterns observed in this treatment, are most likely driven by a
suboptimal tag-to-fish size ratio in this category was suboptimal and significantly disrupted
their swimming patterns.
Initially, eels subjected to the ”Small-Tags” treatment demonstrated the highest levels of
activity, while the ”Large- Tags,” ”Control,” and ”Pinger” treatments displayed relatively
similar activity levels. Interestingly, despite an initially (right after tagging) high activity
observed in he ”Medium-Tags” treatment, overall activity levels were the lowest compared
to the other treatments throughout the experiment, something that can also be seen in the
analysis of positions. An interesting trend emerges as activity levels appear to decrease as
eels receive more hormone injections and progress in maturity, a trend consistent across
all treatments.
Furthermore, it is essential to consider potential sources of discrepancy in our data. To
ensure that our speed and acceleration measurements closely align with actual values, it is
necessary to measure the distinct water flow velocities within the tank and subsequently
make necessary adjustments to the tracking dataset. Due to limitations in equipment, this
study did not incorporate such measurements, leaving uncertainty about the accuracy of
our recorded values in relation to ”real-world” conditions.
Moreover, the measurement of fish accelerations can provide valuable insights into their
behavior, physiology, and interactions within their environment. This approach unveils
distinct activity patterns, allowing us to differentiate between active swimming, periods
of rest, and various behavioral activities. Shifts in acceleration patterns serve as indica-
tors of behavioral transitions and physiological stress, that can occur through irregular
34
==PAGE:43==
movements. Similar trends are followed in the graphs for speeds and accelerations for all
the treatments indicating consistency in measurements . However, in the present case,
accelerations were calculated in the similar way to speeds, thus the conclusions that can
be drawn based on that are limited.
It’s noteworthy that existing research has explored the impact of swimming activity on
sexual maturation in European eels, but there is a gap in our understanding regarding how
sexual maturation might, in turn, affect swimming activity. Ginneken et al.’s 2007 [25]
study suggests that prolonged swimming could potentially stimulate early sexual mat-
uration in female eels.
Furthermore, Palstra et als.’s 2007 research [26] indicates that
swimming plays a role in maturation and reproduction, with observed effects on lipid de-
position and oocyte growth during swimming trials. Collectively, these studies hint at a
potential relationship between swimming and sexual maturation in European eels. How-
ever, further investigation is required to explore this relationship in the opposite direction.
4.2
Limitations of the study
4.2.1
The software: Advantages and limitations
In the context of software selection for this project, significant considerations revolved
around the advantages and limitations of the chosen software.
Open-source software
presents distinct benefits compared to commercial alternatives, necessitating thoughtful
evaluation. One of the most compelling advantages of open-source software is its cost-
effectiveness. Open-source solutions are typically available for use without incurring mon-
etary charges, eliminating the need for licensing fees and recurring costs associated with
commercial software. Another notable characteristic of open-source software is the acces-
sibility of its source code to all users. This openness allows the software’s inner workings
to be explored by users, fostering trust and confidence. The integrity of the software can
be verified, its intended functionality ensured, and any hidden vulnerabilities uncovered,
thereby enhancing overall transparency. Hence, during the data analysis phase, it was
straightforward to revisit the code, identify, and, if feasible, make necessary adjustments
to lines of code that impacted tracking quality and the integrity of the extracted data set.
In the context of this study, maintaining a reasonably high frame rate was crucial for effec-
tive video tracking analysis, as ”Tracktor” relies on measuring the distance between objects
35
==PAGE:44==
in consecutive frames to establish identities. However in different scenarios involving swift
movements, such as predatory attacks or prey escape responses, higher temporal resolu-
tions become essential for capturing details accurately. Thus it is not clear how ”Tracktor”
would behave in a following similar study with different set up and objectives. While other
open source software options were considered in this case, they did not perform as well due
to unique behavioral characteristics of eels. Considering these significant advantages, the
decision to employ the open-source ”Tracktor” software for video tracking analysis in this
master’s thesis aligns with the principles of cost-effectiveness, transparency, and software
customization providing results that corresponded to the observations, especially in terms
of preferred sectors and swimming patterns.
4.2.2
Importance of smoothing for movement data and the impact on
subsequent result accuracy.
During tracking the identification numbers (IDs) showed substantial ”jumps” over consid-
erable distances, inaccurately reflecting the actual movement and leading to exaggerated
speeds in the final data set that did not align with the true velocities. This occurrence
is thought to be a consequence of eel behavior since they swim very close to and above
one another. As a result, the algorithm faced challenges in consistently assigning IDs to
individuals in all frames, as the fish were not clearly visible to the software. While pa-
rameter adjustments could partially improve this issue in certain cases, they often proved
challenging and insuﬀicient. As a solution, a portion of the tracking code was modified
to generate a more refined data set, effectively reducing the presence of extreme speed
values induced by abrupt and rapid changes in the assigned IDs. This was proven to be
a significant improvement in the data set however it is not clear how much the smoothed
speed values are corresponding to the real ones.
Initially, there was a lack of understanding regarding how the setup and minor modifica-
tions can impact the tracking process in this experiment. For instance, it was observed that
different mounting heights and positions of top-view cameras, various tank orientations,
and the use of only one top-view camera for video recording have significant consequences.
This single-camera setup does not allow the acquisition of vertical movement information
for the eels in the tanks and introduces positional data deviations, assuming that all eels
swim at the same horizontal level. Additionally, the frequent switching of eel identities,
36
==PAGE:45==
especially when multiple eels overlap, can potentially lead to inaccuracies in speed and
acceleration calculations, despite employing pre-processing techniques such as ”smooth-
ing and filtering” to eliminate outliers. Moreover, in Tracktor, the default definition of
”pxpercm” as 37*scaling (Appendix A) differs substantially from the actual ”pxpercm”
value of approximately 2.5 in this experiment. Furthermore, Tracktor occasionally fails to
perform adequately in tracking eels, resulting in the absence of tracking data for specific
cases.
4.3
Future perspectives
The discussion highlights several crucial considerations for future improvements to the
experimental setup. One notable factor is the need for precise measurement of water speeds
in different positions within the tank to enable accurate measurement (and correction) of
fish speeds and accelerations. This information is essential to align the recorded data as
closely as possible with actual values.
Another aspect to explore is the behavior of eels during nighttime, which could provide
valuable insights. Investigating night vision technology or other means of tracking eel
behavior during nocturnal periods could enhance the comprehensiveness of the study and
provide more insights in time-of-day related factors that can affect the behavior of tagged
eels.
Moreover, it is considered necessary to reflect on the challenges encountered during the
tracking process, suggesting several improvements to the experimental design.
These
include maintaining uniform tank orientation and camera mounting to prevent any ad-
justments and exploring automated solutions for removing undesired elements from video
footage, but also addressing imperfections on tank walls to reduce reflections and improve
tracking accuracy.
Furthermore, options for optimizing eel tracking in the horizontal plane can also be inves-
tigated, including reducing water depth to minimize vertical movement or exploring 3D
coordinate reconstruction using multiple cameras. Additionally, to maintain individual
eel identities, it is recommended to either reduce the number of eels per tank or employ
larger tanks relative to eel size. The use of unique identifiers such as color-coded tags
is also suggested to aid in distinguishing eel identities and addressing tracking challenges
37
==PAGE:46==
within the software. In summary, these insights provide valuable guidance for future ex-
perimental setups, ensuring improved accuracy in tracking eel behavior and enhancing the
overall quality of research outcomes.
38
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusion
The results highlight notable variations in eel behavior associated with tag size and the
duration of hormonal treatment for hormonal maturation. Small tags seemed to cause
fewer disruptions, while large tags resulted in reduced activity, indicating that this fish-to-
tag ratio should be avoided for future applications. However, due to the limited number of
fish in each group and variations in fish weights (Table 2.1), the percentages for tag-to-fish
ratios for both Medium and Small-tags appear quite similar. As a result, estimating the
”optimal” ratio would not 100% be reliable.
Limitations in the study’s setup and data analysis are acknowledged.
Future studies
should focus on improving experimental design, including precise water speed measure-
ments, addressing nighttime behavior, and exploring more advanced tracking techniques.
Additionally, maintaining eel identities and distinguishing individual behaviors remain
crucial for accurate data collection. Nonetheless, the tracking data indicate a significant
difference in both positions and movement patterns, with greater confidence in the posi-
tions data, as the movement data for speeds and accelerations may be less reliable.
Lastly, this master thesis provides valuable insights into European eel behavior and the
potential for innovative tagging technologies to be used to uncover the mysteries of their
spawning area but it also emphasizes the need and importance for continued research
efforts to protect and conserve this enigmatic species.
39
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
J. F. Lopez-Olmeda et al. “Daily rhythms of digestive physiology, metabolism and
behaviour in the European eel (Anguilla anguilla)”. In: Aquaculture International
20.6 (2012), pp. 1085–1096. issn: 1573-143X. doi: 10.1007/s10499-012-9547-z.
[2]
Vincent J. T. Van Ginneken and Gregory E. Maes. “The European eel (Anguilla an-
guilla, Linnaeus), its Lifecycle, Evolution and Reproduction: A Literature Review”.
In: Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries 15.4 (2005), pp. 367–398. issn: 0960-3166,
1573-5184. doi: 10.1007/s11160-006-0005-8.
[3]
Maarten C. M. Bruijs and Caroline M. F. Durif. “Silver Eel Migration and Be-
haviour”. In: Spawning Migration of the European Eel. Ed. by Guido Van Den
Thillart, Sylvie Dufour, and J. Cliff Rankin. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2009,
pp. 65–95. isbn: 978-1-4020-9094-3 978-1-4020-9095-0. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-
9095-0_4.
[4]
Roman Motyka et al. “Growth and behaviour of juvenile European eel (Anguilla
anguilla) in sandy and stony bottom substrates”. In: Ecology of Freshwater Fish
32.3 (2023), pp. 640–647. issn: 0906-6691, 1600-0633. doi: 10.1111/eff.12716.
[5]
Adina Schwartzbach et al. “Marine mussel beds as attractive habitats for juve-
nile European eel (Anguilla anguilla); A study of bottom habitat and cavity size
preferences”. In: Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 246 (2020), p. 107042. issn:
02727714. doi: 10.1016/j.ecss.2020.107042.
[6]
P. Anders Nilsson et al. “Substrate-size choice in European eel (Anguilla anguilla)
elvers is not altered by piscivore chemical cues”. In: Journal of Fish Biology 96.6
(2020), pp. 1534–1537. issn: 1095-8649. doi: 10.1111/jfb.14343.
[7]
David Righton et al. “Important questions to progress science and sustainable man-
agement of anguillid eels”. In: Fish and Fisheries 22.4 (2021), pp. 762–788. issn:
1467-2960, 1467-2979. doi: 10.1111/faf.12549.
[8]
Rosalind M. Wright et al. “First direct evidence of adult European eels migrating to
their breeding place in the Sargasso Sea”. In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (2022), p. 15362.
issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-19248-8.
40
==PAGE:49==
[9]
Christiaan V. Henkel et al. “Primitive Duplicate Hox Clusters in the European Eel’s
Genome”. In: PLoS ONE 7.2 (2012). Ed. by Michael Schubert, e32231. issn: 1932-
6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032231.
[10]
Michael J. Miller et al. “Spawning by the European eel across 2000 km of the Sargasso
Sea”. In: Biology Letters 15.4 (2019), p. 20180835. issn: 1744-9561, 1744-957X. doi:
10.1098/rsbl.2018.0835.
[11]
Reinhold Hanel et al. “Low larval abundance in the Sargasso Sea: new evidence
about reduced recruitment of the Atlantic eels”. In: Die Naturwissenschaften 101
(2014). doi: 10.1007/s00114-014-1243-6.
[12]
Daniel P. Costa, Greg A. Breed, and Patrick W. Robinson. “New Insights into
Pelagic Migrations: Implications for Ecology and Conservation”. In: Annual Review
of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 43.1 (2012), pp. 73–96. doi: 10.1146/annurev-
ecolsys-102710-145045.
[13]
Maria Beger et al. “Conservation planning for connectivity across marine, freshwater,
and terrestrial realms”. In: Biological Conservation 143.3 (2010), pp. 565–575. issn:
0006-3207. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2009.11.006.
[14]
Pieterjan Verhelst et al. “Mapping silver eel migration routes in the North Sea”. In:
Scientific Reports 12.1 (2022), p. 318. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-
04052-7.
[15]
Niels Jepsen et al. “The use of external electronic tags on fish: an evaluation of
tag retention and tagging effects”. In: Animal Biotelemetry 3.1 (2015), p. 49. issn:
2050-3385. doi: 10.1186/s40317-015-0086-z.
[16]
K Tsukamoto, J Aoyama, and M J Miller. “Migration, speciation, and the evolution
of diadromy in anguillid eels”. In: Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sci-
ences 59.12 (2002), pp. 1989–1998. issn: 0706-652X, 1205-7533. doi: 10.1139/f02-
165.
[17]
The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.
url: https://www.iucnredlist.org/en.
[18]
Finn Økland et al. “Development and testing of attachment methods for pop-up
satellite archival transmitters in European eel”. In: Animal Biotelemetry 1.1 (2013),
p. 3. issn: 2050-3385. doi: 10.1186/2050-3385-1-3.
41
==PAGE:50==
[19]
A.P. Palstra et al. “Artificial maturation and reproduction of European silver eel: De-
velopment of oocytes during final maturation”. In: Aquaculture 249.1 (2005), pp. 533–
547. issn: 00448486. doi: 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2005.04.031.
[20]
Johanna S. Kottmann et al. “Effects of essential fatty acids and feeding regimes on
egg and offspring quality of European eel: Comparing reproductive success of farm-
raised and wild-caught broodstock”. In: Aquaculture 529 (2020), p. 735581. issn:
0044-8486. doi: 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2020.735581.
[21]
Vivek Hari Sridhar, Dominique G. Roche, and Simon Gingins. “Tracktor: Image-
based automated tracking of animal movement and behavior”. In: Methods in Ecology
and Evolution 10.6 (2019), pp. 815–820. issn: 2041-210X. doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.
13166.
[22]
Julian Meister et al. “Protection and guidance of downstream moving fish with hori-
zontal bar rack bypass systems”. en. In: Ecological Engineering 178 (2022), p. 106584.
issn: 09258574. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoleng.2022.106584.
[23]
Charlotte Steendam et al. “Burrowing behaviour of the European eel (Anguilla an-
guilla): Effects of life stage”. In: Journal of Fish Biology 97.5 (2020), pp. 1332–1342.
issn: 1095-8649. doi: 10.1111/jfb.14481.
[24]
Erik Burgerhout et al. “Schooling reduces energy consumption in swimming male
European eels, Anguilla anguilla L.” In: Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology 448 (2013), pp. 66–71. issn: 00220981. doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2013.05.015.
[25]
V. Van Ginneken et al. “Does a 5500-km swim trial stimulate early sexual matura-
tion in the European eel (Anguilla anguilla L.)?” In: Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology Part A: Molecular & Integrative Physiology 147.4 (2007), pp. 1095–1103.
issn: 10956433. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2007.03.021.
[26]
Arjan Palstra et al. “Swimming stimulates oocyte development in European eel”. In:
Aquaculture 270.1 (2007), pp. 321–332. issn: 00448486. doi: 10.1016/j.aquaculture.
2007.04.015.
42
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
1. Female broodstock information
Table A.1: Female broodstock IDs obtained from the eel farm (initial number), weight and
length with the means and standard deviations corresponding to each treatment. Mind
that not all fish made it to the filming stage.
Treatment
Tag
Weight(gr)
Length(cm)
Control
5EF0
736
70.4
5EF3
748
71
5EF7
694
70.3
5EED
844
76.6
610B
742
69
6112
704
70.5
6114
694
71
5EEF
675
71.2
6110
670
70
mean
723
71.1
st.dev
53.6
2.2
Pinger
5EF5
806
72.8
5EEE
870
71.7
5EFD
740
68.5
5EFE
716
70.3
5EFF
742
68
mean
774.8
70.3
st.dev
62.8
2
Medium tag
5F00
954
71.8
610A
778
72.5
6109
832
73.5
5EF2
702
72.7
mean
816.5
72.6
st.dev
106
0.7
Small tag
5EF4
906
76
5EF9
772
72.2
5EFA
896
72.5
6118
770
73.8
mean
836
73.6
st.dev
75.2
1.7
Big tag
5EF1
784
72.8
5EF8
836
73.7
6111
976
78.7
mean
865.3
75.1
st.dev
99.3
3.2
43
==PAGE:52==
Table A.2: Female broodstock IDs at the beginning of the filming stage, weight and length
with the means and standard deviations corresponding to each treatment
Treatment
Tag
Weight (g)
Length (cm)
Control
5EF0
736
70.4
5EF3
748
71
5EF7
694
70.3
610B
742
69
6112
704
70.5
Mean
724.8
70.3
St. Dev.
24.2
0.8
Pinger
5EF5
806
72.8
5EEE
870
71.7
5EFD
740
68.5
5EFE
716
70.3
5EFF
742
68
Mean
774.8
70.3
St. Dev.
62.8
2
Medium tag
5F00
954
71.8
610A
778
72.5
6109
832
73.5
Mean
854.7
72.6
St. Dev.
90.2
0.8
Small tag
5EF4
906
76
5EF9
772
72.2
5EFA
896
72.5
6118
770
73.8
Mean
836
73.6
St. Dev.
75.2
1.7
Big tag
5EF1
784
72.8
5EF8
836
73.7
6111
976
78.7
Mean
865.3
75.1
St. Dev.
99.3
3.2
2. Python code for treatment recording using Open CV
1
import numpy as np
2
import cv2
3
import time
4
# Set the desired video length in seconds (5 minutes = 300 seconds)
5
video_length_seconds =300
6
#create capture objects
7
video_tank1=cv2.VideoCapture(1)
8
video_tank2=cv2.VideoCapture(2)
9
video_tank3=cv2.VideoCapture(3)
10
video_tank4=cv2.VideoCapture(4)
11
video_tank5=cv2.VideoCapture(5)
44
==PAGE:53==
12
video_tank6=cv2.VideoCapture(0)
13
video_tank7=cv2.VideoCapture(6)
14
fourcc = cv2.VideoWriter_fourcc(*'mp4v')
15
# Get start time
16
start_time = time.time()
17
# Create video writers with the same frame rate as the original video frames
18
out_1 = cv2.VideoWriter('output_1.mp4', fourcc , 10.0, (int(video_tank1.get(3))
, int(video_tank1.get(4))))
19
out_2 = cv2.VideoWriter('output_2.mp4', fourcc , 10.0, (int(video_tank2.get(3))
, int(video_tank2.get(4))))
20
out_3 = cv2.VideoWriter('output_3.mp4', fourcc ,10.0, (int(video_tank3.get(3)),
int(video_tank3.get(4))))
21
out_4 = cv2.VideoWriter('output_4.mp4', fourcc , 10.0, (int(video_tank4.get(3))
, int(video_tank4.get(4))))
22
out_5 = cv2.VideoWriter('output_5.mp4', fourcc , 10.0, (int(video_tank5.get(3))
, int(video_tank5.get(4))))
23
out_6 = cv2.VideoWriter('output_6.mp4', fourcc ,10.0, (int(video_tank6.get(3)),
int(video_tank6.get(4))))
24
#Video capturing and saving loop
25
while True:
26
ret1, frame1 = video_tank1.read()
27
ret2, frame2 = video_tank2.read()
28
ret3, frame3 = video_tank3.read()
29
ret4, frame4 = video_tank4.read()
30
ret5, frame5 = video_tank5.read()
31
ret6, frame6 = video_tank6.read()
32
ret7, frame7 = video_tank7.read()
33
#tank 1
34
if (ret1):
35
# show image in new window
36
cv2.imshow('Cam 1', frame1)
37
# record image
38
out_1.write(frame1)
39
# lets do the same for all cameras ...
40
#tank 2
41
if (ret2):
42
cv2.imshow('Cam 2', frame2)
43
out_2.write(frame2)
45
==PAGE:54==
44
#tank 3
45
if (ret3):
46
cv2.imshow('Cam 3', frame3)
47
out_3.write(frame3)
48
#tank 4
49
if (ret4):
50
cv2.imshow('Cam 4', frame4)
51
out_4.write(frame4)
52
#tank 5
53
if (ret5):
54
cv2.imshow('Cam 5', frame5)
55
out_5.write(frame5)
56
#tank 6
57
if (ret6):
58
cv2.imshow('Cam 6', frame6)
59
out_6.write(frame6)
60
#tank 6
61
if (ret7):
62
cv2.imshow('Cam 7', frame7)
63
out_7.write(frame7)
64
65
# Check if video length exceeds the desired length
66
elapsed_time = time.time() - start_time
67
if elapsed_time > video_length_seconds:
68
print("Video length exceeds 5 minutes. Stopping and saving videos...")
69
break
70
# Check for 'q' key press to exit
71
if cv2.waitKey(1) & 0xFF == ord('q'):
72
print("Exiting...")
73
break
74
# release video writers to save the videos
75
out_1.release()
76
out_2.release()
77
out_3.release()
78
out_4.release()
79
out_5.release()
80
out_6.release()
81
out_7.release()
46
==PAGE:55==
82
# close all windows
83
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
3.Example of code snippet for data smoothing
1
# the smoothing window parameter determines the extent of smoothing (this
parameter must be odd)
2
smoothing_window = 11
3
# Fill in the parameters below if you'd like movement measures to be converted
from pixels and frames to
real-world measures (cms and secs)
4
# Frame-rate (fps or frames per second) of recorded video to calculate time
5
fps = 10
6
# Pixels per cm to in the recorded video to calculate distances
7
pxpercm = 37 * scaling
8
#derivatives for speeds
9
import scipy
10
dx = df['pos_x'] - df['pos_x'].shift(n_inds)
11
dy = df['pos_y'] - df['pos_y'].shift(n_inds)
12
d2x = dx - dx.shift(3)
13
d2y = dy - dy.shift(3)
14
#Speed extraction
15
df['speed'] = np.sqrt(dx**2 + dy**2)
16
# smoothing speeds by using the savitzky golay moving average filter
17
df['smoothed_speed'] = scipy.signal.savgol_filter(df['speed'],
smoothing_window , 1)
18
#Acceleration extraction
19
df['accn'] = np.sqrt(d2x**2 + d2y**2)
20
#smoothing accelerations in the same way as speeds
21
df['smoothed_accn'] = scipy.signal.savgol_filter(df['accn'], smoothing_window ,
1)
22
23
#producing data frames and smoothed data frames
24
df['speed'] = df['speed'] * fps / pxpercm
25
df['smoothed_speed'] = df['smoothed_speed'] * fps / pxpercm
26
df['accn'] = df['accn'] * fps * fps / pxpercm
27
df['smoothed_accn'] = df['smoothed_accn'] * fps * fps / pxpercm
28
df.head()
29
# We now remove any outliers that remain post smoothing
47
==PAGE:56==
30
# Here we want to be conservative and not eliminate any relavant points as
outliers. We therefore choose a high 'm' value in the reject_outliers
functions.
31
index = tr.reject_outliers(df['smoothed_speed'], m = 6)
32
index = np.array(index[0])
4. Supplementary graph
Figure A.1: Residence coeﬀicients (mean±std) for (a) sector 1 and (b) sector 5 in three
times-of-the-day for the “Large-Tags” treatment.
48
==PAGE:57==
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.aqua.dtu.dk
