==PAGE:1==
Off-policy reinforcement learning
for portfolio allocation
Andreea Teodora Bejenariu
Supervisor: Tue Herlau, Associate Professor
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with applying model-free reinforcement learning for managing
a portfolio of financial assets in the stock trading industry.
The thesis assumes that the reader has a solid knowledge background of Machine
Learning and some (but not necessary) knowledge of Reinforcement Learning.
Lyngby, 09-October-2023
Andreea Teodora Bejenariu
Supervisor: Tue Herlau, Associate Professor
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
i
1
Introduction
5
2
Theory
9
2.1
Machine Learning - an Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Portfolio Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Technical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Modern Portfolio Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3
Sharpe ratio (SR)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.4
Reinforcement Learning for the Portfolio Optimization
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Model-Based Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.1
The Bellman Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.2
Value Iteration Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Model-Free Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5.1
Temporal Difference (TD) Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.6
Model-Free Reinforcement Learning: Deep Q-Learning . . . . . .
28
2.7
Conservative Q-Learning (CQL)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Methods
35
3.1
Data Extraction and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
The Training and Validation sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3
Experimental Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
3.3.1
The Financial Data and Technical Indicators
. . . . . . .
44
3.3.2
The MDP formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4
The Q-network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.5
The Q-Network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.5.1
Initially proposed model: DQNi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.5.2
A more complex model: DQNi-LSTM . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.5.3
A simple model: simpleDQN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.5.4
The baseline model: a buy-and-hold strategy . . . . . . .
60
3.5.5
Training Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4
Results
61
4.0.1
Model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.1
Adjusting the reward function to the RL model . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.1.1
Model performance on several portfolios.
Conservative
DQN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5
Discussion
75
5.1
Discussion of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Conclusion
79
Bibliography
83
Appendix I - The Fully Connected Layer
93
Appendix II - other RL methods
97
.1
Policy Iteration Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
.2
Actor-Critic Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Appendix III - Results
103
.3
simpleDQN with reduced action space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
.4
Average Profits and Sharpe ratio for simpleDQN with and with-
out CQL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
.5
Profits table for the Validation Dataset - no percentages . . . . . 107
.6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
.7
Detailed Results for Training and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
==PAGE:7==
1
Abbervations
ADX - Average Directional Index
ANN - Artificial Neural Network
Corp. - Corporation
CQL - Conservative Q-Learning
DL - Deep Learning
DX - Directional Movement Index
EMA - Exponential Moving Average
FC - Fully Connected
Inc. - Incorporated (company is an entirely separate entity from its owner)
LBB - Lower Bollinger Band
LSTM - Long Short-Term Memory
LSTM-RNN - Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Network
Ltd. - limited (form of corporate structure)
MACD - Moving Average Convergence Divergence
ML - Machine Learning
MLP - Multi-Layer Perceptron
MM - Market Maker
MPT - Modern Portfolio Theory
MSE - Minimum Squared Error
RNN - Recurrent Neural Network
RSI - Relative Strength Index
==PAGE:8==
2
Abbreviations
SMA - Simple Moving Average
SR - Sharpe Ratio
UPB - Upper Bollinger Band
==PAGE:9==
3
Abstract
Portfolio allocation poses a significant decision-making problem for traders who
must continuously adjust their investments based on complex technical analyses
of historical data and stock market behavior. To address this, many studies
have formulated this problem into a Markov decision process, with recent works
turning to model-free reinforcement learning. However, existing literature often
focuses on a narrow range of datasets and lacks transparency in the decision-
making process of the agent and/or training stability. This thesis introduces
a fresh perspective by applying a model-free RL method on a wider range of
portfolio assets and delving into the Deep Q-Network (DQN) with a discretized
action space in order to tackle convergence instability challenges.
It further
provides insight into the models’ decision-making mechanisms, training stability,
and result variance, offering a comprehensive view of portfolio allocation. The
approach is benchmarked on several portfolios and compared with existing state-
of-the art models.
==PAGE:10==
4
Abstract
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
==PAGE:12==
6
Introduction
A portfolio refers to a collection of financial assets held by investors. Stock trad-
ing particularly refers to buying and selling shares of publicly listed companies
with the aim of making profit. Shares, often referred to as stocks or equities,
represent ownership in a corporation and constitute a claim on a portion of
the corporation’s assets and earnings. Stock trading involves buying or selling
shares of a company with the aim of profiting on future price fluctuations. This
is done through various trading actions, which usually include buying or selling
stocks at their current price value. Trading allows for more frequent buying
and selling transactions, as opposed to investing, which typically involves fewer
transactions and holding assets for a longer period of time. The stock market
serves as the platform for trading, whether conducted digitally or face-to-face.
Portfolio management involves allocating capital to financial assets and adjust-
ing this capital as it seems fit through occasional tradings, usually in response
to time-varying market conditions. Portfolio trading is a practice in the finan-
cial industry, which aims to maximize the trader’s monetary wealth over the
period during an investment horizon.
Due to the increase of online trading
platforms, such as (Alpacca[1], eToro[2], RobinHood[3] etc.), online trading has
become largely available to the public. In modern financial context online trad-
ing has become the norm due to its convenience, lower fees and rapid execution
[1, 2, 4, 3]. Furthermore, many online trading platforms offer integration with
algorithmic trading solutions, allowing individual traders to deploy automated
trading strategies directly from their personal accounts [1, 5, 6, 7].
Navigating the intricate world of portfolio allocation, traders are tasked with the
ongoing challenge of determining and periodically adjusting their investments
across a variety of financial assets in their portfolios. The problem represents
a decision-making challenge since (changes to) the allocation must be deter-
mined at each time step, and the active trading decision can be taken based
on a technical analysis (historical data, past behavior of the stock etc.). The
objective is to maximize the monetary return (profits) over a long-term invest-
ment period while typically keeping measures of risk at an acceptable level. A
common approach to address this complex decision problem employs model-
free reinforcement learning, with many studies gravitating towards the Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) method [8, 9, 10]. Yet, much of the ex-
isting literature exhibits constraints, often focusing on a limited set of datasets
or reduced transparency of the decision-making process. This thesis addresses
these limitations by exploring a broader spectrum of datasets and introduces
a novel perspective by exploring the Deep Q-Network (DQN) with discretized
actions, aiming to circumvent the convergence instability challenges associated
with DDPG models. Additionally, a comprehensive exploration is made into the
decision-making mechanisms of these models, while also examining training sta-
bility and variance in results, thus offering a more holistic view of the portfolio
allocation process.
==PAGE:13==
7
In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has become a popular approach
for financial portfolio trading problems [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 8, 17, 9, 10]. In
RL methods it is assumed that an agent can learn from the complex financial
environment in order to come up with an optimal trading strategy, namely an
optimal policy. However, as opposed to usual neural network-based approaches
in the stock market industry, where future stock prices are predicted using
neural networks [18, 19, 20], the RL agent can interact with the stock market
environment and attempt various trading strategies. An intelligent agent can
act according to a learnt policy or strategy using current market observations
and feedback from past experiences.
All RL methods implemented were done on a simulated stock market environ-
ment in order to assess the performance of this method without any actual
monetary losses. Thus, the RL method is offline, meaning the agent learns from
a fixed dataset rather than online interactions with an environment, such as an
actual trading online platform. Interactions with the actual stock market on a
trading platform are a lot more complex and what was used for this project was
a simplified offline framework. Bellow are the following assumptions for this
project:
- The portfolio is static. For managing a real portfolio of investments, a
trader would be able to add or remove assets from their portfolio. However,
for this set-up, the RL agent is expected to learn from a static portfolio
which contains the same assets throughout the whole trading period. By
having the portfolio simplified to be static, the complexities and uncertain-
ties introduced by continuously changing asset compositions are removed,
and the RL agent is allowed to focus on optimizing trading strategies for
a known set of assets.
- Commissions are not included for trading actions. When commissions are
excluded, the variable costs associated with frequent trades are eliminated.
This lets the RL model prioritize pure asset performance and intrinsic
value without being influenced by external fee structures. The assump-
tion is not far from some real-world scenarios, as certain platforms, such
as Alpacca[1] and eToro[2], offer some commission-free trading. Nonethe-
less, it is important to note that several stocks might not adhere to this
commission-free premise.
- Only buying and selling actions are permitted, although when trading one
has a plethora of many other actions available, such as options trading
or shorting. Options trading is the buying and selling of contracts that
give investors the right, but not the obligation, to purchase or sell an
underlying asset at a predetermined price within a specified time frame
[21]. Shorting, or short selling, is the practice of selling assets, typically
==PAGE:14==
8
Introduction
stock shares, which are borrowed but not owned, with the intention of
buying them back at a lower price later [22].
Shorting method profits
from the stocks going down in price. By being limited to only buying
and selling, the model is thus protected from the added complexity and
risk associated with derivatives like options or the nuances of shorting.
The learning problem is made more tractable and the action space gets
simplified.
- The RL method implemented for this project allows only one buying or
selling action for a single stock per day or in the given time frame. In
the actual stock market a trader is allowed to perform multiple trading
actions during the day. By being restricted to a single action per stock
per day, the agents’ interactions with the simulated stock market are thus
simplified. This approach was used in order to make the Deep Q-learning
process more efficient and stable.
- Sufficient liquidity: since it is a simulated trading environment, all assets
considered are assumed liquid, meaning shares can quickly be converted
into liquid cash.
Furthermore, since it is an offline reinforcement learning method, the RL port-
folio allocation strategy in this paper does not take into consideration: actual
explicit trading costs, liquidity, market maker spread, market impact or oppor-
tunity costs. The market-maker is an individual or brokerage house that holds
a large size of assets or securities and provides trading services for investors
in an effort to keep financial markets liquid. The market maker spread is the
difference between the price at which a market-maker (MM) is willing to buy a
security and the price at which the MM is willing to sell the security. Market
impact results when high volumes of trades influence the market price. Oppor-
tunity cost is the effective cost of price movements that occur before the trade
executes. Not taking these factors into account are further limitations of the
offline RL strategy which was used for this paper.
The coding implementation of this project can be found on https://gitlab.
gbar.dtu.dk/s184377/portfolio_optimization_w_reinforcement_learning
or with the supplementary material of the hand-in. Having introduced these
portfolio trading concepts and outlining the constraints of the methodology em-
ployed in this study, chapter 2 will delve deeper into the research and theory
behind machine learning (ML), RL methods and specifically Deep Q-Learning,
while touching upon the novel research in conservative Deep Q-Learning[23].
The methods, such as data extraction, data processing and the experimental
setup will be further addressed in chapter 2. Performance metrics, model stabil-
ity and the decison-making transparency will be presented in chapter 4, followed
by a discussion in chapter 5.1. A conclusion will be drawn in chapter 6.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
==PAGE:16==
10
Theory
2.1
Machine Learning - an Overview
Since in Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a general framework for building au-
tonomous agents to make decisions without human supervision, it can generally
be said that RL falls under the category of unsupervised Machine Learning
(ML). The latter focuses on the development and application of models which
are capable of learning from datasets [24] via the use of artificial neural net-
works (ANNs). This section of the chapter provides a brief introduction to the
ML methods used in this project. However, since it is assumed that the reader
already has knowledge within ML, it will not go in depth into the multiple layer
calculations or learning processes of backpropagation and gradient descent. The
reader can however consult Appendix I - The Fully Connected Layer for further
details.
Deep learning (DL) is a field of ML that utilises multiple hidden layers to learn a
function directly from data. DL involves passing the data observations through
multiple hidden layers. A hidden layer in a neural network is an intermedi-
ate layer between input and output layers that processes input data, typically
through weighted sums and activation functions. In a deep network architec-
ture, each layer progressively extracts features from the data and transmits the
information to the next layer. The network architectures used for this project
involve Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), but also a Long Short-Term Memory
Recurrent Neural Network (LSTM-RNN).
2.1.1
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
The Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) consists of a feedforward ANN involving
an input layer, an output layer and multiple hidden layers.
In an MLP, an
input layer receives the input data and the hidden layers process the input
signals. Usually there is an activation function between the layers to introduce
nonlinearity and allow neural networks to learn complex representations. The
output layer makes predictions based on the processed information from the
previous layers [25]. An example of a single-neuron perceptron layer is shown
in Figure 2.1.
As Figure 2.1 depicts below, x1, x2, ..xn are the inputs and w1, w2, ..., wn are the
weights of a single neural node. A hidden layer usually consists of several such
nodes. The single output is the summation of all those weights times the inputs
plus a bias b. There is usually a single bias per hidden layer. z is obtained by
passing the output through an activation function ϕ and this can be expressed
via equation 2.1:
==PAGE:17==
Machine Learning - an Overview
11
Figure 2.1: Single-neuron perceptron model, adapted from [26].
Note: An
MLP consists of multiple neurons (hiden units), thus this is a
simplified model.
z = ϕ(xw + b)
(2.1)
In equation (2.1), x is the input observation with a dimension of 1 × n, where
n is the number of features. w represents the weight matrix of the first hidden
layer with dimensions n × m, where m is the number of neurons in the hidden
layer. The product xw thus produces the activation for the m neurons in the
hidden layer before the biases are added and the activation function ϕ is applied.
The activation function ϕ is an non-linear activation function, such as Rectified
Linear Unit: ϕ(x) = max(0, x), which is widely used in deep learning [27]. The
activation function finally maps the summation function xw + b to the output
value z, as shown in Figure 2.1.
Every layer in an MLP is fully connected (FC), meaning every neuron in a layer
connects to every neuron in the following layer via weights. An MLP makes
usage of one or several FC layers. Overall, the total number of weights for each
neural node of all network layers plus the number of biases are the trainable
parameters θ (weights and biases) of a network, which are updated through
backpropagation. Explaining backpropagation and the learning processes of a
neural network is out of the scope of this project. For a more in depth overview
of how calculations are done for MLPs with multiple hidden units one is advised
==PAGE:18==
12
Theory
to consult Appendix I - The Fully Connected Layer.
2.1.2
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM)
Recurrent neural networks are a class of deep learning models that consider the
temporal order of inputs, allowing them to learn from sequential information
[28]. RNNs have proven to be useful for tasks such as natural language pro-
cessing [29, 30] and time series forecasting [31]. RNNs possess internal memory
which makes it possible to capture sequential dependencies. The architecture
of an simple RNN is depicted in Figure 2.2 A). As can be seen in this figure,
x1, x2, x3, . . . represent the inputs, h0, h1, h2, h3, . . . are the hidden units, and
z1, z2, z3, . . . are the network outputs. The number of inputs, hidden states, and
outputs depends on the specific problem at hand. In contrast to a standard
MLP, which has weights wx and wy for input and output layers respectively,
RNNs introduce recurrent weights wh that connect the hidden state across time
steps in order to store sequence information. By employing a loop, RNNs apply
the same operation to each element in a series, with the current computation
depending on both the current input and the information from previous com-
putations [32].
Figure 2.2: The RNN (A) and LSTM architecture (B), adapted from [33].
A limitation of simple RNNs is the short-term memory which restricts informa-
tion retainment over long sequences [34]. One way of overcoming this limitation
is by using a Long Sort-Term Memory (LSTM), which has proven to be more
effective at retaining information over longer sequences [33]. LSTMs incorporate
memory cells, gates, and a unique architecture that allows them to selectively
==PAGE:19==
Machine Learning - an Overview
13
remember or forget information, enabling them to handle long-range dependen-
cies in sequences more effectively than simple RNNs. The overall architecture
of an LSTM in also depicted in Figure 2.2, B).
Figure 2.2 B) depicts the update mechanism within the inner structure of an
LSTM, which consists of three gates: an input gate, a forget gate and an output
gate. Each gate controls the flow of information by performing a specific func-
tion. The input gate decides how to update the internal state by the use of the
current input and previous internal state. The forget gate determines the degree
to which the information from the previous internal state can be forgotten. The
output gate regulates the influence of the internal state in the system [32].
Many works have proven LSTMs to be succesful for predicting stock prices [35,
36, 37, 38]. For this project, an MLP and an RNN-LSTM were combined to form
a neural network model used for addressing the RL stock trading problem. More
information regarding the architecture can be found in the Methods chapter,
section 3.5.
The upcoming section 2.2 will introduce the reader to the stock market trading
problem in the context of optimally managing a portfolio of financial assets.
Afterwards, Reinforcement Learning is introduced, which addresses the portfolio
optimization problem (see section 2.3). This is followed by an explanation of
the model-free RL method which was utilized for the scope of this project,
namely Deep Q-learning (section 2.6).
The latter utilizes a deep Q-network
that incorporates the network architectures which were previously discussed in
this section.
==PAGE:20==
14
Theory
2.2
Portfolio Optimization
Managing a portfolio of financial assets could be viewed as an optimization prob-
lem, since it involves the optimization of profits and a sequential decision mark-
ing process according to the price movements of the financial assets. Considering
the stochastic component of time-varying market variables, traditional portfo-
lio trading strategies have been formulated as stochastic optimization problems
[39, 40, 41]. The stock market is influenced by a wide range of socio-economic
factors that are constantly changing and are often difficult to predict. How-
ever, stock trading and algorithmic trading are widely known practices and this
project aims to automize some of the trading activities, such as managing a
portfolio of assets.
2.2.1
Technical Analysis
Decision making and trading based on hystorical data is a common practice
which involves analyzing past price movements, trading volumes and other com-
puted metrics (technical indicators) to forecast future price trends. This method
is refferd as technical analysis and relies on the premise that patterns in his-
torical price movements tend to repeat themselves [42]. It is speculated that
technical analysis could rather work due to the preponderant belief and practice
in the trading community of the method itself, which might actually influence
the market behaviour [43]. However, the assumption of the fact that past per-
formance of stocks is an indicator or future trends remains yet debatable.
Technical analysis involves attempts to predict future price movements based on
historically observed market data. Financial data regarding price movements of
stocks can be retrieved as stock quotas through numerous APIs (e.g.: Alpacca
APO [1], YahooFinance API [44]), and it usually consists of n timesteps. When
a stock quota is retrieved at time t, it has has the following trading information:
• ot the price at which the first trade of stock i is executed at time t.
• ht the highest price the stock was traded at at time t
• lt the lowest price the stock was traded at at time t
• pt the closing or last price of a stock or asset at time t, which is the last
price the stock was traded at.
• vt, which is the traded volume or number of shares of stock i at time t,
usually during the time between the opening and closing price.
==PAGE:21==
Portfolio Optimization
15
Tradings of a stock are executed rapidly but the trading frequency might differ.
Stock quotas can thus be retrieved at different time frequencies (e.g.: every
minute, every day), but the trading information could be the same if no trade
was executed between two consecutive timesteps t −1 and t.
A typical measurement which a trader is interested in when retrieving stock
quotas in is the return of a stock. The return of a stock, often denoted as rt,
represents the percentage change in the stock price from one period to the next.
It gives an investor an idea of how the value of a particular investment has
changed over time. For two consecutive timesteps, it calculated as:
rt = pt −pt−1
pt−1
(2.2)
Where pt is the closing price at time t and pt−1 is the closing price of the previous
timestep t −1. By dividing the difference (pt −pt−1) with the initial price pt−1
the absolute change in price is normalized in order to make it relative to the
starting value.
2.2.2
Modern Portfolio Theory
According to the original modern portfolio theory formulated by Markowitz,
portfolio management can thus be formulated as a portfolio optimization prob-
lem [45]. The following annotations are used:
- n is the number of assests in the portfolio
- wi is the proportion of total portfolio value invested in asset i, for i =
1, 2, 3, ..., n. Then the following vector w = [w1, w2, ..., wn] is denoted as
the vector of portfolio weights.
- ri is the expected monetary return of each asset i and r = [r1, r2, ..., rn]
the respected return of all assets.
- Σ is the covariance matrix of asset returns
The objectives are:
1. Maximize the portfolio return wT r
==PAGE:22==
16
Theory
2. Minimize the portfolio variance (considered as portfolio risk in the invest-
ment industry): wT Σw
Subject to the following constraints:
1. The weights of all assets in the portfolio should sum up to 1, ensuring all
funds are allocated:
n
X
i=1
wi = 1
(2.3)
2. Each weight is bound between 0 and 1 to prohibit short-selling.
0 ≤wi ≤1
∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n}
(2.4)
Markowitz discusses the optimization of a portfolio in terms of expected return
and variance, laying the foundation for why minimizing variance (while achiev-
ing a target return) is critical [45]. Minimizing the variance aims to reduce the
overall risk or volatility in a portfolio and this could be beneficial for risk-averse
investments. The portfolio optimization problem for this project considers el-
ements from the MPT, with slightly modified objectives and constraints (see
Methods, section 3.3).
2.2.3
Sharpe ratio (SR)
The Sharpe ratio (SR) is a key component of MPT and it is used in finance
to measure the risk-adjusted performance of a portfolio. It helps investors un-
derstand the expected return rapported to the volatility of the portfolio. The
Sharpe ratio formula in equation 2.5 takes into account a return from a portfolio
and a constant return from investments in risk-free financial assets. Risk-free
assets (such as government bonds, loans, bank savings accounts etc.) usually
provide lower but consistent returns.
SR = Rp −Rf
σp
(2.5)
Where:
• Rp = wT r is the expected return of the portfolio
==PAGE:23==
Portfolio Optimization
17
• Rf is the expected return of the risk-free assets, which due to time con-
straints was not considered for this project.
• σp is the standard deviation of the portfolio returns
Due to limited time constraints, the inclusion of risk-free assets is omitted from
this project. A higher Sharpe ratio is preferred by investors, as it suggests that
the portfolio is providing a better return for its level of risk. In other words, for
each unit of risk taken the portfolio provides a higher return. A negative Sharpe
ratio implies that the portfolio return is less than the risk-free rate on average.
A Sharpe ratio equal to 0 means that the portfolio’s returns are exactly equal
to the returns of the risk-free assets.
2.2.4
Reinforcement Learning for the Portfolio Optimiza-
tion Problem
Attempts to solve portfolio optimization problems were made using Monte Carlo
simulations [46]. However, the drawbacks of this method are that it is compu-
tationally expensive, since it relies on simulations, and it assumes a normal
distribution of returns. Other related studies rely on heuristic methods, but
finding a good heuristic is often challenging [47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53]. In recent
years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has gained traction in financial portfolio
trading [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 8, 17, 9, 10], offering a more direct and adaptable
approach to optimal decision-making than methods like Monte Carlo simula-
tions. Unlike traditional Machine Learning applications in finance that predict
stock prices with neural networks, RL agents dynamically interact with the
stock market, testing various trading strategies based on current observations
and past feedback. These agents learn and act on optimal trading strategies
derived from their interactions. Figure 2.3 below shows a schematic for the RL
set-up for this project and how an the agent interacts with a simulated stock
market environment.
As figure 2.3 depicts, the agent interacts with the stock market environment
via taking trading actions and observing the rewards received from taking those
actions, which are usually the monetary returns of the portfolio. The agent
is given a portfolio with predetermined stocks. The agent observes a state st,
which is the price performance of the stocks at time t, and the reward rt, which
is the portfolio return at time t. For this set-up, the agent is allowed to take a
single action at, which is either buy, sell or hold an amount of shares of a single
stock. After completing the transaction the agent notices the next reward, rt+1,
which is the return of the updated portfolio. Observing now in the next state
==PAGE:24==
18
Theory
Figure 2.3: Reinforcement Learning set-up: Agent interacting with the stock
market environment by taking trading actions and observing the
reward, which is usually the portfolio return, and the market state,
which is usually the price performance of stocks
st+1, which is the performance of stocks at time t + 1, the agent takes the
next trading action. Through this action-feedback mechanism the agent was
expected to learn to make correct trading decisions over time with the stocks
available in the portfolio.
Having discussed the mechanisms of managing a portfolio of financial assets and
an overview of the RL framework, the next section, 2.3, will go more in depth
with the RL theory.
==PAGE:25==
Reinforcement Learning
19
2.3
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a subfield of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that
is concerned how to make an intelligent agent learn how to act in a complex,
dynamic environment in order to maximize its cumulated rewards (utility). It
has been successfully applied in games with varying complexity - from simple
games, such as Tetris [54] and Atari [55], to more complex games, such as
Total War [56], Poker [57] and Alpha Go [58], where it has surpassed human
abilities. Furthermore, Reinforcement Learning has given promising results in
other areas such as robotics [59, 60], healthcare [61, 62], energy optimization
[63], and nevertheless finance [11, 10, 8, 9].
RL has evolved to become a machine learning technique concerning itself with
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)[64] and neural networks.
An MDP is a
mathematical framework for solving decision-makings problems where the out-
comes may either be probabilistic or deterministic. An agent interacts with an
environment by taking an action and observing the reward rt which is given
from the environment. Figure 2.3 illustrates this interaction. The agent is usu-
ally trained or directed according to an algorithm in order to accomplish a goal,
such as maximizing the total sum of rewards which can be obtained from the
environment by taking the best sequence of actions.
In the context of this project the MDP is defined by:
• A collection of states given by st ∈S. Usually, a state st is characterized
by a feature set xt ∈X that consists of random variables.
• A set of actions at ∈A. These are the actions permissible for the agent
at a given time t to interact with the given environment. For the scope
of this project, an agent is allowed to take only one action out of 13
permissible actions for a single stock at time t. The number of actions
resulted from trying to discretize a continuous action space given by [11].
The enviornment which is subject to change is simply the portfolio of
stocks and total balance.
• A transition function T(st, at, st+1). By taking the action at in state st
the agent ends up in the next state st+1. The tranasition function reflects
the model or the dynamics of the MDP. The transition could be non-
deterministic, and the probability that performing at from st leads to
st+1 is denoted as P(st+1|s, a). For this project, the transition function is
unknown.
• A reward function R(st, at, st+1) ∈R, sometimes also defined as rt. In the
context of stock trading, the reward could be the portfolio return.
==PAGE:26==
20
Theory
• A start state s0 denoted by the first observation at time t = 0 of the stock
quotes data.
• A terminal state sn denoted by the lastly retrieved observation at time
t = n of the stock quotes.
• Occasionally a goal state sg, which is omitted for this project. Normally
a trading strategy adopted by the agent would be considered profitable
if a decent profit is obtained (e.g. above 10%) but the maximum attain-
able profit remains yet unknown due to the time-consuming complexity of
calculating it via other methods (e.g. via Monte Carlo Simulations).
What is important to mention is that generally in RL notations are denoted for
s, a, r as the current state, action and reward, respectively and s′, a′, r′ for the
next state, action and next reward. However, since the project concerns itself
with an agent learning from historical financial data, the states are time-bound
and thus the notation used for this paper is different. The current state, action
and reward were denoted as st, at, rt, respectively and the next state, action and
reward denoted as st+1, at+1, rt+1 respectively.
2.4
Model-Based Approaches
Solving an MDP implies finding an optimal policy, which is a plan or sequence
of actions to follow in order to maximize the total rewards accumulated (also
called the utility) from the start state s0 to the end state sn.
An optimal policy π∗: S →A maps a given state st to an the best action at
which can be taken at time t. The purpose of finding an optimal policy is to
maximize the utility. Since it is a large horizon problem and a complex MDP,
in order to help convergence of the algorithm and facilitate the preference for
immediate rewards, a discount factor γ is usually used, 0 < γ < 1, such that:
U([r0, ..., rn]) =
n
X
t=0
γtrt ≤Rmax
(1 −γ)
Where r0, ..., rn ∈R are the rewards accumulated from starting state s0 to
ending state sn, U([r0, ..., rn]) is the utility and Rmax is the maximum reward
which can be obtained in a single state.
There can be multiple policies π, but the optimal one π∗maximizes the expected
utility, which is the total rewards accumulated from the start state s0 to the
==PAGE:27==
Model-Based Approaches
21
end state sn. The value function V (st) denotes the utility or expected return
(total discounted future rewards) that an agent can achieve, starting from state
st and following a certain policy to the end state sn. V ∗(st) denotes the utility
starting in st and acting to an optimal policy π∗(st) thereafter. In cases where
the reward outcome is probabilistic, the utility is named as the expected utility.
Using this term was rather be adopted since there is uncertainty and variability
in the stock market.
Having introduced value functions, one can thus introduce the notion of a Q-
value, also denoted as Q(st, at). It is the expected utility gained by taking an
action at in state st. While the value function is calculated on based the action
which gives the highest utility in that state, the Q-values are representing the
values of a state for each possible action which can be taken from a state st, as
shown in Figure 2.4. To the left of the figure is shown a state transition from a
node st+1 to the next state (node) st+1 via the best possible action at. To the
right is shown a Q-value node st, at, which encapsulates the state-action pair
utility that the agent would get by choosing action at. One should note that
there are multiple states and transitions in an MDP. Furthermore, the number
of q-nodes for a state st is equal to the number of possible actions from st.
Figure 2.4: A graphical illustration of a state transition. Left: Without in-
cluding Q-values. Right: Including Q-values.
When it comes to the RL interpretation of the right graph shown in figure 2.4,
one can see the agent being state st and reaching a transitional state (st, at)
with its own Q-value before reaching the next state st+1. The Q-state can be
seen as a node split between st and st+1. The Q-states are used in MDPs in
order to explore all the outcomes of the search tree and its suitable for modelling
probabilistic outcomes.
==PAGE:28==
22
Theory
Having introduced Q-values, Qπ(st, at) is the Q-value obtained starting out
having taken action at from state st and thereafter acting according to a policy
π. Naturally, Q∗(st, at) denotes the optimal Q-value starting out having taken
action at from state st and thereafter acting according to an optimal policy π.
2.4.1
The Bellman Equation
The Bellman equation is a mathematical optimization method based on dynamic
programming. Dynamic programming breaks the problem down into subprob-
lems and relies on the principle of optimality: an optimal sub-solution preceeds
the optimal solution to the problem [65]. It is an equation for calculating the
value of a state V π(st) in an MDP as the the maximum expected sum of rewards
that can be obtained by following an optimal policy from the state st onward
[64] and can be written as in equation 2.7 below:
V π(st) = E
" ∞
X
t=0
γtR(st, π(st), st+1)
#
(2.6)
Where as previously mentioned, γ is the discount factor and R(st, π(st), st+1)
is the reward obtained by taking an action according to the policy π in state
st and reaching the next state st+1. The expectation is the sum considering all
probabilistic reward outcomes.
Since in our stock trading MDP formulation we have a start state s0 and an
end state sn, the equation can be written as:
V π(st) = E
" n
X
t=0
γtR(st, π(st), st+1)]
#
(2.7)
Where the expectation becomes thus the sum of all probabilistic reward out-
comes starting in state s0 and ending in state sn. Another way to write Bell-
man’s equation considering probabilities is shown in equation 2.8 below:
V π(st) =
X
st+1
P(st+1|st, π(st))[R(st, π(st), st+1) + γV π(st+1)]
(2.8)
Where π(st) is an action dictated by the policy taken in state st and P(st+1|st, π(st))
is the probability of transitioning to a state st+1 from st when following the pol-
icy π.
==PAGE:29==
Model-Based Approaches
23
For the optimal V ∗(st) and Q∗(st, at), equation 2.8 can be further expanded to
a the Bellman updates equations shown in 2.9 and 2.10 below:
V ∗(st) = max
at
X
st+1
P(st+1|st, at)[R(st, at, st+1) + γV ∗(st+1)]
(2.9)
Q∗(st, at) =
X
st+1
P(st+1|st, at)[R(st, at, st+1) + γQ∗(st+1, at+1)]
(2.10)
Where P(st+1|st, at) is the probability of reaching state st+1 from state st when
taking action at. The term maxat in eq. 2.9 is the argument of at which reaches
the maximum utility. It is only used for equation 2.9, since the Q-states consider
all state-action pair values.
Needless to say is that that equations 2.9 and 2.10 lead to equation 2.11 shown
below, since the Q-state Q∗(st, at) is a state-action pair function.
V ∗(st) = max
at Q∗(st, at)
(2.11)
The next section discusses a solution approach for a simple MDP based on the
Bellman update, namely the value iteration pseudocode is shown in Algorithm 1.
Although it is a model-based approach, understanding value iteration is essential
before discussing the model-free approach based on Q-learning in section 2.6.
One should be aware that there is also yet another MDP solution based on the
Bellman update, namely the policy iteration algorithm, which is discussed in
Appendix II - other RL methods, section .1). This algorithm not included in
the Theory section since is out of the scope of this project.
2.4.2
Value Iteration Algorithm
Value Iteration is value function approximation algorithm and it is based on
the Bellman update for V (st) shown in equation 2.9. The algorithm was firstly
introduced by Richard Bellman [66] and relies on dynamic programming. The
pseudo-code for Algorithm 1 shown below is adapted from [67].
==PAGE:30==
24
Theory
Algorithm 1 Value Iteration, adapted from [67]
1: Input: MDP M = ⟨S, s0, A, P(st+1 | st, at), R(st, at, st+1)⟩
2: Initialize V (st) arbitrarily; e.g. V (st) = 0 for all states st ∈S
3: repeat
4:
∆←0
5:
for each state st from s0 to sn do
6:
v ←V (st)
7:
V (st) ←maxa
P
st+1 P(st+1|st, at) · [R(st, at, st+1) + γ · V (st+1)]
8:
∆←max(∆, |v −V (st)|)
9:
end for
10: until ∆< θ
As it can be seen in Algorithm 1, V (st) is the current expected utility for a state
st before being stored in a variable v (line 6). V (st) then gets updated based
on the Bellman update as shown in equation 2.9 and this is iteratively done for
each state st (line 7). The discount factor is denoted by γ. st+1 is the next
state, P(st+1|st, at) represents the transition probability from state st to a next
state st+1 by taking the action at, and R(st, at, st+1) is the immediate reward
received when transitioning. Note that for this algorithm there can be different
kind of rewards for each action at that can be taken at time t when in st. The
algorithm chooses the action argument which gives the highest value.
The maximum change in the value function is represented as ∆and it gets
updated as shown in line 8. The Bellman update is done either until convergence,
when ∆changes only by a very small amount (θ), or until a terminal state sn
has been reached. Value iteration converges asymptotically to the optimal value
function (V →V ∗) as the number of iterations increases (i →∞) [66]. The
convergence relies on the fact that ∆is reduced by a factor of at least γ in each
iteration due to the Bellman update [67]. Some drawbacks of the Value Iteration
algorithm are that it might be a bit slow depending on the complexity of the
MDP, since each iteration takes O(|S|2||A|) running time [68]. Furthermore,
depending on the MDP, it is often the case that the policy converges long before
the V values [67].
Having the Value Iteration algoirthm given in pseudocode 6 one can easily adapt
it to Q-states. The algorithm can thus be re-written using Q-values and it relies
on the Bellman update shown in equation 2.10.
==PAGE:31==
Model-Free Approaches
25
Algorithm 2 Q-value Iteration, adapted from [67]
1: Input: MDP M = ⟨S, s0, A, P(st+1 | st, at), R(st, at, st+1)⟩
2: Initialize Q(st, at) arbitrarily, e.g. Q(st, at) = 0 for all states st ∈S and
actions at ∈A
3: repeat
4:
∆←0
5:
for each state st from s0 to sn do
6:
for each action at in A do
7:
q ←Q(st, at)
8:
Q(st, at)
←
P
st+1 P(st+1|st, at)
·
[R(st, at, st+1)
+
γ
·
maxat+1 Q(st+1, at+1)]
9:
∆←max(∆, |q −Q(st, at)|)
10:
end for
11:
end for
12: until ∆< θ
Algorithm 2 is very similar to Algorithm 1, but considers the q-value for every
state-action pair and is closer to a code-based implementation. The Q-value
for each state-action pair Q(st, at) gets updated according to equation 2.10.
The algorithm iteratively updates the Q-values until convergence. Value- and
Q-Value Iteration are efficient model-based algorithms for simple MDPs where
all parameters (including the probabilities and transition function) are known.
For solving unknown MDPs other solutions are preffered, such as model-free
approaches.
2.5
Model-Free Approaches
The stock market is a complex environment where a lot of the parameters are
now known, such as probabilities P(st+1 | st, at) and the transition function
T(st, at, st+1) ,∀st, st+1 ∈S and at ∈A . Hence, this paper relies on applying
a model-free reinforcement learning, such as DQN. In model-free RL the MDP
is not known, but the agent learns the optimal policy or value function directly
from the data it collects by interacting with the environment.
==PAGE:32==
26
Theory
2.5.1
Temporal Difference (TD) Learning
TD-Learning is a fundamental concept in RL and it involves updating value
estimates for state-action pairs based on observed experiences. It is a method
which also makes use of the Bellman update. TD(0)-Learning is a specific form
of TD learning that uses a one-step look-ahead to update the value estimates.
The pseudocode for TD(0)-Learning is given below in Algorithm 3, adapted
from [69].
Algorithm 3 Temporal Difference (TD) Learning, adapted from [69]
1: Initialize value estimates V (st) for all states st
2: Set learning rate α
3: Set discount factor γ
4: for each episode do
5:
Initialize starting state s0
6:
for each state st from s0 to sn do
7:
Choose action at using a policy (e.g., ϵ-greedy (see Algorithm 5))
8:
Take action at, observe reward rt and next state st+1
9:
TD target ←rt + γ · V (st+1)
10:
TD error ←TD target −V (st)
11:
V (st) ←V (st) + α· TD error
12:
end for
13: end for
TD-learning relies on the idea of temporal proximity [69]. An episode refers
in this case to a single sequence of states, actions, and rewards that ends in a
terminal state sn or after a certain number of steps (e.g. timesteps within a
year). In each episode, the agent chooses actions based on some policy (line
7) and observes the reward rt and the next state st+1 (line 8). The TD-target
is calculated based on the utility of the next step from the previous episode
V (st+1), the observed the reward rt and discounting factor γ (line 9). The TD-
error is simply computed as the residual between the current utility V (st) and
the TD-target (line 10). The TD-error is crucial because it guides how much
the current value estimation V (st) should be adjusted based on the experience
of the agent in line 11.
The α parameter is used to adjust the influence of the TD-error on the V (st)
update. When α is small, updates are conservative and slow. A small α can
stabilize learning and reduce overshooting the optimal values V ∗(st), but more
iterations might be needed for convergence. When α is high, the updates are
more impactful and fast. The value estimates may converge more quickly, but
==PAGE:33==
Model-Free Approaches
27
there is a risk for oscillations or overshooting, which might hinder convergence
[69].
Understanding Temporal Difference learning is crucial, as Deep Q-Learning com-
bines TD-Learning with deep neural networks to approximate the Q-value func-
tion. More is discussed further in section 2.6
==PAGE:34==
28
Theory
2.6
Model-Free Reinforcement Learning:
Deep
Q-Learning
Deep Q-learning is a model-free reinforcement learning method which aims to
learn a function to approximate the Q-values for each state-action pair at any
given time t. The Deep Q-Network (DQN) is the neural network used for this
algorithm and it is the one which supposedly can learn an parametrical approx-
imation of the Q function. The action-value function Q is a trainable network
with weights θ and is denoted as Q(st, at; θ). DQN has been successfully applied
for game playing, such as Atari [55] and other games [70], robotic control [71],
navigation and path planning [72], resource management [73] and personalized
health treatments [74]. The pseudo-code for deep Q-Learning is shown bellow
in Algorithm 4. It was adjusted from [55] according to the scope of this project:
Algorithm 4 Deep Q-Network (DQN) (inspired from [55]) with Polyak Aver-
aging [75]
1: Initialize replay memory D
2: Initialize Q-network with random weights θ
3: Initialize target Q-network with weights θ′ = θ
4: for epoch = 1 to e do
5:
Initialize state s1
6:
for timestep = 1 to n do
7:
Choose action at using ϵ-greedy policy (see Algorithm 5)
8:
Take action at, observe reward rt and next state st+1
9:
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in D
10:
Sample random minibatch of size b from D
11:
Compute each target Q-value from batch:
yt,j
=
rt,j + γ ·
maxat+1 Qtarget(st+1,j, at+1,j; θ′)
12:
Compute MSE loss: Lj = (yt,j −Q(st,j, at,j; θ))2
13:
Update
Q-network
using
gradient
descent:
θ
←
θ
−
α∇θ 1
b
Pb
i=1( 1
m
Pm
j=1 Lj)
14:
Soft update target Q-network: θ′ ←τ · θ + (1 −τ) · θ′
15:
st ←st+1
16:
end for
17: end for
Algorithm 4 shows step-by-step the Deep Q-learning process the agent goes
through in order to learn the optimal Q-function. It makes use of both of a
Q-network which is trained, and a Qtarget network. The outer loop iterates
through each epoch, with each epoch being a complete iteration through the
entire training dataset from which the agent learns. The inner loop iterates
through each timestep t, having thus the agent visiting each state s1, s2, ...sn.
==PAGE:35==
Model-Free Reinforcement Learning: Deep Q-Learning
29
The first action the takes agent at each timestep t (line 7) is either an action
from a uniform random distribution or the action according to the maximum
argument of the Q-network output. The choice is done according to an ϵ-greedy
policy, which is shown below in Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Epsilon-Greedy Policy
Require: Q-values Q(st, at), current state st, epsilon ε
Ensure: Action at
1: Generate a random number r ∈[0, 1]
2: if r > ε then
3:
at ←arg maxa Q(st, a) {Choose the best action}
4: else
5:
at ←Random action from action space
6: end if
7: return at
According to Algorithm 5 and refering back to Algorithm 4, one can observe in
the Deep Q-Learning Algorithm that the chance of the agent acting according to
the random action is higher especially when in the initial states, but decreases
with each iteration once ϵ decays as shown in equation 2.12:
εt = εmin + (εmax −εmin) × e−λ·t
(2.12)
Where:
εt is the exploration factor (epsilon) at time step t
εmin is the minimum exploration factor
εmax is the maximum exploration factor
λ is the decay rate
t is the current time step
Once the agent has taken an action at, the next state st+1 and the reward rt
are observed (line 8).
Each transition is stored in the replay buffer D (line
9). DQN uses experience replay characterized by the use of a replay buffer,
where agent stores and randomly samples past experiences to learn from, thus
breaking temporal correlation between consecutive experiences and enhancing
the stability of learning [55]. Transitions are sampled from D as a minibatch of
size b (line 10) and each target Q-value yt,j from the batch is computed using a
Bellman update with the Qtarget-value of the next state st+1 (line 11). The loss
function the mean squared error loss (MSE) and is computed for each output
==PAGE:36==
30
Theory
and then averaged out over the size of the Q-network ouput size m, as shown
in line 13. Drawing parallels with TD-Learning (see Algorithm 3), the target is
replaced with the Qtarget-network and the TD error is now replaced with a loss
which is be backpropagated through the Q-network. Gradient descend is done
on the whole minibatch (line 13) in order to adjust the parameters θ towards
finding an optimal Q-value.
The procedure described above is done for each state st. Once the final state
sn has been reached, the whole dataset has passed through the network (one
epoch). The procedure is then repeated according to a number of epochs, with
the scope of training the Q-network to learn the training datatset in order to
produce an optimal estimate of the Q-value function. To ensure convergence, the
Qtarget-network is updated using the Polyak-Ruppert averaging [75] as shown
in line 14, which is a bit different than the method used in [55]. The latter
makes the Qtarget network parameters of the Q network every C steps (θ′ = θ).
However, the Polyak-Ruppert averaging is a softer update of the Qtarget network
paremeters using a hyperparameter τ, which has proven to stabilize convergence
[76] and exhibit superior empirical performance [77, 78].
While DQNs are powerful, there are also some disadvantages. A main disad-
vantage of DQN is that is not applicable for continuous action spaces. Thus,
the actions the agent can take in the simulated stock market enviornment are
discretized, as opposed to other methods presented in [8, 11, 9, 10] which make
use of Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (see "Appendix II - other RL meth-
ods" section .2.0.3). One of them is the overestimation of action values due
to max operator, which can impair learning stability [79]. Furthermore, DQNs
have slow convergence in high-dimensional state spaces, which might lead to
sample inefficiency [80].
There is also a susceptibility for DQNs to present
catastrophic forgetting, which happens when the network to completely and
abruptly forget previously learned information upon learning new information
[81]. Catastrophic Forgetting of DQNs could impact the ability to retain useful
knowledge.
The DQN disadvantages presented above could be mitigated by other model-free
RL methods, such as the actor-critic methods which are discussed in "Appendix
II - other RL methods", section .2. However, the DQN was used for the scope
of this project, as it has proven to have more convergence stability [55] and is
more straightforward to implement.
==PAGE:37==
Conservative Q-Learning (CQL)
31
2.7
Conservative Q-Learning (CQL)
In offline RL, a distributional shift can happen between the dataset the agent
was trained on and the learned policy, which can produce overestimation of Q-
values. Conservative Q-Learning was firstly introduced in [23] and has proven
to be successful for handling this problem. This method learns a conservative
Q-function such that the expected value of a state-action pair under this Q-
function lower bounds its actual value.
Poor performance of RL algorithms can be caused by value updates based on, at
least in part, on value estimates associated with out-of-distribution actions [32,
17]. Out-of-distribution actions suggest actions that are not typically taken or
are unexpected under the current policy. Other issues of RL usually arise with
overfitting [15, 32, 3], which happens when the model learns too much from the
training dataset and thus fails to generalize on the validation dataset, which is
external from the training dataset. This thus manifests as enormously optimistic
value function estimates [23]. The paper in [23] proposed a method of learning
a lower-bound estimate of the q-value function, which provides a lower bound
on the true values and possibly solving the overestimation problem. It relies
on using a Conservative Q-Learning (CQL) regularization term to the Q-value
update.
Referring back to the DQN algorithm in 4, the Q-network with parameters θ is
updated according to
θ ←θ −α∇θ
1
N
X
i
Li
(2.13)
where Li is the the Minimum Squared Error (MSE) loss between the target Q-
values yt = rt+γ·maxa′ Qtarget(st+1, at+1; θ′) and expected Q-values Q(st, at; θ).
Equation 2.14, is adapted from [23], which considers only Deep Q-Learning and
not other actor-critic methods.
ˆQk+1 ←arg min
Q E(st,at,st+1,rt)∼D

rt + γ max
at+1
ˆQk(st+1, at+1)

−Q(st, at)
2
(2.14)
Where:
- ˆQk+1: The target Q-value at iteration k + 1.
==PAGE:38==
32
Theory
- Q: The current estimate of the Q-value function that the algorithm is
trying to optimize.
- st, at, st+1, rt: Represent the current state, action taken, next state, and
immediate reward received, respectively.
- D: Represents the experience replay buffer.
- γ: The discount factor, which determines the present value of future re-
wards.
- maxat+1 ˆQk(st+1, at+1): Represents the maximum Q-value for the next
state st+1, according to the current estimate ˆQk, indicating the value of
taking the best possible action at state st+1.
- E(st,at,st+1,rt)∼D: Denotes the expectation, representing an average over
the sampled experiences from the replay buffer D.
Using the notation ˆB (as in [23]) to denote the application of the Bellman
equation to form the TD target, i.e., ˆB ˆQk(st, at) = rt+γ maxat+1 ˆQk(st+1, at+1),
equation 2.14 becomes:
ˆQk+1 ←arg min
Q
E(st,at,st+1,rt)∼D

ˆB ˆQk(st, at) −Q(st, at)
2
(2.15)
The goal of this equation in DQN is to minimize the mean squared Temporal
Difference (TD) error between the current Q-value estimate and the target Q-
value, thereby improving the estimate of the action-value function.
This is
similar to trying to minimize the loss function as shown in Algorithm 4. The
choice of penalty from [23] is to minimize the expected value under a particular
distribution of state-action pairs from the sampling buffer D. Adding the CQL-
regularization term from [23] on equation 2.15 results into equation 2.16 below:
ˆQk+1 ←min
Q
 
αEst∼D
"
log
X
a
exp(Q(st, a))
#
+ 1
2E(st,at,st+1,rt)∼D

Q(st, at) −ˆB ˆQk(st, at)
2!
(2.16)
Where:
- ˆQk+1: This represents the updated Q-value function at the next iteration
k + 1.
==PAGE:39==
Conservative Q-Learning (CQL)
33
- minQ: This notation signifies that we are finding the Q-value function Q
that minimizes the expression inside the parenthesis.
- α: This is a hyperparameter controlling the contribution of the regular-
ization term to the overall loss. It is a non-negative scalar.
- Est∼D: Represents the expectation over states st sampled from the expe-
rience replay buffer D.
- log P
a exp(Q(st, a)): This is the log-sum-exp operation applied to the Q-
values of all actions for state st. It acts as a regularizer, discouraging the
Q-value function from becoming overly optimistic.
-
1
2E(st,at,st+1,rt)∼D: This term signifies taking an expectation over transi-
tions sampled from the experience replay buffer D.
Having discussed conservative Q-learning, the Theory concludes. The following
chapters (Methods and Theory) will discuss the methods and evaluate the re-
sults of applying off-line Deep Q-learning to the portfolio optimization problem.
Additionally, it will be examined whether incorporating the CQL regularization
term into the loss function yields any advantages.
==PAGE:40==
34
Theory
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Methods
==PAGE:42==
36
Methods
3.1
Data Extraction and Processing
Through Reinforcement Learning, an agent (or bot) should be able to mimic the
actions of a good trader who is seeking to maximize the expected returns of a
portfolio over a defined time period. The RL algorithm is thus assesed based on
how good an agent is at learning a good tarding policy from any given portfolio
(given enough training time on previous data). Ideally the bot would perform
better than an already existing stock index, which a group of shares that are used
to give an indication of a sector, exchange or economy measures. An example
of such an index is the Nasdaq 100 index, which gives an indication of the
technology sector and consists of more than 2500 stocks listed on the Nasdaq
stock exchange [82]. It is constructed on an modified capitalization-weighted
index methodology, where asset allocation is based on the market capitalization
(total market value of all shares) of each item.
The normal capitalization-
weighted index entails that companies with a higher market cap will have a
higher weighting in the index, however the modified version used by Nasdaq 100
allows to limit the influence the larger companies have on its price fluctuation
[83].
The trading agent should thus be able to learn from historical price movements
of the stocks which form a portfolio dataset. As inspired from [10], various US
companies with sufficient trading volume and price fluctuations were selected
from the NASDAQ 100 index [84] in order to create these datasets. Each com-
pany is represented by a stock ticker, as shown below:
- HA - Hawaiian Holdings, Incorporated (Inc.): company engaging in pro-
vision of air transportation services [85]
- WBA - Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc.: provision of healthcare and retail
pharmacy services [86]
- INCY - Incyte Corporation (Corp.): biopharmaceutical company [87]
- BIDU - Baidu, Inc.: provision of internet search and online marketing
solutions [88]
- TCOM - Trip.com Group Limited (Ltd.): travel-related service company
[89]
- AAPL - Apple, Inc.: popularly known company which engages in the
design, manufacture and sale of smartphones, personal computers, tablets,
wearables and accessories, and other varieties of related services [90]
==PAGE:43==
The Training and Validation sets
37
- COST - Costco Wholesale Corp.: operation of membership warehouses
through wholly owned subsidiaries, which are legal entities distinct from
their parent companies [91]
3.2
The Training and Validation sets
The construction of datasets used for this project was adapted from [10]. The
period selected for training the model was the historical price movement data
from June 2014 to December 2019, whereas the validation period was from
January 2020- December 2022.
The grouping of the companies listed above
in each dataset was based on their price movement trend over time, which is
shown in table 3.1. The point was to assess the performance of the RL model
on portfolios which generally have an up, down or mixed trend throughout the
training and validation periods. The training data used for this project was the
historical data from the period selected as in [10]: June 2014 - December 2019.
However, the validation data used for this project not only includes the period
used in [10] (Jan 2020 - Dec 2021), but also and the more recently fetched data
from 2022 (Jan 2022 - Dec 2022).
Dataset
Companies
Price
Trend
(June 2014
- Dec 2019)
Price
Trend
(Jan 2020 -
Dec 2021)
Price
Trend
(Jan 2022 -
Dec 2022)
1
HA, WBA, INCY
Mix
-
Mix
2
HA, WBA, INCY, BIDU
Down
Down
Down
3
HA, WBA, INCY, BIDU, TCOM
Down
Down
Down
4
HA, WBA, INCY, AAPL
Up
Up
Down
5
HA, WBA, INCY, AAPL, COST
Up
Up
Down
6
HA, WBA, INCY, BIDU, TCOM, AAPL,
COST
Mix
Mix
Down
7
BIDU, TCOM, AAPL, COST
Mix
Up
Down
Table 3.1: Datasets constructed from HA (Hawaiian Holdings), WBA (Wal-
greens Boots Alliance), INCY (Incyte), BIDU (Baidu), TCOM
(Trip.com), AAPL (Apple), and COST (Costco). Adapted from
[10]. Price trend observation is separated on various time periods.
The price trend is assessed based on observing each stock price movement during
the specific periods. For example, the dataset no. 2 consisting of HA, WBA,
INCY, BIDU was considered to have a down trend between 2019-2020 because
each of these companies had a down trend in the price movement between June
2014 and December 2019. Entries marked with ’-’ denote no specific trend. One
should note that the price trend is mostly down when it comes to the more
recently added validation year, 2022.
==PAGE:44==
38
Methods
3.2.0.1
Data Sources: Data Quaility versus Cost
Fetching the data was done via the YahooFinance API[44] using the already
made FinRL preprocessor [92]. This API was selected since it was free to use
and allowed fetching data without any specific requests limits, as opposed to
other APIs listed in [93] (e.g. Alpacca API[1]).
Ideally, one should use good quality historical data for the price movements
in the specified time range for each stock mentioned in Table 3.1. Good APIs
should have various frequencies at which the price movements can be retrieved:
2-minute, 5-minute, daily frequency etc. However, good quality financial data
comes with a cost. For the stocks mentioned in Table 3.1, finding price move-
ment data was only possible for free for a daily-frequency price movement.
Meaning, for each day there was there was only one entry for the open, high,
low, close prices and trading volumes. Furthermore, YahooFinance API [44]
might have not been the most suitable API, since the data had missing price
entries for some dates. Table 3.2 shows a snippet of the price quotas that could
be extracted for the HA stock.
Table 3.2: Historical Price Movement Data for HA (from July 1-8, 2014)
Date
Open
High
Low
Close
Volume
2014-07-01
13.74
13.90
13.73
13.39
1030800
2014-07-02
13.90
13.94
13.53
13.07
824300
2014-07-03
13.59
13.79
13.55
13.06
354000
2014-07-07
13.51
13.64
13.07
12.67
1257300
2014-07-08
13.03
13.53
12.67
12.92
1489700
Table 3.2 shows the open, high, low and closing prices of one share of the HA
stock, as well as the trading volume.
Stock quotas were extracted for each
day, which is shown in the ’Date’ column. Note that many quota entries were
extracted, from 2014 to 2021. Using 1-day frequency trading data for finding a
solution to the portfolio optimization problem might not be enough, since stocks
are traded and thus share prices usually change more frequently than once a day.
Furthermore, a trader is usually able to sell/buy stock shares multiple times
throughout the during the business operating hours within a day, as it is enabled
on many trading platforms (e.g. eTroro[2], Robinhood[3], SaxoTrader[4]). The
data quality used for this project might not thus be the most suitable for this
project and it might have affected the model training results - the impact is
addressed further in the Discussion of results chapter. A snippet of the overall
processed dataset obtained looks as in Table 3.3 bellow, which shows a snippet
for Dataset 1 in the from July 1-8, 2014.
Table 3.3 shows the price movements and technical indicators for the HA, INCY,
WA stocks. The technical indicators are discussed more in detail in subsection
==PAGE:45==
The Training and Validation sets
39
Table 3.3: Processed Dataset 1: HA, INCY, WA price movements and techni-
cal indicators
Date
Open
Close
Volume
tic
macd
rsi_30
2014-07-01
13.74
13.39
1030800
HA
0.0
0.0
2014-07-01
56.56
56.59
686900
INCY
0.0
0.0
2014-07-01
74.30
56.95
4191900
WBA
0.0
0.0
2014-07-02
13.90
13.07
824300
HA
-0.0071
0.0
2014-07-02
56.57
55.78
902800
INCY
-0.0182
0.0
2014-07-02
73.76
56.38
5240300
WBA
-0.0128
0.0
2014-07-03
13.59
13.06
354000
HA
-0.0097
0.0
2014-07-03
56.07
55.62
629800
INCY
-0.0281
0.0
2014-07-03
73.31
57.11
4730100
WBA
0.0062
56.7865
2014-07-07
13.51
12.67
1257300
HA
-0.0245
0.0
2014-07-07
55.63
53.71
928800
INCY
-0.1009
0.0
2014-07-07
73.87
56.80
3233200
WBA
0.0035
45.4300
2014-07-08
13.03
12.92
1489700
HA
-0.0221
26.9866
2014-07-08
53.72
51.72
1582300
INCY
-0.2175
0.0
3.3.1. For simplicity and lack of space, the time-lags (closing prices from the
previous 14 days) for each stock are not shown. What can be noticed is that
some dates are missing for some stocks due to the poor quality of the data
source. This is compensated by filling the missing row with the previous stock
quotas.
Overall, Table 3.3 shows in fact a snippet of X which is the training dataset,
which is used for training the DQN model and optimising the network param-
eters. Each observation Xt for each t ∈1, 2..., n is fed to the network. Taking
the first observation X1 gives the following matrix:
X1 = X2014−07−08 =


13.74
13.39
1030800
1
0.0
0.0
56.56
56.59
686900
1
0.0
0.0
74.30
56.95
4191900
1
0.0
0.0


(3.1)
Where X1 is the first observation at time t = 1 involving all stocks in Dataset
1 (HA, INCY, WA). The example provided above in equation 3.1 shows an in-
stance of a start observation X1, which is further processed into an initial state.
The matehmatical formalization of the whole training dataset X and proce-
dures of obtaining a an observable state for the RL problem are as described in
chapter 3.3, namely subsection 3.3.1. The validation dataset is constructed in
a similar manner and it is fed to the network, only that the network does not
==PAGE:46==
40
Methods
learn from it. Thus, the validation set is used to assess the model’s performance
on a dataset which it has not seen before.
==PAGE:47==
Experimental Set-up
41
3.3
Experimental Set-up
The portfolio optimization formulation for this project uses elements from the
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) [45] in a Reinforcement Learning framework,
as inspired from multiple works [11, 8, 9, 10].
The method considers observed manual online trading processes. When a trader
opens a trading account on a trading platform (such as eToro [2], RobinHood [3]
or SaxoBank [4]), an initial amount (denoted as b1) of cash is deposited, which
is used for allocation in stocks (buying shares). Once a trader invests in stock
i, there is yet some cash remained in the account (c), which is the liquid cash
available for buying future stocks.
Let 1, 2, . . . , m be the indexes of stocks in a portfolio.
Let poi denote the amount of cash invested in stock i
and po = Pm
i=1 poi be the total amount invested in all stocks. Denoting c as
the leftover cash, the total balance b can be computed:
b = po + c
(3.2)
Let w1, w2, ...wm be the proportion or weight of asset i of the total balance.
Each wi, can be defined as:
wi = poi
b
(3.3)
Let wcash denote the proportion of liquid cash, such that:
wcash = c
b
(3.4)
Given that these values can vary for each trade executed at time t, let rb signify
the change in balance from time t −1 to t, relative to the initial amount b1:
rb
t = bt −bt−1
b1
(3.5)
where bt is the balance monetary value at time t and bt−1 is the previous balance
at time t −1.
Having defined these concepts one can further formulate the portfolio con-
straints, adapted from the MTP [45] (see eq. 2.3 and 2.4, section 2.2).
The portfolio constraints are:
==PAGE:48==
42
Methods
1. The weights w1,, w2, ..., wm all sum up to 1:
m
X
i=1
wi, + wcash = 1
(3.6)
2. Each weight is bound between 0 and 1 to prohibit short-selling.
0 ≤wi, ≤1
∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , m}
(3.7)
0 ≤wcash ≤1
(3.8)
The Portfolio Optimization problem centers around two main objectives:
1. Achieving the highest total balance return at the end of each year, repre-
sented as wT
n rb
n.
2. Maximizing the Sharpe ratio of rb
t at the end of each year, aiming to adjust
the portfolio’s return in proportion to its risk/variance.
The methodologies used for this project initially address the first objective be-
fore transitioning their focus to the second. The approach to cater to the first
objective involves leveraging the reward described by equation 3.9 for the RL
method:
R(1)
t
= rb
t = bt+1 −bt
b1
(3.9)
The methods follow then a comprehensive approach by addressing both objec-
tives. This is mainly done by leveraging the reward shown in equation 3.10
bellow:
R(2)
t
= SR(rb
t)
(3.10)
notably excluding the risk-free assets. For each t is the Sharpe ratio can be
calculated as:
srt =
µrb
t
σrb
t
(3.11)
where µrb
t is the mean balance return and σrb
t is the standard deviation, which
can be expressed as:
µrb
t = 1
t
t
X
i=1
rb
t
(3.12)
==PAGE:49==
Experimental Set-up
43
σrb
t =
v
u
u
t1
t
t
X
i=1
(rb
i −µrb
t )2
(3.13)
Note that in eq. 3.11, risk free assets are not taken into account as in eq. 2.5.
Based on eq. 3.11, for each t the reward Rt can thus be calculated as:
Rt = srt
(3.14)
Having declared the objectives, the following section (3.3.1) will dive deeper into
the mathematical formulation of the dataset used for training and validating the
RL agent.
==PAGE:50==
44
Methods
3.3.1
The Financial Data and Technical Indicators
Let xt,i denote each financial data observation of stock i price indicators at
a sepcific time t. Each observation includes stock quotas, as explained in the
Theory, section 2.2. The stock quotas are: the closing price (pt,i), the opening
price (ot,i), the high price (ht,i), the low price (lt,i) and the traded stock volume
(vt,i) at time t.
Furthermore the data has been processed to obtain additional features, as in-
spired from [11]. The features are in fact the technical indicators listed bellow.
The information presented below about each technical indicator was adapted
from [94]:
• SMA30, which is the 30-day simple moving average at time t for stock i:
SMA30(t) = 1
30
t
X
t=t−30
pt
SMA is used as a way to smooth out short-term fluctuations and iden-
tify trends in a security’s price movement. A high moving average might
indicate an upward trend which could be a sign of buying a stock.
• UBB30, which is the Upper Bollinger Band of the SMA30:
UBB30 = SMA30 + (k × σi)
where σi is the standard deviation of the closing prices of stock i over the
same period of 30 timesteps (∆t = 30). k is a constant that determines
the number of standard deviations away from the SMA. k = 2 is used,
meaning the band is set two standard deviations above the SMA.
• LBB30, which is the Lower Bollinger Band of the SMA30:
LBB30 = SMA30 −(k × σi,)
where k = 2 and σi, is the standard deviation, as in the case above. The
LBB and UBB adjust the SMA to the volatility in the price fluctuations.
For risk-averse investors, a low difference between the UBB and LBB might
be preferred when deciding to buy a stock.
• SMA60, which is the SMA for the past 60 timesteps.
• MACD, which is the Moving Average Convergence Divergence of for a
stock i:
MACD = EMA12 −EMA26
==PAGE:51==
Experimental Set-up
45
where EMA12, EMA26 is the Exponential Moving Averages (EMAs) of the
closing prices for the past 12 and respectively 26 consecutive timesteps.
The EMA of a stock i for a period of n′ timesteps is calculated as:
EMAt = (Pt × α) + (EMAt−1 × (1 −α))
Where:
– EMAt−1 is the previous EMA at time t −1.
– Pt is the closing price at time t.
– α represents the smoothing factor, which is derived from:
α =
2
n′ + 1
where n′ is the number of timesteps chosen: n′ = 12 or n′ = 26.
The EMA differs from the SMA since it adds more weight to recent
closing prices.
The MACD gives information of price momentum
which can indicate bullish (price up-trends) or bearish (price down-
trends) patterns, proportionally to its value.
• RSI30, which is the Relative Strength Index of the past 30 timesteps:
Average Gain = Sum of gains over the 30 timesteps
30
Average Loss = Sum of losses over the 30 timesteps
30
RS30 = Average Gain
Average Loss
RSI30 = 100 −
100
1 + RS
Where a gain is considered as a positive difference between two consecutive
closing prices of stock i, whereas the loss is a negative difference. The RSI
measures the speed and change of price movements based on the Relative
Strength (RS) which is the gain/loss mean ratio over the previous 30
timesteps. RSI is considered overbought when above 70 and oversold when
below 30 [94], so an investor might consider investing at an RSI around
50.
• DX30, which is a component of the Average Directional Index (ADX),
firstly introduced in [95]. The DX quantifies the Positive Directional Move-
ment (+DM) and the Negative Directional Movement (−DM) and scales
this difference as a value between 0 and 100.
+DI30 =
+DM30
TR30

× 100
==PAGE:52==
46
Methods
−DI30 =
−DM30
TR30

× 100
where TR is the true range of each period of ∆t = 30 previous timesteps
up until t. It is calculated on the lowest price (lt) and highest price (ht)
closing price values of current ∆t periods, as well as the last closing price
(Close) of the previous ∆t−1 period:
TR∆t = max [(ht −lt), |ht −pt−1|, |lt −pt−1|]
where pt, ht and lt are the closing, low and high prices of a stock traded
at time t. DX30 is then defined as:
DX30 = |(+DI30) −(−DI30)|
(+DI30) + (−DI30) × 100
A high DX30 value could indicate a strong price up-trend, which might
be a good sign to buy a stock.
Let X denote the financial data which was retrieved, which includes stock quotas
and computed technical indicators mentioned above for each stock. The data X
was further processed such that for each stock i the previous 14 closing prices
were added: pt,i−1, pt,i−2, pt,i−3, ..., pt,i−14.
A row of a stock i at time t from the dataset X can be denoted as an observation
xt,i, which can be formulated as in equation 3.15 bellow:
xt,i =


pt,i
ot,i
ht,i
lt,i
vt,i
sma_30t,i
ubb_30t,i
lbb_30t,i
sma_60t,i
macdt,i
rsi_30t,i
dx_30t,i
pt,i−1
pt,i−2
...
pt,i−14


(3.15)
==PAGE:53==
Experimental Set-up
47
Where pt,i, ot,i, ht,i are the closing, opening, highest and lowest daily prices
and vt,i is the volume traded of stock i at time t.
The technical indicators
mentioned above are denoted as: sma_30t,i, ubb_30t,i, lbb_30t,i, sma_60t,i,
macdt, i, rsi_30t,i and dx_30t,i. pt,i−1, pt,i−2, . . . , pt,i−14 are the previous 14
closing prices of stock i, also referred to as time lags.
An observation xt considering all stocks in a portfolio can be represented by the
matrix shown in equation 3.16:
Xt =


−xt,1−
−xt,2−
...
−xt,m−


(3.16)
where i represents the individual stock index, varying from 1 to m, and t denotes
the specific timestep, ∀t ∈{1, 2, ..., n}. Based on equations 3.15 and 3.16, the
whole processed dataset X can be expressed as in equation 3.17:
X =


X1
X2
...
Xt
...
Xn


(3.17)
Where X1 contains the initial price features of stocks and Xn is the lastly
retrieved price feature matrix.
Apart from the time-dependent observations, at each timestep t the agent inter-
acts with a portfolio environment (object), which contains the following matrix
made of the environment parameters (attributes):
Pt =


bt
bt
. . .
bt
pot,1
pot,2
. . .
pot,m
pot
pot
. . .
pot
rret
t,1
rret
t,2
. . .
rret
t,m
rret
t
rret
t
. . .
rret
t
ct
ct
. . .
ct
wt,1
wt,2
. . .
wt,m
sht,1
sht,2
. . .
sht,m


(3.18)
==PAGE:54==
48
Methods
PT
t,i =


bt
pot,i
pot
rret
t,i
rret
t
ct
wt,i
sht,i


(3.19)
Where
- bt = pot + ct, which is the total invested an non-invested monetary funds
at time t.
- pot,1, pot,2, . . . , pot,m are the positions of each stock 1, 2, . . . , m respec-
tively, each representing the monetary amount invested in each stock at
time t
- pot = Pm
i=1 pot,i is the total monetary position at time t.
- rret
t,1 , rret
t,2 , . . . , rret
t,m are the returns of each stock 1, 2, . . . , m respectively at
time t. The return formula for a stock i at time t can be characterized as:
rret
t,i = pot,i −pot−1,i
pot−1,i
(3.20)
where pot,i, pot−1,i are the positions of a stock i at time t, t−1 respectively.
- rret
t
= Pm
i=1 wt,irret
t,i is the total return of the invested amount at time t.
- ct is the liquid or non-invested cash amount in the balance at time t.
- wt,1, wt,2, . . . , wt,m are the weights or proportion of each stock of the total
portfolio balance at time t. A portfolio weight for a stock i at time t is
calculated as:
wt,i = pot,i
bt
(3.21)
- sht,1, sht,2, . . . , sht,m are respectively the shares owned of each stock i at
time t. A share of stock i is calculated as the monetary position of stock
i divided by the closing price of stock i, pt,i:
sht,i = pot,i
pt,i
(3.22)
==PAGE:55==
Experimental Set-up
49
The environment is thought as such: the portfolio parameters and matrix Pt
is subject to changes according to the buying and selling actions, but also
price fluctuations.
A column of Pt is defined as Pt,i and consists with the
general portfolio information bt, pot, ct plus information related to a stock i:
pot,i, rret
t,i , wt,i, sht,i.
Furthermore, the starting portfolio P1 is initialized as:
P1 =


b1
b1
. . .
b1
po1,1
po2,1
. . .
pom,1
po1
po1
. . .
po1
rret
1,1
rret
2,1
. . .
rret
m,1
rret
1
rret
1
. . .
rret
1
c1
c1
. . .
c1
w1,1
w2,1
. . .
wm,1
sh1,1
sh2,1
. . .
shm,1


=


b1
b1
. . .
b1
0
0
. . .
0
0
0
. . .
0
0
0
. . .
0
0
0
. . .
0
b1
b1
. . .
b1
0
0
. . .
0
0
0
. . .
0


(3.23)
3.3.2
The MDP formulation
As Deep Q-Learning (refer to Theory, section 2.6) is used for solving the port-
folio optimization problem, the Markov Decision Process (MDP) model (see
Theory, sec. 2.3) was formulated as:
• A set of states s ∈S. A state st at time t is formulated as Xt:
st = Xt
(3.24)
• A start state s1, which contains the first price features retrieved for all
stocks:
s1 = X1
(3.25)
• A terminal state sn = Xn
• A discretized set of actions a ∈A, which was adapted from the continuous
action space of the FinRL implementation [11]. A trading action allows to
buy or sell stock shares using a specified monetary amount h. A buying
or selling action can be defined as such:
– buy(p%, pt, i, h) - where p% is a percentage, pt is the vector contain-
ing the closing prices for all stocks at time t, i is the stock index
and h is the monetary amount parameter defined at the beginning of
trading.
This action entails buying shares of stock i corresponding to a per-
centage of the amount h (p%h), according to the closing price pt,i.
==PAGE:56==
50
Methods
– sell(p%, pt, i, h) - sell shares of stock i corresponding to a percentage
of the amount h (p%h), according to the closing price pt,i.
The p% in both buying and selling cases is discrete: %p ∈{0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}.
In addition, the following actions are also permitted:
– hold: do nothing
– buy_1_share(pt, i): buy one share of stock i according to the price
pt,i obtained from pt.
– sell_everything(pt): sell the shares of all stocks 1, 2, ..., m according
to the respective closing prices obtained from pt
The portfolio P is the environment that changes once buying or selling actions
have been performed, but also under retrieving the next closing prices pt+1,i
from the next state. Figure 3.1 illustrates this concept:
Figure 3.1: The experimental set-up for offline Reinforcemet Learning for
managing a simulated portfolio of financial assets (stocks). The
agent takes an action to buy 10%h of stock (h is a fixed amount
of money selected at the beginning of training) for stock i = 1.
As it can be shown in Figure 3.1, the portfolio changes some parameters once
==PAGE:57==
Experimental Set-up
51
an action has been performed.
Being in state st, the agent takes action at,
which is buying 10%h of stock 1. h is a fixed amount of money selected as
a parameter at the beginning of training (e.g. h = 1000$). This affects the
portfolio environment Pt, where the position, shares and weight are updated
for stock 1. The portfolio entries are then updated based on the closing prices
extracted from Xt+1, which constitutes the next state st+1. This leads to a new
portfolio Pt+1. The next state is observed by the agent, as well as the reward,
which is computed either as shown in equation 3.9 or in 3.10. Observing the
next state st+1 and the reward Rt+1, the agent takes another action and the
feedback mechanism continues until the agent learns to take optimal actions
throughout the course of trading.
The process of the illustrated portfolio changes in Figure 3.1 is reasonable, since
a trader takes a buying or selling action giving the current observed prices at
time t and only after observing the next stock prices at time t + 1 the trader
realizes whether it was a profitable action or not.
The more detailed steps
showing how the portfolio changes after a trading action are described bellow.
For a buying action buy(10%, pt, i = 1, h) the following entries of Pt are up-
dated:
1. The buying amount 10%h is subtracted from the current total cash:
ct = ct −0.1h
(3.26)
2. The bought amount is added to the monetary position of stock i:
pot,1 = pot,1 + 0.1h
(3.27)
3. The portfolio weight wt,1 and share sht,1 for stock i are adjusted according
to the equations 3.21 and 3.22.
4. The rest of the entries remain unchanged.
Once the action was made, the changed portfolio Pt further adjusts to the future
closing prices of the stocks for the next day: pt+1,i, thus becoming Pt+1. The
following entries are updated:
1. The monetary position for each stock i , ∀i ∈1, 2, ...m is updated based
on the number of shares previously owned and the next closing price pt+1,i
pot+1,i = sht,ipt+1,i
(3.28)
==PAGE:58==
52
Methods
2. The new total monetary position changes for all entries: pot+1 = Pm
i=1 pot+1,i
3. The total balance changes: bt+1 = pot+1 + ct+1
4. The weight wt+1,i changes for each stock i, ∀i ∈1, 2, ...m:
wt+1,i = pot+1,i
bt+1
(3.29)
5. The return of each stock i, ∀i ∈1, 2, ...m changes based on the relative
difference between the current and previous monetary position:
rret
t+1,i = pot+1,i −pot,i
pot,i
(3.30)
6. The new total return changes rret
t+1 = Pm
i=1 wt+1,irret
t+1,i
Having provided more clarification over the buying actions that the agent can
take, one should take note that the selling actions are done in a similar manner.
For example, for action sell(10%, pt, i = 1, h) the amount (10%h) is subtracted
from the monetary stock position:
pot,1 = pot,1 −0.1h
(3.31)
and added to the cash leftover entry:
ct = ct + 0.1h
(3.32)
The rest of the entries are modified in the portfolio as in the steps which were
previously explained.
The agent can choose from a a total number of 13 actions per stock i. What
is worth mentioning is that throughout with each interaction with the environ-
ment, most of the actions entail that agent can perform one action for a single
stock (except for the hold and sell_everyhting actions. The action space A for
13 stocks is of a total size of 13m. Some of those actions were not permitted
if they did not make sense (e.g. the agent was not allowed to buy stocks if the
agent didn’t have enough cash left, the agent could not sell anything more from
stock i than the position which was held etc.)
The agent decided to take an action by passing st+1 through a Deep Q-Network
(DQN). The learning process of the agent was explained in Theory, section 2.6
and explicitly shown in Algorithm 4. What is to be noted that in the context
of this project, an episode is represented by an yearly period. The years were
==PAGE:59==
Experimental Set-up
53
selected as shown in 3.2. The aim of the agent was to learn to take an optimally
sequence of actions (learn a policy) in order to maximize the profits at the end
of each year. The setup is for the agent to start with the initial portfolio P1 at
the beginning of each year in ordeer to assess whether the agent is capable of
profiting from the price movement patterns of each year.
What is left to discuss in the Methods chapter is the architectures of the DQNs
which were tried out throughout the course of this project, as well as the model
hyperparameters which were used in the end. Further details regarding this is
are described in the following section 3.4.
==PAGE:60==
54
Methods
3.4
The Q-network
Let pt,i denote a row of the transposed portfolio vector P previously shown in
eq. 3.19. Eeach pt,i contains portfolio features directly related to each stock i
at time t. Let Xt be the observation at time t, which was normalized according
to the mean and standard deviation of each feature column corresponding to
each stock from the training set. Let xt,i be the feature vector for stock i, as
previously shown in equations 3.15 and 3.16. Let x′
t,i be the feature vector of
stock i containing only the price movements and technical indicators, whereas
let x′′
t,i be the feature vector of stock i containing the closing price lags, as shown
in below in 3.33:
x′
t,i =


pi,t
oi,t
hi,t
li,t
vi,t
sma_30i,t
ubb_30i,t
lbb_30i,t
sma_60i,t
macdi,t
rsi_30i,t
dx_30i,t


, x′′
t,i =


pi,t
pi,t−1
pi,t−2
...
pi,t−14


(3.33)
The Q-network was built such that it the inputs above can be fed to the model.
The network consists of two layers. For each pt,i, x′
t,i and x′′
t,i the output of the
first layer will be:
zt,i =


h(

x′
t,i, pt,i

; θ1), l(x′′
t,i; θ2)

,

1
m
X
j̸=i
h(x′
t,j; θ1), l(x′′
t,j; θ2)




(3.34)
Where:
-

x′
t,i, pt,i

is the vector obtained from concatenating x′
t,i and pt,i
- h is a neural network defined as:
h(x′
t,i; θ1) : Rds′ →Rh
(3.35)
==PAGE:61==
The Q-network
55
where θ1 ∈θ is the h network trainable parameters, ds′ is the length of
x′
t,i and h is the number of hidden units. The number of hidden units m
is determined by:
h =
2
3ds′

(3.36)
This choice of hidden units is yet another parameter of the network which
adapts to the number of features for each stock.
- l is an LSTM neural network defined as:
l(x′′
t,i) : Rds′′ →Rl
(3.37)
where θ2 ∈θ are the parameters of l, ds′′ is the input dimension of x′′
t,i
and l is the ouput dimension. In this case, l was arbitrarily chosen to be
of 32 units, considering the number of 14 time lags of the input x′′
t,i.
- The term

1
m
X
j̸=i
 h(x′
t,j; θ1), l(x′′
t,j; θ2)



(3.38)
represents the average vector of the outputs of networks for all other stocks,
where m is the total number of stocks. This is used to capture potential
linear relationships between the stocks.
The output zt,i which was obtained as shown in eq.
3.34 is further passed
through another linear network, such that:
qt,i = f(zt,i; θ3)
(3.39)
Where f is a nerual network defined as:
f(zt,i; θ3) : Rh+l →Rf
(3.40)
Where θ3 ∈θ are the parameters of f and f = 13 is the number of outputs, as
it is the number of permitted discretized action space for a single stock i (see
section 3.3.2). Overall the final output qt for all stocks will be of format:
qt = [qt,1, qt2, . . . qtm]
(3.41)
Where qt,1, qt2, . . . qtm are the final neural network outputs of each stock 1, 2, . . . , m.
qt is of size m ∗f = 13m The Q-network is a learnt function that maps state-
action pairs to real values. For a given state st and action a, the Q-value is
defined in this context as:
Q(st, a) = qt(a)
(3.42)
Here, st is represented as st = [Xt, P T
t ], where Xt denotes some state-related
feature at time t. The action a is an integer index, a ∈{0, 1, . . . , 13m}, since m
is the number of stocks and there are 13 permissible actions per stock.
==PAGE:62==
56
Methods
3.5
The Q-Network architecture
It is recognized that throughout the development of this project the approach
was rather convoluted. The complexity of the model and the state was incre-
mentally increased based on the misleading observations of single instances run
of the model, by initially using the validation data from [10]. This has led to the
building of more complex models, such as DQNi and DQNi-LSTM.Throughout
the model building phase, as another year has been added to the validation data
(2022), results changed. Furthermore, an multiple training runs resulted in an
instability within the results.
Attempts were made for tuning the hyperparameters of the model, but that
had little effect on providing model running stability and improving the results
for the validation set (years 2020, 2021 and 2022). Later one it was decided
to reduce the complexity of the model, eventually leading to a more simple
DQN. Overall, the DQN models which were ran are described in the following
paragraphs.
3.5.1
Initially proposed model: DQNi
The initially proposed model DQNi includes the following:
- the input without an annexed portfolio: xt,i
- the fully-connected FC layers h and f, of parameters θ1 and θ3 respec-
tively.
The dimension of the h layer was set to 2/3 ∗dim(xt,i).
The
dimension of f was set to 2 ∗dim(zt,i), where zt,i is the output size of h
shown in equation 3.34.
- initially, 2 dropout layers with p = 20%, one for the h and one for the f
layer. A dropout layer randomly sets a fraction p of the input units to 0
during training, which helps prevent overfitting of the training data. The
dropout layers were omitted later on to increase model stability.
- a ReLu activation function for layer h. The ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit)
activation function outputs the input value if it is positive, otherwise it
outputs zero.
Figure 3.2 the architecture of DQNi, which is highlighted in blue. Each input
passes through the MLP in an iterative manner: first xt,1, then xt,2 until lastly
xt,m passes through the h layer. Each newly created ouput zt,i (formed as shown
==PAGE:63==
The Q-Network architecture
57
in equation zt,i) passes through the f layer.
The ouputs are concatenated,
resulting in a total output size of 13m, where m is the number of stocks and the
numer of permissible actions per stock is 13.
3.5.2
A more complex model: DQNi-LSTM
The DQNi-LSTM is a model very similar to DQNi, but includes an LSTM layer.
Figure 3.2 shows the architecture of DQNi-LSTM.
Figure 3.2: The Deep Q-Network Architecture of DQNi-LSTM. A schematic
representing the passing of the state input st through the multi-
layered Q-Network, eventually leading to qt, which contains the
q values for each state-action for all stocks at time t. Price and
portfolio observations xt,i for each stock i are passed iteratively to
the first level layers, h and l. The LSTM layer l takes in x′′
t,i, which
contains the previous 14 closing prices plus the current closing
price, pt,i. Layer h takes in x′
t,i the price observation inputs. The
part highlighted in blue is the DQNi architecture, which does not
contain the LSTM layer l.
==PAGE:64==
58
Methods
Figure 3.2 depicts the layers h and f, which are fully-connected (FC) layers,
and the layer l, which is an LSTM layer (see Theory, section 2.1). The price
observation xt,i is iteratively fed through the first DQN layers, h and l. What is
to note is that in this case xt,i contains both price movements x′
t,i and price time
lags x′′
t,i, as shown in equation 3.33. The input x′
t,i passes through the h layer,
whereas x′′
t,i passes through the LSTM layer l. Following that, the ouputs from
the h and l layer are concatenated into a single output, zt,i. After all outputs
zt,1, zt,2, . . . , zt,m are formed, each of them is further fed through the next FC
layer, f, in a similar procedure as for the DQNi. In the end all resulted outputs
from the f layer qt,1, qt,2, . . . , qt,m are concatenated to a single output qt. The
equations in further details are shown in section 3.4.
3.5.3
A simple model: simpleDQN
Finally, a more simple DQN architecture consisting of only one fully connected
layer h was tried out. Figure 3.3 shows a simplified schematic of simpleDQN.
Overall, the simpleDQN network had 1/2 ∗dim(xt) = 6m hidden units. The
network takes the fully flattened input xt (without the price lags) and feed
forwards it to h. The ouput of h is 13m and the number of hidden units was
set to be half of the size of the input. Passing an observation xt through the
network can be described by equation 3.43 bellow:
qt = f(ϕ(h(x); θ1); θ3) = Wf × ϕ(Wh × xt + bh) + bf
(3.43)
Where:
- xt is the flattened output consisting of the price observations of m stocks:
x′
t,1, x′
t,2...x′
t,m only and excluding the past price lags. Each x′
t,i consists
of 12 features as shown in equation 3.33
- wh and bh are the weights and bias for the h layer.
- ϕ is the ReLU activation function of the h layer outputs
- wf and bf are the weights and bias for the f output layer.
- θ1 and θ2 are the parametric notations for the h and f layers, respectively.
==PAGE:65==
The Q-Network architecture
59
Figure 3.3: The Deep Q-Network Architecture of simpleDQN. The whole in-
put Xt is flattened before being fed to the single FC layer. The
figure is simplified - there are in fact 12m inputs, 6m hidden units
and 13m outputs, where m is the number of stocks. The bias node
is omitted from this figure.
Overall, the selection between the DQNi, DQNi-LSTM and simpleDQN models
was done based on the performance of the portfolio Dataset 1, consisting of the
HA, WBA and INCY stocks from the Nasdaq 100 index (see Methods, section
3.1). The selection was done based on the average yearly profit of three model
runs (see section 4.0.1 in the Results chapter). Each model was run for about 35
Epochs, since running the models for more epochs did not necessarily improve
the results and was very time-consuming (see Figure 4.3, section 4.1 in the
Results chapter). The selection was done in comparison with the buy-and-hold
baseline.
==PAGE:66==
60
Methods
3.5.4
The baseline model: a buy-and-hold strategy
The baseline model is simply an agent which at the beginning of the year splits
the initial monetary amount into equal parts and thus invests an equal amount of
money in all stocks. The agent is a balanced agent since the monetary positions
are equal for each stock at the beginning of the trading period. Those positions
change according to the fluctuation of stock prices, but the agent does nothing
but hold the stock positions until the end of the year. This baseline was chosen
since it is quite a straightforward strategy. By using it as a baseline, it becomes
easier to compare more complex strategies against a simple and well-understood
benchmark. Furthermore, the buy-and-hold strategy depends on the market
conditions and inherently shows signs of the market volatility.
3.5.5
Training Hyperparameters
In the experiments conducted, several key hyperparameters were chosen and
adjusted to guide the learning process. The discount factor, denoted as γ, was
initially set at 0.80 and later modified to 1, ensuring that future rewards were
emphasized. An exploration rate of ε = 1.0 was adopted, and it was decayed at
a rate of δε = 0.90 until the threshold of εmin = 0.01 was reached. The learning
rate, represented as α, was determined to be 1 × 10−4. A batch size, denoted
B, of 128 was employed to specify the number of training samples used in each
iteration. The soft update factor, τ, was assigned a value of 1 × 10−3, with it
being understood that a higher τ might lead to faster convergence but could
introduce potential training instability. Additionally, αCQL, representing the
trade-off factor for the CQL regularizer, was set at 1.0. Across most experiments,
training was executed over N = 35 epochs, bu some runs were done over 100
epochs to assess model convergence. One is aware that the hyperparameters
remain yet to be optimized, but these are the values which were decided upon
due to the time-limit constraints of this project.
Having defined the data extraction and processing in section 3.1 and the exper-
imental set-up in section 3.3, including the models with their hyperparameters,
the Results chapter will describe the performance of the RL models on the stock
market, particularly when managing a portfolio of assets over a yearly period.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 4
Results
==PAGE:68==
62
Results
As mentioned in the Methods, the approach was letting the agent run at the
beginning of each year with a reset portfolio - with no shares owned in any of
the companies but an the initial amount of liquid cash. The aim was to asses
the ability of a trading agent to make a decent amount of profit at the end of
the year while being in the same financial situation at the beginning of each
year. The following sections will go through model selection via comparison of
the profit metrics (section 4.0.1), but as well as the learning process and ability
to maximize the utility (section 4.1) . Finally the chosen model will be assessed
on 7 portfolios (section 4.1.1), and conservative Q-learning will be taken into
consideration as well.
4.0.1
Model selection
Several model architectures were tried out: DQNi, DQNi-LSTM and simpleDQN,
which were described in Methods, section 3.4. Their performance was assessed
on the portfolio dataset consisting of the HA, WBA and INCY stocks, which
are also included in the Nasdaq 100 index (see Methods, section 3.1). The se-
lection was done on the average yearly profit of 3 model runs and by comparing
each model performance to the buy-and-hold baseline described in Methods,
subsection 3.5.4.
Figure 4.1 below shows the comparison of three models against the buy-and-
hold baseline. The top image shows the comparison between DQNi (green line
plus green area) and simpleDQN (blue line and area), alongside with the buy-
and-hold baseline (dotted red line). The bottom image shows the comparison
between DQNi-LSTM (green) and simpleDQN (blue), alongside with the same
baseline. The line of each model is the mean of the yearly profits achieved during
3 training runs of each model and the colored transparent area around the mean
is the standard deviation of the yearly profits. Each year is marked with a dot
colored according to whether it was part of the training set or the validation
set. The x-axis shows each year and the y-axis shows the profit/ return, which
is the amount obtained at the end of the year divided by the initial monetary
amount which was invested. A number greater than 1.0 signifies a profit (for
instance, 1.2 represents a 20% gain), while a number less than 1.0 denotes a
loss (e.g. 0.8 denotes a 20% loss and shows that the trading method resulted in
monetary losses).
==PAGE:69==
63
Figure 4.1: Results comparison of yearly profits between 3 DQN model ar-
chitectures alongside the the buy-and-hold baseline. Top image:
comparison between DQNi (green) and simpleDQN (blue). Bot-
tom image: comparison between DQNi-LSTM (green) and sim-
pleDQN (blue).
==PAGE:70==
64
Results
What can be observed in Figure 4.1 in either of the images is that all the
models including the buy-and-hold baseline strategy achieves both profits in
some years (2014, 2015, 2016 for the training set) and losses for other years
(2016, 2017 for the traning set and 2022 for the validation set).
The worst
performing years which are in common are 2018 from the training set and 2022
from the validation set. From a data splitting point of view, it is good that both
the the training and validation set include profitable and non-profitable years.
The top plot of figure 4.1 shows a performance comparison between DQNi and
simpleDQN. Both models seems to perform roughly the same as the baseline.
simpleDQN performs slightly worse for the 2014, 2015 and 2016 training years,
yet it still manages to attain small profits.
For the 2016 and 2017 training
years both models seem to perform slightly better than the baseline.
It is
noteworthy that both simpleDQN and the baseline outperform DQNi during the
validation years. Specifically, simpleDQN achieves a significant profit in 2020,
approximately 40%, while both the buy-and-hold strategy and the DQNi model
incur monetary losses. Upon examining the performance of the DQNi-LSTM
model, as presented at the bottom of Figure 4.1, it is evident that this model lags
behind both the simpleDQN and the baseline in terms of performance. While
the DQNi-LSTM achieves notable profits in the years 2015 and 2016 (exceeding
40%), it fails to maintain this trajectory in the subsequent years, incurring losses
instead. The perforamnces of DQNi-LSTM particularly underwhelming on the
validation set, where it suffers from monetary losses of roughly 20%.
All in all, the simpleDQN was the model selected for further experiments but
to its decreased architecture complexity. simpleDQN was also selected due to
more being less computationally expensive and being able to run further on
multiple datasets in a shorter amount of time. The rest of the sections will deal
with optimizing the model via changing the reward function (sec. 4.1), assess
the performance of simpleDQN on other 7 portfolios datasets (sec. 4.1.1) and
eventually provide more insight into the trading decisions made by the RL agent
(see sec. 4.1.1.1).
4.1
Adjusting the reward function to the RL model
Several approaches have been tried out in order to attempt to improve the
performance of simpleDQN. One of them was to reduce the action space to
3 and 5 trading actions per stock, but this has led to more instability and
worse performance (see Appendix III - Results section .3). Another approach
was to try different reward functions. Adjusting the reward function was done
according to the described objectives in the Methods chapter, section 3.3.2. The
goal was to assess whether different reward could influence the performance to
==PAGE:71==
Adjusting the reward function to the RL model
65
the simpleDQN in terms of learning stability and attaining profits.
Figure 4.2: Comparison between simpleDQN models with different rewards
and the buy-and-hold baseline strategy. Average yearly profits are
plotted over 3 runs of the simpleDQN models. The colored area
around the mean is the standard deviation of the 3 runs. Each
year is marked according to whether it was part of the training or
validation set.
As explained in Methods, section 3.3.2, two types of rewards were used. The
first reward was the return of the total balance adjusted to the initial balance
amount: R(1)
t
= rb
t (see equation 3.9).
The second reward was the Sharpe
ratio of the balance: R(2)
t
= SR(rb
t) (see equation 3.10). Figure 4.2 shows a
profit comparison between simpleDQN with reward R(1)
t
and simpleDQN with
reward R(2)
t . As one can observe, simpleDQN with the Shapre ratio reward
performs slightly better, even surpassing the baseline in certain training years
(2016, 2917, 2018). Apart from that, it seems that both simpleDQN models
manage to make a better profit for the validation year 2020 than the buy-and-
hold baseline strategy.
What is important to notice is rather that simpleDQN with the reward R(2)
t
apparently manages to alleviate the losses for the worse performing years (e.g.
==PAGE:72==
66
Results
2020, 2022) slightly better than the buy-and-hold strategy or the simpleDQN
with reward R(1)
t . Overall the mean profits of all the 3 training and validation
runs tends to be positive (>1.0) for simpleDQN with the reward R(2)
t . Further-
more, this model seems to have more stable returns over the validation years.
When deciding on which reward to use, it is important to also analyze the train-
ing process, namely whether the training converges and whether simpleDQN
manages to maximize the utility (cumulative reward) during training, as it is
expected from an RL model. Figure 4.2 depicts this by showing:
- in the left plots, the training and validation losses over the epochs. It is
expected from a good model that the losses to decrease concurrently after
each epoch and eventually converge.
- in the middle plots, the cumulative reward (utility) over the epochs. For
a good model, it is expected that the utility shows an upward trend over
the epochs.
- in the right plots, the average yearly profit over the epochs. For a good
model, it is expected that the average profit shows an upward trend over
the epochs and eventually reaching a plateau after a certain number of
epochs.
Figure 4.2 below shows those plots for the simpleDQN with the reward R(1)
t
= rb
t
after 30 epochs (A)), simpleDQN with the reward R(2)
t
= SR(rb
t) after 30 epochs
(B)) and simpleDQN with the reward R(2)
t
after 80 epochs (B)). The left plots
of Figure 4.2 show that for both models both the training and validation losses
behave as expected, by decreasing over the epochs and eventually seeming to
converge. The loss curves for simpleDQN with the reward R(2)
t
behave differently
for the 2 runs (B) and C)), which could indicate model instability. When using
the return (rb
t) as reward, simpleDQNL model fails at maximizing the utility
(A)), but manages to behave as expected when using the Sharpe ratio (SR(rb
t))
as a reward (B) and C)): although noisy, the utility curves seem to have an
upward trend over the epochs. The fact that the upward trend for the Sharpe
ratio utility continues even after 85 epochs indicates that the model might be
able to learn from the data. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said about the
average yearly profit for either of the models, which is noisy and fluctuating over
the epochs. Regardless of the reward used, simpleDQN does not seem to uphold
the trend of maximizing the average yearly profit over the epochs. Although
simpleDQN with the Sharpe ratio as a reward seems to have increasing profits
over the epochs (B)), another training run over 85 epochs of the same model
(C)) does not exhibit a similar pattern, which hints towards model instability.
==PAGE:73==
Adjusting the reward function to the RL model
67
This could also indicate the Sharpe ratio is not strongly related to obtaining
the highest profits. All in all, although still unstable, simpleDQN with reward
R(2)
t
= SR(rb
t) seems to be the preferred choice for further experiments.
Figure 4.3: Training run comparison between simpleDQN models with differ-
ent rewards. A) simpleDQN model with balance return as reward,
R(1)
t
= rb
t (see eq.
3.9) - model trained for 30 epochs B) sim-
pleDQN model with Sharpe ratio as reward, R(2)
t
= SR(rb
t) (see
eq. 3.10) - model trained for 30 epochs. C) simpleDQN model
with Sharpe ratio as reward, R(2)
t
- model trained for 85 epochs.
Apart from the fact that all runs were a bit unstable (each training and valida-
tion run yielded slightly different results), neither of the network has managed
==PAGE:74==
68
Results
to attain a consistent value of profits after a certain number of epochs.
4.1.1
Model performance on several portfolios. Conserva-
tive DQN.
Having selected the simpleDQN model as the default model, from now on it will
be referred to as the regular DQN model. The portfolio datasets constructed
as explained in Methods, section 3.1 were used to further asses the DQN model
performance on a wider selection of stocks. Due to suspected model instability,
for each portfolio dataset 3 training runs were done using the simple model
architecture.
Furthermore, conservative Q-learning was applied to this model (see Theory,
sec. 2.7), in order to investigate whether applying CQL regularization (shown
in Theory, section 2.7, equation 2.16) can improve the results. Figure 4.4 offers a
glimpse into the model’s efficacy across 7 datasets, both with and without CQL
regularization. On the left scatter plot, each data point depicts the model’s
average annual profit. Conversely, the right scatter plot displays the average
annual Sharpe ratios. These metrics were selected because portfolio profit is
crucial in trading, and the Sharpe ratio indicates if the RL model has successfully
achieved a favorable risk-adjusted return.
In general, for most portfolio datasets, Figure 4.4 shows that regular DQN
(DQN_regular) tends to have higher mean profits than conservative DQN (DQN_CQL)
during validation. This applies to most of the datasets except Dataset 1 due to a
run which yielded good profits for conservative DQN. This means that in terms
of profits the regular DQN over conservative DQN might be preferred. The
baseline model typically has lower mean profits than the DQN models in most
datasets. The portfolio managed by the regular DQN model has an overall pos-
itive Sharpe ratio for all the runs and it is higher than the baseline. Appendix
III - Results, section .4 further sustains that the profits and Sharpe ratios are
lower for the conservative DQN model.
However, there is variance in the results of all the model runs. This applies to
both the profits and the Sharpe ratio given by the portfolio managed by the
DQN models. At a first glance, conservative Q-Learning did not necessarily
help reduce the variance or provide more stability in the runs. Tables 2) and
1) in Appendix III - Results, section .4 sustains this as well - there is not much
difference in the standard deviation of the profits and Sharpe ratios.
Furthermore, both models seem to attain overall higher profits for each run than
the buy-and-hold baseline strategy.
Performance tends to be slightly better
==PAGE:75==
Adjusting the reward function to the RL model
69
during training than validation for most models, which is expected in machine
learning contexts. regular DQN achieves superior performance in terms of yearly
profits and Sharpe ratios of the portfolios.
==PAGE:76==
70
Results
Figure 4.4
==PAGE:77==
Adjusting the reward function to the RL model
71
Dataset
Avg Profit
simpleDQN
(%)
Avg Profit
buy-and-hold
Baseline (%)
Profits
Std Dev.
simpleDQN
Dataset1: HA-WA-
INCY
3.4%
-6.6%
0.15
Dataset2: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU
0.05%
-6.9%
0.11
Dataset3: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU-TCOM
18.6%
-2.9%
0.13
Dataset4: HA-WBA-
INCY-AAPL
9.6%
-7.2%
0.13
Dataset5: HA-WBA-
INCY-AAPL-COST
17.7%
-7.0%
0.17
Dataset6: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU-TCOM-
AAPL-COST
13.9%
-4.2%
0.18
Dataset7: BIDU-TCOM-
AAPL-COST
24%
-2.4%
0.26
Table 4.1: Comparison of DQN and buy-and-hold strategies’ average yearly
profits across the validation dataset
Preliminary observations in Figure 4.4 thus indicate that regular DQN once
again achieves superior profits. Table 3 provides an overview of the performance
of the DQN model compared to the baseline. Regular DQN manages to obtain
profits from most of the portfolio datasets, except for dataset 2 where there is a
minor loss of -0.05%. It seems that the buy-and-hold strategy yielded only losses
on average for all the datasets, which suggest it might be a poor-performing
baseline. The trend of the stocks (shown in table 3.1 from Methods, section
3.1) does not necessarily influence the performance on the model. The highest
average yearly profit obtained was 25%, which might suggest that larger datasets
(e.g., HA-WBA-INCY-BIDU-TCOM) or stocks with mixed price fluctuations
tend to yield higher profits, suggesting that adding more stocks in a portfolio
can be beneficial. However, it is essential to account for the potential overfitting
or noise introduced by the added data.
Volatility of the cumulated returns for the trading strategy is an important met-
ric in finance. For a risk averse trader, volatility should be as low as possible.
Table 4.2 shows that the volatility of both regular DQN and buy-and-hold strate-
gies are around 1%. Whether this result is good or not is discussed in chapter
5.1. The deep Q-learning trading method overall achieves a lower volatility than
the simple buy-and-hold baseline strategy. This is expected since the reward
used is the Sharpe ratio, which is the risk-adjusted return.
==PAGE:78==
72
Results
Dataset
Avg Volatility
simpleDQN
(%)
Avg Volatility
buy-and-hold
Baseline (%)
Dataset1: HA-WA-
INCY
1.2%
1.5%
Dataset2: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU
1.1%
1.4%
Dataset3: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU-TCOM
1.1%
1.4%
Dataset4: HA-WBA-
INCY-AAPL
1.0%
1.3%
Dataset5: HA-WBA-
INCY-AAPL-COST
0.99%
1.2%
Dataset6: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU-TCOM-
AAPL-COST
1.2%
1.3%
Dataset7: BIDU-TCOM-
AAPL-COST
1.0%
1.3%
Table 4.2: Comparison of DQN and buy-and-hold strategies’ average volatility
across the validation dataset
4.1.1.1
Algorithm transparency
Transparency regarding how intelligent agents act is essential in the RL domain.
It is important to thoroughly assess whether the trading actions taken by a bot
are somewhat sensible from a human perspective and ideally the assessment
would be carried on by a financial analyst.
Figure 4.5 depicts a plot with
the price movements of the HA, WA, INCY stocks of Dataset 1, as well as
the trading actions which were executed by the agent. Upward green triangles
represent buying actions and the color intensity is proportional with the amount
bought. Conversely, downward red triangles represent selling actions and the
color intensity is proportional with the amount sold. Blue squares symbolize
holding actions. The plot was made according to the agent actions which were
tracked during the validation period.
==PAGE:79==
Adjusting the reward function to the RL model
73
Figure 4.5: simpleDQN Agent trading decisions on the HA-WA-INCY portfo-
lio (Dataset 1) according to the price evolution of those stocks
The observations from Figure 4.5 suggest that the agent can capitalize on rising
prices in certain scenarios. This is exemplified by buying actions that occur
just before price peaks. This trend is especially evident for INCY stock, which
exhibits more pronounced peaks. On the selling front, the agent seldom sells
when prices dip. The agent appears to favor holding, particularly during price
troughs or periods of frequent price fluctuations. Given that the agent employs
the Sharpe ratio as a reward metric—a measure adjusting returns for risk—it is
understandable why the agent adopts a more conservative stance.
Having presented the results, the chapter 5.1 will go deeper into discussing those
results, future works and improvements, whereas chapter 6 will draw an overall
conclusion of this project.
==PAGE:80==
74
Results
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Discussion
==PAGE:82==
76
Discussion
5.1
Discussion of results
The purpose of this section is to discuss whether applying Reinforcement Learn-
ing, particularly Deep Q-Learning to the portfolio management problem is a
suitable method. Before digging deeper into the results obtained in chapter 4,
one is aware of the limitations and constraints this RL method has. First of all,
the assumptions stated in the Introduction (no trading fees, only one action per
stock at a time etc.) and the fact that this is an off-line approach, the method is
a bit far off from being ready to be deployed on the stock market. Secondly, the
data used for this project is not of the best quality, since a free API was used for
data extraction (section 3.1, Methods). Moreover, 1-day frequency stock quotas
might not contain the patterns which could be discovered from the price fluctua-
tion of stocks during the day. It is also well-known that a typical trader can buy
or sell stocks multiple times during the stock market’s open hours, as it is en-
abled on many trading platforms (e.g. eTroro[2], Robinhood[3], SaxoTrader[4]).
Having stated the limitations, the next paragraphs will go through the methods
and results of applying off-policy reinforcement learning for portfolio allocation.
Regarding the methods (section 3.4, Methods) the top-down approach of build-
ing the DQN model was not suitable from the beginning. In the end the DQN
model with a simpler architecture was selected. In fact, simpleDQN performed
on par with the baseline and with the DQNi model, as shown in Figure 4.1
from Results, section 4.0.1. Adding an LSTM layer on top of the DQNi model
worsened the performance, as shown by the results given by the DQNi-LSTM
model. Ideally the DQN architecture is sophisticated enough to capture the
complexities of the trading environment. The number of layers, neurons, acti-
vation functions, etc., can all influence the performance, but in this case adding
more complexity to the model did not evidently improve the results.
The training of DQN models used partially went as expected, as indicated by
figure 4.3 in the Results chapter, sec. 4.1. Both training and validation losses
converge, but in a different manner according to the model runs. This indicates
that there is instability in the DQN model, which is somewhat expected from
the method itself. Learning stability can be impaired by the overestimation of
Q-values due to max operator [79]. Furthermore, DQNs have slow convergence
in high-dimensional state spaces [80]. There is also a susceptibility for DQNs
to present catastrophic forgetting, which happens when the network to com-
pletely and abruptly forget previously learned information upon learning new
information [81]. Other factors include the ϵ-policy the algorithm employs at
the beginning, which makes the agent randomly take actions in order to increase
exploration. Other factors are the hyperparameters of the model, such as the
learning rate, ϵ-decay factor, number of epochs etc. or the loss function used
(see Algorithm 4 in section 2.6, Theory), which is sensitive to outliers. Ad-
==PAGE:83==
Discussion of results
77
justing those hyperparameters throughout the project somewhat improved the
stability of the model (e.g. decreasing the learning rate, running training over
more epochs), but not enough. It is recognized that hyperparameter tuning will
be a consideration should this project continue in the future.
Setting model instability aside, section 4.1 in the Results has proven that using
the Sharpe ratio as a reward works better than using the balance return as
a reward. It seems that the DQN model was also capable of maximizing the
total Sharpe ratio rewards (utility) over the epochs, which indicates that the
RL model was able to learn from data. There is not yet an explanation of why
the balance return did not work as a reward - it could be that small profitable
trades in a large portfolio might not lead to significant rewards, causing the
agent to be indifferent between doing nothing and making small profits. Other
approaches have been tried out, such as reward function that accounts for the
relative profit or loss as a percentage of the trade rather than the total balance,
but with no avail. Furthermore, although the DQN agent was able to maximize
the utility, the overall trend of the profits still remained somewhat fluctuating
for some runs, which could indicate that the Sharpe ratio might yet not be
reflective of the yearly profits of the portfolio. Nevertheless, using the Sharpe
ratio as a reward increased the performance and stability to an extent, as shown
in Figure 4.2, section 4.1.
Preliminary observations of the performance metrics in section 4.1.1 in the Re-
sults chapter indicate that, although yet unstable, the DQN model achieves
superior results compared to a simple buy-and-hold baseline strategy. Addi-
tionally, regular DQN seems to overall perform better than conservative DQN.
Table 3 further supports the evidence that the DQN model performs better than
the buy-and-hold strategy, having profits for most of the portfolio datasets. The
highest average yearly profit obtained was 25%, which might suggest that larger
datasets (e.g., HA-WBA-INCY-BIDU-TCOM) tend to yield higher profits, sug-
gesting that incorporating more stocks in a portfolio could be beneficial. How-
ever, it is essential to account for the various overall price trends of these stocks.
Furthermore, it seems that the buy-and-hold strategy yielded only losses on av-
erage for all the portfolios, which suggest it might be a poor-performing baseline.
Choosing a more complex baseline, such as Nasdaq 100 Index [83], which has an
average annualized return of 10% [82], might not be reflective for this method,
since it operates on a larger portfolio of assets.
Given enough computation
power, one could apply this RL method over all the stocks from the Nasdaq
index and assess the performance thereafter. A more suitable baseline would
have perhaps been choosing the capitalization-weighted index methodology on
the portfolios which were constructed for this project.
Another metric which is seemingly important in the financial trading world is
volatility, which represents the overall risk of the trading strategies employed.
==PAGE:84==
78
Discussion
For example, a risk-averse investor prefers a low-risk portfolio even if its ex-
pected return is low, and, on the contrary, a risk-taking one rather prefers a
high-expected return even if its failure probability (or its variance) is high [10].
Volatility is around 1% for both the DQN and the buy-and-hold baseline strat-
egy. Volatility can be influenced by various market conditions. In calm and
bullish markets, 1% volatility might be viewed as high. Conversely, during mar-
ket downturns or periods of uncertainty, such as during a financial crisis, 1%
might be viewed as low. At a first glance it seems that regular DQN achieves
overall a lower volatility than the baseline, and this makes sense due to employ-
ing the Sharpe ratio as a reward, which is the risk adjusted return.
5.2
Future Work
Training deep RL agents can be inherently unstable. Techniques like experience
replay and using target networks help, but hyperparameters and their interplay
can still cause instability.
For the future, the usage of actor-critic methods
might be considered, such as Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C), Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG), which
are mentioned in "Appendix II - other RL methods", section .2. In fact, using
DDPG is the method applied in many works [8, 9, 10]. Really good results
for the cumulative return were attained in [10] on the same portfolio datasets,
somewhat better than this project. However, the variance of those results based
on different model runs or training stability is not made evident.
Saving the model at the best performing epoch for training and validation then
applying testing model to 2023 data might be something to consider.
Fur-
thermore, a statistical test like a paired t-test could be performed over many
runs (more than 7) to determine if the performance differences between mod-
els are statistically significant. Processing the data differently might also play
a role, such as by adding other technical indicators, news sentiment, or other
data sources that might inform trading decisions. Comparing the model perfor-
mance against a capitalization-weighted index methodology baseline should also
be taken into consideration. Furthermore, obtaining higher-quality data (stock
quotas) at a higher frequency will be crucial moving forward.
Finally, it is always useful to remember that real-world trading is different from
simulations. Real-world markets can be much more unpredictable. If taking this
project further, one will have to ensure that any strategy developed in simulation
is thoroughly tested in a paper-trading environment before committing real
funds.
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
==PAGE:86==
80
Conclusion
Portfolio allocation and management in the financial trading sector was ap-
proached from a machine learning perspective and modelled into an MDP. An
RL framework was applied to the decision making system of buying and selling
stocks which constitute the overall portfolio of assets. This research proposed
a unique discretization scheme of the action space in order to model the prob-
lem specifically for Deep Q-Learning. The main objective was to maximize the
return (total amount held) over a long-term investment period while typically
keeping measures of risk at an acceptable level.
In addressing the complexities of portfolio allocation, several approaches were
implemented via model variation, reducing the action space, reward structure,
CQL regularization and testing on various portfolio configurations. Model vari-
ation was done by building several DQN models which were tested on a port-
folio with a mixed price trend - it has been discovered that simpleDQN with a
decreased architecture complexity performed on par with other more complex
models and has shown slightly less variance in the results. Going forward with
the selected simpleDQN model, several approaches were tried out to improve
model performance, from hyperparameter adjusting, reducing the action space
and trying a different reward function. From these it has been concluded that
changing the reward function was the best course of action. The RL agent has
consistently shown that it can maximize the utility when using the Sharpe ratio
as a reward, which indicates that the model might be able to learn from fi-
nancial data. However, multiple runs have shown training instability, especially
regarding maximizing the yearly returns. This could either be due to the known
instability and convergence issues of the DQN method itself, the lower quality
of data the experiments were conducted on or the reward function which might
not yet be optimal.
The performance of the DQN model with a Sharpe ratio as a reward has been
analyzed over 7 portfolio configurations with different price trends. To account
for model instability, 3 runs have been made on each portfolio. DQN has con-
sistently shown superior performance over the buy-and-hold baseline strategy.
Using conservative DQN has neither helped improving the mean profits nor the
mean Sharpe ratio. Furthermore, the portfolio risk or volatility of returns were
not necessarily reduced using conservative Q-learning. Overall, the regular DQN
model with Sharpe ratio as a reward was the preferred method - it has not only
helped keeping the average yearly profits (returns) higher than the buy-and-
hold baseline strategy, but has also helped reduce risk. Both annual return and
volatility (risk) are important metrics in the financial trading industry.
All in all, considering the findings of this research project, model-free RL could
have a lot of potential in the financial trading industry. Optimizing portfolio
management is a difficult problem; real-world markets are complex, highly dy-
namic, and difficult to predict. Successful models must be able to distill the most
==PAGE:87==
81
pertinent and computationally tractable features of these markets and present
high robustness. That is, pragmatic modeling hinges upon pragmatic simpli-
fication, empirical validation through several experiments and decision-making
transparency: this thesis illustrates the utility of this approach and that even
simple models might be able to garner useful real-world insights.
==PAGE:88==
82
Conclusion
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1] “Alpaca - developer-first api for trading.” Accessed on 10 March, 2023.
[2] “From stocks to crypto: Invest in 3,000+ assets on etoro.” Accessed on 10
March, 2023.
[3] “Commission-free stock trading investing app | robinhood.” Accessed on
10 March, 2023.
[4] “Saxotraderpro – professionel handelsplatform | saxo bank.” Accessed on
10 May, 2023.
[5] M. 4, “Automated trading,” 2023. Accessed: 2023-08-24.
[6] NinjaTrader, “Ninjatrader,” 2023. Accessed: 2023-08-24.
[7] cTrader, “ctrader,” 2023. Accessed: 2023-08-24.
[8] H. Park, M. K. Sim, and D. G. Choi, “An intelligent financial portfolio
trading strategy using deep q-learning,” Expert Systems with Applications,
vol. 158, p. 113573, 2020.
[9] C. Betancourt and W.-H. Chen, “Deep reinforcement learning for portfolio
management of markets with a dynamic number of assets,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 164, p. 114002, 2021.
[10] H. Yang, H. Park, and K. Lee, “A selective portfolio management algo-
rithm with off-policy reinforcement learning using dirichlet distribution,”
Axioms, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 664, 2022.
==PAGE:90==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] H. Yang, X.-Y. Liu, S. Zhong, and A. Walid, “Deep reinforcement learning
for automated stock trading: An ensemble strategy,” in Proceedings of the
first ACM international conference on AI in finance, pp. 1–8, 2020.
[12] Y. Deng, B. Feng, Y. Kong, Z. Ren, and Q. Dai, “Deep direct reinforcement
learning for financial signal representation and trading,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 28, pp. 653–664,
2016.
[13] Z. Jiang, D. Xu, and J. Liang, “A deep reinforcement learning framework
for the financial portfolio management problem,” arXiv preprint, 2017.
[14] P. C. Pendharkar and P. Cusatis, “Trading financial indices with rein-
forcement learning agents,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 103,
pp. 1–13, 2018.
[15] S. Almahdi and S. Y. Yang, “A constrained portfolio trading system using
particle swarm algorithm and recurrent reinforcement learning,” Expert
Systems With Applications, vol. 130, pp. 145–156, 2019.
[16] G. Jeong and H. Y. Kim, “Improving financial trading decisions using
deep q-learning: Predicting the number of shares, action strategies, and
transfer learning,” Expert System with Applications, vol. 117, pp. 125–138,
2019.
[17] Y. Ye, H. Pei, B. Wang, P.-Y. Chen, Y. Zhu, J. Xiao, and B. Li,
“Reinforcement-learning based portfolio management with augmented as-
set movement prediction states,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 1112–1119, 2020.
[18] T. Fischer and C. Krauss, “Deep learning with long short-term memory
networks for financial market predictions,” European Journal of Opera-
tional Research, vol. 270, no. 2, pp. 654–669, 2018.
[19] M. F. Dixon, D. Klabjan, and J. H. Bang, “Classification-based finan-
cial markets prediction using deep neural networks,” Algorithmic Finance,
vol. 6, no. 3-4, pp. 67–77, 2016.
[20] W. Bao, J. Yue, and Y. Rao, “A deep learning framework for financial time
series using stacked autoencoders and long-short term memory,” PloS one,
vol. 12, no. 7, p. e0180944, 2017.
[21] J. C. Hull, Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives. Pearson, 2017.
[22] A. Bris, W. N. Goetzmann, and N. Zhu, “The mechanics of short selling,”
Financial Analysts Journal, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 26–39, 2007.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[23] A. Kumar, A. Zhou, G. Tucker, and S. Levine, “Conservative q-learning for
offline reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33, pp. 1179–1191, 2020.
[24] D. K. Rathore and P. K. Mannepalli, “A review of machine learning tech-
niques and applications for health care,” in 2021 International Conference
on Advances in Technology, Management Education (ICATME), pp. 4–8,
IEEE, 2021.
[25] N. B. Gaikwad, V. Tiwari, A. Keskar, and N. Shivaprakash, “Efficient
fpga implementation of multilayer perceptron for real-time human activity
classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 26696–26706, 2019.
[26] F. Rosenblatt, “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information
storage and organization in the brain,” Psychological Review, vol. 65, no. 6,
pp. 386–408, 1958.
[27] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
[28] S. Abbaspour, F. Fotouhi, A. Sedaghatbaf, H. Fotouhi, M. Vahabi, and
M. Linden, “A comparative analysis of hybrid deep learning models for
human activity recognition,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 19, 2020.
[29] T. Mikolov, M. Karafiát, L. Burget, J. Cernocky, and S. Khudanpur, “Re-
current neural network based language model,” in Eleventh Annual Con-
ference of the International Speech Communication Association, 2010.
[30] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
[31] J. T. Connor, R. D. Martin, and L. E. Atlas, “Recurrent neural networks
and robust time series prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
works, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 240–254, 1994.
[32] W. Fang, Y. Chen, and Q. Xue, “Survey on research of rnn-based spatio-
temporal sequence prediction algorithms,” Journal on Big Data, vol. 3,
no. 3, 2021.
[33] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech recognition with deep
recurrent neural networks,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 6645–6649, IEEE, 2013.
[34] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
==PAGE:92==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[35] M. Roondiwala, H. Patel, and S. Varma, “Predicting stock prices using
lstm,” International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR), vol. 6, 04
2017.
[36] J. Cao, Z. Li, and J. Li, “Financial time series forecasting model based on
ceemdan and lstm,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,
vol. 519, pp. 127–139, 2019.
[37] W. Bao, J. Yue, and Y. Rao, “A deep learning framework for financial time
series using stacked autoencoders and long-short term memory,” PLOS
ONE, vol. 12, pp. 1–24, 07 2017.
[38] S. Selvin, R. Vinayakumar, E. A. Gopalakrishnan, V. K. Menon, and
K. P. Soman, “Stock price prediction using lstm, rnn and cnn-sliding win-
dow model,” in 2017 International Conference on Advances in Computing,
Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), pp. 1643–1647, 2017.
[39] G. Consigli and M. A. H. Dempster, “Dynamic stochastic programming
for assetliability management,” Annals of Operations Research, vol. 81,
pp. 131–161, 1998.
[40] B. Golub, M. Holmer, R. Mckendall, L. Polhlman, and S. A. Zenios, “A
stochastic programming model for money management,” European Jour-
nal of Operations Research, vol. 85, pp. 282–296, 1995.
[41] R. Kouwenberg, “Scenario generation and stochastic programming mod-
els for asset liability management,” European Journal of Operational Re-
search, vol. 134, pp. 279–292, 2001.
[42] J. J. Murphy, Technical analysis of the financial markets: A comprehensive
guide to trading methods and applications. Penguin, 1999.
[43] E. F. Fama, “Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical
work,” The journal of Finance, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 383–417, 1970.
[44] “Yahoo finance api - a complete guide - algotrading101 blog.” Accessed on
16 May, 2023.
[45] F. J. Fabozzi, H. M. Markowitz, and F. Gupta, “Portfolio selection,” Hand-
book of finance, vol. 2, 2008.
[46] C. Zopounidis and E. Galariotis, Quantitative financial risk management:
theory and practice. Wiley Online Library, 2015.
[47] W. Brock, J. Lakonishok, and B. Lebaron, “Simple technical trading rules
and the stochastic properties of stock returns,” The Journal of Finance,
vol. 47, pp. 1731–1764, 1992.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[48] C. H. Chen and H. Y. Yu, “A series based group stock portfolio optimiza-
tion approach using the grouping genetic algorithm with symbolic aggre-
gate approximations,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 125, pp. 146–163,
2017.
[49] T. Chen and F. Chen, “An intelligent pattern recognition model for
supporting investment decisions in stock market,” Information Sciences,
pp. 261–274, 2016.
[50] U. Derigs and N. H. Nickel, “Meta-heuristic based decision support for
portfolio optimization with a case study on tracking error minimization in
passive portfolio management,” OR Spectrum, vol. 25, pp. 345–378, 2003.
[51] W. Leigh, N. Modani, R. Purvis, Q. Wu, and T. Robert, “Stock market
trading rule discovery using technical charting heuristics,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 23, pp. 155–159, 2002.
[52] F. Papailias and D. D. Thomakos, “An improved moving average technical
trading rule,” Physica A, vol. 428, pp. 458–469, 2015.
[53] X. Zhang, Y. Hu, K. Xie, W. Zhang, L. Su, and M. Liu, “An evolutionary
trend reversion model for stock trading rule discovery,” Knowledge-Based
Systems, vol. 79, pp. 27–35, 2015.
[54] D. Carr, “Applying reinforcement learning to tetris,” Department of Com-
puter Science Rhodes University, 2005.
[55] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wier-
stra, and M. Riedmiller, “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
[56] N. A. Barriga, M. Stanescu, F. Besoain, and M. Buro, “Improving rts
game ai by supervised policy learning, tactical search, and deep reinforce-
ment learning,” IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 8–18, 2019.
[57] D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglou, A. Huang,
A. Guez, et al., “Mastering the game of go without human knowledge,”
Nature, vol. 550, no. 7676, pp. 354–359, 2017.
[58] N. Brown and T. Sandholm, “Superhuman ai for multiplayer poker,” Sci-
ence, vol. 365, no. 6456, pp. 885–890, 2019.
[59] S. Gu, T. Lillicrap, I. Sutskever, and S. Levine, “Continuous deep q-
learning with model-based acceleration,” in Proceedings of the 34th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70, pp. 1378–1387,
2017.
==PAGE:94==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[60] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-end training of deep
visuomotor policies,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 1334–1373, 2018.
[61] O. Gottesman, F. Johansson, J. Meier, J. Dent, D. Lee, S. Srinivasan,
and F. Doshi-Velez, “Guidelines for reinforcement learning in healthcare,”
Nature Medicine, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 16–18, 2019.
[62] A. Raghu, M. Komorowski, I. Ahmed, L. A. Celi, P. Szolovits, and
M. Ghassemi, “Deep reinforcement learning for sepsis treatment,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.09602, 2017.
[63] N. Lazic,
M. Gomrokchi,
and D. Precup,
“Data-efficient deep re-
inforcement
learning
for
dexterous
manipulation,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1804.06393, 2018.
[64] R. Bellman, “A markovian decision process,” Journal of Mathematics and
Mechanics, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 679–684, 1957.
[65] A. K. Dixit, Optimization in Economic Theory. Oxford University Press,
2nd ed., 1990.
[66] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
MIT Press, 2nd ed., 2018. Chapter IV.
[67] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
MIT Press, 2nd ed., 2018. Chapter VI, Section 4.4.
[68] S. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach.
Prentice Hall, 3rd ed., 2010. Chapter 17, Section 4.3: Value Iteration,
Page 652.
[69] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
MIT Press, 2nd ed., 2018. Chapter VI.
[70] D. Silver et al., “Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general re-
inforcement learning algorithm,” in Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
[71] S. Gu et al., “Deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipulation
with asynchronous off-policy updates,” in Robotics: Science and Systems
(RSS), 2017.
[72] L. Li et al., “Virtual-to-real deep reinforcement learning:
Continuous
control of mobile robots for mapless navigation,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2017.
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
89
[73] H. Mao et al., “Resource management with deep reinforcement learning,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Com-
munications (INFOCOM), 2016.
[74] O. Gottesman et al., “Evaluating reinforcement learning algorithms in
observational health care settings,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, vol. 116, no. 52, pp. 25362–25368, 2019.
[75] B. T. Polyak and A. B. Juditsky, “Acceleration of stochastic approximation
by averaging,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, vol. 30, no. 4,
pp. 838–855, 1992.
[76] W. Mou, C. J. Li, M. J. Wainwright, P. L. Bartlett, and M. I. Jor-
dan, “On linear stochastic approximation: Fine-grained polyak-ruppert
and nonasymptotic concentration,” in Conference on Learning Theory,
pp. 2947–2997, PMLR, 2020.
[77] N. M. Kiefer, T. J. Vogelsang, and H. Bunzel, “Simple robust testing of
regression hypotheses,” Econometrica, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 695–714, 2000.
[78] O. Anschel, N. Baram, and N. Shimkin, “Averaged-dqn: Variance reduc-
tion and stabilization for deep reinforcement learning,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 176–185, PMLR, 2017.
[79] H. van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning with
double q-learning,” in Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2016.
[80] P. Henderson et al., “Deep reinforcement learning that matters,” 2017.
[81] E. Parisotto and A. A. Rusu, “Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer
reinforcement learning,” 2015.
[82] “NASDAQ Stock Screener.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[83] “Nasdaq index methodology.” Accessed on 27 July, 2023, © Copyright
2021, Nasdaq, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
[84] “NASDAQ Composite Index.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[85] “HA Company Profile.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[86] “WBA Company Profile.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[87] “INCY Company Profile.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[88] “BIDU Company Profile.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[89] “TCOM Company Profile.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
==PAGE:96==
90
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[90] “AAPL Company Profile.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[91] “COST Company Profile.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[92] “FinRL Yahoo Finance Data Processor.” Accessed: 2023-05-01.
[93] “Ai4finance-foundation/finrl: Finrl: Financial reinforcement learning..”
Accessed on 10 March, 2023.
[94] J. J. Murphy, Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets: A Compre-
hensive Guide to Trading Methods and Applications. New York Institute
of Finance, 1999.
[95] J. W. Wilder, “New concepts in technical trading systems,” Trend Re-
search, 1978.
[96] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016. http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[97] F. Rosenblatt, “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information
storage and organization in the brain,” Psychological review, vol. 65, no. 6,
pp. 386–408, 1958.
[98] F. D. Turek, “Introduction to neural net machine vision: neural networks
offer improved classification capabilities for machine-vision systems,” Vi-
sion systems design, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 19–, 2007.
[99] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature (London),
vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[100] P. J. Werbos, Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Analysis
in the Behavioral Sciences. PhD thesis, Harvard University, 1974.
[101] L. Bottou, “Online Algorithms and Stochastic Approximations". Online
Learning and Neural Networks.,” Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[102] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
MIT Press, 2nd ed., 2018. Chapter IV, Section 4.3.
[103] T. e. a. Haarnoja, “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep
reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor,” 2018.
[104] L. e. a. Espeholt, “Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance
weighted actor-learner architectures,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[105] R. e. a. Lowe, “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive
environments,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2017.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
91
[106] T. P. e. a. Lillicrap, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2016.
[107] E. Parisotto and A. A. Rusu, “Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer
reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06342, 2015.
[108] J. e. a. Schulman, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017.
[109] P. e. a. Henderson, “Deep reinforcement learning that matters,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.06560, 2018.
[110] M. e. a. Fortunato, “Noisy networks for exploration,” 2017.
[111] J. e. a. Schulman, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017.
[112] O. e. a. Vinyals, “Grandmaster level in starcraft ii using multi-agent rein-
forcement learning,” Nature, vol. 575, no. 7782, pp. 350–354, 2019.
[113] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, and
D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning,” 2016.
[114] F. S. Khan and A. Anoosheh, “End-to-end autonomous driving navigation
using deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019.
[115] M. Popova, O. Isayev, and A. Tropsha, “Deep reinforcement learning for
de novo drug design,” Science Advances, vol. 4, no. 7, 2018.
==PAGE:98==
92
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:99==
Appendix I - The Fully
Connected Layer
This Appendix goes more into depth into the calculations of a fully connected
layer with multiple hidden units. The fully connected layer consists of a feed-
forward neural network, as it models the parameters in order to approximate
some function f [96]. It resembles the artificial neural network, of which pro-
totype was firstly introduced by Rosenblatt [97] in 1958, and it is supposed to
mimic connected firing neurons of the human to recognize patterns. ANNs have
evolved since then to the point that they are nowadays able to solve many clas-
sification problems [98].
A neural network is a collection of fully collected units (or nodes), which are
also called artificial neurons. The connection between those nodes are called
edges and they have a weight which adjusts according to the learning process.
The Deep Learning book written by Goodfellow et al.[96] covers the fundamen-
tals of the feed forward neural network in Chapter 6. The goal of the model is to
map an input x to an output y. The function which needs to be approximated
is
y = f(x; θ)
(1)
where f is a linear function which needs to be approximated based on the pa-
rameters θ, which are learnt throughout repeated forward and backward prop-
agation.
==PAGE:100==
94
Appendix I - The Fully Connected Layer
The foward model
This part will focus on explaining the mathematical concept behind a forward
model consisting of one hidden layer, inspired by LeCun et al. [99]. One forward
propagation entails calculating the output values (predictions) by feeding the
inputs to the neural networks once. The network takes the flattened feature
vector of size D as input, where each entry is denoted as [x1, x2, ...xD] and a
bias node x0 = 1. Let the hidden layer consist of N nodes plus a bias node
h0 = 0. As adapted to the RL method used in this paper, the output layer will
contain several nodes y0, y1, ..., yM according to the number of outputs chosen.
The weights of the edges connecting the nodes from each layer are denoted as
w(l)
nj. This notation denotes the edge connecting node j from layer l-1 to node i
from layer l.
First, the values of the hidden layers are computed based on the input nodes
and connected weights. A linear combination value for each node is computed
as zn, (n ∈N), such that:
zn =
D
X
d=0
w(1)
nd xd + w(1)
n0
(2)
where w(1)
id is the correspondent weight between the input and hidden unit from
layer 1. A non-linear activation function denoted ϕ(zn) is used, such that the
next layer (the output layer) can be computed in eq. 3:
ˆyj =
N
X
n=0
w(2)
jn ϕ(zn) + w(2)
j0
(3)
where w(2)
jn is the correspondent weight between the hidden layer and output unit
(from layer 2) and yj is the node value of the hidden layer, j ∈{0, 1, 2, ...M}.
What it is worth mentioning is that equation 2 can be simplified through matrix
operations. Let ˜X be the matrix of dimensions (D+1,1), consisting of the all
inputs xd plus x0. Let W (1) be the matrix of dimensions (N,D+1), consisting
of all w(1)
id from 2. The ouput matrix can be modelled as:
Z = ˜XT W (1)
(4)
The same procedure can be used for eq. 3. W (2) denotes matrix having all the
w(2)
jn . Let ϕ(Z) denote the activated values of Z, then the following equation:
ˆY = ϕ(Z)W (2)
(5)
==PAGE:101==
95
is another matrix simplification for calculating the output matrix ˆY of dimen-
sions (M,1).
Backward propagation
From equations 2 and 3 is thus evident that weight values are the most impor-
tant parameters of the ANN to approximate the linear function in equation 1.
During the first iteration, as the weights are initialized at random, prediction
will most likely be random as well [99]. The backpropagation algorithm was
firstly introduced by Werbos [100] and implies the distribution of the error term
back up through the layers, by modifying the weights at each node. This algo-
rithm enabled the practical learning of multi-layer networks.
In order to adjust the weights, a loss function is defined, which measures how
different the predicted output is from the ground truth. To measure the loss,
target values are needed, which present the actual label of the class. The Mean
Squared Error (MSE) loss is used and is characterized by:
L = 1
M
M
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(6)
where M is the length of the output vector, ˆyi is the i-th scalar value in the
predicted output, and yi is the corresponding target value. The equation repre-
sents the average of the squared differences between the predicted values and the
actual target values. Larger values of MSE indicate poorer fit to the data, while
a value of 0 indicates that the predictions perfectly match the actual outcomes.
Backward propagation has proven to be efficient when it comes to training net-
work architectures [100]. During this the loss is minimized over the set of inputs
by adjusting the weights. In each iteration of the stochastic gradient descent,
the partial derivatives are evaluated in order to determine how the change in
each weight w(l)
nj affects the loss.
w(l)new
nj
= w(l)
nj −α ∂L
∂w(l)
nj
(7)
where α is a chosen learning-rate parameter. The learning rate is a hyperparam-
eter which controls how to adjust the weights in response to the loss function
L, defined in 6.
A linear algebra approach is taken in order to have a simple mathematical
layout of the network architecture. Equations are adapted from the formulas
==PAGE:102==
96
Appendix I - The Fully Connected Layer
provided in [96] and [99]. Consider the W (2) weight matrix of which entries are
the weights of layer 2, between the hidden and output layer (w(2)
nj ). Let A(2) be
the matrix of which entries correspond to the partial derivatives
∂L
∂w(2)
nj . Then
A(2) can be calculated as:
A(2) = [h, 1]T δ(2)
(8)
where [h,1] is the vector containing the activated hidden layer outputs plus the
bias. δ(2) is a vector set of derivatives, calculated as:
δ(2) = y −t
(9)
, t being the target label vector and y the predicted output vector.
From here we can compute the values between the output and hidden layer
(layer 1):
δ(1) = a′ ×
ˆ
W (2)(δ(2))T
(10)
where a′ is the derivative of the hidden layer activations and
ˆ
W (2) is W (2)
having the bias row omitted. × denotes element-wise multiplication. The partial
derivatives for layer 1 can be calculated as:
A(1) = [x, 1]T δ(1)
(11)
Having calculated the partial derivatives from both layer 1 and 2, the new
weights can be updated according to equation 7:
W (1),new = W (1) −αA(1)
(12)
W (2),new = W (2) −αA(2)
(13)
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) method is the learning algorithm used for
optimizing machine learning models [101]. It involves choosing an initial vector
of parameters: W (l) and learning rate α. The training set is randomly shuffled
and for each input equation 7 is applied. The training set is then re-shuffled and
the parameters re-adjusted so that the loss function is minimized. This entails
taking gradient descent steps in order to reach a local minimum.
==PAGE:103==
Appendix II - other RL
methods
.1
Policy Iteration Algorithm
The Policy Iteration algorithm is is a policy-based method briefly discussed in
this section. It involves evaluating and improving a policy iteratively until the
policy π converges to the optimal one π∗. The algorithm is shown bellow in 6
and it’s inspired from [102].
==PAGE:104==
98
Appendix II - other RL methods
Algorithm 6 Policy Iteration
1: Input: MDP M = ⟨S, s0, A, P(st+1 | s, a), R(st, at, st+1)⟩
2: Initialize a random policy π(st) for all states s ∈S
3: repeat
4:
Policy Evaluation:
5:
Initialize V (st) arbitrarily for all states s ∈S
6:
repeat
7:
∆←0
8:
for each state st in st do
9:
v ←V (st)
10:
V (st) ←P
st+1 P(st+1|s, π(st)) · [R(s, π(st), st+1) + γ · V (st+1)]
11:
∆←max(∆, |v −V (st)|)
12:
end for
13:
until ∆< θ
14:
Policy Improvement:
15:
policy_stable ←true
16:
for each state st in st do
17:
old_action ←π(st)
18:
π(st) ←arg maxa
P
st+1 P(st+1|s, a) · [R(s, a, st+1) + γ · V (st+1)]
19:
if old_action ̸= π(st) then
20:
policy_stable ←false
21:
end if
22:
end for
23: until policy_stable
For each iteration the algorithm consists of two main steps:
• Policy Evaluation: the value function (utilities) are calculated for some
fixed policy until the residual ∆converges.
V (st) ←
X
st+1
P(st+1|s, π(st)) · [R(s, π(st), st+1) + γ · V (st+1)]
• Policy Improvement: Once the value function has been updated, the policy
is improved by greediliy choosing the action that give the highest value.
Note that each policy evaluation uses the value function calculated with
the policy in the previous iteration.
π(st) ←arg max
a
X
st+1
P(st+1|s, a) · [R(s, a, st+1) + γ · V (st+1)]
In this step it is also ensured that there is a stable policy, which is con-
sistent with the current value function during each iteration. The policy
==PAGE:105==
Actor-Critic Methods
99
improvement in this step ensures that the policy is always improved or
kept optimal [102].
.2
Actor-Critic Methods
Actor-Critic is a type of reinforcement learning algorithm that combines ele-
ments of both policy-based methods (the actor) and value-based methods (the
critic). It is also a model-free method that also uses a parameterized policy
(usually a neural network) to represent the actor, together with the critic (the
parametrized Q-function), typically another neural network, that estimates the
state-value function to evaluate the policy. The actor is updated based on the
policy gradient, while the critic’s parameters are updated using a form of TD
learning, often with the help of bootstrapping.
Let πθ be the parametrized policy than can be expressed as:
πθ(s, a) = P[a|s, θ]
(14)
Which is the learnt probability of outputting an action a given a state st and the
approximated policy function with θ paremeters. For any differentiable policy
πθ(s, a) the policy gradient can be represented as:
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(s, a)Qπθ(s, a)]
(15)
Where J(θ) is the objective function and the gradient ∇θJ(θ) indicates that
the objective function is optimized with respect of the policy parameters θ. The
goal is to update the policy parameters θ in the direction that increases the
expected utility, as indicated by the gradient. E is the expectation with resect
to the distribution defined by the policy πθ and log πθ(s, a) is the logarithm
of the probability of taking action at in state st under policy πθ. Qπθ(s, a) is
action-value function following the policy πθ
Using the parametrized action-state value function Qw(s, a) (usually a trainable
neural network), equation 15 can be rewritten as:
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(s, a)Qw(s, a)]
(16)
==PAGE:106==
100
Appendix II - other RL methods
∆θ = α∇θ log πθ(s, a)Qw(s, a)
(17)
The second equation 17 suggests an update of the policy parameters based on the
aforementioned gradient and a step size (learning rate) α, where ∆θ represents
the update to the policy parameters θ.
Policy gradient methods are especially useful for problems where the MDP is
formulated as having a continuous action-space [8, 10, 9].
The Actor-Critic
methods are briefly discussed, as an ensemble RL model is used by FinRL con-
sisting of the following actor-critic methods: Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C),
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(DDPG) [11].
.2.0.1
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C)
Advantage Actor-Critic is a policy gradient-based method with reduced vari-
ance. It relies on subtracting a baseline from the policy gradient, such that
Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(s, a)B(s)] = 0
, thus reducing variance without changing expectation. The state value function
is chosen as a baseline: B(s) = V πθ(s). Using the advantage function:
Aπθ(s, a) = Qπθ(s, a) −V πθ(s)
(18)
equation 15 can be rewritten as:
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(s, a)Aπθ(s, a)]
(19)
Using parametrization for each of the Q-function and value function we get the
parametrized advantage function:
A(s, a) = Qw(s, a) −Vv(s)
(20)
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(s, a)Aw(s, a)]
(21)
Where both Qw(s, a) and Vv(s) are estimated via a neural networks. A2C’s
pseudocode is given in APPENDIX A2C PSEUDOCODE. A2C is applicable
for environments with continuous action spaces [103]. Its architecture makes it
==PAGE:107==
Actor-Critic Methods
101
suitable for parallel and distributed training [104], which lead to faster learn-
ing. It can be extended to multi-agent systems where multiple agents interact
and learn simultaneously [105]. A2C was used to train agents for robotic con-
trol tasks and other continous control problems [106]. Moreover, A2C can be
adapted for transfer learning [107], which is a machine learning method that
re-trains models for other related tasks.
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) exhibits certain limitations in reinforcement learn-
ing contexts. High variance in gradient estimates can hinder convergence and
stability [108]. Other disadvantages are sensitivity to hyperparameter tuning
[?] and sample inefficiency in high-dimensional state-action spaces [109]. Fur-
thermore, exploration strategies might struggle in complex noisy environments
[110].
.2.0.2
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is another actor-critic method introduced
by [111], which aims to reduce the variance of traditional policy gradient meth-
ods. PPO introduces a proximal constrain on the policy update, thus preventing
preventing large policy updates that might lead to unstable learning. This is
done by using a Clipped Surrogate Objective and an Adaptive Kullback-Leibler
(KL) Divergence penalty [111].
The Clipped Surrogate Objective is a surrogate loss for policy updates consisting
of a policy improvement term and a clipped term that bounds the policy update:
LCLIP (θ) = E [min (rt(θ)At, clip (rt(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) At)]
(22)
where LCLIP (θ) is the surrogate objective, At is the advantage function at time
step t and ϵ is a another hyperparameter that controls the extent of policy
clipping. rt(θ) =
πθold(at|st)
πθ(at|st)
is the likelihood between the new and old policy
and timestep t.
The adaptive KL Penalty introduces a term which constrains the KL divergence
between the new policy and the old policy to remain within a certain range:
LCLIP +V F +S(θ) = LCLIP (θ) −c · LV F (θ) + HCLIP(πθ)
(23)
where LV F (θ) is the value function loss, HCLIP(πθ) is the entropy of the new
==PAGE:108==
102
Appendix II - other RL methods
policy and c is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of the adaptive KL
penalty.
PPO has been succesfull applied for continuous control tasks [?], game play-
ing [112], robotics [?], transfer learning [?] and multi-agent systems [?]. Some
disadvantages of PPO include sensitivity to hyperparameter tuning [?], slow
convergence in high-dimensional state spaces [?] and suboptimal performance
in certain scenarios [?].
.2.0.3
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) extends the policy gradient frame-
work by utilizing a deterministic policy and combining it with the actor-critic
architecture [113]. DDPG uses a deterministic policy that directly maps states
to actions. Equation 16 for the gradient update thus becomes:
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ
"
∇θµθ(s)∇aQw(s, a)

a=µθ(s)
#
(24)
where ∇θJ(θ) is the gradient of the objective function with respect to the pa-
rameters θ, muθ(s) is the deterministic policy’s action ay state st parametrized
by θ, Qw(s, a) is the parametrized action-value function and ∇aQw(s, a) is the
gradient of the action-value function with respect to the action. The latter is
computed with respect to the action thus guiding the policy updates towards
the actions that increase the Q-values.
The pseudocode for the algorithm can be found in APPENDIX PSEUDOCODE
DDPG. DDPG employs an actor-critic architecture which uses two networks:
one to learn the policy and one to apprximate the action-value Q function.
Similar to Q-learning, DDPG also uses experience replay and target networks.
DDPG learns from experiences generated by previously learnt policies during
the training, thus increasing sampling efficiency by reusing data.
DDPG has been applied for robotic control [106], autonomous vehicles [114],
game playing[70], drug discovery[115] and financial trading [8, 9, 10, 11]. How-
ever, similar to the other actor-critic methods (A2C and PPO), DDPG could
present some disadvantages such as sensitivity to hyperparamteres [?] and sam-
ple inefficiency [80].
Furthermore, DDPG has proven to show instability in
training [108] and might struggle with exploration in environments that require
stochastic actions [103].
==PAGE:109==
Appendix III - Results
==PAGE:110==
104
Appendix III - Results
.3
simpleDQN with reduced action space
Figure 1: simpleDQN with reduced action space to 3 actions per stock: one
buy action, one sell action and hold.
==PAGE:111==
simpleDQN with reduced action space
105
Figure 2: simpleDQN with reduced action space to 5 actions per stock: two
buy actions, two sell actions and hold.
==PAGE:112==
106
Appendix III - Results
.4
Average Profits and Sharpe ratio for simpleDQN
with and without CQL
Table 1: Summary of Average Profits for simpleDQN with and without CQL
Dataset
Average Profit
Profits Std. Dev.
Baseline
simpleDQN
simpleDQN w. CQL
simpleDQN
simpleDQN w. CQL
1
10.3%
10.1%
0.049
0.043
9.3%
2
10.1%
10.0%
0.047
0.039
9.3%
3
11.9%
10.4%
0.049
0.040
9.7%
4
10.9%
10.5%
0.051
0.050
9.3%
5
11.8%
10.4%
0.051
0.041
9.3%
6
11.2%
9.9%
0.057
0.053
9.6%
7
12.4%
11.9%
0.062
0.068
9.8%
Table 2: Summary of Average Sharpe Ratios and Standard Deviations
Dataset
Average SR
SR Std. Dev.
Baseline SR
simpleDQN
simpleDQN w. CQL
simpleDQN
simpleDQN w. CQL
1
0.045
0.032
0.002
0.015
0.033
2
0.062
0.037
0.017
0.009
0.033
3
0.080
0.043
0.004
0.017
0.038
4
0.085
0.044
0.017
0.011
0.053
5
0.090
0.046
0.086
0.005
0.064
6
0.088
0.031
0.014
0.016
0.060
7
0.088
0.049
0.084
0.040
0.054
==PAGE:113==
Profits table for the Validation Dataset - no percentages
107
.5
Profits table for the Validation Dataset - no
percentages
.6
Dataset
Avg Profit
simpleDQN
Avg Profit
Buy-And-
Hold
Baseline
Profits
Std Dev.
simpleDQN
Dataset1: HA-WA-
INCY
1.034
0.9336
0.154
Dataset 2: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU
1.0095
0.9309
0.107
Dataset3: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU-TCOM
1.1855
0.9712
0.130
Dataset4: HA-WBA-
INCY-AAPL
1.0955
0.9282
0.130
Dataset5: HA-WBA-
INCY-AAPL-COST
1.177
0.9298
0.172
Dataset6: HA-WBA-
INCY-BIDU-TCOM-
AAPL-COST
1.1387
0.9578
0.181
Dataset7: BIDU-TCOM-
AAPL-COST
1.2351
0.9760
0.269
Table 3: Comparison of DQN and Buy-And-Hold strategies across the Valida-
tion dataset
.7
Detailed Results for Training and Validation
mean_profits: Measures the average profitability of the model.
mean«_sr:
performance metric related to Sharpe Ratio. volatility: A measure of risk or
uncertainty in the model’s profits. variance_profits and variance_sr: Measures
the consistency of the model’s performance.
==PAGE:114==
108
Appendix III - Results
Dataset1: HA-WA-INCY
Validation
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.103550
0.046682
0.016644
0.023729
0.000009
DQN_regular
1
Run2
0.993508
0.045207
0.009550
0.023729
0.000009
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.005077
0.042030
0.010503
0.023729
0.000009
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.103066
0.035648
0.008500
0.011298
0.000226
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
0.998373
0.013017
0.006826
0.011298
0.000226
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
0.929262
0.048393
0.009280
0.011298
0.000226
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
0.933584
0.032736
0.014640
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
Training
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.056150
0.084216
0.009494
0.026206
0.000817
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.043774
0.063692
0.009646
0.026206
0.000817
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.086795
0.054853
0.012111
0.026206
0.000817
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.018264
0.072418
0.001652
0.021687
0.004363
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
1.011332
0.008843
0.005841
0.021687
0.004363
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.140485
0.135814
0.011216
0.021687
0.004363
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
1.021753
0.083314
0.013792
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
Dataset 2: HA-WBA-INCY-BIDU
Validation
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
0.949970
0.047275
0.010929
0.011500
0.000261
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.127163
0.083141
0.012084
0.011500
0.000261
DQN_regular
2
Run3
0.951479
0.054962
0.010872
0.011500
0.000261
DQN_regular
3
Run1
0.966546
0.042327
0.006435
0.006304
0.000153
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
1.025191
0.043239
0.005119
0.006304
0.000153
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.004567
0.025446
0.004368
0.006304
0.000153
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
0.930911
0.033075
0.013960
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
Training
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.080972
0.101761
0.010903
0.030582
0.001736
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.176653
0.136342
0.011714
0.030582
0.001736
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.065724
0.088817
0.010376
0.030582
0.001736
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.067103
0.103693
0.005385
0.005973
0.003471
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
1.041785
0.072941
0.004833
0.005973
0.003471
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.010226
0.065032
0.001944
0.005973
0.003471
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
1.007857
0.078742
0.013016
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
==PAGE:115==
Detailed Results for Training and Validation
109
Dataset3_HA-WBA-INCY-BIDU-TCOM
Validation
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.114674
0.077773
0.011401
0.01704
0.000036
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.253904
0.076846
0.010483
0.01704
0.000036
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.188992
0.086242
0.010909
0.01704
0.000036
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.040471
0.061453
0.006295
0.00414
0.000220
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
1.075079
0.029061
0.005376
0.00414
0.000220
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
0.999459
0.038975
0.007828
0.00414
0.000220
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
0.971211
0.037829
0.014322
0.00000
0.000000
Baseline
Training
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.140414
0.133847
0.010560
0.028872
0.002314
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.089229
0.145153
0.008470
0.028872
0.002314
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.160534
0.130095
0.008853
0.028872
0.002314
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.106989
0.078090
0.008106
0.031744
0.002486
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
0.998993
0.055170
0.002976
0.031744
0.002486
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.085265
0.108839
0.010416
0.031744
0.002486
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
1.014268
0.077223
0.013378
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
Dataset4_HA-WBA-INCY-AAPL
Validation
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.108100
0.098839
0.009206
0.017020
0.000231
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.114980
0.092779
0.010205
0.017020
0.000231
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.063349
0.064827
0.011446
0.017020
0.000231
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.026765
0.043093
0.008650
0.023704
0.000121
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
0.993173
0.033180
0.009045
0.023704
0.000121
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.135037
0.055278
0.006328
0.023704
0.000121
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
0.928179
0.052694
0.012934
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
Training
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.199746
0.136408
0.011772
0.033258
0.002581
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.187764
0.157896
0.009801
0.033258
0.002581
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.081675
0.103058
0.011380
0.033258
0.002581
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.042102
0.064059
0.002145
0.005739
0.001543
DQN_CQL
==PAGE:116==
110
Appendix III - Results
4
Run2
1.021492
0.072794
0.004010
0.005739
0.001543
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.027245
0.075460
0.004143
0.005739
0.001543
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
1.053382
0.091856
0.012100
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
Dataset5_HA-WBA-INCY-AAPL-COST
Validation
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.138112
0.076741
0.010725
0.029654
0.000142
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.112114
0.102997
0.007973
0.029654
0.000142
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.280865
0.091869
0.011020
0.029654
0.000142
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.044447
0.045022
0.006543
0.012589
0.000037
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
1.021960
0.041463
0.003989
0.012589
0.000037
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.053889
0.051819
0.004267
0.012589
0.000037
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
0.929844
0.064381
0.011620
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
Training
Run
mean_profits
mean_sr
volatility
variance_profits
variance_sr
Model
0
Run1
1.154156
0.116601
0.010964
0.034248
0.003576
DQN_regular
1
Run2
1.163038
0.154134
0.007762
0.034248
0.003576
DQN_regular
2
Run3
1.161770
0.100967
0.008743
0.034248
0.003576
DQN_regular
3
Run1
1.074720
0.106029
0.004743
0.004654
0.002852
DQN_CQL
4
Run2
1.014221
0.042068
0.004976
0.004654
0.002852
DQN_CQL
5
Run3
1.052521
0.088894
0.004239
0.004654
0.002852
DQN_CQL
6
Baseline
1.057939
0.101721
0.010809
0.000000
0.000000
Baseline
