==PAGE:1==
AI framework for automatic quality control in
Biolab using Image analysis
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
Master Thesis
Sep, 2023
By
Haoying Yu
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In today’s age of advanced technology, image processing plays a key role as an efficient
and indispensable tool in a variety of fields, covering a wide range of applications such as
industrial, corporate, and surveillance systems. This study focuses on integrating image
processing techniques with Opentrons industrial robots to ensure quality control in the
production process.
Using the YOLOv5 model, the robot can proficiently recognize different types of pipette
tips, identify liquids by color, and accurately measure the liquid level to estimate the vol­
ume percentage of the liquid inside each tip. These detection results can be used as pa­
rameters to guide the programmable robot to perform specific operations on the pipette
tips according to predefined criteria.
This report details our integrated control­robot system’s methodology, implementation,
and evaluation, emphasizing its great potential to improve quality control processes signif­
icantly. The image processing technology is an efficient and indispensable tool in the con­
temporary high­tech field, playing a crucial role in various industries, companies, surveil­
lance systems, and other application areas. This study focuses on integrating image
processing techniques with Opentrons industrial robots to ensure quality control during
the manufacturing process.
Using the YOLOv5 model, the robot can proficiently recognize different types of pipette
tips, identify liquids by color, and accurately measure liquid levels to estimate the vol­
ume percentage within each tip. These detection results are parameters to guide the
programmable robot to perform specific operations on the pipette tips according to pre­
defined criteria.
This report details the methodology, implementation, and evaluation of our integrated
control­robot system, emphasizing the system’s great potential to improve quality control
processes dramatically.
ii
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I want to convey my appreciation to my mentors Marjan Mansourvar and Vilhelm Krarup
Møller for their patience and guidance during the project. Their counsel and recommen­
dations have allowed me to acquire new methods for the project and to systematically
structure the entire workflow.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Approach and Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
4
3
Dataset
6
3.1
Data Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Test and verification datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Method and approach
10
4.1
Tip and Liquid Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2
Liquid Level Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Color Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Robot Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Results
20
5.1
Tip and Liquid Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2
Liquid Level Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Color Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6
Discussion
24
7
Conclusion
26
Bibliography
28
iv
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In recent years, robotics automation has been a development direction in biology labora­
tories. Robots are ideally suited to replace laboratory personnel in laboratories for tasks
that are highly repetitive and possess a high degree of precision. Any minor mistakes in
the laboratory can have serious consequences. Robots can operate precise equipment
in the laboratory, such as pipettes, with a high degree of precision, thus reducing the risk
of sample contamination due to operator error. At the same time, the robots can perform
tasks continuously, handling multiple tasks, effectively increasing the laboratory’s produc­
tivity, and speeding up research. Robotics can also be integrated with other advanced
technologies in the laboratory, such as image analysis, image recognition, machine learn­
ing, deep learning, etc. The integrated technology enables real­time analysis, judgment,
and monitoring of data and samples. Robotic automation can streamline the workflow of
laboratory staff, increase productivity and accelerate the development of fields such as
biological research.
Of course, robots themselves lack the vision systems to determine whether a task is be­
ing appropriately performed in real­time, as researchers do. Vision systems allow robots
to perceive and understand their surroundings, adding the ability to sense, understand
and interact with robots. Robots can recognize and track objects and detect obstacles
utilizing cameras or sensors. Vision systems also allow robots to detect and identify dif­
ferent target objects for performing specific tasks. Robots can determine different target
objects through image recognition technology and perform appropriate actions based on
features and attributes. During the execution of the task, the robot is unable to determine
and automatically stop in the event of errors, such as uneven liquid separation or incorrect
configuration of the robot platform. This shortcoming may ultimately lead to experimen­
tal failure and contamination of the sample, which in turn may affect the progress of the
experiment. As computer vision and machine learning advance, image analysis and im­
age recognition techniques are gradually being applied to robotics. State­of­the­art deep
learning algorithms enable robots to achieve very high levels of accuracy in tasks such
as image recognition, image detection, and more. The integration of these technologies
into robots in the laboratory allows them to be used to better effect in scientific research.
Robots can enhance research, improve experimental results, avoid errors, and contribute
to scientific research in various fields through these technologies.
This research thesis proposes a deep learning­based method for image recognition of
robot operations applied to robots in a biology laboratory. The aim of this project is to de­
velop an automated system that can accurately determine whether the robot is performing
the operation correctly, grabbing the correct number of tips, and identifying the presence
of liquid in the tips, the color of the liquid, and the volume of the liquid. In this project, the
input to the algorithm is an image of the robot taking a picture after each action. The out­
put is a labeled image and labeled data the neural network identifies. The algorithm uses
the recognition data to determine whether the robot is operating correctly and to store the
recognition data.
1.2
Problem formulation
Opentrons is a company specializing in the life sciences and biotechnology field, and they
are constantly researching and developing innovative products to provide scientists and
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
1
==PAGE:7==
biologists with more efficient tools for biological research. One of their most recent accom­
plishments is designing and developing an automated liquid­handling robot. This robot
plays multiple roles in the laboratory, including, but not limited to, liquid dispensing, mixing,
dilution, and PCR pre­treatment, among other experimental operations. The introduction
of this technology has dramatically improved the efficiency, accuracy, and reproducibility
of laboratory work, establishing it as an essential part of the research landscape.
However, as with advanced technology, automated liquid­handling robots have some
challenges. Because robots are often responsible for performing repetitive tasks, lab
workers are only sometimes around the robot to supervise it. This means that the robot
operates independently most of the time. If an error occurs during operation, such as a
liquid spill or a pipette that does not successfully draw up all of the liquid, the robot can­
not detect the problem in real­time. This could lead to failure of the entire experiment,
contamination of the experimental material, or even damage to the robot itself.
Therefore, we initiated this project to introduce deep learning and image analysis methods
to add a state­of­the­art vision system to an automated liquid handling robot. Considering
that the robot needs to interact with a variety of different devices and liquids, our goal
is to achieve not only accurate recognition of devices and liquids but also to equip the
robot with the ability to recognize and respond to error situations. The key to this vision
system is to identify potential problems and take appropriate action in a timely manner to
prevent further errors. Meanwhile, the successful implementation of this system will also
lay the foundation for future research, allowing it to be extended to other types of robots,
further improving the efficiency and reliability of experiments, and providing researchers
with more powerful tools to support them.
1.3
Objectives
This paper aims to investigate and implement fast and accurate algorithms to be applied
to robots in the laboratory to detect whether the robot is working correctly and to detect the
volume of liquid operated by the robot: 1.Create a program that can identify the number
of tips in a picture.
2.Create a program that can identify the different tip types in an image
3.Create a program that identifies whether a tip contains liquid in an image and detects
the colour of the liquid in the image.
4.Create a program that identifies how much liquid is pressent in the tip and estimate if
the mount corresponds with the programmed dispensation amount.
5.Implementing the program on Opentrons
1.4
Approach and Overview
Report includes 7 chapters in total, including this one. The following chapters together
with their purpose is listed below.
Chapter 2: Providing a comprehensive literature review on the development of robotics
in biological laboratories, the advancement of image analysis, and the evolution of deep
learning.
Chapter 3: Present the collection, production, and labeling process of the datasets used
in this study. Furthermore, perform a fundamental analysis of the data.
2
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 4: This section describes the design and methodology of the project. Steps such
as experimental design and model construction are described in detail. Emphasize the
principles of the tools, techniques, and analytical methods used.
Chapter 5: This section uses charts, tables, and images to visualize data, presenting and
interpreting the results of an experiment or research study.
Chapter 6: This section focuses on the interpretation of the results, including some unex­
pected findings. Discuss the limitations of the study and suggest possible improvements.
Chapter 7: This section summarizes the main findings and key ideas of the study. A con­
cise and clear answer to the research question or whether the hypothesis was validated,
as well as highlighting the contribution and importance of the research. Suggestions for
future research directions are also included.
The Python codes implemented for this project are available in the repository https://
github.com/VilhelmKMoller/OT_image_analysis
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature Review
Since the beginning of the 21st century, biology laboratories have been committed to
developing automation, using robots to replace researchers performing more repetitive
tasks. Jennifer L. Ware et al. 2000 proposed implementing automation in small DNA se­
quencing core facilities to reduce the time required for complex and lengthy procedures
to improve cost benefits[1]. Abdulrahman Ahmed Saleh et al. proposed the application of
robotics to teaching biology in 2017[2]. In this, they focused on how to use robotic vision
systems for detection, identification, and localization. Holland, I. and Davies, J. proposed
that automated robots can optimize reproducibility in various ways, including decreasing
variability caused by human’s operation, accelerating the rate of data generation, and
minimizing probability of contamination[3]. Tacker, D.H., Topardo, J., Mahaffey, C. et.al
concluded from an experiment that automated specimen processing for mass spectrom­
etry can achieve higher efficiency than manual operation[4]. Almada, P., Pereira, P.M.,
Culley, S. et al. introduced an automated robot system integrated with image acquisition
that can trigger fixation when observing the process of mitosis[5]. Reed CE, Fournier
J, Vamvoukas N, Koza SM demonstrated the capability of an automated platform in N­
Glycan analysis, which is frequently performed for biotherapeutic protein characteriza­
tion[6]. In 2022, Yu Han et al. suggested using pipetting robots to prepare enzymatic
proteins. This study aims to minimize manual labor, enhance throughput, and improve
the reproducibility of research.se, and improve throughput and the reproducibility of stud­
ies.[7] However, Villanueva­Cañas et al. presents a reproducible workflow for SARS­
CoV­2 testing using open­source liquid­handling robots, addressing challenges posed by
supply chain disruptions. Their framework enables flexible and cost­effective automation,
making it accessible to various laboratories and hospitals.[8] Maciej B. Holowko and Clau­
dia E. Vickers, explores the establishment and operation of biofoundries, emphasizing key
considerations in their development[9]. They delve into topics such as funding, person­
nel, data management, and sustainability, providing valuable insights for researchers and
institutions looking to establish biofoundries in the field of synthetic biology.
Image analysis as a field, dating back decades, has been evolving and developing. Early
image analysis focused on basic image processing tasks such as image enhancement,
noise removal, and edge detection. However, as computer technology advances, image
analysis has evolved into a multidisciplinary field that includes advanced image recogni­
tion, pattern recognition, and computer vision. Early image processing methods such as
linear filtering and histogram equalization laid the foundation for later research. With the
advent of digital images, researchers began to focus on how to use computers for image
analysis. Early work included the pattern recognition method proposed by Duda and Hart
in 1972[10] and Digital Image Processing published by Rosenfeld and Kak in 1982[11].
Further developments include tasks such as image segmentation, feature extraction, and
image classification. Classical methods regarding image segmentation, such as K­means
clustering [12] and the edge detection algorithm Canny edge detection [13] have become
essential tools in image analysis.
With the development of deep learning and the improved performance of hardware de­
vices, deep learning­based methods are able to replace manual feature extraction com­
pared to traditional ones and have achieved excellent results in recent years. lenet, in­
troduced in 1998, provides a sound basis for image analysis using convolutional neural
networks[14]. The classification of images by extracting features shows the potential of
4
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:10==
convolutional neural networks. With the increase in hardware equipment and computing
performance, AlexNet was proposed in 2012[15]. Convolutional neural networks can no
longer handle simple tasks like number recognition. The massive success of CNNs in
computer vision has led researchers from all walks of life to invest in convolutional neural
networks. A more complex, deeper network, VGGNet, introduced pre­training and weight
initialization[16]. Convolutional neural networks became the future of computer vision
development. ResNet was proposed in 2015, also known as the residual network. In pre­
vious networks, deeper networks resulted in gradient disappearance[17]. This problem
was solved by introducing the residual module, which compares the difference between
the input and output of each layer. The R­CNN algorithm, proposed by Ross Girshick in
2014, was the first algorithm to use two­stage in target detection[18]. These algorithms
divide the target detection problem into two steps, first generating regional proposals,
which contain information about the fuzzy position of the detected target, and then classi­
fying the regional proposals and determining the precise position of the target. However,
R­CNNs take a long time to process images, cannot share CNN features of the same
image, and need to be faster to train.
So, in 2016, Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, et al. proposed a single­
stage target detection network, YOLO (You Only Look Once)[19]. Compared to previous
networks, the YOLO network is high­speed and can process 45 frames per second, al­
lowing it to run in real­time. The YOLO network divides each image into 7x7 grids, and
the grid in which the center of the target is located is responsible for predicting that tar­
get.YOLOV1 also had some drawbacks, in particular poor prediction of smaller objects. In
2017, Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi released YOLOv2, building on YOLOv1, making
substantial improvements to its recall and accuracy. YOLOv2 adds a Batch Normalization
layer after each convolutional layer. The network can be used for a wide range of image
sizes compared to its predecessor. Anchor is introduced instead of the fully connected
layer used in YOLOv1 to predict the Bounding Box. The Anchor template is computed
during training to improve the model recall. This generation will also connect shallow fea­
tures to in­depth features, solving the insensitivity problem to small target detection in the
previous version. YOLOv3 is the pinnacle of the entire YOLO range of releases. The
authors have changed the backbone network from darknet­19 to darknet­53. YOLOv3
chooses Anchors of three different shapes, each providing three different scales, nine in
total. This improvement can be used to predict targets at multiple scales. YOLOv3 adds
multi­label prediction compared to the single­label prediction of YOLOv2. In the prede­
cessor network, targets would only be identified as a category and categorized according
to their scores. YOLOv3, however, identifies individual targets as belonging to multiple
categories. This feature is also used in this project. Alexey Bochkovskiy et al. proposed
a fourth version of the algorithm, YOLOv4, in 2020 after contacting the original authors.
Some common deep­learning Tricks were added to the original algorithm, such as Mosaic.
YOLOv5, the algorithm used in this project, is an improved version of its predecessor. The
authors have added adaptive greyscale padding to the training process. In order to make
the input images the same size, the previous generation resized the original image directly
to a uniform size. This simple approach may lead to image distortion. Adding greyscale
padding avoids the problem of target distortion.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
5
==PAGE:11==
3
Dataset
Every machine­learning algorithm must rely on a comprehensive and representative dataset.
In this project, we have carefully constructed a set of autonomous datasets that provide a
solid foundation for training deep learning networks. This dataset is designed to empower
the network to detect the presence of liquids and tips in images accurately. A portion of
the dataset was also used to train the network to distinguish the color of the liquid and
contrast it with other recognition methods. In the following sections, we will delve into the
process of making this dataset and show its inner details.
3.1
Data Introduction
In this project, the dataset contained in these images covers two main types of pipettes.
When operated correctly, these pipettes use different numbers of tips, aspirating different
colors and volumes of liquid. The dataset is divided into two key sections to cater to two
different testing phases. First, we perform the first step of the robot’s operation, where the
pipette grasps the individual tips in order to verify the correctness of the robot’s operation.
Secondly, we perform the second detection step, i.e., the detection of liquid color and
volume.
In total, our dataset consists of 543 images. For pipette tip and liquid detection, given
that two different types of pipettes were involved in the project, each equipped with two
different types of tips, we covered a total of four tip types. Adding the color and volume of
the liquid as an additional consideration, we ended up with five labels. We added three
labels to the previous ones for the liquid color detection for red, blue, and transparent
liquids.
The figure below shows that the dataset is divided into two main categories, with liquid in
the tip and without liquid in the tip. This is further broken down into two smaller categories
based on whether or not the pipette successfully picked up all the tips. Moreover, the
category in the bottom right corner is used to detect the color of the liquid.
Such a design ensures the richness and diversity of our dataset, providing sufficient ma­
terial for our deep­learning network to excel in liquid and tip recognition.
Figure 3.1: Dataset structure
3.2
Data Collection
The dataset was recorded in April 2023. Data collection occurred in the DTU biology
laboratory. Three aspects were taken into account when collecting the data, the first being
the diversity of the data. While the camera and robot remained mainly in a relatively stable
6
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:12==
position during the detection, ensuring that the system remained available when the user
adjusted the camera position was essential.
The next consideration is the clarity of the images. Environmental factors such as lighting,
background, and resolution quality can significantly affect the recognition results of the
algorithm. The differences between the different tip types are insignificant, and ambient
light can cause the algorithm to fail to recognize them correctly in cases such as light
reflections. Failure to focus correctly when the robot moves the pipet to capture an image
can also lead to unclear images. Adjusting the robot’s distance to ensure the target is
focused on the camera is also essential. Data balance should also be considered when
collecting data. It is crucial to ensure that the number of images in each category in the
dataset is relatively balanced to avoid affecting the training and resulting in poor model
performance and failure to obtain good results.
Figure 3.2: Image Example
3.3
Annotations
After the data acquisition phase is successfully completed, it is closely followed by the
image annotation process, which is a critical step in ensuring that the dataset can be
properly applied for deep learning training. Image annotation aims to add the necessary
markers to each image so that the model can understand and recognize the presence
of different objects in the image. In our project, we used a bounding box approach to
clearly mark the outlines of the various objects involved in the images. This step makes
the dataset more informative and provides a standardized input for training the model.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3.3: An Example of Annotation using Label­studio
Throughout the project, we chose Label­Studio as our image annotation tool. This tool
has a high degree of flexibility and applicability and can effectively support us in annotating
images. We used Label­Studio to draw bounding boxes on the images and place these
boxes precisely on the regions of interest to ensure the accuracy and consistency of the
annotation.
We export the annotation information to the YOLO dataset format to ensure that the
dataset format meets the needs of the deep learning model we employ.
This format
is widely used in target detection tasks and has an unambiguous structure that makes
model training more efficient and accurate.
During the image annotation process, we need to ensure the precise positioning of the
bounding boxes and the accuracy of the area covered by each box. This way, when our
dataset is ready to enter the training phase of the deep learning network, we can provide
rich and accurate inputs to the model, thus improving its accuracy.
3.4
Test and verification datasets
Validation sets could verify the performance of the trained network in real­world applica­
tions and also help ensure that the network is learning in the expected direction. In this
project, we monitor the training process with the help of validation sets so that adjustments
can be made to achieve more efficient network training.
The division of the dataset is crucial for the balance of training, validation, and testing.
We adopt a proportional partitioning strategy, dividing the dataset into training, validation,
and testing sets to ensure the model is trained and evaluated reliably and accurately. We
adopted an 8:2 ratio where 80% of the data was used for training, and the remaining 20%
constituted the validation set. A validation set allows us to monitor the model’s training
progress in real­time to ensure that its performance during the learning process meets
our expectations.
In the case of the test set, its role is to independently evaluate the network’s performance
once it has been trained. We select an image from each of the different categories of the
dataset and construct it as a test set. This selection ensures the representativeness and
8
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:14==
diversity of the test set, which can thoroughly test the trained network’s generalization
ability and adaptability to different contexts.
In summary, the validation set acts as a guide during the training process to ensure that
the learning trajectory of the network is as expected. The test set, on the other hand, is
independently examined at the end of training to assess the network’s performance. The
rationality and accuracy of this process will provide a solid guarantee for the performance
and effectiveness of our deep learning network.
Figure 3.4: Total view of the dataset
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
9
==PAGE:15==
4
Method and approach
This chapter presents methods and approaches in target, liquid level, and color detec­
tion. For target detection, we use a single­stage detection model, YOLO, and introduce a
series of performance metrics for evaluating the accuracy and performance of the trained
model. We propose a liquid volume estimation method based on liquid height for liquid­
level detection. By comparing the ratio of the liquid height to the tip height, we can achieve
real­time estimation of the liquid volume and issue an alarm when the liquid volume is
abnormal. For color detection, we have combined the target detection results and the
properties of the HSV color space to identify the liquid color accurately. By analyzing
the hue values at the center point of the liquid, we can accurately determine the color of
the liquid. Finally, we present the implementation of robot control through Raspberry Pi.
With the Raspberry Pi, we have successfully successfully integrated control and image
processing functions for robot operation, improving the performance and efficiency of the
entire system.
4.1
Tip and Liquid Detection
Most of the classical target detection models are two­stage detection algorithms. The al­
gorithm accomplishes the target detection task in two separate phases. The first stage
generates a candidate box, while the second stage classifies and regresses the generated
candidate boxes to obtain the final target detection result. The two­stage algorithm has
high accuracy, but because it requires two separate neural network models, it has a more
complex structure and takes longer to detect the target. The model used in this paper is
a single­stage detection model. The whole target detection problem is considered a re­
gression problem. The class and location of the target are predicted directly by classifying
and regressing the targets at each position of the graph. The algorithm structure of the
single­stage detection model is more straightforward and has a faster detection speed.
However, the disadvantage is that it may need to be more accurate than the two­stage
model regarding target localization.
4.1.1
Performance Metrics
A series of performance metrics are needed to evaluate the trained model. Performance
metrics provide objective criteria for evaluating a model’s accuracy, quality, efficiency, and
other aspects. The performance metrics used in this article are described in the following
section.
Precision, Accuracy, and Recall
Precision, accuracy, and recall are often used in target detection algorithms to evaluate
the performance of a model. Figure4.1 shows the confusion matrix.
10
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:16==
Figure 4.1: Confusion Matrix
Accuracy is the proportion of the sample in which the model detects a target that is a real
target. It can predict the overall correctness of the model. When the samples in each
category are approximately equal, using accuracy to evaluate the model is appropriate.
However, the accuracy can be misleading when there is a significant difference in the
number of samples from different categories. Precision measures the proportion of all
samples that are predicted to be targets that are true to the target. It focuses only on
accuracy in positive samples. Recall is concerned with the proportion of all targets to
be detected and emphasises the ability of the model to capture positive examples. The
calculation of these three metrics can be expressed as:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(4.1)
The F1 score takes into account both the precision and the recall factors and reconciles the
two. The f1 score ranges from 0 to 1, with scores close to 1 indicating better performance.
F1 = 2 ∗(precision ∗recall)
precision + recall
(4.2)
IoU
Intersection over Union (IoU) is often used to evaluate the performance of target detection
models, as shown in Figure 4.2. It is calculated by computing the ratio of the intersection
and merge of the predicted region to the true region to measure the degree of overlap
between the predicted and true regions of the model. This performance parameter takes
values in the range of 0 to 1. A value closer to 1 indicates that the more significant the
overlap between the predicted and true regions, the better the model performance.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 4.2: Pictorial presentation of IoU
P­R curve
The PR curve shows the Precision vs Recall curve, which uses both TPR (Recall), and
Precision. the PR curve focuses more on positive cases to avoid the problem of un­
balanced category samples. As shown in the Figure 4.3 below, each point in the curve
represents the accuracy and recall of the model at different thresholds. The curve shape
indicates the model’s performance, and in practice, the closer the P­R curve is to the top
left corner, the better the model’s performance.
Figure 4.3: An Example of P­R curve
mAP
mAP (Mean Average Precision) is the average precision calculated at different recall lev­
els. mAP refers to the area below the P­R curve. This parameter represents the av­
erage performance of the model at different recall rates. In this paper, mAP@0.5 and
mAP@0.95 are used. They represent the average precision for recall rates of 0.5 and
0.95, respectively. It measures how well the model performs in the case of high recall.
12
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:18==
4.1.2
Network structure
As shown in the Figure 4.4, the network structure of YOLOV5 is divided into three main
parts, the backbone network, the neck network, and the head network. It uses a lightweight
network structure with fewer parameters in the whole network and a smaller size com­
pared to other target detection models. This allows YOLOv5’s algorithms to be more
flexible and can be tailored to suit requirements.
Figure 4.4: YOLOv5 Network Structure
backbone Network
YOLOv5 uses CSPDarknet53 as the backbone network. CSPDarknet53 is a modified
convolutional neural network based on Darknet53, which consists of a series of convo­
lutional layers and residual blocks. The network uses the Cross­Stage Partial Network
(CSP) module, which allows the network to extract features more efficiently and accu­
rately. CSPdarknet53 is divided into three parts. The first half of Darknet53 starts by
passing the input image through a convolutional layer to extract the features of the image
initially. It then goes through several residual modules. The residual module contains
several convolutional layers and a skip connection, which allows the extraction of fea­
tures at different levels. The Cross­Stage Partial Network(CSP) plays an essential role
in the backbone network to improve the accuracy and efficiency of feature extraction. It
will divide the input into two branches. One performs feature extraction and reduces the
size of the feature map by downsampling. The other branch is passed through only one
convolutional layer and then connected to the previous branch. This operation allows the
network to extract a richer set of features and improves the feature representation of the
network. The last part of the backbone network consists of the residual module and the
global pooling layer, which allows further extraction of high­level feature representation
capabilities. The backbone network has high accuracy without expanding the model size
and maintains the model’s speed. The addition of the CSP structure to the base Dark­
net53 network allows the model to learn features at different levels, thus improving the
accuracy of target detection.
Neck Network
The Neck network links the backbone and head networks in the network model, acting
as a feature fusion and information transfer. The Neck network extracts more feature
characteristics by adding layer­specific connections and operations to enhance target de­
tection performance. YoloV5 selected SPP (Spatial Pyramid Pooling) as the neck net­
work. SPP networks allow access to information at different scales by introducing spatial
pyramid pooling to obtain multiple feature representations at different scales, increasing
the perceptual field of the model. The network will link feature maps from multiple scales
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
13
==PAGE:19==
together, and this feature fusion can capture feature information at different scales and
improve the network’s performance.
Head Network
The head network is the final part of this target detection network, and its role is to convert
the extracted feature information into a target detection result. In yolov5, the head net­
work does not have a fully connected layer. It uses a convolutional network to increase
the number of channels and decrease the spatial dimension to obtain the desired target
detection information.
4.1.3
Loss function
Loss = λcoord
s2
∑
i=0
B
∑
i=1
Lobj
ij (xi −ˆxi)2 + (yi −ˆyi)2
+λcoord
s2
∑
i=0
B
∑
i=1
Lobj
ij (√wi −
√
ˆwi)2 + (
√
hi −
√
ˆhi)2
+
s2
∑
i=0
B
∑
i=1
Lobj
ij (Ci −ˆCi)2 + λnoobj
s2
∑
i=0
B
∑
i=1
Lnoobj
ij
(Ci −ˆCi)2
+
s2
∑
i=1
Lobj
i
∑
c∈classes
(pi(c) −ˆpi(c))2
(4.3)
The loss function is the degree to which the actual and predicted values of the model are
evaluated differently during deep learning training. This algorithm’s loss function consists
of three components: classification loss, localization loss, and confidence loss. YOLOv5
uses Binary Cross­Entropy with the Logits Loss function to calculate the loss of category
probability and target confidence scores. It uses CIOU Loss as the loss of the bounding
box. Each loss function helps optimize the network and improve the target detection
accuracy.
Classification loss
Most networks will choose the softmax function to calculate the classification score. This
is because most classifiers assume that the outputs of the labels are mutually exclusive,
meaning that a detected target will not have more than one label at a time. However,
in this algorithm, multiple logistic classifiers are used to replace the softmax function in
order to calculate the likelihood of inputting a specific label.The classification loss in ob­
ject detection models, such as YOLOv5, is a component of the overall loss function that
measures the accuracy of predicted object classes. It quantifies the discrepancy between
the predicted class probabilities and the ground truth class labels. In YOLOv5, the clas­
sification loss is commonly computed using the Cross­Entropy Loss. This loss function
compares the predicted class probabilities (outputted by the model) with the one­hot en­
coded ground truth class labels for each bounding box. The classification loss encourages
the model to assign high probabilities to the correct object class and low probabilities to
the incorrect classes. It penalizes the model for incorrect predictions and incentivizes it
to learn discriminative features for different object categories. The classification loss is
typically computed for each bounding box, and the total loss is the sum of the classifica­
tion losses for all objects in an image. During training, the model adjusts its parameters
to minimize this loss, improving the accuracy of object class predictions.
localization loss
The localization loss in object detection models, including YOLOv5, is a component of
the overall loss function that measures the accuracy of predicted bounding box positions.
14
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:20==
It quantifies the discrepancy between the predicted bounding box coordinates and the
ground truth bounding box coordinates. In YOLOv5, the localization loss is typically ex­
pressed as the Mean Square Error (MSE) between the predicted bounding box coordi­
nates (x, y, w, h) and the ground truth bounding box coordinates (tx, ty, tw, th). The
localization loss encourages the model to accurately predict the center coordinates (x, y)
and the width and height (w, h) of the bounding boxes. The localization loss is computed
for each object within an image, and the total loss is the sum of the localization losses for
all objects. The model adjusts its parameters during training to minimize this loss, aiming
to improve the accuracy of bounding box predictions.
confidence loss
The confidence loss in object detection models, such as YOLOv5, is a component of
the overall loss function that measures the accuracy of predicted object confidences or
probabilities. It quantifies the discrepancy between the predicted confidences and the
ground truth labels indicating the presence or absence of objects in each bounding box.
In YOLOv5, the confidence loss consists of two parts: the object confidence loss and
the no­object confidence loss. The object confidence loss measures the accuracy of
predicting whether an object is present within a bounding box. It is typically computed
using the Binary Cross­Entropy Loss. This loss function compares the predicted object
confidences (indicating the presence of an object) with the ground truth labels, which
are 1 for bounding boxes that contain objects and 0 for those that do not. The object
confidence loss encourages the model to assign high probabilities to bounding boxes that
contain objects and penalizes it for predicting low probabilities for positive samples.The
no­object confidence loss measures the accuracy of predicting the absence of objects
in bounding boxes. It is also computed using the Binary Cross­Entropy Loss. This loss
function compares the predicted object confidences for background or non­object regions
(negative samples) with the ground truth labels, which are 0 for those regions.The no­
object confidence loss encourages the model to predict low probabilities for bounding
boxes that do not contain objects, penalizing it for assigning high probabilities to negative
samples.The confidence loss is calculated for each bounding box, considering both the
presence and absence of objects. The total loss is the sum of the object confidence losses
and the no­object confidence losses for all bounding boxes in an image.
4.1.4
Anchor box regression and cross­grid strategies
Anchor box regression is a technique used in object detection models, including YOLOv5,
to refine the position and size of predefined anchor boxes based on the predicted offsets.
In YOLOv5, anchor boxes are pre­defined bounding boxes of different shapes and sizes
that are initially placed at specific grid cells of the feature map. During training, the model
predicts the offsets for each anchor box relative to its initial position. These offsets, typ­
ically represented as (tx, ty, tw, th), specify the adjustments to the anchor box’s center
coordinates (tx, ty) and its width and height (tw, th). The anchor box regression is per­
formed by applying the predicted offsets to the initial anchor box coordinates, resulting in
refined bounding box predictions that are more accurately aligned with the objects in the
image. The regression aims to improve the localization accuracy of the detected objects.
Cross­grid strategies are employed in object detection models, such as YOLOv5, to en­
hance the detection performance by detecting objects at different scales and resolutions
across multiple grid cells of the feature map. In YOLOv5, cross­grid strategies involve
dividing the input image into multiple grids of different sizes or scales. Each grid is re­
sponsible for detecting objects at a specific scale or resolution. By using multiple grids,
the model can capture objects of various sizes more effectively. The cross­grid strate­
gies in YOLOv5 enable the model to detect small objects in finer­grained grids and larger
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
15
==PAGE:21==
objects in coarser­grained grids. This approach helps improve the model’s ability to han­
dle objects at different scales and enhances the overall detection accuracy. By combining
anchor box regression and cross­grid strategies, YOLOv5 can accurately localize and de­
tect objects of different sizes and scales within an image, contributing to its robust object
detection capabilities.
Figure 4.5: Structure of Robot Operation
4.2
Liquid Level Detection
During an experiment, the robot must dispense different volumes of liquid depending on
the experiment’s needs. When the robot dispenses the liquid, if the liquid volume in the
tip is incorrect, it may contaminate the experimental samples with each other, or the robot
may blow the liquid onto the deck. Obtaining the liquid volume directly from the image
becomes especially difficult when dealing with different types of tips, especially small­
sized tips. We propose a method to estimate the liquid volume from the height of the
tip’s liquid level, and the robot will automatically pause the operation and issue an early
warning when the amount of liquid in the tip has a significant error from the predetermined
value during the experiment.
Figure 4.6: Example of warning
The implementation of this function borrows the bounding box identified in the previous
section. When the algorithm identifies the tip and the liquid, it first needs to match them.
Since there is more than one tip in the image, the position of the bounding box is used to
determine which tip the liquid belongs to, and then the heights of the two bounding boxes
are compared to calculate the ratio of the liquid in the tip to the height of the tip. Before
each operation, the robot is calibrated once under the experimenter’s supervision, and the
ratio of the liquid volume required for that experiment to the tip is recorded. Subsequently,
the liquid level’s height is detected and compared with the previously recorded value in
each subsequent operation. The robot will pause and issue an early warning when the
ratio exceeds a certain threshold (e.g., 0.8 to 1.2 in this experiment).
16
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:22==
By employing this comparative approach, the system can effectively detect discrepan­
cies in the liquid aspiration process, enabling early identification of potential issues and
enhancing the overall accuracy and reliability of the pipetting operations with the manip­
ulator robot.
4.3
Color Detection
In the actual operational process, the robot’s work deck holds a variety of liquids used
for experiments. These liquids carry important information that their colors can often dis­
tinguish and verify. To ensure that the robot accurately selects and handles the correct
liquids, we use two methods to identify the colors of the liquids in the tip and compare
them. The first method was trained by labeling each liquid as a LABEL via YoloV5. The
second method utilizes the previously identified positions of the tip and liquid to locate the
liquid. In contrast, the color recognition of the liquid relies on the properties of the HSV
color space. The HSV color space consists of three key factors, hue, saturation, and
value, which work together to enable us to capture color characteristics more accurately.
The HSV color space offers unique advantages over the traditional RGB color space. The
most significant difference is its hue property, which makes it perform more consistently
in the face of light changes and is closer to the way the human visual system perceives
color. As a result, we can accurately determine the color of a liquid by analyzing the hue
value at the center point of the liquid bottle and marking this information on the image
(see Figure ). This approach dramatically improves the accuracy of our recognition of
liquid color and ensures the system’s reliability during mechanized liquid detection and
analysis.
4.4
Robot Control
In this project, given that the robot supports only pure Python­based packages, we faced a
challenge that it cannot directly execute the algorithms designed for detection. To address
this challenge, we wisely adopted Raspberry Pi as a solution to control the operation of
the robot and the camera. Raspberry Pi is a cost­effective and high­performance single­
board computer that provides an ideal platform for solving our problems. It is based on the
Linux operating system, which provides an open environment for seamless integration,
while its compact size brings practical advantages.
By employing the Raspberry Pi, we established control over the robot through an HTTP
API (Application Programming Interface based on HTTP protocol), a turning excuse based
on the HTTP protocol. This strategy creates the possibility of interaction and communica­
tion between different software applications. The HTTP API facilitates all robot functions,
including picking up tips and aspirating liquids. The Raspberry Pi controls the robot’s oper­
ations and captures images via a connected camera during execution. The introduction of
the Raspberry Pi not only successfully bridged communication barriers but also realized
seamless synergy between the robot and the image processing functions, significantly
improving the performance and efficiency of the entire system.
In this project, a total of 10 functions are used to operate the robot to perform experiments.
Opentrons robot needs to create a run ID to initialize and load the current equipment of
the robot before operating. For the operation’s convenience, the robot’s run functions can
change the offset and location of the experimental materials autonomously. The robot’s
run function can change the offset and the location of the experimental materials for con­
venience.
This integration solution dramatically enhances the practicality and operability of the project.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.7: The Raspberry Pi
Function Name
Description
global variable
robot_ID, commands_URL, pipette_ID
Create_run
Create commands_URL, run_ID
load_equipment
Load experimental equipment, location of experimental materials
pick_up
Move the pipette to the specified position to pick up the tip
aspirate
Move the pipette to the specified position to aspirate liquid
move
Move the pipette to the specified position
dispense
Move the pipette to the specified position to dispense liquid
blowout
Blow out the remaining liquid in the tip
drop_tips
Return the tip to the specified position or discard it.
home
Reset the pipette
light
Switch track lights on or off
Table 4.1: Function List
18
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:24==
By leveraging the computational power of the Raspberry Pi, we successfully interconnect
the robot control and image processing functions, effectively overcoming the limitations
of the robot’s communication capabilities. In conclusion, this ingenious solution not only
ensures the smooth implementation of the project but also highlights the importance of
interdisciplinary cooperation and technology integration in the solution of complex prob­
lems.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
19
==PAGE:25==
5
Results
This chapter presents and analyses the experimental results, focusing on tip and liquid
detection, liquid level detection, and liquid color detection. We assessed the quality of the
pipette tip and liquid detection results using mean accuracy (mAP) as an evaluation metric.
Liquid­level detection experiments demonstrate high accuracy at larger liquid volumes but
highlight the challenges when the liquid volume decreases. We introduce and compare
two different methods for liquid color detection, namely the deep learning method and the
HSV color space method, and compare the advantages and disadvantages of these two
methods.
5.1
Tip and Liquid Detection
In this experiment, we used mean accuracy (mAP) as the primary evaluation metric to
assess the quality of tip and liquid detection results. The calculation of the average preci­
sion is based on the precision values at different recall levels, which are closely related to
the area under the precision­recall (P­R) curve and thus provide a comprehensive picture
of the model’s performance at each recall threshold.
In this paper, we pay particular attention to two specific mAP values, namely mAP@0.5
and mAP@0.95. These values represent the average precision at a recall of 0.5 and
0.95, respectively. By using these two mAP values, we can comprehensively evaluate
the model’s performance under different recall conditions. Specifically, mAP@0.5 is used
to measure the model’s performance at moderate recall levels, while mAP@0.95 is able
to reveal the model’s performance under high recall conditions. Such an evaluation strat­
egy enables us to accurately understand the model’s performance in terms of precision
and recall under different application scenarios and thus evaluate its practical utility more
comprehensively.
Figure 5.1: Results of Training
By observing the training results, we can perceive the trend of gradually decreasing the
loss of the model as the training progresses. This decrease in loss is not just a numer­
ical change but a significant reflection of the gradual convergence and optimization of
the model during training. This improvement in convergence provides strong evidence
of the model’s positive performance in absorbing data features, tuning parameters, and
optimizing the prediction process.
20
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:26==
In addition to the change in the loss function, the mean average precision of the images
(mAP) is also a critical metric that reflects the model’s performance in the target detection
task. We noticed that the mAP value gradually increases as the training continues. Ob­
serving this rising trend implies that the model gradually becomes more accurate in the
detection task, with more confidence in recognizing and localizing the target object.
Of particular interest, when we focus on the mAP@50 evaluation metric, we can see that
its value is close to 1, which implies that in the later stages of training, the model can
identify the target accurately with at least 50% overlap in its predictions with a high de­
gree of reliability. This excellent performance strongly supports our model’s effectiveness
in real­world applications. Table I shows that we combine multiple recall levels in our
Table 5.1: Tip and Liquid detection result
mAP@50
mAP@95
Recall
0.995
0.815
0.98941
evaluation. The mAP@50 of this algorithm is as high as 0.995, while the mAP@95 also
reaches 0.815. This data indicates that the algorithm is very effective in tip and liquid
recognition.
5.2
Liquid Level Detection
To test the correctness of the liquid volume estimation algorithm. Fifty sets of experi­
ments for different volumes of liquids were tested. Overall, this series of experiments
demonstrated an overall accuracy of up to 0.98, which suggests that the model achieves
a relatively high level of accurate execution in most cases. However, it is worth noting
that in some specific cases, the robot experienced difficulty accurately detecting small
changes due to errors caused by insufficient liquid volume in the tips (as shown in Table
5.2).
Table 5.2: Result of Liquid Level Detection
150ml
100ml
30ml
15ml
Total
Correct
96
95
102
99
392
Instance
96
96
104
104
400
Accuracy
100%
98.9%
98.1%
95.2%
98%
The table shows that the robot performs very well when there is a high volume of liquid and
has a very high accuracy rate. However, as the liquid volume decreases, the accuracy of
the robot’s recognition also decreases due to the tip’s shape. When the liquid volume is
less, a reduction of 10ml does not make much difference in the height of the liquid level.
In particular, in the case of insufficient liquid volume, the robot may need help to complete
the task as expected, which raises problems in terms of accuracy. However, in all other
cases with sufficient liquid, the robot can still perform the task successfully, pausing and
issuing warnings when necessary.
This mechanical robot­based quality control system has demonstrated outstanding effec­
tiveness in practice. By effectively detecting and reacting to potential problems, especially
in the use of pipette tips and liquid detection, the system plays an essential role in the
quality control process. This significantly improves the reliability and efficiency of the liq­
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
21
==PAGE:27==
uid handling process and provides a higher level of security for production and laboratory
operations.
5.3
Color Detection
5.3.1
Deep Learning Method
In the previously described training for pipette tip and liquid recognition, we also introduced
liquid colors as labels to be fused into the training process. Because of this approach,
we achieved excellent results. Liquid color recognition achieved 98% correctness. This
means the model can distinguish different colored liquids highly reliably, thus providing
strong data support for subsequent experimental analysis and manipulation.
However, it is worth noting that deep learning algorithms take a long time to train and
detect. It took approximately 9 seconds to perform liquid color recognition on a single
image frame. Although the time cost is slightly higher, the high correctness and reliability
are important advantages for experimental and research work.
5.3.2
HSV Space Method
Five hundred experiments were performed using the HSV color space to identify colors
in liquid centroid coordinates. The initial correctness was 0.87. The table shows that the
method performs better for liquids with more distinct colors than for transparent liquids.
The ambient light, as well as the experimental background, had a significant effect on the
color prediction. Since different hue intervals can be used to predict colors, the boundary
values of these intervals become very important. Some similar colors may be confused;
for example, red may be predicted as purple under the influence of ambient light.
Figure 5.2: Example of Confused Picture
After several rounds of adjustments to fine­tune the boundary values of the intervals,
the accuracy improved to 0.94. This iterative approach to adjusting the boundary values
showed significant results in reducing the influence of environmental factors and improv­
ing the accuracy of color recognition. Notably, this method also demonstrated excellent
efficiency with a less than one­second processing time.
22
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:28==
Red
Blue
Transparent
Total
Correct
150
146
189
485
Instance
150
150
200
500
Accuracy
100%
97.3%
94.5%
97%
Table 5.3: Result of Liquid Color Detection (HSV space)
5.3.3
Contrasting Approaches
Comparing these two approaches, we conclude that using deep learning algorithms can
effectively avoid the effects introduced by the light source and the experimental back­
ground, which significantly impact the accuracy of the detection method using the HSV
color space. However, there are still solutions. In practice, laboratory environments are
usually stable and clean, and we can reduce the effects of light sources and background
on liquid color recognition by placing the robot in a controlled and less disturbed experi­
mental environment.
When we faced with a choice of two methods, we finally decided to use the HSV color
space for liquid color detection. Although deep learning performs well in overcoming
interference, the difference between the two methods in accuracy is insignificant. The
advantage of the HSV color space detection method is its faster processing speed, which
is more rapid than deep learning. Especially in large­scale repetitive experiments, this
method can significantly reduce the running time, thus improving the processing efficiency
of the robot.
We used the HSV color space for liquid color detection based on comparative analysis
and trade­offs between the two approaches. This choice achieves efficient liquid color
detection while considering the robot operation’s time efficiency.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
23
==PAGE:29==
6
Discussion
In this experiment, our system employs the YOLOv5 object detection model, and by ana­
lyzing the test images, we have achieved significant results in tip type recognition, liquid
color differentiation, and estimation of the volume of liquid in the tip.
During the experiments, we obtained encouraging results (mAP@50 of 0.995 and recall
of 0.989) in pipette tip and liquid detection tasks, which took about 9 seconds for each
detection. Meanwhile, we achieved an accuracy of up to 0.98 for liquid­level detection.
We chose to compare two methods for color recognition, which gave good results. In
particular, when using HSV Space, we were able to improve the initial color detection
rate from 0.87 to 0.98 after a simple calibration, and we were able to use a Raspberry Pi
to control the robot via an HTTP API, which solved the robot’s complex communication
problem.
After applying this set of algorithms, the robot can detect whether it is working correctly in
real­time during operation and alert the experimenter promptly. This dramatically avoids
the damage of experimental equipment or the contamination of experimental samples
due to some slight errors in the unsupervised operation of the robot. This series of results
fully proves our proposed method’s effectiveness and demonstrates the great potential of
applying machine learning technology in laboratory automation.
Although our procedure introduces a photo­processing step in the robot’s operation, which
may increase the robot’s running time, this step dramatically prevents problems that may
arise during the experiment. It avoids the loss of time and property that the experimenter
would incur if he/she needs to re­run the experiment or repair the robot. Especially in
biological laboratories, where unsupervised robots are used for sample processing, the
introduction of this procedure is undoubtedly a significant enhancement. It has had a
positive and far­reaching impact on robotics and biological research.
During the development of the procedure, we faced many challenges. For example, the
robot could not actively communicate, which prevented us from directly acquiring images,
or the robot did not support the specific packages required by the program. However, we
overcame these problems during our research and achieved excellent results. In retro­
spect, these challenges have also served as motivation to continually refine and enhance
our system, making our solution more mature and reliable.
Looking ahead, we believe that there is still much potential in this project that can further
explore to improve the performance and functionality of the system to meet a wide range
of experimental needs better:
Using a server for inspection: To further enhance the system’s ease of use, we can con­
sider uploading images to a server for inspection. By processing and analyzing the im­
ages on the server, not only can the computational burden on the robot be reduced, but
the algorithms can also be updated and optimized more flexibly and efficiently, thus better
supporting the use of this functionality by non­programmable biological experimenters.
Adaptation to multiple lab equipment: Although the system is currently oriented towards
Opentrons robots, it could be considered to extend the system to other types of lab equip­
ment or robots. This would require collecting additional training data to ensure that the
model can accurately recognize and operate different types of equipment, thus accom­
modating a wider variety of experimental needs.
24
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:30==
Through continuous optimization and expansion, we are confident that this system will
play a more significant role in biological experiments, providing experimenters with a more
convenient, accurate, and intelligent experimental operation experience, thus promoting
the progress of scientific research. Our project is of great value and significance both for
the development of robotics and the promotion of automation in biological experiments.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
25
==PAGE:31==
7
Conclusion
This research explores the intersection of robotics, deep learning, and bio­lab automation
to enhance robotic manipulation through deep learning image recognition techniques. In
biology labs, robots are not only required to fulfill the needs of lab workers but also to
complete tasks with precision and without error. For unsupervised automated robots,
the critical role of vision systems in enhancing their ability to perceive and adapt to their
environment is well established.
Through an in­depth literature review, we trace the evolution of laboratory automation,
where experimenters have increasingly relied on robots to perform tasks that require pre­
cision and consistency. However, robots’ accuracy and real­time processing ability to
cope with errors need to be improved. The emergence of convolutional neural networks
has not only transformed the field of image analysis but combining them with robots can
effectively improve their efficiency.
This project used the YOLOv5 deep learning network to add a vision system to the Open­
trons robot. The system enables control of the robot and functions for tip presence, liquid
detection, liquid color differentiation, and liquid volume estimation with high accuracy. By
analyzing the images captured by the robot, the system can provide timely feedback on
errors during the robot’s operation, thus ensuring the accuracy of the experimental pro­
cess.
Furthermore, we are pleased to announce that the findings and methodologies from our
project have been presented at ICRCV 2023 (2023 the 5th International Conference on
Robotics and Computer Vision) in Nanjing in September. This additional exposure allows
us to contribute to the broader scientific community and foster collaboration in the field.
The implications of this research are profound. The automated system developed herein
has the potential to significantly enhance the efficiency, reproducibility, and reliability of
laboratory experiments. By reducing the risk of human error, minimizing contamination,
and expediting tasks, the integration of image recognition and deep learning into robotics
brings us closer to the ideal of fully automated laboratories. Moreover, the system’s adapt­
ability to various laboratory devices and potential for further expansion underscores its
relevance in a rapidly evolving research landscape.
As the fields of robotics, deep learning, and biology continue to evolve, this research pro­
vides a foundation for future studies and advancements. Further refinements of the im­
age recognition algorithms, increased dataset diversity, and potential collaborations with
experts from multiple domains could yield even more sophisticated and capable robotic
systems. The journey towards seamless human­robot collaboration and the pursuit of
cutting­edge research through automation remains an exciting and ongoing endeavor.
Expanding Robot Control Functions: In future versions, the robot’s control functions can
be further expanded to allow it to perform more complex actions and operations. For
example, the robot can perform more complex experimental operations such as mixing
and diluting liquids, thus further expanding the application scenarios of the system and
providing more experimental automation support for experimenters.
In conclusion, this research underscores the transformative potential of merging robotics,
deep learning, and laboratory automation. By addressing challenges, refining method­
ologies, and harnessing technological progress, the research contributes to the broader
26
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:32==
goal of streamlining laboratory workflows, enhancing research outcomes, and shaping
the future of scientific exploration and discovery. The journey towards a fully automated,
intelligent, and efficient laboratory environment is well underway, and this research rep­
resents a significant step forward in this endeavor.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
27
==PAGE:33==
Bibliography
[1]
Janet L Ware et al. “Implementation of automation in a small­scale DNA sequencing
core facility”. In: J Biomol Tech 11.4 (Dec. 2000), pp. 151–154.
[2]
Mohsen Zahiri. “Application of computer vision in surgical training and surgical robotics”.
eng. 2017, p. 143.
[3]
Ian Holland and Jamie A. Davies. “Automation in the Life Science Research Labo­
ratory”. eng. In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8 (2020), p. 571777.
ISSN: 22964185. DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.571777.
[4]
Danyel Hermes Tacker et al. “Workflow analysis comparing manual and automated
specimen processing for mass spectrometry­based Vitamin D testing”. eng. In: Lab­
oratory Medicine 45.4 (2014), pp. 361–367. ISSN: 19437730, 00075027. DOI: 10.
1309/LMZL47EN6KDODMXJ.
[5]
Pedro Almada et al. “Automating multimodal microscopy with NanoJ­Fluidics”. eng.
In: Nature Communications 10.1 (2019), p. 1223. ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/
s41467-019-09231-9.
[6]
Corey E. Reed et al. “Automated Preparation of MS­Sensitive Fluorescently La­
beled N­Glycans with a Commercial Pipetting Robot”. eng. In: Slas Technology 23.6
(2018), pp. 550–559. ISSN: 24726311, 24726303. DOI: 10.1177/2472630318762384.
[7]
Yu Han et al. “Shotgun proteomics sample processing automated by an open­
source lab robot”. eng. In: Journal of Visualized Experiments 2021.176 (2021),
e63092. ISSN: 1940087x. DOI: 10.3791/63092.
[8]
José Luis Villanueva­Cañas et al. “Implementation of an open­source robotic plat­
form for SARS­CoV­2 testing by real­time RT­PCR”. eng. In: Plos One 16.7 (2021).
Ed. by Ruslan Kalendar, e0252509. ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0252509.
[9]
Maciej B. Holowko et al. “Building a biofoundry”. eng. In: Synthetic Biology 6.1
(2021), ysaa026. ISSN: 23977000, 19397267. DOI: 10.1093/synbio/ysaa026.
[10]
RO DUDA and PE HART. “USE OF HOUGH TRANSFORMATION TO DETECT
LINES AND CURVES IN PICTURES”. eng. In: Communications of the Acm 15.1
(1972), 11–. ISSN: 15577317, 00010782. DOI: 10.1145/361237.361242.
[11]
A. Rosenfeld and A. C. Kak. Digital picture processing. Second edition. Vol.2. eng.
Academic Press, 1982, pp. xii+349. ISBN: 0125973012, 0323139914, 1299052010,
9780125973014, 9780323139915, 9781299052017.
[12]
HH BOCK. “ALGORITHMS FOR CLUSTERING DATA ­ JAIN,AK, DUBES,RC”.
eng. In: Journal of Classification 6.1 (1989), pp. 126–128. ISSN: 01764268.
[13]
J CANNY. “A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO EDGE­DETECTION”. eng. In:
Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 8.6 (1986), pp. 679–
698. ISSN: 19393539, 01628828, 21609292. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.1986.4767851.
[14]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient­Based Learning Applied to Document Recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE. Vol. 86. 11. 1998, pp. 2278–2324. URL: http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.42.7665.
[15]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. “ImageNet Classifica­
tion with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Informa­
tion Processing Systems 25. Ed. by F. Pereira et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2012,
pp. 1097–1105. URL: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-with-
deep-convolutional-neural-networks.pdf.
28
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
==PAGE:34==
[16]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large­Scale Image Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1409.1556 (2014). URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[17]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: Proceedings
of 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. CVPR ’16.
Las Vegas, NV, USA: IEEE, June 2016, pp. 770–778. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7780459.
[18]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R­CNN: Towards Real­Time Object Detection with Re­
gion Proposal Networks.” In: NIPS. Ed. by Corinna Cortes et al. 2015, pp. 91–99.
URL: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/nips/nips2015.html#RenHGS15.
[19]
Joseph Redmon et al. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real­Time Object Detection.
cite arxiv:1506.02640. 2015. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02640.
AI framework for automatic quality control in Biolab using Image analysis
29
