==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Physics and Nanotechnology
The Influence of Metal exchange in the MOF
UiO-66 on Light absorption properties for
Photocatalytic applications
Author: Swetha Gopalakrishnan
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Andreas Kaiser
Co-supervisor: Yujie Zhao
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej
Building 301
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis fulfills the requirements for the completion of the Master’s degree titled
’Physics and Nanotechnology’ at the Technical University of Denmark. It was con-
ducted in collaboration DTU Energy, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
from April 2023 to October 2023, at the Technical University of Denmark. The pur-
pose of this thesis is to investigate the modification of the metal center will be done
on the MOF UiO-66. The change in structure and light absorption properties are in-
vestigated by different characterization techniques, such as XRD, SEM, EDS, FTIR,
and UV-Vis.
The images presented in this thesis were created for this report using softwares such
as Origin for graphs, and graphic designing using Aﬀinity Designer. Additionally, this
document was compiled using Overleaf.
Kongens Lyngby, 15th October 2023
Swetha Gopalakrishnan
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I wish to convey my profound appreciation to my supervisor, Andreas Kaiser, and my
dedicated co-supervisor, Yujie Zhao, for their invaluable mentorship and for facilitat-
ing a collaboration with DTU Energy Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
B301. Their guidance has been instrumental in elevating both my proficiency, par-
ticularly in the synthesis and analytical interpretation of data. Furthermore, I owe a
debt of gratitude to Andreas, Yujie and Ashwin for extending to me the unique priv-
ilege of not only contributing to DTU Energy but also for enriching my laboratory
skillset through a special course work before beginning this thesis work.
My gratitude extends as well to Dr. Romy Ettlinger from the University of St. An-
drews for graciously providing the ZrxTi6−x mixed-metal nodes concoction, along
with her invaluable expertise in the development of bimetallic UiO-66 MOFs. I also
sincerely thank Ashwin Nambi for his guidance in diverse characterization method-
ologies and for his invaluable advice concerning the synthesis of metal-organic frame-
works. The weekly meetings was also pivotal in the analytical interpretation of data,
serving as a cornerstone in advancing my knowledge and boosting my confidence.
For this, I extend heartfelt thanks to Andreas, Yujie, and Ashwin for their time,
constructive insights, and support.
Special acknowledgment is due to Raquel Ribeiro for her assistance with syntheses
carried out in B375 of the DTU Energy Department. Equally, my thanks go to the
entire staff of the DTU Energy Department of Energy Conversion and Storage for their
introductory guidance and for providing access to state-of-the-art instrumentation
and equipment.
On a personal note, I express my heartfelt gratitude to my parents for their love
and support, which enabled me to undertake this M.Sc. journey. Lastly, but by no
means least, my heartfelt thanks go to my partner and best friend, Karthik, for his
unwavering kindness, patience, and emotional support throughout this M.Sc. journey.
He has been a pillar of strength, and for that, I am eternally grateful.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
Abbreviations
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
ix
Abstract
1
I
Theoretical Concepts
2
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Metal-Organic Frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.1
Metal-Organic Frameworks for Photocatalysis . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.1.2
Modified MOFs for Photocatalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Choosing a Zr-MOF: UiO-66
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.1
Zr-based MOFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.2
The UiO series of MOFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.2.3
Structure and Characteristics of UiO-66 MOF . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.2.4
Metal-Cluster Modification of UiO-66 using Titanium
. . . . .
15
1.3
Synthesis of UiO-66
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.3.1
General Synthesis Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.3.2
Defect Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.4
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
II
Experimental Techniques and Results
23
2
Materials & Methods
24
2.1
Synthesis Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2
Characterization Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.1
BET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.2
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2.3
SEM & EDS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2.4
FTIR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.2.5
UV-Vis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.2.6
Photocatalytic Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Results & Discussions
36
3.1
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
SEM & EDX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3
FTIR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4
UV-Vis Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.5
Photocatalytic Test & BET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Conclusion
60
Bibliography
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
MOF
Metal-organic framework
SBU
Secondary building unit
POE
Points of extensions
MOP
Metal-organic polyhedra
HSAB
Hard/soft acid/base principle
MIL
Materials of Institute Lavoisier series
IRMOF
Isoreticular Metal-Oganic Frameworks series
ZIF
Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks series
UiO
University of Oslo series
PCN
Porous Coordination Network series
HKUST
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
series
LIC
Laser Induced Carbon series
H3BTC/BTC
1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid
HOMO
Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO
Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
CB
Conduction band
VB
Valence band
LMCT
Ligand-to-metal charge transfer
MLCT
metal-to-ligand charge transfer
MMCT
metal-to-metal charge transfer
LLCT
Ligand-to-ligand charge transfer
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
vi
Redox
Reduction/oxidation
H2BDC/BDC
1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid
NBO
Natural bond orbital theory
RCSR
Reticular Chemistry Structure Resource
DMF
N,N’-dimethylformamide
PSM
Post-synthesis modification
SEM
Scanning electron microscope
FTIR
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
BET
Brunauer-Emmett-Teller instrument
XRD
X-ray diffractometer
EDS/EDX
Energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy
MB
Methylene blue dye
UV
Ultra-violet region in a spectrum
UV-Vis
Ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer
IR
Infrared region in a spectrum
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Photosynthesis reaction mechanism [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Components of metal-organic frameworks [2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Photoreaction of a semiconductor TiO2 photocatalyst upon UV light irra-
diation. [2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Interaction of semiconductor photocatalysts with substrate materials show-
ing (A) reduction, (B) oxidation, (C) reduction/oxidation or redox and (C)
neither reactions [3]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
The typical technique employed for solvothermal synthesis of UiO-66(Zr) is
shown in this figure. This procedure, which is outlined here, was also uti-
lized as a step-by-step approach in the present thesis to synthesize different
UiO-66(Ti/Zr) materials.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.6
Metal modification of UiO-66 by partial substitution of Zr with Ti through
three syntheses such as addition of mixed-metal nodes, in-situ and post-
synthetic modification strategies. [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1
The post-synthesis modification (PSM) approach has been utilized to intro-
duce Ti into UiO-66 MOF using variations in the post-grafting techniques.
The solvothermal, stirring, and reflux synthesis procedures, as described
here, have been employed to achieve this objective. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2
BET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.3
SEM Instrument and scattering principle [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.4
FTIR characterization [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.5
UV-Vis spectrophotometer [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1
XRD characterization of UiO-66(Zr) in a modulated and demodulated syn-
thesis procedure, where the crystallization peaks present in modulated ap-
proach agrees with the reference [6].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
XRD crystallography peaks of UiO-66(Zr2Ti4), UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) and UiO-
66(Zr2Ti4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
XRD characterization of C_UiO-66(Zr), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol,
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol.
. . . .
39
3.4
XRD crystallography peaks of samples UiO-66(Zr), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%),
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) and UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
viii
3.5
SEM image of UiO-66(Zr) at 50 KX magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.6
SEM images showing morphologies of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-66(Zr4Ti2),
66(Zr3Ti3), and UiO-66(Zr2Ti4)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.7
SEM images of C_UiO-66(Zr) and rough measurement procedure using
ImageJ software is presented in the case of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol
particles both viewed at 30 KX. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.8
SEM images of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol,
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene and UiO-66-(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol . . . .
45
3.9
SEM images showing morphologies of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%),
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%), and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.10 SEM images showing morphologies of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%)
and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.11 FTIR peaks of Ti-loaded UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.12 UV absorption peaks of Ti-loaded UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples
. . . . .
52
3.13 Tauc plots of Ti-loaded UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples with extrapolation
on the energy x-coordinate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.14 Tauc plots and UV absorption peaks of best photoactive Ti-loaded UiO-
66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.15 UV absorption peaks (normalized) of solution with MB after exposure to
adsorbents in dark and light illuminated conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.16 BET analysis of adsorbent UiO-66(Zr4Ti2). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
2.1
Addition of precursors ZrOCl2.8H2O as metal and H2BDC ligand precursors
along with Hac (acetic acid) and DMF in a solvothermal reaction to give
’UiO-66(Zr)’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2
Addition of mixed metal nodes Zr4Ti2 as metal precursors to give ’UiO-
66(Zr4Ti2)’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Addition of mixed metal nodes Zr3Ti3 as metal precursors to give ’UiO-
66(Zr3Ti3)’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Addition of mixed metal nodes Zr2Ti4 as metal precursors to give ’UiO-
66(Zr2Ti4)’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5
PSM of C_UiO-66(Zr) resulting in ’UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol’ using
Ti(OBu)4 in methanol [7], [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.6
PSM of C_UiO-66(Zr) resulting in ’UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene using
Ti(OBu)4 in toluene [9]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7
PSM of C_UiO-66(Zr) using Ti(OBu)4 in ethanol/water mixture to give
’UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol’ [10]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:12==
Abstract
This study investigates the modification of UiO-66 Metal-Organic Framework (MOF)
by incorporating titanium atoms to create a mixed-metal UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF, as-
sessing its implications on structural characteristics and photocatalytic properties.
Employing various techniques such as X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD), scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Brunauer-Emmett-Teller analysis (BET),
and ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis), the modified material is scrutinized for
changes in crystallinity, particle morphology, and optical properties. Ti-loading con-
centration negatively correlated with crystallinity, forming a framework containing
agglomerated and spherical particles. Optical properties exhibited bandgap values of
2.85 eV, 2.88 eV, and 2.89 eV for differently Ti-doped samples, reducing absorption
to a near-visible range compared to 3.68 eV for parent UiO-66(Zr).
The study further extends its inquiry to assess the utility of UiO-66(Ti/Zr) for pho-
tocatalytic degradation of methylene blue under simulated sun radiation. Among the
tested samples, UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) showed the most promising performance as an effec-
tive adsorbent, reducing methylene blue concentration more significantly than the
parent UiO-66(Zr) MOF. BET analysis indicated a microporous-mesoporous surface
contributing to about 50% of the external surface area for adsorption. The signifi-
cance of these findings lies in the fact that they provide valuable insights into the
implications of modifying metal cations in MOFs, offering a customized approach for
improving photocatalytic applications. The changes in photoactivity and the increase
in surface area for adsorption make UiO-66(Ti/Zr) a promising contender for appli-
cations in wastewater treatment, thereby expanding the range of utility of MOFs in
environmental remediation.
==PAGE:13==
Part I
Theoretical Concepts
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Today, the depletion of natural resources in a post-pandemic world contributes to
the severe global energy crisis and significant rise in environmental pollution that
plagues the well-being of all lives on this planet. Other significant concerns relating
to our environment include the long-term reliability of fossil fuel supplies, climate
change, melting glaciers and rising sea levels [11]. In recent years, families have been
pushed into poverty by rising energy prices [12], and billions of them have lost ac-
cess to clean water while causing millions of deaths due to severe illnesses affected
by pollution. Dye-contaminating waste water for instance produced by textile, pa-
per and printing industries have posed a damaging situation for human health and
surrounding environment [9]. These disturbances create an urgent need for suitable
and affordable materials to meet the current energy setbacks and reduce the harmful
effects of global warming on our surroundings. Energy resources in today’s climate
also face a requirement to be clean, safe, renewable, and sustainable which are then
used, stored, converted, or transferred depending on our future needs [11].
New
technology should eﬀiciently utilize renewable energy, which can not only positively
impact our surroundings but also lead to an improvement in the quality of our lives.
A promising green energy resource available in abundance is solar energy, which has
garnered great attention from researchers and various industries. Solar energy utiliza-
tion has enabled the production of hydrogen H2 clean fuel resource by water-splitting
mechanism, reduction in greenhouse gas emissions such as CO2 and degradation of
inorganic/organic pollutants to safeguard the environment [13]. Photosynthesis, de-
picted in Figure 1.1, is a biological and natural process that plays a prominent role
in the survival of cellular organisms like plants, algae, and some microorganisms [1].
Taking inspiration from our ecosystem, such a reaction has allowed us to envision a
similar process to convert solar energy into a usable form of energy, such as chemical
energy, via a photochemical conversion reaction.
Some of the most prominent discoveries to capture solar energy effectively would be
solar cells and photovoltaic devices designed to convert solar energy to electricity,
chemical or thermal energy for further use [11]. One or more of the materials in
these devices are semiconductors that react upon exposure to light. Photocatalysts
are a substrate material that absorbs light and, as a response to the absorbed light,
generate electron-hole pairs producing chemical energy needed to change the rate of a
reaction or photocatalysis phenomenon. All photocatalysts are semiconductors that
utilize light as a source for further chemical reactions [3]. Researchers have also con-
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
4
structed functional materials like molecular dyes, organic/inorganic semiconductors,
hybrid materials etc. for numerous solar-energy applications [11]. Significant contri-
butions have driven the creation of solar energy-converting semiconductors since the
discovery of TiO2 photocatalysts reported by Fujishima and Honda in 1972. Some
novel semiconductors g-C3N4, ZnO, Ag3PO4 and their composites as photocatalysts
have also emerged since the discovery of TiO2 photocatalyst [14]. Upon light irradia-
tion, photocatalysts like TiO2, ZnO, CdS, Fe2O3, etc. lead to oxidative or reductive
reactions, which can help degrade various refractory organic pollutants and heavy
metal ions. For instance, TiO2 specifically utilizes UV light, which accounts for 5%
of the 45% utilizable incident solar light [15]. However, these materials are limited by
characteristics such as tunable functionalities, instantaneous separation of electron-
hole pair [16], low conversion-eﬀiciency [13], and inherent properties of materials such
as molecular orientation, surface area and porosity [11].
Figure 1.1. Photosynthesis reaction mechanism [1]
1.1
Metal-Organic Frameworks
Assembled by coordination bonds between metal ions/clusters and organic molecules,
metal-organic frameworks or MOFs are a desirable class of crystalline materials with
ultra-high specific surface area (over 6000 m2/g), rich topology, excellent porosity
(up to 90% free volume), structural flexibility and tailorable functionalities ( [13],
[15], [17], [6]). Two disparate disciplines of science, organic and inorganic chemistry
==PAGE:16==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
5
bring about topologically diverse MOF structures often derived from natural miner-
als [6]. Discovered in the late 1950s, MOFs exist as coordination polymers consist-
ing of intriguing structures with highly robust architectures paving the way towards
permanent porosity based upon metal-carboxylate clusters. The flexibility of MOF
structures has gained a growing interest within the scientific community over the last
20 years in contrast to materials such as inorganic zeolites, mesoporous silica, and
porous carbon [18]. MOFs have since shown great potential in energy-based applica-
tions as a storage media, high-capacity adsorbents, and separation purposes for gases
like hydrogen and methane, and other applications in membranes, thin film devices,
catalysis, and biomedical imaging [6].
The three major MOF building blocks are 1) topology of the framework, 2) inorganic
metal center, and 3) organic ligands [19] as described in Figure 1.2. They provide
ease of understanding the complex MOF structures by deconstructing the available
moieties of a metal-organic framework. The structure of metal-organic frameworks
is built by metal cluster entities or secondary building units combined with organic
ligand molecules [18]. Sustaining one coordination mode within the combination of
metal ion and linker SBUs, the final structures of MOFs can be tuned with the help
of crystal engineering or reticular chemistry. The reticular chemistry of MOFs can
be described by the atoms at the vertices or nodes, which are linked together by
the bonds or edges. For instance, in a porous inorganic zeolite, TO4 building unit
forms a tetrahedra vertex where the T is Si, Al, and the oxygen atom linker serves
as the edge of the net. Similarly, in coordination polymers like MOFs, the metal
ion serves as the vertex, and the organic molecules serve as the edges joining the
vertices together. With multiatomic SBUs, the vertex is also usually their centre of
gravity or barycenter. SBUs are also classified by their points of extension or POEs,
which refer to the number of possible connections between the metal clusters through
organic linkers.
The POEs for MOFs help with the foundation of metal-organic
polyhedra (MOPs) and fall typically in the range of 3, forming triangular-shaped
building units to 24, resulting in rhombicuboctahedron building units. The pattern
of POEs defines the shapes of metal cluster SBUs, thus highlighting their importance
in understanding the complex morphologies of MOFs [18]. Some of the forces and
effects determining the stability of MOF structures include the coordination effect,
pi-pi stacking, hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces [17] and electrostatic attractions
between the metal clusters and multidentate organic linkers [20].
The metal-ligand bond strengths are dictated by the hard/soft acid/base (HSAB)
principle by which stable MOFs are synthesized using either a hard or soft Lewis
acid or base. High-valent metal cations like Ti4+, Zr4+, Al3+, Fe3+ and Cr3+ with
a hard Lewis base, such as carboxylates, lead to highly stable MOFs. At the same
time, divalent metal ions such as Zn2+, Co2+, Cu2+ and Ni2+ with a soft Lewis base
like azolates lead to other stable and favourable MOFs [15]. MOFs are recognized by
names, differentiating them from each other based on their elemental compositions,
topologies or the group of people or the institution that first discovered the respec-
tive MOF structures. Some of the known families of MOFs include MIL (Materials
of Institute Lavoisier) series, IRMOF (Isoreticular Metal-Oganic Frameworks) series,
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
6
ZIF (Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks) series, UiO (University of Oslo) series, PCN
(Porous Coordination Network) series, HKUST (Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology) series, LIC (Laser Induced Carbon) MOFs, etc. Other groups of
MOFs include F-MOF-1, CPL, and MOP-1 based on the research group’s classifica-
tion, with each number signifying a different structure of that MOF. ZIF MOF series
consists of silica-alumina molecular sieves, while UiO MOF series represents a variety
of zirconium-based MOFs, PCN series contains cubic octahedral nanopores forming
a Cu-BTC pore cage-channel topology in space, and IRMOFs signify MOFs with sim-
ilar symmetries or isoreticular structures ( [17], [19]). Although these MOF series
provide a solid foundation, their structural flexibility enables modifications to fabri-
cate materials for various applications. Several MOFs are synthesized using methods
such as slow diffusion, hydrothermal, solvothermal, electrochemical, mechanochemi-
cal, microwave-assisted, heating, and ultrasound techniques where the synthesis pa-
rameters such as reaction time, temperature, concentration, pressure, pH, solvent,
and precursors play a vital role in determining the characteristics and features of the
resulting MOFs produced [19].
With a wide range of metal nodes and organic linkers, MOFs provide an attractive
reaction platform for light harvesting as well as active sites for photocatalytic applica-
tions [13]. Structurally analogous to zeolites, MOFs consist of metal nodes regarded
as isolated quantum dot semiconductors which can be excited by light or activated
by the organic ligands acting as light-absorbing antennas [20]. In the past few years,
light-responsive MOFs have been researched and reported for photocatalytic removal
of pollutants, disinfection of bacteria, production of H2, fixation of CO2, selective
transformation of organics, etc. [15]. Various techniques are explored, for instance,
to remove oxidation and light-stable dyes from wastewater, such as adsorption, pho-
todegradation, flocculation, electrolysis and biodegradation, where adsorption and
photodegradation are environmentally friendly, low cost and highly eﬀicient methods.
This combination of photodegradation with adsorption also enhances dye degradation
eﬀiciencies without sacrificing the porous properties of catalysts used. Hence, MOFs
are evaluated for removal of methylene blue dye under simulated sunlight irradiation
where the MB removal strategy attributed to a Ti-doped UiO-66 MOF characteris-
tics such as light absorption intensity, eﬀicient separation of the electron-hole pairs
and the porosity [9]. Introducing nanoscale chemistry to MOFs has helped produce
nanorods, nanosheets and nanocrystals with improved material properties due to ver-
satile characteristics of MOFs such as high external surface regions, increased active
sites and faster electrons or ions transmissions [11] for supercapacitor applications.
However, such materials are still in their infancy, facing challenges for further devel-
opment [21]. The general weaknesses of MOF materials with relatively low thermal,
hydrothermal, basic/acidic conditions, and chemical stabilities analogised to metal-
oxides or zeolites and the poor conductivity of pristine MOFs make their performance
far from satisfactory. Additionally, their application in photocatalysis is in its emerg-
ing state compared to semiconductor-based photocatalysts ( [15], [20]).
==PAGE:18==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
7
Figure 1.2. Components of metal-organic frameworks [2]
1.1.1
Metal-Organic Frameworks for Photocatalysis
Semiconductors capable of conducting electricity upon exposure to light irradiation
work as photocatalysts as observed in the case of TiO2 shown in Figure 1.3. When
light of suﬀicient wavelength/energy falls on a photocatalyst, the energy of photons
is absorbed by the electrons in the valence band, leading to the generation of electron
and hole pair. The excited electron can reduce an acceptor while the hole oxidises
donor molecules. There are four ways in which a photocatalyst semiconductor and a
substrate interact. The substrate undergoes reduction when the redox level is lower
than the conduction band level of the semiconductor, oxidation when the redox level
is higher than the semiconductor, and both reduction and oxidation when the redox
level is lower than the conduction band and higher than the valence band level of the
semiconductor or neither if the redox level is higher than the conduction band level
and lower than the valence band level of the semiconductor [3] as shown in Figure 1.4.
Light excitation of either metal nodes or organic linkers generates charge separation
states in MOFs [20]. The excited electrons are displaced from the highest occupied
molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), while
the holes in HOMO [13]. The HOMO-LUMO levels of MOFs act as the conduction
band – valence band levels present in a semiconductor.
The photogenerated elec-
trons can react with O2 in LUMO, leading to the formation of superoxide radicals
(O.−
2 ), while holes in HOMO can oxidize hydroxyl group or water to form hydroxyl
radicals (HO.). These reactive species are responsible for degrading organic pollutant
molecules [15]. For instance, to degrade organic pollutants based on the semiconduc-
tor, MOFs irradiated by light conduct photoexcited electrons to the conduction band
(CB) from the valence band (VB), leaving holes (h+) back in the valence band. These
holes have strong oxidation power, oxidizing, degrading, and absorbing small organic
molecules located on the surface or reacting with H2O molecules to form hydroxyl
radicals with higher oxidation potential. Hydroxyl radicals are known to oxidize and
degrade organic pollutants directly [17].
Using the HOMO-LUMO theory, organic linker molecules in MOFs absorb light ex-
citing electrons to LUMO from HOMO and further to the surface of the metal-oxo
cluster [17]. This reaction is known as the LMCT or ligand-to-metal charge-transfer
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
8
mechanism. At times, the metal centers can also harvest light, making the MOF
more photoreactive, like Fe-based MOFs providing dual excitation pathways, i.e., the
excitation of ligands and metal clusters, providing MOFs that work synergistically for
superior photocatalysis. Unlike pristine Ti-based or Zr-based MOFs, which consist of
metals unreactive under the visible light region, all amine-functionalized Fe-MOFs un-
dergo excitation of Fe-O metal clusters as well as excitation of amine functional group
with electron transfer from excited organic linker to metal clusters [20]. The central
metal reduced to a lower valence state allows the excitation of electrons from ligand
donor to metal acceptor orbitals, absorbing lower energy photons and giving rise to
LMCT mechanisms within photoactive MOFs.
With substitutions such as amine
functionalization, the absorption band of LMCT can be tuned and regulated. Strong
electron donor substitutions significantly reduce the energy of LMCT. Additionally,
the uncoordinated d orbital of metal ions narrows the LMCT energy gap by lowering
the LUMO of the ligand. Other reactions that can take place with MOFs include
metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT), metal-to-metal charge transfer (MMCT)
and ligand-to-ligand charge transfer (LLCT) mechanisms. MLCT occurs when the
metal center is oxidized to higher valence state and the ligand gives a stable empty
place, while MMCT occurs when two metals with different valence states are coupled
to a ligand, such as poly-nuclear complexes, and LLCT occurs when two kinds of
ligands interact with each other via the metal center [17].
Figure 1.3. Photoreaction of a semiconductor TiO2 photocatalyst upon UV light irradia-
tion. [2]
MOF-5, introduced in 1999, proposed photoactivity as the ZnO metal-oxo-cluster
behaved as quantum dots with organic ligands as light-absorbing antenna.
The
==PAGE:20==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
9
semiconductor behavior of MOF-5 was further confirmed in 2007 by Garcia et al.,
via laser-induced photoactivity for phenol degradation. Despite such functionality,
MOF-5 decomposed when exposed to moisture in air or water, indicating decreased
long-term stability [15]. Zn, a d-block transition metal element, is used to construct
ZIF-8 with imidazolate ligands. In the presence of UV light, electron transfer from
HOMO to LUMO takes place. N 2p bonding orbitals mainly contribute to the HOMO
level, while empty Zn orbitals contribute to the LUMO level. An electron captured by
water molecules was oxygenated to hydroxyl active species, which becomes primarily
responsible for degrading an organic methylene blue dye [16].
Figure 1.4. Interaction of semiconductor photocatalysts with substrate materials showing
(A) reduction, (B) oxidation, (C) reduction/oxidation or redox and (C) neither reactions [3]
1.1.2
Modified MOFs for Photocatalysis
Pristine MOFs are porous materials composed of open metal sites, unsaturated metal
centers and catalytically active organic linkers. Although MOF-5, NTU-9 and UiO-66
are some of the MOFs that can act as semiconductors where the energy transfer takes
place from organic linkers to metal-oxo-clusters, they mainly possess large bandgaps
that can harvest just the UV-light immensely limiting their functionalities. For ex-
ample, MOF-5, after its discovery, was found with a tuned bandgap upon changing
the organic linker to 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid. Using this organic compound
produced the best catalytic activity in the photo-oxidation of propene for a MOF-5
material.
However, this material suffers structural transformation on exposure to
water, leading to poor stability. UiO-66 is a water stable MOF utilizing hydrogen
generation in a water/methanol mixture upon irradiation at wavelengths above 300
nm. With the help of a chromophoric anthracene-9,10-discarboxylic acid linker in-
stead of H2BDC, they performed effectively in degrading methylene orange (MO) dye
upon visible light irradiation. Ti-based MIL-125, synthesized first in 2009, exhibits
high photonic sensitivity for forming Ti3+ - Ti4+ mixed valence under UV light in the
presence of alcohols, where the reduction of metal centers and oxidation of alcohol
molecules co-occurred. Another Ti-based MOF NTU-9 shows strong absorption in
the visible light region with the transfer of electrons following LMCT reaction de-
graded rhodamine B and methylene blue dyes. Although these pristine MOFs are
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
10
effective photocatalysts, they are opportunistic, rare, and challenging to readily-tune.
They are sensitive to UV-light irradiation or capture only a fraction of photons in
the visible region with very short charge carrier lifetimes to perform catalytic ac-
tivities under solar illumination. Any modification to these existing pristine MOFs
is viewed as a sensible choice in moving forward to realize very eﬀicient MOF pho-
tocatalysts [14]. Optimization of photocatalytic MOF properties are made to utilize
solar energy, regulate the photoelectron ratio transported from photosensitive compo-
nents to active sites such as photogenerated charge carrier lifetime, charge separation
eﬀiciency, charge transfer resistance, etc. and the redox reactivity. Different architec-
tural strategies are implemented to improve pristine MOFs as photocatalysts. MOFs
are subjected to bandgap engineering, encapsulation of nanoparticles, energy level
alignment, electron-diffusion pathway optimization and active site regulation. More-
over, bandgap engineering and encapsulation of nanomaterials help enhance the light
absorption range of MOFs, while energy level ladder alignment and electron-diffusion
pathways optimization benefit the MOFs as they increase the charge carriers’ life-
time and separation eﬀiciency of electron-hole pairs. MOFs uniquely integrate light
harvesters and catalytic active sites, allowing abundant selectivity to build tunable
photocatalysts. Modifying the building units of MOFs optimizes the light absorption
and optical properties. MOFs offer fast electron transfer with reduced distance be-
tween redox sites, and the porosity serves as substrates or hosts for loading functional
materials such as photosensitizers and catalytic centers. Incorporation of MOFs with
other materials can also form composites of heterojunctions or electron-trapping sites,
enabling eﬀicient charge transfer and separation in a photocatalytic mechanism. Pure
MOFs endure disadvantages such as low photo-response, high electron-hole recombi-
nation rate and poor stability. Nanoparticles incorporated in MOF structures help
absorb near-infrared photons and emit UV-visible light, causing wavelength tunability
for desired light-based photoactivity. Noble metals as acceptors and heterojunctions
formed using semiconductors can help increase the lifespan of charge carriers, shorten
diffusion pathways, and strengthen interaction with targets by integrating MOFs with
good conductors and implanting active sites on organic linkers or metal nodes, respec-
tively. Degradation of organic molecules has helped curb the environmental issues
caused by water contamination. Hybridizing MOFs with noble metals, carbon, or
semiconductors has considerably reduced degradation time by increasing the degra-
dation degree of these organic pollutants. MOF-based photocatalysts are still confined
to the laboratory stage, limited by MOF stabilities and cost of fabrication. There is
a dire need for understanding the relationship between MOF architecture structure
and the resulting photocatalytic response as well as their performance so that one
can optimize the building blocks of MOFs, their decorations, and morphologies for
desired light-based applications [13].
In comparison with traditional metal oxide semiconductors, MOFs present a tunable
combination between metal clusters and organic linkers, which can be optimized to
enhance their photocatalytic properties. Bandgap engineering by ligand functional-
ization is one such strategy to tune the optical properties of MOFs. Using mono
or bi-functionalized BDC linkers reduces the bandgap of zirconium-based UiO-66
==PAGE:22==
1.1 Metal-Organic Frameworks
11
MOF from 4 eV to 2.2 eV. Modifying BDC linkers in an unmodified UiO-66 with
an electron-donating amine functional group resulted in better photocatalytic perfor-
mance by increasing the separation and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers.
A mixed metal or linker strategy has been developed to introduce additional metal
ions or linkers to a pure MOF. The as-prepared MOFs exhibit unique and superior
photocatalytic activity with more active catalysis sites than pristine MOFs without
such modifications. Mixed metals represent the partial substitution of existing metal
centers in each MOF structure. For example, Ni-doped ZIF-8 experienced a light
response shift from UV to visible light regions. Ni-doped ZIF-8 degraded methylene
blue dye in the visible region within 25 minutes, while the undoped pristine ZIF-8
exhibited negligible activity. Ti substituted UiO-66-NH2(Zr) displayed better pho-
tocatalytic performances for CO2 reduction or H2 production as the titanium metal
substitution acts as an electron mediator. Increasing titanium doping concentration
also gradually decreased the bandgap of UiO-66 MOF. The mixed linker strategy
introduces electron-withdrawing halogen groups, leading to enhanced photocatalytic
performance for alcohol oxidation [15]. The doping of metals has proven to cause a
new energy level between the HOMO and LUMO of the pristine MOFs, which helps
to effectively separate the electron-hole pairs generated.
Generally, these pristine
MOFs often have no or low redox activity and are least responsive to visible light.
Leading to several strategies for doping such as cocatalyst loading, construction of
heterojunction and ligand or metal center modifications, MOF-based photocatalysts
are functionally designed to introduce active sites through direct or post-synthetic
modification methods, to add defects providing characteristics such as porosity and
charge transport pathways, and to select the functional metal nodes or organic linkers
as the reactive sites. Alternating between organic-inorganic molecular arrangements,
MOFs exhibit rather complex semiconductor properties due to the existence of a large
number of organic molecules like pure organic semiconductors, where the existence
of high binding energy of excitons makes the separation of charge carriers very diﬀi-
cult. Traditionally, MOF-based photocatalysts choose between Zr and Ti for metal
nodes and porphyrin macromolecules as organic ligands. MOFs with an increased de-
gree of functionalization also create a complex structure, and current research works
target to strengthen their functions and stabilities as well as their performances ori-
ented to practical applications. The photocatalytic performances and eﬀiciencies of
MOF-based photocatalysts are affected by the bandgap, position of HOMO-LUMO
band levels, number of active sites, charge separation/transfer eﬀiciencies and light
absorption capabilities [17].
Most crystalline solids exist with defects. Besides, the flexibility, defects and disor-
derly characteristics present in MOF structures ascribe to entropy, which is produced
from the high dimensionality of intramolecular degrees of freedom of the materials,
many soft modes of low energy, and the weak forces of interactions in the framework
assembly. Entropy helps design disordered MOFs as some undergo suﬀicient thermo-
dynamic driving forces to overcome unfavourable enthalpies of defects incorporated.
By replacing or substituting MOF metal centers in the process of doping, imperfec-
tions are introduced the pristine MOF structures. For instance, a defective Cd-MOF
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Choosing a Zr-MOF: UiO-66
12
consisted of core Cd metal intercalated with Ag+ , Zn2+ and Fe3+ different valence
metal ions, resulting in lowering of the bandgap from 3.6 eV to 3.5 eV, 3.4 eV and 2
eV respectively. Fe3+ presents the lowest energy gap among the different metal ions,
improving the light absorption range to the visible light region [16].
1.2
Choosing a Zr-MOF: UiO-66
1.2.1
Zr-based MOFs
Conventional MOFs have relatively low hydrothermal and chemical stability, and
their structures collapse at high temperatures (above 700 K), pressures (1 MPa) or
in an acid/alkaline environment. The structural stability of MOFs reduces with in-
creasing lengths of organic linker ( [22], [23]).
The stability of MOF frameworks
is controlled by first the inorganic brick and next the strength of interconnection
through the chemical bonding between this inorganic brick and the linker molecules.
Group 4 elements of the periodic table are known to interact strongly with oxygen
atoms, generating stable inorganic cornerstones when combined with organic linkers
containing oxygen [24]. Chemically stable MOFs with water stability are crucial for
practical applications of such porous materials. Interaction with water molecules re-
mains inevitable in our environment; hence, stability in the presence of water would
mean that the water molecules do not attack the metal-organic coordination bonds,
break the ligand-metal bonds (ligand displacement), change the crystal phases, or
collapse the MOF structure altogether. For water stability, the metal-ligand binding
strength is higher than the metal-water binding energy, giving MOF structures suﬀi-
cient energy to resist hydrolysis. High strength between metals and ligands, high acid
dissociation constant or PKa of organic ligands, high oxidation state of metal ions
and high coordination number generate water-stable MOFs. Zr-MOFs or Zr-based
MOFs show exceptional stability against water molecules owing to the strong Zr-O
bond and specific geometry that hinders the inclusion of water molecules to mitigate
hydrolysis reactions [25]. Zirconium is extensively distributed in nature and found
in almost all biological systems and is even considered low toxic, favoring further
development for their applications [26].
In the last ten years, there has been a significant increase in exploring Zr-MOFs
for pollutant degradation applications [27]. An essential feature of Zr-MOFs is the
high oxidation state of Zr(IV) compared to low valence metals with states M(I),
M(II) and M(III) where M stands for metal elements. With high charge density and
bond polarization, Zr-MOFs introduce strong aﬀinity between Zr(IV) and carboxylate
oxygen (O) atoms. Based on Pearson’s HSAB principle, Zr(IV) ions are hard acid
and carboxylate linker molecules are hard base leading to high strength coordination
bonds when combined. Zr-MOFs are also known for their high stability in organic
solvents, and water. Although Zr-MOFs exhibit tolerable stabilities in acidic aqueous
solutions, currently Zr-based MOFs are less stable in basic aqueous solutions explained
==PAGE:24==
1.2 Choosing a Zr-MOF: UiO-66
13
by natural bond orbital (NBO) theory. The NBO charge of oxygen atoms in OH−
(-1.4) is higher than oxygen atoms in carboxylate group (-0.74) that results in bond
formation between Zr(IV) and OH−. This effect leads to decomposition of Zr-MOF
structures in basic solutions [26]. The majority of Zr-based MOFs exhibit excellent
stability, with applications such as adsorption, separation, catalysis, sensing, medical
uses and supercapacitors [23].
1.2.2
The UiO series of MOFs
The three-dimensional porous composites constructed from Zr4+ and carboxylic acids
create UiO-MOFs featuring isoreticular UiO-66, UiO-67, UiO-68 and UiO-69. These
MOFs have uniform, large pores, specific surface areas, robust stabilities and active
Zr-O clusters used for several applications. With many coordinatively saturated Zr4+
sites beneficial for adsorption and mass transfer, among the UiO series, UiO-66 has
exceptional stability in solvents such as DMF, benzene, acetone, methanol, and iso-
propanol [22]. With dissimilar ligand lengths from each other, the UiO MOFs share
the same network topology where choosing various dicarboxylic acids can result in
different UiO having analogous structures and prominent stability. UiO MOFs also re-
port tunability by having structures that readily accept the introduction of functional
groups. As a stable representative of the UiO MOF family, UiO-66 is built from Zir-
conium secondary building units (SBUs) and terephthalic acid linkers (H2BDC) first
synthesized by Cavka and team from University of Oslo. Ideally, the structural unit
of UiO-66 is the coordination between [Zr6O4(OH)4] metal clusters and 12 H2BDC
linker molecules possessing one of the highest coordination numbers among several
MOFs. High-density structure units ensure closely packed frameworks, where Zr has
high oxytropism, forming strong Zr-O bonds ( [23], [24]).
1.2.3
Structure and Characteristics of UiO-66 MOF
The zirconium clusters have SBUs as Zr6O4(OH)4 linked with 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic
acid (BDC) ligand molecules in a UiO-66 MOF structure. This zirconium MOF has a
face-centred cubic crystal structure where the zirconium metal atom is 8-coordinated
by oxygen atoms, and 6 of these metal centers form Zr6O4(OH)4 metal clusters.
Each SBU or Zr6O4(OH)4 metal cluster is connected to the 12 nearest neighbouring
metal centers through 12 BDC linkers [25]. UiO-66 encompasses
1.1 nm or 12 Å
octahedral cages and 0.8 nm or 7.5 Å tetrahedral cages interconnected through 0.6
nm triangle windows or 6 Å pore apertures ( [23], [28]). With a real structure packed
with certain degrees of ligand defects, UiO-66 MOF particles are controlled through
synthesis parameters such as reaction time, the addition of different modulators and
crystallisation temperature. The specific surface areas between 600 and 1600 m2/g,
UiO-66 has a metal cluster formula unit cell as [Zr6(µ3-O)4(µ3-OH)4(O2C)12] with
12-connections for the linker molecules [23].
==PAGE:25==
1.2 Choosing a Zr-MOF: UiO-66
14
UiO-66 MOF possesses one of the highest coordination reported for a MOF in a
12 coordination of metal atoms as a part of closely packed metal structures formed
with linear ligands forming cubic close-packed structures in all expanded versions.
With a temperature of breakdown at 540◦C where benzene gas is released, the weak-
est point of the MOF remains the bond between benzene rings and terminal car-
boxyl group and not the inorganic brick or the bond between the inorganic struc-
ture and linkers. UiO-66 consists of an inner Zr6O4(OH)4 core where Zr6 forms a
triangular-faced octahedron alternatively capped by µ3-O and µ3-OH groups. The
polyhedron edges are bridged by carboxylates (-CO2) from linker molecules thus
forming Zr6O4(OH)4(CO2)12 clusters. Each zirconium atom, observed during the
first discovery of UiO-66 MOF, forms a square antiprismatic eight coordination with
eight oxygen atoms. One square face is generated from oxygen atoms supplied by
dicarboxylic ligand molecules, while the second face is formed by µ3-O and µ3-OH
groups. With crystallite sizes of 1-2 µm, dehydroxylation of Zr clusters occurs between
250◦C and 300◦C where two of the four µ3-OH groups leave the structure resulting
in a 7-coordinated Zr6O6 cluster. Upon dehydration, the inorganic nodes preferen-
tially squeeze in one direction, resulting in nodes squeezing in random directions over
the entire structure, retaining the symmetry as before the dehydration of framework.
This phenomenon of maintaining framework through reversible hydroxylation or the
release or uptake of water molecules and changes in coordination enables further
understanding of UiO-66 MOF structural stability. The flexibility of Zr6-cluster in
UiO-66 allows the formation of a large variety of different and functional MOF frame-
works ( [24], [28]).In its most stable form, the hydroxylated structure crystallizes into
a face-centred cubic structure containing fm-3m symmetry with a lattice parameter of
20.7 Å. UiO-66 MOF consists of a 0.77 cm3/g of theoretical pore volume and a surface
area of 1160 m2/g ( [28], [24]). According to Yaghi et al., a classification system called
Reticular Chemistry Structure Resource (RCSR), UiO-66 has a fcu topology defining
inorganic zirconium oxide node as cuboctahedral that allows 12 points of extension
for BDC structures to coordinate. This method of classifying MOF structures allows
understanding the impact of synthesis parameters and steric hindrances caused by
ligands [26]. In a hydroxylated state two oxygen atoms leave the SBU with hydrogen
atoms, resulting in 6 oxygen atoms left on the SBU each coordinated to zirconium
atoms in hydroxide form [28]. The excellent structural stability of UiO-66 holds on
to the framework or crystallinity at 375◦C and more than 70% of initial weight up
to 500◦C where the structure collapses, leaving a low crystalline ZrO2. Along with
dehydration, solvent removal also implies loss of µ3-OH groups, changing the ordered
Zr6O4(OH)4 to a distorted Zr6O6 cluster where the symmetry changes with the Zr
coordination change [29].
UiO-66 consists of a 12-fold connected MOFs among three other examples, such as
the aluminium based CAU-1, Ni-cubane MOF with cubic octanuclear Ni2+ cluster
as-synthesized by Masciocchi et al., and isostructural UiO-66 MOF prepared using
trans, trans muconic acid as the ligand molecule by Ferey et al. UiO-66 also pos-
sesses immense stability in solvents such as water, benzene, acetone, ethanol, DMF,
and strong acids like HCl and a strong base like NaOH [30]. Additionally, UiO-66
==PAGE:26==
1.2 Choosing a Zr-MOF: UiO-66
15
is extensively studied as a material for photoactive applications by harvesting light
for photocatalytic reactions. As Garcia et al. studied influence of amine groups with
UiO-66 on a shift in absorption wavelength range towards the visible region for Cr(VI)
reduction, they provided informative insights on the mechanism and processes that
occur as light irradiated on UiO-66 finding the first proof of ligand-to-metal charge
transfer in the MOF [31]. The oxygenophilic Zr4+ allows UiO-66 to achieve a robust
framework under aggressive chemical conditions and elevated pressures. Although
this MOF displays photocatalytic behaviour under UV light irradiation, UiO-66 MOF
faces poor intrinsic photoresponse compared to traditional semiconductor photocat-
alysts. The absorption range lies in UV with a range edge around 310 nm due to
π-π electronic transfer of the aromatic ring in terephthalic ligand molecule. Unlike a
zirconium-porphyrinic MOF such as PCN-224 that responds to visible light irradia-
tion or MIL-125 which also has similar UV absorption and wide bandgap, in UiO-66
the electron transfer from excited linker to Zr-oxo cluster remains ineﬀicient due to
the high redox potential energy level of Zr-oxo cluster.
This process leads to in-
adequate transfer and low photogenerated charge eﬀiciencies. Hence, modifications
to UiO-66 pristine MOF provides for necessary solution to realize this material as
an effective photocatalyst [32]. Especially for UiO MOFs, modification approaches
should increase the absorption range to visible light intensity and lower the recom-
bination rate of photogenerated charge carriers such as electrons and holes. Some
of the many different strategies used to modify include linker/ligand, metal nodes
or mixed metal-ligand functionalization, constructing a MOF combination with semi-
conductors, noble metals, dye sensitization system or nanoparticles, missing linker/-
cluster, or a combination-based defect engineering, etc. These modifications reduce
the bandgap by strengthening the photoresponsivity range, modulate electronic struc-
tures with tailorable properties, and create eﬀicient channels for charge transfer and
separation, thus promoting the development of UiO-66 as an effective photocatalyst
material ( [32], [14]).
1.2.4
Metal-Cluster Modification of UiO-66 using Titanium
This research looks more keenly into defect engineering for better crystallinity and the
strategy of building UiO-66 zirconium MOFs with mixed metal compositions to im-
prove the optical properties of UiO-66 MOF as an active visible-light photoresponsive
catalyst. Current research work on photoactive MOFs supports the incorporation of
second metal ions into the nodes of the metal-organic frameworks forming bimetallic
MOFs for their beneficial catalytic, electronic, and luminescence properties. These
MOFs include the integration of two dissimilar metal ions into the same framework,
enhancing the structural stability and performance of the original MOF [33]. As a
form of doping pristine MOFs, the addition of one or more functional materials creates
composites with advantages such as high porosity, optical properties, magnetism, and
catalytic properties, leading to the successful formation of new physical and chemi-
cal features facilitating applications for the original MOF [23]. New findings suggest
==PAGE:27==
1.2 Choosing a Zr-MOF: UiO-66
16
that the partial substitution of metal centers could influence the photocatalytic ac-
tivity, where metal doping serves as an effective way for enhancing the performance
of semiconductor-based photocatalysts. Introducing metal-to-metal charge transfer,
bimetallic assemblies with partial substitution of metal cations in MOFs result in
the formation of oxo-bridged heterometallic build within the same MOF. New metal
nodes help transfer electrons between different metal clusters, hence narrowing the
bandgap of the same MOF. Like bimetallic composites constructed using zeolites and
semiconductors, the flexibility characteristic of bimetallic MOF assemblies enhances
their photocatalytic performance to a certain degree [14]. Transition metal doping
affects the electrons on d-orbitals of metal, leading to charge redistribution and d-
band center shift.
For instance, Zn/Co-MOF composite with bimetallic assembly
particularly enhances electron coupling and exposes abundant active catalytic sites.
Transition metals like titanium and zirconium have high oxidation states as well as
electron densities where doping results in significant charge redistribution beneficial
for the photocatalytic performance of the MOF with both these metals in the struc-
ture [34].
Partial metal substitution has practically demonstrated to modify the
absolute and relative energy position of metal states in a band structure. For the
case of which metals can be doped, the position of its states plays an important role
which is defined by the electron aﬀinity of a metal node. In MOFs, smaller band gaps
and high electron aﬀinity defined by the absolute position of the conduction band
edge seem the most appropriate criteria for the research. The dependence of electron
level modulation amplitude on the dopant concentration remains significant for band
structure tuning. The study considers metal states in a Ti-MOF MIL-125-NH2 and
Zr-MOF UiO-66-NH2 where the potential dopants considered were nd0 transition
metals in their highest oxidation states. Based on their oxides, the best candidates
for Zr replacement were Ta, Nb, W and Ti ( [35], [36], [37]).
Tetravalent Ti4+ cation is an attractive candidate for strong metal-ligand bonding,
rigid framework, and good redox activity in Ti-based pristine MOFs. Ti-MOFs encom-
pass interesting structural topologies where titanium metal offers low toxicity, rich
content or naturally available in abundance, and relatively low cost. Ti-oxo clusters
in a Ti-MOF with carboxylate ligand molecules form stable structures with strong
bonds with carboxylate linkers. Upon exposure to light, the electrons are transferred
from organic ligand to Ti4+ with relatively long-lived excited charge states reducing
Ti4+ to Ti3+. This Ti3+ acts advantageously as a reactive site from ligand-to-metal
electron charge transfer. With titanium being a tetravalent element in ionic form
with a smaller ionic radius than Zr4+, it forms stronger bonds with oxygen and is
well known for its multifunctionality such as redox activity by a transition between
Ti4+ and Ti3+, photochemical property and biocompatibility ( [35], [36], [37]). Al-
though Ti(IV) ion remains the most stable state of the metal ion, it is highly reactive
and prone to hydrolysis into uncontrolled diverse titanium-oxo clusters or TiO2 pre-
cipitate due to low electronegativity and high polarizability. Hence, titanium ions
in MOF structures have coordination geometry that varies with different reaction
systems. Variable nuclearity ranging from 2 to 52, it is generally diﬀicult to con-
trol the chemistry of titanium ions in MOF structures and to predict their structure
==PAGE:28==
1.3 Synthesis of UiO-66
17
and topology remains arduous. From existing Ti-based MOF structures, Ti(IV) is
octahedrally six-coordinated with O forming TiO6 further bridged by µ2-O or µ3-O
atoms. For example, MIL-125 and its amine functionalization consists of Ti8O8(OH)4
cluster which is different from the metal cluster Ti3(µ3-O) in polymorph Ti-MIL-101
MOF [36].
A study of inorganic substitution in pristine and functionalized UiO-66 reported that
incorporating titanium provided lowest bandgap of UiO-66 material synthesized owing
to the strong influence Ti has on the valence band edge and the bandgap. In this case,
the inorganic Ti ion is within the metalloid, bound by oxygen and aromatic carbon.
The binding between titanium and oxygen is stronger with a decreased bond length
than the binding between oxygen atoms. Compared to Zr and Hf ions, Ti has a lower
atomic number, leading to a sp3d hybrid bonding with oxygen. Their bond is reasoned
to be an indirect influence of photosensitive aromatic carbon that exhibits the change
in the bandgap of UiO-66 MOF. With the inorganic substitution of Ti in UiO-66,
the Ti-O cluster represents the sp2 π-π binding of aromatic carbon where the slight
distortion of pi-pi electron clouds confirms the change in the charge state of aromatic
carbon. This effect determines the modulation caused by the inorganic substitution in
UiO-66. The lowest reported with this work is 2.67 eV, where the pristine UiO-66 with
Zr shows a bandgap of 2.95 eV determined using DFT predictions [38]. Introducing
Ti4+ in UiO-66 using a mixed metal node strategy has proved to produce visible light
photoactive materials in comparison to the pristine MOF, where the introduction of
cerium into a titanium-incorporated UiO-66 reported photocatalytic activity seven
times more than the pristine UiO-66 MOF [39].
1.3
Synthesis of UiO-66
UiO-66 MOF synthesis generally involves mixing zirconium tetrachloride and tereph-
thalic acid by dissolving it in N,N’-dimethylformamide or DMF as an example shown
in Figure 1.5. This mixture was then heated in a sealed container overnight by Karl
et al., where they reported first-generation Zr-MOF with crystallization that occurs
in the vessel within the time given, and the final product was obtained after cool-
ing, filtration and repeatedly washing with DMF. The team later discovered that
this reaction resulted in a gel product rather than powder MOFs at higher concen-
trations. With rapid nucleation and interconnection, UiO-66 was produced with a
long-range order 3-D network due to the dissociation of ligand molecules from Zr
clusters. In 2011, Schaate et al. and Zhao et al., introduced modulators and deproto-
nating agents to control the rate of crystallization, hence achieving better crystalline
powder MOFs [28].
==PAGE:29==
1.3 Synthesis of UiO-66
18
Figure 1.5. The typical technique employed for solvothermal synthesis of UiO-66(Zr) is
shown in this figure. This procedure, which is outlined here, was also utilized as a step-by-
step approach in the present thesis to synthesize different UiO-66(Ti/Zr) materials.
1.3.1
General Synthesis Procedure
Deprotonating agents are beneficial to activate ligand molecules by initiating the
nucleation reaction. Triethylamine remains one of the most used agents for synthe-
sizing MOFs, where the agent removes a hydrogen group from the terephthalic acid
ligand, which in turn advances the nucleation of MOF during synthesis. Deproto-
nating agents used in excess while using modulators can make them ineffective for
their intended purpose. Protonation modulation is created by adding strong inor-
ganic acid like HCl, which slows the rate of precipitation by dissociating H2BDC
to BDC [28]. Modulators utilized in the synthesis of MOFs help slow the crystal-
lization process by competitively and reversibly binding to the metal nodes. This
process induced controlled growth of crystallites where the modulators used are sin-
gle carboxylic acid connected to a carbon chain with R-COOH. R attached may be
a methyl group (acetic acid), hydrogen (formic acid), benzene ring (benzoic acid) or
-CF3 (trifluoroacetic acid). Creating a lack of second carboxylic acid upon binding,
modulators slow the rate of precipitation allowing larger crystal growth depending
on the concentration added during synthesis.
For instance, larger crystals enable
detailed structural characterization and analysis of MOF crystallites. A very high
concentration of modulators may inhibit crystallization and stop the reaction from
occurring altogether. Modulators also help with the reproducibility of synthesizing
==PAGE:30==
1.3 Synthesis of UiO-66
19
UiO-66 MOF by improving the crystallinity, decreasing reaction time and providing
well-defined morphology, high thermal and moisture stability [28].
The catalytic activity of UiO-66 as Lewis acid is also drastically improved by introduc-
ing defects. With the help of modulators, defective UiO-66 formed exhibits enhanced
Lewis acidity or accept electrons. By utilizing a modulator like trifluoroacetic acid,
the catalytic activity of MOF gradually increased with increasing modulator concen-
tration. This increase in activity was attributed to a large number of open sites on
Zr6 clusters or internal active sites and enabled access to substrates, which, after
a specific threshold value of concentration, remained the same. A modulator like
acetic acid added during synthesis of UiO-66 also enhances the catalytic behaviour
of UiO-66 [40]. The modulator approach in the case of adding acetic acid during the
synthesis of Cu2(ndc)2(dabco) where the competing reagents were ndc2−linker and
acetate, provides evidence for the control over morphology by limiting the growth
of the layers which is beneficial for assembly of thin layers in sensing applications.
For UiO-66 synthesis, Schaate et al. showed that without modulation, the Zr-MOFs
precipitate as agglomerates, leading to a disordered phase with a low specific surface
area [41]. The choice of modulator incorporated during the synthesis of UiO-66 de-
pends on its pKa value. With a similar value for H2BDC linker with pKa as 4.82,
acetic acid shows less competitive ability to attach to cluster forming a less defective
UiO-66 with a pKa value of 4.76 in comparison to trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) with
pKa value of 0.23 [4].
Modulators and deprotonating agents both can influence crystal sizes and defects
present in a MOF structure where the number of defects are increased at higher con-
centration of modulators as well as deprotonating agents, while the particle sizes of
MOF crystallites can be reduced by increasing the concentration of deprotonating
agents. The default synthesis parameters for making UiO-66 MOF are a solvother-
mal reaction at 120C for 24 hours where the solvent is DMF, metal salt used is ZrCl4
along with terephthalic acid H2BDC linker materials.
The oxygen source needed
to create the inorganic secondary building unit is either a part of the metal salt or
stored in DMF solvent.
Metal salt precursors for UiO-66 are present in different
forms where those that are hydrated like ZrOCl2.8H2O do not exhibit hygroscopic
behaviour like ZrCl4 that become hydrated quickly [28]. Besides a solvothermal syn-
thesis technique that is time-consuming and often suffers from low product yield, other
synthesis techniques used to synthesize UiO-66 MOF include microwave-assisted syn-
thesis, mechanochemical synthesis, electrochemical synthesis, evaporation technique
and continuous flow strategy [23].
Research work by Feng et al., studies using two different kinds of Zr precursors such
as ZrCl4 and ZrOCl2.8H2O to synthesize UiO-66-NH2 as well as UiO-66-NH2 with Ti
substitution. Although ZrCl4 produced MOF with better crystallinity, less defective,
less agglomerated and smaller sized particles, ZrOCl2.8H2O metal precursor when
used for synthesizing Ti-substituted UiO-66-NH2 shows significant improvement in
Cr(VI) adsorption and photocatalytic performance [42]. The hydrated Zr precursor
is the primary hydrolysis product of ZrCl4, where it exists as tetranuclear cluster
[Zr4(OH)8(H2O)16]Cl8.12(H2O) that enables fast crystallization resulting in small
==PAGE:31==
1.3 Synthesis of UiO-66
20
particles [4]. This rapid crystallization results in disordered particle size growth due
to phenomena such as Ostweld ripening with formation of Zr4+ oxo/hydroxo clusters
hindering the coordination of organic ligand to Zr [43]. In an ideal UiO-66, one Zr6
is coordinated with 12 nearest neighbour Zr6 clusters via 12 organic linker molecules.
Defects are created when fewer linkers are connected to the clusters, but the existence
of H2O in the metal precursor only allows linkers to partially displace coordinated
water and hydroxyl ion groups, leading to the formation of defective UiO-66 [42]. In
a way, H2O from this precursor acts as a soft template or modulator, producing 1.53
missing linkers per cluster, producing smaller meso-/macro-porous defective UiO-66
[4]. As this framework begins to crystallize, the research learns that the lack of space
in crystallized structure prevents linkers from replacing water and bonding to the Zr6
cluster, generating defective UiO-66 MOF material. This precursor also results in
more missing linker defects forming larger defective pores, facilitating mass transfer
by elongating the existence of photogenerated electrons or slowing the recombination
rate of charge carriers [42].
1.3.2
Defect Engineering
In UiO-66, the defects arise mainly from a missing linker and missing Zr6 node or
cluster. As the BDC2−linker bridges two Zr6 clusters, a missing BDC−linker creates
two defective centres with four coordinated unsaturated Zr sites. Allowing fewer BDC
linkers to attach to the Zr6 cluster or removing the BDC linker after their attachment
are the primary routes to creating bcu structured missing linker defects in UiO-66.
Cliffe et al., find missing cluster defects where the whole Zr6 cluster is removed from
the framework, leading to defective reo topology and phase. The clusters have eight
linker connectivity instead of 12 in the ideal UiO-66 MOF. A hybrid of missing linker
and cluster defects form a defective scu structure where one-third of Zr6 clusters
are connected to 8-connected with surrounding clusters via linkers, leaving the other
two-thirds Zr6 only 4-connected. Some of the advantages of a defective UiO-66 are
exposure to more saturated Zr atoms as active sites, creation of Lewis and Brönsted
acid sites, generation of extra migration pathways for photogenerated charge carriers,
broadening of visible light absorption ability, increased charge transfer by lowering d
orbitals of Zr atoms, enhanced hydrophilic nature and improved porosity [4]. Miss-
ing linker and cluster defects occur in UiO-66 MOF material, which can help yield
stable frameworks. Lillerud et al. proved that defects are inherently present in the
UiO-66 framework under normal synthesis conditions where incorporation of defects
in a controlled manner revealed different characteristics such as mechanical proper-
ties, catalytic behaviour, and absorption properties of the MOF in comparison to the
defect-free MOF material [44]. Metal substituting 8-coordination Zr atoms in UiO-66
results in defective UiO-66 frameworks. For instance, a 6-coordinated Ti ion substitu-
tion does not bind the same number of BDC linkers, hydroxyl groups and oxo groups
as the 8-coordinated Zr atoms. This structure has fewer linkers coordinated with
the original clusters, leading to defects and enhanced surface areas. Ti-incorporated
==PAGE:32==
1.4 Objective
21
UiO-66 can be commonly obtained using a Ti precursor during the synthesis of UiO-
66, by treating UiO-66 with a Ti precursor post the synthesis process or by utilizing
Ti supported as part of a Zr node to synthesize a mixed metal UiO-66 MOF mate-
rial [4]. Choosing a titanium precursor is essential to define the mixed metal MOF
structure based on the different procedures to incorporate Ti into the UiO-66 frame-
work. Among the most commonly used Ti sources are titanium alkoxides or Ti(OR)4,
where R is an alkyl group. Introducing these hydrophobic alkoxy groups during di-
rect synthesis with steric hindrance restrains hydrolysis of Ti4+ while the reactivity
can be tuned to some extent with different alkoxy chains in an in-situ addition of
Ti atoms in MOFs. Using preserved Ti clusters can also serve as building blocks to
directly construct MOFs with Ti atoms, where this method is more beneficial to tune
reaction rates and acquire larger single crystals. As shown by Cohen et al. with the
first example of post Ti-exchange, this approach introduces Ti into a structure-known
MOFs, avoiding highly reactive and vigorous hydrolysis of Ti precursors [37].
1.4
Objective
This thesis work, described in Figure 1.6, modifies a parent UiO-66 MOF material
by introducing titanium atoms to create a mixed metal MOF material. The changes
in the framework structure and optical properties of this UiO-66(Zr/Ti) material are
evaluated using characterization techniques such as X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD),
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR),
Brunauer-Emmett-Teller analysis (BET) and ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-
Vis). The chosen UiO-66 MOF with Ti doping is assessed for a specific photocatalytic
application, such as degradation or removal of methylene blue (MB) under simulated
sun radiation based on the metal cation modification of UiO-66.
This step helps
explain further the change in photoactivity of the UiO-66 MOF for a metal-cluster
modification.
==PAGE:33==
1.4 Objective
22
Figure 1.6. Metal modification of UiO-66 by partial substitution of Zr with Ti through
three syntheses such as addition of mixed-metal nodes, in-situ and post-synthetic modifica-
tion strategies. [4]
==PAGE:34==
Part II
Experimental
Techniques and
Results
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2
Materials & Methods
2.1
Synthesis Procedure
To synthesize UiO-66 MOF material with good crystallinity, a recipe was derived
with the precursors readily available to prepare the MOF powders.
The step-by-
step procedure used for this work is described in Figure 1.5. At first a solvother-
mal synthesis technique was optimized using metal salt precursor as ZrOCl2.8H2O,
organic ligand precursor as H2BDC or terephthalic acid and solvent as DMF (N,N’-
dimethylformamide). After the washing and drying steps, the resulting process pro-
duced an amorphous product that required better crystallinity. Thus, an acetic acid
modulator was added to this synthesis technique, leading to distinct physiochemi-
cal properties such as structure, morphology, and coordination [45]. This step also
enriched the sample’s crystallinity; hence, the concentration of precursors was ad-
justed to synthesize white crystalline UiO-66 MOF powders. Using a solvothermal
approach supported by literature, H2BDC (2.27 mmol), acetic acid (3.6 mL), and
ZrOCl2.8H2O were blended into 30 mL DMF to form a homogenous solution with
the help of ultrasonication. This solution was transferred to a 50 mL Teflon-lined
autoclave and placed in an oven, which was maintained at 120◦C for 24 hours to un-
dergo MOF formation. The as-prepared UiO-66(Zr) MOF was obtained by washing
the solution three times using DMF, and two times using ethanol with the help of
centrifugation at 4500 rpm for 20 minutes followed by drying in a vacuum oven at
60◦C overnight [45]. The concentration of precursors added is as shown in Table 2.1
and described as shown in (Figure 1.5).
Precursors
Amount
Solvothermal Temperature & Time
Washing Procedure
Drying Temperature
ZrOCl2.8H2O
0.7315 g (2.27 mmol)
120◦C (24h)
1 x Itself
2 x DMF
2 x Ethanol
2 x Water
60◦C
Water
5 mL
H2BDC
0.3771 g (2.27 mmol)
DMF
30 mL
Hac
3.6 mL
Table 2.1. Addition of precursors ZrOCl2.8H2O as metal and H2BDC ligand precursors
along with Hac (acetic acid) and DMF in a solvothermal reaction to give ’UiO-66(Zr)’
Post-synthetic modification (PSM), the addition of mixed metal (ZrxTi6−x) nodes and
in-situ synthesis techniques were utilized to incorporate titanium (Ti) atoms by partial
substitution of zirconium (Zr) metal ions in UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF. Dr. Romy Ettlinger
==PAGE:36==
2.1 Synthesis Procedure
25
from the University of St. Andrews, Scotland, prepared and sent the different mixed
metal nodes concoctions with zirconium and titanium metals. These mixed metal
nodes were prepared by adding a specific concentration of ZrCl4 and TiCl4 in a
blend of acetic acid and isopropanol under N2 atmosphere at about 120◦C for an
hour. The white solid is collected after washing with acetone and drying at room
temperature [46].
The mixed metal nodes used in this work are as Zr4Ti2 for a
composition of about 33% Ti and 66% Zr loading, Zr3Ti3 for 50% of each metal
composition and Zr2Ti4 for about 66% Ti and 33% Zr loading. These mixed metal
nodes were used as metal precursors replacing ZrOCl2.8H2O in the UiO-66(Zr) recipe.
As the mixed metal nodes were tested for less solubility in DMF, this work involves
first mixing the nodes in water followed by dissolution in DMF with H2BDC and acetic
acid. UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) was prepared as described in Table 2.2, by first dissolving Zr4Ti2
nodes (0.37833 mmol) in water (5 mL). After obtaining a homogenous solution, this
solution is added to DMF (30 mL) along with H2BDC (2.27 mmol) as well as acetic
acid (3.6 mL), which are then combined with the help of ultrasonication from an
ultrasonic bath. This mixture is transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave, placed in an
oven and maintained at temperature 120◦C for 24 hours. This solvothermal reaction
is then followed by washing twice with DMF, twice with ethanol and twice with water
to remove unreacted precursors with the help of centrifugation at 4500 rpm for 20
minutes. The dried white powder is obtained after drying the wet residue in a vacuum
oven at 60◦C overnight. To prepare UiO-66(Zr3Ti3) and UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) shown in
Table 2.3 and Table 2.4 respectively, the same node concentration (mmol) was used
as well as the solvothermal synthesis technique as mentioned above.
The mixed
metal nodes concentration was calculated to replace the 2.27 mmol concentration of
ZrOCl2.8H2O from the UiO-66(Zr) synthesis procedure used at the beginning.
Precursors
Amount
Solvothermal Temperature & Time
Washing Procedure
Drying Temperature
Zr4Ti2
0.4568 g (0.37833 mmol)
120◦C (24h)
1 x Itself
2 x DMF
2 x Ethanol
2 x Water
60◦C
Water
5 mL
H2BDC
0.3771 g (2.27 mmol)
DMF
30 mL
Hac
3.6 mL
Table 2.2.
Addition of mixed metal nodes Zr4Ti2 as metal precursors to give ’UiO-
66(Zr4Ti2)’
Precursors
Amount
Solvothermal Temperature & Time
Washing Procedure
Drying Temperature
Zr3Ti3
0.4404 g (0.37833 mmol)
120◦C (24h)
1 x Itself
2 x DMF
2 x Ethanol
2 x Water
60◦C
Water
5 mL
H2BDC
0.3771 g (2.27 mmol)
DMF
30 mL
Hac
3.6 mL
Table 2.3.
Addition of mixed metal nodes Zr3Ti3 as metal precursors to give ’UiO-
66(Zr3Ti3)’
==PAGE:37==
2.1 Synthesis Procedure
26
Precursors
Amount
Solvothermal Temperature & Time
Washing Procedure
Drying Temperature
Zr2Ti4
0.424 g (0.37833 mmol)
120◦C (24h)
1 x Itself
2 x DMF
2 x Ethanol
2 x Water
60◦C
Water
5 mL
H2BDC
0.3771 g (2.27 mmol)
DMF
30 mL
Hac
3.6 mL
Table 2.4.
Addition of mixed metal nodes Zr2Ti4 as metal precursors to give ’UiO-
66(Zr2Ti4)’
A simple stirring and two post-grafting synthesis techniques were used to modify
UiO-66 post-synthetically. For this methodology (PSM), UiO-66 MOF was commer-
cially purchased from novoMOF company, and this material will be referred to in
this work by the name of ‘C_UiO-66(Zr)’. The first method involves exposing 0.2 g
of C_UiO-66(Zr) to a mixture of 16 mL methanol with 4 mL tetrabutyl titanate or
Ti(OBu)4 sealed in a Teflon-lined autoclave and placed in an oven at 100◦C for 24
hours. Once the mixture is cooled to room temperature, the resulting solid named
‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol’ is obtained by washing thrice with methanol fol-
lowed by drying at 80◦C in a vacuum oven overnight. The literature using this proce-
dure detects the titanium content loading as 10% using inductively coupled plasma
optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) ( [7], [8]).
The concentration of precur-
sors and synthesis procedure is as described in Table 2.5. This Figure 2.1 describes
the three different approaches and equipments used to prepare PSM UiO-66 MOF
samples.
Figure 2.1. The post-synthesis modification (PSM) approach has been utilized to introduce
Ti into UiO-66 MOF using variations in the post-grafting techniques. The solvothermal,
stirring, and reflux synthesis procedures, as described here, have been employed to achieve
this objective.
==PAGE:38==
2.1 Synthesis Procedure
27
Precursors
Amount
Solvothermal Temperature & Time
Washing Procedure
Drying Temperature
C_UiO-66(Zr)
0.200 g
100◦C (24h)
1 x Itself
3 x Methanol
60◦C
Methanol
16 mL
Ti(OBu)4
4 mL
Table 2.5.
PSM of C_UiO-66(Zr) resulting in ’UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol’ using
Ti(OBu)4 in methanol [7], [8]
The second method is a reflux technique that adds the same concentrations of C_UiO-
66(Zr) and Ti(OBu)4 while replacing the solvent with toluene (30 mL) instead of
methanol as shown in Table 2.6. The mixture is placed in a round-bottom flask on a
magnetic stirrer undergoing continuous stirring. The reflux setup is connected via a
schlenk line to argon gas that helps pump vacuum or remove other gases present in the
setup and to nitrogen gas, which helps pump nitrogen gas into the setup for the reac-
tion to occur under nitrogen atmosphere. After removing the gases, the final reaction
occurs at 100◦C for 24 hours under a nitrogen atmosphere. This simplified variation
from the literature is followed because of losing large amounts of solvent during a
nitrogen flow reaction. The final product named ‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene’ is
obtained after washing the mixture several times with toluene and drying in a vacuum
oven at 40◦C overnight [9].
Precursors
Amount
Reflux Temperature & Time
Washing Procedure
Drying Temperature
C_UiO-66(Zr)
0.200 g
100◦C (24h)
1 x Itself
3 x Toluene
60◦C
Toluene
30 mL
Ti(OBu)4
4 mL
Table 2.6.
PSM of C_UiO-66(Zr) resulting in ’UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene using
Ti(OBu)4 in toluene [9]
The third technique shown in Table 2.7 uses the help of literature as they form
UiO-66-NH2@Ti precursor, which is further calcinated to form ZrO2@TiO2 core-shell
heterostructure [10]. For preparing the Ti/Zr-precursor, 0.4 g of C_UiO-66(Zr) was
added to a mixture of water (0.1 mL) and ethanol (60 mL). Another mixture of
Ti(OBu)4 (5 mL) and ethanol (25 mL) was prepared, and the two solutions were
mixed together with the help of ultrasonication. The mixture was then stirred at room
temperature with the help of a magnetic stirrer for 4 hours. The final product named
‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol’ was obtained after washing thrice with ethanol using
centrifugation and drying the precipitate at 60◦C overnight.
Precursors
Amount
Stirring Temperature & Time
Washing Procedure
Drying Temperature
C_UiO-66(Zr)
0.400 g
RT (4h)
1 x Itself
3 x Ethanol
60◦C
Ethanol
85 mL
DI water
0.1 mL
Ti(OBu)4
5 mL
Table 2.7. PSM of C_UiO-66(Zr) using Ti(OBu)4 in ethanol/water mixture to give ’UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol’ [10]
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Characterization Tests
28
The in-situ crystallization method of doping UiO-66 with Ti involves utilization of
the solvothermal recipe for preparing UiO-66(Zr) supplement to adding Ti precur-
sor as titanium isopropoxide or Ti(OCH(CH3)2)4 along with ZrOCl2.8H2O, H2BDC,
and acetic acid altogether [47]. The chosen molar ratios of Ti/Zr were 10%, 15%,
25%, 35% and a very high concentration of Ti(OCH(CH3)2)4 concerning the recipe
described from the reference literature. The mixture of ZrOCl2.8H2O (2.27 mmol),
H2BDC (2.27 mmol), acetic acid (3.6 mL) and DMF (30 mL) was prepared with the
help of ultrasonication after which required amount of Ti(OCH(CH3)2)4 was added
to the mixture. This mixture is transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave at 120◦C for
24 hours. The final products named ‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)’, ‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%)’,
‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%)’, ‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%)’ and ‘UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh)’ were
obtained after washing twice with DMF and twice with methanol followed by drying
in vacuum oven at 60◦C overnight. The resulting powders obtained were white at
low concentrations of Ti loading to very pale yellow as concentrations of Ti doping
increased. Characterization tests such as XRD, SEM, EDX, FTIR spectroscopy, and
UV-Vis spectroscopy were used to identify the crystallinity, the morphology, detect
Ti composition, confirm the formation of necessary compounds and evaluate optical
properties of the final UiO-66 MOF synthesized.
2.2
Characterization Tests
2.2.1
BET
Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) Isotherms as shown in Figure 2.2 describe multilayer
adsorption and the sample surface area. Adsorption occurs either by a physisorp-
tion or chemisorption mechanism between the species from the sample surface and
the gas that flows over it. In contrast, desorption refers to detachment or the re-
verse process of the adsorption phenomenon. Physical adsorption is a reversible re-
action due to weak attraction forces between the species involved in the reaction.
Such a mechanism is usually studied through isotherms representing the amount of
adsorbed species by the sample surface as a function of partial pressure or concen-
tration at constant temperature.
Adsorption isotherms represent the variation of
fractional coverage with pressure at a given working temperature.
Isotherms can
often be described in simple equations, where Langmuir isotherms are considered
one of the simplest forms. Different isotherms can be derived to illustrate the im-
portance of adsorption mechanisms in a given sample by describing the monolayer
physisorption of gases or liquids at ideal conditions. BET isotherms are one such
model, thus derived from Langmuir adsorption isotherms to validate its development
further and understand multilayer adsorption mechanisms. Nitrogen adsorption at
77 K is a commonly used technique to understand different porous structures and
catalyst surface area. Adsorption hysteresis generally appears in 4 types/shapes that
can help describe different porous materials. While the amount of species adsorbed
==PAGE:40==
2.2 Characterization Tests
29
is normalized by the mass of the sample, which enables comparison of different ma-
terials, analysis of isotherms reveals plenty of information about the sample, such
as surface area, pore volume distribution, pore size and potential catalyst substrate
reactions. The isotherm shapes are classified by the International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry organization, known as IUPAC, under six types (Figure 2.2(a)).
The shape of isotherms helps determine the sample’s porosity, surface area and other
physicochemical conditions. Hysteresis along with the isotherms appear in multilayer
range of physisorption which are related to condensation inside capillaries divided
into five types by IUPAC [5](Figure 2.2(c)). The UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) MOF material was
analyzed with the help of BET Instrument (Figure 2.2(b)) using this isotherm model
with N2 as the adsorbent gas. The adsorption kinetics depicted graphically using the
linear relative pressure isotherm were recorded along with the BET-specific surface
area, micropore area and external surface area to assess this UiO-66 MOF as a pho-
tocatalyst effectively. With the limited time-frame of this thesis, this isotherm was
only recorded for the most photoactive sample among the different UiO-66(Ti/Zr)
MOF samples. The photoactivity of several MOFs synthesized was investigated and
compared using UV-Vis absorption measurements. In addition, examining the cat-
alyst surface area and the pore-texture properties plays a vital role in assessing the
catalytic performance of a photocatalyst. The sample thus underwent activation at
150◦C for 8 hours, followed by adsorption measurements using N2 at 77K to measure
the surface area, provide more information about the pores present and assess the
impact of Ti doping on the photocatalytic performance of UiO-66 MOF material.
((a)) IUPAC classification of
adsorption isotherms [5]
((b)) BET Instrument [5]
((c)) IUPAC classification of
hysteresis [5]
Figure 2.2. BET
==PAGE:41==
2.2 Characterization Tests
30
2.2.2
XRD
X-ray diffraction is a non-destructive methodology used to examine the crystalline
structure of materials since the X-ray wavelengths (0.2nm - 10nm) correspond to the
inter-atomic spacing in a crystalline solid. This technique enables us to determine the
orientation of a single crystal and measures the size and shape of small regions within
the solid. The machine consists of an X-ray beam source and a detector that moves
synchronously. The periodic lattice of the sample scatters the X-rays as the photons
interact with the electrons from the material using a coherent scattering process.
The scattered beam is a constructive or destructive interference that creates a unique
diffraction pattern called Bragg diffraction peaks. A crystalline sample produces well-
defined peaks at specific scattering angles where the angle between the incident X-ray
beam and the resulting scattered beam is 2θ. The diffraction mechanism is described
by Bragg’s law:
nλ = 2dsinθ
where d is the perpendicular distance between the adjacent planes, θ is the angle
of incidence or Bragg angle, λ is the wavelength of the beam and n is the order of
reflection and is the path difference between scattered waves by adjacent planes of
atoms [48]. XRD characterization peaks were recorded for all UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF
powder materials to investigate and understand the change in crystallinity of the
MOF sample with different Ti-loading.
2.2.3
SEM & EDS
As an advanced microscopy instrument, the scanning electron microscope () captures
images of samples by scanning the sample surface with the help of an electron beam.
From higher resolution images compared to optical microscopes, SEM records a large
sample surface using a focused electron beam to yield a three-dimensional appearance
of the sample surface. An electron gun accelerated to a voltage (1 kV - 40 kV) produces
a condensed electron beam with a path controlled by electromagnetic lenses from the
top portion of the column; the scanning coils at the bottom raster the electron beam
along the x and y direction over a small area of the sample surface.
This beam
induces an interaction (Figure 2.3) between the incoming primary electrons and the
sample to usually generate back-scattered electrons, auger electrons, characteristic
X-rays and secondary electrons.
Secondary electrons, or SE, are electrons kicked
out of conduction or valence bands of the atoms in the constituting sample due to
inelastic scattering.
With a low energy and generated few nms from the sample
surface, it provides topographic information when collected by appropriate detectors.
Elemental analysis with the help of energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS or
EDX) effectively utilizes characteristic X-rays developed from the interaction between
the electron beam and samples to give a qualitative overview of the sample. An inner-
shell electron ejects from a constituent atom as the electron beam hits the sample. The
==PAGE:42==
2.2 Characterization Tests
31
vacant orbital is then filled with an outer-shell electron, leading to an X-ray emission
with an energy corresponding to the energy gaps between two shells of the excited
atomic element that produces well-defined lines in the EDS spectrum. Continuum X-
rays are also generated as primary beam electrons, which slow down to varying degrees
because of the electromagnetic field of atomic nuclei. With a continuous distribution
of energy loss in the EDS spectrum, this energy loss is also not characteristic of the
specimen atomic number. Although significant limitations of EDS analysis include
the impossibility of detecting the lightest elements, such as hydrogen or helium, all
other elements can usually be analyzed, and the composition of the sample can be
determined in a semiqualitative way [5].
The typical preparation of samples for SEM imaging introduces the MOF materials
dispersed in ethanol and deposited on a small piece of aluminium foil stuck onto
the carbon tape on the SEM stubs or pins. A gold layer of 30 nm was then sputter-
coated or deposited onto the sample stubs. The SEM images were recorded using Zeiss
Ultra-55 Scanning Electron Microscope, and the EDX spectra were recorded using the
Bruker EDS. For EDS measurements, the MOF powders were dispersed in acetone
and coated directly on the stubs with carbon tape, after which a carbon layer of 12
nm was sputter-coated. Samples were prepared with dispersion in a solvent and gold
or carbon coating to reduce the effects of charging on imaging quality and to analyze
better morphology and characteristic spectra of the non-conducting particles in MOF
materials. SEM images were recorded for all UiO-66 MOF materials to examine the
morphology of MOF particles qualitatively. In contrast, the EDS spectra of the UiO-
66 MOF samples with different Ti loading concentrations were recorded to confirm
the loading and to find the composition of Zr and Ti present in these bimetallic MOFs.
Figure 2.3. SEM Instrument and scattering principle [5]
2.2.4
FTIR
One of the earliest and most common characterizations used to investigate catalytic
systems is the infrared (IR) spectroscopy. IR spectroscopy shown in Figure 2.4, based
==PAGE:43==
2.2 Characterization Tests
32
on the vibrations of atoms in a molecule that generates characteristic IR spectrum
as a result of sending an IR beam through a sample, determines the fraction of beam
absorbed at a specific energy. The resulting absorption spectrum with peaks cor-
responds to frequencies characteristic of vibrations from exciting covalently bonded
atoms and groups in functional units of sample molecules. Most energies of signifi-
cant molecular vibrations in catalysts occur in the mid-IR or between 200-4000 cm−1,
where the localized nature of these vibrations, depending on the type of bonds in-
volved and the local environment, develops a unique IR ”fingerprint” characteristic
spectrum. As one of the oldest techniques available since the 1940s, IR spectroscopy
may provide fundamental information about surface Lewis and Brønsted acid sites,
surface hydroxyl chemistry, and molecular structure of metal oxide species. Fourier-
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy works on the principle that radiation inter-
ference between two beams generates a signal called the interferogram by a Michelson
interferometer. The principle is as given in Figure 2.4(b). The interferometer depends
on a beam splitter to split the incoming IR beam into two optical beams; one reflects
off a fixed mirror with a fixed length, while the other reflects off a movable mirror
with a continually changing length. The two beams recombined at the beam splitter,
with the radiation from the interferometer reaching the sample compartment and the
detector. Amplification of the signal results in data translated into digital form using
an analog-to-digital converter, after which the data is transferred to a computer with
Fourier transform carried out to obtain the desired IR spectrum. The interactions
between the IR beam and samples result in alterations of molecular dipoles linked to
vibrations and rotations. As the molecule absorbs IR light, rotations or vibrations
inside a molecule lead to a net change in the molecule’s dipole moment. Interactions
between the fluctuations in dipole moment and alternating electrical field of radiation
play a significant role as the IR light is absorbed when the frequency of IR radiation
corresponds to the vibrational frequency of the molecule, resulting in a variation of
the amplitude of molecular vibrations. The vibrations generated are of two types:
stretching and bending. Stretching is associated with in-phase (symmetric) or out-
of-phase (asymmetric) alteration in the interatomic distance along a bond axis, and
bending is associated with variation in the angle between two bonds. Terminal groups
present in molecule results in stretching modes with varying proportions depending on
the changes in stretching and coupling of each group. Bending vibrations are scissor-
ing, rocking, wagging, and twisting, where all these characteristic vibrations give rise
to the IR spectrum with absorption signals as molecules are characterized by several
bonds corresponding to several possible vibrations. In recent days, FTIR spectropho-
tometers have been equipped with several accessories to operate in different modes
such as transmission (TIR) mode, where IR signal is collected after passing through
the sample; diffuse reflectance (DRIFTS) mode where IR radiation reflected or scat-
tered diffusely by roughened surfaces of sample is collected by a high area parabolic
mirror, reflection-absorption (RAIRS) mode that relies on absorption and reflection
of low incident angle IR radiation by the surface molecules of a highly reflective or
polished sample, and attenuated total reflection (ATR) mode where the IR beam is
focused on a crystal with high refractive index at an angle above the critical angle
==PAGE:44==
2.2 Characterization Tests
33
for total internal reflection producing evanescent wave projected onto the sample and
collecting the reflected portion giving the attenuated resulting radiation. The main
benefit of using ATR-IR mode lies in easy sample preparation and analyzing samples
in their natural state to collect reliable spectra [5].
((a)) FTIR Instrument [5]
((b)) IR spectroscopy principle [5]
Figure 2.4. FTIR characterization [5]
A few milligrams (mg) of different UiO-66 MOF powders are placed on the plate
covering the crystal surface beneath.
The powders are locked with a force gauge
reading of about 132 by controlling the arm near the plate, creating a uniform distri-
bution of solid samples over the crystal surface. Perkin Elmer Spectrum Two FTIR
instrument shown in Figure 2.4(a) was used to record FTIR spectra of the different
UiO-66(Ti/Zr) samples to investigate and confirm the presence of Ti loading and
composition of organic and inorganic compounds present in the MOF samples.
2.2.5
UV-Vis
UV-Visible spectroscopy (Figure 2.5) is a procedure to evaluate the absorption prop-
erties of a given material. This technique determines the light energy required to acti-
vate the material for a photocatalyst. UV and Visible are part of the light spectrum or
the electromagnetic spectrum. In absorbance spectroscopy as shown in Figure 2.5(b),
this technique quantitatively determines the amount of light absorbed by the given
material as a function of different wavelengths of incident light.
==PAGE:45==
2.2 Characterization Tests
34
((a)) UV-Vis Instrument
((b)) UV-Vis spectroscopy principle [5]
Figure 2.5. UV-Vis spectrophotometer [5]
From the electromagnetic spectrum, the wavelengths of the ultraviolet region range
from 180 to 400 nm, while the visible region ranges from 400 to 800 nm, and the near-
infrared (NIR) region is between 800 and 3200 nm. As light interacts with the matter,
depending on the wavelength of incident light and the band structure of the given
material, one can expect photon absorption, reflection, transmittance, scattering or
refraction of light as a response to the interaction.
I0 = A% + T + R + S
I0 refers to incident intensity, A% is the absorbance (A% = 1 −10−A), T as trans-
mittance, R as reflected light and S as the scattering light. A fraction of transmitted
light measured after interaction with the given material (I) can be deduced with the
help of Beer-Lambert law:
T =
I
I0 ,
A = −ln( I
I0 )
where the intensity of the incident light is independent on the amount of light ab-
sorbed by the sample. UV-Visible spectroscopy also allows one to calculate the optical
bandgap, or the energy needed to excite an electron from the valence band to the
conduction band in the given material. When monochromatic light enters the surface
of the powder material, the interaction leaves with fractions of light either being ab-
sorbed or resulting in varying reflections. The diffuse reflected light is then compared
to the incident light, where if it is weak, it is sensed as partially absorbed by the given
material. However, d-d transitions, binding energies of excitons generated, phonon
absorbtions, vibrations and emissions can negatively impact the bands, causing de-
fects that can result in diﬀiculties interpreting UV-Visible diffuse reflectance spectra.
Such spectra can generally help distinguish different transitions that inherently occur
in the given material as a response to incident light. The different types of transitions
are explained with Tauc equation [5]:
(αhν)n = A(hν −Eg)
==PAGE:46==
2.2 Characterization Tests
35
The indirect band gap energy Eg values of UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOFs with the help of UV-
Visible spectroscopy are deduced using Tauc plots. Where α as absorptivity, n for
type of electronic transition (such as 1
2 for direct transition or 2 for indirect allowed
transitions) and hν or HV as photon energy expressed in eV can be further expressed
as:
(αhν)n=2 = A(hν −Eg)
By plotting (αhν)2 in the y-coordinate and hν (or HV (eV)) in x-coordinate, the
bandgap energy can be found extrapolating the linear portion drawn that connects
the curve to the x-coordinate in a linear graph [9]. The powder MOF samples were dis-
persed in ethanol and characterized using square cuvette quartz sample holder. This
technique quantitatively evaluates the optical bandgap, thus help predict the photo-
catalytic performance of the UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF by finding the wavelength range
of light required to activate the given material. The spectrophotometer used VWR
UV-3100PC Spectrophotometer that records absorption spectra between wavelengths
ranging from 190 nm to 1100 nm(Figure 2.5(a)).
2.2.6
Photocatalytic Test
To test the modified UiO-66 MOF for photocatalysis, the removal of dye pollutant
methylene blue was investigated in a liquid medium under a lamp that emits a combi-
nation of wavelengths ranging from 220-2500 nm. MB solution containing 5 mg/L was
prepared in DI water and divided into two beakers. Based on the indirect band gap
values, the most photoactive MOF was chosen for observing photocatalytic changes
due to the modification of UiO-66. UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) and UiO-66(Zr) MOFs were the
adsorbents utilized for this test, of 2 mg/mL concentration each. Initially, the adsor-
bents were introduced to two separate beakers, and after 30 minutes of continuous
stirring in the dark, 4 mL of samples were collected. Subsequently, the light was
illuminated, and at an interval of 30 minutes for the next 1 hour, 4 mL of samples
were collected.
During light irradiation experiments, the solution was kept under
constant stirring at 400 rpm on a cooling plate maintained at 18◦C. The samples
obtained were centrifuged at 4500 rpm for 5 minutes, from which the supernatant
was analyzed using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3
Results & Discussions
3.1
XRD
This section aims to explore the crystalline properties of MOFs by examining the
XRD crystallography peaks of UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples.
Additionally, it will
investigate three different methodologies for incorporating Ti into the MOF structure.
At first, the precursor concentrations were optimized where modulators’ addition
presented a better crystalline sample with distinct peaks compared to a demodulated
or no modulators synthesis procedure. The peaks correspond well with the reference,
which was loaded using the CIF file obtained from CCDC MOF database ID 733458.
The characteristic peaks from Figure 3.1 of UiO-66(Zr) shown in Figure 3.1(a) present
in the 2θ(◦) values of 7,46◦, 8,56◦, 12,13◦, 14,20◦, 17,20◦, and 25,83◦which according
to literature correspond to crystal planes of (111), (002), (022), (113), (004), and (224)
in UiO-66 respectively. The increasing and distinctive intensities present in diffraction
peaks of UiO-66 with the addition of modulator described in Figure 3.1(b), sample
hence posses enhanced crystallinity [45]. Although adding modulators significantly
improved the crystallography peaks, the crystallography peaks are broader, which
can be attributed to the metal precursor used to synthesize these materials. The
hydrated Zr precursor with coordinated water molecules and hydroxyl ion groups lacks
additional space and actively competes with the ligand molecules added resulting is
only partial displacement and defective UiO-66.
==PAGE:48==
3.1 XRD
37
((a)) XRD crystallography peaks of modulated UiO-66(Zr) with ref-
erence [6].
((b)) Crystallinity of UiO-66(Zr) with and without modulators.
Figure 3.1. XRD characterization of UiO-66(Zr) in a modulated and demodulated synthesis
procedure, where the crystallization peaks present in modulated approach agrees with the
reference [6].
Using the same recipe for synthesizing Ti-incorporated UiO-66 MOFs, the UiO-66
samples prepared using mixed metal nodes exhibit characteristic peaks at about 7,46◦
and 8,56◦that merge together, showcasing lower crystallinity similar to the crystal-
lography peaks of UiO-66(Zr) synthesized without modulators. With an increase in
Ti loading for UiO-66(Zr3Ti3) from UiO-66(Zr2Ti4), the peak at about 7,46◦shifts to
slightly a lower value indicating incorporation of Ti with the Zr oxo-bridge forming
==PAGE:49==
3.1 XRD
38
oxo-bridged-hetero-Zr-Ti clusters [9]. The shift is also further explained by a shrink-
ing phenomenon caused by smaller Ti atom substitution in Zr clusters, resulting in
low uniform porous structures [9].
However at very high concentrations of Ti in
UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) the two peaks are distinctive at about 7,6◦and 8,8◦with a second
peak emerging near 25,83◦at about 26◦which may be attributed to a Ti-based im-
purity [7]. Further bond formations present in UiO-66 can be analyzed using FTIR
to find the structural formation of UiO-66. Changing the concentration of modulator
added also did not significantly improve the crystallinity of UiO-66 MOFs prepared
using mixed-metal nodes. In addition, these samples present low crystallinity or crys-
tal sizes where a comparison of crystallography peaks of UiO-66 MOF synthesized
using a full metal node (either Zr6 or Ti6) can help further deduce the shift in the
peaks formed.
Figure 3.2.
XRD crystallography peaks of UiO-66(Zr2Ti4), UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) and UiO-
66(Zr2Ti4)
Commercially purchased UiO-66 MOF with well-defined peaks and crystallinity was
chosen to modify the sample by adding Ti post-synthetically. In the first variation
of the post-grafting method using methanol for UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol, the
crystallinity is reduced with the presence of one high-intensity peak at about 9,11◦
with a low-intensity second peak at 10,44◦. The shift of peaks to a higher 2θ value
indicates the formation of new crystal planes or phases, which can be attributed to
Ti-based impurities as the peak values differ from C_UiO-66(Zr) pure MOF sample.
In the second method for UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene, a relatively slight shift to a
higher 2θ is observed; however, it is composed of most other significant peaks present
from C_UiO-66(Zr) confirming less formation of impurities or new crystal planes.
==PAGE:50==
3.1 XRD
39
The peak intensity at about 7.7◦is lower, indicating growth changes corresponding
to that particular crystal plane in the final MOF structures. While a Ti coating pro-
cedure in UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol crystallography peaks corresponding to Ti
species could not be found, attributing to weak crystallization of Ti atoms [10]. Oth-
erwise, most peaks present in the diffraction of C_UiO-66(Zr) pure MOF are present,
indicating less formation of new crystal planes or phases with fewer impurities.
((a))
((b)) Crystallinity of UiO-66(Zr) with and without modulators.
Figure 3.3. XRD characterization of C_UiO-66(Zr), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol, UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol.
==PAGE:51==
3.1 XRD
40
XRD peaks of different UiO-66(Ti/Zr) samples prepared using an in-situ synthesis
technique maintain the unique characteristic diffraction peaks of the pure UiO-66(Zr)
MOF synthesized using the same recipe but without the addition of Ti precursor. At
higher concentrations of Ti loading, the UiO-66 MOF loses the complete crystallinity
of the MOF. The reduction in intensity and broader peaks at higher concentrations of
Ti doping also indicate smaller crystal sizes of samples produced with higher loading
of Ti.
The diffraction crystal peaks do not show any variation in increasing the
Ti loading by just 5% between UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%). The
slight shift of peaks to a lower 2θ value at higher Ti loading concentration when
comparing UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) is observed and indicates
transitional metal doping that leads to substitution of Zr4+ in Zr-O with smaller
Ti4+.
Figure 3.4. XRD crystallography peaks of samples UiO-66(Zr), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%), UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=15%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh)
X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis is limited in providing detailed information on the
presence of different elements, bond formations, and types of defects when describing
the crystallinity of various Ti-loaded UiO-66 MOFs alone. The XRD of UiO-66 is
mainly influenced by Zr atoms, which makes it insensitive to organic linkers as the
cross-section of every element is proportional to the square of atomic number [4]. The
poor crystallinity in higher concentrations of Ti-loading could also be attributed to
the mismatch in atomic sizes of Ti substituting Zr [9]. Therefore, relying solely on
XRD analysis to determine the structural properties of these MOFs may not provide
a complete understanding of the material’s characteristics [4]. Thus, the following
steps lead to further characterization tests conducted on the various samples.
==PAGE:52==
3.2 SEM & EDX
41
3.2
SEM & EDX
This section aims to confirm the morphology of MOF particles and analyze the varia-
tions in Ti loading, along with examining EDS results that verify the atomic percent-
ages of Ti loaded into each sample through the three syntheses.
Modulated UiO-66(Zr) MOF form intergrown and agglomerated particles with aver-
age particle sizes of about 60 nm viewed at 120 KX magnification ( [42], [45], [41]).
These particles are sphere-shaped as shown in Figure 3.5 with large pores and low
crystallinity [47]. With EDS measurements, the presence of zirconium is confirmed
with 3.4% average atomic percentage of the sample examined at 100 KX, 50 KX and
30 KX magnifications.
Figure 3.5. SEM image of UiO-66(Zr) at 50 KX magnification
Samples prepared using nodes also exhibit low crystallinity viewed at a magnification
of 50KX shown in Figure 3.6. The particles are more agglomerated with Ti-loading
compared to pure UiO-66 MOF, and measuring the particle sizes remains challenging
as shown in Figure 3.6(a), Figure 3.6(b) and Figure 3.6(c). EDS was utilized to find
the elemental composition of samples where the average atomic percentages of Ti in
UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), 66(Zr3Ti3), and UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) were 21.84 %, 49.4% and 67.55%
leaving Zr as 78.16%, 50.6% and 32.45% respectively. These atomic percentages could
mean that a difference of 11.16%, 0.6% and 9.45% of Ti from each of UiO-66(Zr4Ti2),
66(Zr3Ti3), and UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) respectively were lost from the mixed metal nodes
concoction as used at the beginning. The structures could also represent an excess
of unreacted BDC linker molecules along with the elements of the node lost, or the
formation of Ti-based impurities is possible.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 SEM & EDX
42
((a)) SEM image of UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) particles at 50 KX
((b)) SEM image of UiO-66(Zr3Ti3) particles at 50 KX
((c)) SEM image of UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) particles at 50 KX
Figure 3.6. SEM images showing morphologies of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-66(Zr4Ti2),
66(Zr3Ti3), and UiO-66(Zr2Ti4)
==PAGE:54==
3.2 SEM & EDX
43
Commercially purchased C_UiO-66(Zr) present well-defined octahedral crystal par-
ticles shown in Figure 3.7(a) with average particle sizes ranging from 200-300 nm
viewed at 30 KX magnification.
((a)) SEM image of highly crystalline C_UiO-66(Zr) particles at 30
KX
((b)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol particles at 30 KX
using ImageJ software to roughly measure the particle sizes.
Figure 3.7. SEM images of C_UiO-66(Zr) and rough measurement procedure using ImageJ
software is presented in the case of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol particles both viewed at
30 KX.
All the samples synthesized are viewed at 50 KX magnification to analyze the mor-
phology while at 30 KX (in Figure 3.7) to measure particle sizes as shown in Fig-
==PAGE:55==
3.2 SEM & EDX
44
ure 3.7(b). PSM of UiO-66 with Ti using three methods results in the formation
of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol, UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene as well as UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol having average particle sizes from Figure 3.8 of 293 nm, 291
nm, and 327 nm. The increase in UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol from Figure 3.8(c)
could confirm the coating of Ti over C_UiO-66(Zr) without any morphological changes
caused to C_UiO-66(Zr) [10]. While in the case of UiO-66, (Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene
shown in Figure 3.8(b) presents irregularly shaped octahedral to spherical agglomer-
ated crystal particles. As the structures retained the similar morphology of C_UiO-
66(Zr), these results agree with the XRD results of this sample [9].
In UiO-66-
(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol from Figure 3.8(a), the morphology of the particles is modi-
fied, which, even though it agrees with XRD with low crystallinity as the particles are
agglomerated and spherical, suggests that Ti may have formed impurities when added
to C_UiO-66(Zr). EDS results reveal that for UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol, UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene and UiO-66-(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol the average atomic per-
centages of Ti present were 61.74%, 45.11% and 53.65% leaving Zr at 38.26%, 54.89%
and 46.35%. These percentages also suggest that the amount of Ti precursor concen-
tration added is possibly very high.
==PAGE:56==
3.2 SEM & EDX
45
((a)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol parti-
cles at 50 KX
((b)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene particles
at 50 KX
((c)) SEM image of UiO-66-(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol parti-
cles at 50 KX
Figure 3.8. SEM images of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol, UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene and UiO-66-(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol
==PAGE:57==
3.2 SEM & EDX
46
For samples prepared using in-situ synthesis procedure, UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%), UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=15%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) or Figure 3.9(a), Fig-
ure 3.9(b), Figure 3.9(c), Figure 3.10(a) and Figure 3.10(b) shown in Figure 3.9 and
Figure 3.10 respectively, presents agglomerated spherical particles with a hard to dis-
tinguish crystallites. These materials exhibit behaviour that agrees well with their
XRD peaks, showing low crystallinity at higher Ti doping concentrations. In compar-
ison with UiO-66(Zr), the particles are spherically shaped with rougher edges, and
very high Ti concentrations in UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%) show smooth, hard-to-distinguish
particles with low crystallinity [47].
EDS of the sample confirms the presence of
Ti in MOF samples, while the atomic percentages of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%), UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=15%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) & UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHi
-gh) are 9.48%, 12.56%, 22.00%, 28.13% and 59.02% respectively. These percentages
mean that the Ti loading is lower than the concentration of Ti precursors added
during the in-situ preparation of UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOFs.
==PAGE:58==
3.2 SEM & EDX
47
((a)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%) particles at 50 KX
((b)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%) particles at 50 KX
((c)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%) particles at 50 KX
Figure
3.9.
SEM images showing morphologies of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%), and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%)
==PAGE:59==
3.2 SEM & EDX
48
((a)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) particles at 50 KX
((b)) SEM image of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh) particles at
50 KX
Figure 3.10.
SEM images showing morphologies of Ti-doped UiO-66 MOFs UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=35%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh)
The SEM and EDS instruments are utilized to analyze and confirm the morpholo-
gies and elemental composition of defective UiO-66(Ti/Zr) samples, revealing the
presence of irregular agglomeration of spherical particles, which is generally observed
when high concentrations of Ti are loaded into UiO-66 MOF samples.
Although
all the morphologies agree well with the XRD results, further tests are required to
investigate the bond formations with different Ti loading. Therefore, FTIR and UV-
Vis absorption measurements are conducted to effectively deduce the influence of Ti
in MOFs with different molecules formed and the optical properties of the resulting
MOFs.
==PAGE:60==
3.3 FTIR
49
3.3
FTIR
This section aims to analyze the various vibrations and validate the bond forma-
tions within the UiO-66 modified MOF using FTIR. Additionally, it will examine the
incorporation of Ti into the MOF.
The FTIR spectra of UiO-66 MOF materials shown in Figure 3.11 reveal the pres-
ence of bond formations, resulting in vibrations and stretchings when exposed to IR
radiation. This property can be utilized to detect the molecules present in the sam-
ples quantitatively. The most important peaks are highlighted in (), and the peaks
are found at 1580 cm−1, 1396 cm−1, 748 cm−1 and 660 cm−1. The appearance and
disappearance or the modifications influenced by the addition of Ti atoms is closely
examined where the presence of coordinated carboxylate groups by asymmetric and
symmetric stretching vibrations found at about 1580 cm−1 and 1400 cm−1, respec-
tively, compared to the free ligand showing only one band at about 1680 cm−1 [49].
The intensity of peaks observed at about 1580 cm−1 and 1400 cm−1 exhibit reduc-
tion, leading to disappearance at higher concentrations of Ti-loading. This result may
interpret that adding Ti leads to the formation of impurities. Around 1660 cm−1 ob-
served in samples generally attributed to stretching modes of the DMF molecules’
carbonyl group (C=O) trapped within the pores [49]. Peaks found at about 1651
cm−1 and 1385 cm−1 are attributed to the symmetrical and asymmetric stretching
vibrations of O-C-O bonds in H2BDC respectively, which are found to disappear
or dramatically reduce in PSM samples UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol and UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene as seen in Figure 3.11(b). Although a reduction in inten-
sity could be attributed to the concentration of the sample tested, the disappearance
of the peaks may be deduced to the non-existence of the required bond formations
in UiO-66 MOF. The bands in the range 1156-1100 cm−1 and 781-482 cm−1 are as-
signed to the C-H in-plane and out-of-plane ring bending respectively [49]. Chemical
compositions of UiO-66 show broad absorption peaks in the region 3700-3200 cm−1
attributed to the stretching vibration of O-H belonging to residual water molecules
or solvent in the framework [45]. This peak is also observed in almost all samples.
The assymmetric vibrations observed at 661-653 cm−1 or 740 cm−1 and 652 cm−1 at-
tribute to Zr-(µ3-O or O-Zr-O bridges in the framework with a band observed around
500 cm−1 associated with stretching vibration of Zr-(OC) bonds ( [49], [45]).
At
higher concentrations of Ti in UiO-66(Zr3Ti3), UiO-66(Zr2Ti4), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%)
seen in Figure 3.11(a) and Figure 3.11(c), the peaks around 660 cm−1 disappear
which can be induced on addition of Ti while causing a mismatch or distortion and
thus forming defects or impurities in the resulting MOF structures. Introducing Ti
in mixed metal-nodes compositions, very slight red-shift in peaks can be observed
towards a lower value of about 650 cm−1 assigned to O-Ti-O vibrations as shown in
UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) and UiO-66(Zr3Ti3) [47]. The same is observed in in-situ samples
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) when compared
to parent UiO-66(Zr).
==PAGE:61==
3.3 FTIR
50
((a)) FTIR peaks of UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), 66(Zr3Ti3), and UiO-
66(Zr2Ti4) MOFs.
((b))
FTIR
peaks
of
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol,
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene
and
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol MOFs.
((c))
FTIR
peaks
of
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%),
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=15%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%)
and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh MOFs.) samples
Figure 3.11. FTIR peaks of Ti-loaded UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples
==PAGE:62==
3.4 UV-Vis Measurements
51
Hence, the samples were analyzed and confirmed as Ti-doped UiO-66 using FTIR
spectroscopy where UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol is the only sample that exhibits
almost all peaks from parent UiO-66 MOF while the MOFs formed using mixed-metal
nodes composition and in-situ synthesis procedures help understand the framework
and bonds present in Ti-loaded UiO-66 MOFs as the concentration of the Ti-loading
is increased. Samples UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh) display the ab-
sence of the necessary bonds found in UiO-66 MOF, indicating the breakdown of the
framework and crystallinity. To further evaluate these MOFs for photocatalytic activ-
ity, UV-Vis absorption measurements were acquired to identify the most photoactive
Ti-loaded UiO-66 MOF and investigate the impact of Ti-loading on the optical prop-
erties of these MOFs.
3.4
UV-Vis Measurements
This section aims to compare the distinct absorption spectra of MOF samples in
Figure 3.12 and utilize Tauc plots to determine the indirect optical band gaps of the
materials as shown in Figure 3.13. The optimal MOF for photocatalytic testing will
be selected by evaluating the best samples from each Ti loading synthesis procedure.
Samples prepared by the addition of mixed metal nodes forming UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), UiO-
66(Zr3Ti3) and UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) show absorption in the wavelengths between 209 and
294 nm with 100% absorption in the UV region with small absorption edges around
the near-visible region as seen in Figure 3.12(a). Incorporation of Ti helped provide
these edges which are then estimated using Tauc equation to have band gap values of
2.88 eV, 3.49 eV and 3.20 eV for UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), UiO-66(Zr3Ti3) and UiO-66(Zr2Ti4)
from Figure 3.13(a) in comparison to the 3.68 eV of UiO-66(Zr). This result indicates
a decrease in band gap due to the addition of Ti, favouring Ti3+-O-Zr4+ formations
trapping electrons in inorganic clusters. The addition of a modulator also results in
a second absorption band gap compared to UiO-66 MOF without it, attributing to
the formation of defects changing the electronic structure of resulting UiO-66 MOF
( [50], [4], [47]).
==PAGE:63==
3.4 UV-Vis Measurements
52
((a))
UV
absorption
peaks
of
UiO-66(Zr4Ti2),
66(Zr3Ti3), and UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) MOFs.
((b))
UV
absorption
peaks
of
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol,
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene
and
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol MOFs.
((c)) UV absorption peaks of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%),
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=15%),
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%),
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=35%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh MOFs.)
samples
Figure 3.12. UV absorption peaks of Ti-loaded UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples
==PAGE:64==
3.4 UV-Vis Measurements
53
((a)) Tauc plots of UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), 66(Zr3Ti3), and
UiO-66(Zr2Ti4) MOFs.
((b)) Tauc plots of UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol,
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene
and
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol MOFs.
((c))
Tauc
plots
of
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%),
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=15%),
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%),
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=35%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=VeryHigh MOFs.)
samples
Figure 3.13. Tauc plots of Ti-loaded UiO-66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples with extrapolation on
the energy x-coordinate.
==PAGE:65==
3.4 UV-Vis Measurements
54
PSM samples UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol, UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Toluene and UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Ethanol show red-shift as seen on Figure 3.12(b) with the incorpora-
tion of Ti and indirect band gap values of 2.85 eV, 3.24 eV and 3.07 eV in comparison
to UiO-66(Zr) with a bandgap of 3.68 eV indicating reduction in band gap as a re-
sponse to addition of Ti in UiO-66 MOF structures shown in Figure 3.13(b).
((a))
UV
absorption
peaks
of
UiO-66(Zr4Ti2),
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) MOFs.
((b))
Tauc
plots
of
UiO-66(Zr4Ti2),
UiO-
66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol
and
UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%)
MOFs samples.
Figure 3.14.
Tauc plots and UV absorption peaks of best photoactive Ti-loaded UiO-
66(Ti/Zr) MOF samples.
Samples prepared using in-situ addition of Ti precursor UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%), UiO-
==PAGE:66==
3.5 Photocatalytic Test & BET
55
66(Ti/Zr=15%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=25%), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=Very
High) exhibit slight red shift as seen in Figure 3.12(c), close to the near visible region
with band gap values of 3.46 eV, 3.35 eV, 3.27 eV, 2.89 eV and 2.61 eV as described
in Figure 3.13(c). The gradual decrease in band gap values as the concentration of Ti
incorporated is in favour of ligand-to-metal charge transfer through a metal-to-metal
electron exchange ( [9], [42]).
The samples were compared as shown in Figure 3.14 between the three methods for
incorporating Ti into UiO-66 and confirmed based on XRD, SEM, EDS, and FTIR re-
sults. Although the chosen samples, UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol
and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%), exhibit suﬀicient crystallinity and adequate Ti doping with
agglomerated spherical particles, they also present band gap values indicating a re-
sponse in the near visible region as seen in Figure 3.14(a). With band gap values of
2.85 eV, 2.88 eV, and 2.89 eV corresponding to UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol, UiO-
66(Zr4Ti2), and UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%) respectively seen in Figure 3.14(b), the sample
UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) was selected for a photocatalytic test to degrade methylene blue dye
in water based on its adequate crystallinity, particle morphology, and FTIR peaks.
3.5
Photocatalytic Test & BET
This section presents the UV-Vis absorption spectrum (Figure 3.15) results of methy-
lene blue dye solution at 30-minute intervals under dark and light-illuminated con-
ditions, along with the BET analysis of the adsorbent, to qualitatively assess the
MOF’s photocatalytic capability as a photocatalyst.
At first, the beaker with the adsorbent UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) 0.2 g in a 100 mL MB (5 mg/L)
solution is placed in dark condition by wrapping the beaker with Al foil. This solution
is continuously stirred at 400 rpm for 30 minutes, after which 30min_dark_MB_UiO-
66(Zr4Ti2) sample is collected and measured for absorption. The pure dye exhibits
100% absorption after normalization at 664 nm. After 30 minutes, the adsorption
capacity drastically leads to the removal of 38% degradation of dye by adsorption with
reduced intensity in comparison to the absorption of pure dye. The same procedure
is repeated with a pure UiO-66(Zr) sample to produce absorption spectra of MB
collected after exposure in dark conditions for 30 minutes. The absorption spectrum
of MB in 30min_dark_MB_UiO-66(Zr) produces a slight blue shift, implying the
formation of an intermediate or complex with the adsorbent.
==PAGE:67==
3.5 Photocatalytic Test & BET
56
((a)) UV absorption peaks of solution with MB along with
adsorbent UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) in dark and light conditions.
((b)) UV absorption peaks of solution with MB along with
adsorbent pure UiO-66(Zr) in dark and light conditions.
Figure 3.15.
UV absorption peaks (normalized) of solution with MB after exposure to
adsorbents in dark and light illuminated conditions
For light measurements, the solution with adsorbent UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) is placed under
a UV-Xe lamp that illuminates the sample with the wavelengths between 220-2500
nm, covering the regions of UV, visible, IR and near-IR regions. The intensity of light
falling on the samples can be attributed to the power of light irradiated on the sample.
For this measurement, a standardized solar cell is used, which, based on its height, is
placed on a support stand (bottom) and at a height equivalent to the sample surface
(top). The reference power measured is 1477 W/m2 with a fill-factor of 69.96% where
light illuminated at a height of 21.3 cm or top is 1539 W/m2 with a fill-factor of
==PAGE:68==
3.5 Photocatalytic Test & BET
57
64.14% and at the bottom or on the support stand is 1381 W/m2 with a fill-factor
of 65.54%. The slight variations recommend placing samples at the same height to
compare them under identical conditions. 4 mL of samples 15min_light_MB_UiO-
66(Zr4Ti2), 30min_light_MB_UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), 60min_light_MB_UiO-66(Zr4Ti2)
and 90min_light_MB_UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) were collected after illumination of light on
the solution with Ti-loaded UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) after 15, 30, 60 and 90 minutes respec-
tively Figure 3.15(a). The absorption spectra of the supernatant experience a blue
shift, suggesting the formation of intermediates or complexes from adsorbent inter-
acting with MB dye molecules. The peaks are observed at 636 nm, 610 nm, 599 nm,
with a broad small peak at 604 nm for 15, 30, 60 and 90 minutes of light illumination,
respectively. The gradual reduction intensity of the peaks with increased light illumi-
nation suggests a decrease in MB dye concentration from the solution; however, the
different shifts in peaks suggest the formation of intermediates or complexes. This
could also be due to the dye’s degradation as observed by the naked eye with a colour
shift of solution from blue to cloudy white of the adsorbent. The settled adsorbent
particles were turquoise-coloured, suggesting effective adsorption of MB dye. The
same is studied for pure UiO-66(Zr) as an adsorbent that reveals absorption spectra
as shown in Figure 3.15(b) with little to no change in dye concentration except for
blue shift, suggesting the formation of new complexes from the interaction between
the adsorbent and the dye. Although significantly fewer concentration decreases are
observed by illuminating the pure MOF, the adsorbent precipitate particles were blue
with a colour change in solution from blue to purple/violet as viewed.
BET surface area of commercially purchased UiO-66 named C_UiO-66(Zr) falls in
the range of 1100-1600 m2/g while the BET analysis of the sample UiO-66(Zr4Ti2)
provides a surface area of 510.78 m2/g. With a micropore surface area of 263.34
m2/g, micropore volume of 0.1278 cm3/g and external surface area of 247.43 m2/g
about 51.56% of surface area is contributed by the presence of micropores and 48.44%
of surface are appears outside of the material. The linear isotherm plot shows in
Figure 3.16 characteristics of IUPAC classified reversible type I(b) at relative pressures
between 0-0.4 and between 0-0.1 p/p0 showing type VI isotherm. Type I isotherms
are given by microporous solids with relatively low surface areas and steep uptake due
to enhanced adsorbent-adsorptive interactions in narrow micropores [51]. However,
at higher relative pressures, hysteresis suggests mesoporous adsorbents depending on
the adsorbent-adsorptive interactions between molecules in a condensed state. The
reversible stepwise type VI isotherm observed at low relative pressures also suggests
a non-uniform porous surface of the adsorbent of layer-by-layer adsorption [51]. The
presence of hysteresis relates to the features of the pore structures and even suggests
a possible underlying adsorption mechanism. Based on the IUPAC classification, the
adsorbent presents hysteresis of type 2 or type H2 at high relative pressure, indicating
complex structures in which the network effects are significant. The steep desorption,
as mentioned in H2(a), indicates pore-blocking or percolation in a narrow range of
pore necks or cavitation-induced evaporation ( [51], [5]).
==PAGE:69==
3.5 Photocatalytic Test & BET
58
Figure 3.16. BET analysis of adsorbent UiO-66(Zr4Ti2).
From both BET results and MB photocatalytic tests, adsorption-related mechanisms
have begun even in dark conditions, suggesting a supply of active sites for interaction
with Ti-loading. Further reactions upon light radiation resulting in decreased dye
concentrations with UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) adsorbent suggests a light-based photo reaction
where, when tested in the literature, suggests dependence of dyes on hydroxyl rad-
icals and superoxide in the reaction system. Trapping experiments were conducted
where these radicals and superoxide were the main active species in the photocatalytic
system. The addition of Ti in the UiO-66 has also proved to enhance the optical prop-
erties by narrowing the band gap, which is also observed with the samples prepared
as a part of this work. The proposed photoreaction suggests that illumination of
light excites electrons from a lower energy level to a higher energy level, leaving holes
behind where the trapped electrons by molecular oxygen form superoxides and react
with hydrogen ions in water to form hydroxyl radicals, leaving holes to interact with
active OH groups to produce hydroxyl radicals directly. The radicals possess strong
oxidation ability, taking forward the said photocatalytic reaction in the given sys-
tem [9]. Ti incorporated into this system helps induce a more photogenerated charge
carrier, thus promoting a photocatalytic reaction. The non-uniform porous structure
observed in UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) also suggests a defective structure presenting more migra-
==PAGE:70==
3.5 Photocatalytic Test & BET
59
tion pathways for photogenerated electrons and holes prolonging their recombination
lifetime and increasing the charge separation eﬀiciencies [9].
Nevertheless, these findings need to be more comprehensive and are restricted by the
timeframe of the thesis work to fully comprehend and examine possible adsorption
mechanisms, which are highly complex.
Numerous studies have explored the im-
pact of pH on adsorption, the reusability of adsorbents, zeta potential measurements,
optimization of dye-to-adsorbent concentrations, investigations of the adsorption ki-
netics using pseudo-first-order and second-order equations, and FTIR analysis of end
products following photocatalytic reactions to gain a deeper understanding of the
adsorption-degradation mechanics of adsorbent-dye interactions. Han et al. studied
the adsorption isotherms of all samples to choose the Ti-modified MOF with the best
BET surface area owing to poor adsorption at decreased surface areas. Beyond the
isotherms, the adsorption is influenced by electrostatic attractions, pore/size-selective
adsorption, hydrogen bonding, acid-base interactions and π-π stacking-based inter-
actions [47].
In Ti-added UiO-66 MOF, they find the electrostatic attraction to
play a significant role in determining adsorption capacity using zeta-potential analy-
sis, where the Ti-loaded MOF became positive after doping, leading to electrostatic
attraction with an anionic dye such as Congo Red or CR. The different coordina-
tion based on substituting Zr4+ with Ti4+ decreased the amount of hydroxyl groups
present. With pH, the strong influence can affect the dissociation of specific func-
tional groups and create an acid environment that leads to 100% removal rate of
CR [47].
==PAGE:71==
Conclusion
Various samples of UiO-66(Ti/Zr) of UiO-66 MOF doped with titanium were pre-
pared, each with different amounts of Ti atoms. Ti-loading concentration was ob-
served to have a negative correlation with the degree of crystallinity. Moreover, the
particles exhibited an agglomerated and spherical morphology when the mixed-metal
nodes approached, and in-situ methods of Ti-incorporation into UiO-66 were utilized.
The PSM approach utilized a more crystalline parent MOF, C_UiO-66(Zr), with
highly crystalline octahedral-shaped particles with average particle sizes between 200-
300 nm and BET surface areas ranging from 1100-1600 m2/g, as revealed by the tech-
nical data sheet from the company. The PSM technique introduces Ti into the MOF,
resulting in smaller particles without bond formations that comprise the UiO-66 MOF
framework. FTIR analysis reveals that higher concentrations of Ti added to the sam-
ple destroy the UiO-66 framework, leading to the formation of Ti-based impurities.
UV-Vis absorption measurements indicate the influence of Ti on the optical proper-
ties of UiO-66 MOF by reducing the absorption to near-visible range, with bandgap
values of 2.85 eV, 2.88 eV, and 2.89 eV for samples UiO-66(Ti/Zr=10%)_Methanol,
UiO-66(Zr4Ti2), UiO-66(Ti/Zr=35%), respectively. Among the lowest band gap val-
ues obtained, the UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) sample was utilized to study the influence of Ti-
doping on photocatalytic performance as an effective adsorbent. The degradation of
methylene blue absorption spectra reveals reduced concentrations using the adsorbent
UiO-66(Zr4Ti2) compared to a parent UiO-66(Zr) MOF. Even though the catalytic
reaction commences in the dark conditions, the reduction in dye concentration in the
solution shows blue-shifted absorption spectra, indicating the formation of complexes
or intermediates between the adsorbent and dye. BET analysis of the adsorbent UiO-
66(Zr4Ti2) reveals a microporous-mesoporous surface, with about 50% surface area
contributed by the external surface area for adsorption. This porosity is consistent
with SEM images, which validate the defective structure and particle gaps.
The approach studied in this thesis has several limitations. The addition of modula-
tors with close competitive coordination between acetate and deprotonated BDC2−
inhibits crystal nucleation, and the acidity ensures that only a small amount of acetate
is incorporated into the UiO-66 material, leading to low concentrations of defects [52].
BET analysis of all samples can help further comprehend the porosity and surface
area of the adsorbents, including the parent MOF prepared through the modulated
approach, to realize them as effective catalysts.
However, the photocatalytic test
of degrading methylene blue dye is a straightforward process; hence, the influence
==PAGE:72==
Conclusion
61
of temperature and pH could not be regulated even with a cooling plate. Addition-
ally, the catalytic study does not investigate the kinetics that lead to the adsorption
and degradation of the dye further. An eﬀicient system for testing photocatalysis is
required and should be implemented to evaluate the Ti-incorporated MOFs as photo-
catalysts eﬀiciently. The synthesis procedures used in this thesis work relied heavily
on readily-available chemicals. However, with better planning, a more reliable syn-
thesis technique can be utilized to introduce Ti-based metal cluster modification of
UiO-66 MOF. Ti-loaded MOFs only achieved a slight decrease of 0.8 eV for band gap
values. Thus, metal-cluster modification in combination with amine functionalization
of UiO-66 can be used to envision visible-light responsive photocatalysts [7].
Furthermore, using defective UiO-66 as adsorbents is influenced by BET surface area,
pore size, amount of defects, and electronegativity for the adsorption performance,
which needs to be effectively evaluated in this work. Defective UiO-66 has fragile
mechanical properties, significantly affecting loss-of-crystallinity pressures and bulk
modulus [4]. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), Raman, and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopies can also give valuable information about the defect terminal groups
and even validate the Ti loading in these MOF samples prepared [4]. Studying the
type, quantity, and quantification of the defect sites present in UiO-66 MOF synthe-
sized is also intricate. The low degree of crystallinity in samples supported by the
SEM images indicates optimization of the parent MOF recipe while also making the
necessary changes incorporating the same recipe in the case of mixed-metal nodes.
Using a dehydrated ZrCl4 metal precursor in the in-situ methodology also produces
highly crystalline materials, which were not reproduced when using the hydrated Zr
precursor [47].
PSM methodologies utilized were limited by the availability of Ti
precursor, which failed to exhibit the crystallinity as proved in literature ( [7], [8]).
The high tunability of MOFs allows for strategies such as doping and post-synthetic
modifications to add functionalities for applications such as catalysis, photocatalysis,
adsorption, separation, sensors, and biomedicine. However, MOFs generally suffer
from poor photostability and thus degrade quickly under stress [28]. Therefore, fur-
ther research is always recommended to address the issues faced using modified MOFs
as effective photocatalysts.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Mar 2018.
[2]
J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, and C. Jiang, Surface science of photocatalysis. Academic
Press, 2020.
[3]
R. Ameta, M. S. Solanki, S. Benjamin, and S. C. Ameta, “Photocatalysis,” in
Advanced oxidation processes for waste water treatment, pp. 135–175, Elsevier,
2018.
[4]
Y. Feng, Q. Chen, M. Jiang, and J. Yao, “Tailoring the properties of uio-66
through defect engineering: A review,” Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Re-
search, vol. 58, no. 38, pp. 17646–17659, 2019.
[5]
S. Yurdakal, C. Garlisi, L. Özcan, M. Bellardita, and G. Palmisano, “(photo)
catalyst characterization techniques: adsorption isotherms and bet, sem, ftir, uv–
vis, photoluminescence, and electrochemical characterizations,” in Heterogeneous
photocatalysis, pp. 87–152, Elsevier, 2019.
[6]
H.-C. Zhou, J. R. Long, and O. M. Yaghi, “Introduction to metal–organic frame-
works,” 2012.
[7]
X. Wang, W. Zhang, R. Li, J. Han, J. Guo, and B. Liu, “Platinum nanopar-
ticles decorated and titanium incorporated with nh 2-uio-66 for photocatalytic
hydrogen production,” Reaction Kinetics, Mechanisms and Catalysis, vol. 129,
pp. 505–518, 2020.
[8]
X. Wang, W. Zhang, C. Wei, R. Li, J. Guo, and B. Liu, “Titanium incorporated
and gc 3 n 4-coated nh 2-uio-66 for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution,”
Applied Physics A, vol. 126, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[9]
A. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, M. Chen, L. Sun, and X. Liu, “Titanium incor-
porated with uio-66 (zr)-type metal–organic framework (mof) for photocatalytic
application,” RSC advances, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 3671–3679, 2016.
[10] F. Li, Y. Jiao, J. Liu, Q. Li, C. Guo, C. Tian, and B. Jiang, “Promoting the spa-
tial charge separation by building porous zro2@ tio2 heterostructure toward pho-
tocatalytic hydrogen evolution,” Journal of colloid and interface science, vol. 561,
pp. 568–575, 2020.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[11] M. Zeeshan and M. Shahid, “State of the art developments and prospects of
metal–organic frameworks for energy applications,” Dalton Transactions, vol. 51,
no. 5, pp. 1675–1723, 2022.
[12] Oct 2023.
[13] Y.-C. Wang, X.-Y. Liu, X.-X. Wang, and M.-S. Cao, “Metal-organic frameworks
based photocatalysts: Architecture strategies for eﬀicient solar energy conver-
sion,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 419, p. 129459, 2021.
[14] J. Qiu, X. Zhang, Y. Feng, X. Zhang, H. Wang, and J. Yao, “Modified metal-
organic frameworks as photocatalysts,” Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
vol. 231, pp. 317–342, 2018.
[15] Q. Wang, Q. Gao, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. Nafady, and S. Ma, “Recent advances in
mof-based photocatalysis: environmental remediation under visible light,” Inor-
ganic Chemistry Frontiers, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 300–339, 2020.
[16] D. Jiang, P. Xu, H. Wang, G. Zeng, D. Huang, M. Chen, C. Lai, C. Zhang,
J. Wan, and W. Xue, “Strategies to improve metal organic frameworks pho-
tocatalyst’s performance for degradation of organic pollutants,” Coordination
Chemistry Reviews, vol. 376, pp. 449–466, 2018.
[17] X. Zhao, J. Li, X. Li, P. Huo, and W. Shi, “Design of metal-organic frameworks
(mofs)-based photocatalyst for solar fuel production and photo-degradation of
pollutants,” Chinese Journal of Catalysis, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 872–903, 2021.
[18] A. Schoedel, “Secondary building units of mofs,” in Metal-organic frameworks
for biomedical applications, pp. 11–44, Elsevier, 2020.
[19] M. Safaei, M. M. Foroughi, N. Ebrahimpoor, S. Jahani, A. Omidi, and
M. Khatami, “A review on metal-organic frameworks: Synthesis and applica-
tions,” TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 118, pp. 401–425, 2019.
[20] Y. Qin, M. Hao, and Z. Li, “Metal–organic frameworks for photocatalysis,” in
Interface Science and Technology, vol. 31, pp. 541–579, Elsevier, 2020.
[21] Y.-S. Wei, L. Zou, H.-F. Wang, Y. Wang, and Q. Xu, “Micro/nano-scaled metal-
organic frameworks and their derivatives for energy applications,” Advanced En-
ergy Materials, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 2003970, 2022.
[22] J. Ru, X. Wang, F. Wang, X. Cui, X. Du, and X. Lu, “Uio series of metal-
organic frameworks composites as advanced sorbents for the removal of heavy
metal ions: Synthesis, applications and adsorption mechanism,” Ecotoxicology
and Environmental Safety, vol. 208, p. 111577, 2021.
[23] D. Zou and D. Liu, “Understanding the modifications and applications of highly
stable porous frameworks via uio-66,” Materials Today Chemistry, vol. 12,
pp. 139–165, 2019.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[24] J. H. Cavka, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, N. Guillou, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga, and
K. P. Lillerud, “A new zirconium inorganic building brick forming metal organic
frameworks with exceptional stability,” Journal of the American Chemical Soci-
ety, vol. 130, no. 42, pp. 13850–13851, 2008.
[25] F. Ahmadijokani, H. Molavi, M. Rezakazemi, S. Tajahmadi, A. Bahi, F. Ko,
T. M. Aminabhavi, J.-R. Li, and M. Arjmand, “Uio-66 metal–organic frameworks
in water treatment: A critical review,” Progress in Materials Science, vol. 125,
p. 100904, 2022.
[26] Y. Bai, Y. Dou, L.-H. Xie, W. Rutledge, J.-R. Li, and H.-C. Zhou, “Zr-
based metal–organic frameworks: design, synthesis, structure, and applications,”
Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 2327–2367, 2016.
[27] Q. Du, R. Rao, F. Bi, Y. Yang, W. Zhang, Y. Yang, N. Liu, and X. Zhang,
“Preparation of modified zirconium-based metal-organic frameworks (zr-mofs)
supported metals and recent application in environment: A review and perspec-
tives,” Surfaces and Interfaces, vol. 28, p. 101647, 2022.
[28] J. Winarta, B. Shan, S. M. Mcintyre, L. Ye, C. Wang, J. Liu, and B. Mu,
“A decade of uio-66 research: a historic review of dynamic structure, synthe-
sis mechanisms, and characterization techniques of an archetypal metal–organic
framework,” Crystal Growth & Design, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1347–1362, 2019.
[29] L. Valenzano, B. Civalleri, S. Chavan, S. Bordiga, M. H. Nilsen, S. Jakobsen,
K. P. Lillerud, and C. Lamberti, “Disclosing the complex structure of uio-66
metal organic framework: a synergic combination of experiment and theory,”
Chemistry of Materials, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1700–1718, 2011.
[30] J. A. Rodríguez, J. C. Hanson, and P. J. Chupas, In-situ characterization of
heterogeneous catalysts. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[31] K. Hendrickx, D. E. Vanpoucke, K. Leus, K. Lejaeghere, A. Van Yperen-
De Deyne, V. Van Speybroeck, P. Van Der Voort, and K. Hemelsoet, “Un-
derstanding intrinsic light absorption properties of uio-66 frameworks: a com-
bined theoretical and experimental study,” Inorganic chemistry, vol. 54, no. 22,
pp. 10701–10710, 2015.
[32] H. Liu, M. Cheng, Y. Liu, G. Zhang, L. Li, L. Du, B. Li, S. Xiao, G. Wang,
and X. Yang, “Modified uio-66 as photocatalysts for boosting the carbon-neutral
energy cycle and solving environmental remediation issues,” Coordination Chem-
istry Reviews, vol. 458, p. 214428, 2022.
[33] A. Kumari, S. Kaushal, and P. P. Singh, “Bimetallic metal organic frameworks
heterogeneous catalysts: Design, construction, and applications,” Materials To-
day Energy, vol. 20, p. 100667, 2021.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[34] J. Xu, C. Zhu, R. Liu, Q. Fang, Y. Zheng, Z. He, S. Song, and Y. Shen, “Eluci-
dating the charge redistribution in bimetallic metal–organic frameworks: High-
electron-density reactive center for removal of organic micropollutants in water,”
Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 468, p. 143723, 2023.
[35] X. Chen, X. Peng, L. Jiang, X. Yuan, H. Yu, H. Wang, J. Zhang, and Q. Xia, “Re-
cent advances in titanium metal–organic frameworks and their derived materials:
Features, fabrication, and photocatalytic applications,” Chemical Engineering
Journal, vol. 395, p. 125080, 2020.
[36] L. Li, X.-S. Wang, T.-F. Liu, and J. Ye, “Titanium-based mof materials: from
crystal engineering to photocatalysis,” Small Methods, vol. 4, no. 12, p. 2000486,
2020.
[37] J. Zhu, P.-Z. Li, W. Guo, Y. Zhao, and R. Zou, “Titanium-based metal–organic
frameworks for photocatalytic applications,” Coordination Chemistry Reviews,
vol. 359, pp. 80–101, 2018.
[38] A. S. Yasin, J. Li, N. Wu, and T. Musho, “Study of the inorganic substitution in
a functionalized uio-66 metal–organic framework,” Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics, vol. 18, no. 18, pp. 12748–12754, 2016.
[39] A. Melillo, M. Cabrero-Antonino, S. Navalon, M. Alvaro, B. Ferrer, and H. Gar-
cia, “Enhancing visible-light photocatalytic activity for overall water splitting
in uio-66 by controlling metal node composition,” Applied Catalysis B: Environ-
mental, vol. 278, p. 119345, 2020.
[40] A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. Santiago-Portillo, A. M. Asiri, and H. Garcia, “En-
gineering uio-66 metal organic framework for heterogeneous catalysis,” Chem-
CatChem, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 899–923, 2019.
[41] A. Schaate, P. Roy, A. Godt, J. Lippke, F. Waltz, M. Wiebcke, and P. Behrens,
“Modulated synthesis of zr-based metal–organic frameworks: from nano to single
crystals,” Chemistry–A European Journal, vol. 17, no. 24, pp. 6643–6651, 2011.
[42] Y. Feng, Q. Chen, M. Cao, N. Ling, and J. Yao, “Defect-tailoring and tita-
nium substitution in metal–organic framework uio-66-nh2 for the photocatalytic
degradation of cr (vi) to cr (iii),” ACS Applied Nano Materials, vol. 2, no. 9,
pp. 5973–5980, 2019.
[43] C. Ardila-Suárez, J. Rodriguez-Pereira, V. G. B. Medrano, and G. E. Ramírez-
Caballero, “An analysis of the effect of the zirconium precursor of mof-808 on
its thermal, structural, and surface properties,” 2018.
[44] A. De Vos, K. Hendrickx, P. Van Der Voort, V. Van Speybroeck, and K. Le-
jaeghere, “Missing linkers: an alternative pathway to uio-66 electronic structure
engineering,” Chemistry of Materials, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 3006–3019, 2017.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[45] L. Tan, Y. Li, Q. Lv, Y. Gan, Y. Fang, Y. Tang, L. Wu, and Y. Fang, “De-
velopment of soluble uio-66 to improve photocatalytic co2 reduction,” Catalysis
Today, vol. 410, pp. 282–288, 2023.
[46] S. Dai, C. Simms, I. Dovgaliuk, G. Patriarche, A. Tissot, T. N. Parac-Vogt,
and C. Serre, “Monodispersed mof-808 nanocrystals synthesized via a scalable
room-temperature approach for eﬀicient heterogeneous peptide bond hydrolysis,”
Chemistry of Materials, vol. 33, no. 17, pp. 7057–7066, 2021.
[47] Y. Han, M. Liu, K. Li, Q. Sun, W. Zhang, C. Song, G. Zhang, Z. C. Zhang, and
X. Guo, “In situ synthesis of titanium doped hybrid metal–organic framework
uio-66 with enhanced adsorption capacity for organic dyes,” Inorganic Chemistry
Frontiers, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 1870–1880, 2017.
[48] M. Kaliva and M. Vamvakaki, “Nanomaterials characterization,” in Polymer
Science and Nanotechnology, pp. 401–433, Elsevier, 2020.
[49] M. PICIORUS, A. POPA, C. IANASI, E. I. SZERB, and C. CRETU, “Zr(iv)
mofs based on terephtalic acid and acetic acid modulator.”
[50] Y. He, C. Li, X.-B. Chen, Z. Shi, and S. Feng, “Visible-light-responsive uio-66(zr)
with defects eﬀiciently promoting photocatalytic co2 reduction,” ACS Applied
Materials amp;amp; Interfaces, vol. 14, no. 25, p. 28977–28984, 2022.
[51] M. Thommes, K. Kaneko, A. V. Neimark, J. P. Olivier, F. Rodriguez-Reinoso,
J. Rouquerol, and K. S. Sing, “Physisorption of gases, with special reference to
the evaluation of surface area and pore size distribution (iupac technical report),”
Pure and Applied Chemistry, vol. 87, no. 9–10, p. 1051–1069, 2015.
[52] G. C. Shearer, S. Chavan, S. Bordiga, S. Svelle, U. Olsbye, and K. P. Lillerud,
“Defect engineering: Tuning the porosity and composition of the metal–organic
framework uio-66 via modulated synthesis,” Chemistry of Materials, vol. 28,
no. 11, p. 3749–3761, 2016.
==PAGE:78==
