==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Master’s thesis in Mathematical
Modelling and Computation
Title: Physics-informed policies for smart
power distribution networks
Author: Evangelos Diouslous
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors:
Professor Henrik Madsen
Section for Dynamical Systems
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technichal University of Denmark
E-mail: hmad@dtu.dk
Assistant Professor Georgios Tsaousoglou
Section for Dynamical Systems
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technichal University of Denmark
E-mail: geots@dtu.dk
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The thesis presents a comprehensive analysis of selecting the optimal dispatch ac-
tions for a power distribution system. The research utilizes physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) to investigate how this type of neural network can learn to make
near-optimal dispatch decisions while ensuring adherence to the laws of physics that
govern the system. Training data were collected by simulating the Optimal Power
Flow (OPF) problem, which was formulated as a decision-making task under uncer-
tainty with flexible consumers. This uncertainty arises due to various distributed en-
ergy resources. The large penetration of renewable energy sources leads to challenges
in planning and controlling the distribution of energy in power systems. Uncertainty
should be addressed and included in the OPF problem. Additionally, a thermal model
for temperature control in buildings is incorporated, providing further flexibility in
the system operator’s decisions. Controlling the temperature of buildings can be a
potential solution to shift from supply control to demand control. The proposed so-
lution for the OPF is a graph recurrent neural network (GRNN) with a loss function
that embeds physical knowledge. Overall, this study advances knowledge in the area
of scientific machine learning applied in power distribution systems.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Science (MSc) in Mathematical Mod-
elling.
Kongens Lyngby, 24th September 2023
Evangelos Diouslous
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude to my supervisors.
Thank you, Professor Henrik Madsen, for providing me with the opportunity to work
in this field. Thank you, for being positive and supportive throughout this journey.
Special thanks must also go to Assistant Professor Georgios Tsaousoglou, who has
been available for insightful discussions and collaboration from the very first moment
to the last.
Lastly, I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my family and friends.
Your motivation and encouragement have been pivotal in sustaining my efforts over
the past months.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
AC
Alternating current
DC
Direct current
LV
Low Voltage
EVs
Electrical Vehicles
DGs
Distributed Generators
OPF
Optimal Power Flow
RES
Renewable Energy Resources
GNN
Graph Neural Network
LCTs
Low-Carbon Technologies
DSO
Distribution System Operator
LVDNs Low Voltage Distribution Networks
SOCP
Second Order Cone Programming
PINNs Physics Informed Neural Networks
SciML
Scientific Machine Learning
GConvLSTM Graph Convolutional LSTM
GRNN Graph Recurrent Neural Network
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Low Voltage Distribution Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Optimal Power Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
The Power Flow for two buses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Resistor-Capacitor Thermal Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Theory of Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Neural Networks in Power Systems.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.3
Graph Convolutional LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Physics Informed Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
Theory of Physics Informed Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.2
Physics Informed Neural Networks in Power Systems . . . . . .
18
3
Problem Formulation
21
3.1
SOCP for the Distribution System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Distributed Energy Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Solution Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Experimental Setup
31
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.1
Distribution Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Architecture of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Parameters of the selected model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Results
37
5.1
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Appendices
45
Appendix A
Discretization of the Resistor-Capacitor Thermal Model
47
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context and Motivation
As the global push for sustainable energy grows, power distribution systems are be-
coming increasingly complex. More specifically, in modern power systems, the un-
certainties introduced by the integration of distributed energy resources (DERs) like
renewable energy sources (RES), electric vehicles (EVs), and the active participation
of consumers in the energy market further magnify the complexity of managing and
maintaining a system like that. Additionally, the varied nature of DERs complicates
solutions that rely on comprehensive modeling, and their numerous decentralized
characteristics challenge centralized management. These challenges are imposed on
the Distribution System Operators (DSOs) who are responsible for the eﬀicient and
safe operation of the system.
Consequently, determining the optimal operation points has become even more criti-
cal and challenging than ever before. In this context, the Optimal Power Flow (OPF)
approach plays a crucial role as a mathematical optimization technique. OPF de-
termines the dispatch of generating units to satisfy the electricity demand at the
minimum cost while complying with the technical limits of the system.
However,
throughout its history, OPF has faced a number of challenges. The most persistent
one is computational complexity. Given the high-dimensional, non-linear, and non-
convex nature of OPF problems, finding global or high-quality solutions has been
computationally challenging, especially for large-scale systems. [1]
Efforts have been made to overcome those challenges by applying modern optimiza-
tion techniques. Linearized approximations, so-called DC OPF techniques, reduce
the original problem significantly but it has several limitations among which the
most severe one is that the solution of DC-OPF may not even be a feasible solu-
tion of AC-OPF. [2] More advanced techniques that include convex relaxations, with
semidefinite programming and second-order cone programming (SOCP) models be-
ing noteworthy. The main idea of these approaches is to approximate the original
non-convex optimization problem with a convex one. Convex relaxation techniques
have a lot of advantages [3] and can be solved eﬀiciently but they don’t take into
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
consideration the uncertainty that modern power systems have to deal with.
Until recently, it was not possible to solve the optimization problems of large-scale sys-
tems considering this stochasticity explicitly, mainly due to the lack of reliable data
about the future state of variables and computational resources. However, advances
in optimization techniques like mixed-integer programming, which has achieved speed
improvements of 107, and excessive collection of data have changed that. Stochastic
optimization techniques, that consider different scenarios to model uncertain parame-
ters and other sophisticated methods for solving the OPF problem under uncertainty
have been proposed. As an example, [4] suggested a centralized approach while [5]
introduced a distributed method, both utilizing a scenario-based stochastic program-
ming approach for the SOCP model.
Even though a lot of advancements have been made, the increasing volatility in grid
conditions due to the integration of DERs creates a desire for OPF problems to be
solved in near real time to have the most accurate state of the system. Yet, this task
is diﬀicult for large-scale OPF issues, even with the DC-OPF approximation. The
need for online decision-making has led to new research efforts in using data-driven
and machine learning (ML) approaches to shift the computational effort away from
real-time (optimization) to offline training, potentially providing an almost instant
prediction of the outputs of OPF problems. One suggested approach is the ”learn-
to-optimize” method, which concentrates on modeling relationships between power
system inputs and outputs using historical measurement data. Using ML techniques
has shown a computational speed increase of 100 to 1,000 times compared to tradi-
tional approaches [6].
Machine learning methods for this application face two primary obstacles. Firstly,
there’s a challenge with the quantity and quality of training data. Achieving high
accuracy with a neural network (NN) demands extensive OPF results, encompassing
both typical and atypical scenarios.
Secondly, current machine learning solutions
haven’t provided worst-case performance assurances. Given that OPF is frequently
utilized in safety-critical contexts, it’s imperative that NN predictions adhere to all
OPF constraints, including those related to line, voltage, or generator limits.
A
possible solution to overcome those challenges is physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs).
PINNs are neural networks that incorporate a priori knowledge from physical laws.
Unlike traditional neural networks that are purely data-driven, PINNs integrate
known physical equations into their structure, enhancing their training. This inte-
gration makes the network more robust and allows it to generalize better, especially
in cases where data might be sparse. [7] By being informed by physics, PINNs auto-
matically satisfy known physical constraints, making them ideal for modeling complex
systems where we possess some understanding of the underlying mechanisms [8]. In
essence, they serve as hybrid models, synergizing empirical data-driven insights with
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Thesis Objectives
3
first-principles-based knowledge. However, the use of scientific machine learning, and
PINNs, is still in its early stages and not fully developed.
1.2
Thesis Objectives
This thesis is a novel try to solve the OPF problem with active distributed energy
resources (DERs) and flexible consumers with a Graph Recurrent Neural Network
(GRNN). By selecting a GRNN architecture, we anticipate that our model will ef-
fectively capture both spatial (graph-structured) and temporal (sequential) features.
With the introduction of flexible consumers, DSOs have the ability to shift from tradi-
tional supply control to demand control. This can help the smart grid (SG) operators
enhance the eﬀiciency of their operations while taking into account the consumer’s
needs.
In order to achieve that, a thermal model for the temperature control of buildings is
going to be incorporated into the original OPF problem that was originally formulated
by [9]. Controlling the temperature of buildings except of a major opportunity for
energy savings, a more flexible regulation system can be introduced too, allowing for
a balance between energy consumption and user comfort. By integrating this thermal
model, grid operators can achieve more precise demand-side management, optimizing
not just the power flow but also ensuring a sustainable and comfortable environment
for occupants.
In this study, we’ll look at how the Graph Recurrent Neural Network (GRNN) per-
forms using two different types of loss functions. The first takes into consideration
only the training data and the second is a physics-informed loss function. The research
questions that this thesis will try to investigate and answer are:
1. How does solving the OPF problem as an optimization problem differ from
approximating it with an NN? (Section 3.3)
2. How does the GRNN perform when optimized solely based on training data
fidelity as opposed to integrating the physics system constraints? (Chapter 5)
3. What implications do these findings suggest for future applications of neural
network models in systems constrained by physical laws? (Section 6.2
By examining these questions, we aim to gain a deeper understanding of how PINNs
differ from traditional NNs and what improvements are needed for their application
in real-world scenarios.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.3
Thesis Structure
To address these questions, a theoretical background and a literature review will be
presented first, followed by the problem formulation, the experimental setup, and
the results. Specifically, Chapter 2 provides relevant background information and
introduces the foundational concepts for the subsequent chapters. Chapter 3 delves
into the mathematical description of the model, focusing on all the constraints neces-
sary for simulating and optimizing a distribution network, and clarifies the solution
methodology. Chapter 4 presents the experimental setup, including the preprocessing
of open-source datasets and intricate details of GRNN. Finally, Chapter 5 presents the
results of this study while Chapter 6 discusses the challenges and offers suggestions
for future work.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In this chapter, we first look at the basics of the Low Voltage (LV) distribution
grid, and then move on to Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problems. Next, we go over
Neural Networks (NNs), discuss different types, and focus on Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) and their application in power systems. The chapter ends with a simple
intro to Physics Informed Neural Networks (PINNs).
This chapter helps set the
foundation for more detailed discussions later on. This collective discussion aims to
create a well-rounded theoretical groundwork for forthcoming in-depth analyses and
applications.
2.1
Low Voltage Distribution Networks
The electrical power distribution system involves a multi-tiered structure for eﬀicient
and safe delivery of electricity to end users. Starting with generation, typically at a
centralized location, the power is transmitted at high voltage (132-400 kV in the UK)
through a transmission network. This voltage is then stepped down at Grid Supply
Points to a lower distribution voltage level (e.g., 132 kV). Further down the network,
at Bulk Supply Points and primary substations, the voltage is reduced to a medium
voltage level (e.g., 33 kV and then 11 kV).
The Low Voltage (LV) distribution network represents the final step in the power
supply chain ((230V single phase and 0.4 kV Three-phase), directly interfacing with
end-user customers and accommodating numerous smaller-scale dispersed loads. Gov-
ernments around the globe, in a bid to meet their environmental objectives and
tackle the problem of energy deficiency, are incorporating more and more renew-
able energy sources (RES) into the electricity grid. Furthermore, various forms of
low-carbon technologies (LCTs), including electric vehicles (EVs), are becoming in-
creasingly prevalent. [10] A considerable amount of RES and LCTs is integrated into
the LV distribution network, presenting a broad array of challenges. To address these
issues, it’s critical to continuously evolve traditional planning and operational frame-
works to manage these emerging technologies effectively. It can be concluded that
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
the traditional centralized generation system has reshaped towards a decentralized
power generation. [11]
There are three main configurations of electrical power networks:
• Interconnected Network Topology: Predominantly used in High Voltage
(HV) transmission networks. This topology is employed to ensure a secure power
supply during an outage, as it allows multiple paths for electricity transmission.
• Ring Topology: This topology includes both link arrangements and an open
loop. It is commonly used in 11 kV and 33 kV Medium Voltage (MV) networks to
provide a secure supply. The open point, positioned between two interconnected
radial feeders, maintains radial operation for each feeder and helps isolate a
faulty section.
• Radial Network Topology: Predominantly used in Low Voltage (LV) distri-
bution networks. This topology is chosen when faults occur infrequently and
the fault fatality level (number of consumers affected by the fault) is not high.
The radial network can be reconfigured into a weakly meshed network to inter-
connect two buses within the network.
The Low Voltage (LV) distribution network has several defining characteristics. It
consists of numerous nodes, accounting for more than 99.6% of total system connec-
tions in some networks, such as the Dutch power system [12]. However, monitoring
of these networks is often limited, as advanced metering infrastructure is still under-
developed, leading to a lack of understanding and substantial uncertainties about
the network state. LV networks typically operate in radial or weakly meshed topolo-
gies, simplifying power flow analysis but also exhibiting high R/X ratios, especially
with underground cables. This makes resistance crucial in determining voltage. LV
networks have highly variable and uncertain load patterns, further complicated by
untransposed feeders.
The introduction of distribution generators results in a bi-
directional power flow, which can raise the voltage level on the load side due to the
reverse power flow.
To conclude, LV networks introduce a unique set of operational challenges, necessitat-
ing advanced power flow techniques to maintain system stability and security. The
primary objective of power flow analysis in this evolving landscape is to manage the
complexities introduced by a diverse range of energy sources, notably Distributed
Generators (DGs), as well as coping with high load demand variations and unbal-
anced voltage and current conditions.
A variety of research works have proposed
deterministic and probabilistic power flow methods to address these issues. [13]. In
the next section, the OPF problem is going to be presented in detail.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Optimal Power Flow
7
2.2
Optimal Power Flow
Optimal Power Flow (OPF) is a crucial optimization challenge in the energy indus-
try [14]. It plays a vital role in system planning, establishing day-ahead market prices,
and eﬀiciently allocating generation capacity throughout the day. Despite being for-
mulated over fifty years ago, there is still a lack of fast and robust techniques for
solving OPF, which could lead to saving tens of billions of dollars annually [14]. At
its core, OPF aims to determine the optimal power output that generators in the
grid must produce to meet a given demand, with the objective of minimizing the
generation costs for each unit. However, the sinusoidal nature of electrical generation
makes this problem challenging to solve [15] [16].
To address this complexity, one approach is to use linear approximations, assuming
constant bus voltage and employing small-angle approximations for trigonometric
terms in voltage angle differences. This method, known as DC-OPF, is commonly
utilized in the industry but has limitations, particularly in heavily loaded networks
where voltage angle differences become significant [17].
The more precise and comprehensive formulation of the problem is referred to as
AC-OPF, incorporating AC dynamics and resulting in a non-convex problem due to
nonlinearities in power flow equations [18]. This has been proven to be NP-complete
[16].
Convex relaxation techniques, leading to semi-definite programs, have been
attempted to tackle AC-OPF [1].
Efforts have been made to apply machine intelligence to the OPF problem [19]. Vari-
ous approaches, such as evolutionary programming, evolutionary strategies, genetic al-
gorithms, artificial neural networks, simulated annealing, fuzzy set theory, ant colony
optimization, and particle swarm optimization, have been explored. However, none
of these approaches have demonstrated success on networks larger than the 30-node
IEEE test case [20].
Apart from that, more challenges arise when the optimal power flow problem should
be applied in low-voltage distribution networks (LVDNs). Low-voltage distribution
networks (LVDNs) differ significantly from high-voltage transmission networks in
terms of scale, complexity, and proximity to end-users. As the installation of dis-
tributed energy resources (DERs) continues to surge at residential and commercial
levels, LVDNs face unique challenges in maintaining voltage levels and accommodat-
ing the increasing capacity demand. [21]. The limited availability of data on LVDNs’
capacity further complicates the planning, installation, and connection of new DERs.
Additionally, the lack of transparency in LVDNs’ data and information often necessi-
tates model simplifications, such as ignoring phase imbalance, resulting in inaccurate
outcomes.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
Given the challenges posed by the increasingly high levels of uncertainty introduced by
distributed renewable generation, electric vehicles (EVs), and smart heating systems,
a possible solution to address these issues in the context of the Optimal Power Flow
(OPF) problem is to adopt a stochastic and adaptive approach. This approach in-
volves the Distribution System Operator (DSO) making real-time decisions while con-
sidering the future impact of these decisions and continuously adapting them based
on updated information revealed online. By incorporating this sequential decision-
making under uncertainty, the DSO can effectively manage the uncertainties arising
from renewable generation variability, EV charging patterns, and dynamic loads. [22]
Furthermore, the diversity and multitude of Distributed Energy Resources (DERs)
make comprehensive modeling approaches impractical. Additionally, their distributed
nature complicates centralized management. To tackle these challenges, data-driven
and distributed decision-making approaches are proposed as potential solutions. [9]
A data-driven approach leverages historical data and predictive analytics to make
informed decisions in real time. This allows the DSO to optimize the operation of
the distribution network by learning from past experiences and adjusting strategies
accordingly. On the other hand, a distributed decision-making approach allows DERs
to make local decisions autonomously based on local information, while coordination
and optimization can be achieved through communication and coordination mech-
anisms.
This decentralized approach can enhance flexibility and scalability while
eﬀiciently utilizing DERs’ capabilities to improve overall network performance.
2.2.1
The Power Flow for two buses
A power grid is comprised of a large number of components that interact with each
other and have to satisfy physical, economic, and environmental conditions. Power
grids can be represented as networks and the two main components that they include
are buses (nodes) and transmission-distribution lines [14]. We denote the set of nodes
(buses) as B. An AC circuit can be described by the complex power that is flowing
from a bus i to a bus j through a transmission line (i, j), where i, j ∈B and (i, j) ∈E.
Sij = Pij + jQij
(2.1)
where, Qij and Pij are called active and reactive power, respectively.
Sij = ViI∗
ij
(2.2)
where I∗
ij is the complex conjugate of the current and Vi is the complex voltage at
bus i. In addition, transmission lines have losses due to their resistance (Rij). In AC
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Optimal Power Flow
9
circuits there is a dynamic effect caused by the line’s reactance (Xij) which causes
delays through storing energy and providing it later to the circuit. These two physical
effects define impedance as Zij = Rij + jXij and admittance, which is the reciprocal
of the impedance Yij = 1/Zij. Using equation (3), we can express the current between
two buses as a function of the voltage drop and the admittance, which is basically
Ohm’s Law:
Iij = Yij(Vi −Vj)
(3)
The next step is to represent the voltage by using the polar form:
Vi = Vioejδi = Vio(cos δi + j sin δi)
(2.3)
where Vio and δi are the voltage magnitude and angle of bus i, respectively.
By
replacing equation (3) with equation (2) and considering the polar form of voltage,
we can obtain the final equations for the real and imaginary parts of the power:
Pij =
1
R2
ij + X2
ij

Rij(V 2
io −VioVjo cos δij) + Xij(VioVjo sin δij)

(2.4)
Qij =
1
R2
ij + X2
ij

Xij(V 2
io −VioVjo cos δij) + Rij(VioVjo sin δij)

(2.5)
To conclude, here we presented the power flow between two connected buses and
established a relationship between complex power flow and complex voltages which
are the building blocks for the formulation of the AC-OPF problem.
However, instead of solving the original AC-OPF, a second-order cone programming
(SOCP) approximation is going to be considered in this study. The SOCP approxi-
mation of the OPF is often preferred over solving the original OPF problem due to
its computational eﬀiciency and robustness. The original OPF problem is non-linear
and non-convex, making it challenging and time-consuming to solve. In contrast, the
SOCP approximation offers a convex reformulation, linearizing the non-linearities.
This not only accelerates the solution process but also ensures global optimality,
making it a more practical choice for real-world power system applications. Interest-
ingly if the solution is not globally optimal, it offers a lower bound on the minimum
cost, indicating how close a feasible solution is to the best possible. At last, if the
relaxed problem is infeasible, it confirms that the original OPF can’t be solved.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background
2.3
Resistor-Capacitor Thermal Models
The theoretical foundations behind the thermal model that was selected for our sim-
ulation is presented here.
Among a variety of data-driven models, the thermal resistor-capacitor-network model
(i.e., RC model) is of particular interest due to its obedience to fundamental physical
principles. The RC model, which uses a network of thermal resistors and capacitors,
is of interest due to its adherence to physical principles. This model can capture
building thermal dynamics and estimate thermal resistances, capacitances, and other
parameters by tuning model outputs to measured outputs. Unlike pure statistical
models, the parameters of the RC model have physical interpretations. Researchers
have used this model to derive important thermal properties of building components
and to develop physically plausible and statistically accurate models for characterizing
building thermal dynamics and predicting indoor temperatures or transient building
loads. [23]
To model building thermal dynamics, zonal temperatures are used as outputs while
outdoor temperature, solar radiation, and heating power are used as inputs. An RC
network is used to represent the relationship between inputs and outputs. Some key
assumptions for building the RC model are that the air in each zone is well mixed,
heat transfer coeﬀicients for conduction, convection, and radiation are constant, nat-
ural ventilation rate is constant, thermal conduction is one-dimensional within each
building component, and heating power is distributed uniformly across the house.
Based on the above assumptions, the thermal dynamics of each temperature node in
the RC network are governed by the following ordinary differential equation, taking
the k th node as an example:
Ck
dTk
dt =
X
h
(Th −Tk)
Rh
+
X
j
wjQj
(2.6)
where Ck is the thermal capacitance of the kth node, Tk is the temperature of the
k-th node, Th represents temperature of the hth node adjacent to the kth node, Rh,k
is the thermal resistance between the kth and the hth node and wj is a weighting
factor that evaluates the heat input Qj.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Neural Networks
11
2.4
Neural Networks
Neural Networks (NNs) are computational models designed to recognize patterns in
complex datasets. Within the broad spectrum of NNs, this chapter will specifically
delve into Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
GNNs are tailored for systems with
interrelated entities that can offer valuable insights for the study of smart power
distribution networks
Interestingly, when combining Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs), one obtains a model capable of understanding data with both
spatial (graph-structured) and temporal (sequential) characteristics.
Such hybrid
models are particularly powerful in scenarios where the data is not only interrelated
but also evolves over time. For instance, in smart power distribution networks, this
combined approach could capture the temporal dynamics of power consumption while
accounting for the interconnected nature of the grid. The result is a more holistic
and nuanced model that can provide richer insights and more accurate predictions in
complex, time-varying systems. A model like that will be utilized in this study and
be thoroughly presented in the next Chapters.
In this section, we will delve into the foundational theory of neural networks (NNs).
Furthermore, we’ll spotlight the applications of NNs, with a particular emphasis on
graph neural networks (GNNs), within the realm of power systems.
2.4.1
Theory of Neural Networks
Artificial Neural Networks (NNs) are computational models inspired by the way bi-
ological neural systems process information.
Neural Networks, often heralded for
their versatility, are considered universal approximators, capable of representing a
wide variety of continuous functions to any desired degree of accuracy given a suﬀi-
cient number of hidden layers and units [24]. At the core of these models are simple
processing units called neurons, as depicted in Figure 2.1. These neurons can pro-
duce real-valued activations based on a mathematical representation, often given by
Equation (2.7):
output = f

X
j
wjxj + bj


(2.7)
where f can be any linear or non-linear activation function like sigmoid,tanh, or ReLu,
and wj, and bj are the weights and biases of the neuron, respectively.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background
Figure 2.1. A depiction of the neuron input-output mechanism.
Neurons are connected to each other through weighted connections, and the strength
of these connections (or weights) determines how information is processed within the
network. Input neurons receive data from external sources and, as this information
flows through the network, it gets transformed and combined in various ways, de-
pending on the weights. The objective of training a neural network is to adjust these
weights in a way that the network produces the desired output for a given input.
This process of adjusting weights to minimize the difference between the predicted
and actual output is quantified by the loss function shown in (2.8). The challenge in
this learning process is to accurately determine how much each weight contributes to
the final output, especially when there are multiple layers of computation involved.
min
w,b L(w, b) =
N
X
i=1

y(i) −fw,b(x(i))
2
(2.8)
In (2.8), L(w) represents the total loss over the dataset, where N is the number of
data samples, y(i) is the actual output, fw,b(x(i)) is the network’s predicted output
for the ith input sample with weights w and biases b, and the aim is to minimize the
squared difference between predictions and actual outputs.
The cornerstone algorithm of learning and NNs is backpropagation (BP). Originating
from ideas discussed in the early 1960s, it pivots on the notion of minimizing errors by
adjusting the network’s weights through iterative gradient descent methods, inspired
by historical mathematical principles such as the Euler–Lagrange equations in the
Calculus of Variations. The process utilizes the chain rule from calculus, first con-
ceived by mathematicians like Leibniz in the late 17th century, to propagate errors
backward through the network [25]. Simplified derivations of BP employ the chain
rule exclusively, allowing the algorithm to eﬀiciently optimize the network’s perfor-
mance. This mathematical structure, although eﬀicient in propagating information
through the network’s layers, didn’t initially address certain complexities like direct
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Neural Networks
13
multi-layer connections or potential eﬀiciency boosts from network sparsity.
Algorithm 1 Backpropagation Algorithm for Neural Networks
1: Input: x
2: Set activation for input layer: a1 ←x
3: for l = 2 to L do
4:
Compute weighted input: zl ←wlal−1 + bl
5:
Compute activation: al ←σ
 zl
6: end for
7: Compute output error: δL ←∇aC ⊙σ′  zL
8: for l = L −1 downto 2 do
9:
Backpropagate the error: δl ←
 wl+1T δl+1
⊙σ′  zl
10: end for
11: The gradient of the cost function with respect to weights is:
∂C
∂wl
jk ←al−1
k
δl
j
12: The gradient of the cost function with respect to biases is:
∂C
∂bl
j ←δl
j
However, by the 1980s, the NN-specific application of BP emerged as a powerful tool
for training multi-layered neural networks, paving the way for a paradigm shift in the
field. A groundbreaking work in 1986 by Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams showcased
the ability of BP to cultivate meaningful internal representations within the hidden
layers of neural networks. This revelation bolstered the belief in the potential of deep
learning, where networks could learn complex patterns and representations from data.
In essence, backpropagation facilitates the ’learning’ or ’credit assignment’ in NNs by
adjusting weights based on the propagated error, enabling them to better predict
outcomes over time.
Artificial Neural Networks (NNs), over the years, have evolved into a plethora of ar-
chitectures, each tailored to address specific types of problems. From the simplicity
of feed-forward networks to the temporal depth of recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
the spatial awareness of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and the generative
prowess of generative adversarial networks (GANs), the diversity in design mirrors the
vastness of their applications. These architectures have driven revolutionary advance-
ments in fields such as image and speech recognition, natural language processing,
medical diagnosis, financial forecasting, and even artistic content creation.
2.4.2
Neural Networks in Power Systems.
In recent times, power systems have grown a lot, especially with more focus on clean
energy and new technologies. With this growth comes a lot of data that needs under-
standing. One new way to help with this is through the utilization of NNs. These
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Background
tools from the world of artificial intelligence have shown to be better than the major-
ity of recent algorithms [26]. By using NNs, we’re merging old electrical know-how
with new tech solutions, leading to better ways to study and improve power systems.
More specifically the smart grid, after decades of evolution, has transformed into
a large, dynamic, and non-linear control system known as the power system. This
transformation has introduced multi-directional information flows, complicating the
coordination among various participants like producers, distributors, and consumers.
One significant challenge arises from the increasing incorporation of renewable energy
sources, like solar and wind, which introduce fluctuations requiring additional reserve
capacities to maintain a consistent power supply. Additionally, integrating modern
elements like electric vehicles demands new adjustments for power flow and voltage.
Deregulation in electricity markets further complicates strategy development that
benefits both consumers and producers. Traditional model-based methods, previously
used to manage such systems, now struggle due to these complexities, especially in
capturing the nuances of renewable energy source fluctuations and regional power
curve variations. [27]
Deep neural networks (DNNs), with their remarkable success in computer vision, have
brought innovative solutions to challenges in power systems that traditional model-
based methods couldn’t address. Tasks like time series prediction, fault diagnosis, and
operational control, which heavily relied on manual feature engineering, have been
revolutionized by the application of various DNNs such as RNNs, CNNs, and GANs.
This success is attributed to the synergy of DNNs’ capability to extract latent features
from diverse data, the proliferation of advanced sensors, and enhanced computing
resources.
However, power systems often produce complex graph-structured data,
which doesn’t fit well into the Euclidean domain where conventional DNNs operate.
[28]. This is where graph neural networks (GNNs) come into play. These specialized
networks, encompassing variations like GCNs and GRNNs, are designed to handle
the irregularities and complexities of graph data, preserving topological information
that standard DNNs might overlook. In essence, while DNNs have paved the way for
more advanced data processing in power systems, GNNs further refine the approach
by catering to the unique structure and intricacies of power system data.
Despite the promising capabilities of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), their applica-
tion has been largely restricted to domains like computer science and biology, with a
focus on areas such as social networks, link prediction, and natural language process-
ing. The surge in GNN-related publications predominantly started around 2018, but
their applications in power systems remain sparse. [29] Current literature in power sys-
tem applications spans topics including fault scenario analysis, time series prediction
for renewable energy sources, power flow computations, and data generation. How-
ever, as research progresses and the volume of publications grows, the categorization
of these applications is likely to become more granulated.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Neural Networks
15
When it comes to OPF problem, GNNs have shown great capabilities.
GNNs go
beyond mere power flow calculations to optimizing it. For instance, spectrum-based
GCNs are tailored to optimize the reactive power in distribution networks. They
employ the adjacency matrix to capture topology information between nodes, unveil-
ing the correlation of nodes, and subsequently use deep graph convolutional layers
to discern the intricate nonlinear relationship between power equipment states and
power loads. [30]. Their capability to mine network structures makes GNNs potent
tools for approximating optimal power flow solutions. Simulation results have shown
that GNNs are adept at leveraging latent grid structures and consistently outperform
other methods. [28]. One distinctive feature of GNNs is their adaptability to changing
conditions. They cater to constraints such as voltage and current limitations, ensur-
ing the power grid’s safe operation. Moreover, with power systems’ topologies being
subject to change, GNNs can be modeled to account for such dynamic shifts, making
them particularly suited for real-world applications. [31].
The application of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in power systems, while promis-
ing, faces some hurdles in transitioning from theoretical research to commercial and
practical application. GNN theory, while evolving rapidly, is still in its nascent stages,
particularly when applied to domains outside of computer vision. Power systems de-
mand extreme stability and reliability in their control methods. Given the current
state of GNNs, which largely rely on statistical patterns and probabilities, there’s a
tangible risk in integrating them without comprehensive validation. At last, a fun-
damental limitation of the simplistic GNN models is their inability to recognize or
respect the inherent physics of power systems. [28]
In essence, GNNs provide a holistic solution in the power systems domain by ensuring
accuracy, reducing computation time, and offering adaptability to dynamic changes.
Their application in power flow approximation and optimization marks a significant
leap from traditional methodologies, pushing the frontier of advancements in this
field.
2.4.3
Graph Convolutional LSTM
As previously discussed, GNN seems really promising in the field of power systems
with active research in the last few years. In this study, we will focus on examining a
specific type of GNN known as a Graph Recurrent Neural Network (GRNN). GRNN
aims to capture both spatial and temporal characteristics in data. Such structured
sequences are commonly encountered in various domains, including videos, vocabulary
graphs for natural language modeling, and spatiotemporal measurements collected
from sensor networks. More specifically, we will deploy a Graph Convolutional LSTM
(GConvLST), a model first introduced by Seo et al. in their work [32].
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Background
The mathematical description of the model is given by:
i = σ (Wxi ∗G xt + Whi ∗G ht−1 + wci ⊙ct−1 + bi) ,
f = σ (Wxf ∗G xt + Whf ∗G ht−1 + wcf ⊙ct−1 + bf) ,
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙tanh (Wxc ∗G xt + Whc ∗G ht−1 + bc) ,
o = σ (Wxo ∗G xt + Who ∗G ht−1 + wco ⊙ct + bo) ,
ht = o ⊙tanh (ct) .
(2.9)
where ∗G is the graph convolution product, ⊙denotes the Hadamard product, σ(·)
the sigmoid function and i, f, o are the input, forget and output gates.
The graph convolutional kernels are denoted as Wh ∈RK×dh×dh and Wx ∈RK×dh×dx.
Notably, the value of ”K” determines the number of model parameters.
To simplify our notation, we use the expression ”Wxi ∗G xt” to describe a graph
convolution operation on the input data ”xt” using ”dhdx” filters. These filters depend
on the graph Laplacian ”L” and are characterized by the ”K” Chebyshev coeﬀicients.
y = gθ ∗G x = gθ(L)x =
K−1
X
k=0
θkTk(˜L)x
(2.10)
In the context of distributed computing, the parameter ”K” plays a crucial role in
controlling communication overhead. Specifically, it determines how many nodes a
given node ”i” needs to exchange information with in order to compute its local states
effectively.
2.5
Physics Informed Neural Networks
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINN) are a type of neural network that inte-
grates specific model equations, such as Partial Differential Equations (PDE), di-
rectly into their structure. In modern applications, PINNs are employed to address
problems associated with PDEs, fractional equations, integral differential equations,
and stochastic PDEs. Essentially, this innovative approach functions as a dual-task
learning system, where the neural network is trained to match observed data and
simultaneously respecting the physics of the system.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Physics Informed Neural Networks
17
2.5.1
Theory of Physics Informed Neural Networks
Incorporating prior knowledge into machine learning is not new. Dissanayake and
Phan-Thien’s 1994 work can be seen as an early form of Physics-Informed Neural
Networks (PINNs), building on the universal approximation theories of the 1980s, like
Hornik et al.’s 1989 study. During the 1990s, various models used neural networks to
approximate PDEs, including constrained neural networks by Psichogios and Ungar
in 1992. Dissanayake and Phan-Thien employed a basic neural network with two
hidden layers to mimic a PDE. [7] The network’s loss function, based on the L2 error,
was evaluated using quasi-Newtonian methods and finite difference techniques.
Research on using neural networks (NNs) to address PDEs surged in the late 2010s,
driven by enhanced hardware, improved training practices, and open-source tools like
Tensorflow. A significant advancement came from Raissi et al. in 2019, who incorpo-
rated earlier ideas and introduced innovative methods, such as a time-stepping scheme
that optimized the predictive capability of NNs [33]. This framework simplified the
application of PINNs, making it a preferred choice for many researchers. The impact
of this work is evident from the rapidly increasing citations Raissi et al. received in
subsequent years.
Physically-informed neural networks (PINNs) are adept at tackling problems charac-
terized by sparse or noisy data. They merge data-driven learning with physical laws
defined by nonlinear partial differential equations. Represented in its most general
form, PINNs solve differential equations as:
F(u(z); γ) = f(z)
z in Ω,
B(u(z)) = g(z)
z in ∂Ω
defined on the domain Ω⊂Rd with the boundary ∂Ω. Where z := [x1, . . . , xd−1; t]
indicates the space-time coordinate vector, u represents the unknown solution, γ are
the parameters related to the physics, f is the function identifying the data of the
problem and F is the nonlinear differential operator.
Within this framework, the neural network (NN) aims to approximate the differential
equations by determining the optimal parameters, w, of the NN. This is achieved by
minimizing a composite loss function that integrates the differential equation term
LF, boundary conditions term LB, and potentially some existing data term Ldata.
Each component of the loss function is assigned a specific weight:
w∗= arg min
w
(ωFLF(w) + ωBLB(w) + ωdLdata (w))
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Background
2.5.2
Physics Informed Neural Networks in Power Systems
Power systems are increasingly reliant on Optimal Power Flow (OPF) for eﬀicient
planning and real-time operations. Traditional approaches to solving the AC-OPF
problem, which is non-linear and non-convex, often face challenges in convergence
and computational times.
To circumvent these issues, there has been a pivot to-
wards machine learning (ML) methods, which offer considerable speedups. However,
these methods introduce their own set of challenges, primarily revolving around the
need for extensive, high-quality datasets and a lack of worst-case performance guar-
antees, essential for safety-critical applications in power systems. [34] When it comes
to NN-based algorithms, their performance relies on the proper selection of a large
number of hyperparameters. Yet, there lack of an eﬀicient algorithm to guide this
hyperparameter tuning process. [35]
One promising approach to counter these limitations is the use of Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs) in power systems. By incorporating the physical laws gov-
erning power systems directly into the neural network training process, PINNs aim
to reduce the dependency on vast datasets. Moreover, by embedding these physi-
cal constraints, PINNs can potentially offer better reliability and assurance in their
predictions [36].
In their 2021 study, Rahul Nellikkath and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis introduced the
use of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) for the DC Optimal Power Flow
(OPF) problem. [34] By integrating the Karush-Kuhn-Tacker (KKT) conditions into
the neural network, they achieved enhanced accuracy with fewer training data points.
A notable contribution is the provision of worst-case guarantees, ensuring reliability
in predictions. However, the study is primarily confined to DC-OPF, signaling future
explorations towards AC-OPF applications.
In the same year, a paper from Rahul Nellikkath and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis again
made significant advancements in the realm of Optimal Power Flow (OPF) solutions
within power systems. [36] The authors introduced a novel application of physics-
informed neural networks (PINNs) to accurately predict the AC-OPF results, bring-
ing forth a unique blend of machine learning and power system physics.
Unlike
traditional neural network approaches, which often require vast training datasets and
offer no guarantees concerning constraint violations, their method integrates the AC
power flow equations directly into the neural network training. The network embeds
the AC-OPF Karush-Kuhn-Tacker (KKT) conditions directly into its training pro-
cess. The loss function of the physics-informed neural network comprises multiple
components, including the mean absolute error of active and reactive power gener-
ation prediction, voltage, and dual value prediction, as well as the KKT condition
violations.
Interestingly, the paper utilizes three neural networks (NNs) that are
independent and are trained to minimize their respective mean absolute errors along-
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Physics Informed Neural Networks
19
side the KKT condition violations. This separation and focused training ensure that
each network specializes in its specific task, offering a more precise and reliable OPF
estimation. Future work, as proposed by the authors, aims to further refine this ap-
proach by focusing on a multilevel optimization algorithm for fine-tuning the PINN
hyperparameters, thus minimizing constraint violations even further.
In their paper, Xingyu Lei et al. address the intricate challenges of optimal power
flow (OPF) by introducing a data-driven methodology rooted in the stacked extreme
learning machine (SELM) framework [35].
Recognized for its quick training pace
and reduced parameter tuning demands, SELM is refined through a tri-stage learn-
ing approach. This progression systematically breaks down OPF model intricacies,
ensuring a simplified learning process and the rectification of inherent learning biases.
To bolster the process, the team incorporates a sample pre-classification strategy, em-
phasizing active constraint identification to enhance feature extraction. Unlike many
deep learning algorithms, this method necessitates minimal parameter adjustments,
underscoring its adaptability across diverse systems.
Validations using IEEE and
Polish benchmark systems highlighted the method’s edge over existing alternatives,
hinting at its future potential in practical systems enriched with field data.
In the realm of power systems, especially in the context of Optimal Power Flow (OPF),
the application of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) remains a relatively
underexplored territory. The current body of literature provides limited insights into
this intersection of technology and application. This study aims to bridge this gap by
delving into the OPF problem, particularly focusing on integrating distributed energy
resources (DERs). Moreover, it introduces a thermal model to oversee temperature
control within residential settings, providing flexibility to the operator and leveraging
the capabilities of a Graph Neural Network (GNN). Through this work, we aim to add
valuable insights into the growing discussion about how PINNs and power systems
work together.
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Formulation
In this chapter, we will present the formulation of the OPF problem tailored for
solution by our GRNN. Specifically, we will introduce the OPF as a Second-Order
Cone Programming (SOCP). Additionally, we will detail the models for Distributed
Energy Resources (DERs), including generators, photovoltaic systems (PVs), electric
vehicles (EVs), storage solutions, and flexible consumers. Finally, we will describe
the objective function and frame the problem within an optimization context.
We’ve reviewed how power flows between two linked nodes (see subsection 2.2.1) and
how thermal energy for buildings can be modeled (refer to Section 2.3). Using this
knowledge, we’re set to build our main optimization problem. The system model that
is going to be considered for modeling the distribution system and the energy resources
is given by Tsaousoglou et al.’s data-driven approach to distributed sequential optimal
power flow under uncertainty in power distribution systems (2022). [37] Additionally,
we’re using the model by Anders Thavlov and Bindner for the intelligent heating of
buildings. [38]
Notation: In the following discussion, straight fonts will signify parameters, while
italics will be used to denote decision variables. Random variables will be indicated
using tilded fonts. Sets will be represented by calligraphic fonts, and vectors will be
designated in bold fonts.
3.1
SOCP for the Distribution System
Each bus can be connected with a set of resources N that can either produce or
consume electricity. Resources that will be considered in this study are generators,
photovoltaics (PVs), consumers, energy storage, and electrical vehicles (EVs). The
way to model and describe those will be in section 3.2. The set of resources that
can be connected to a bus b ∈B will be denoted as Nb, its parent node by ζb and
its children nodes by Cb and the continuous time will be separated in equal time
intervals T . The equations that describe the node’s active and reactive power follow
the power balance equations which express the conservation of power (energy) and
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Problem Formulation
can mathematically be described as:
Pζbb,t +
X
n∈Nb
xn,tPn,t −
X
c∈Cb

Pbc,t + RbcIsqr
bc,t

= 0
Qζbb,t +
X
n∈Nb
Qn,t −
X
c∈Cb

Qbc,t + Xbc:Isqr
bc,t

= 0
∀b ∈B, t ∈T ,
(3.1)
The squared magnitude of the current flowing through each line Isqr
bc,t, as well as the
resistance Rbc and reactance of the line Xbc, are included in the equations to account
for power losses in the transmission lines. At last xn,t is a decision variable that
determines the active power of each resource from its upper bound Pn,t.
The voltage difference between the parent node ζb and the bus node b is represented by
an equation that takes into account the active and reactive power flows, the active and
reactive line parameters, and the squared magnitude of the current flowing through
the line.
V sqr
ζb,t −2 (RζbbPζbb,t + XζbbQζbb,t) −

R2
ζbb + X2
ζbb

Isqr
ζbb,t
= V sqr
b,t ,
∀b ∈B, t ∈T
(3.2)
For the branch power flows, the Second-Order Cone Programming (SOCP) relaxation
of the optimal power flow problem is going to be utilized. It is calculated by taking the
product of the voltage at node b and the current flowing through the line connecting
node ζb to b, and comparing it to the sum of the squares of the active and reactive
power flowing through that line.
Vb,tIζbb,t ≤P 2
ζbb,t + Q2
ζbb,t,
∀b ∈B, t ∈T
(3.3)
At last, we have to take into consideration the mechanical restrictions of our system.
The voltage at bus b must be between V and V and the current flowing through the
line connecting node ζb to b must be between 0 and Iζbb.
V ≤Vb,t ≤V
∀b ∈B, t ∈T
0 ≤Iζbb,t ≤Iζbb
∀b ∈B, t ∈T
(3.4)
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Distributed Energy Resources
23
3.2
Distributed Energy Resources
In each node, different sets of electricity resources can be connected that either con-
sume, produce, or store energy. In this study, we are going to consider generators,
residential properties (Consumers), electric vehicles (EVs), photovoltaic panels (PVs),
and storage. Each resource belongs to a set Nθ of type θ ∈Θ, where Θ = { Generators,
PV, Consumers, Storage, EVs }.
The next step is to characterize each resource with different features according to the
type of resource to which it belongs. Firstly, all the resources are characterized by
their active power injection which is constrained by upper and lower bounds, Pn,t, Pn,t.
Those bounds can be either positive or negative for resources that they produce or
consume energy, respectively. Any resource can be set to a specific level of operation.
Pn,t ≤xn,tPn,t ≤Pn,t,
∀n ∈N, t ∈T ,
(3.5)
In Eq. 3.5, xn,t is a decision variable that can dispatch the resource to operate at
any value from the set that the upper and lower bounds define. If the resource is
a generator then this set would contain only positive values with the upper bound
being the power capacity of the generator, while if it was a residential load would be
a set of non-positive values to denote the power consumption.
When it comes to the consumers, we can correlate the energy consumption with the
internal temperature of the residence. This step is taken to integrate the heat demands
with the electricity demands of a consumer and to make our energy management
system more flexible. The temperature of the indoor air (Tn), the temperature in
the house envelope (Tom), and in the interior walls and floors (Tnm) are going to
be considered to describe the heat dynamic model of each residence. The interior
wall exchanges heat with the indoor air, the indoor air exchanges heat with the
inside of the house envelope and directly to the outside.
At last, the outside of
the house exchanges heat with the ambient environment. The temperature of the
outdoor environment (eTa) can be considered as a random variable which introduces
further uncertainty to our system. Energy is fed into the building from controllable
heaters that consume energy Φn and is treated as a controllable variable, and by solar
radiation through windows. The solar radiation is considered a random variable (eΦs)
is partially absorbed, a fraction p reaches the interior walls and the rest is absorbed
by the air. The temperatures can be considered as the three states that describe
the heat dynamics of the house and they can be formulated as a coupled differential
equation system:
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Problem Formulation
Cn
dTn
dt
= 1
Ra

eTa −Tn

+ 1
Rn
(Tnm −Tn)
+
1
Rnm
(Tom −Tn) + A(1 −p)eΦs
+ Φn
Cnm
dTnm
dt
= 1
Rn
(Tn −Tnm) + ApeΦs
Com
dTom
dt
=
1
Rnm
(Tn −Tom) +
1
Ram

eTa −Tom

∀n ∈NCons
(3.6)
The parameters for the three coupled differential equations are provided by the study
cited in [38]. To incorporate the thermal model as a constraint into the Optimal
Power Flow (OPF), it is essential to both introduce stochasticity and discretize the
equations. As a result, the final thermal model integrated into the OPF is described
by a linear stochastic state-space model.
T(t + 1) = ΦT(t) + ΓU + v(t)
(3.7)
The methodology that was followed to obtain Eq. (3.7) is presented in the Appendix
. At last, we need one equation that is going to connect the consumers’ node power
injection with the energy that the heater is consuming. For simplicity, we are going
to consider a linear relationship between those two.
Φn,t ≤ηnxn,tPn,t
∀n ∈NCons, t ∈T
(3.8)
where ηn is the fraction of the power converted into energy Φn that is required to
operate the heater.
One more thing to take into consideration is the stochastic nature of the power gen-
eration of a PV. For this reason, we are going to consider that the maximum power
generation of a PV is a random variable eGn,t and it can be dispatched to
0 ≤xn,tPn,t ≤eGn,t,
∀n ∈NPV, t ∈T
(3.9)
Moreover, power grid operators to manage the stability of the electrical grid consider
ramp-up and ramp-down constraints. These constraints limit the rate at which a gen-
erator can increase or decrease its output power, helping to prevent sudden changes in
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Distributed Energy Resources
25
power that could lead to instability or blackouts. They also ensure that the generator
can respond quickly enough to changes in demand, while still operating within safe
and eﬀicient limits.
RDn ≤xn,tPn,t −xn,t−1Pn,t−1 ≤RUn
∀n ∈NGen, t ∈T
(3.10)
The reactive power injections for the consumers and PVs are assumed to have a
constant power factor. That means that the relationship between active and reactive
power remains constant over time.
Qn,t = xn,tPn,t tan
 cos−1 (fpn)

∀n ∈NCons ∪NRES.
(3.11)
When it comes to EVs, storage units, and generators, it is assumed that the reactive
power can vary within an operational power factor.
|Qn,t| ≤xn,tPn,t tan
 cos−1 (fpn)

,
∀n ∈NEVs ∪NSto ∪NGen ,
(3.12)
One more thing that we have to take into consideration is the energy levels of storage
units and EVs. Both of them have the ability to charge and discharge. That means
the lower and upper bounds of their active power are non-positive and non-negative,
respectively. More specifically, a storage unit is characterized by the energy limits on
its battery’s containment En, En and its initial state of charge eEarr
n .
En ≤eEarr
n
+
X
τ∈[1,t]
xn,τPn,t ≤En,
∀t ∈T , n ∈NSto .
(3.13)
Moreover, we define that the battery’s state of charge at the end of the horizon must
be equal to its initial state of charge.
X
t∈T
xn,tPn,t = 0,
∀n ∈NSto .
(3.14)
When it comes to the EVs, they can be characterized by their arrival and departure
times ˜tarr
n
,˜tdep
n , their initial state of charge eEarr
n , their battery capacity Cn and a
desired state of charge eEdes
n
at the departure time. The characteristics of an EV can
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Problem Formulation
take a different value and they can be considered random variables. To conclude the
energy constraint on the EV can be described as
0 ≤eEarr
n
+
X
τ∈[1,t]
xn,τPn,t ≤eCn,
∀t ∈T , n ∈NEVS,
(3.15)
Also, we have to quantify the difference between the desired state of charge and the
actual state of charge at the departure time.
yn = eEdes
n
−


eEarr
n
+
X
t∈[[tarr
n
,˜tdep
n ]
xn,tPn,t


,
∀n ∈NEVs
(3.16)
Here the dispatch variable xn,t is always zero before the EV arrives or after its depar-
ture.
Defining the physical and mechanical constraints of every resource can be described
by Eq.(3.1)-(3.15). Each resource can be controlled by the dispatch variable for a
given time. Of course, operating every resource comes with a cost. The cost function
for a generator is given by
cn:n∈NGen (xn) =
X
t∈T
gn ·
 xn,tPn,t
2 −ept · xn,tPn,t
(3.17)
The cost function of the generator is defined as the product of the fuel cost (gn)
and the square of the energy generation (xn,tPn, t) minus the wholesale market price
(ept) multiplied by the energy generation. The fuel cost (gn) is a constant value that
represents the cost of the fuel used by the generator to produce energy. The wholesale
market price (ept) is a random variable that represents the price at which the energy
is sold in the market. The cost function (3.17) calculates the revenues generated from
energy generation by taking into account both the fuel cost and the wholesale market
price.
The cost function for operating a renewable energy resource like a PV can be described
as
cn:n∈NPV (xn) = −
X
t∈T
(ept + sn) · xn,tPn,t
(3.18)
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Distributed Energy Resources
27
The cost function (3.18) is defined as the negative product of the wholesale market
price (ept) plus the per unit subsidy (sn) and the energy generation (xn,tPn, t). The
per unit subsidy (sn) is a constant value that represents the financial support provided
for each unit of energy produced by the PV. This means that the revenue generated
from selling each unit of energy is increased by the amount of the subsidy. The cost
function is decreasing in xn,t, meaning that as the energy generation increases, the
cost of producing the energy decreases. This can be explained by the fact that the
negative product of the wholesale market price and the energy generation represents
the revenue generated from selling the energy. Thus, as the energy generation in-
creases, the revenue generated also increases, resulting in a decrease in the cost of
producing the energy. Additionally, the per unit subsidy further reduces the cost of
producing the energy.
The cost function for a storage unit calculates the total cost of operating the storage
unit by considering both wholesale market revenues and the battery degradation cost.
The cost is reduced when the unit earns more revenue from selling energy back to the
grid and when the number of full charge-discharge cycles is reduced, reducing battery
degradation.
cn:n∈Nsto (xn) =
X
t∈T
 
d ·
xn,tPn,t
En
2
−ept · xn,tPn,t
!
(3.19)
where the first part of the equation described the battery degeneration cost with d
being a constant, it represents the cost per full charge-discharge cycle. EVs can be
described with the same cost function with one more additional term that increases
the cost for not getting the battery charged at the desired level, using the variable yn
that was defined in eq.(3.16).
cn:n∈NEV: (xn) =
X
t∈T
 
d ·
xn,tPn,t
eCn
2
−ept · xn,tPn,t
!
+ w1 · yn
(3.20)
The cost function for a consumer in the energy market is composed of three main
components: the retail cost, the load-shifting cost, and the comfort temperature cost.
cn:n∈NCons(xn) =
X
t∈T

ept · xn,tPn,t + w2 ·

eDn,t −xn,tPn,t
2
+ w3 · (Tcomf −Tn)2

(3.21)
where eDn,t is the energy demand level of the consumer at time t and w2,w3 are the
weighting factors for each term.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Problem Formulation
3.3
Solution Methodology
When we remove the uncertainties from the problem described in the preceding sec-
tion, the deterministic OPF problem with DERs and flexible consumers can be defined
as:
minU
P
n∈N cn (xn)
s.t. (3.1) -(3.16)
(3.22)
The objective function of this optimization problem represents the sum of the cost
functions from eq. (3.16-3.20) with respect to the mechanical and physical constraints
of the system. The set of the decision variables is
U =
n
(xn,t, Qn,t)n∈N,t∈T , (yn)n∈N ,
(Vb,t, Pζbb,t, Qζbb,t, Iζbb,t)b∈B,t∈T
o
∪(Φh,n,t)n∈NCons ,t∈T
(3.23)
However, our system includes random variables as parameters that introduce uncer-
tainty. More specifically, these parameters can be described as the following set:
Wt =

eGn,t

n∈NPV
,

eDn,t,

n∈NCons
, ept, eTa, eΦs

∪(En)n∈NEVs:tarr=t
(3.24)
To include this uncertainty in our problem we are going to formulate it as a mapping
of input-output space that our NN can learn. We can define our problem by a set of
decision stages T , where the input space is going to describe the state of the system
St given information until t −1 while the output space by the set At:
St =
n
(xn,t, Qn,t)n∈N,t∈T ,
(Vb,t, Iζbb,t)b∈B,t∈T , Wt−1,
o
(3.25)
At =
n
(xn,t, Qn,t)n∈N,t∈T ,
(Vb,t, Iζbb,t)b∈B,t∈T
o
(3.26)
The goal in designing our neural network (NN) is to enable it to make decisions that
closely mirror optimal ones. We can generate a training dataset by resolving the OPF
problem under varied conditions. We plan to test two distinct loss functions. The
first only considers the mean square error (MSE) between the predicted and actual
values. In contrast, the second adds a term that provides physical insights into the
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Solution Methodology
29
system. Specifically, it integrates the branch power flow equation, as shown in Eq.
(3.3).
LPINNS = Ldata + λLPF
(3.27)
Here, λ is a Lagrange multiplier. Before we calculate the loss LPF, it’s essential to
compute the active and reactive power flow on the line. While one approach might
be to include these power flows in the output space, given that we already have the
dispatched variables, the reactive for each resource, and the system coordinates, we
can directly compute them. This approach also benefits from keeping the output
space dimensionality low.
The mathematical formulation of the physics-informed
part of the loss function is defined as:
LPF = E[ReLu(VbIζbb −P 2
ζbb −Q2
ζbb)],
∀b ∈B
(3.28)
By incorporating the physical knowledge into the NN’s loss function we anticipate
that the dispatch decisions will satisfy the constraints of our system and the solution
will be feasible. In the next chapter, the details of the simulation and the parameters
of the NN will be presented.
==PAGE:42==
30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental Setup
This chapter presents the experimental setup and data for simulating the smart grid
and training the Neural Network.
The OPF simulations and the training of the NN models were conducted on a system
equipped with an Intel Core i7-10710U CPU, a 64-bit operating system, and 16.0 GB
of RAM.
4.1
Distribution Network
The test system used for simulating the AC-OPF model, as described in Chapter
3, was adapted from the study by [37]. In the present study, we considered only
ten nodes in order to reduce the computational complexity. This simplification was
essential not only for performing the optimization in a time-eﬀicient way. Moreover,
training of the neural network.
Table 4.1. Line parameters and limits
From
To
R (Ohm)
X (Ohm)
Imax (Ampers)
1
2
0.117
0.048
400
2
3
0.1073
0.044
400
3
4
0.1645
0.0457
400
3
7
0.1572
0.027
400
4
5
0.1495
0.0415
400
5
6
0.1495
0.0415
400
6
9
0.1794
0.0498
400
9
10
0.1645
0.0457
400
7
8
0.2096
0.036
400
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Experimental Setup
Figure 4.1. The system’s topology
Table 4.2. Generation Parameters
Bus
P (MW)
P (MW)
Power Factor
Ramp up
Ramp Down
3
0
500
0.99
0.5
-1
5
0
500
0.99
0.5
-1
Each bus is assumed to have 1.07 per unit as the voltage upper limit and 0.93 as the
lower limit. Generators were considered in buses 3, and 5. Loads are connected in all
buses except the first one which is a slack bus where voltage is fixed. and all loads
have a 0.99 lagging power factor. Consumers are connected to all load buses, PVs
are connected to buses 3 and 6, storage solutions are connected to buses 5 and 6, and
EVs are connected to buses 5 and 9. The nominal values for the DERs connected to
the power system were provided by [37].
The parameters for the thermal model were provided by [38] and they can be found
in Table 4.3. The thermal storage ability of the house’s outer shell is notably greater
than other thermal storage components. Interestingly, the heat retention capacity
of the interior walls seems significantly lesser than that of the room’s air. This is
counterintuitive, as one would presume the interior walls to hold more heat than the
air inside. A potential reason for this could be the high variability in temperature
estimates for the interior walls, suggesting substantial uncertainty regarding their
actual temperatures. However, according to [38], the model shows that it can predict
the indoor temperature within 1oC over an hour which is acceptable.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Data Processing
33
Table 4.3. Maximum likelihood estimates with p=1.
Parameter
Estimate
Standard Error
of estimate
ˆRi
46.848◦C/kW
0.134
ˆCi
8.120kWh/◦C
0.294
ˆRim
1.809◦C/kW
0.147
ˆRa
8.021◦C/kW
0.501
ˆCim
0.00553kWh/◦C
0.000611
ˆCom
292.950kWh/◦C
7.675
ˆRam
0.0846◦C/kW
0.0294
ˆA
20.212 m2
1.491
ˆp
1.000
-
log

bR11,1

−2.754◦C2
0.299
log

ˆR22,1

6.368◦C2
0.0586
log

ˆR33,1

−0.943◦C2
0.312
log

ˆR2

−7.066◦C2
0.0755
4.2
Data Processing
To develop the methods in this thesis various data sources have been used.
1. Grid topology data - available through pandapower and stored in CSV files.
2. Meteorological data - was fetched in JSON format from the open data from
the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), using their API [39].
The time
resolution was 1 hour.
3. Electrical Vehicles data - were fetched in JSON format from the ACN-Data [40]
that helps researchers access real data around electric vehicle charging.
4. Wholesale market prices data - available through [41] in a CSV format.
5. Consumers’ consumption data - available through [42] containing 2075259 mea-
surements gathered in a house located in Sceaux (7km of Paris, France) between
December 2006 and November 2010 (47 months).
6. Solar power generation data - available through [4] where PV solar energy gen-
eration data from 42 PVs were collected at 15-minute intervals.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Experimental Setup
To get a more representative view of the data, outliers were identified by the IQR
(Interquartile Range) method and were imputed with the mean. For missing values,
a linear interpolation was used between the two known data points. At last, the time
series data were converted to a sampling time of 1 hour by performing an averaging.
After cleaning data, distributions were created for some parameters that are treated
as random variables in the OPF problem. More specifically, we considered that the
consumer’s consumption is described from 24 normal distributions each for every hour
of the day with a mean and standard deviation as shown in Fig. 4.2(a)). We can see
the mean and the standard deviation almost follow the same trend with picks around
8-10 and 20-22. In that way, we can simulate the demand of consumers for different
hours during the day and create different scenarios for the OPF problem. In the same
way, solar power generation was treated for the generation of random data. (See Fig.
4.2(b)).
((a)) Mean and standard deviation of active
power consumption.
((b)) Mean and standard deviation of solar
power generation.
Figure 4.2. The hourly statistics for consumers (a) and PVs (b).
For the EVs, we created a cumulative distribution from which we can draw the arrival
time of the vehicle to the charging station and the duration of the charge. Looking
at Fig. 4.3(a) and 4.3(b), we observe that most of the EVs start charging during the
evening hours, and most of them last less than 10 hours. There are not suﬀicient
data to describe the probability of cars arriving between 7-10 in the morning, so we
assume that no cars are arriving at a charging station during those hours.
In that way, we could solve the OPF problem for an arbitrary number of different
scenarios. More specifically, 26,280 data points were created which accounts for 3
years since every data point corresponds to an hour. Solving the OPF that many
times gives us the opportunity to produce suﬀicient data points to train our Neural
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network
35
((a)) The cumulative distribution function
for the connection of charging.
((b)) The cumulative distribution function
for the duration of charging
Figure 4.3. The cumulative distribution functions for connection time (a) and duration
time (b) of EVs.
Network.
4.3
Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network
The NN that was chosen in this study is a Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network
(GCRN) which is a deep learning framework adept at predicting structured sequences
of data developed by [32]. Uniquely, the GCRN extends the capabilities of traditional
recurrent neural networks (RNN) to accommodate data governed by complex graph
structures. The model for this study was developed by using Pytorch.
4.3.1
Architecture of the model
The architecture of the model consists of a Graph Convolutional LSTM (GConvLST)
layer 2.4.3 and a linear transformation layer. GConvLSTM is a specialized LSTM
cell and is based on the Chebyshev Graph Convolution technique. The motivation
behind using this is to generalize the LSTM’s capabilities to process data present on
graphs. The linear transformation layer transforms the output of the GConvLSTM
into a new feature. The purpose of this layer is to bring the feature dimensions down
to the desired output size.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Experimental Setup
The GConvLSTM cell can only handle homogeneous graph-structured data. This
implies that the number of features in each node of the graph should be consistent.
As a result, the number of DERs connected to each node should be identical, which
isn’t the case in this study. To address this, nodes with fewer features were padded
with zeros.
4.3.2
Parameters of the selected model
The parameters that were selected for the final model can be found in Table 4.4. The
main parameters for the GConvLSTM layer are the input channels which represent
the node features. The number of output channels was selected to 32 after performing
optimization on that parameter. The lowest possible value was selected to keep the
number of parameters of the model as low as possible. The filter support was selected
to K = 1 and the normalization parameter was set to a random walk.
Parameter
Value
in_channels
18
out_channels
32
K
1
normalization
’rw’
((a)) Parameters for the GConvLSTM layer
Parameter
Value
Input
32
Output
12
((b)) Parameters for the Linear transformation layer
Table 4.4. Parameters of the selected model.
For the Linear transformation layer, the input was set to 32 to match the output of
GConvLSTM, and the output was set to 12 to match the dimensions of the target
variable. For the simple NN and the PINN the same parameters were selected so we
can compare the models while having the same number of parameters. At last, the
Lagrange multiplier from Eq. (3.27) was set to λ = 1.35.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Results
In this chapter, the outcomes of training and testing the models are going to be
presented. Holdout approach was followed, with 80% of the data used for training
and the rest of them for testing the models.
5.1
Training
During the training process, parameter optimization was conducted, with the initial
focus on tuning the learning rate to assess its impact on model’s parameter optimiza-
tion. As depicted in Figure 5.1, several observations can be made. Firstly, it becomes
evident that when employing high learning rates, the loss function experiences explo-
sive growth after only a few epochs.
Interestingly, when employing a learning rate of 0.3, the loss function exhibits non-
smooth behavior, characterized by significant jumps. Conversely, when employing a
learning rate of 0.01, the loss function fails to converge to a stable value. It appears
that a learning rate of 0.05 represents the optimal choice. However, it is worth noting
that while extending the number of epochs may promote convergence, our training
time has already reached approximately 15,000 seconds. Increasing the number of
epochs further might lead to overfitting, especially given that the model’s current
level of accuracy is satisfactory.
In Fig. 5.2(a), the loss function for different values of the output channel for the
GConvLSTM were examined. By tuning this parameter we can control the number of
parameters of the model and consequently the complexity of the model. As expected,
as the number of the output channel grows the model has a better accuracy at the
training data. At last, the training time was increased as the model complexity was
increased by approximately 20 minutes. This is not a significant sacrifice compared
to the total training time (more than 4 hours). Moreover, it is the model’s ability
of doing accurate and fast predictions and not the training time that it’s of great
importance. The same models were trained for the PINN models.
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Results
Figure 5.1. Loss fucntion for different values of learning rate.
In Fig. 5.2(b), the loss function for the different PINN models are presented. One
more time, the most complex model reached the lowest point without a significant dif-
ference though. None of the models seem to have converged, and more epochs should
have been considered. The PINN models seem to be unstable during the training.
There are big jumps in the models with 28 and 32 channels that could be a result
of the physics informed part since it was noticed that the physics informed penalty
had a greater impact on the models while loss is approaching values less than 0.9. It
could be easier to draw results if we could examine the physics informed part and
the data part seperately. Time constraints didn’t allow to run this experiment again.
Most importantly, the training of the PINN models took twice the time compared to
the simple ones. The main reason is that before calculating the loss function there
is an extra step included that is calculating the active and reactive power flows from
node to node.
To conclude, the optimal learning rate was found to be 0.05. The models with more
parameters lead to lower values in the loss function but with a possibility of overfitting.
A proposal to solve this issue is to use a validation set for early stopping while
optimizing the models. Overfitting can be realised when the models are tested on
test dataset. When it comes to PINN models an examination of the physics informed
part seperately could help to realise more about the progress of the model learning the
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Training
39
((a)) GConvLSTM
((b)) GConvLSTM-PINNs
Figure 5.2. Loss function for different values of output channel.
branch power flows inequaltiy but due to time constaints this wasn’t implemented.
In general, PINN models have an unstable behavior and their training time was
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Results
significanlty greater.
5.2
Testing
In the last section of this chapter, the comparison between the models on the testing
data will be discussed. The models were tested on different criteria as the model
complexity, the time of prediction, the mean square error (MSE) and the feasibility
of solutions.
Table 5.1 shows the performance of various models, the GConvLSTM with a simple
loss function, and the GConvLSTM with a physics informed loss function where
different values of the output channel were considered.
Firstly, all the models can make predictions almost instantly, without the number of
parameters affecting the time per prediction. This is one of the biggest advantage of
the NNs that can take decisions instantly and make them great for applications that
have to operate online and fast.
Table 5.1. Comparison between models
Model
Out_Channel
Parameters
Time(s)/prediction
MSE
feasibility
GConvLSTM
32
6508
9 × 10−4
0.00923
62%
GConvLSTM
28
5248
9 × 10−4
0.01225
62%
GConvLSTM
14
1846
9 × 10−4
0.01704
54%
GConvLSTM-PINNs
32
6508
9 × 10−4
0.00983
65%
GConvLSTM-PINNs
28
5248
9 × 10−4
0.01263
62%
GConvLSTM-PINNs
14
1846
9 × 10−4
0.02005
55%
Secondly, as the number of parameters is increasing the MSE is decreasing.
By
looking the magnitude of the MSE, it can be concluded that our model overfitts since
the MSE on the training data is one order less.
Overfitting is more clear on the
GConvLSTM with 32 channels in the output. Furthermore, comparing the PINNs
models with the non physics informed, the first performs worse when it comes to the
MSE. During the training GConvLSTM-PINNs is not focused only on predicting the
output accurately but is trying to learn the physics of the network so it seems to be
a trade off.
At last, the most important criteria is the feasibility of the solutions. That was verified
by taking the ouput of the models and running the power flow to see if the solution
was feasible or not. The percentage of the feasibility of the solutions is not changing
significantly. Ideally, the PINNs should overperform the simple GConvLSTMs. Al-
though, by comparing the PINNs with output channel of 32 and the corresponding
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Testing
41
simple GConvLSTM a difference of 3% is observed. This is not a significant differ-
ence but if the penalty on the power flow constrain was greater it might have been
increased. Moreover, using a ReLu function to see if the inequality is satisfied and
then calculating the mean of that output might had as result to underestimate the
penalty on the physics informed part.
Concluding, all models can make predictions fast and accurately which make them
great for live operation. The PINNs’ performance is not exceeding the one of simple
NNs. The feasibility of the PINNs is not good enough for operating a real system.
Optimizing on the Langrange multiplier for the physics informed part could help to
achieve better results. The approach on how the penalty of not obeying the SOCP
power flow constraint or including more constraints could lead to better results.
==PAGE:54==
42
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this chapter, an examination of the challenges faced during this thesis will be
presented. The obstacles faced during the simulation of the OPF and during the
training of the NNs will be outlined.
Moving forward, the chapter makes suggestions for future work that could stem from
this research. A discussion around how the project could be improved, and extended
will be considered.
6.1
Challenges
The first part of the project focused on problem formulation and running OPF simu-
lations with DERs and flexible consumers. This step was intricate, requiring careful
consideration of numerous parameters and their units. Balancing the various cost
functions and incorporating a thermal model added more complexity. Ensuring the
model’s predictions were accurate and didn’t deviate over time was another chal-
lenge. Creating enough data for model training was time-consuming, especially when
changing any aspect of the power test system or the model’s input/output settings.
The second part involved using Graph Neural Networks to solve the OPF. Preparing
the data and choosing the best neural network model was challenging due to limited
computing resources. The hardest part was defining a physics-informed loss function,
as this is a relatively unexplored area. A ReLU function was used to test the SOCP
branch power flow inequality.
This choice resulted in a smoother but sometimes
unstable loss function, slowing down the training process.
Time management was a critical aspect of this project. It was diﬀicult to estimate
how long each part would take, leading to some tasks falling behind. Notably, we
couldn’t fully explore optimizing the Lagrange multipliers or investigate alternative
loss functions. One key lesson was the importance of understanding the theory before
taking any steps, as last-minute changes slowed the project’s success.
Finally, the area of Graph Recurrent Neural Networks is both exciting and challenging
==PAGE:56==
44
6 Discussion
because it’s largely unexplored. The same is true for PINNs, especially when applied
to the OPF problem.
6.2
Future Work
Graph Neural Networks, particularly the recurrent ones, show great promise for re-
search, especially in the context of OPF problems framed as decision-making under
uncertainty. These networks could be further optimized by incorporating edge fea-
tures and integrating the admittance matrix into the graph’s adjacency matrix. On
the physics-informed side, fine-tuning the Lagrange multiplier is key. Techniques like
grid search selection or using a new neural network for predictions, as suggested in
the literature [36], could lead to significant improvements. Finally, speeding up the
training process by eliminating intermediate calculations, and adding system opera-
tional constraints like voltage and current limits, could make the model more eﬀicient
and its predictions more reliable.
==PAGE:57==
Appendices
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
Discretization of the
Resistor-Capacitor
Thermal Model
In this chapter, the heat dynamic model that was used for controlling the temperature
of buildings is presented. First, the physical mechanisms behind heat transfer are
going to be presented, and how they can be modeled. Later, the steps for discretizing
the model are described to include the model in the OPF problem.
Heat dynamic models are typically constructed using sub-models representing the
core mechanisms of heat transfer. The primary mechanisms include:
• Conduction: Represents heat transfer within a single medium.
• Convection: Describes heat transfer between two distinct media.
• Ventilation: Refers to heat transfer due to the movement of mass, such as warm
air passing through an open window.
• Radiation: Concerns heat transfer between entities in optical contact, like solar
radiation.
The heat transfer resulting from both conduction and convection is largely dependent
on the temperature disparity between the involved media. Additionally, it is going
to be assumed that ventilation can be described by a linear relationship to maintain
the model’s linearity,
More specifically, the temperature of the indoor air (Tn), the temperature in the house
envelope (Tom), and in the interior walls and floors (Tnm) are going to be considered to
describe the heat dynamic model of each residence. The interior wall exchanges heat
with the indoor air, the indoor air exchanges heat with the inside of the house envelope
==PAGE:60==
48
A Discretization of the Resistor-Capacitor Thermal Model
and directly to the outside. At last, the outside of the house exchanges heat with
the ambient environment. The temperature of the outdoor environment (eTa) can be
considered as a random variable which introduces further uncertainty to our system.
Energy is fed into the building from controllable heaters that consume energy Φn and
is treated as a controllable variable, and by solar radiation through windows. The
solar radiation is considered a random variable (eΦs) is partially absorbed, a fraction
p reaches the interior walls and the rest is absorbed by the air. The temperatures can
be considered as the three states that describe the heat dynamics of the house and
they can be formulated as a coupled differential equation system:
Cn
dTn
dt = 1
Ra

eTa −Tn

+ 1
Rn
(Tnm −Tn)
+
1
Rnm
(Tom −Tn) + A(1 −p)eΦs
+ Φn
Cnm
dTnm
dt
= 1
Rn
(Tn −Tnm) + ApeΦs
Com
dTom
dt
=
1
Rnm
(Tn −Tom) +
1
Ram

eTa −Tom

∀n ∈NCons
(A.1)
where Cn, Cnm, and Con are the heat capacities of the indoor air, interior walls, and
house envelope, respectively that they simulate the heat storage ability. Eq. (A.1)
can be reformulated as:
dT
dt = AT + BU
(A.2)
The state vector, denoted by T, is given by
T =


Tn
Tnm
Tom

,
(A.3)
which consists of temperature states. Meanwhile, U represents the external inputs to
the system and is defined as
U =


eTa
eΦs
Φn

,
(A.4)
==PAGE:61==
A Discretization of the Resistor-Capacitor Thermal Model
49
where eTa is the ambient temperature, eΦs is the solar radiation, and Φn is the heater
input.
The 3 × 3 matrices, A and B, dictate how the current state and exogenous input
influence the future states, respectively. Eq.
represents a system that is entirely
deterministic. To incorporate the irregularities, a random process is often included
in the differential equation. This amendment leads to the formulation of a stochastic
differential equation represented by:
dT = AT dt + BUdt + dω(t)
(A.5)
where ω(t) is a stochastic process. By integrating the stochastic differential equation
over a given horizon and assuming the exogenous input is constant over time, the
following linear stochastic state-space model results:
T (t + τ) = Φ(τ)T (t) + Γ(τ)U(τ) + v(t, τ)
(A.6)
where,
Φ(τ) = eAτ
Γ(τ) =
Z τ
0
eAsBds
v(t, τ) =
Z t+τ
t
eA(t+τ−s)dω(s)
(A.7)
where v(t, τ) is a normal distributed white noise with zero mean and covariance:
R1(τ) =


R11
0
0
0
R22
0
0
0
R33


(A.8)
The Eq. A.5 is a discrete model that can be used for predictions by considering a time
horizon τ and can be used as a constraint of the OPF problem to consider control of
temperature in buildings given the dynamics that are described by this linear state
space model.
==PAGE:62==
50
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Momoh, R. Koessler, M. Bond, B. Stott, D. Sun, A. Papalexopoulos, and
P. Ristanovic, “Challenges to optimal power flow,” IEEE Transactions on Power
systems, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 444–455, 1997.
[2]
K. Baker, “Solutions of dc opf are never ac feasible,” 2020.
[3]
S. H. Low, “Convex relaxation of optimal power flow—part ii: Exactness,” IEEE
Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 177–189, 2014.
[4]
E. Grover-Silva, M. Heleno, S. Mashayekh, G. Cardoso, R. Girard, and G. Karin-
iotakis, “A stochastic optimal power flow for scheduling flexible resources in mi-
crogrids operation,” Applied Energy, vol. 229, pp. 201–208, 11 2018.
[5]
M. Bazrafshan and N. Gatsis, “Decentralized stochastic optimal power flow in
radial networks with distributed generation,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
pp. 1–15, 2016.
[6]
L. Duchesne, E. Karangelos, and L. Wehenkel, “Recent developments in machine
learning for energy systems reliability management,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 108, no. 9, pp. 1656–1676, 2020.
[7]
S. Cuomo, V. S. Di Cola, F. Giampaolo, G. Rozza, M. Raissi, and F. Piccialli,
“Scientific machine learning through physics–informed neural networks: Where
we are and what’s next,” Journal of Scientific Computing, vol. 92, no. 3, p. 88,
2022.
[8]
F. Fernández de la Mata, A. Gijón, M. Molina-Solana, and J. Gómez-Romero,
“Physics-informed neural networks for data-driven simulation: Advantages, lim-
itations, and opportunities,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applica-
tions, vol. 610, p. 128415, 2023.
[9]
G. Tsaousoglou, P. Ellinas, J. Giraldo, and M. Varvarigos, “Distributed sequen-
tial optimal power flow under uncertainty in power distribution systems: A data-
driven approach,” 10 2022.
==PAGE:64==
52
Bibliography
[10] M. A. Al-Jaafreh and G. Mokryani, “Planning and operation of lv distribution
networks: a comprehensive review,” IET Energy Systems Integration, vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 133–146, 2019.
[11] A. Ehsan and Q. Yang, “Optimal integration and planning of renewable dis-
tributed generation in the power distribution networks: A review of analytical
techniques,” Applied Energy, vol. 210, pp. 44–59, 2018.
[12] I. A. Ibrahim and M. J. Hossain, “Low voltage distribution networks modeling
and unbalanced (optimal) power flow: A comprehensive review,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 143026–143084, 2021.
[13] N.-C. Yang and H.-C. Chen, “Decomposed newton algorithm-based three-phase
power-flow for unbalanced radial distribution networks with distributed energy
resources and electric vehicle demands,” International Journal of Electrical
Power Energy Systems, vol. 96, pp. 473–483, 2018.
[14] M. B. Cain, R. P. O’neill, A. Castillo, et al., “History of optimal power flow and
formulations,” Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, vol. 1, pp. 1–36, 2012.
[15] B. Lesieutre and I. Hiskens, “Convexity of the set of feasible injections and
revenue adequacy in ftr markets,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 1790–1798, 2005.
[16] D. Bienstock and A. Verma, “Strong np-hardness of ac power flows feasibility,”
Oper. Res. Lett., vol. 47, p. 494–501, nov 2019.
[17] S. Chatzivasileiadis, “Lecture notes on optimal power flow (opf),” 2018.
[18] D. Molzahn and I. Hiskens, “Convex relaxations of optimal power flow problems:
An illustrative example,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular
Papers, vol. 63, pp. 650–660, May 2016.
[19] M. AlRashidi and M. El-Hawary, “Applications of computational intelligence
techniques for solving the revived optimal power flow problem,” Electric Power
Systems Research, vol. 79, no. 4, pp. 694–702, 2009.
[20] C.-R. Wang, H.-J. Yuan, Z.-Q. Huang, J.-W. Zhang, and C.-J. Sun, “A modified
particle swarm optimization algorithm and its application in optimal power flow
problem,” in 2005 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernet-
ics, vol. 5, pp. 2885–2889, IEEE, 2005.
[21] I. A. Ibrahim and M. J. Hossain, “Low voltage distribution networks modeling
and unbalanced (optimal) power flow: A comprehensive review,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 143026–143084, 2021.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
53
[22] D. Molzahn, F. Dörfler, H. Sandberg, S. Low, S. Chakrabarti, R. Baldick, and
J. Lavaei, “A survey of distributed optimization and control algorithms for elec-
tric power systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. PP, pp. 1–1, 07
2017.
[23] Z. Wang, Y. Chen, and Y. Li, “Development of rc model for thermal dynamic
analysis of buildings through model structure simplification,” Energy and Build-
ings, vol. 195, pp. 51–67, 2019.
[24] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[25] J. Schmidhuber, “Deep learning in neural networks: An overview,” Neural Net-
works, vol. 61, pp. 85–117, 2015.
[26] M. Khodayar, G. Liu, J. Wang, and M. E. Khodayar, “Deep learning in power
systems research: A review,” CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems, vol. 7,
no. 2, pp. 209–220, 2021.
[27] V. Veeramsetty, D. R. Chandra, F. Grimaccia, and M. Mussetta, “Short term
electric power load forecasting using principal component analysis and recurrent
neural networks,” Forecasting, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 149–164, 2022.
[28] W. Liao, B. Bak-Jensen, J. R. Pillai, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “A review of graph
neural networks and their applications in power systems,” 2021.
[29] J. Zhou, G. Cui, S. Hu, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Wang, C. Li, and M. Sun,
“Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications,” 2021.
[30] M. M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, Y. LeCun, A. Szlam, and P. Vandergheynst, “Ge-
ometric deep learning: Going beyond euclidean data,” IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, vol. 34, pp. 18–42, jul 2017.
[31] D. Owerko, F. Gama, and A. Ribeiro, “Optimal power flow using graph neural
networks,” 2019.
[32] Y. Seo, M. Defferrard, P. Vandergheynst, and X. Bresson, “Structured sequence
modeling with graph convolutional recurrent networks,” 2016.
[33] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed neural networks:
A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involv-
ing nonlinear partial differential equations,” Journal of Computational Physics,
vol. 378, pp. 686–707, 2019.
[34] A. Venzke, G. Qu, S. Low, and S. Chatzivasileiadis, “Learning optimal power
flow: Worst-case guarantees for neural networks,” 2020.
[35] X. Lei, Z. Yang, J. Yu, J. Zhao, Q. Gao, and H. Yu, “Data-driven optimal power
flow: A physics-informed machine learning approach,” 2020.
==PAGE:66==
54
Bibliography
[36] R. Nellikkath and S. Chatzivasileiadis, “Physics-informed neural networks for
AC optimal power flow,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 212, p. 108412,
nov 2022.
[37] G. Tsaousoglou, P. Ellinas, J. Giraldo, and E. Varvarigos, “Distributed sequential
optimal power flow under uncertainty in power distribution systems: A data-
driven approach,” 2022.
[38] A. Thavlov and H. Bindner, “Thermal models for intelligent heating of buildings,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Applied Energy, ICAE 2012,
p. A10591, 2012. 4th International Conference on Applied Energy (ICAE 2012)
: Energy innovations for a sustainable world, ICAE 2012 ; Conference date:
05-07-2012 Through 08-07-2012.
[39] “Introduktion til Frie Data — dmi.dk.” https://www.dmi.dk/frie-data/. [Ac-
cessed 18-09-2023].
[40] “ACN-Data – A Public EV Charging Dataset — ev.caltech.edu.” https://ev.
caltech.edu/dataset. [Accessed 18-09-2023].
[41] “Independent Power Transmission Operator | IPTO — admie.gr.” https://www.
admie.gr/en. [Accessed 18-09-2023].
[42] “UCI
Machine
Learning
Repository
—
archive.ics.uci.edu.”
https:
//archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/235/individual+household+electric+
power+consumption. [Accessed 18-09-2023].
