==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Towards understanding social design
Tackling the gaps of an emerging research field
Master thesis 
 
Jacob Valdemar Juel Ammitsøe  
Student number: s173849 
 
Design and Innovation, 
Technical University of Denmark 2023 
==PAGE:2==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
1 
 
Abstract 
The field of social design presents approaches to tackling complex societal challenges. The field has 
not been clearly defined, which has led to confusion over the term. Through identifying and 
reviewing five current social design approaches, this thesis presents seven dimensions of social 
design to explain the field. The analysis of the approaches reveals a gap of a lacking definition of 
society, which limits the field toward creating real social impact. To address the gap, sociologist 
Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory is explored as a possible way of strengthening the theoretical 
foundation of social design. Moving from the more theoretical level of social design to a practical 
level, a case study at the Technical University of Denmark shows how the seven dimensions of 
social design can be practically understood and strengthened at a technical university, with respect to 
university-specific requirements.     
 
==PAGE:3==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
2 
 
Contents 
Abstract ...................................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Introduction. Social design and the attempt at addressing complex societal challenges .......................... 4 
Research methods .................................................................................................................................................... 5 
Methodological approach to literature review ............................................................................................... 5 
Methodological approach to the empirical case study ................................................................................. 7 
Part 1: Understanding social design. Analysis, critique and strengthening the core ................................. 8 
1.1 Introducing social design ............................................................................................................................ 8 
1.2 Contemporary approaches of social design ........................................................................................... 10 
1.2.1 Designing for Society, Nynke Tromp and Paul Hekkert (2019) .............................................. 11 
1.2.2 Transition Design, Terry Irwin (2018) .......................................................................................... 13 
1.2.3 Frame Creation, Kees Dorst (2015)................................................................................................ 15 
1.2.4 Speculative Design (2013), Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby .................................................. 17 
1.2.5 Soft Systems Methodology, Checkland and Poulter (2010) ..................................................... 19 
1.3 Summary of the five approaches ............................................................................................................. 21 
1.3.1 What is social design? ....................................................................................................................... 22 
1.4 Analysis and critique. Identifying gaps and directions of social design ......................................... 23 
1.4.1 Social objective and intervention type ........................................................................................... 24 
1.4.2 Causality between intervention and social objective .................................................................. 25 
1.4.3 Looking into the theoretical underpinnings .................................................................................. 26 
1.4.3 Identifying the gaps of social design .............................................................................................. 27 
1.4.4 The core of social design: are we on the right path to address complex societal issues? ... 28 
1.5 Exploration of the core. Using Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory as a model of society .......... 29 
1.5.1 Key concepts in Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory ................................................................... 29 
1.5.2 Exploring how Luhmann can contribute to the issues in social design .................................. 32 
1.5.3 
Implications of the exploration .................................................................................................. 35 
1.6 Concluding on Part 1 ................................................................................................................................. 35 
==PAGE:4==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
3 
 
Part 2: Case study. How can the aspirations of social design be incorporated at Technical University 
of Denmark? ........................................................................................................................................................... 37 
2.1 Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 37 
2.1.2 
Interviews ....................................................................................................................................... 37 
2.2 Current state of social design at DTU .................................................................................................... 38 
2.3 Evaluation of social design at DTU ........................................................................................................ 41 
2.4 Summing up: the gaps of social design at DTU ................................................................................... 43 
2.5 The challenge of strengthening social science at a technical university ......................................... 45 
2.5 How should DTU understand social design? ........................................................................................ 46 
Part 3: Next steps ................................................................................................................................................... 48 
3. 1 What are the next steps for DTU? .......................................................................................................... 48 
3.2 What are the next steps for the social design field? ............................................................................ 48 
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................................. 50 
Literature ................................................................................................................................................................. 51 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
4 
 
Introduction. Social design and the attempt at addressing 
complex societal challenges 
Society currently faces extensive large-scale complex challenges of climate change, migration, 
ageing populations, chronic disease, and resource depletion, where causes are not clear, solutions not 
straightforward, and many actors are involved. Current systems are upholding complex issues, and 
there is a need to rethink the existing systems. Social design is presented as a possible solution for 
addressing these challenges and presents various approaches of designing better systems. These 
design approaches incorporates participatory methods of design and theories from the social 
sciences. However, the multitude of diverse approaches have made the social design field unable to 
define itself resulting in confusion to what social design is and how it is addressing complex societal 
problems (Tromp and Hekkert, 2019). 
 
This thesis makes four contributions:  
1. It identifies and reviews current social design approaches from academia to provide better 
understanding of how social design is addressing complex challenges.    
2. It identifies gaps of what social design approaches are not addressing.  
3. It explores how to strengthen the theoretical foundation of social design using sociologist 
Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory.   
4. It presents an empirical case study discussing how social design can be understood and 
strengthened at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).  
The thesis falls in three main parts. The first part presents previous attempts of defining social design 
and moves on to reviewing five specific social design approaches to enrich the understanding of the 
field. After analysis and critique of the five approaches, critical gaps are identified and discussed. 
The thesis goes on to address the gaps by exploring the possible benefits of implementing Niklas 
Luhmann’s systems theory and concept of society in social design approaches. The second part of 
the thesis explores how the theoretical understanding of social design can be understood and 
strengthened in the real-life context of DTU. Afterwards, recommended next steps are presented for 
social design at DTU and for the academic field of social design.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
5 
 
Research methods 
In this section I outline my research methods and how I have undertaken my research. I will explain 
how I have chosen the materials for my research that will underly my research approach to reviewing 
literature and conducting an empirical case study.  
Methodological approach to literature review 
I will in the following explain in what ways I have followed the six generic steps that literature 
reviews falls under (Paré and Kitsiou, 2019), to provide transparency of the conducted approach. I 
will explain how I have followed the method and the reasonings behind my choices.  
The six steps of a literature review are presented as: 
1. Formulating the research question(s) and objective(s), 
2. Searching the extant literature 
3. Screening for inclusion 
4. Assessing the quality of primary studies 
5. Extracting data 
6. Analyzing data 
Formulating research questions and objectives 
Objective 1: Get an overview of previous literature on social design. 
Objective 2: Define the academic field of social design from identified social design approaches. 
Research questions: 
 How has the academic field of social design previously been described? 
 What are current influential social design approaches? 
 How are social design approaches addressing complex societal challenges? 
Searching the extant literature 
The search process was not structured, but I used keywords such as, “social design”, “Transition 
design”, in Google scholar to get an overview of the field. I also used the literature review done by 
Tromp and Hekkert (2019) as inspiration for social design approaches.  
Screening for inclusion 
I set out to find literature on social design approaches in academia, this means excluding social 
design found in practice, like in public sector bodies or industry. Although these practices are very 
relevant to the field of social design, the scope of the literature review is limited to academic 
==PAGE:7==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
6 
 
approaches. I wanted to find review papers of social design which attempts to define what social 
design in academia is. The papers should explicitly touch upon the term “social design”. The second 
part of my literature review was a review of social design approaches. The criteria of selection were 
that the social approach should explain a process of designing, not merely outlining an approach.  
Assessing the quality of primary studies 
For the overview on previous social design definitions, I included papers which for published and 
was referenced in literature. For the social design approaches, I chose primary texts of approaches to 
ensure the accuracy of the review. I did not want a comprehensive review of all social design 
approaches, but rather select approaches that represent the academic breadth of the field. 
Extracting data 
Five specific research questions were created to extract relevant data from the social design 
approaches. I reviewed each approach in relation to the same five questions: 
 What is the theoretical underlying social theory through which they conceptualize an 
understanding of society? 
 What are the theories and practices used to gather and interpret empirical knowledge? 
 What is presented as possible forms of interventions (products, services, policies, etc.)?  
 What is seen as the purpose of the intervention in terms of what it is trying to change? 
 What is presented as the process of intervening?  
Analyzing and synthesizing data 
The extracted data was organized, and a framework based on previous literature, and key dimensions 
of social design were found, based on the reviewed approaches. My analysis of the approaches was 
done using the sense-making framework as underlying logic for my analysis. The analysis was 
focused the social objective, intervention type, and cross-disciplinarity.   
Study quality and risk of bias 
The search process has not been structured by a certain method of searching. This might have 
included some approaches that in a structured search would otherwise not have showed up. Some 
approaches might have been missed also. The unstructured searching approach could be in risk of 
bias towards personal opinions of good social design approaches. Since I come from a technical 
university, I will most likely be biased towards more technical or scientific social design approaches. 
However, I have tried to be aware of this bias and included an approach like Speculative Design 
which represents a less technical and scientific part of social design.  
==PAGE:8==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
7 
 
Methodological approach to the empirical case study 
The case study is a research strategy which is qualitative designs where a program, event, activity, 
process, are explored in depth (Priya, 2020). The case study design has followed the considerations 
research strategy presented by Arya Priya in her paper reviewing case study methodologies. Below I 
will present my considerations and process: 
Purpose 
The case study is a exploratory case study which purpose is to study the phenomenon of social 
design at DTU in order to identify new research questions which can be used in subsequent research 
studies.  
Research questions 
 Where is social design presently seen at DTU? 
 What are important factors at DTU regarding strengthening social design? 
Unit of analysis 
I will investigate social design dimensions within DTU. The unit of analysis is the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU) and the definition social design dimensions is defined from in part 1 
of the thesis which I will use as definition of social design.  
Methods of data collection  
I used the qualitative method of interviews to collect data that enable the research questions to be 
answered. Make sure that appropriate data was collected for the purpose of the study I designed my 
interview questions to touch upon the social design dimensions. Since the purpose of the study was 
exploratory, the interviews also included other topics such as the organizational structure of DTU 
and historical accounts of DTU to identify relevant factors regarding strengthening social design at 
DTU. 
Analysis of data  
My analysis of social design at DTU was done using the social design dimensions analyzing 
initiatives for each dimension. The evaluation of DTU was done based a collective assessment of the 
analysis and visually presented. 
==PAGE:9==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
8 
 
Part 1: Understanding social design. Analysis, critique and 
strengthening the core  
1.1 Introducing social design 
To start the exploration into the field of social design I first want to give a brief overview of how 
social design has been described and defined in the literature. A prominent scholar in the social 
design field is Ezio Manzini, describes social design, by identifying the different meanings of the 
term “social”. Social can refer to the “social forms”, that is concerning how society is built. This he 
sees as the main objective in the field of social innovation, to create new social forms. In social 
design, however, “social” refers to “the existence of particularly problematic situations (such as 
extreme poverty, illness or exclusion, and circumstances after catastrophic events) to which both the 
market and the state fail in finding solutions.” (Manzini, 2016. By this definition the word “social” 
becomes synonym for “a problematic condition”, which was what was referred to when the term 
“social design” appeared in the design debate several decades ago (Manzini, 2016). Thereby, he sees 
social design as concerned with problems that the state and market is not adequately addressing, and 
designing for “unmet needs”, where the involved people do not normally have a say in a matter. This 
gave rise to the ethical, and noble nature of social design. By this description, social design works 
outside the market in a “charity mode”, where it relies on other actors to pay for the implementation, 
like NGOs (Manzini, 2016).  This description of social design highlights the ethical and noble nature 
of social design, however, Manzini notes himself, that the description of social design as pure charity 
independently working to solve problematic conditions, has evolved, and changed form in recent 
years. 
One of the first comprehensive attempts to describe social design was a commissioned report by the 
Arts and Humanities Research Council in the UK on social design in relation to higher education 
(Armstrong et al., 2018).  The report finds social design to be “concepts and activities enacted within 
participatory approaches to researching, generating, realizing new ways to make change happen 
towards collective and social ends” They find these activities may be “embedded within government 
policies or public services” and that social design “may be carried out by people who think of 
themselves as designers or who studied at design schools, or it might be an activity of designing that 
takes place involving people who are not professional designers.” (Armstrong et al., 2018) This 
description, contrary to Manzini’s description, is much broader an encompassing, and highlights 
some important points of social design: 
==PAGE:10==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
9 
 
 Social design is towards social ends rather than predominantly commercial. 
 Social design uses participatory approaches to researching and designing. 
 Social design can be done in the public sector.  
 Social design is not necessarily done by trained designers. 
The report further classifies the academic field of social design in three overall approaches: Design 
for social innovation, which involves supporting and amplifying changing social practices. Socially 
Responsible Design, where designers have a deep understanding of a specific domain, such as health, 
crime, or food. Design Activism, which is more explicitly political in its intentions to foster more 
consciousness concerning collective challenges. By this classification social design is a broad and 
inclusive term to hold many approaches fields concerning social ends. The report even states that 
social design is not a field or discipline but rather a discursive moment (Armstrong et al., 2018).  
Tromp and Hekkert, in their review of social design practices and approaches likewise find social 
design to be an ambiguous term, and not well specified. They even point out that the conceptual 
ambiguity might be its strength as it allows for multiple interpretations and practices to develop in 
parallel (Tromp and Hekkert, 2019). They found from their review the only common element of 
social design to be that it is about “improving society”. They see social design as design that does not 
exist for other reasons than improving society. However, they find many ways that approaches 
understand what improvement means. Tromp and Hekkert classify three general approaches of social 
design: Improving the conditions of people who are underrepresented, that is traditional user-
centered practices applied to issues that have social relevance. Improving the performance of public 
sector bodies, where efforts are made to improve organizations concerned with societal objectives 
and rethink their issues to transform organizations from within. Build social capital, helps benefit a 
community rather than specific groups. Tromp and Hekkert’s description classify social design 
through the social objective, meaning what the approaches intends to change.  
In recent years social design has been interested in exploring how to design for societal 
transformation, using transformational theories. Especially the Multi-level-perspective (MLP), has 
been widely used (Ceschin, and Gaziulusoy, 2021). MLP explains the dynamics of transitioning from 
one socio-technical system to another, seen as three levels of society interacting on one another 
(Ceschin, and Gaziulusoy, 2021). It has been adopted and popularized by Transition Design (Irwin, 
2018), which explores the possibilities of designing for certain transitions. It sees social design 
approaches as tools that can be strategically used in designing bigger transitions. The interest in this 
branch of social design is still growing with other similar approaches and frameworks investigating 
==PAGE:11==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
10 
 
transitions, Design for Sustainability (Ceschin, and Gaziulusoy, 2021) and Designing for transitions 
and transformations (Coops, 2022). Tromp and Hekkert and Chen et al. still see Transition Design as 
a part of social design given its social objective, however, with Transition Design the field is 
expanding towards designing for bigger societal transitions at many levels of society (Tromp and 
Hekkert, 2019; Chen et al., 2015).   
From this brief overview of the present literature on social design the field is not coherent, and many 
interpretations are being employed. The field itself is not keenly interested in defining itself and finds 
that the varying practices and academic approaches easily can coexist without determined 
definitions. The field is still in service to the original thought of addressing complex social problems, 
but it has adopted many ways of doing so. It is not only restrained to serve the unmet needs in 
society but acknowledges that the bigger institutional structures of society are also upholding many 
of the systemic issues. Many new fields of design like service design, strategic design, policy design, 
social innovation, design activism, are tackling complex societal issues in various contexts. The new 
design objects have enhanced the importance of cross-disciplinarity in design research and practice 
expanding the field of design to make more contact with the social sciences. In the light of the 
current literature on social design, a lacking agreement and clarity of social design is evident. 
Attempts at describing social design have been made, however, no current academic definitions have 
been broadly accepted. I wish to contribute to the understanding of social design, by identifying 
current social design approaches and reviewing them to bring more clarity around the field. 
1.2 Contemporary approaches of social design 
Five social design approaches have been selected from the literature as representing the 
contemporary field of social design. I have only included approaches found in academia and I have 
not included the many social design approaches found in practice, like in public sector bodies or 
industry. Although these practices are very relevant and influential to the field of social design, they 
have been excluded due to the often-hidden theoretical foundation that underpins them. The purpose 
is not to form a complete picture of the field, but rather to include approaches from different 
academic backgrounds to showcase the breadth of the current field. The approaches are: 
- 
Designing for Society, Nynke Tromp and Paul Hekkert (2019) 
- 
Transition Design, Terry Irwin (2018) 
- 
Frame Creation, Kees Dorst (2015) 
- 
Speculative Design, Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby (2013) 
- 
Soft System Methodology, Peter Checkland and John Poulter (2010) 
==PAGE:12==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
11 
 
I will review the selected approaches using five research questions. The questions are guided by the 
social design web, to touch upon the social objective, the intervention type, and cross-disciplinary 
theories and practices. As each approach has different notions and purposes, and comes from 
different academic traditions, I will try and come around each question in a way that leaves some 
room for the inherent differences. Therefore, the research questions will act as a guide to ensure that 
the review will touch upon the same dimensions to enable comparability in the analysis. 
 What is the theoretical underlying social theory through which they conceptualize an 
understanding of society? 
 What are the theories and practices used to gather and interpret empirical knowledge? 
 What is presented as possible forms of interventions (products, services, policies, etc.)?  
 What is seen as the purpose of the intervention in terms of what it is trying to change? 
 What is presented as the process of intervening?  
1.2.1 Designing for Society, Nynke Tromp and Paul Hekkert (2019) 
Designing for Society takes the stance of a purely effect-driven design approach. This means that the 
societal improvement, which the design team wishes to contribute to, should define the design 
outcome, and not the other way around. In this way, the approach argues that societal improvement 
should be the justification for the existence of any social design. A large part of the Designing for 
Society approach therefore evolves around exploring, understanding, and deciding what social 
impact the design team wishes to achieve before conceptualizing any kind of design intervention. 
Theoretical underpinnings  
Tromp and Hekkert do not take a clear position of any social theory. Instead, they propose a science-
driven approach, which encourages design teams to ensure that their judgements about the effect the 
design will have, are informed by relevant scientific knowledge. In that regard, every academic view 
on society from social science, philosophy, biology psychology, etc. can be equally applied if it is 
seen “relevant” by the design team. Scientific knowledge could be of society, human nature, or what 
constitutes a “good life”, all of which can be used to form scientific arguments for the desired effect 
a design should have on society. However, Tromp and Hekkert refer designers to understand the “life 
world” and the “system world”, building on works by philosopher Jürgen Habermas. With the life 
world being the day-to-day world as experiences enacted by people and the systems world as the 
political, economic, and legal systems. They see systems thinking as an important skill, and a 
necessary skill to be able to expand the frame of which a problem is looked at to enable a reframing 
of the issue. 
==PAGE:13==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
12 
 
Empirical research 
Designing for Society proposes a variety of ways to collect knowledge about the system world and 
the life world. Visiting relevant end-users is suggested to deepen the understanding of current 
behaviors and find out the underlying attitudes and values that exist in the domain. Examining 
literature about the given domain, this includes many disciplines like biology, psychology, 
behavioral economics, sociology, philosophy to provide a broad scientific understanding of a 
domain. Consulting expert stakeholders in the field is also suggested. Observations and other sources 
like visiting museums or documentaries, are also proposed as possible sources of getting a deeper 
understanding. Looking for trends and developments of the domain, that would include looking at 
possible technological evolutions, political developments, public concerns, demographic 
developments, which could influence the domain. All these varied observations of a domain are 
described as “context factors”. Context factors will, after systematic structuring, bring forward a 
certain anticipated future of the domain. A clustering process brings forward patterns between 
context factors through their association, followed by a second structuring process where the clusters 
are connected to form coherent perspective (story) of the domain. Three types of structuring methods 
are presented: Cause-and-effect chain, Force field analysis, Venn diagram (see fig). The ordered 
picture that is formed from this process will be the design team’s understanding of the domain and 
where it is headed. The unique picture of the domain should reveal opportunities for interventions, 
while serving as a means for positive client engagement. 
Social objective 
The Designing for Society approach suggests intervening in a way that will either encourage or 
discourage a certain collective behavior. The focus is on how to change behavior either of a single 
user or of the collective, through the interaction with an artefact (intervention). Tromp and Hekkert 
have chosen the focus of creating behavioral change, because they see behavior as an important lever 
of societal transformation. Furthermore, behavior allows for structured evaluation of social 
interventions. They also note that it is easier to link a behavioral change with social phenomena, like 
“safety” or “cohesion”, and thereby create a feeling of contributing to these phenomena. Lastly, they 
point out that behavior can be facilitated by design because artefacts enable or stimulate behavioral 
changes. 
Intervention types 
The type of artefacts that is meant to create behavioral changes, is not fixed to any type of artefact, 
like a product or service. Instead, they open for any kind of artefact to serve as a behavioral 
intervention, whether it is products, services, platforms, or even systems as interventions. The focus 
==PAGE:14==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
13 
 
is on the interaction with the artefact which will create the desired change of behavior. The 
behavioral change is linked to the phenomenon which the design team have chosen to contribute to 
in the domain (for instance, neighborhood cohesion) and provide reasonings for why the behavioral 
change will contribute to the phenomenon.  
Intervention process 
The approach stops at the design of the intervention and does not go into the implementation and 
evaluation of the intervention. However, strategies for validating the intervention design are 
presented. The SID approach stresses that the intervention should be assessed before implemented, 
with the two goals of: determining whether the effects are likely to occur the way they have been 
anticipated, and to obtain insights into how the design can become more effective and appropriate. 
They propose three different strategies of assessing a social design before implementation:  
A Narrative-based study is an illustrated narrative that follows characters interacting with the 
designed intervention and showcases the intended behavioral and social implications of the 
design. It should be used to assess the proposal’s ability to elicit socially responsible behavior. 
Stakeholders and experts can provide meaningful inputs to the next iteration of the intervention 
and question whether the behaviors and events shown in the narrative are likely to happen. The 
narrative-based study is suitable when the anticipated social implication will take several years, 
or when the budget is limited. 
A Pilot study is a systematic study of the effectiveness of the intervention. The intervention is 
assessed by measuring indicators of the experimental, behavioral, and/or social effects before and 
after the pilot. The pilot study is suitable when there is a need for more data to improve the 
design, more than a need for validation. 
An experiment distinguishes itself from the other strategies by introducing a control condition. In 
an experiment the effectiveness is assessed by comparing the behavioral effect of the intervention 
to a situation without an intervention. Experiments provide a solid assessment and may be 
required when dealing with designs that will be implemented on a big scale, like introducing a 
new tax form, or meeting ethical standards.  
1.2.2 Transition Design, Terry Irwin (2018) 
The Transition Design approach aims at addressing complex wicked problems by involving all 
affected stakeholders of a given issue to co-create sustainable and desirable long-term futures. 
Transition design attempts at providing a rationale for intervening in complex systems and 
“solutioning” over long periods of time. 
==PAGE:15==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
14 
 
Theoretical underpinnings  
Transition Design is highly influenced by the Multi-Level-Perspective developed by Frank W. Geels, 
which describes how transitions within complex systems happens at multiple levels of scale (niches, 
regimes, and landscape) over long periods of time. This premise is taken up by Transition Design 
that attempts to outline an approach to design interventions for transitions, which takes many years 
and works on many levels. Transition Design outlines an emerging field that looks at ways that we 
can design towards desirable futures by leveraging on the knowledge of change in complex systems. 
The approach includes a framework that helps practitioners understand how, and in what ways, 
practices and knowledge from other disciplines can be utilized in addressing complex problems. The 
framework also suggests several practices and theories that the authors see relevant in the four areas 
of the framework, “Visions for Transition”, “Theories of Change”, “Posture and Mindset”, and “New 
Ways of Designing”. 
Empirical research approaches 
The approach focuses on understanding the current problem that is affecting a large system 
consisting of many stakeholders that each has their own understanding of the problem and their own 
concerns and beliefs. Therefore, the emphasis is on multi-stakeholder engagement and co-creation. 
Four steps with specific tools are suggested, all of which are to be co-created with affected 
stakeholder groups in a workshop setting. 1) “Mapping the Problem in the Present” helps to identify 
concerns and relations, identifying interdependencies, affinities, causal and conflictual relationships 
between stakeholders. 2) “Mapping the concerns and relations” helps to identify concerns, fears, 
hopes, and desires related to the problem, and reflecting on the cultural norms, beliefs, and 
assumptions (held by the stakeholder group) that may have contributed to the problem. 3) “Future 
visioning” enables stakeholders to co-create compelling visions of long-term, lifestyle-based futures 
in which the problem has been resolved and many stakeholder fears/concerns addressed, and 
hopes/desires fulfilled. 4) The final step is “backcasting” from the desirable future back to the 
present, which creates a tangible transition pathway.  
On top of the concrete suggestions for understanding the present “wicked problem” and a shared 
future vision among stakeholder groups, the approach also briefly outlines a way to investigate 
further the complexities of the problem, to help inform what kind of interventions would be suitable. 
The exploration draws on the theory Multi-Level-Perspective and guides the design team to 
investigate the problem in multiple systems levels, in the present, future, and past. It is a way to 
understand how the problem ramifies to other system levels and a way to identify how the problem 
has evolved through time. 
==PAGE:16==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
15 
 
Social objectives 
The approach is trying to improve the stakeholder relations it is seen to be the dominating factor for 
upholding the complex problems. The approach, thus, attempts to resolve tensions, increase 
understanding, and strengthen relations between affected stakeholders.   
Intervention types 
Transition design highlights two distinct types of interventions, linking and amplifying projects, 
specifically for wicked problems. Linking new and existing projects (from multiple sectors, 
including service design and social innovation) to each other to create long-term visions is seen as 
“key” in Transition Design strategy. This strategy should, over time, create greater traction and 
leverage. The strategy of amplifying projects looks at existing projects and efforts that are already 
working at a “grassroot” level and try to support (amplify) these efforts.  
Intervention processes 
The transition design approach argues that changing complex systems and resolving wicked 
problems takes multiple interventions, at multiple levels of scale over multiple time horizons 
(referring to the MLP). Therefore, working within large slow-moving systems will involve periods of 
intervention activity, and periods of observation and reflection to understand the response of the 
system. The approach sees systems as self-organizing, which means that systems determine their 
response from internal processes that cannot be predicted. Because the effect of an intervention can 
not be predicted, the transition designer must wait and observe how the system reacts. Instead of 
thinking in designing “solutions” the Transition Design approach appeals designers to think in terms 
of “solutioning” at multiple levels of scale, over long periods of time.  
1.2.3 Frame Creation, Kees Dorst (2015) 
Frame creation seeks to help public organizations and companies to deal with complex problems in a 
thoughtful manner to achieve radical innovation. The frame creation approach is modelled by 
looking at how expert designers have been solving seemingly unsolvable problems. Frame 
innovation is concerned with contemporary problems, which are identified to be open, complex 
dynamic and networked. The conventional ways of problem-solving are not adequate to deal with 
these complex problems, since most of them were conceived to work in a reasonably isolated, static, 
and hierarchically ordered “miniworlds”. 
Theoretical underpinnings 
Frame creation contrasts itself to the theory rational action, which is said to underlie much of 
conventional problem-solving. While rational thought is dispassionate, disembodied, and that theory 
==PAGE:17==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
16 
 
leads practice, frame creation is engaged guided by empathy, has phenomenological analysis at its 
core, and suspends every premise about how the world might work to instead form “theories” lead by 
the practices of stakeholder and parties involved. Frame creation outlines, at its core, the elements of 
a new fluid rationality that can address contemporary problems. The approach is not formed by 
social science theories, but through design research and learning how expert designers are dealing 
with complex problems. Therefore, it is quite a practical approach filled with advice for dealing with 
real world complex problems.  
Empirical research approaches 
The Frame creation model presents multiple sequential steps to create new frames to a problem 
situation. To understand the context of any apparent problem the design team should look at 
“archaeology” of the problem. In complex problem setting with no “problem owner”, archaeology is 
seen as a neutral investigation of the initial situation. From the initial understanding of the problem, a 
wider exploration into the context of the problem is initiated. This exploration includes gathering 
information through interviews stakeholders, affected groups, and exploring the wider field of the 
problem, meaning the cultural, economic, social, and symbolic influences all of which contribute to 
the problem situation. Based on the comprehensive understanding of the problem situation, the 
design team comes up with certain “themes” which are deep understandings of root issues which 
normally is hidden “beneath the surface”. This could be needs, motivations and experiences from 
different stakeholder groups. Based on the themes the design team will attempt to come up with new 
frames to the problem situation, through a creative process preferably done in a team with diverse 
backgrounds. The last steps are to explore the implications of the frames. Different frames are 
applied to the problem situation and designers investigate which frames could lead to realistic and 
viable solutions. In an organizational context the solutions should have a short-term component that 
will lead to quick results (working with the organization as it is now) and a long-term component 
that requires changing the practices of organizations. 
Social objective  
The frame creation process aims at transforming the organizations it is working with. The approach 
sees organizations using old frames to solve their problems, which are hindering innovation and 
growth. The approach sees the aim of doing a frame creation project with an organization as enabling 
the organization to do frame creation projects themselves, to deal with future complex problems that 
the organization will face. The aim is to change organizations through adoption of frame creation to 
becoming more open, complex, dynamic, and networked themselves.  
==PAGE:18==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
17 
 
Intervention types 
The approach looks at the frame creation process as an intervention in the “receiving” organization. 
The “intervention” in organizations is not so much about realizing a specific solution that might 
come up through a frame creation process, but more that the organization will adopt the frame that 
“produced” the solution. The frame creation approach has also been employed in the context of 
complex societal issues with no “problem owner”, where designers might start with a theme like 
“loneliness” in a certain area. Often interlocking problem patterns are what causes these problems, 
and therefore the solution to these type of problems lies in creating new an alternative, not as one 
single intervention but the creation of a bigger process in which the found themes work together. 
Transformation of complex situations requires subtle jointly planned efforts. 
Intervention process 
To achieve this organizational transformation, which Dorst calls “frame innovation”, it is seen vital 
that organizations come on board the frame creation project. The partner organization should be an 
equal partner and learner, to enhance the chances of the organization to adopt the frame creation 
process. In Dorst’s own experience of changing organizations towards frame creation, he found that 
it requires many small initiatives, rather than a grand vision and expecting people to fall behind this. 
In the case of changing the practice of a design school, initiatives involved human resources, 
demonstration projects, and physical changes to buildings.  
1.2.4 Speculative Design (2013), Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby 
Speculative Design is an approach to address current societal challenges and viewpoints using 
speculative futures that act as catalysts for social change. The approach uses speculative futures as an 
alternative way for designers to address great societal issues like climate change, overpopulation, and 
water shortages. Speculative Design uses design as a means of speculating on how things could be to 
present alternative ways for society. Speculative Design is not for experimenting about how things 
are now, and how to make them better or different, it is about completely other possibilities. 
Speculative Design is thus not operating within reality as it is, but what could be, to pose questions, 
provoke, and inspire, through the alternative futures. 
Empirical research approaches 
There are no formal research approaches presented in the approach. However, Speculative Design 
envisions designers to define futures together with experts, ethicists, political scientists, economists, 
etc., to form desirable futures. The approach is, however, not about making future predictions, as 
==PAGE:19==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
18 
 
they question the reliability of such predictions from weak signals, but to present alternatives to 
spark new ideas, ideals, reflections, and values in people.  
Theoretical underpinnings 
Speculative design does not refer to any theoretical underpinnings. The approach, however, has some 
opinions on society. It sets itself apart from other design disciplines by completely separating itself 
from market pressures, to be able to explore ideas and issues. Speculative Design believes that 
changing people’s behavior should be up to the individual, or to the government to ban some kinds 
of behavior (for instance smoking). They see individuals as “free agents”, not necessarily rational, 
but free to make up their minds.  
Social objectives 
The approach believes that change starts with the individual and that the individual should be 
presented with many options to form an opinion. The approach wants to catalyze public discussions 
towards discussing what kinds of futures that people really want. This can help to create new 
perspectives on complex problems to create spaces for discussion and debate about alternative ways 
of being. They claim that the actual limits for what is achievable “depend in part on the beliefs 
people hold about what sorts of alternatives that are available”. Therefore, the objective of the 
approach is to impart alternative ways of society through interventions, to create an internal change 
in people. It could be on an individual or group level. 
Intervention types 
There are no presented limitations to what form an intervention could look like. It could take any 
form, but as it is presented the focus is on creating conceptual scenarios or products that people can 
interact with. The designs are seen as “proposals”, to propose, suggest, and offer new perspectives 
and realities. An example of this kind of design is a prototype restaurant in Amsterdam that used 
take-away apps to outsource cooking. Customers gathered in the restaurant and enjoyed the social 
ambience but ordered their food from local take-away restaurants. Customers were guided by food 
advisors that would provide information about the food and delivery times. This example showcases 
how speculative design lies in the borders of design and art and social critique. The restaurant idea 
could be seen as a lucrative and great idea for future restaurants, but it could also be seen critique of 
digital culture, perhaps both. The approach does not explain what effective interventions would be, 
but present inspirational interventions like the prototype restaurant.  
==PAGE:20==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
19 
 
Intervention process 
Speculative Design does not provide insights into any intervention process of how the speculative 
futures should be presented or in what contexts and so on. This part is left to the designer to choose.  
1.2.5 Soft Systems Methodology, Checkland and Poulter (2010) 
Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) is an organized way of tackling perceived, complex social 
situations. The approach was created from action research as a pragmatic approach to identification 
and solution of “soft” ill-defined problems.  
Theoretical underpinnings 
SSM is a configuration of the Systems Engineering approach (SE), which saw systems to exist in the 
real world and could be “engineered” to meet certain objectives. The shift from SE to SSM was an 
introduction to “worldviews” of human beings. It led SSM to see systems not as existing in the real 
world, but to use systems thinking to understand problematic situations. SSM is based on certain 
“system ideas” concerning the interaction between parts which make up a whole. SSM realized, 
however, that all problematic situations contain people trying to act purposefully, and that you can 
treat purposeful actions as a system. A logically linked set of activities constitutes a system and its 
emergent property being its purposefulness. This could be a company that has a certain purpose, or 
simply the purpose of painting a fence, each can be modelled as systems containing the activities to 
reach this purpose. In a complex phenomenon like a football match, you can look at it from many 
perspectives, like the coaches, players, hot dog sellers, commercial sponsors and so on, each having 
different purpose models. No one model would capture it all. Thus, SSM sees the society as 
dependent on the worldview of the one observing. Models of society, therefore, cannot be 
descriptions of the real world, it can only express a certain way of looking and thinking about the 
real situation from a certain worldview.  
Empirical research approaches 
The SSM approach is seen as a cycle of learning which starts at investigating the problematic 
situation to defining and taking up actions to improve it. To start understanding the problematic 
situation at hand, the approach outlines four ways to get around it. Firstly, to get a rough idea of the 
situation a so-called Rich Pictures can be made to capture, informally, the main entities, processes, 
issues, structures, and viewpoints in the situation. The Rich Picture would be made by talking to 
people, conducting interviews, reading documents, etc. The Rich Picture will be used for discussion 
of the situation. “Analysis One” is mainly about identifying who can be regarded as affected or 
concerned about the situation (issues owners), each having their own worldview.  “Analysis two” is 
==PAGE:21==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
20 
 
concerned about the culture in the situation, it is to identify norms, values, and roles to get a sense of 
the social context. “Analysis Three” is the political analysis, that examines the disposition of power 
in a situation. SSM uses the metaphor of “commodity”, which embodies power. Possible 
commodities of power could be a certain role, personal charisma, intellectual authority, having 
access to certain information.  
Based on the analysis of the situation, models depicting the situation through a declared worldview 
can be made. These models are made from Root Definitions, which describes the activity system to 
be modelled, what it is, what it does and why it does it. This always describes the purposeful activity 
being modelled as a transformation process, where some entity (example of an “unpainted fence”) is 
transformed into another state (a “painted fence”).  In doing the model three criteria are relevant to 
reflect upon to enrich the model, efficacy, efficiency, and effectiveness. Efficacy is whether the 
transformation is working (is the fence painted). Efficiency is whether the transformation is being 
achieved with the minimum resources (is it painted with minimum resources), and effectiveness is 
whether the transformation is helping to achieve some higher-level or longer-term aim (would the 
painted fence enhance the property appearance). Other criteria can also be applied like ethicality or 
elegance depending on the situation.  
Intervention types 
The intervention of SSM can be seen as the purposeful activity models used in structured discussions 
with stakeholders, to agree on actions to improve the situation. The models are seen as devices to ask 
good questions about the real situation and enabling it to be explored in a rich way. It can structure a 
discussion about the real-world situation and bring to the surface different worldviews, to find 
possible ways of make desirable and feasible changes. The models can create a common ground of 
the situation for agreeing on which actions to improve. 
Social objective 
The approach aims at changing structures, processes, or attitudes through the interventions with the 
activity models. It mainly focuses on organizations, but objectives outside organizations are also 
possible. 
Intervention process 
The SSM approach is not concerned with following the actual implementation of the “actions to 
improve” in the real world. The approach thus is concerned with agreeing on actions to improve the 
situation but does not provide insights beyond this.   
==PAGE:22==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
21 
 
1.3 Summary of the five approaches 
To summarize the approaches, I have made a simple framework based on Tromp and Hekkert’s 
finding of a collective goal of “improving society”. The framework consists of three rings; social 
objective describing what the approach intends to change, Intervention type describing the presented 
types of interventions that achieves the social objective, and cross-disciplinarity that describes the 
supporting theories and practices from different fields. The framework thus frames social design as 
“effect-driven” meaning that its purpose is to create social change and only social change. I have 
summarized my review in the following framework: 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Sense-making framework of social design 
==PAGE:23==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
22 
 
1.3.1 What is social design? 
Based on the five reviewed approaches, I have attempted to find some key dimensions that are 
distinctive for the field of social design to bring more clarity to what social design is. Although not 
all dimensions are present in all approaches, they capture the general dimensions that social design is 
concerned with. Seven distinctive dimensions are seen to explain social design: 
 
1) Challenging current systems. Social design is about critically examining current systems and 
challenging underlying mechanisms. A social design project might start with a problematic situation, 
but social design is not only solving the immediate problem but to tackle the systemic issues 
upholding a problematic situation. This requires holistic reasoning or systems thinking of a social 
design project to go beyond analytical problem solving. Social design is interested in explicating 
underlying problematic systems and exploring better ways that the system could function.  
2) Presenting alternative future systems. Social design is not only interested in solving a problem, 
but to present alternative futures that point in better directions. Social design dares to imagine 
alternative futures where current issues would not exist. Timescales can be years or decades into the 
Figure 2. The seven dimensions of social design 
==PAGE:24==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
23 
 
future but should always be connected to actions in the present. Futures should be well grounded in 
trends forecasting with a scientific approach. 
3) Realizing interventions. Social design is not about mere designing of solutions, it is about 
realizing impactful interventions. Social design has no value as design concepts but must lead to real 
change in society. Impact should be measured and evaluated. Social design projects are change 
agents and they carry out the change.  
4) Towards collective and social ends rather than commercial. Social design does not seek 
commercial ends, it seeks social change. It takes the view of the collective and designs for the 
betterment of society. Commercial aspects of social designs are merely a means to realize social 
change not an end. Commercial success is not the measure of social designs’ success, only the social 
value it gives. Social design works with unmet needs in society, market failures, and complex 
problems.  
5) Using social theories. Social design uses social theories to support the understanding of systems, 
designing of interventions, and realizing of interventions. Social sciences are a distinctive part of 
social design. Social theories form the logic behind system dynamics, and intervention strategies. 
Models of society help guide intervention design to maximize the intended social impact.  
6) Cross-disciplinary collaboration. Collaborating across many disciplines from philosophy and 
sociology to ecology and life science helps bring new perspectives to a complex situation. Cross-
disciplinarity is both in research, designing, consulting, and evaluating. The competences needed for 
social design project exceeds the capacity of individual designers, thus making cross-disciplinary 
teams and collaborations a necessary part of social design. 
7) Participatory research, designing, and realizing. Social design involves itself with all affected 
stakeholders to include contradicting perspectives in complex issues. Social design uses participatory 
approaches to involve stakeholders throughout the process, in research, designing, and realizing. 
Thus, involved stakeholders are also learning and changing throughout a project, contributing to the 
total social impact of a project. 
1.4 Analysis and critique. Identifying gaps and directions of social design 
In this section, I will analyze the field of social design with respect to the five approaches, which I 
have identified as presenting the variety of approaches in the field of social design. The analysis of 
the field will of course be limited by the inclusion and therefore also exclusion of approaches within 
social design. I will use figure 1. Sense-making framework of social design from the review, as a 
==PAGE:25==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
24 
 
starting point for the analysis. I will assume, as the framework, that the purpose of social design is to 
create positive social change. Based on this assumption I will analyze how each approach argues for 
creating social change. I will follow logic of the framework starting from the inner rings of the social 
objective and intervention type of the five approaches and discuss the causalities between 
intervention and the social objective. From there I move outwards to discuss the underlying cross-
disciplinary theories supporting the approaches. This leads us back to the core of social design to 
discuss whether the field is on the right path of improving society.     
1.4.1 Social objective and intervention type 
A surprising finding of looking at the approaches was that the objectives were not clearly stated and 
required some digging to really grasp what they were trying to change. In Designing for Society, the 
objective is presented as “improving society”, however, looking closer the approach is only 
interested in changing individual and collective behavior. Similarly in Transition Design, the 
objective was presented, and referred to in the literature (Ceschin and Gaziulusoy, 2021) as an 
approach to transition society, however, looking at the approach itself its objective is mostly focused 
on changing stakeholder relations. In Frame Creation the objective is to transform organizations to 
becoming more innovative, but little time is used to go in depth with this objective. The tendency in 
social design approaches of not clearly expressing the social objectives, makes it difficult to 
understand the intended change of the approaches. At first, the objectives of social design seem to be 
the same, to address complex societal issues, however, mapping the social objectives, it becomes 
clear that each approach has its own way of tackling societal issues.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Excerpt from the sense-making framework 
of social design 
==PAGE:26==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
25 
 
Although the objectives of change vary across the approaches, the type of interventions are not 
particularly fixed on any specific artefact, like products, services, systems, etc. Difference is not so 
much in the object itself, but rather what the intervention tries to achieve, e.g., the social objective. In 
Designing for Society, the artefacts should create behavioral change, in Frame creation the design 
process should transform the partner organization. In Speculative Design the futures should inspire 
internal change, and in Transition Design interventions should link efforts between stakeholders. 
Finally, in Soft System Methodology the purposeful activity models should change processes, 
structures, or attitudes. Thereby, the logic of social design is that interventions serve as means to 
achieve the social objective, but any type of artefact can be used. What is interesting to look further 
into is the arguments for why the interventions will achieve the social objectives. 
1.4.2 Causality between intervention and social objective  
Designing for Society is trying to change collective behavior and suggests behavioral design 
interventions to change individual or group behavior. The approach argues that small behavioral 
changes can lead to bigger society wide changes. While this could be said to be true, the gap between 
individual and group behavior changes and society wide change is quite big and unexplored by the 
approach. Although encouraging to make changes towards collective change, the unexplored gap 
between the two makes the causality link quite weak. In Frame Creation, the reasonings for why the 
approach is transforming organizations are found in some case studies of organizations that have 
been partially transformed by a Frame Creation project. However, the approach does not go into 
depth of this transformation process, which makes the claim of using Frame Creation to transform 
organizations more like a hope than a real possibility. Speculative Design is not concerned about the 
effectiveness of its interventions. It trusts the designer to make discussion-provoking future 
scenarios, on his/her gut feeling. The central claim that speculative design can change internal ideals 
and values is not being supported by any theories. It also does not explain the relationship between 
internal change and societal wide change. The SSM approach presents a way of agreeing with 
stakeholders on the actions that will lead to change of structures, processes, and attitudes. The 
agreement on action does not mean that the interventions will work, only that stakeholders believe 
they will. This is not enough to ensure change since stakeholders are limited to their worldview. 
Transition Design provides scientific groundings for why it is an effective approach to change 
stakeholder relations in accordance with the transition path that would resolve the problems upheld 
by the stakeholders. It proposes tested practices of multiple-stakeholder-engagement as interventions 
that would better the chances of linking efforts among stakeholders. Transition Design uses the 
systems-principle of self-organization to describe how designers should intervene in systems, but it 
==PAGE:27==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
26 
 
does not go into any depth of this process, or bring measures to what observation and intervention 
means in this context.  
When we look at the presented arguments for the intervention effectiveness, the great promise of 
societal change becomes more questionable. There is paid surprisingly little attention to the 
interventions ability to serve as means for achieving the social objective. The contemporary 
approaches of social design presented here are, although making admirable attempts, lacking in 
causality for achieving the social objectives. The core arguments of why the interventions will bring 
about the desired change are not theoretically or logically grounded and, in some cases, not present. 
The lacking causality between intervention and social objective could stem from traditional industrial 
design logic, where the goal of the design process was the design of objects and not the 
implementation and production of the products. Similarly, the focus of many of these approaches is 
to design interventions, but not to realize them. The intervention process of changing a system is, 
thus, not included by most approaches. However, excluding the intervention process makes the 
causality of the approaches weak, since the complexity of realizing change is anything but a trivial 
matter of “implementation”. Transition Design is addressing this complexity, however, and presents 
a theory for intervening, but does not go into depth of the intervention process. 
1.4.3 Looking into the theoretical underpinnings 
I wanted to investigate the way in which each approach looks at society “the social” from a 
theoretical perspective. No approach clearly states any underpinning social theory. However, by 
looking at the theoretical backgrounds of the approaches it is possible to identify some theoretical 
stands. Frame Creation does not link itself with any social theory and has its foundations in empirical 
case studies of expert designers. While its understanding of contemporary problems appears to be 
aligned with complexity theory and systems thinking, this connection is not directly stated. 
Designing for Society does not explicitly state any theoretical stands. However, it draws on 
Habermas' social theory to establish a conceptualization of society (Bohman and Rehg, 2017). The 
emphasis on systems thinking resonates with Habermas’ perspective, however Designing for Society 
is not consistently using any overall theory of society. Soft System Methodology’s position is 
relatively clearly articulated. It assumes that the social reality dependent on the individual observer’s 
interpretations and perspectives. This view of reality runs through the entire approach and is the 
reason why the models can only be used as communication tools with stakeholders and not explain 
“reality”, because it is socially constructed. However, the approach does not draw on any theories, 
only on observations that the social world cannot be objectively modelled. It also observes that social 
systems can be seen to follow systems principles, but this relationship is also just an observation and 
==PAGE:28==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
27 
 
not grounded in any theoretical or philosophical tradition. Transition Design understands society 
through many theories with different theoretical foundations, however, systems theory seems to be 
the dominant one. It looks at societal issues as systems that obey systems principles, and this 
becomes the grounding arguments for the proposed intervention process. However, it also opens for 
other theories that has different theoretical underpinnings, which makes the overall theoretical 
foundation unclear. Speculative Design does not refer to any social theory, but it is politically 
leaning to the left by encouraging alternative ideologies and critique of neoliberalism.  
It is seen that many of the approaches are not explicit about how they view society in theoretical 
terms. Some approaches do not include a theoretical understanding of society, while others only hint 
at an underlying understanding but without consistency. Although many theories and practices are 
being used to support the approaches, the underlying understanding of society is not theoretically 
grounded.  
1.4.3 Identifying the gaps of social design  
In the light of the analysis of current social design approaches we find that the current social design 
approaches do not have an underlying model of society in which the approach is consistent. The lack 
of underlying models of society is seen to be the dominant issue in the approaches, which causes 
many of the present inconsistencies. Without an explicit understanding of society, it has several 
implications for the approaches:  
 Weak causality: with no underlying model of society the causality between the proposed 
intervention and the social objective becomes weak. The reviewed approaches do not present 
grounded arguments for the causality between the interventions and the assumed effect. This 
weak causality can be contributed to the lacking fundamental understanding of society.  
 Lacking intervention strategy: With no clear theoretical model of the dynamics of society it 
becomes impossible to propose a qualified intervention strategy. This is observed in social 
design approaches, which do not include strategies for how to intervene.  
 Difficult combinations of multiple interventions: With no explicitly stated models of 
society, different interventions will not be able to be combined in bigger strategies, because 
there is no shared model of society that interventions could refer to. Although current 
approaches imagine this to be possible, it will not be possible to freely combine approaches in 
a coherent way without a shared understanding of what society is.   
 Limited engagement and advancements: with no explicit theoretical underpinnings it will 
be hard for scholars to critically evaluate and refine the approaches. 
==PAGE:29==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
28 
 
1.4.4 The core of social design: are we on the right path to address complex societal issues? 
The current field of social design seems to be moving in the direction of Transition Design (Irwin, 
2018) and Design for Sustainability (Ceschin and Gaziulusoy, 2021), with broad frameworks to 
encompass multiple approaches and theories of society. These approaches do not present a clear 
theoretical stand on what society is but embraces a multitude of social theories and practices as their 
foundation. By adopting the Multi-Level-Perspective they see change in society to happen at 
multiple levels of society over a long-time span. In a transitional framing of social design, all the 
existing design practices might work strategically together towards a common future goal. This 
seems to be the direction of the current field of social design. However, by adopting the current 
plurality of theoretical understanding of society, it at the same time postpones the theoretical 
discussion about what society is and how it works, because all theories can equally be applied and 
mixed. Although the discussion of society is not currently seen in social design, it is luring in the 
background. If social design wants to include multiple types of interventions and propose 
intervention strategies, the field needs to address the current issue of lacking understanding of 
society. These findings resonate with Chen and colleagues’ review of social design approaches 
(Chen et al. 2015). They found that the field was weak in dealing with the complex structures of 
modern society, like bureaucracies, where actions happen from a long chain of actions, and see need 
for closer collaboration with the social sciences. 
With the grand transitional visions of social design, and growing interests from governments and 
industry (Van Assche et al., 2011), the field of social design has a responsibility of providing robust 
theoretical considerations of how society works. It should not be based on mere gambling and 
learning by doing, when talking change at this level. Especially when decades of intellectual debates 
and theories of society already exist in other fields and can be incorporated. Without considering 
consistent theories of society, social design is at risk of proposing radical action-plans for societal 
change that do not consider many functions of society. In a critique of the Transition Design program 
in the Netherlands, scholars pointed out several societal functions that Transition Design was not 
aware of. They used Luhmann’s systems theory as their model of society, to make the critique (Van 
Assche et al., 2011). This shows the potential of considering theories of society to strengthen current 
approaches. 
Moving forward social design approaches must begin the discussion of what society comprise of, to 
enable meaningful contributions and collaborations across approaches and disciplines based on 
explicitly stated theoretical underpinnings. This I see as a constructive way forward for the field. The 
emphasis on explicit theoretical grounds is not with the immediate goal of expanding social design to 
==PAGE:30==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
29 
 
tackle more and more complex systems, as the current field is pushing for, but rather to take a step 
back and discuss what society is, how it works, and how we can design approaches consistent with 
these understandings. The first step is to realize that there is a need in current social design to be 
more explicit in their theoretical understanding of society, which the analysis has shown. The second 
step is to make a convincing case for the possible benefits of a stronger foundation. This I will 
attempt to do by using Luhmann’s systems theory to show the feasibility of a stronger theoretical 
inclusion and the possible benefits. 
1.5 Exploration of the core. Using Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory as a model of 
society 
Although there are many theories of society, which could be used to form a strong theoretical 
foundation to social design, I have chosen Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory to explore how his 
model of society could tackle some of the current issues in social design. I have chosen Luhmann 
since his systems theory has been used to make contemporary critiques of critiques to Transition 
Design and Planning Theory (Van Assche et al. 2011; Van Assche and Verschraegen, 2008). 
Luhmann was a German sociologist and thinker in systems theory and has provided one of the most 
elaborate theories of society (Albert, 2016). My attempt with this exploration is to explore the 
possibilities of using a comprehensive social theory like Luhmann’s to help close the gaps of social 
design. The purpose is not to make a comprehensive argument with Luhmann, but simply to show 
the feasibility of incorporating Luhmann’s systems theory in the context of social design.  
1.5.1 Key concepts in Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory  
I will start by presenting the key notions and points in Luhmann’s systems theory. The following 
description of Luhmann’s systems theory is based on Mathias Albert’s article Luhmann and Systems 
Theory (2016) and Tina Keiding’s PhD thesis Hvorfra min verden går. Et Luhmann-inspireret 
bidrag til didaktikken. First, Luhmann sees society as consisting of social systems, so to understand 
society we first need to understand what social systems are and how they function. He differentiates 
society into three types of social systems, Interaction systems, organizations, and function systems. 
Interaction systems are social systems like classrooms where there is required physical presence. 
Organizations are social systems which exists also without physical presence and is characterized by 
memberships. Function systems are greater systems in society like the economic system, legal 
system, scientific system. Organizations interact with function systems and co-create them, in their 
legal, financial, scientific communication. A radical position of Luhmann’s theory is that social 
systems only consist of communication. Human beings are thus not a part of social systems, only our 
==PAGE:31==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
30 
 
communication. Society thus only consists of communication, not anything else. Human beings, 
energy, physical spaces, are necessary for society, but they are not a part of society. Society is 
differentiated in social systems, and these systems have certain characteristics, which Luhmann has 
described. In the context of social design, which wants to change systems, it is important to 
understand how systems work and how they can change. I will try to highlight the most important 
notions and aspects of Luhmann’s systems theory to enable an exploration of social design through 
the lens of his theory. When I talk of “systems” it is applicable to social systems, however, since 
Luhmann also sees biological systems and psychic systems (our consciousness) to be systems, his 
theory will also pertain to these. However, social systems are the focus of this exploration since these 
constitute society. Especially, organizations are interesting to keep in mind as social systems, as a lot 
of social design is focused on changing organizations.  
Characterizing systems 
Systems are units that differentiate themselves from their environment. A key characteristic of 
systems is the ability to differentiate between what is a system and what is environment. When 
systems are changing their system boundaries the environment will therefore also change. Systems 
are closed to its environment, meaning that a system cannot access any other system outside itself 
directly. The environments will therefore look different for different systems. Subsequently, different 
systems will observe and understand their environment (society) differently. Therefore, there is not 
one agreeable social reality, but many realities depending on the system observing. Since systems are 
closed off from each other, the different realities cannot be directly accessed, which figure 4 allows 
us to see: 
 
 
Figure 4. Systems and environments 
==PAGE:32==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
31 
 
The environment can be described as more complex than the system. Here, complexity refers to a 
measure of lacking information. As the environment is understood through the system, a change in 
the system’s own complexity will also lead to a change in the environment’s complexity. This 
describes the notion of learning, as learning can be seen as the system increasing its complexity to 
reduce the environment’s complexity. In this way Luhmann says that “only complexity can reduce 
complexity” (Luhmann cited in Keiding, 2005, p. 73). Systems are furthermore described as 
autopoietic, which means systems are operationally closed to its environment. Systems produces all 
the elements that it uses to sustain itself as a system. A system must affirm its system boundaries to 
its environment, to be able to sustain its existence as a system. Although operationally closed, they 
are cognitively open, meaning they can observe and adapt to changes in its environment. In other 
words, systems are operationally closed and cognitively open to its environment. This is also seen in 
the fact, that systems are able to observe both other systems and itself. A system uses the capacity to 
observe to distinguish between itself and the environment. This is the most important type of 
observation, as it is sustaining the system itself. Systems can also observe other systems although 
never directly and will have a subjective understanding. Systems, however, can observe previously 
made observations in a reflective process. This type of observation is called a 2. order observation, 
where an observation is observed. This allows the system to change its observation if the previous 
observation were not in service to its existence. In this way a system can change its perception of 
itself and of its environment. This change will be an increase in the system’s own complexity and 
thus also a learning.  
Communicating and changing 
Although systems are operationally closed, they can still communicate with each other. 
Communication between a sender system and a receiver system is possible through an event 
comprised of a sequence of three selections: 
1. Selection: The sender system chooses information (what should be communicated) 
2. Selection: The sender system chooses message (how the information should be expressed, 
verbally, bodily, through an artefact) 
3. Selection: The receiver system chooses its understanding of the message 
The receiving system may choose an understanding of the information, which was not the original 
intent by the sender system. The receiving system can either accept or reject the understanding of the 
message. If it accepts the message then it may change, if it rejects the message then no change will 
happen. A system accepts the message depending on the system’s understanding of its current state 
==PAGE:33==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
32 
 
and the expected future state with the new information. If the information seems to point to a better 
future state of the system, then it may accept the message. If the information triggers a 2. order 
observation in the receiving system, it can lead to new system boundaries and learning in the 
receiving system. A change in system boundaries, however, will only happen if the receiving system 
expects the future state to be stable, otherwise it will reject the reflection. Communication that 
intends to change other systems is called “intervention communication” and requires convincing the 
receiving system that the new expected state is beneficial to the system stability. The sender system, 
now intervening system, cannot know directly whether the receiving system has understood and 
accepted the communication in the intended way. In fact, it is certain, due to the closed systems, that 
it is understood differently than intended. Thus, the intervention system will have to observe changes 
in indirect ways, to evaluate whether the system has changed the way it was intended.  
Conditioning 
The way that social systems observe themselves and their environment depends on the conditioning. 
Conditioning regulates how the system is observing. In the case of the scientific system, it is 
conditioned to look through the difference of truth/false, meaning it looks at the world with the 
interest of finding what is truth and what is false. This conditioning regulates all the communication 
in the scientific systems, down to a single lab which is conditioned by this differentiation of 
truth/false. In the case of a company, a strategy can be seen to condition consequent communication 
and actions in the company. A strong strategy towards sustainability conditioning many choices in a 
company.  
1.5.2 Exploring how Luhmann can contribute to the issues in social design 
To apply Luhmann’s systems theory to social design, we can first recognize that a social design 
project is a social system trying to change other systems. To change other systems the social design 
projects, need to communicate with other systems, following the three selections of communication. 
The communication can be characterized as intervention communication, as it is deliberately trying 
to change other systems in a certain direction. Luhmann does not limit the form of a message, thus 
artefacts like products, services, other systems, or behaviors can act as messages, which in social 
design language would be equivalent to interventions. I will now explore how a theoretical 
foundation in Luhmann’s systems theory can address the gaps found in the analysis, namely, Weak 
causality, Lacking intervention strategy, Difficult combinations of multiple interventions, Limited 
engagement and critical evaluations.   
==PAGE:34==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
33 
 
Strengthening causality 
Luhmann can increase the causality link between intervention and its expected effect. Using 
Luhmann it is possible to argue that an intervention is essentially communication, which can be 
accepted by another system leading to change. This provides a strong link between intervention and 
change of social systems, which can be further explored using Luhmann’s theory. As society consists 
of social systems, this causality will apply to all systems in society, making it universally true. Using 
Luhmann’s theory it allows us to propose some intervention types that could be effective for 
changing systems: 
Interventions that target the system boundaries. When targeting to change system boundaries, 
you are interfering with an important element of the system’s self-description - what is 
system and what is environment. By proposing new boundaries and challenging existing 
boundaries, the system will start to reflect upon its existing boundaries. This reflection can 
lead the system to choose new boundaries, which presents new opportunities of connection 
with the environment. This will enable learning and change in a system. 
Interventions that challenge conditioning. When challenging the system’s conditioning it can 
radically change many subsequent decisions. This is seen when new visions or strategies are 
proposed in companies. An intervention could trigger a system to reflect and change its 
conditioning. This could be done by introducing new strategies and visions, or present 
misalignments between existing visions and system actions. 
Interventions with a compelling case. In both cases of changing system boundaries and 
conditioning, the intervention must present a compelling case for why the organization 
should start a reflection and consider alternative ways. This can be achieved by 
communicating in themes that the organization is able to understand, and by presenting a 
compelling future state that does not threaten the existence of the system.   
This shows that the causality between intervention and effect, can be supported by a solid 
understanding of society. Using Luhmann it is possible to make proposals for effective interventions 
for systems change based on his theory. These general types of interventions presented here, can be 
greatly elaborated using Luhmann’s theory, but it shows that causal relationships between 
interventions and social objectives can be strengthened using Luhmann. The strength of these 
principles is the universality that they can be applied to all social systems in society regardless of 
sector, types of organizations, or countries. 
==PAGE:35==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
34 
 
Enabling intervention strategies 
We cannot be certain that a system will change according to the design project’s intentions. This is 
due to the systems being operationally closed. However, it is possible to make grounded arguments 
to which strategies will increase the chances of intervention success. I have found the following 
strategies: 
Multiple intervention. The strategy of making multiple interventions can help a system to 
better internalize the new information presented through the interventions. Intervening in 
multiple ways will allow the system to connect and work with the new information in 
different ways. For instance, if a new system boundary is introduced to an organization, the 
adoption/learning of the new system boundary will be increased if the organization can 
understand and work with the new system boundary in multiple ways. Multiple interventions 
will lead to a “complexity surplus” in a system, which is a strategy for increasing system 
learning (Keiding, 2005). This is principle also applies to human education, where repetition, 
illustrations, examples, and group work, are known strategies to increase learning (Keiding, 
2005).  
Interventions over a longer period. Interventions over a long period of time allow a system to 
internalize and work with the new information (Keiding, 2005). Time is thus an important 
aspect to allow systems to internalize interventions and make sense of them, which is 
important for learning.  
Evaluate learning. The design project should measure the system to evaluate the learning. It 
is not possible to directly know what has been learned, but learning can be seen as changes in 
communications or changes in actions (Keiding, 2005). For instance, if an organization is 
corresponding with new stakeholders, or communicating about themes it previously didn’t. 
These measurements can be used to approximate the system learning. 
With Luhmann’s theory it is possible to make an overall strategy for increasing the chances of 
reaching a desired change. Since systems are operationally closed and have an unknown  
internalization process, the intervention strategy can not be a step-by-step process, but a continuum 
of interventions and evaluation over time. However, Luhmann provides some valuable insights into 
this process, and concrete strategies for effective change. 
Combining multiple interventions 
With Luhmann’s model of society, it is possible to combine multiple interventions in bigger 
strategies. If a certain information is chosen by the design team, multiple types of interventions 
==PAGE:36==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
35 
 
(messages) can express the same information to a receiving system. Combinations of behavioral 
interventions, artefacts, workshops, and strategic interventions can all be combined in a coherent 
strategy. This is possible since all interventions can be seen as intervention communication, and all 
social systems follow the same systems principles. With a foundation in Luhmann’s systems theory 
an intervention strategy with multiple interventions is possible, which can form the ground of bigger 
social design projects.  
Enabling critical evaluation and refinement 
Using Luhmann’s systems theory, other scholars with expertise in Luhmann’s theory can critique 
and refine the approach. Scholars using other theories of society can point out the weaknesses in 
Luhmann’s theory in relation to different areas of society, which could lead to new adaptations and 
refinements. Results from practice could inform and strengthen the approach, in terms of validation 
and refinement of strategies, leading to more practical approaches still within a coherent theoretical 
foundation. Looking at the strongest theoretical social design approach, Soft Systems Methodology, 
it has been refined in many ways incorporating different theoretical perspectives (Checkland and 
Poulter, 2010)). This has only been possible because scholars can understand its foundation. 
1.5.3 Implications of the exploration 
The exploration of Luhmann’s systems theory can be seen to have certain implications for the field 
of social design: 1) Adopting a theoretical model of society can address the current gaps of social 
design. 2) A consistent theory of society can unite many social design approaches in the same 
framework of society in a more consistent way than present frameworks. 3) Luhmann’s systems 
theory can be further explored as a theoretical model for social design approaches. 
1.6 Concluding on Part 1 
From the existing literature on social design, it is seen that the term has not been clearly defined. By 
identifying and reviewing five contemporary social design approaches, it was possible to find seven 
general dimensions of social design. The closer analysis of the approaches highlighted an underlying 
issue in social design: there is lacking theoretical understanding of society. Four implications of the 
lacking theoretical understanding were identified to be: Weak causality, Lacking intervention 
strategy, Difficult combinations of multiple interventions, Limited engagement and critical 
evaluations. As the field of social design is rapidly expanding its scope to look at big societal 
transitions, the need for addressing the issue of lacking theoretical foundation becomes more urgent. 
With no definition of society, the field will not be able to form consistent approaches to address 
societal transitions. Theoretical discussions within the social design field of what society is, and how 
==PAGE:37==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
36 
 
it works, could be a fruitful path towards consistent academically grounded approaches. By adopting 
Luhmann’s systems theory as the definition of society, I endeavored an exploration into the potential 
of addressing the current issues in social design. The exploration showed that Luhmann’s systems 
theory could successfully address the identified issues of social design. The exploration showed the 
feasibility of incorporating a consistent model of society into social design approaches. 
==PAGE:38==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
37 
 
Part 2: Case study. How can the aspirations of social design 
be incorporated at Technical University of Denmark? 
2.1 Introduction 
In the light of the current state of the academic field of social design, how can a technical university 
with a strong industry focus look toward social design? What are the strategic and conflicting 
interests in social design, and where lie potentials for incorporating social design? Using the 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) as my case, I will identify the current state of social design 
at DTU, using the social design dimensions found in Part 1 as my reference. The case study is based 
on seven interviews with central figures at DTU that each has a unique view on social design at 
DTU. The case attempt to give an answer to the following research questions: 
 What are current social design initiatives at DTU? 
 Where are the gaps of social design at DTU? 
 Where lie the challenges of social design at DTU? 
 What are appropriate ways of understanding social design at DTU?  
2.1.2 Interviews 
The case study is based on points from seven interviews made during spring/summer 2023. The 
interview questions were designed to touch upon the different dimensions to form a coherent picture 
of social design initiatives at DTU. I will briefly present the interviewed people and their role in the 
context of social design: 
Dagný Valgeirsdóttir, is Assistant Professor and a part of DTU Skylab. Dagny started the 
Technology Leaving No One Behind initiative and is one of the main voices within 
considering inclusion in technology. 
 
Josef Oehmen, Associate Professor at DTU and Head of Design and Innovation master’s 
program. Josef is actively promoting the systems engineering agenda at DTU and is currently 
in the process of rethinking the Design and Innovation master’s education to include a 
stronger social design focus. 
 
Roberto Flores, Head of FoodLab at DTU Skylab. Roberto is a main figure in food systems at 
DTU with knowledge in technical food innovations and systemic issues in the food sector.  
==PAGE:39==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
38 
 
Henrik Nørregaard, Head of Department at DTU Construct. As Head of Department, Henrik 
has the final say on the direction of the department. He knows organizational structures at 
DTU from the inside. 
 
Philip Binning, Dean of Graduate Studies, and International Affairs at DTU. Philip has an 
interest in social design and is actively trying to incorporate more sociotechnical competences 
at DTU. 
 
Marianne Thellersen, SVP Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Marianne has the birds eye 
perspective of the different innovation legs at DTU.  
 
Ole Broberg, Associate Professor Erimitus. Ole was a co-teacher in the now removed social 
design course for Design and Innovation bachelor students. 
 
2.2 Current state of social design at DTU  
From the seven interviews, several social design initiatives could be identified at DTU, using the 
social design dimensions as reference in the interviews. Social design initiatives were spread out 
across many actors and departments in small local initiatives. There was no collected strategy of 
social design at DTU, but rather independent initiatives that were seen to match the social design 
dimensions in different ways. I have made an arena map situating the initiatives (blue text) in the 
different contexts at DTU. I have included some overall visions (in pink) of some of the stakeholder 
groups, to illustrate what the differences between them. Recalling Luhmann’s term of conditioning, 
you could say the pink visions are the conditioning of the systems explaining how each system is 
“looking” and deciding. 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Arena Map 
==PAGE:41==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
40 
 
The Arena Map allows us to identify the following initiatives: 
Holistic Design is a Master’s course at Design and Innovation, where a systems engineering 
approach is combined with frame creation approach inviting students to look at the root causes of 
societal issues and come up with interventions directed at these.  
FoodLab starts with looking at a systems view of the food sector and invite student projects to look 
at the systemic issues. FoodLab is currently interested in getting more involved with systemic 
changes, and is in discussions with Design and Innovation to make a Food Systems Transformation 
focus area for the master program.  
Circular Economy research group offers several courses on ways to decouple economic growth 
from the consumption of finite resources. Circular Economy takes a “life-cycle perspective” to 
designing products and services, looking from material extraction to design and consumption.  
Design and Innovation program comes up as the “poster education” for the innovation agenda at 
DTU. It has a user-centered design approach and has introduced design thinking across all study 
lines in the now mandatory Innovation in Engineering course for all DTU students.   
MSc Technology Entrepreneurship program brings students together from varied backgrounds 
like, humanities, business studies, engineering, and social science, to create solutions and start-ups 
with a sustainable focus.  
Technology Leaving No One Behind initiative aims at making technical solutions at DTU consider 
inclusion and accessibility. The initiative is concerned with the social impact of technology, and has 
been supported greatly by the leadership. 
Centre of Absolute Sustainability is researching sustainability assessment of technology to provide 
evidence-based policy advice.  
The sustainable development goals (SDG’s) have become a big part of DTU, from research to 
course objectives and student solutions. It has started the conversation of the social impact of 
technology at DTU. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
41 
 
2.3 Evaluation of social design at DTU 
I will evaluate the general state of social design at DTU using the social design dimensions found in 
Part 1 in relation to the identified social design initiatives. The evaluation of social design 
dimensions is done from 0 to 5, where 0 is not any activities seen and 5 is many activities within a 
dimension. The evaluation turned out as follows: 
 
Social design dimensions  
Initiative 
DTU Score (0-5) 
Challenging current systems 
 
Holistic Design, FoodLab, 
Circular Economy 
3 
Envisioning long-term futures 
None 
1 
Intervening in Realizing  
 
Holistic Design 
2 
Towards collective and social 
ends rather than commercial 
 
Technology Leaving No One 
Behind, Centre of Absolute 
Sustainability 
2 
Using social theories  
 
None (?) 
0 
Cross-disciplinary 
collaboration 
 
MSc Technology 
Entrepreneurship, Innovation 
in Engineering 
2 
Participatory research and 
designing 
 
Design and Innovation 
program, MSc Technology 
Entrepreneurship, Skylab 
3 
This evaluation can also be presented in a spider diagram to showcase where DTU are strong and not 
so engaged: 
Table 1. Social design at DTU 
==PAGE:43==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
42 
 
 
Challenging current systems 
I see Holistic Design course as challenging current systems since it looks at the root issues in current 
systems and challenges these assumptions. FoodLab is likewise looking at the systemic issues to 
change the underlying unsustainable structures in food systems. Circular Economy is inherently a 
challenge to the current resource coupled economic system. It is seen that systems thinking is present 
at all the initiatives, emphasizing that this is an important skill for challenging existing systems. 
Although DTU is seen to challenge systems through the identified initiatives, its main output is 
technology which works to improve existing systems. 
Envisioning long-term futures 
There are no initiatives at DTU which envisions of long-term futures. The closest is Circular 
Economy which has an embedded long-term future towards a circular economy. However, students 
are not creating futures themselves. In Holistic Design students are to make new desirable “future 
states” of systems, however, it is not a future looking many years ahead towards a radically new 
system. Therefore, DTU is not seen to have little inclusion of long-term future visions. 
Figure 6. Spider diagram of social design at DTU
==PAGE:44==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
43 
 
Towards collective and social ends rather than commercial 
Technology Leaving No One Behind is the most prominent initiative with a social impact focus, 
rather than commercial. The SDG’s are likewise non-commercial social goals, which are widely used 
at DTU. Although DTU is increasing its focus towards social impact, the university is still mainly 
focused on providing technology to the industry with a commercial perspective.  
Using social theories  
DTU is not seen to use any explicit social theories to understand society. A course like 
“organizational change” uses social theories to understand change within organizations. However, its 
use of social theories is to help management, but management is not seen to be social design. 
Cross-disciplinary collaboration 
Generally, DTU does not interact with other disciplines such as social science, business studies, or 
humanities. MSc Technology Entrepreneurship stands out by its inclusion of students with other 
disciplines. The context is entrepreneurship where other disciplines are seen to be valuable in 
creating innovative solutions. The course Innovation in Engineering is cross-disciplinary internally 
across different study lines. Although mixing different fields of engineering the competences are still 
limited to within the engineering field.  
Participatory research and designing 
Design and Innovation has a participatory approach to understanding issues prototyping and testing 
with users and stakeholders. Generally, DTU has a great focus on including a participatory approach 
to designing, which is seen essential for innovation.   
Realizing interventions 
The intervention or realization of solutions is often not included in design courses. Holistic design 
includes interventions but does not follow through with the actual intervention process of integrating 
new solutions in old systems. The realization of design solutions is included in the MSc of 
Technology Entrepreneurship where teams work on realizing their idea through a start-up venture, 
over the entire master’s degree. This, however, is not an intervention to change a system, it is more 
the process of making a start-up. Therefore, the intervention process is to a low extend included at 
DTU.  
2.4 Summing up: the gaps of social design at DTU 
Generally, DTU is engaged with several dimensions of social design. There is seen active 
engagement with challenging current systems, through systems thinking approach. Participatory 
==PAGE:45==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
44 
 
research and designing are getting increasingly integrated as a mindset for engineers, through 
multiple initiatives. The emphasis on social impact is not high but through initiatives like SDG’s and 
Technology Leaving No One Behind, the awareness of social implications of technology is to some 
extent present at DTU, although the commercial aspect of technology is most prominent. Cross-
disciplinarity is only sporadically seen at DTU, and social science use is almost absent. Presenting 
alternative futures is also not being seen. The gaps of social design at DTU are thus identified to be: 
 Lacking social theory inclusion 
 No realization of interventions 
 No use of long-term futures 
 Limited cross-disciplinary collaboration 
Connecting the gaps to the lack of social theories 
From looking at the gaps of social design at DTU, it is seen that that all are very connected to the 
lacking social theory inclusion. With limited social science knowledge at DTU, it becomes hard to 
make qualified assessments of how interventions and solutions should be successfully introduced in 
the social world. This requires understanding of how industries, governments, and politics work, to 
propose qualified processes of achieving change. Without the inclusion of social science, the 
processes of creating change can not be understood or educated. Another factor is that courses run 
over a semester, which is not long for realizing interventions. Getting this dimension within 
education can, however, be done through theoretical discussions of intervention strategies and 
students proposing intervention action-plans. For students to make qualified alternative long-term 
futures, an understanding of political, social, and economic factors must be considered. For qualified 
futures this would require understanding of social theories. If DTU programs want to incorporate 
futures, social theories are required and hereby also a focus on cross-disciplinarity. Although MSc 
Entrepreneurship is doing cross-disciplinarity at a small scale, the departments at DTU are not 
greatly involved with cross-disciplinary research. With no social science understanding at DTU, 
collaborations with social sciences will be difficult. If DTU wants more cross-disciplinary research 
and programs, DTU itself must have some knowledge on social sciences, otherwise the two worlds 
will not be able to understand each other. From this perspective, the gaps of social design at DTU are 
partially caused by the lacking inclusion of social theories. Conversely, with a stronger inclusion of 
social theories it can strengthen the missing social design dimensions at DTU. Of course, any kind of 
social theory inclusion will not automatically create stronger initiatives. However, if certain 
dimensions were to be strengthened, strategic professors and competences from the social sciences 
could enable DTU to open the black box of the social world to enable stronger social impact. 
==PAGE:46==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
45 
 
2.5 The challenge of strengthening social science at a technical university 
DTU does not attempt to understand society through theories from the social sciences. This is, 
however, no surprise. It has never been the task of DTU to understand theories of society since its 
focus has been on providing engineering solutions to the industry. The industry’s objective is 
economic growth, which DTU provides with technology, research, and engineers. DTU has never 
been required by the industry to understand the workings of society, therefore it makes sense that it 
has not been incorporated at DTU. Even in the many policy advice centers and research groups at 
DTU, a theoretical understanding of society is not required. The job of DTU is only to give 
evidence-based policy advice, but not to understand the social or political contexts of these policies.  
Looking at DTU’s strategy, “Technology for People”, one could assume that DTU would be very 
interested in understanding the social relationship between technology and people. In fact, from 
talking with the Dean, who is responsible for the master’s educations, the ambition from the 
leadership is towards increasing the “sociotechnical” understanding, meaning the relationship 
between social and technical aspects. However, social understanding at DTU is limited to doing 
participatory research and design, which is a practical way of understanding the social context. This 
understanding is useful for improving technological innovation, but to better address societal issues 
as social design is attempting, the social sciences must be more closely included. The step of 
including social sciences would be a big one for a technical university like DTU and would challenge 
the identity and role of the university. As of now DTU is far from including the social sciences, and 
DTU seems content with its technical industry focus.  
Even if the leadership should decide on more inclusion of social theories, it would be very difficult. 
The departments at DTU are responsible for offering courses and hiring professors, and they are all 
technical minded departments. Convincing a department to start a new research group looking at 
social theories will not be possible any time soon. The leadership and study lines have some 
influence on department decisions, but at the end of the day it is the department that decides, and 
they will prioritize technical research. 
Given the current role of DTU in society as a technical university providing technical innovations to 
the industry. DTU seems content with this role, leaving the social sciences to other universities. If 
DTU should include social theories and strengthen other social design dimensions, it must be aligned 
with the current role of DTU. 
==PAGE:47==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
46 
 
2.5 How should DTU understand social design?  
Adopting social design uncritically would not make sense at DTU. As the role of DTU is to provide 
technological solutions to the industry and policy, this will still be a central part of any activity. An 
approach like Speculative Design would not be successfully integrated at DTU without 
modifications. Its provocative and design-conceptual nature is far from a technical and scientific 
mindset. At the social design master’s degree at Design School Kolding, Speculative Design is used 
to critique and investigate the current norms and ideals in society. This approach works fine for a 
design school; however, the requirements are different at DTU. For DTU any activity must be 
relevant for the industry, and it must involve technology to some extent.  
Social design at DTU should rather be seen through the social design dimensions which DTU could 
try to strengthen. Simply adopting specific social design approaches would not be the best way 
forward, especially in the light of the theoretical gaps. Looking at social design through the 
dimensions allows DTU to strengthen the social impact of existing programs and initiatives and 
introduce new initiatives, while not abandoning its technical industry focus. 
Some social design dimensions will fit better with the DTU requirements than others. The 
dimension, “challenging current systems”, is already present at DTU and could be strengthened even 
more. Systems thinking is a central part of this dimension, to investigate underlying systemic causes 
for a given social issue. Systems thinking allows students to explore deeper systemic issues and can 
be a useful competence for all engineers. Phillip Binning also referred to the industry asking for 
engineers that are good systems thinkers. 
Approaches like Frame Creation, SSM, and Designing for Society have an explicit focus on systems 
thinking, which helps “reframe” a problematic situation. These approaches could be considered to be 
more widely incorporated at DTU to strengthen this dimension. The requirements of DTU makes it 
difficult, however, to increase the use of social theories, which is seen to be a main hindrance for 
social design at DTU. It will be difficult for DTU to include more social science at DTU due to its 
industry role and organizational structure. However, strengthening social theory inclusion could have 
many benefits in other social design dimensions. From this case study, I would not exclude social 
sciences at DTU simply because it does not align with the requirement. There are ways that social 
theories and technology innovation align and can strengthen each other. For instance, is systems 
theory a theory from the social sciences and can be aligned with DTU’s requirements. These 
alignments must be explored and made visible. The social design dimensions are one way of 
explicating how social design is connected to the social sciences. However, more explorations into 
the possibilities of strengthening the dimensions are needed going forward. For now, the dimensions 
==PAGE:48==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
47 
 
lay the ground for a discussion of social design at DTU, where are the strengths and weaknesses of 
social design at DTU, where are the low-hanging fruits, and which dimensions makes sense to 
strengthen going forward.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
48 
 
Part 3: Next steps 
3. 1 What are the next steps for DTU? 
In the light of contributing to the discussion at DTU, I propose the following next steps: 
 The case study made it clear that a discussion around the role of DTU in relation to social 
design is needed. DTU can not be expected to incorporate social design in its breadth of 
social science and humanities, nor should they. A discussion between the Dean and Design 
and Innovation study line about the social design dimensions at DTU could be a first step 
towards a social design strategy going forward. 
 It could greatly improve the social design discussion at DTU if social design dimensions were 
adopted and reiterated by the DTU leadership. Having a collected strategy at DTU towards 
social impact, could help link and amplify efforts and initiatives across DTU.  
 Investigate how social theories could strengthen social design at DTU. How can social 
science be an integrated part of the DTU ecosystem? How can social theories support existing 
social design initiatives? What social theories would be most promising in the context of 
DTU? 
 Create explicit social design initiatives at DTU to showcase and explore the possibilities 
within social design in a DTU context. It could help start the conversation at DTU, to 
showcase the feasibility of creating social change within the requirements of a technical 
university. 
3.2 What are the next steps for the social design field? 
Taking into consideration the identified gaps of social design and the exploration a more 
theoretically grounded approach, I would recommend the following directions for the field: 
 The field should present convincing definitions of social design based on current academic 
approaches, to enable conversations between different approaches and smaller fields.   
 The field needs to start a conversation about the need to define society in theoretical terms. 
This can be done through critique of existing approaches and by presenting convincing 
approaches with a strong theoretical foundation.  
 The field must reach out to the social sciences for help with applying theories of society into 
social design approaches.   
 The field must increasingly separate itself between academic social design and social design 
found in practice. Academic social design should focus on creating scientifically grounded 
==PAGE:50==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
49 
 
approaches and theories of social design, while social design found in practice should give 
feedback on the usefulness of the approaches and inspire for creation of new approaches 
where existing academic approaches are inadequate.  
 
 
==PAGE:51==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
50 
 
Conclusion 
This thesis has investigated the field of social design. The thesis did not find extensive definitions of 
the field of social design in existing literature. By identifying and reviewing five social design 
approaches, seven dimensions of social design were found to explain the field: 
1) Challenging current systems. 
2) Presenting alternative future systems. 
3) Realizing interventions. 
4) Towards collective and social ends rather than commercial. 
5) Using social theories. 
6) Cross-disciplinary collaboration. 
7) Participatory research. 
From the analysis of the approaches, it was found that a gap in current social design was a lack of 
theoretical understanding of society. Four issues resulting from a lacking definition of society were 
identified as: Weak causality, Lacking intervention strategy, Difficult combinations of multiple 
interventions, Limited engagement and critical evaluations. By using Luhmann's systems theory to 
define society, I found that a strong theoretical foundation could help address the current problems in 
social design. Shifting from theory to practice, the case study conducted at the Technical University 
of Denmark demonstrated that the seven dimensions of social design can be used in a DTU context 
to understand social design. Furthermore, it was found that strengthening social theory inclusion, 
could be fruitful at DTU. Nonetheless, moving forward, it will be essential to carefully account for 
the specific requirements and organizational structures presently determine relevant decisions and 
directions.  
In conclusion, the case study highlights the need for a dialogue at DTU regarding its role in social 
design, emphasizing the importance of defining social design dimensions and initiating a 
conversation with DTU leadership. Additionally, the broader social design field should work on 
establishing clear definitions, engaging in theoretical discussions about definitions of society, 
collaborating with social sciences, and distinguishing between academic and practical approaches to 
drive its development.   
 
==PAGE:52==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
51 
 
Literature 
Albert, M. (2016) ‘Luhmann and systems theory’, Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics 
[Preprint]. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.7.  
Armstrong, L. et al. (2018) Social Design Futures: Hei Research and the AHRC, The University of 
Brighton. Available at: https://research.brighton.ac.uk/en/publications/social-design-futures-
hei-research-and-the-ahrc (Accessed: 14 September 2023).  
Bohman, James and William Rehg, "Jürgen Habermas", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Fall 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),  
URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/habermas/>. 
Ceschin, F. and Gaziulusoy, I. (2021) Design for sustainability: A multi-level framework from 
products to socio-technical systems. London: Routledge.  
Checkland, P. and Poulter, J. (2010) ‘Soft systems methodology’, Systems Approaches to Managing 
Change: A Practical Guide, pp. 191–242. doi:10.1007/978-1-84882-809-4_5.  
Chen, D. -S., Cheng, L. -L., Hummels, C., & Koskinen, I. (2015). Social design: An introduction. 
International Journal of Design, 10(1), 1-5. 
CRAIG, L.F.K., Paré and Kitsiou, S. (2019) ‘Chapter 9: Methods for literature review’, in Handbook 
of EHEALTH evaluation an evidence-based approach. S.l.: E-CONTENT GENERIC 
VENDOR.  
Coops, F. (2022) ‘Designing for transitions and transformations’, Proceedings of DRS [Preprint]. 
doi:10.21606/drs.2022.897.  
Design for social innovation vs. Social Design (2016) DESIS Network. Available at: 
https://www.desisnetwork.org/2014/07/25/design-for-social-innovation-vs-social-design/ 
(Accessed: 14 September 2023).  
Dorst, K. (2015) Frame innovation: Create new thinking by design. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.  
Dunne, A. and Raby, F. (2013) Speculative everything: Design, fiction, and Social Dreaming. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  
IRWIN, T. (2018) ‘The emerging transition design approach’, DRS2018: Catalyst [Preprint]. 
doi:10.21606/drs.2018.210.  
Keiding, T. B. (2005). Hvorfra min verden går: et Luhmann-inspireret bidrag til didaktikken. (2. 
edition.) Institut for Uddannelse, Læring og Filosofi, Aalborg Universitet. 
Priya, A. (2020) ‘Case study methodology of qualitative research: Key attributes and navigating the 
conundrums in its Application’, Sociological Bulletin, 70(1), pp. 94–110. 
doi:10.1177/0038022920970318.  
==PAGE:53==
Design and Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Jacob Juel Ammitsøe 
52 
 
Tromp, N. and Hekkert, P. (2019) Designing for society: Products and services for a Better World. 
London ; New York ; Oxford ; New Delhi ; Sydney: Bloomsbury Visual Arts.  
Van Assche, K. and Verschraegen, G. (2008) ‘The limits of planning: Niklas Luhmann’s systems 
theory and the analysis of planning and planning ambitions’, Planning Theory, 7(3), pp. 263–
283. doi:10.1177/1473095208094824. 
van Assche, K. et al. (2011) ‘Social Systems and Social Engineering: Niklas Luhmann’, 
Transformation and sustainability in agriculture, pp. 35–48. doi:10.3920/978-90-8686-717-
2_3.  
 
 
