==PAGE:1==
Modelling plankton aggregates
formation and sinking in the
ocean
Author
Txomin Perthuisot- s212829
Supervisor
Andre William Visser (awv@aqua.dtu.dk)
DTU Aqua
submitted date : June 19, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
SISSOMA model description
4
2.1
SISSOMA model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Definition of the 2 dimensional state space . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Physical processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Sinking speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Flux framework definition
10
3.1
Output and Flux state definition in steady state
. . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Output and Flux state definition in seasonal model . . . . . . . .
12
4
Flux characteristics analysis
15
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Focus on stickiness and turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.3
Focus on initial production pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.4
Conclusion of the OAT sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Threshold establishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Aggregate sinking speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Simple characterization of the SISSOMA model
26
5.1
Steady state model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.1
Fitting analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.2
Evaluation of the simplified model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Seasonal state model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Comparison with steady state model . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Offset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.3
Amplitude variation with time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.4
Evaluation of the simple model in seasonal mode . . . . .
36
6
Discussion
39
6.1
Aggregates distribution and characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Sinking speed pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Projection for further implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4
Future climate projection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Annex
44
References
51
1
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis
Abstract
This study presents the SISSOMA model, which aims to mechanisti-
cally reproduce the formation and fate of aggregates within the ocean’s
mixed layer. The focus is on understanding the influences of key param-
eters such as stickiness, turbulence, primary production size, and density
on the characteristics of the downward aggregates flux, including intensity,
size, density, and sinking speed.
Our result highlights a shift in the flux characteristics being either
dominated by a direct sinking or by bigger aggregates. This particular
behaviour is largely affected by the seasonal cycle and therefore by the
key parameters variations. The sensitivity analysis provides an in depth
understanding of such interactions. The sinking speed study qualifies the
size-based approach in determining the sinking pattern especially for large
aggregates where the density and porosity inherited from mother particles
become significant. Our gaussian approach based only on the key parame-
ters to model the resulting flux provides an interesting basis as a new way
of representing flux aggregate distribution. The significant reduction in
computational expenses associated with this method constitute as well an
initial stage for implementation in global model and for machine learning
implementation. Finally this model leads to a better understanding of
aggregate formation, fate and impact on the biological pump and insights
of its possible evolution with climate change.
1
Introduction
The biological carbon pump of the ocean (BCP) refers to all the processes
that transfer carbon from the surface ocean to the deep ocean. Three main path-
ways can be distinguished : The physical mixing of suspended carbon by water
masses movements (mixing pump), the active transport by the vertical migra-
tions of metazoans (migrant pump) and finally the passive gravitational sinking
of particulate organic matter (POM) (gravitational pump). Then, through res-
piration at high depth, this exported carbon can be remineralized to CO2 and
sequestered as dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) for years to centuries.
The
global carbon export through the ocean is estimated between 5 and 12 Pg C yr1
([22] [10] [26]) and the range total amount of carbon sequestered via the biologi-
cal pump is 1000 to 3000 Pg C ([4] [22]). The gravitational pump is estimated to
account for 70% of the BCP export, with a POM repartition estimated as such :
85% of zooplankton fecal pellets and 15% of phytoplankton aggregates([22]). As
POM sinks, a part of it is remineralized by diverse bacteria and metazoans and
the downward flux logically decreases with depth. This attenuation, and the
quantity of carbon reaching sequestration depth, depends on this equilibirum
between remineralization and sinking velocities ([17]). Many features such as
size, density, porosity, composition (ballast, minerals etc..) affect the sinking
velocities of POM and the resulting export flux. Therefore, understanding and
modelling the physical processes that affect the POM formation is crucial to
understand the global carbon cycle of the ocean both in terms of export and
2
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
sequestration. This advancement has the potential to greatly enhance our abil-
ity to forecast forthcoming alterations associated with climate change, given
that the ocean’s capacity for absorbing anthropogenic emissions falls within the
range of 20–30% as indicated by the latest IPCC report ([1]).
Most of existing models and studies focused on the POM size parametriza-
tion to determine sinking speeds ([29]) associating measured or calculated sink-
ing speed to POM size classes. Even if the sinking velocity of aggregates is
primarily determined by their size ([14]), the aggregated structure of the POM
(porosity, composition) impacts its excess density and its sinking speed. But
only a few models incorporate mechanistically the physical aggregation/disag-
gregation processes to model this evolving characteristic ([20],[13], [14]). The
self similarity theory ([11]) appears in most of the studies as a good framework
to model the aggregation dynamics in such environment. The aggregate com-
munity distribution is regularly modeled with a power law profile ([21],[13],[14])
with slope (aggregate number spectra) varying between -5 (small size commu-
nity) to -3 (bigger size community) [19] allowing to decrease the computational
cost of models. However, a clear understanding and prediction of the processes
leading to these distribution remain elusive and features acquired during aggre-
gation processes are hardly accessible with such types of curves.
Our model, SISSOMA, then aims to give an explicit mechanistic descrip-
tion linking the surface plankton community characteristics (e.g. productivity,
grazers, size spectra, mineral ballast, aeolian deposits) to the sinking character-
istics of the export flux through the mixed layer (density and size distribution
of aggregates and sinking speed). We will use a 2 dimensional representation of
the emerging aggregate community based on ”self-similarity” to apply the dif-
ferent physical processes (aggregation, fragmentation, fragmentation) affecting
POM distribution and sinking.
This work will first present the model, its parametrization and results.
The way of studying flux characteristics will be explained and discussed. Then
a simple sensitivity analysis conducted on chosen input parameters will allow
to get a better understanding of aggregate characteristics and sinking speed
sensitivity beside primary production and environmental conditions. In order to
characterize the behaviour of the model under different situation, simple fitting
and analytical relations will constitute both a key of understanding and a basis
for a simpler model to decrease its computational cost. Finally, results will be
discussed with the existing literature. Further implementation and projections
relative to climate change and BCP will as well be considered.
3
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
2
SISSOMA model description
2.1
SISSOMA model
A key hurdle in estimating particle export flux is to determine how fast
aggregates sink. Altogether well described by Stokes law, the fact that density of
aggregates can be highly variable means that direct size distribution application
provides very poor predictions. Aggregates of any size can show a wide range
of sinking speed from almost neutrally buoyant to hundreds of meters per day.
SISSOMA seeks to mechanistically model the dynamics governing aggregate
density from production of primary particles to their sinking out of the mixed
layer.
2.1.1
Definition of the 2 dimensional state space
The SISSOMA model depicts the fate of marine aggregates through 3 pro-
cesses : aggregation producing larger less dense aggregates, remineralization
which reduces the solid mass (and hence excess density) of aggregates, and
fragmentation. The frame used is a 2 dimensional state space with size (linear
dimension r of aggregates) in abscissa and excess density (ie ρ −ρw compared
to density of sea water ρw) in ordinates.
Figure 1: Dynamics are driven by 3 processes; aggregation producing larger less
dense aggregates, degradation/dissolution which reduces the solid mass (and
hence excess density) of aggregates, and fragmentation. Primary particles (e.g.
diatoms) are produce in a specific size and density range. The production of
other material such as dust and TEP can also be specified. The distribution of
aggregates in this state space eventually reaches steady state when the rate of
supply is balanced by the sinking losses particularly of large dense aggregates.
4
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
2.1
SISSOMA model
Figure 1 highlights the effects of the 3 different processes on the aggregates
in the described space.
The self-similarity theory ([11]) allows to take into account the porosity
increase of aggregates as they grow in size. It suggests that the linear dimension
rioj of an aggregate formed by the combination of two parent aggregates of linear
dimension ri and rj respectively is given by :
rioj = (ra
i + ra
j )(1/a)
(1)
where a is called the self-similarity coefficient. Its value < 3 describes the
fact that aggregate length increases more rapidly than cubic root of mass. If a
gets closer to 3, aggregates tend toward a perfect mass sphere situation. Going
the other way, the forming aggregates includes more water and gets more porous.
The concept of self similarity echoes aggregate fractal dimension, a topic of some
interest in the past([11]). However, SISSOMA model treats self-similarity as a
property of the aggregate process not of the aggregate itself. Therefore fractal
dimensions of aggregates are variable. This particular porosity increase with size
is therefore included in a simple 2D space creating two transformed variables
(x, z) that maps to (r, ρ −ρw) as:
r = roδx
ρ −ρw = ρozδ(a−3)x
(2)
with δ = ( rmax
ro )(1/Nr) a logarithmic scaling factor of the size space. Nr is
the number of size class. rmax = 1m and ro = 1µm. ρo is the density interval
equal to 0.2ρw/(Nd −1) , with Nd the number of density bins.
The factor
δ(a−3)xtakes advantage of the reduction of density by aggregation and expands
the density resolution for large aggregates.
Porosity of aggregates ϕ can be
estimated as follows:
1 −ϕ = δ(a−3)x
(3)
The two transformed variables are used to create a new discrete state space
(X,Z). X going from 0 to Nr and Z going from 0 to Nd resulting in Nd ∗Nr bins
with specific characteristics. Equation 2 allows to come back to size and density
for every (X,Z) values. Figure 2 represents the evolution of density in the bins.
5
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
2.1
SISSOMA model
Figure 2: Excess density mapping within (X,Z) space
2.1.2
Physical processes
The 3 processes are described as such in the (X,Z) space:
Aggregation
N(bi) and N(bj) are the number of particles in the bins bi and bj. They will
collide and aggregate together to form N(bij). In the (X,Z) space, this process
includes all the possible combination between all bins.
dN(bij) = N(bi)N(bj)αβ(bi, bj)
(4)
The term β(bi, bj) is the encounter kernel [m3s−1], and α is the sticki-
ness, the probability that once a collision takes place, the two particles stick
together. The encounter kernel includes turbulence mixing, differential settling,
and Brownian diffusion.
6
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
2.1
SISSOMA model
βbij = 2kT
3ηρw
(ri + rj)2
rirj
βsij = 1.3
r ε
η (ri + rj)3
βwij = π
2 min(ri, rj)|wi −wj|
(5)
where ϵ is the turbulent dissipation rate [m2.s−3], η is the kinematic vis-
cosity of water [m2.s−1], and wi is the sinking speed [m.s−1] of a particle. T is
the temperature [K].
The process of aggregation entails considering every potential interaction
among aggregates within the specified bins. This can be mathematically rep-
resented as a convolution. By employing the bin numbering system described
as above (bi,bj etc), we can generate a list of distinct bin combinations, rep-
resented as bi, bj, where i ranges from 0 to L-1, and j ranges from i to
L-1 with L = Nr ∗Nd. The total number of such combinations is given by
K = (L + 1) ∗L/2. Then the equations defined above define the aggregate
characteristics.
Remineralization
Bacteria respire a part of the POM for their own metabolism affecting
aggregates mass mainly. Here we consider that remineralization only affects the
density of aggregates:
dρ
dt = −γ(ρ −ρw)
(6)
with γ the remineralization rate (fixed to 0.1day−1) which is a reason-
able value ([21]). To be consistent with our representation of state space, we
transform the density ordinate according to Equation 2. Size is invariant with
remineralization so the transformed coordinate z follows Equation 6. For any
small interval dx along the size ordinate, the number flux out of a bin (x′, z′)
is given by γz′qx′N(x′, z′)dx with dx between [x,x+1].
After an integration
between x and x+1, the flux of particle can be established as follow:
d
dtN(x, z) = γqx 1 −q
3 −a [(z + 1)N(x, z + 1) −zN(x, z)]
(7)
here, q = δ(a−3). Since q is always < 1, the ’remineralization matrix’ has
the highest value at low X and high Z. It agrees with the initial density exponen-
tial decay. Then, in our scheme small dense particle are more exposed to such
process. However, some edges conditions need to be fixed at Z=0 to be sure
that mass leaves the system by this process and therefore the remineralization
is increased at this limit.
7
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
2.1
SISSOMA model
Fragmentation
As aggregates form, many processes (turbulence, porosity increase) affect
its stability and inevitably some fragment in smaller aggregates. χ(x, z) is de-
fined as the fragmentation rate that depends on turbulence (external condition),
porosity and the size of aggregates.
d
dtN(x, z) = −χ(x, z)N(x, z)
(8)
with
χ(x, z) = ϵ ∗1E6 ∗(δx/(δ(Nr−1)) ∗(1 −ϕ) ∗Frate
(9)
ϵ is the turbulent dissipation rate [m2.s−3], (1-ϕ) the porosity and Frate =
500 the maximum fragmentation rate [day−1]. A shown in the equation the
more porous (and large) the aggregate gets (higher X), the more prone it is to
breakdown into smaller ones. The mass lost is divided into smaller size bins.
2.1.3
Sinking speed
The 3 processes described above allow to depict the size, density and poros-
ity evolution of aggregates in the mixed layer. In the model, the depth of the
mixed layer is fixed to H = 50m. These parameters allow to determine a sinking
speed and therefore the export flux of aggregates out of this limit considered
close to the euphotic zone limit. The sinking velocity w of an aggregate (r, ρ)
in a fluid can be described with the Stokes law as:
w =
s
8rg(ρ −ρw)
3ρw
Cdrag
(10)
with Cdrag the drag coefficient depending on the Reynolds number R =
2wr/η ≪(η = 1E −6m2.s−1)determined by the following empirical equation.
Cdrag = 24
R +
6
1 +
√
R
+ 0.4
(11)
The matrix of the sinking velocities is:
8
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
2.1
SISSOMA model
Figure 3: Sinking velocities mapping within (X,Z) space
As shown in Figure 3, the sinking speed of aggregate increases with X and Z.
Even if it seems a rather simple sinking scheme, this matrix captures explicitly
the simulated evolution of the particle (size, density, porosity) spectra (through
processes of growth, decay, aggregation, fragmentation and remineralization).
This sinking matrix captures the intrinsic characteristics of the formed ag-
gregates.
The export flux attributes are determined by how much mass are
present within certain bins.
Table 1: Parameter summary
Parameter
Abbreviation
Value
Units
self similarity coefficient
a
2
Stickiness
α
[0 1] variable
turbulent dissipation rate
ϵ
variable
m2.s−3
Production
Ptotal
variable
µgC.m−2.day−1
Minimum radius
r0
1
µm
Maximum radius
rmax
1E6
µm
density of seawater
ρw
1027
kg.m−3
kinematic viscosity of seawater
η
1E-6
m2.s−1
Boltzmann constant
k
1.38065E-23
[m2.kg.s−2.K−1
Remineralization rate
γ
0.1
day−1
Maximum fragmentation rate
Frate
500
day−1
Depth of mixed layer
H
50
m
Number of size bins
Nr
30
Number of density bins
Nd
10
Temperature
T
281
K
9
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
3
Flux framework definition
3.1
Output and Flux state definition in steady state
Figure 4: Up: Flux output of the model; Down : size aggregated Flux. The red
dot is the weighted center of mass of the Flux. Amplitude, variance and mean of
the approximated gaussian curve for the aggregated flux are also marked .Input
: Ptotal = 1E6µg/m2/day; α = 0.4; ϵ = 1E −7m2.s−3
Figure 4 shows a typical output of the model. The Flux represents the mass
of aggregates sinking out of the mixed layer fixed to a depth of 50m for the study.
In this way we can extract the characteristics of the export ratio (fraction of
NPP exported out of the mixed layer) relative to the gravitational pump. As
explained in the section above this flux is directly linked to the sinking speed
matrix established by the model and how much mass is brought to each bins
through the physical processes explained above.
This flux has a typical size, density and porosity captured by the the posi-
tion of the yellow zone observed on this (X,Z) 2D space. The weighted center
of mass (red dot) allows to approximate this position. Its coordinates will be
marked as (XF,ZF).
The flux intensity and shape (ie how much mass is actually leaving the sys-
tem) is represented by the size aggregated curve (Figure 4 bottom). Amplitude,
10
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
3.1
Output and Flux state definition in steady state
µ and σ are defined as the amplitude, mean and variance of the approximated
Gaussian curve that can be fitted. Studying those outputs allows to characterize
quantitatively the flux and to come back to a size class pattern that can be fed
to other models.
It is already clear that the defining parameters of this Gaussian type curve,
especially its amplitude is closely related to the position of the flux (XF,ZF).
For instance increasing the ZF at the same XF would result in denser aggregates
of the same size sinking faster increasing the intensity of the Flux and thus the
Amplitude of the curve. The section 4 will explore more precisely the outcome
of such variations.
In order to come back to sinking speed value, the weighted mean sinking
speed is calculated at every size class (every X) as such:
W(X) =
X
z
wX,zFluxX,z
P
z Flux(x, z)
(12)
It allows to decrease the weight especially on the top bins (high Z) where
few particles sink but with high sinking speeds.
Figure 5: Mean sinking speed per size; Input : Ptotal = 1E6µg/m2/day; α =
0.4; ϵ = 1E −7m3.s−2.
Figure 5 shows the mean sinking speed per size distribution. The sinking
speed increases with aggregate size according to the initial mapping Figure 3.
Velocity values are consitent and tend to be a bit low compared to other studies
([17], [21]). The size class range can be restricted to the class concentrating
the majority of the downward flux. For this p20 (Xinf) and p80 (Xsup) on the
cumulative size flux distribution are calculated. A global mean sinking speed of
the flux can then be established doing a weighted mean of the values between
Xinf and Xsup.
11
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
3.2
Output and Flux state definition in seasonal model
Wmean =
Xmax
X
Xinf
W(X)
Flux(X)
PXmax
Xinf Flux(X)
(13)
The variations in flux characteristics are inherently connected to the re-
sulting sinking speeds. Therefore, by examining both the position and shape
of aggregates, it becomes possible to explain and quantify the distribution and
sinking speeds of aggregates based on their size, density, and porosity. For this
purpose a Flux state is defined and will constitute a solid output framework in
this multivariate space.
Fstate = (XF, ZF, Amplitude, µ, σ)
3.2
Output and Flux state definition in seasonal model
Seasonal production variations are simulated at every timestep t (day).
Ptotal changes following this equation:
Ptotal(t) = Ptotal ∗freq(t)
(14)
freq(t) = 1 −cos( 2πt
365)
2
(15)
At this point, only the total production is changing.
Figure 6 shows a
typical outcome of the seasonal model.
Figure 6: Phase diagram of (XF,ZF) for the same run. The left panel shows
the evolution of the flux intensity (in colorscale) with time and position and the
right panel record the total production (in colorscale) at the same time . Start
after a year ; [α = 0.3; ϵ = 1E −7m2.s−3; Ptotal = 1E6µg/m2/day]
12
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
3.2
Output and Flux state definition in seasonal model
Figure 7: Left panel: evolution of flux intensity compared to total production
with time.
Right panel : evolution of flux position (XF) compared to total
production with time. Start after a year (t=365 days). [α = 0.3; ϵ = 1E −
7m2.s−3; Ptotal = 1E6µg/m2/day]
First, a clear ’seasonal steady state’ is observed. After a year, (XF,ZF) and
the intensity of the flux follow a cycle dictated by the production. Intensity and
position frequency (Figure 7) are dictated by the production frequency.
This outcome lead us to modify our simple Flux state defined before to
fully capture the seasonal pattern. At least three other parameters need to be
considered:
• Offset between the production maximum and the flux maximum. Indeed,
Figure 6 highlights a distinct ”aggregation” time that causes a phase shift
between the characteristics of the flux at its peak and its position during
the peak production.
• (XF,ZF) amplitude. The flux position is now varying with time reach-
ing extrema both for XF and ZF.
• Amplitude variation. In the steady state model, amplitude was clearly
defined at one fixed point in the time (when steady state is reached).
However, the intensity of the flux is now varying due to the Ptotal pattern
and therefore the (XF,ZF) changes.
The new Flux state is described as follows:
Fstate = (XF(t), ZF(t), Amplitude(t), µ(t), σ(t), offset)
With this more complete flux state, the shape and position evolution of
the gaussian curve in time would fully describe the sinking flux dynamic over a
seasonal cycle.
13
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
3.2
Output and Flux state definition in seasonal model
Figure 8: seasonal Flux state scheme. tmax and tmin are example of the flux shape at a certain time representing maximum
and minimum flux. Fstate capture characteristics variations with time between these two extrema
14
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
4
Flux characteristics analysis
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state
This section aims to give a qualitative understanding of the Flux state
response to the variation of the different input parameters (a, α, ϵ,Production).
For this, a simple one-at-a-time sensitivity analysis (OAT) is conducted. This
preliminary study will help to understand the multivariate behaviour described
in the section 5.1.
4.1.1
Methodology
First a base case scenario is defined.
• self similarity : a = 2. This assumption is quite crucial since it fixes
the characteristics of the 2D space (Equation 2) and a impacts all the
processes. Indeed, the self similarity coefficient impacts aggregate fractal
dimension for every process step and leading to a wide range of shapes and
characteristics. Studies have shown that fractal dimension of aggregates
can vary from 1.26 to 2.5 ([14]),[11]). Figure 29 shows that a lower a values
result in bigger, fluffier aggregates bringing down a lot of matter. In order
to analyze compare simulations and physical processes in the same metric
space, the self similarity value is fixed to a reasonable value for the study.
• stickiness : α = 0.3
• turbulent dissipation rate ϵ = 1E-7 m2.s−3
• production pattern with 50% of Ptotal on the bin (X=1,Z=1) and the
bin(X=1,Z=10)
• Ptotal = µg/m2/day
Then parameters are moved independently within the ranges explained be-
low:
• α : [0.05 to 0.7]. 0.05 represents a really low stickiness resulting in few
aggregates whereas 0.7 is another extreme. This parameters depends on
the type of POM but realistic ranges are between 0.05 and 0.4 . ([16])
• ϵ : [10E-10 to 10E-4]. 10E-10 m2.s−3 represents a really low mixing of the
water column whereas 10E-4 m2.s−3 is a highly turbulent situation ([25])
• The initial production pattern is explained in the Figure 9 . The inputs
PX and PZ are defined as the weighted Z and X of the production. PZ will
vary between 1 and 10, PZ = 1 meaning that 100% of the total production
is in the bins (X,Z=1). PX will vary between 1 and 5. PX = 1 means
that the two bins are at the smallest possible size range (X=1 ie r= 1µm
corresponding unicellular size). PX = 5 means the two bins are the size
15
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state
range X=5, meaning r=10µm which corresponds to bigger phytoplankton
or small fecal pellets of copepods. Assuming that copepods can generate
POM reaching 10% of their size we could reach initial production size
around 100µm leading to X values around 10.
However, one order of
magnitude in terms of size is enough to describe the tendencies.
• The initial total production is also varying between low value (1E3µg/m2/year)
representative a really low productivity region or a time of the year with
a quite low productivity (close to winter). On the other hand higher val-
ues (> 1E6µg/m2/day or 1gC/m2/day) are more representative of high
productivity zone or during a bloom for instance. As an example, in his
model, [12] uses an annual primary production of 65gC/m2/yr in a olig-
otrophic zone.
Figure 9: Initial Production pattern variation
16
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state
4.1.2
Focus on stickiness and turbulence
Figure 10: Flux state for different α values. Up : size aggregated flux. Bottom:
(XF,ZF) of the resulting flux. the colors in legend correspond to different α
values.
stickiness α :
Figure 10 shows that both the size (XF) and the intensity (Amplitude)
of the flux is increasing with the stickiness. Coming back to the definition of
stickiness in our model (Equation 4), increasing α means increasing the chance
of aggregation between two particles that collided. More aggregation occurs
and bigger but porous aggregates are formed leading to an increase in the size
alongside with a density (ZF) decrease. On the other hand remineralization
and fragmentation are ’winning’ as α decreases: less aggregates are formed and
small denser particles dominates but with low sinking speed (Figure 3) creating
a weak flux.
17
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state
Figure 11: Flux state for different ϵ values. Up : size aggregated flux. Bottom:
(XF,ZF) of the resulting flux. the colors in legend correspond to different ϵ
values.
epsilon ϵ:
Figure 11 shows that both the size (XF) and the intensity (Amplitude) of
the flux first increases with ϵ until reaching a maximum (in this situation for
ϵ = 1E −5 m2.s−3) and then it follows the inverse tendency. The turbulent
dissipation coefficient impact both aggregation and fragmentation (Equation 5,
Equation 9). Thus, increasing ϵ fosters two opposite processes. Turbulence is
needed to increase the encounter rate for bigger aggregates to form (note that a
low mixed environment is dominated by remineralization) but too much mixing
breaks down aggregates coming back to denser but less intense flux.
4.1.3
Focus on initial production pattern
Both production value and production pattern (size and density as PX and
PZ) are studied.
18
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state
Figure 12: Flux state for different Ptotal values.
Up : size aggregated flux.
Bottom: (XF,ZF) of the resulting flux.
the colors in legend correspond to
different Ptotal values.
Figure 12 shows that both size (XF) and intensity (Amplitude) of the flux
increase with total production. Low Ptotal values mean that fewer particles are
available to aggregate, fragmentation and remineralization keep aggregates at
low size range which draws down the intensity of the flux. On the contrary
the more initial particles are present the more mass will be brought through
aggregation to bigger size bins with high sinking speed creating a significant
flux.
19
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state
Figure 13:
Flux state (XF,ZF) for different (PX,PZ) pattern.
PX values:
[1,2,3,4,5]. PZ values: [1;1.9;2.8;3.7;4.6;5.5;6.4;7.3;8.2;9.1;10].
The Flux state evolution relative to the initial production pattern isn’t as
trivial as the former parameters (Figure 13). First a linear pattern appears at
low sized flux (around X < 10), with a slowly decreasing Z tendency. It mostly
concerns small (PX,PZ) situation. In these, few big aggregates are formed and
the sinking happens at low velocities for small particles creating a general low
flux (Figure 14).
Then, at higher sized flux (around X > 10), while maintaining a low pro-
duction size (PX = 1 to 3), an elevation in PZ at a fixed PX (indicating an
increase in density) leads to the formation of larger yet less dense aggregates.
The denser the initial production, the longer the remineralization time required
to remove it from the system. Consequently, it remains available for aggregation
over an extended period.
On the other hand for high sized production (PX=4 or 5), a PZ increase at
PX fixed doesn’t affect the size of aggregates but tends to increase its density
(ZF increase at same XF). Starting with a high initial production size, less
aggregation time is needed to bring mass to bins where the aggregates are big
and dense enough to sink. Therefore, a production density increase result in a
direct density increase of the early aggregates constituting the flux.
It should be noted that, in general, an increase in production size does not
yield larger aggregates due to the faster sinking of initially formed aggregates,
20
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
4.1
Sensitivity analysis in steady state
which limits the maximum size achievable.
The intensity of the resulting flux is depicted in Figure 14. The mean value
of the Gaussian curve (associated with XF) is highly dependent on PX, while
the amplitude of the curve appears to be correlated with PZ, once the mean
value is established.
Figure 14: Flux state (Intensity) for different (PX,PZ) pattern.
PX values:
[1,2,3,4,5]. PZ values: [1;1.9;2.8;3.7;4.6;5.5;6.4;7.3;8.2;9.1;10].
4.1.4
Conclusion of the OAT sensitivity analysis
First of all it is important to note that all the (XF,ZF) limits reached by
the flux are highly dependant on the value of the self similarity (fixed to 2) that
shapes the density, size, porosity space of the study. The value of Frate also
plays a determining role in the intensity of fragmentation, which contributes to
limiting the maximum size of aggregates.
Two situations clearly appears:
• Situation with low flux intensity and low XF. In those, remineralization
combined with fragmentation quickly retrieve mass to the new formed
aggregates or even to the primary production. The export flux decreases
as only small and dense particules, sinking slowly, dominate. The flux
have characteristics close to the production one. We consider this situation
driven by direct sinking of primary production.
21
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
4.2
Threshold establishment
• Situation with higher flux intensity and high XF. In those, aggregation
allows to bring enough mass to higher size bins even if fragmentation
retrieves a part of it. Big, porous and fast sinking aggregates are formed
increasing the flux intensity . The resulting flux is formed by aggregates
way bigger and more porous than the initial production characteristics.
It is also clear that this OAT sensitivity can’t catch quantitatively the
behaviour of the model. Studying the input parameters together should allow
to get an idea of the importance of every parameters relatively to the other. The
following section aims to establish a clear threshold between the two situations.
4.2
Threshold establishment
A total of 108 simulations have been run with α, ϵ, PX, PZ taking different
values between the ranges described in the former section.
Ptotal is kept at
1E6µg/m2/day since its variations are more linked to the seasonal model. To
decrease the computational cost only certain values between the range have been
chosen (usually one median, high and low value) to capture the range and the
tendency of the Flux state variation.
Figure 15: Flux position (XF,ZF) of the 108 runs, the total intensity of the Flux
(sum over the all gaussian curve) is in color scale
Figure 15 illustrates the two situations described before.
Simple linear
relationship can be established in the low flux case. Figure 30 shows how the flux
characteristics are close to the production characteristics (especially for size).
Moreover it is important to note that in this situation the weighted centroid
might not be the best way to capture the flux characteristics. Indeed, a peak
at the production size appears creating a strong bias in our way to evaluate the
flux ’position’ (Figure 31).
On the other hand a simple relationship seems difficult to establish when
bigger aggregates are formed. Since the intensity of the resulting flux is big-
22
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
4.3
Aggregate sinking speed
ger the study will mainly focus on those situations. The threshold has been
arbitrary fixed to XF = 9 (which corresponds to a diameter around 1E −4m
(100µm) for several reasons: It allows to consider sinking flux representative
compared to the initial production (> 10% of the total production) and to as-
sure that the flux is not only constituted of the initial particles unaggregated
(or sparsely aggregated) ([14] : maximum diameter of diatoms around 50 µm,
[17] : smallest aggregates class :80-130 µm, [28] : consider aggregates only if
diameter > 0.02cm).
In this way the flux studied capture the result of the
physical processes described by the model. Note that after the threshold the
excess density recorded at (XF,ZF) varies between 0.05 and 2.2 kg/m3, which
is consistent with the range of values found in in situ studies ([3]).
4.3
Aggregate sinking speed
Figure 16: Mean sinking speed for the simulations in steady state against the
size of the flux (XF). blue triangle (resp red dot) : before (resp after) threshold
Figure 16 shows that the size of aggregates is clearly the main contributor
of the sinking velocities. It explains 98% of the variance of the logarithm of the
mean velocity. However red dots tend to diverge from the relationship, and after
threshold it decreases to 83% . Therefore, the Z component of aggregates become
more important as the situation shift from one regime to another (Figure 17). It
is also reflected in the export ratio value corresponding to the total flux divided
by Ptotal (1 gC/m2/day). Indeed, (XF,ZF) explains 83% of the variance of the
export ratio after the threshold and ZF counts for 67% of it whereas it drops
to 40% for all simulations with approximately the same correlation coefficient
(R2 = 0.82)
23
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
4.3
Aggregate sinking speed
Figure 17: evolution of the sinking speed within a seasonal cycle. [α = 0.3;
ϵ = 1E −7m2.s−3; PX=3;PZ=5.5; Ptotal = 1E6µg/m2/day]. The first two
panels are the production (blue) and the resulting flux. The 3 others are mean
sinking speed at size X=3 (=PX), X=13 (X of the maximal flux) and X=17
(Xsup)
Figure 17 highlights a seasonality in the sinking speed of the aggregates
depending on their size. Since it is averaged over size (Equation 10), varia-
tions in sinking speed express a density (therefore composition) variation of the
aggregate within the size class.
Indeed, At smaller size (X=3) a drop in the production leads to a fast
remineralization of the mass particles that aren’t aggregating much creating a
density drop observed in the seasonality of the sinking speed really close to the
production drop.
On the other hand, at higher size class (X= 13, 17), where the majority of
the flux is concentrated, the sinking speed seasonality is really close to the flux
24
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
4.3
Aggregate sinking speed
one (shape and offset). Indeed, right at the offset quite dense big aggregates
are formed in the corresponding size class and sinks but also they start losing
density through remineralization. Therefore as the flux decreases in intensity
and size due to the production pattern, the leftover aggregates are actually less
dense and sink slower. This situation goes on untill the next ’bloom’ where new
denser aggregates are formed again (Figure 18).
In the end, the seasonality of all the size class varies between these two
limits situations. The bigger sinking speed variations at high size class (from to
12 m.s−1 at X=17) confirms the analysis of the Figure 16.
Figure 18: Scheme of the sinking speed seasonality for big size aggregate. The
top curve is the production, the bottom one is the sinking speed of aggregates
at X=17.
25
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
5
Simple characterization of the SISSOMA model
5.1
Steady state model
5.1.1
Fitting analysis
Looking at Figure 15, it seems that the flux intensity (Amplitude) is cor-
related to the position (XF,ZF) of the flux. A simple linear regression fit shows
that 84 % of the amplitude variation can be explained by (XF,ZF). (see Table 2).
In order to be able to compare the influence of the different parameters the β
coefficient have also been evaluated doing the same regression but with reduced
and centered income variables. The amplitude is dominated by the Z compo-
nent of the flux but this needs to be qualified knowing that those situations
considers only flux superior to the threshold.
Table 2: Linear regression Amplitude = f(XF,ZF)
model
Amplitude linear
Amplitude β coefficient
Intercept
-1.194E5
5.765E4
X1 (XF)
7.738E3
1.319E4
X2 (ZF)
1.858E4
3.004E4
R squared
0.84
RMSE
1.38 E4
26
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
5.1
Steady state model
Figure 19: size aggregated flux of the 52 runs over the threshold, the flux has
been divided by the maximum of the amplitude so all the curves are normalized
to 1
Figure 19 shows that the flux has more or less the same size shape distri-
bution (after normalizing its amplitude) whatever its position and the initial
parameters. The variance σ seems to be the same and the mean µ can be linked
to XF. The various peaks observed at low size (X=3 and X=5) are due to the
fraction of the initial primary particle sinking directly. Given that the driving
force behind the flux in these cases is predominantly big aggregates, both the
Gaussian model and the weighted center of mass emerge as suitable choices for
capturing the flux’s characteristics (which is not the case before the threshold
Figure 31). It means that knowing only (XF,ZF), the entire flux state can be
approximated.
Figure 20 highlights (XF,ZF) evolution with the four input parameters α,
ϵ, PX and PZ. The pattern observed supports the results of the sensitivity
analysis.
27
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
5.1
Steady state model
Figure 20: Flux position (XF,ZF) of the 52 runs over the threshold, the four
parameters are in colorscale
A simple multi linear model based on four initial parameters (Table 2 and
Figure 21 ) has been fitted to determine (XF,ZF). The β coefficient values
highlight the dominant impact of the initial production pattern on ZF. On the
other hand the size (PX) of the initial production has little impact on the size
of the aggregates sinking whereas the production density (PZ) and physical
environmental conditions (especially stickiness) are the main contributors. At
any size, the denser the initial production combined with a quite high stickiness
and turbulence (fostering encounter rate and bonding probability) the faster
big aggregates are formed and able to resist remineralization creating bigger
size flux.
28
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
5.1
Steady state model
Table 3: Linear regression (XF,ZF) = f(PX,PZ,α,ϵ)
model
XF linear
ZF linear
XF β coefficient
ZF β coefficient
Intercept
7.184
-0.824
12.053
4.507
X1 (PX)
0.037
0.761
0.055
1.153
X2 (PZ)
0.220
0.388
0.623
1.098
X3 (α)
10.431
1.378
1.325
0.175
X4 (ϵ)
1.184E5
-7.555E3
0.588
-0.038
R squared
0.702
0.8
RMSE
0.97
0.752
Figure 21: Predicted Flux position (XF,ZF) of the 52 runs over the threshold,
the four parameters are in colorscale
Now that (XF,ZF) variations are well characterized, a simple gaussian
model has been fitted (Table 4) to characterise the shape of the flux for the
52 runs (Figure 19). The aim is to relate the size component of the flux (XF)
to the mean of the fitted Gaussian and determine the variance that seems con-
stant. Only µ and σ are studied here since the amplitude can be determined by
(XF,ZF) (Table 2).
29
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
5.1
Steady state model
Table 4: Gaussian fitting
mean (µ-XF)
0.866
var (µ-XF)
0.110
mean (σ)
3.377
var (σ)
0.068
The small value of var(µ−XF) confirms that XF is a good way of approx-
imating µ. The mean(µ−XF) shows that XF has a tendency to underestimate
the exact µ which is actually due to the way of calculating XF. Indeed, the flux
is not a perfect gaussian, both the skewness and the small size pattern drag
the center of mass (XF) to smaller size (see for example Figure 4). The small
var(σ) compared to its mean shows that the σ of the gaussian can be considered
constant. Therefore the following gaussian model is established:
Fluxnormalized(X) = exp −(X −(XF + A))2
2B2
(16)
with A = 0.866 and B = 3.377. The Figure 22 compares the actual Flux
versus the simple gaussian.
Figure 22: size aggregated flux (red) and fitted gaussian according to the equa-
tion (blue)
30
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
5.1
Steady state model
5.1.2
Evaluation of the simplified model
Summary of the steady state model
For the position and amplitude :
XF = 7.184 + 0.037PX + 0.220PZ + 10.431α + 1.184e + 05ϵ;
(17)
ZF = −0.824 + 0.761PX + 0.388PZ + 1.378α −7.555E3ϵ;
(18)
Amplitude = −1.1937E5 + 7.738E3XF + 1.858E4ZF;
(19)
Finally :
Flux(x) = Amplitude ∗exp −(x −(XF + 0.866))2
2 ∗3.3772
(20)
Evaluation
In order to evaluate how good the fit is, the root mean squared error (RMSE)
between the actual size aggregated curve and the gaussian model have been
evaluated for the different runs. Then, this RMSE is divided by the total flux
to have a percentage value evaluating the model error. It is then averaged over
the different runs (52 in that case)
error = mean( RMSE
TotalFlux)
(21)
For the model described before : error = 3.12% which is a reasonable value.
Most of the errors is due to the amplitude component of the flux that isn’t well
caught by the really simple relation established with its position. Therefore,
a better approach should be found to describe the amplitude of the flux. The
same model have been evaluated with initial production in different size bins
(PX corresponds to the weighted mean taking the values: [1.4 ; 2.2 ; 3 ; 3.8
; 4.6]) : error = 2.27%, is in the same range. It confirms the fact that the
weighted mean characteristics of the initial production can be used to describe
the resulting flux.
Since the simple model considers only one total Ptotal value (1gC/m2/day),
it also have been evaluated with situation where the initial production value
varies (from 0.1g to 1g). The error increases to 9.19% mainly because Ptotal
affects the linear relationship used to determine (XF,ZF). It thus should be
included in further model.
The simple linear models and threshold established here aren’t a substi-
tution to SISSOMA. But, through simple tendencies it allows to explain and
analyze the aggregation dynamics with different parametrization. Influence of
stickiness, turbulence and production pattern are now fully understood in a
steady situation. It constitute a basic key of understanding of the response to
seasonality.
31
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
5.2
Seasonal state model
5.2
Seasonal state model
5.2.1
Comparison with steady state model
The same simulations as in section 4.1.5 have been run but in seasonal con-
dition (maximum production being established at Ptotal = 1E6µg/m2/year).
Picking only the simulations after the threshold, (XF,ZF) at the maximum flux
has been recorded and compared to (XF,ZF) in steady state.
Figure 23: (XF,ZF) comparison between seasonal and steady model. The top
panel corresponds to the same plot as in Figure 15 for the situations after the
threshold and with flux value in µg/m2/day in colorscale. The bottom panel
represents (XF,ZF) when the flux (total flux in colorscale) reaches its maximum
over the seasonal cycle
Figure 23 shows slight differences due to the fact that Ptotal is sometimes
lower than the value used in the steady model and a certain time is needed
for the processes to happen leading to a small shift of (XF,ZF) to lower X.
However, the steady model seems to be a good representation of the seasonal
flux behaviour at its maximum. Moreover, the intensity (total or maximum
flux) is quite similar. We can thus consider that all the conclusion established
in the steady state model regarding the influences of the parameters on the
flux state are still valid for the seasonal maximum. (see Figure 32 for the full
comparison). So, σ is considered constant and µ follows XF(t).
32
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
5.2
Seasonal state model
It leads us to focus our work on the offset and the evolution of amplitude
and XF with time, knowing the other features are already understood with the
steady state analysis.
5.2.2
Offset
The offset varies from 30 days to more than 120 days. Under the threshold
(ie in situation with lower flux and few aggregation) the offset increases linearly
with the size of the flux (Figure 33). Over the threshold, the offset is not linearly
increasing with the size of the maximum flux as one could expect (the bigger
the aggregates the more time needed). Even if the offset seems to decrease with
ZF, no clear relation with only (XF,ZF) can be used and it is necessary to come
back to the initial input parameters.
Table 5: Linear regression Offset = f(PX,PZ,α,ϵ)
model
Offset linear
Offset β coefficient
Intercept
187.01
61.659
X1 (PX)
-12.029
-18.194
X2 (PZ)
-3.591
-10.024
X3 (α)
-126.01
-14.785
X4 (ϵ)
-3.859e+06
-18.869
R squared
0.731
RMSE
15.2
A simple multi linear model depending on (PX, PZ, ϵ, α) can explain
around 73% of the offset. β coefficient have been calculated to better understand
the influence and weight of the income parameters. All the coefficients show
negative values with no particular predominance of one parameter. Indeed, an
increase in (PX,PZ) means that the first aggregates to form will already be big
and dense enough to sink. Thus less process iteration are needed to reach the
maximum flux. In the same way, a bigger α and ϵ (here in the range considered
ie < 10E −5) increases respectively the chance of aggregation and the encounter
probability. Considering the β coefficient, the inputs considered have more or
less a similar impact on the offset. Note that this simple model can’t really
catch the extrema.(see annex Figure 34, Figure 35, Table 5).
5.2.3
Amplitude variation with time
The linear relationhip found earlier in steady model relating the amplitude
with (XF,ZF) could have been used here. However, several hurdles decrease its
strength. Indeed, first following exactly the (XF,ZF) evolution with time seems
quite difficult (see phase diagram Figure 6) and most of the error of the steady
model depend on it. Then, it was established for a specific Ptotal value and only
for situations above the threshold. It was therefore necessary to find a new way
of approaching amplitude evolution with time (ie Ptotal variation).
33
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
5.2
Seasonal state model
For all seasonal runs above the threshold, the amplitude of the gaussian
shape curve has been recorded at every time-step (starting after a year). In
order to be able to compare all the different runs, this amplitude has been
divided by the maximum amplitude for every run. In this way the maximum
amplitude reached is equal to one.
This reduced amplitude is plotted against the production at the time t −
offset so that the value of the amplitude reflects the production.
Figure 24: evolution of the reduced amplitude for the different seasonal runs
with the production at time t −offset
Figure 24 shows a clear linear trend between the production and this par-
ticular reduced amplitude.
The outliers are created by the existence of the
’peak’ at production location when (PX,PZ) values already allows a consequent
sinking (see Figure 19). This linear trend observed means that knowing only
the maximum Amplitude, the offset, XF at the maximum and its range the flux
in seasonal mode can be reconstructed. The assumption made in section 3.2 on
XF frequency is a key to finalize our model.
The maximal characteristics of the flux are known from the steady state
study and the offset has been studied before.
The Figure 25 shows for the
seasonal runs the (XF,ZF) at its maximum and the (XF,ZF) range reached by
the flux. Considering the quite low value of the mean and standard deviation
of the ZF range (mean = 1.836 and std = 0.886) and the density mapping
34
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
5.2
Seasonal state model
(Figure 2), the ZF can be considered as equal to its value at maximum flux for
simplification.
Figure 25: (XF,ZF) evolution of the flux during a seasonal cycle; the blue (resp
red) errorbar represents the XF (resp ZF) ranges. The blue dot represents the
position at which the maximum flux is reached. One point and both errorbars
give an idea of the shape of the phase diagram
The maximum flux is reached at the maximum of the XF range. Then,
as the production decreases, fewer mass is available to process until the high
size bins, the flux logically gets closer to the initial production characteristics.
Therefore, both (PX,PZ) and (XFmax,ZFmax) are determining. The following
Table 7) shows that 75% of the XF range variation can be explained only with
(PX,PZ).
Table 6: Linear regression XF range = f(XFmax,ZFmax) or f(PX,PZ)
model
XF range = f(XFmax,ZFmax)
XF range = f(PX,PZ)
Intercept
1.685
8.751
X1
0.481
-0.974
X2
-0.589
-0.099
R squared
0.633
0.755
RMSE
0.995
0.812
35
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
5.2
Seasonal state model
5.2.4
Evaluation of the simple model in seasonal mode
Summary of the steady state model
The Flux state is now reduced to maximum situation (XF, ZF, Amplitude)max,
offset and time evolution of Amplitude(t) and µ(t). (XF, ZF, Amplitude)max
is determined with the steady state simple model. Pt is defined as Ptotal(t +
offset) :
offset = 187.01 −12.029PX −3.591PZ −126.01α −3.859E6ϵ
(22)
Amplitude(t) = (0.097 + 0.789Pt) ∗Amplitudemax
(23)
µ(t) = XFmin + (XFmax −XFmin) ∗freq(t −offset) + 0.866 (24)
with XFmax −XFmin = 8.751 −0.974PX −0.099PZ.
Finally :
Flux(x, t) = Amplitude(t) ∗exp −(x −µ(t))2
2 ∗3.3772
(25)
Evaluation
In order to evaluate the model, the same RMSE as in section 5.1.2 is cal-
culated at every time. Then it is divided by the the Total Flux to have a %
value. Figure 26 shows a typical pattern of the RMSE with time:
Figure 26: evolution of the flux given by SISSOMA (dashed red), the simple
gaussian model (dashed black) and the RMSE (blue) with time. the time starts
after a year.[α = 0.3; ϵ = 1E −7; PX=3;PZ=5.5; Ptotal = 1E6]
The error reaches highest value when the flux is at its lowest intensity when
production has decreased and (XF,ZF) edges the initial production pattern. As
explained in the section above this simple gaussian model isn’t fitted for those
36
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
5.2
Seasonal state model
situation. However, the error reaches reasonable values for high flux intensity
values. The mean and the standard deviation of the error across time have been
evaluated for the simulations over the threshold.
Table 7: evaluation of the error across all simulations
mean( mean error)
7.27%
std (mean error)
6.65%
The general error values seems reasonable knowing that most of the error
is restrained to low intensity flux case. The intensity difference at its maximum
questions our way of calculating the error and therefore the values shown should
be treated cautiously. However, this approach also emphasizes the significance of
accurately determining the offset and amplitude evolution in order to precisely
capture the intensity pattern of the flux.
The lack of precision when shifting from one regime to another (before
and after the threshold) can be filled with a new approach: a combination of
the depicted gaussian model and a normalized lognormal distribution centered
on PX with a constant variance. This log normal distribution is assumed to
represent the peaks observed in the flux (Figure 31. Then those two models are
combined with a simple weighting that varies with time. The fitting of the flux
shape considerably improves and allows a smooth shift between direct sinking
and aggregate formation. The weighting evolution could then be analyzed with
the seasonal pattern as a shortcut to reconstruct the flux. No further work have
been conducted with such model but it constitute an interesting possibility for
further studies.
37
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
5.2
Seasonal state model
Figure 27: combined model. The black dashed line is the combination of the
two other model with a weighting approach at any time t: Mixture = weight1∗
Gaussian + weight2 ∗Log −Normal. The flux can be reconstructed only with
weight1(t) and weight2(t) if the two simple models are known.
38
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
6
Discussion
The SISSOMA model constitutes an attempt to mechanistically reproduce
the formation and fate of aggregates within the mixed layer. This study focuses
on the influences of a few parameters (stickiness, turbulence, primary produc-
tion size and density) over the characteristics (intensity, size, density and sinking
speed) of the downward aggregates flux. A simple model fitting tries to analyze
quantitatively the parametrization while creating a basis for further implemen-
tation.
6.1
Aggregates distribution and characteristics
The first part of this study proposes a mechanistic reconstruction and un-
derstanding of aggregate distribution profile in the ocean :
Figure 28: Power law profile distribution based on the steady state simulation.
blue triangle (resp red dots) before (resp after) the threshold. The abscissa axis
has been cut to X=20 considering biggest aggregates doesn’t really exist.log
is logartihm in base 10. The abundance (ie number of particles within a size
range) is divided by the size value. Slope values vary approximately from -2.5
to -10.
The power law profile for initial aggregate distribution used in many model
39
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
6.1
Aggregates distribution and characteristics
seems a consistent choice ([21],[14],[13]). A wide range of slope is shown in Fig-
ure 28 as stated in different studies ([19]). However, it doesn’t give any insight
on the flux itself.
The Gaussian mass distribution obtained with SISSOMA
therefore represents a much more complete approach(Figure 4) . It effectively
captures the variations in both aggregate distribution profiles and sinking ve-
locities, providing a holistic perspective on the POM downward flux.
The sensitivity analysis conducted (section 4.1) and the simple character-
ization in steady state (section 5.1) allow a better understanding of the flux
distribution results relatively to the initial parametrization. Not surprisingly
initial plankton community characteristics alone (size, density, porosity) can’t
fully explain the downward flux characteristics as physical (turbulence) and in-
dividual (stickiness) characteristics need to be considered. The formation of
bigger aggregates increases with the POM production (during a bloom for in-
stance) and its size and density weighted mean is determining as well. Stickiness
is a fundamental parameter especially considering the size of the aggregates just
as turbulence that impacts the equilibrium between encounter rate and fragmen-
tation. Beyond a certain value of the turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rate,
disaggregation becomes more dominant than aggregation, hindering further size
increase of aggregates. It is consistent with [28], although there is a difference
in the specific values observed (1E-6 m2.s−3 compared to 1E-4 m2.s−3) that
might be due to maximum rate (Frate) set up. The self similarity coefficient
impacts tremendously the overall frame of this study and its possible variations
according to aggregates type should be investigated in further work.
The threshold establishment (section 4.2) suggests a regime shift between
conditions where the flux is mainly constituted by larger aggregates or by a
direct sinking of particles depending on the dominance of certain physical pro-
cesses. Therefore the initial plankton community structure determines partly
the flux ([5],[26]) by direct sinking while stickiness and turbulence impact ag-
gregate formation and are crucial to understand the flux after the threshold
(Table 3). This shift between these two behaviours is intrinsically related to
the seasonality of the zone: aggregates will dominate in eutrophic water after a
bloom whereas the initial particles might mainly constitute the flux during low
productivity times (oligotrophic environment) creating important slope distri-
bution variation with time ([19]). The exact timing is determined by the offset
between the production peak and the flux maximum depending on the initial
parametrization (section 5.2.2) and may differ between regions. Some in situ
studies had already highlighted regional and temporal variations of the POC
flux ([6]). Being able to determine precisely this shift both in time and magni-
tude would need further work and allow a better understanding and prediction
of the model.
Similar to [9] we find that the flux out of the euphotic zone/mixed layer
is more intense when large aggregates dominate (Figure 15) with high sink-
ing speed, suggesting that the dominant mechanism of vertical transport is by
rapid settling of rare large particles ([27],[12]). In these scenarios, the density
characteristic of the aggregates appears to play a crucial role, outweighing their
size. Consequently, it becomes necessary to incorporate the composition of the
40
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
6.2
Sinking speed pattern
aggregates into models. However, since SISSOMA only focus on this primary
layer, we can’t discuss their conclusion on transfer efficiency but considering that
bigger aggregates are fluffier, their labile fraction could increase and therefore
explain the lower transfer efficiency for those particles.
6.2
Sinking speed pattern
Our work suggests that a size-based approach might be simplistic to de-
termine the sinking pattern of aggregates ([29]).
Indeed, even if the size of
aggregates remains a determining factor ([14]) (Figure 16), their specific forma-
tion path (density and porosity inherited from mother particles) affects widely
their sinking velocities (not uniform within one size class)[18] especially for large
aggregates. Therefore assigning one sinking speed to a size class might be reduc-
tive as seasonal variations in aggregate composition (reflected by their excess
density) (section 4.3) affect the sinking pattern at a fixed size. Moreover, the
dominant class (in terms of mass) in the flux is the result of aggregation/disag-
gregation processes and its sinking pattern is then bound to the parametrization
sensitivity. The general low values found for aggregates compared to literature
([21], [17]) might be explained by the neglecting of ballast effect and by the
choice of some fixed parameters.
For instance, the maximum fragmentation
rate and a similarity coefficient of 2 tend to penalize the formation of big ag-
gregates (with sinking speed > 100 m/s). It also highlights the difficulty of
calculating a mean sinking speed of the downward flux considering a wide range
of particles and our proposition (Equation 12) could be improved.
6.3
Projection for further implementation
The primary objective of the simple characterization conducted in section
5 was to reduce the computational cost of the model so that it can be used
on a global scale. The simple Gaussian model fitting shows that the flux can
be approximated through simple tendencies based on only 4 input parameters :
mean production size and density, stickiness and turbulence. Using the weighted
mean (centroid) of size and density of the flux (XF,ZF) appears as a good
frame to analyze the characteristics of downward export of POM. However, this
includes a bias in the analysis of the shape and position of the flux as it can’t
really capture the sinking ’peak’ of the initial particles (Figure 19). The steady
state model constitutes a good basis to understand the seasonal mode (section
5.2.1). The prediction of the ’position’ characteristics of the flux (XF,ZF) seems
good (RMSE within a unit box (Table 3) while the determination of amplitude
and offset is more difficult and leads to significant error especially in the seasonal
mode (Table 7). This multi linear approach combined with a simple gaussian
has some lacks: fixed initial total production, fixed self similarity parameter,
non-realistic seasonal pattern (only one large bloom and stability of physical
parameters) and the choice of a gaussian curve is rather simplistic. Therefore
the initial linear relationships used can’t be considered as general and have to
be improved with multiple set up. However it gives a fairly good understanding
41
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
6.4
Future climate projection
and prediction of the behaviour of the model when large aggregates dominate.
Moreover it gives a good basis for machine learning implementation to create a
precise and light computational model.
The general aggregate mass distribution following a time dependant mix-
ture of lognormal and gaussian distribution constitutes an interesting path to
work on as some studies already suggest this type of distribution ([23],[7],[28]).
For further implementation, SISSOMA could be fed with existing model
able to provide plankton community characteristics and distribution ([8]). The
resulting aggregate distribution and sinking characteristics would represent a
more precise and validated starting point for models that aim to evaluate either
carbon flux on a full water column or at a global scale.
Then, It could as
well provide some enlightenment on some studies discussing the sinking flux
attenuation profile ([21],[15],[24]).
6.4
Future climate projection
The recent reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC)[1] and the Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing
Climate (SROCC)[2] (Chapter 5) highlight numerous anticipated changes in the
ocean ecosystem. Stratification is likely to increase with temperature trapping
part of the nutrient in the lower level and thus reducing nutrient availability in
the epipelagic ocean. This might result in a general decrease of the NPP and
zooplankton biomass.
Acidification and expansion of oxygen minimum zone
could lead to shifts in community composition toward hypoxia-tolerant and
non-calcified organisms (destabilization of ballast minerals such as calcite or
aragonite with acididy). All of the above combined suggest that more and more
of the future ocean will be dominated by small-sized phytoplankton, growing
more efficiently in oligotrophic environment.
The above climate change effect can be partially captured by our model
parametrization to understand the effect on the POC flux. Indeed, a general
weaker production, smaller (PX,PZ) (small sized dominance and less ballasting
effect) combined with low turbulence (epsilon) lead to smaller aggregates and a
weakening of the downward flux. This agrees with their general conclusion of a
decrease in the POC flux in the epipelagic ocean.
However, as shown in the report, a lot of uncertainties remain to predict
precisely the effect on the BCP since the changes described above need to be
qualified. Indeed, ocean biogeochemistry projections are marked by strong re-
gional variations and several other factors need to be taken into account (in-
creased metabolisms of bacteria, change in food web, interactions of stressors
at regional level, etc...).The Figure 36 highlights the low confidence on many of
the consequences of climate change on the BCP efficiency. Our model and its
study yet contribute to improve the ”mechanistic understanding of how climatic
drivers affect different components of the biological pump”.
42
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
6.5
Conclusion
6.5
Conclusion
In conclusion, the SISSOMA model presented in this study offers a mecha-
nistic understanding of the formation and fate of aggregates within the ocean’s
mixed layer. By investigating key parameters such as stickiness, turbulence,
primary production size, and density, the model provides insights into the char-
acteristics of the resulting downward aggregates flux, including intensity, size,
density, and sinking speed.
The results of this study reveal a shift in the flux characteristics, with
either direct sinking or larger aggregates dominating the process. This behavior
is strongly influenced by the seasonal cycle and variations in the key parameters.
The sensitivity analysis conducted in this study deepens our understanding of
the interactions of these parameters.
The investigation of sinking speed questions a size-based approach, partic-
ularly for larger aggregates where density and porosity inherited from mother
particles become significant factors. The Gaussian approach employed in mod-
eling the resulting flux, based solely on the key parameters, presents a promising
avenue for representing flux aggregate distribution in a new way. Additionally,
this approach offers the advantage of significantly reducing computational ex-
penses, making it suitable for implementation in global models and machine
learning applications.
Ultimately, the SISSOMA model contributes to a better comprehension of
aggregate formation, fate, and their impact on the biological pump.
It also
provides valuable insights into the potential evolution of these processes under
climate change conditions.
The findings of this study serve as a foundation
for further research and highlight the importance of considering the complex
interactions between key parameters in modeling the dynamics of aggregates.
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude to all those who have contributed to
this work.
Firstly, thank you to Andy for welcoming me into this subject and for
providing assistance whenever I encountered challenges.
I would also like to thank Thanos for the support and enjoyable moments
shared. Always in a fun and positive mood, thanks !
Thank you to the ocean modellers group for the interesting presentations
and the help provided.
Furthermore, I am grateful to Adele, Juliane, and Loic for the well-deserved
moments of relaxation and camaraderie in our non-working time.
Once again, I extend my sincere appreciation to everyone involved for their
contributions to this endeavor.
43
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
7
Annex
Figure 29: Size aggregated for different a values (in color scale)
Figure 30: (XF,ZF) in situations before threshold.
Input parameters are in
color scale
44
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
Figure 31: size aggregated flux of the 56 runs before the threshold, the flux has
been divided by the maximum of the amplitude so all the curves are normalized
to 1.
45
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
Figure 32:
(XF,ZF) comparison between seasonal (left) and steady model
(right). The (XF,ZF) recorded for the seasonal model corresponds to the time
at the maximum flux. The different parameters are in color scale
46
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
Figure 33: offset evolution (no threshold considered) against (XF,ZF)
47
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
Figure 34: offset plotted against the maximum flux in µgC/m2/day. Parameters
are in color scale
48
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
Figure 35: predicted offset plotted against the maximum flux; parameters are
in color scale
49
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
Figure 36: SROCC analysis of the climate change effect on the BCP in the
epipelagic ocean.
50
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
References
References
[1] Fifth assessment report (ar5), ipcc.
[2] Special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a changing climate (srocc).
[3] Chris Gotschalk Alice L. Alldredge. In situ settling behavior of marine
snow. Limnology and oceanography, 1988.
[4] Levy M. Siegel D. A. Weber T. Boyd P. W., Claustre H. Multi-faceted
particle pumps drive carbon sequestration in the ocean. Nature, 2019.
[5] Newton PP Boyd PW. Does planktonic community structure determine
downward particulate organic carbon flux in different oceanic provinces?
Deep sea research, 1999.
[6] Boyd Buesseler. Shedding light on processes that control particle export
and flux attenuation in the twilight zone of the open ocean. Limnology and
oceanography, 2009.
[7] Maureen Conte Manon T. Duret Christopher L. Follett Cael B, Kelsey Bis-
son. Open ocean particle flux variability from surface to seafloor. Geophys-
ical Research Letters, 2021.
[8] Andr´e W. Visser Thomas Kiørboe Ken H. Andersen Camila Serra-Pompei,
Floor Soudij. A general size- and trait-based model of plankton communi-
ties. Progress in Oceanography, 2020.
[9] Galen A. McKinley Lucas Gloege Darren Pilcher Colleen B. Mouw, Au-
drey Barnett. Phytoplankton size impact on export flux in the global ocean.
Global Biogeochemical cycles, 2016.
[10] Weber T DeVries T. The export and fate of organic matter in the ocean:
New constraints from combining satellite and oceanographic tracer obser-
vations. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 2017.
[11] Jackson G. Using fractal scaling and two-dimensional particle size spectra
to calculate coagulation rates for heterogeneous systems. Journal of Colloid
and Interface Science, 1998.
[12] C. Rabouille D. Ruiz-Pino V. Andersen M. Bianchi V. Gar¸con I. Dadou,
F. Lamy. An integrated biological pump model from the euphotic zone to
the sediment: a 1-d application in the northeast tropical atlantic. Deep sea
research, 2001.
[13] J. F. Tjiputra I. Kriest M. Bentsen I. Bethke M. Ilicak K. M. Assmann
C. Heinze J. Schwinger, N. Goris. Evaluation of noresm-oc (versions 1 and
1.2), the ocean carbon-cycle stand-alone configuration of the norwegian
earth system model (noresm1). European Geoscience Union, 2016.
51
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis
References
[14] Irene Stemmler Soeren Ahmerkamp Tatiana Ilyina Joeran Maerz, Katha-
rina D. Six. Microstructure and composition of marine aggregates as co-
determinants for vertical particulate organic carbon transfer in the global
ocean. European Geoscience Union, 2019.
[15] David M. Karl William W. Broenkow John H. Martin, George A. Knauer.
Vertex: carbon cycling in the northeast pacific. Deep Sea Research Part A.
Oceanographic Research Papers, 1987.
[16] Hansen Kiørboe. Phytoplankton aggregate formation: observations of pat-
terns and mechanisms of cell sticking and the significance of exopolymeric
material. Journal of Plankton Research, 1993.
[17] A. Larsen N. Hildebrandt K. G. Schulz L. T. Bach, T. Boxhammer and
U. Riebesell. Influence of plankton community structure on the sinking
velocity of marine aggregates. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 2019.
[18] Debby Ianson Lars Stemmann, George A. Jackson. A vertical model of
particle size distributions and fluxes in the midwater column that includes
biological and physical processes—part i: model formulation.
Deep sea
research, 2004.
[19] George A. Jackson Frederic Ibanez Herve´ Claustre Louis Legendre
Marc Picheral Lionel Guidi, Lars Stemmann and Gabriel Gorskya.
Ef-
fects of phytoplankton community on production, size and export of large
aggregates: A world-ocean analysis. Limnology and Oceanography, 2009.
[20] N. Emprin O. Aumont C. Heinze O. Ragueneau M. Gehlen, L. Bopp. Rec-
onciling surface ocean productivity, export fluxes and sediment composition
in a global biogeochemical ocean model. European Gesocience Union, 2006.
[21] Jing He Amala Mahadevan Melissa M. Omand, RamaGovindarajan. Sink-
ing fux of particulate organic matter in the oceans: Sensitivity to particle
characteristics. Scientific reports, 2020.
[22] David A. Siegel Michael Nowicki, Tim DeVries. Quantifying the carbon
export and sequestration pathways of the ocean’s biological carbon pump.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 2022.
[23] Checkley Jr Petrik, Jackson. Aggregates and their distributions determine
from lopc observations made using an autonomous profiling float. Deep sea
research, 2012.
[24] John I. Hedges b Susumu Honjo c Stuart G. Wakeham d Robert A. Arm-
strong a, Cindy Lee a. A new, mechanistic model for organic carbon fluxes
in the ocean based on the quantitative association of poc with ballast min-
erals. Deep sea research, 2001.
52
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis
References
[25] Merckelbach L CarpenterJ. R Scheifele B, Waterman S.
Measuring the
dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy in strongly stratified, low-energy
environments: A case study from the arctic ocean. Journal of Geophysical
Research, 2018.
[26] Doney S. C. Sailley S. F. Behrenfeld M. J. Boyd P. W. Siegel D. A., Bues-
seler K. O. Global assessment of ocean carbon export by combining satellite
observations and food-web models. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 2014.
[27] Suess. Particulate organic carbon flux in the oceans—surface productivity
and oxygen utilization. Nature, 1980.
[28] Jackson MisuzuYukawa Sagara HidekatsuYamazaki Takeuchi, Doubell.
Turbulence mediates marine aggregate formation and destruction in the
upper ocean. nature scientific report, 2019.
[29] Giering Williams. In situ particle measurements deemphasize the role of
size in governing the sinking velocity of marine particlesj.
Geophysical
Research Letters, 2022.
53
