==PAGE:1==
Quantifying
subjective
fatigue
to
prevent
overtraining
A case study
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
A case study
Master Thesis
October, 2023
By
Rasmus Boldvig Rottwitt
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over eight months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Rasmus Boldvig Rottwitt ­ s200348
Signature
Date
ii
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
16-10-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this thesis, we have explored tracking and recollection of fatigue for endurance athletes
training towards a specific goal. Fatigue is very prevalent among endurance athletes ap­
plying great levels of strain to their body, and despite fatigue is to be expected identifying
when fatigue is too much is an important factor in improving performance. Previous re­
search has shown a gap between recollection and tracked data from emotions, such as
fatigue. The experiment at hand focuses on the difference between tracking fatigue in­situ
using an EMA device, the One Button Tracker, and recollected fatigue after tracking during
ten weeks of training towards the Copenhagen Half Marathon. The analysis of all ten ath­
letes show that a correlation might be prevalent between increasing strain and feelings of
fatigue tracked using EMA. Furthermore, the experiment finds using qualitative data from
all athletes and a focus on four case studies that the degree of recollection varies greatly
across the ten participants, and that tracking of fatigue using EMA can provide a valuable
tool to better assess fatigue from athletes and thereby prevent overtraining and injuries.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Rasmus Boldvig Rottwitt, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Jakob Eg Larsen, Assicuate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com­
puter Science, Cognitive Systems
Supervisor
iv
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Endurance sport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Fatigue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Recollecting subjective experiences compared to tracking in­moment
. . .
5
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Quantifying fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Personal Running Watches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Results and discussion
15
4.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Quantitative results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Qualitative results across the group
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Case studies
31
5.1
Case 1: A03
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Case 2: A01
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Case 3: A05
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.4
Case 4: A07
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5
Summary of case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Future Work and Limitations
47
6.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
7
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
51
A Interview guide
55
B Transcription of interviews
57
B.1 A01
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
B.2 A03
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
B.3 A05
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
B.4 A07
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
C Observable visualisations
70
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Endurance sports is to some degree one of the simplest sports to quantify performance
and improvement within. In its essence, it is a matter of performing repetitive movements
at the highest level possible over a specified time or distance. Optimizing within endurance
sports is a matter of repeating this movement, be it running, cycling or swimming, and
thereby applying as much strain to the muscles working to improve how efficient they can
perform the movement being repeated ­ the more strain, the more the body adapts to
perform and the better performance in the end. For runners, pushing the boundary of
strain is measured as kilometers over a time period and intensity, with many elite athletes
reaching beyond 200 or even 300 km a week across multiple sessions daily. Increasing
performance is however not a game of simply running as much as possible, but match­
ing the strain undertaken by running with adequate recovery. A misbalance in strain and
recovery (or adaptation) leads to a multitude of effects, from not improving from not ab­
sorbing the strain applied to injury or chronic disease.
Athletes are taught that tiredness and fatigue is part of the game, and they should to some
degree push through it a long as they are capable of completing the training as prescribed.
The threat of overtraining, however, is always present. If the athlete is feeling too tired
to perform and train, it is necessary to inspect whether the training or recovery should be
altered to avoid overtraining and thereby lowered performance or injury ­ despite them
being sufficient according to science. If the athlete reaches a state of overtraining, this
inspection may however be too late avoid. A vital aspect of avoiding overtraining is bal­
ancing the feeling of fatigue, which as mentioned is to be expected when training and
increasing strain in endurance sports. Usually these assessment are done qualitatively
and based on feelings and recollection from the athlete. The difficult question to answer
is when fatigue becomes too much and can this threshold be quantified?
Overtraining is detrimental to the performance of an athlete. Bordering a chronic condi­
tion, it requires the athlete to take a break from running and endurance sports in general
for a longer period of time, which then requires the athlete to start the training over. For
a recreational athlete, this may result in losing the joy from a hobby and passion, whilst
for the elite field a loss of occupation, income and in worst cases career. Avoiding and
identifying overtraining is detrimental to ensure continuous running.
In this thesis, we will investigate the foundations of endurance performance and under­
stand how fatigue is usually tracked. Following this, we will investigate a method to track
fatigue for a group of athletes reaching the limit of strain they can undertake while train­
ing towards the Copenhagen Half Marathon. Following the event, we will compare their
tracked fatigue to their tracked training and recovery to inspect patterns of increase or
decrease in fatigue following changes in their training and lifestyle. Lastly, we will inves­
tigate how the recollection of fatigue ­ which is commonly used to understand fatigue for
athletes currently ­ compares to the tracked fatigue, and identify potential reasoning for
differences in tracked and recollected fatigue.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Background
In this section, we will explore the underlying parameters an athlete needs to implement in
order to improve in endurance sports. We will explain how a balance between stress and
adaptation is essential to improve, and why a misbalance can lead to injury and therefore
is in the forefront of ensuring improvement throughout a training block. Next, we will
investigate fatigue as an emotion and how it links to an imbalance between strain and
adaptation, followed by an investigation of how feelings can be quantified from previous
work. Lastly, we will go through the uncovered differences between emotions tracked as
they occur and how they are recollected from different methods of data sampling methods.
2.1
Endurance sport
Training to perform within endurance sports relies on properly increasing strain on the
body, and providing appropriate adaptation. In the following sections, these two elements
will be explored within the field of endurance sport, with a focus on running.
2.1.1
Strain
Training to improve as a runner requires an increase in strain on the body [1] over time. An
increase in strain can both be in terms of intensity and quantity of training ­ also termed
training stimulus. This is usually measured as time or distance ran over the previous
seven days. To increase the performance of runners and endurance athletes in general,
the athlete can over a short period of time over­strain the body followed by a period of time
to properly recover and adapt the strain as an increase in fitness. Focused on a specific
event, this is done by having an athlete follow a set of periodizations [1] generally struc­
tured as three training periods: build, peak and tapering [2]. During the build period, the
athlete gradually increases the strain endured to build endurance and gradually improve
the amount of strain the body is able to absorb [3]. During the peak period, the athlete
completes a set of workouts specified towards the event, whilst maintaining the levels of
strain build towards in the build period. The peak period has the athlete at the very edge
of pushing too hard in regards to strain, and is followed by a period of tapering where the
athlete decreases the strain to ensure the athlete is well recovered to perform come race
day.
Quantifying strain in both forms of training stimuli, distance or time spent running and
intensity, can be done with modern running equipment in form of GPS watches which
have become an essential piece of equipment for runners.
2.1.2
Adaptation
Strain obtained by an individual must be followed by adequate recovery to be absorbed
by the body and improve performance over time. Quantifying whether the body is being
given the appropriate amounts and thereby recovering after an amount of stress is not
as easily quantifiable as strain, since the symptoms of recovery vary from individual and
depend on a variety of factors.
An aspect widely agreed as most important of adaptation is sleep [4]. During sleep, mus­
cle recovery takes occurs, as well as regulation of the body’s immune­ and hormonal
system [5]. To perform at a high level during training and performance for an endurance
athlete, adequate amounts and proper quality of sleep is essential. General public health
benefits of adequate sleep have been proven many, including cognitive functions to pre­
vent and better lifestyle diseases [6].
2
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:9==
Sleep can be quantified simplistically by the amount of sleep, and at a more granular level
the times spent in each of the stages of sleep. Healthy adults should amount 7­9 hours of
sleep, whereas athletes should aim for 8< hours to ensure proper adaptation and reduce
the risk of injury [4]. Studies have furthermore shown that higher quantities of sleep result
in greater endurance performance for runners [7] [8], making it a key aspect to focus on
for improvement as an endurance athlete.
2.1.3
The importance of balancing strain and adaptation
Continual improvement for endurance athletes is a matter of consistently pushing and
balancing strain with adaptation. Applying too much strain without adequate recovery, in
either dietary, sleep or load­related, will limit or devalue the benefits from training. Seek­
ing improvement as a runner by pushing the levels of strain undertaken does come with
the heavy risk of injury, and between 30% and 70% of all runners experience an injury
over the span of a year [9]. Prolonged over­strain of the body has been shown to lead
to overtraining [10], which shows as severe fatigue or injuries such as stress fractures.
Overtraining can come from either over­straining severely in a short period of time, slightly
over a longer period of time or monotonous stress, all not matched with adequate recovery
in the forms of rest and caloric intake[11]. Overtraining takes form as a pathological con­
dition, whereas expected levels of fatigue from straining the body will disappear naturally
[11].
Identifying overtraining can to some extent be done qualitatively by the athlete, by evalu­
ating fatigue, but since the workload should stress the body and be a slight overload the
athlete should feel some degree of both ­ so identifying when these are too much is hard.
Furthermore, once these symptoms begin to appear it might be too late, and degenerating
of the body and thereby the need for a break may be required.
An ever present bias for athletes is that the potential imbalance of strain and adaptation
is a well­known and required aspect of training for athletes. Athletes at a high level will
experience fatigue, and are aware that they might need to push through it to some degree
to reach a goal, especially during the peak­period [1]. The balance to navigate is termed
the Fitness­Fatigue model as seen in Figure 2.1, which illustrates the fitness is adapted
after fatigue is experienced. This is both the case in long term and short term of either a
training block or specific workouts. The difficult aspect remains assessing when fatigue
becomes too much fatigue and thereby becomes overtraining and evaluating when an
athlete should minimize strain and focus on adaptation, either instructed by the athlete
themselves or a coach.
Figure 2.1: The Fitness­fatigue model[12]. Fitness is adapted following an increase in
fatigue.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
3
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Fatigue
Fatigue is characterized as the subjective experience of “a feeling of lack of energy, or
tiredness” [13]. Fatigue can be a prevalent feeling for an individual for a multitude of
reasons, ranging from psychological factors such as stress or depression to physiological
factors such as sleep deprivation or poor nutrition. Fatigue can be perceived at a multitude
of variations, grouped in either pathological and non­pathological reasons.
Figure 2.2: Different variations of fatigue[13]. The severity of fatigue varies greatly from
variation to variation in regards to how it should be treated.
For endurance athletes specifically, the major concern occurs with the prevalence of fa­
tigue being a common symptom for overtraining, in which the fatigue becomes patholog­
ical as an effect of overtraining.
As described in the previous section on strain, various degrees of fatigue are to be ex­
pected in some periods of training, in particular a period of peak training prior to a race.
This fatigue is non­pathological, and a symptom of the strain being obtained by the body
from physical exercise. The importance of fatigue for an endurance athlete is therefore
not whether or not fatigue is prevalent, but rather if fatigue is experienced to a degree
matching the increase and decrease in strain, and especially not as a longer sustained
condition which can turn into overtraining.
2.2.1
Tracking fatigue
Tracking fatigue can be a valuable tool to understand whether the athlete is experiencing
the appropriate amounts of fatigue, with a focus on not over exceeding fatigue and thereby
risking overtraining.
Traditionally, qualitative methods such as questionnaires or interviews have been utilized
[14], often supplemented with a scale to quantify aspects within the feeling of fatigue. More
than 30 different scales have been found over time, varying in extend of use and quality
of the feedback received from the utilization. The scales vary in being either linear or step
wise in the options to quantify one’s experience of fatigue, and are often supplemented by
examples to map one’s feelings to. Requiring an individual to fill out a questionnaire can
therefore provide various degrees of detail on the subjective experience, open for inter­
pretation and quantification. An issue with requiring an athlete to fill out a questionnaire
are however also well established; often, this is a time and resource requiring process for
the interviewer and interviewee, and furthermore if the experience of interest occurs fre­
quently over the time of investigation, a challenge occurs in regards to investigating and
recollecting each occurrence independently.Fatigue has been attempted to be tracked
objectively using sensors previously. One study investigated a quantification of fatigue as
a function of the demands of oxygen and heart rate with mixed results in respect to con­
clusively quantifying fatigue objectively[15]. Methods to track and translate the feelings
4
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:11==
experienced as close to the experience itself and investigate patterns from these seem a
beneficial path to investigate an individual’s fatigue over time.
2.3
Recollecting subjective experiences compared to
tracking in­moment
Remembering emotions is central to understanding how we are feeling as human beings.
There are however many factors that can affect how past feelings are remembered. Stud­
ies have shown that participants are able to recollect feelings as far back as a year [16].
However, remembrance of emotions are subject to biases and it has been found that in­
dividuals overestimate positive and negative emotions when compared to tracking said
emotions at the end of each day [17]. Among various factors, recollection of emotions of
experiences have been found to be potentially affected by an emotional coping strategy
utilized in a particular period of aiming towards a goal. Rating emotions retrospectively
may be affected from the significance of the reported emotion [18]. Evaluating emotions
retrospectively has been found to rely on the average of said emotions even when the
retrospective period is as short as a single day [19].
A phenomenon of skewed recollection of experiences has been described in literature as
the peak­end rule, initially published by Daniel Kahneman.
2.3.1
The Peak­end Rule
The Peak­End Rule [20] is a concept which suggests individuals primarily recollect pre­
vious experiences based on the peak (the most intense or emotionally charged moment)
and the end (the final moments) of those experiences. As Kahneman outlines in his book
“Thinking, Fast and Slow” [21], the rule applies to various aspects of life, including expe­
riences related to fatigue.
When individuals experience emotions during a task or activity, their recollection and
memory of that emotion are influenced more by the most intense or peak moments of
emotion during the activity and the way it ends rather than an overall assessment of emo­
tion throughout the entire duration. For example, during an intense period of training,
the peak moment of fatigue might occur when trying to complete particularly challenging
work.
The final moments of an experience, such as the last period of training or the concluding
minutes of a physically demanding key workout, play a significant role in the memory of
fatigue for an individual. If the ending is relatively less fatiguing or if there is a sense of
relief, it can significantly influence how individuals recollect their overall fatigue level.
Kahneman’s research suggests that our memories tend to emphasize the emotional and
sensory aspects of an experience, particularly the peaks and the end, while diminishing
the importance of the duration of the experience itself. This is termed Memory Consoli­
dation.
These terms can potentially map to endurance athletes, in regards to how an athlete per­
ceived fatigue retrospectively. If an athlete experiences a particularly challenging section
of work or strain (peak fatigue) followed by easier work towards the end of the period
(relief), they are more likely to remember the entire training period as less fatiguing than
it may have felt in the moment according to Kahneman. Conversely, if the training block
ends on a challenging note, it can lead to a more negative memory of the entire experi­
ence.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
5
==PAGE:12==
2.3.2
Ecological Momentary Assessment
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) aims to address the biases regarding remem­
brance of emotions by collecting a tracking of the emotion as close as possible to the
experience. EMA aims to allow the user to track data either or both at the time it is ex­
perienced (momentary) as well as in the situation it is experienced at (ecological) [22].
Protocols to utilize EMA can therefore either rely on tracking at a specific time or event.
Quantifying emotions in­situ requires an easily accessible and interpretable method, as
well as a clearly defined protocol. When requesting a participant to track occurrences as
close to time or event as possible, the simplicity of tracking should be considered. The
conflicts within determining the proper degree of simplicity of tracking with an EMA proto­
col are many fold. Too many required trackings, and the individual may become outworn
by having to think about the experiment too heavily; and on the contrary, too infrequent
and the participant may either forget the experiment or start to recollect the experience dif­
ferently as described [21]. Furthermore, the tracking itself should be both simple enough
to complete easily for the participant without interfering too heavily with the everyday life
and thereby having to be taken out of the environment; but on the other hand provid­
ing appropriate levels of granularity for the experiment. The method and apparatus for
tracking using EMA should therefore be considered carefully with regards to the balance
between simplicity and granularity of data actually obtained from the experiment. Previ­
ous studies have utilized various devices to capture data, from journaling to smartphones
and wearables, or even specifically designed apparatus for the experiment.
EMA is however not a certain path to quantifying data from a participant exactly as expe­
rienced. Rating emotions momentary are subject of bias and affect from the individuals
own perception [23], regardless of how close to the experienced event the tracking occurs.
Furthermore, the aspect of being aware of being under assessment regarding a specific
phenomenon is likely to lead to more reflection on the experiences and the tracking itself
by the participants. In a study by Schrimscher et al., it was found the tracking the con­
sumption of alcohol led to a reduction in alcohol consumption from the assessment itself
[24].
2.3.3
Quantifying fatigue using EMA
Based on the background of endurance sports and recollection of fatigue, the difficulty
of balancing strain and adaptation is evident. The athlete is required to strain the body,
and even with proper adaptation a level of fatigue is to be expected. Too much strain can,
however, lead to over training and monitoring fatigue over various aspects of time is of the
essence to avoid pathological fatigue and negative outcomes from an athletic perspective.
The measuring of fatigue retrospectively, as it has been custom, might potentially lead
to biased data points and therefore not a fair reflection of the actual fatigue. We will
investigate whether a bias in recollected fatigue compared to tracked fatigue using EMA
exists for athletes undergoing such periods of varying strain training for a specific goal;
the Copenhagen Half Marathon 2023.
6
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:13==
3
Methodology
In this section, we will explain the design and setup of the experiment. We will initially
cover the aspects surrounding the timeframe of the experiment itself with research ques­
tion and how fatigue, workouts and sleep was tracked, followed by a review of the time
frame, communication and recruitment of participants of the experiment. Lastly, we will
cover the time frame of the project.
3.1
Research question
The experiment was designed to open­ended explore which patterns emerged from track­
ing fatigue for athletes training intensely and structured towards a specified goal. The
experiment initiated with two open research questions:
• Does patterns of fatigue exist across the group and personally by an increase in
training or decrease of training was prevalent in the subjective feeling of fatigue
tracked using EMA.
• Do differences between the recollection of fatigue after the Half Marathon compared
to the tracked fatigue exist, and if patterns existed in the differentiation or similarity
of recollected and tracked fatigue can these be reasoned.
3.2
Quantifying fatigue
As described in the Background to this experiment, multiple scales exist to track fatigue.
The scale was required to be simple to use and remember, and easy and fast to track
in order to make the trackings as accessible for the participants. The experiment design
required many interactions, and minimizing the required efforts whilst collecting sufficient
data to understand changes in fatigue was the primary goal for selecting a scale. To track
the perception of fatigue in this experiment, the Samn­Perelli 7­point scale was used[25].
Figure 3.1: The Samn­Perelli scale[25], as distributed to the participants.
As described in the Background section, accumulating fatigue is to be expected with in­
creasing strain on the body. A binary scale would therefore not be sufficient at expressing
the changes in fatigue. Furthermore, it was decided to use a scale with discrete tracking
rather than linear (eg. number of presses versus duration pressed). This enabled a more
straightforward way of mapping a tracking to a feeling that could be compared across
individuals in the experiment. The scale was deemed appropriate in terms of granular­
ity, with seven steps allowing the participants to track swings in fatigue without having to
remember too many different levels.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
7
==PAGE:14==
The scale was deemed sufficient for this experiment in part due to its broad usage in other
studies and contexts and proven effect in tracking tiredness and fatigue [25]. It is broadly
used for airplane pilots to assess fatigue prior to flying.
3.3
Apparatus
3.3.1
One Button Tracker
To track the fatigue experienced in situ, the One Button Tracker (OBT) as seen in Figure
3.2, was selected as apparatus. The OBT is an EMA device developed by Jakob Eg
Larsen, PhD and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen, MSc. It is designed as a singular button
that tracks timestamp, time since last click and duration of each click. The OBT is a well­
suited device for EMA, due to its simplicity of interaction [26] and size. The purpose of
the device is to allow the user to track and quantify the experience as simple as possible
and as close as possible to the event, and thereby eliminate retrospective bias. The
combination of these can be utilized to implement various scales and rating metrics.
Figure 3.2: Exterior images of the OBT
The device measures 41 x 31 x 12.5mm, thereby being compact enough to be brought
along to training, and thereby collecting data as close to the particular event as possible.
Internally, the device comprises of a button, a computer, GPS to track timestamp, battery
as well as a motor to signify a press to the user. A complete overview of the components
of the OBT can be seen in Figure 3.3. The simplicity and ease of use lends itself well
to enable users to track everyday experiences easily as long as they can be translated
into a specific signal or scale. Furthermore, the OBT has been used for similar projects
previously which made the success of the apparatus itself for gathering the tracking more
successful, compared to either building a new device or having to build an app or similar
setup.
8
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.3: Overview of the internal components of the OBT
The simplicity of the design comes with disadvantages for some experiment designs,
specifically if the data is to be accompanied by context or if a participant enters an incorrect
tracking by mistake or wishes to alter a previous tracking. The device does not have a
display or indicator to reassure the user that he entered the intended number or duration of
presses. The missing context of the device was not a concern for the specific experiment
design of this project, but the reassuring of number of presses was found a concern during
the pilot experiment. Furthermore, previous work with the OBT has found that forgetting
to bring the device or forgetting to track completely when distracted by other activities [26].
Alongside the OBT, the institute has developed a web­based analytical tool built in Ob­
servable. This portal has been used as a foundation for the experiment conducted in this
thesis. A link to the analytics platform build is found in Appendix A.
Previous work conducted with the OBT
In previous works, it has been found that the OBT can be utilized to track a wide variety of
comparable subjective experienced phenomena to fatigue [26] such as feeling wellness,
stress and fidgeting. EMA has been utilized to track PTSD from veterans and have sug­
gested that self­tracked data can provide greater understanding of emotions compared to
retrospective recollection of emotions [23]. In another study using the OBT as an instru­
ment for EMA while also investigating PTSD, it was found that ruminations and intrusions
are distinct phenomena and could be used to identify and raise awareness of characteris­
tics and contextual cues of both [27]. The OBT has furthermore been used in other thesis
to investigate both the effect of utilizing the device for EMA compared to a smartphone
app to track nicotine consumption, where it was found that the OBT was better suited to
track EMA compared to a dedicated app.
3.4
Personal Running Watches
To track the participants sleep and workouts, all participants were required to track their
workouts using a running watch with GPS and build­in heart rate monitor. The partici­
pants recruited were required to provide the running watch themselves. All participants
were required to wear their running watch during sleep, and it was required in the recruit­
ment process that the watch should have the ability to track sleep. Many modern running
watches offer a variety of metrics with varying levels of accuracy, and it was decided to
require the athletes to use a Garmin Watch as a criterion for recruitment. Garmin was
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
9
==PAGE:16==
decided since it is the most widespread brand of running watches.
It was initially investigated whether a specific set of Garmin models could be a require­
ment for recruitment. Newer models of Garmin watches include more advanced and ac­
curate sensors, and accompanying more granular measurements of metrics during sleep.
During pre­recruitment conversation with possible participants, it was decided to limit the
requirements of running watch to simply a Garmin Watch with the capability to track sleep
in order to prioritize the possibility of recruiting high performing athletes without modern
watches at the cost of comparable granular metrics.
Workout and sleep data was gathered after the experiment concluded from Garmin Con­
nect, and cleansed. This resulted in two data sets for each athlete: a daily overview of
sleep time, wake time, date and duration, as well as a data set for all tracked workouts.
3.5
Procedure
The projected started in March 2023, and concluded in October 2023. During the project,
initial work to design and execute the experiment was undertaken prior to starting the pe­
riod of tracking with the participants, which ran from July 10th­September 17th. Following
the experiment, data analysis and gathering, as well as reporting, took place. The key el­
ements of the projects timeframe will be explored in the following sections, accompanied
by an overview of the period in Figure 3.5.
3.5.1
Pilot experiment
Prior to the main experiment itself, a low­fidelity pilot experiment was held with one par­
ticipant. The objective of the pilot experiment was mainly to test the setup with trackers,
as well as whether the instructions of tracking were clear. Furthermore, the design of the
OBT itself was tested in regards to whether the object alone was sufficient or it should be
paired with a wrist band. It was found that the protocol of communication and briefing of
the experiment was sufficient, and based on feedback from the participant it was decided
to offer the participants the opportunity to wear the OBT as a wrist device, but it was not
required. None of the participants decided to request a wearable device based on the
briefing.
3.5.2
Ten week experiment
The context of the study was the Copenhagen Half Marathon, the largest long­distance
race in Denmark and the official national championships. A common goal for the partici­
pants allowed for an experiment to be conducted on all participants in parallel, with even
comparable periods of training, with an external goal beyond the experiment. The experi­
ment’s time frame was the ten weeks leading up to the race, which includes three specific
blocks of training; an increase in load, maintaining or peaking in which the load is slightly
over­straining the athlete, and a tapering period to allow the athletes to recover properly
before the race. The athletes identified were following a training program provided by a
coach prior to the experiment which followed the build­peak­taper model.
The experiment ran from July 10th until the day of the race, September 17th, thereby con­
sisting of ten weeks (week 27 until 36). How each athlete approached the specific weeks
varied slightly, but generally the first 2­4 weeks (week 27, 28, 29 and 30) were building
periods where the body slowly added strain. The following weeks up until 2­3 weeks left
were peak periods (week 31, 32, 33, 34) where the peak and strain was intended to be at
the highest levels across the training periods. The last 2­3 weeks consisted of gradually
decreasing the strain to allow for greater absorption following the peak period (week 34,
35 and 36).
10
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.4: The build peak load model visualized, based on the concept of periodization
[1]
3.5.3
Timing of trackings
The participants were requested to track their fatigue using the OBT and Samn­Perelli
scale at four times daily; twice at specified recurrent events:
• Upon waking, prior to eating breakfast to ensure the ratings was not increased due
to a rapid increase of blood sugar
• As close to going to bed as possible
Furthermore, they were requested to track fatigue twice for every workout:
• As close as possible to starting a workout
• As close as possible to finishing a workout, prior to refueling with carbohydrates to
ensure the ratings was not increased due to a rapid increase of blood sugar
The specified events were chosen to ensure a large data set for each participant. Fur­
thermore, the difference in tracking around a reoccurring event (sleep) and event­focused
event (running) was chosen to both prompt the participants to acquire habits around both
types of events. Tracking close to running was expected to make the participants reflect
more on their fatigue regarding running throughout the experiment, which as described in
the Background could potentially foster bias from tracking.
3.5.4
Recruitment of participants
The experiment required participants (referred to as athletes during the analysis and dis­
cussion of results) training at a high level and thereby experiencing comparable levels of
strain. The participants were recruited shortly before the other major race in Denmark,
the Copenhagen Marathon, in May 2023, which many runners including the recruited had
in their race calendar as their last race prior to the Half Marathon. Ten participants were
recruited, who had previously ran a half marathon at a high national level, and the strain
they set out to experience was therefore a known element. The criterion’s for participants
were defined as
• Training towards the Copenhagen Half Marathon, following a periodically structured
training program. Preferably designed by a coach.
• Competing at a high national level. This was decided for two reasons. Firstly, to
ensure their strain moving over the period would be high, and thereby having to
be aware of the amount of strain being put on the body. Furthermore, participants
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
11
==PAGE:18==
training to compete at high national levels are assumed to have a desire to get as
close as possible to optimum performance, and thereby push the strain they are
willing to accept as far as possible.
• Previous experience with training and competing at a half marathon. This was de­
cided to recruit individuals who had experience with the work of training towards
the specific goal, and therefore may have been more reflective around their feelings
based on the workload throughout the period.
• Aiming towards setting a personal record.
• Utilizing a Garmin Watch.
Based on the set criteria, ten participants were recruited.
Athlete ID
Gender
Initial goal
A01
M
1:09
A02
M
1:06
A03
M
1:08
A04
M
1:14
A05
M
1:08
A06
M
1:12
A07
F
1:17
A08
F
1:21
A09
F
1:18
A10
F
1:21
Table 3.1: The ten participants recruited for the experiment
3.5.5
Briefing on the experiment to participants
As described in the Background to this experiment, multiple factors are to be considered
in regards to biased to the tracking using EMA. Prior to starting the experiment, the par­
ticipants were informed that the totals of all tracked objects were the main focus of the
experiment, rather than the experiences of fatigue quantified using the OBT. The objec­
tive of the briefing being focused more on the whole setup rather than specifically the
fatigue­aspect was in attempt to avoid biases in the ratings themselves. Furthermore,
the participants were questioned equally on their frequency and whether their watches
functioned properly during the experiment, rather than focusing exclusively on the ratings
themselves.
The participants were informed and introduced to tracking using the OBT, with the afore­
mentioned lack of confirmation of number of presses and possibility to alter previous track­
ings explicitly expressed as a limitation. The participants were asked to track their fatigue
slowly and thoroughly using longer presses and breaks in between presses initially, which
was accustomed for in the data analysis. Furthermore, they were informed to give notice
if they wanted to alter a tracking manually.
The participants were not instructed in how to access and inspect data from the OBT
by design. During the experiment, data was collected for seven of the ten participants to
ensure the OBT was functioning, and ensure that they were utilizing the scale as intended.
The participants were not shown or informed how their ratings were upon inspection during
the experiment.
12
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:19==
3.5.6
Communication with participants during the experiment
All participants were initially briefed in­person with regards to how to use the tracker,
the design of the scale and how to track workouts and sleep using their running watch.
To ensure they all had a full understanding of the device and scale, they were made to
repeat the experiment design. All participants had a test­week prior to starting the 10
week schedule to ensure all devices were running, and the data was tracked correctly on
the device.
During the ten weeks, all participants were contacted as a group on Fridays to hear ev­
erything was progressing and provide motivation to their training and the context of the
experiment within DTU. Furthermore, all participants were contacted individually each
Monday to respond to how the experiment was progressing for them, if they had any is­
sues or questions, and specifically if the OBT was still vibrating. All athletes were added
to a SLACK­workspace, to create an environment for asking questions and sharing expe­
riences between the group, and to communicate with each participant individually.
Besides ensuring that no unexpected issues with the trackers occurred, this was set up to
give reminders to keep tracking throughout the period. The experiment design required
many interactions with the OBT each day, and it was therefore of risk to either be forgotten
or become too strenuous of a mental task for the participants to complete each day.
3.5.7
Post half experiment interview
Following the 10 weeks of training and competing at the half marathon, each participant
was interviewed and debriefed. The purpose of the first part of the interview was to de­
velop an understanding of whether the participants completed the goal of the race, and
more importantly to get an understanding of how the participants utilized the tracker. The
interview was developed as a semi­structured interview with a set of questions narrowing
in on general thoughts to specific data points. Following this, the second part of the inter­
view shifted to focusing on the recollection of fatigue for each participant. The participants
were asked to visualize their recollection of fatigue graphically, followed by an explanation
of peaks and tendencies illustrated. This recollection and reflections on fatigue during the
period were used as comparison to the tracked fatigue using the OBT. The visual recol­
lection of fatigue was drawn using the Samn­Perelli as the trackings of fatigue using the
OBT during the experiment. The interview guide is found in Appendix A.
All interviews were scheduled as close as possible to the race to ensure the experience
of the race itself and the ten week period were as clear in mind as possible. Earlier
versions of the data visualizations included in the following section were built and shown
to the participants as part of the interview to gather reflections. If it became impossible
to schedule the interviews in person close to race, interviews were undertaken online or
over phone, followed by an in­person debrief as soon as possible thereafter.
In summary, the post interview thereby provided two data sets for each participant: data
on the general usage and experience with tracking fatigue using the OBT, as well as a
recollection and reflections of fatigue from the period.
3.5.8
Data analysis and time frame of the project
For the overall project, the timeframe extended prior and post the experiment to both
design the methods for quantifying fatigue as well as data­analysis during and post the
experiment. Prior to the experiment itself, research to ensure the proper methods and
protocols to quantify fatigue were designed and tested in a short pilot experiment.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.5: Timeframe of the experiment
Data analysis with the tracked data sets began after the pilot study in June. The data
from the pilot experiment was used as foundation to create visualizations for the data
sets for each participant as soon as the full experiment had been concluded. Due to the
short time span between gathering data (September 17th­30th) till hand in of the thesis
(October 16th), this element of the procedure was critical for enabling a swift analysis. To
group the clicks registered from the OBT at each tracking as a single measure of fatigue, a
procedure was built into the preexisting data processing setup provided by DTU Compute
in Observable. A set of visualizations based on duplicates and transformations of the
single data set gathered by the pilot experiment were created prior to completion of the
experiment.
Furthermore, access to the data was built and tested prior to and during the experiment
period. Initially, access via API to Strava and Garmin Connect was implemented, but
during the experiment it was decided to utilize exports via Garmin Connect rather than
the API’s. This was chosen due to easier maintenance and access, based on the short
time span to conclude the analysis.
The data extracted via Garmin required transformations that were handled in Google
Sheets, in order to alter formats of string values. This was chosen due to the severe
amount of data files compiled from the experiment, being 3 per participant and the need
of aggregations to be built on row level for rolling averages. Each sheet was exported in
CSV format to be analyzed and visualized in Observable.
During the experiment, visualisations were prepared to investigate the data obtained from
the participants as soon as the experiment was finalized. The process of designing visu­
alisations was done iterative and experimentally, to explore the data obtained and focus
on visualizing patterns. As the experiment concluded, data and interviews from all partic­
ipants were gathered as swiftly as possible.
During the period for data analysis, the visualizations built during the experiment phase
were altered to better illustrate both found patterns and lack thereof. All visualizations are
available for use and inspection as Appendix B.
14
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:21==
4
Results and discussion
In this section, we will initially cover whether the athletes met their race goal and followed
the general structure of build­peak­taper. Following this, we will investigate the objective
parameters tracked to underline whether or not it can be expected that the participants
experienced fatigue based on strain, and if they did supplement with adequate absorption
in the form of sleep quantity. Next, the data from each athletes trackings of fatigue using
the OBT will be visualized to showcase whether patterns are prevalent across the sample
size. The use of OBT and initial patterns will be discussed in regards to which factors may
have affected the results.
Following the quantitative results, each athletes qualitative data gathered from the post­
race interviews will be inspected and compared with the quantitative analysis. First we
will inspect the recollected feelings of fatigue compared to the actual tracked fatigue using
the OBT. Then, we will supplement these comparisons with the data from the post exper­
iment interviews to understand how the athletes utilized the OBT and scale, and which
challenges they had with converting fatigue to a rating and maintaining a high frequency.
The patterns found in comparison between data tracked from the OBT and qualitative
data will be discussed.
Lastly, we focus on four specific cases and investigate how the athletes recollected and
tracked their data, and provide an explanation based on their interviews. These four ath­
letes recollected fatigue distinctly differently, with three explaining their recollected fatigue
explicitly with a mental strategy of recollection mapping to the peak­end­rule and one ath­
lete showcasing a high level of similarity of recollected and tracked fatigue.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
15
==PAGE:22==
4.1
Dataset
Each athlete generated three datasets throughout the ten week duration of the experi­
ment; a dataset of fatigue ratings utilizing the OBT, a dataset of sleep recordings from
their personal watches and a dataset from their workouts, also obtained using their per­
sonal watches. An overview of frequencies of trackings by each athlete can be seen in
Table 4.1.
All athlete’s OBT’s and running watches functioned as intended throughout the entire
period, except for athlete A02 who it seems forgot to charge his device after August 11th
despite reporting that the device was vibrating during the entire duration of the experiment.
Athlete A06 decided to stop tracking at week 6 due to personal reasons. The athlete’s
data which was affected by this is marked by an asterisk in the following table.
Athlete ID
OBT Tracking (%)
Sleeps tracked (%)
Workouts
Interview date
A01
34.39
24.83
87
18/09/23
A02
*10.9
87.0
44
03/10/23
A03
84.93
82.86
66
18/09/23
A04
40.01
64.29
51
20/09/23
A05
77.84
44.28
88
20/09/23
A06
41.52
14.28
42
15/08/23
A07
97.37
94.28
63
19/09/23
A08
89.99
82.86
44
02/10/23
A09
85.56
97.14
62
20/09/23
A10
47.00
70.0
30
18/09/23
Table 4.1: Overview of the three datasets each athlete generated during the ten week
period, as well as when they were interviewed and reported their recollected feeling of
fatigue from the ten week experiment.
4.1.1
Results from the race
Of the 10 athletes recruited, 6 ran the Copenhagen Half Marathon. Two athletes had to
decide not to compete six weeks into the training period due to personal reasons, whereas
the other two decided no to compete close to the race. An overview of the athlete’s
accomplishments at the race alongside their initial goal can be seen in Table 4.2. All
athletes did tracked their training and workouts throughout the ten weeks.
Athlete ID
Goal
Finish Time
Notes
A01
1:09
1:15
A02
1:06
DNS
Decided to prioritize a marathon
A03
1:08
1:10
A04
1:12
1:20
A05
1:08
1:13
A06
1:12
DNS
Not feeling fit
A07
1:17
1:16
A08
1:18
1:21
A09
1:18
DNS
Personal Reasons
A10
1:21
DNS
Personal Reasons
Table 4.2: Initial goals for the race prior to starting the ten week period, as well as finish
time for all ten athletes. DNS denotes ”Did not start”
16
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:23==
4.2
Quantitative results
4.2.1
Training
For eight out of ten athletes, they “met or exceeded” their expected amount of training
within the period, with the exception of A10 and A06. The eight athletes trained consis­
tently throughout the summer despite either deciding not to participate or race at the Half
Marathon or refocusing on other goal events throughout the period. For the eighth ath­
letes, this accumulated to more than 50km at a minimum weekly throughout the period.
All athlete’s running mileage aggregated over previous seven days is visualized in Figure
4.1.
Figure 4.1: Rolling average of previous seven days running in distance for all ten athletes
The weekly mileage across all athletes varies, with some athletes averaging around 50km
a week over the entire period, and few exceeding 100km. The weekly mileage is pre­
scribed by the coach, but it is to be expected they all follow the same general structure.
To inspect the general pattern across all ten athletes, a mean for previous seven days
rolling aggregation is visualized in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Rolling average of previous seven days running in distance for all ten athletes
aggregated
As expected based on the statement from eight of ten athletes that they followed their
training as prescribed, despite two not racing, the mean follows the peak­load­tapering
model 3.4. The athletes spent the initial four weeks building a total weekly mileage and
accustoming the body to increasingly higher levels of strain, followed by a period of less
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
17
==PAGE:24==
strain to ensure the body adapted the strain being put on the body as well as making sure
the athletes were ready to race.
4.2.2
Sleep
Sleep was less varying across the sample of individuals in terms of the quantity each
individual averaged over the ten week period as seen in Figure 4.3 compared to weekly
mileage. As shown in Table 4.1, some of the individuals did not provide sufficient mea­
surements to inspect individual patterns. As reported in Table 4.1, athletes A02, A03,
A07 and A09 recorded 75% or more of their sleeps during the ten week period of the
experiment.
Figure 4.3: Rolling average of previous seven days running in distance for all ten athletes
aggregated
By aggregating the quantity of sleep as the mean quantity across the group shows that
the mean quantity starts low, at around 6,5 hours of sleep, before stabilizing between 7
and 8 for the last 9 weeks of the period.
Figure 4.4: Rolling average of previous seven days running in distance for all ten athletes
aggregated
From Figure 4.3, it can be concluded that the athletes did not sleep less than 6 hours as
a group. Visually inspecting the visualization, most athletes stayed between 7 or 8 hours
on average throughout the period. This is within the requirements of healthy amounts of
sleep for an adult, albeit in the low end of the spectrum of acceptable ranges for athletes
undergoing high levels of strain from exercise [4].
18
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:25==
4.2.3
Self­reported fatigue levels Recordings from the OBT
In this subsection, we will initially investigate the usage and pattern of usage of the OBT
from all ten athletes in self­reported fatigue. Following this, we will investigate the patterns
emerging from the tracking and compare them to the objective measures in the form of
running and sleep.
Frequency and consistency
As seen in Table 4.1 the ten week period, five of the ten athletes utilized the tracker on
75% or more days within the period. For the entire set of participants as a group, the
frequency dropped following the first weeks of tracking. The frequency is calculated on
a weekly level as the percentage of the required trackings being recorded based on the
optimum number of trackings expected from seven nights of sleep and the number of
workouts the athletes underwent.
Figure 4.5: Frequency of trackings measured against expected total trackings for the
entire group.
The degree of which the athletes tracked throughout the period varied greatly as illustrated
in Table 4.1, and by visualizing the individual athlete’s frequency variety also appears
prevalent.
Figure 4.6: Frequency of trackings measured against expected total trackings for each
athlete individually.
Based on Figure 4.6, the athletes can roughly be categorized in three groups based on
their consistency of tracking.
• Consistently high tracking Athletes A03, A05, A07, A08 and A10 kept relatively
consistent levels of tracking throughout the period of the experiment, all tracking
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
19
==PAGE:26==
more than 50% of their expected trackings. Athlete A05 and A07 had few weeks
with significant drops in consistency compared to the other weeks of tracking. The
inconsistency in the individual’s amount of ratings are to be considered when inves­
tigating individual cases and patterns moving forward, and is considered as part of
selecting which cases to focus on in the following case studies.
• Drops in frequency Athletes A01, A02 and A09 experienced their highest levels of
consistency initially in the experiment period, before dropping to lower than 50% of
their initial level of frequency. It is to be considered that the frequency may drop in
an experiment of longer duration, as 10 weeks is considered, which is the reasoning
for the frequent check­ins as prescribed in the protocol of the experiment.
• Outliers Athletes A04 and A06 did not have any of the two expected patterns, of
either remaining consistent or dropping in frequency as the experiment went on.
Athlete A06 had a peak in consistency in week 4 of the experiment, with close to
100% of the optimum amount of trackings being tracked. Athlete A04 had two period
of tracking at around 50%, being the first three weeks and week 9 and 10, with no
trackings in the period in between.
The selection of athletes for case studies will be based on both quantitative data and
qualitative data gathered from the post experiment interviews. Regarding the quantitative
data, both the frequency and consistency of tracking are to be considered in order to
ensure proper foundation of data to conclude on patterns of tracking. The consistently
high tracking athletes, being A03, A05, A07, A08 and A10, will provide the best data
foundation for further investigation prior to including the qualitative data.
4.2.4
Protocols effect on tracking
As described in the Methodology, athletes were reminded bi­weekly to keep up the track­
ing, and to check in regards to whether or not the trackers were still functioning, as well as
if they had any questions about tracking, usage of the scale or any other matters regarding
the experiment.
As seen in Figure 4.5, the frequency of tracking with the OBT was not consistent through­
out the period. Visualizing the frequency of tracking binned over weekdays and the ten
weeks, it can be concluded based on visual inspection that the bi­weekly check in did not
result in peaks in frequency of tracking on the day or the following days after. This was
not the case in the beginning of the experiment, when the frequency was high, not near
the conclusion of the experiment when frequency was low. .
Figure 4.7: Frequency of trackings measured against expected total trackings binned in
weekdays over weeks of the experiment for the entire group
20
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:27==
Inspecting the frequency binned weekdays in each weekday underlines this point at an
individual level. No clear pattern emerges across the group, with minor increases in fre­
quency on various days of the week for various athletes.
Figure 4.8: Frequency of trackings binned in weekdays for the each athlete
The immediate effect of the protocol therefore seems to be that the bi­weekly check­ins on
Monday and Friday did not result in increased level of tracking on any specific weekdays.
Rather, the degree of usage varied independently from athlete to athlete.
Decline in frequency
As shown in Table 4.1, only 5 of 10 ten athletes tracked 50% or more of the optimum
number of trackings. Of the 10 athletes, five remained consistent as seen in Figure 4.6,
whereas the other five dropped to consistent lower levels of trackings following the initial
start of the experiment or varied greatly in frequency. A reason for the low frequency
and inconsistency of half of the sample size might be that they were kept partially unin­
formed regarding the outcome of the trackings and not being shown their data during the
experiment. Due to the hypothesis being tested, the athletes could only be informed on
whether they were still tracking properly and to which degree their sleep and training data
was being inspected properly. Despite it being part of the protocol to both motivate them
with the exterior context of the project as well as the reminders to keep going with the
tracking, this could potentially have led to a lack of motivation to maintain frequency in
tracking during the ten week period, as seen in the dip in frequency. Previous work has
found that weekly checkups do boost motivation to persist tracking [26], but also that the
participants were interested and motivated by seeing graphs of their actual data
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
21
==PAGE:28==
4.2.5
Fatigue ratings
Visualizing the entire set of ratings reveals a varying usage of the scale, with the seven day
rolling average ranging from 2 to 5 across the group. Visually, no clear patterns appear
when inspecting all athletes tracking individually together.
Figure 4.9: Rolling seven day average of ratings of fatigue (magnitude) for all athletes
individually
Inspecting each of the athlete’s individual patterns as rolling averages further details the
varieties in tracking across the group. Each athlete’s ratings is visualised with a Bollinger
band over 20 ratings and 2 deviations, to visualise the variety in usage of the different
levels of the scale for each athlete.
Figure 4.10: Rolling average of ratings of fatigue (magnitude) for each athlete
As Figure 4.10 conveys, each athlete utilises the scale in very different manors. Fur­
thermore, as outlined in Table 4.2, not all athlete’s tracked sufficient events of fatigue to
attempt at drawing conclusions on the collective based on individual analysis of all ten
athletes. We will therefore inspect the ratings as accumulated means for the group in
entirety in a general view, before investigating individual cases more thoroughly based on
a selection from qualitative and quantitative data.
General patterns of trackings
Visualizing the groups ratings over the ten week periods as seen in Figure 4.11, some
patterns are to be inspected. Plotting the frequency of each rating of the Samn­Perelli
scale, it can be seen that ratings 3 and 4, representing slightly below and exact middle
of the scale, are the most prevalent. Inspecting the extremities of the spectrum, 1 and
7 representing extremely low and high levels of fatigue respectively, are utilized in very
22
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:29==
different degrees of frequency. The highest level of fatigue, 7, was reported in less than
1% of all ratings, whereas the lowest level of fatigue, 1, was reported above 16% of all
trackings.
Figure 4.11: Frequency of ratings for all athletes
Visualizing the magnitudes of fatigue reported as patterns of weekdays over the ten week
period, visual patterns start to emerge.
Figure 4.12: Frequency of ratings for all athletes binned in weekdays over the ten week
duration of the experiment
The Saturday in week 9 of the experiment was the hardest in average for the entire group
of athletes during the ten week period, with the following days being the days of least
fatigue. Based on insights post experiment, Saturday in week 9 of the experiment was
the day of the last hard workout prior to the race in the tapering period. During the last
week, being the week leading up to the race, the athletes reported lower scores of fatigue,
most likely due to the tapering [1].
Visualizing the mean over time of the fatigue ratings, we are able to inspect the group’s
feeling of fatigue as a unity. By inspecting Figure 4.13, the mean of ratings starts at 2.5
before peaking at above 3.5 after two weeks of the experiment.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.13: Rolling seven day average of ratings for all athletes during the ten week
duration of the experiment. The average is started on the date of which all athletes had
reported for seven days.
4.2.6
Comparing tracked fatigue to strain and adaptation
To compare the ratings of fatigue to the levels of strain, a seven day rolling average for
fatigue and sleep, and seven days accumulated strain will be applied. Seven days is
chosen due to its wide­spread usage within endurance sports to assess accumulation
and tendencies within various metrics. Most programs therefore also follow a seven day
structure. During the data investigation process for this project, various degrees of rolling
averages were applied without greater levels of patterns, and it was therefore decided to
utilize the standard used generally.
To investigate the patterns between a subjective measure (fatigue) and objective mea­
sures (stress and adaptation), the ratings of fatigue will be moved freely across the y­axis.
The subjective measure of fatigue is not linearly fixed to any aspect of either of the objec­
tive measures. Rather, the point of interest lies with whether patterns in changes in the
quantities of either sleep or running are reflected in tracked fatigue.
Inspecting the seven days rolling average of strain with fatigue rating
Revisiting the groups mean kilometers from Figure 4.1, the gradual build, peak and fol­
lowing taper expected from following the structure of applying strain to increase fitness
from the background section is seen applied. When overlaying the mean rating of the
entire group from Figure 4.13, it appears that the mean rating follows the development of
rolling sum of kilometers to some degree.
24
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.14: Rolling seven day average of ratings for all athletes during the ten week du­
ration of the experiment compared to rolling aggregation of previous seven days distance
run averaged for all athletes
This maps well with the intend of the build­peak­taper model prescribed to the athletes by
the coaches. The initial weeks are utilized to gradually increase strain, which leads to an
expected increase in fatigue.
Comparing the seven days rolling average of sleep with fatigue rating
Visualizing the seven day rolling sleep as visualised in Figure 4.4 with the accumulated
fatigue ratings, a correlation is less obvious. Initially, the y­axis of trackings of fatigue are
reversed, thereby reflecting lower levels on the y axis being a higher fatigue score. Both
the seven day rolling average for sleep and average of fatigue ratings are close to linear,
however the initial increase in duration of sleep in week 1 till 2 is correlated with a rating
of higher fatigue, inspecting the two graphs isolated. It is to be expected in generally that
more sleep should result in less fatigue [4]. Periods with the most sleep had higher levels
of fatigue initially, and following the second week of tracking both fatigue and amount of
sleep stabilizes.
Figure 4.15: Rolling seven day average of ratings for all athletes during the ten week
duration of the experiment compared to rolling average of previous seven days sleep
duration averaged for all athletes
Based on the data from this experiment, there is therefore no obvious conclusions on the
correlation between sleep and the fatigue ratings for the entire group at an aggregated
level.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
25
==PAGE:32==
4.2.7
Summary on general patterns from the quantitative analysis
Despite patterns available visually, the sample size of 10 athletes for the experiment
makes infeasible foundation for conclusions. Furthermore, only half of the participants
tracked 50% or more of their expected fatigue ratings. This provides even less founda­
tion to conclude on the group. A pattern in higher accumulated seven day strain and
increasing the mean of rating of fatigue is prevalent, despite very narrow data founda­
tion. More strain appears to be correlated in higher levels of reported fatigue across the
group of participants, which maps well with the background. Both graphs are however
very close to linear and consistent.
Based on the frequency across the athletes, it can be concluded that the days the athletes
were checked in with did not result in higher frequency of tracking. Rather, the consistency
and frequency of tracking for all athletes varied greatly across the group and during the
time span of the experiment.
Revisiting Table 4.2, not all athlete’s tracked equal frequency of events of fatigue com­
pared to the expected optimum, with five of the ten athletes tracking less than 50% of the
events that occurred over the period. However, as Figure 4.10 conveys, it is clear the
each athlete utilises the various steps of the scale differently, and all athletes did need to
consider how they conveyed their experiences to the Samn­Perelli scale, regardless of
the frequency of tracking. In the following sections, we will shift the focus of the analysis
and discussion to a qualitative analysis to inspect how the athletes both utilized the OBT
to quantify fatigue as well as how they recollect the experiences from the experiment.
26
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:33==
4.3
Qualitative results across the group
In this section, the quantitative results gathered from the OBT and running watches will
be supplemented with qualitative data in two forms; first, we will inspect the recollected
feeling of fatigue as visualised by each individual and group the various patterns they
reported. Following this, we will investigate patterns in comments across all participants
on the remembrance of fatigue from the semi structured interviews on how the scale was
interpreted and utilized throughout the period using the OBT. Based on the insights from
the qualitative data, we will inspect a set of cases that represent different patterns of
recollection and reasoning.
4.3.1
Visualized recollection of fatigue
As described in the main experiment, each athlete was asked to visualize how he rec­
ollected his fatigue over the ten week training block. The visualizations were collected
between September 18th and 20th, again utilizing the Samn­Perelli scale. The athletes
were asked specifically how they recollected their fatigue over the period, rather than
what they believed to have tracked their fatigue as during the period. After having visual­
ized their recollection, each athlete was asked into detail with focus on specific outliers or
changes in the visualisations to ensure these were actual reflections on how he felt. The
visualizations were drawn without having seen their actual recordings using the OBT.
The drawings were for many of the athletes drawn on their own phones or tablets, due to
the interview being undertaken online. This was done to ensure that all participants were
interviewed as close to race day and the experiment itself as possible.
Figure 4.16: Visual representation of the ten athlete’s recollection of fatigue over the ten
week period for all ten participants. The colors of each scale was not intentional, but the
previous color used in the app the participants used on the device.
By comparing each athletes recollection to the tracked fatigue for each individual visual­
ized in Figure 4.17, the recollection of development of fatigue clearly varies greatly from
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
27
==PAGE:34==
the tracked fatigue using the OBT.
Figure 4.17: Comparing the tracked fatigue to visualized collected fatigue. The variety of
similarities of recollected and tracked fatigue is wide across the group.
Generally, three types of patterns in the recollection of fatigue are prevalent in the group
by inspecting the visualizations in Figure 4.16:
• Linear (A05, A07, A10: Athletes A07 and A10 recollect their fatigue as near­constant.
Athlete A05 recollects his fatigue as linearly declining, despite a peak.
• Single peak (A01, A06, A08, A09): Athletes A01, A06, A08 and A09 illustrate a
singular peak in either fatigue or freshness at a specific point during the experiment,
with Athlete A06 also having a near linear graph with a peak halfway through the
experiment. Athlete A05 does, despite a near­linear recollection of fatigue, recollect
a peak in fatigue in the first week of the experiment.
• Volatile (A02, A04): Athletes A02 and A04 recollect their fatigue as very volatile,
ranging from 1 to 5.5 within the same week for athlete A02.
Athlete A03 visualizes two distinct peaks during his training, making him a single outlier
from the three groups identified from the retrospective patterns.
4.3.2
Insights from the post­experiment interviews
As seen in the previous section, the recollection of fatigue varied greatly from the track­
ing of fatigue during the period. In order to investigate how the tracking were made by
the group as an entity, the semi­structured interviews will supplement the tracking and
recollections. The interviews were analyzed using a thematic content analysis to extract
common themes in regards to the tracking.
Utilizing the OBT to track over a ten week period
Generally, the athletes did not express concerns or issues with utilizing the OBT over ten
weeks. The ten week period required all athletes to charge the device multiple times,
with one athlete having failed to do so. Some athletes expressed the experience as “fun”
[A01, A05] and “interesting to gather reflections” [A05]. The device was “intuitive due to the
vibrations”, and despite being questioned directly no athletes experienced frustration or
similar to not being able to inspect their ratings during the period. Due to the design of the
experiment, all athletes were left uninformed regarding their frequency and magnitude of
28
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:35==
trackings in order to gather recollections without bias of knowledge. No athletes requested
to change ratings during the period, nor requested changes in retrospect.
Converting emotions into the Samn­Perelli scale
Generally, no athletes expressed concerns or issues with converting their experience of
fatigue to a value of the Samn­Perelli scale using the OBT. Only one athlete expressed
that the scale was ”too granular” [A05] for his liking, and would have felt more confident
in mapping his feeling exactly using a scale with less levels.
Baseline for fatigue from the start of the experiment and awareness of being
tracked
Four of the ten athletes expressed reflections of previous ratings when determining spe­
cific ratings during the experiment. Two athletes expressed that they remembered “setting
a baseline” [A02, A07] from the first set of rating. The athletes reflected on various meth­
ods to convert emotions into a value using the OBT. Further two athletes expressed they
reflected on previous ratings [A05, A10] in order to assess whether they should maintain
their previous rating or “go one up or down” [A10], with the number of ratings being con­
sidered varying. Some athletes expressed that they stayed very close to a set range [A07]
they identified well with, and did not recollect experiencing major swings.
During the post experiment interview, 3 of the 10 athletes explicitly mentioned an aware­
ness of being monitored. The awareness was settled in various manors. Athlete A07 ex­
pressed indications of adjustment if she felt a rating was not properly reflecting how she
felt shortly after having rated, specifically considering the ratings given prior to a workout:
”If I, for instance, had reported a two but felt I was even fresher after having completed
a run, I contemplated if I should rate lower to reflect that I was fresher than the previous
rating or if I should consider it as an isolated rating”. Athlete A04 mentioned that he was
very aware of the data being inspected throughout the period ”I wanted to be sure that my
ratings were actually a reflection of how I felt that day, so if I had reported low during the
day I thought about getting the average up”.
Despite being briefed initially and reminded during the protocol of the experiment that each
reflection should be an individual reflection, is is athletes did consider the general overview
of their fatigue over the individual ratings. This is to be expected with an experiment of
monitoring individuals who are aware of said monitoring [14], and may have impacted the
trackings from the athletes.
Recollection of fatigue
Reflections on recollection of fatigue was gathered by initially asking questions regarding
their overall feeling during the period, and narrowing in on specific points mentioned.
Then, the athletes drew their recollection as a line on the Samn Perelli scale in a similar
graph as their trackings. The visualization was then questioned, with focus on peaks
and tendencies. After having shown the participants the actual trackings and compared
them to their drawing, the athletes were questioned more specifically regarding either
differences or similarities in the two points of data. Seven athletes recollected swings or
peaks in fatigue due to specific factors they easily recollected, with the remaining three
reporting general stability both verbally and visually with their drawing. The reasoning for
the seven however, varied greatly:
• Athlete A01 expressed that he was “severely overtrained” during the end of the
training period.
• Athlete A02 took a long time drawing his recollection. He expressed high levels of
fatigue during periods of night shifts, with lower levels on holidays or lower periods
of work (the participants’ night shifts were often longer than 12 hours).
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
29
==PAGE:36==
• Athlete A03 expressed that he was the most tired during the two periods when he
trained most heavily, with lower ratings before, after and in between.
• Athlete A04 expressed general swings, due to being less fatigued whilst on vacation.
• Athlete A05 expressed he felt “tired initially, but got more and more fresh the better
shape he got into”.
• Athlete A06 felt most fatigued over a short period of time over the summer due to
personal reasons
• Athlete A09 was severely tired over a short period during the summer, and ex­
pressed no thoughts regarding the periods before and after.
The 7 athletes mentioned their reasoning for their peaks or tendencies in recollection
swiftly during the interview after having visualised their fatigue. Upon expressing the rea­
soning, the athletes were questioned regarding if he or she was certain of the steepness of
the curve around the peak and the exact value of the extremity to ensure they were actual
reflections of how they recollected their tiredness on the Samn­Perelli scale. For athlete
A02 and A05, the graph was altered slightly following the questioning of extremities and
tendencies.
4.3.3
Summary on general patterns from the qualitative analysis
Comparing the tracked fatigue from Figure 4.10 with the recollected fatigue in Figure 4.16,
each set differs visually. Generally, the recollection of fatigue from the athletes can be
divided into three groups of similar patterns: linear, peak or volatile. Seven of the ten
athletes also explicitly recollected a specific reasoning for their development of fatigue.
In the following section, we will focus on three athletes (A01, A03, A05) who recollected
their fatigue significantly being affected by a reasoning, as well as an athlete (A07) who
recollected her fatigue very close to tracked recollection by supplementing their two track­
ings and recollections with insights found in the post experiment interview. For each of
the four cases, we will inspect the tracked measures of fatigue, sleep and training com­
pared to the recollected fatigue, reasoning and other insights from the post experiment
interview to further understand reasons to why or how the recollection differs from the
tracked fatigue.
30
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:37==
5
Case studies
In this section, we will explore four athletes and their explore their recollected experiences
compared to trackings of fatigue. These cases were selected based on their post­race
interviews, as well as the dataset they provided during the experiment. Athlete A03, A01,
A05 expressed significant reasoning in their recollection of fatigue. Athlete A07 on the
other hand expressed no significant recollection of swings or changes in her fatigue, com­
pared to the other participants. Her recollection was however an extremely close match
to the actual tracked levels of fatigue during the ten week period, and she furthermore
expressed insights and reflections between her recollection of fatigue and utilization of
the scale during the process. Each of the athlete visualized their recollection of fatigue in
distinctly different patterns from one another.
For each of the athletes, we will initially compare their tracked fatigue to the tracked met­
rics to provide an overview of whether the subjective experience of fatigue is correlated
with any of the two objective measures. We will then investigate the difference between
recollected and tracked fatigue using the OBT, as well as the objective measures. The
comments and points made in the interview will be included in relevant parts of the case to
supplement the inspected patterns and findings, or the lack thereof. As with the previous
section, the tracked and recollected feeling of fatigue will be moved freely on the y­axis
to match the patterns identified.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
31
==PAGE:38==
5.1
Case 1: A03
Athlete A03 was the male athlete recruited with the highest level of experience competing
in running at high national levels, having competed multiple times at the national cham­
pionships at 5km and 10km. The Copenhagen Half Marathon 2023, the race he trained
for in this experiment, was his first attempt at competing at the national championships at
the half marathon distance, despite having completed multiple half marathons with times
faster than 1:15. He initially set his goal at below 1:10, but adjusted the goal multiple times
throughout the period of training and settled at 1:08 with five weeks of training left.
A03 described himself as “disciplines towards his training” upon recruitment. He aims at
completing the training prescribed very diligently, and trusts that this will get him close to
the goal he and his coach have settled upon without over straining.
The athlete completed the weeks of training very close to the training plan he was pre­
scribed, with only slight adjustments during vacation.
Inspecting his weekly mileage, it is clear that he upon the initial increase in mileage ex­
perienced a further slight increase prior to going on vacation in the middle of August.
The athlete’s progression does not follow the Peak­Load­Taper model [1] exactly, but the
general progressions and decrease in mileage are prevalent.
Figure 5.1: Rolling aggregation of previous seven days running in distance for athlete
A03.
Inspecting the athletes amounts of sleep, he stayed consistent within 7 and 9 hours with
no noticeable peaks. The athlete tracked 82.96% of the optimum number of nights of
sleep during the period.
Figure 5.2: Rolling average of previous seven days sleep for athlete A03.
32
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:39==
Inspecting the athlete A03’s frequency and consistency of tracking fatigue, the athlete
also remained consistent with tracking throughout the period in line with his trackings of
sleep. He logged 84.93% of all tracking expected and remained consistent in tracking
throughout the period.
(a) Frequency of tracking for athlete A03.
(b) Distribution of ratings for athlete A03. He uti­
lized all levels of the scale except 7 throughout
the period.
Figure 5.3: Athlete A03’s consistency and frequency of tracking.
Inspecting athlete A03’s tracking of fatigue he reported close to consistent levels of fatigue,
considering a very broad usage of the spectrum of the scale. The athlete utilized all levels
except 7 throughout the period.
Figure 5.4: seven day average of ratings with Bollinger bands to illustrate distribution of
scale usage for athlete A03.
As seen on Figure 5.4, athlete A03 utilized various levels of the scale throughout the entire
period of tracking. From Figure 5.4 it can be seen that his rating of fatigue throughout the
period compared to Figure 5.1 and 5.2, respectively, remains consistent and unaffected
by strain and adaptation throughout the period. No swings occur in reported fatigue com­
pared to the strain and fatigue throughout the period.
In the post experiment interview, the athlete recollected his fatigue with significantly more
swings, however. The athlete visualized his fatigue with two peaks ­ one initially when
building his training load, followed by a dip whilst on vacation before peaking again upon
arriving home and settling back into training. He then visualized a dip in fatigue based
on his tapering towards the race itself. The slight increase at the very conclusion of the
experiment was reasoned with the last tracking of fatigue for a workout during the exper­
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
33
==PAGE:40==
iment ­ a severe “all out rating”. Athlete A03 was the only athlete ti visualize two distinct
peaks in his visual recollection of fatigue.
Figure 5.5: Post experiment visualisation of fatigue for athlete A03.
Comparing the reported fatigue and recollected fatigue from athlete A03 shows a gap
between the two data sets. The first peak he recollected is partially visible, however not
peaking but in the form of smaller peaks with a decrease to lower levels of fatigue at the
start of August. However, the athlete directly mentions his reasoning for visualizing his
recollected fatigue peaking twice as being due to “many kilometers”. He remembers this
period as a period where he was “running all the time” and having “harder workouts”. The
second peak specifically was due to “the two hardest workouts, they required all of me”.
These recollected peaks are not tracked using the OBT.
Figure 5.6: Post experiment visualisation of fatigue for athlete A03 visualized with tracked
fatigue. The first peak at the start of the experiment can be seen to some degree, whereas
the second peak at mid August differs from the tracked fatigue using the OBT.
Comparing athlete A03s recollected fatigue with rolling average of kilometers shows an
opposite pattern of that found in Figure 4.14. Despite recollecting specific dates and
periods of training, the athlete illustrated highest levels of fatigue whilst training the least,
and vice versa. Athlete A03’s recollection of fatigue prior to being shown his tracking with
the OBT and even after having been shown his metrics compared to his recollection is
based on a strategy for recollection. The athlete seems to map his recollection of fatigue
based on the strain undertaken. Upon showing the athlete his distribution of kilometers,
and recollected fatigue, he expressed this was unintentional. The peaks should be where
he ran the most, as this was indeed when he recollected feeling most fatigues. This
underlines his recollection as based on kilometers, being very tired in the periods where
he was ”running all the time”.
34
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:41==
(a) Post experiment visualisation of fatigue for
athlete A03 visualized with tracked kilometers.
(b) Distribution of ratings for athlete A03. He uti­
lized all levels of the scale except 7 throughout
the period.
Figure 5.7: Athlete A03’s consistency and frequency of tracking.
Furthermore for the second peak he explicitly recollects his two hardest workouts as rea­
soning’s for the higher recollected feelings of fatigue. As shown in Figure 5.6, this peak
is not tracked. This indicates that athlete A03 experiences the Peak­End Rule [21] at this
specific instance of recollection. He explicitly recollects these two workouts as incredibly
strenuous, and following also recollects the period around both workouts with a feeling of
fatigue.
Evidently, athlete A03 recollects his experience of fatigue during the training to his race
as a function of how much he ran mixed with recollection of the hardest moments during
his training.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
35
==PAGE:42==
5.2
Case 2: A01
Athlete A01 had competed once at the national championships at the event last year, but
had no other experiences with racing at national level. Upon discussing his previous ex­
periences and results, it became clear he had experienced a fast increase in performance
at the distance over the last years by training hard periodically for the similar events in
prior years. In 2020, he ran 1:20, 2021 1:14 and in 2022 1:11 and thereby close to the
national levels. He was not yet set on a well­defined goal for the race upon starting the
experiment, since he had experienced radical improvements whilst training hard over the
last couple of years, but aimed to compete below 1:10. During the experiment, he altered
the goal slightly to faster than 1:09 and 1:08 ­ which would result in four minutes faster
than his previous attempt and potentially top 10 national level.
The athlete described himself as “thriving in working hard”, and not always following the
program prescribed by his coach explicitly but rather using it as “a guideline”. If he felt like
pushing harder or running another workout than prescribed to get company in training, he
would.
The athlete did not meet his goal at the Copenhagen Half Marathon. He set out to compete
towards with the 1:09­group on the day, but “bunked” around ⅔into the race. He blamed
the heat initially, but upon questioning further into the fatigue and period he expressed
that he might have even overtrained from training too much.
The overtraining coming from running too much compared to previous periods of training
might be illustrated in the high peaks of weekly mileage in August. Inspecting his training,
he maintained a high weekly mileage without too many swings and sustained weekly
mileage of over 80km a week. His rolling average is not following the build­peak­taper
model as seen in Figure 3.4 completely.
Figure 5.8: Rolling aggregation of previous seven days running in distance for athlete
A01.
Unfortunately, the athlete only tracked 24.83% of sleep and the amount of data does not
provide sufficient foundation to visualize and conclude upon.
The athlete also had a low frequency of tracking with 34.39 of all expected tracking being
recorded. The athlete maintained a high level of tracking initially, but dropped following
the first week.
This provides infeasible data to provide conclusions to whether his tracking of fatigue
compares to recollection and tracked data.
36
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:43==
(a) Frequency of tracking for athlete A01.
(b) Distribution of ratings for athlete A01.
Figure 5.9: The athlete’s usage of the OBT during the ten week experiment.
Inspecting his tracked fatigue in Figure 5.10, we see the athlete mostly tracked 1 initially
in the experiment, and only ratings of 5 or higher in less than 4% of all instances. Based
on the consistency of tracking seen in Figure 5.9a, comparison between visualization of
recollected fatigue and experienced fatigue is only possible in the first two weeks of the
experiment, and with vague data foundation in the last two weeks.
Figure 5.10: seven day average of ratings with Bollinger bands to illustrate distribution of
scale usage for athlete A01.
During the post experiment interview, he did however express significant recollection of
fatigue during the period.
A01 expressed that he initially felt good whilst tracking, but over summer became over
trained. This was not diagnosed, but he expressed he was “totally destroyed” and could
barely “get out the door (to run implied)”. He tried to push through it throughout the period,
but felt increasingly tired. He blamed his lower level of performance for the overtraining.
The athlete visualized the fatigue he experienced as low initially, until half way into the
period steadily increasing linearly to around 5. The only exception was a stabilization
around week 9 of the training, where he felt the effects of running less mileage.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.11: Post experiment visualisation of fatigue for athlete A01.
The athlete also expressed his fatigue peaked upon racing. As described, the athlete
has provided infeasible data to compare his patterns of fatigue with recollected fatigue,
and said patterns with the tracked amounts of strain and adaptation. The athlete does,
however, express his fatigue as peaking at the end, and all points leading up to this peak
during the ten week period as reflections on this level of fatigue. The athlete also clearly
expresses a specific reasoning for the rapid increase in feeling of fatigue. 5.12.
Figure 5.12: Post experiment visualisation of fatigue for athlete A01 compared to tracked
fatigue.
From the data points tracked using the OBT, we can conclude based on the limited amount
of trackings that no ratings in the last five weeks exceeded 4, with only a single rating of
five. Keeping in mind that these weeks less than 20% of expected tracking were recorded,
we can conclude that the feeling of fatigue averaging at four and five and increasing is
not reflected as seen in Figure 5.11.
A point of discussion of the absence of data points in this period is that the athletes levels
of recollected fatigue could impact forgetting to track, since some athletes expressed that
they forgot to track when they were tired or stressed.
His recollection of fatigue does however fit with a case of the Peak­End Rule [21]. The
athlete clearly remembers the high levels of fatigue recollected at the end, and maps the
entire ten week period focusing on performance on that. The underlying reason for the
high levels of recollected fatigue may have come from the peaks in weekly mileage in
August, which could be reasoning for experiencing some degrees of overtraining.
38
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:45==
5.3
Case 3: A05
Athlete A05 was another male competing at previous events at close to the highest level
nationality, as A03. Athlete A05 had competed multiple times at the national champi­
onships at the half marathon in Copenhagen over the last years, and had run below 1:10
at the same event last year. The athlete had experience at multiple distances over the
last years, ranging from a marathon at below 2:30 to a 5k close to 15:00, both being per­
formances at very high national levels. His goal for the Copenhagen Half Marathon 2023
was to compete, in the sense of prioritizing being the fastest of his team over a specific
time. In regards to time, he wanted to at least better his best performance from 2022, and
hopefully run below 1:09.
The athlete followed a program with more weekly miles than the other athletes, due to
following a slightly different methodology prescribed by a different coach as well as the
experience he has on the distance. He was identified as the most experienced within the
group in regards to competing at the highest level at the half marathon. He expressed that
he tries his best to complete the training program, but has no desire to do it completely
as prescribed. Personal circumstances of family and night shifts working in the health
sector determines that he can not follow a regular routine of sleep, and he expressed a
prioritization of sleep and adaptation over diligently following the workouts prescribed.
Based on the initial interview at recruitment, as well as the post experiment interview, it
was evident that the athlete’s knowledge of the human physiology in regards to optimizing
endurance performance was at the forefront of the reflections on his performance. He
“enjoyed” the process of quantifying fatigue on the scale, since he could reflect on it with
physiological knowledge he possessed from his occupation and education.
The athlete did not meet his expected goal, and reasoned the performance with the heat
on race day. He felt “well” and was in “perfect shape”, but he did not have the performance
in him on the day. The athlete struggled slightly with a non­running related injury in his
hip, which prevented him from pushing as hard as he wanted during training and on race
day.
Inspecting the athletes training, there are clearly some swings in accumulated rolling
seven day strain to the body. The seven day average does, however, consistently stay
above 50km over the previous seven days. His average over the entire period is 74km
as an aggregated sum of the previous seven days.
Figure 5.13: Rolling aggregation of previous seven days running in distance for athlete
A01.
The athlete was not concerned with the fact that he had not held a consistent seven day
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
39
==PAGE:46==
rolling strain throughout the training period. These swings are “normal”, and he insisted
on feeling ready on race day to perform at the level he intended post race. He had trained
as intended, based on the circumstances of his life.
According to the athlete post the experiment, the scale was “too granular for his liking”
but provided “easily understandable translations of feeling with the attached examples”.
Diving into specific tracking from recollection, being the first tracking and last couple of
days, the athlete expressed that he “read the scale thoroughly once, then remembered
the key words for each steps” to identify where to place his fatigue. He expressed that
the device was easy to use, and he found the translation from emotion to number using
the OBT “not noteworthy difficult, just a frame of mind to get into”.
The athlete tracked 77.84% of all expected tracking throughout the period. The athlete
utilized the entire spectrum of the scale, with most ratings in the lower level of the scale.
He only tracked 7 once, being on the day of the race.
After the experiment, the athlete reported that he had felt exhausted the days before the
race being the reason for the high rating of 7. When questioned, the athlete responded
that the experiment had forced him into a degree of self reflexivity regarding “am I ever a
7, and when am I a 1”.
(a) Frequency of tracking for athlete A05.
(b) Distribution of ratings for athlete A05.
Figure 5.14: The athlete’s usage of the OBT during the ten week experiment
Inspecting the athlete’s tracking over time in Figure 5.15, he utilized the spectrum of the
scale throughout the entire period, with most ratings of 6 being in the early part of the
training period. The athlete starts with lower ratings including multiple ones, with his av­
erage fatigue ratings inclining from 1 to 3.5 throughout the first three weeks. His average
fatigue ratings remains consistent for the following 2 1/2 weeks, before dropping to a new
consistent average of 2 for the remaining four weeks. The athlete utilises a broad spec­
trum of the scale throughout the entire duration of the experiment, especially with ratings
1­4.
40
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.15: seven day average of ratings with bollinger bands to illustrate distribution of
scale usage for athlete A05.
The athlete provided consistently high levels of tracking throughout the period as seen
in Figure 5.14a, which enables an analysis of patterns of weekdays of levels of fatigue.
Based on the visual representation in Figure 5.15, the athlete felt fresh on most Sundays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, with two clear outliers (Friday in the last
week and Sunday in week 32). The athlete generally reported higher levels of fatigue
on most Mondays, as well as the Saturdays in the first weeks of the training block. The
athlete expressed that he usually did his hard workouts on Mondays, Wednesdays and
Saturdays which could be the reasoning for high levels on Mondays and Saturdays. The
rating of 7 on the last Friday of the experiment was due to “personal reasons”.
Figure 5.16: Ratings of fatigue binned in weekdays over the ten week period for athlete
A05.
Upon post experiment interview, the athletes own remembrance of his fatigue over the pe­
riod was expressed graphically prior to showing him his trackings. The athlete described
his recollection of the experience of fatigue over the period as “exhausted initially, but I
got more and more fresh the better shape I got in”. The athlete was questioned whether
this feeling of freshness due to being “in shape” was also reflected on his tracking not
around workouts to his recollection, to which he expressed “definitely, being in shape for
me just makes me feel more fresh all around”. For the athlete at hand, clearly he reflects
his feeling of being “in shape” and more specifically not being in shape unto how fatigued
he recollects feeling.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.17: Recollection of fatigue for athlete A05 layered on his trackings of fatigue
during the experiment. The athlete’s original visualisation of recollected fatigue without
tracked fatigue can be seen in Figure 4.16.
As seen in Figure 5.17, the athlete clearly recollects his fatigue differs slightly from the
tracked fatigue using the OBT at the start of the experiment. The athlete does drop rapidly
in average ratings of fatigue at the midpoint of the experiment, but the drop and devel­
opment of fatigue during the experiment is not linearly declining. The linear trackings at
the end of the experiment are on the contrary recollected perfectly in the athletes visual
representation.
The athlete reasoned his development in recollected fatigue with the sense of “being in
better shape”, which maps with an instance of the Peak End Rule [21]. Clearly, the athlete
recollects some degree of high fatigue initially, and then a feeling of being increasingly
more fresh consistently throughout the period thereafter. No such peak is directly preva­
lent in the data gathered from tracking with the OBT, except for the patterns of high fatigue
around his key workouts on Mondays and Saturdays.
Upon being presented his actual tracked data, the athlete felt disbelief in the difference
between tracked and recollected fatigue over the period, specifically the great amounts
of lower ratings initially and the slowly build of fatigue initially.
Athlete A05 shows recollection based on a single feeling, or recollection, of the entire
period of training and visualizes the entire period based on this reasoning.
42
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:49==
5.4
Case 4: A07
Athlete A07 was the athlete recruited with the highest level of accomplishments nationally
across both genders. She won bronze at the national championships in the Half Marathon
in 2022, and silver at the Marathon in 2023. She was recruited despite not prioritizing
the half marathon as her biggest goal of the season, being a marathon in December.
The prioritization of the race, specifically the maintaining her positioning in the national
rankings, was deemed sufficient as a goal for the period to include her in the participants.
The athlete is praised by her coach as following her training extremely diligently, never
pushing too hard or missing a workout. She furthermore describes herself as thriving in
“crossing things off”, in the sense of completing the work prescribed ­ nothing more or
less.
The athlete met her goal, by going under the 1:17 time with 3 seconds and retaking her
bronze medal from the year prior. She completed all her training throughout the period,
with almost no missed training or workouts. She competed at track events throughout the
summer to stay sharp, but all as elements leading up to the half marathon.
The athlete completed the highest level of tracking completed by any participant in the ex­
periment, with 97.37% of all expected tracking being recorded. She furthermore recorded
94.28% of all sleeps with her running watch, the second highest of all participants. She
therefore provided an almost complete data set across the three parameters being tracked
during the experiment for analysis.
The athlete maintained a very high weekly mileage throughout the period, consistently
staying above 75km aggregated sum over seven days, except for a planned period of low
training leading into the last hard block.
Figure 5.18: Rolling aggregation of previous seven days running in distance for athlete
A07.
She also maintained high levels of sleep, staying above 7 hours on a seven day rolling
average, with a period of higher levels whilst on vacation.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.19: Rolling average of previous seven days sleep for athlete A07.
Inspecting her ratings from the OBT, she mainly utilized 3 and 4 throughout the period,
representing more than 80% of all her ratings. 7 was not utilized, and less than 1% of all
her tracking were 6. At the other end of the spectrum, less than 5% of all tracking were 1.
Figure 5.20: Distribution of fatigue ratings for athlete A07.
Visualizing her tracking over the ten week period, the pattern of most ratings being 3 and
4 is visually evident. The changes in fatigue are therefore not as grand as the other cases
prior to this, but still some changes are clear. The single rating of 6 is also visible as an
outlier, and the majority of 1s are recorded in the first half of the period.
Figure 5.21: seven day average of fatigue ratings for athlete A07.
44
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:51==
Visualizing her tracking binned as individual days, the pattern of most days being either 3
and 4 is also clear. Three outliers are visible, with two Saturdays and a Monday. The ath­
lete also completes most of her hard workouts on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays
as athlete A05, but there are not enough outliers to conclude on this.
Figure 5.22: Fatigue ratings binned as weekdays over the ten week period for athlete
A07.
At the post marathon interview, the athlete mentioned multiple times how she “enjoyed re­
flecting” on her fatigue, and she would even “consider continuing, without using the data”.
The athlete reflected on her joy and the insights she found upon reflecting on how she
felt throughout the period. Prior to being shown the data she tracked, she remembered
having tracked most ratings around 2, 3 and 4. She “generally felt the same” throughout
the period, and if she felt she was “5 or 6” throughout the period, she deemed that this
would represent her being too tired.
When visualizing her fatigue graphically, she drew a very steady line with small increase
initially at week 2­4, upon settling to close to 3 for the remainder of time tracked. The
average, however, maintained between 3 and 4.
Figure 5.23: Recollection of fatigue over the ten week period for athlete A07.
Keeping in mind that the visualization of recollected fatigue was drawn prior to being
shown actual values tracked, the similarities are very significant and detailed. Athlete
A07 visualized the small increase in the first period, before settling to a close to steady
average the last six weeks.
The athlete did not express any specific reasoning for the increase, and following stability
of fatigue. She had no external reasoning as the other cases had for remembering a peak,
but simply recalled feeling “a bit more tired before vacation”. The average is a function
of a balance between the 3 and 4 she tracked during the period, as both were utilized to
a close to equal frequency ­ she did not simply settle on feeling as a certain point of the
scale for a long period of time, but varied mainly between the two.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.24: Recollection of fatigue over the ten week period compared to tracked fatigue
for athlete A07.
It is to be noted that athlete A07 utilized the ratings of 3 and 4 in 85% of all ratings,
which is also visible in Figure 5.24. This might make for easier reasoning to recollect
an average, but as mentioned an equally significant finding is the small increases and
decreases in fatigue the athlete recollected vividly during the experiment and visualized
during recollection. This shows a very high level of recollection of fatigue, and in contrast
to the other athletes explored in the previous three cases, the recollection is not based
on an experience or feeling and reflected upon. Rather, she seems to express the feeling
linearly as time has elapsed.
5.5
Summary of case studies
The athletes A01, A03 and A05 recollected their fatigue distinctively differently from their
tracked fatigue. They all reasoned their recollection with reasons related to training and
strain, and for athletes A01 and A03 the recollection was based on memories of individual
events of training indicating different aspects of altercations in memory based on the ex­
perience of the specific event; for athlete A01, he was certain he had pushed too hard and
was therefore overly tired and potentially even overtrained, and therefore got increasingly
more tired near the end. Athlete A03 recollected his fatigue as a function of the strain he
had applied to the body, in the form of training, with a dip when he was on vacation and
ran less. Athlete A05 recollected his fatigue declining as he got in better shape, resulting
in a recollection of relatively high fatigue initially in the project and low near the race itself.
All three cases indicate that the recollection of fatigue can not be used as a certain method
to communicate exact changes in fatigue looking back at a period of time.
Athlete A07 does however showcase near identical recollection of her fatigue compared
to tracked fatigue. Despite also indicating reflecting on her fatigue over time, and thereby
not certainly tracking individual data points, this case illustrates that for some individuals
the recollection may be identical as tracked data.
Based on the four cases, and underscored by the variance in both trackings, recollections,
frequency of trackings and consistency of trackings, it can be concluded that EMA tracking
of fatigue using the Samn­Perelli scale does not certainly provide a distinctly different
data set than a recollection based on the setup used for this experiment. It does however
provide a distinctively different and valuable dataset to supplement classic assessments
of fatigue used in an coach/athlete relationship.
46
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:53==
6
Future Work and Limitations
6.1
Limitations
In this section, the limitations of the project at hand will be discussed briefly with the
following effects and possible methods of improving or avoiding said limitations. Following
this, we will review some potential options for future work within the scope of the project.
Small potential sample size
The experiment was conducted with ten individuals, who were selected on a strict set of
criteria limiting the total possible participants to less than 200 nation wide (top 100 male
and female). Furthermore, the sample size was limited due to the time span of the project
and only one individual handling the experiment. The extend of briefing, communicating
and especially interviewing and processing data limited the possible size of set of par­
ticipants. Optimally, all athletes should have been following similar training regiments
and competing towards more comparable standards for each gender. This would provide
the opportunity for comparison between athletes in regards to following the program and
potentially variations of fatigue thereof.
Forgetting to track
Unfortunately, a significant amount of tracking were not tracked by the participants. For a
majority of the participants, the consistency dropped radically following the first few weeks
as seen in Figure 4.5. Based on the post­experiment interviews and the check­ins during
the experiment, this was due to “forgetfulness”, with either bringing the device along for
training or vacations or simply “forgetting I was part of the study” and in some instances
“forgetting to charge the device”. Some degree of forgetting to track was to be expected
to some degree based on previous findings from work with the OBT [26].
With only 50% of the participants tracking consistently high frequency of trackings, this
led to a very limited foundation of data to conclude on general patterns from a already
limited sample size of participants. This also led to the further focus on individual cases
and qualitative data from interviews.
Inaccuracy of sleep monitoring and incoherence of sensors from running watches
The athletes were required to utilize their personal running watch to track sleep and work­
outs. This enabled no costs of acquiring equipment for the participants, but also limited
the accuracy and comparability of data. A proposed setup for collecting better sleep data
will be presented in the Future Work­section.
Limited time for analysis due to set date of race
With the time between finish date of the experiment and hand­in of the project being four
weeks, the time to analyse and present the data was very limited. The limiting factor in
this setup was the Half Marathon itself, being a common goal to utilize for the project
rather than a date set by the project itself. Structuring a project with athletes wanting to
compete at the highest level with another goal in this time frame would be an insurmount­
able challenge, since they are aiming to compete with other athletes at the determined
yearly event. The set date limited the time available for re­interviewing the athletes, and
made the period of collecting the data from the participant’s OBTs and interviewing very
condensed. If it was possible to set the date of the race itself to optimize the time of the
project, it would have been beneficial to have the race in early August. The setup for the
experiment and pilot project was ready in early May. This would have given more time
and freedom to further investigate data and explore the recollection of fatigue, rather than
follow the patterns found early on.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
47
==PAGE:54==
6.2
Future Work
The following section will propose a set of aspects have have been identified to include
and implement in future work beyond aiming to resolve the limitations listed above.
6.2.1
Testing a different protocol
As visualized in Figure 4.5 for the group as an entity and Figure 4.6 for the individuals,
the frequency and consistency of trackings using the OBT dived following the initial two
weeks. As discussed previously, this may be due to the athletes not being shown re­
sults from their efforts, as their ratings and frequency was to remain disclosed prior to
recollection.
If the study was to be carried out in another format, it would be beneficial to consider a
setup where the athletes were shown some degree of progress or results from their effort
during the time span of the experiment to increase the chances of sustained higher levels
of trackings.
6.2.2
Implementing momentary fatigue measuring in training
Implementing fatigue monitoring using a device similar to the OBT to quantify fatigue in
moments for athletes undergoing levels of strain similar to the experiment would provide
value to a coach and athlete alike. The data should be reviewed by the coach frequently
to review with the athlete, and to understand how fatigue is developing. The data should
be supplemented with qualitative data whilst reviewing the data, to understand how the
athlete reflects on the period since last review. Frequent check­ins with the athlete would
also prevent cases of the athletes being unaware of not having a functioning device for
longer periods, as seen with athlete A02.
Frequent reviews and conversations with the athlete could possibly prevent the drop in
frequency of trackings seen in the experiment at hand, since the athletes will be aware
of the reason and implications of tracking their fatigue to prevent periods of fatigue and
potentially fatigue.
6.2.3
Adding additional measures to compare to tracked fatigue
Beyond implementing a similar setup as the one reviewed in this thesis, the setup could
benefit from more aspects of adaptation to quantify if other parameters of the athlete’s
lifestyle may affect swings in fatigue. In this experiment, endurance performance has
been simplified to training and sleep, being two of the most vital aspects of this balance.
There are, however, other key aspects that should not be overlooked by the athlete and
coach, and where non­optimal decisions or patterns could lead to overtraining or injuries.
Blood glucose and diet
Another key aspect in adaptation is nutrition, or the lack thereof. Besides improving en­
durance by adapting more strain over time, weight loss is a proven method to rapidly
increase running performance, and it has been found that losing 5 pounds will increase
running performance by 1.4 seconds per mile [28]. The quest to get as light as possi­
ble, whilst still performing is therefore another key aspects for athletes aiming to optimize
performance ­ but reaching by not providing the body proper nutrition to rebuild muscle
and refuel the cardiovascular system can quickly lead to malnourishment whilst running
many hours each week. Malnourishment for runners is a prevalent reason for injuries and
overtraining[29], and can show itself as fatigue early on. Multiple sensors are available to
track diet and blood glucose levels. Tracking of an athlete’s diet is implemented in many
apps, or could easily be configured using a manual diary. All these solutions do, however,
require more extensive work of the test individuals and are subject to estimation errors in
quantity or content of food intake.
48
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:55==
Furthermore, carbohydrates are the fuel for endurance athletes, and the availability of
carbohydrates in the body is another vital aspect of ensuring optimum performance [30].
As described in the experiment setup, the athletes were briefed strictly in when to track
their experienced fatigue, and both the requirements in timing of tracking in regards to
before breakfast after waking and before consuming energy after a workout were to avoid
the effect of increase in freshness due to increase in blood sugar after a long period of
fasting or depleting energy in the body respectively.
Passive equipment in blood glucose equipment and setups to track daily calories and
macro­nutrients are commercially available, and would be of great value to implement in
a revisit of the experiment. Adding a blood glucose sensor with a timestamp would give
a clearer understanding of the correlation between low blood sugar and tiredness of the
athletes, as well as nutrition of the athlete over the entire span of the experiment.
Sleep stages and Heart Rate Variability to assess recovery
If the project to be redone with a broader scope, it would have been of great value to pro­
vide sensors that could quantify sleep stages and Heart Rate Variability (HRV) to better
investigate a correlation between experienced fatigue and fatigue expressed from phys­
iological parameters. As part of the experiment design, the runners were requested to
provide their own running watch to track workouts and sleep, which limited the compara­
ble metrics recorded for all individuals to the lowest number of metrics. Specifically, the
opportunity to track HRV which has been found to indicate how well recovered the body
is [8] would provide a further level of granularity of adaptation to inspect patterns between
tracked and recollected fatigue, and an objective metric of adaptation.
Some watches do claim the ability to tracks Heart Rate Variability, but has been found to
have too low accuracy [31]. Initially in the project, it was investigated and an aim of the
project to provide all athletes with industry­leading commercially available sleep trackers,
such as WHOOP, Oura or Beddit. This was however not possible, and is an obvious
improvement of quality of data to include if the project was revisited. Furthermore, a
sleep tracking device which does not require removal to charge such as a WHOOP would
most likely result in a greater percentage of sleep tracked during an experiment.
Multiple training cycles and investigating injuries
The project followed the athletes in three training cycles and an A race, all within one
training cycle. Luckily for the athletes, none of them experienced serious injuries that
lead to them having to abandon training or the race itself. Alongside increasing the scope
of the number of athletes, it would be of great interest to increase the time span of the
experiment to investigate all training cycles of a year including base training, A, B and
C races, and the period following the race [1]. Between 30% and 70% of all runners
experience an injury over the span of a year [9], and having the opportunity to investigate
whether a correlation between experienced fatigue, actual fatigue and sleep might lay the
foundation for providing a tool for preventing injuries.
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
49
==PAGE:56==
7
Conclusion
In the experiment described in this thesis, we have explored the difference between
tracked fatigue and recollected fatigue for a specific group of participants. We have used
the OBT to quantify fatigue using the Samn­Perelli scale for ten athletes training towards
the Copenhagen Half Marathon and from comparison with tracking of sleep and workouts,
a pattern indicating more strain being applied to the body could result in higher levels of fa­
tigue is prevalent. This conclusion is, however, based on a very narrow data foundation.
The ten athletes used the OBT at very varying degrees of frequency and consistency,
ranging from 4 athletes with very high levels of both and more than 80% of the optimum
amount of trackings being recorded to 3 athletes who recorded less than 25%. The us­
age varied greatly, and for the group as an entity dropped following the initial two weeks,
despite bi­weekly check­ins with the group and individuals. This may be due to not being
able to show the data or informed on the actual purpose of the project due to the exper­
iment design. All athletes did however express ease of using the OBT and Samn­Perelli
scale to track and quantify fatigue.
Comparing the quantitative with qualitative data from interviews conducted after the ex­
periment had unfolded, a majority of the athletes recollected their fatigue visually distinc­
tively differently from the tracked fatigue during the experiment. All of the athletes who
recollected their fatigue as having a peak or volatile tendencies had specific reasoning for
the peaks and swings, indicating some degree of Peak­End­Rule happening in the recol­
lection. Three of the athletes with significant peaks were investigated further using both
qualitative and quantitative data in a series of case studies, and it is explored to which
degree their recollection of fatigue varies greatly from the tracked data. For all three ath­
letes, the reasoning was grounded in knowledge around the risks and consequences of
applying strain to the body for an athlete training towards a specific goal. On the contrary,
another case study with one athlete who tracked 97.32% of the optimum amount of track­
ings was explored, and it was found that she recollected her fatigue extremely close to
the tracked fatigue.
The general patterns and four cases highlight that the recollection of fatigue can not be
deemed either different or matching the experience of fatigue tracked using an EMA de­
vice. For some athletes the recollection of fatigue and tracked fatigue varied greatly,
whereas for others the recollection and trackings were close to identical. Recollection of
changes in fatigue as a reaction to training were prevalent in the athletes reasoning’s,
despite the specific peaks not being prevalent in tracked data. It can be concluded that
each individuals trackings and recollection requires inspection and supplementation of
qualitative data to understand the fatigue for an individual applying strain to increase en­
durance sport, to ensure he or she does not exceed acceptable fatigue levels and risks
overtraining.
Lastly, this experiment provides multiple opportunities to either investigate general pat­
terns implementing more granular data of sleep or training, as well as other physiological
aspects of strain and adaptation, or a broader study with a grander sample size to provide
more conclusive results across all participants. Tracking fatigue using the OBT and the
Samn­Perelli scale is based on conclusions from the thesis deemed a valuable tool to bet­
ter assess fatigue over time for endurance athletes, which supplemented with qualitative
data can help prevent overtraining.
50
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Harvey Wallmann and James Rosania. An Introduction to Periodization Training
for the Triathlete. 2018. URL: https://journals.lww.com/nsca-scj/Citation/2001/
12000/An_Introduction_to_Periodization_Training_for_the.14.aspx. (accessed:
09.10.2023).
[2]
Brandon Roberts. Tapering and Peaking: Why and How. 2018. URL: https://www.
strongerbyscience.com/tapering/. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[3]
Janet Hamilton and Paul Sorace. TIME TO STEP IT UP! TRAINING FOR A HALF
MARATHON PERSONAL RECORD. 2018. URL: https://journals.lww.com/acsm-
healthfitness/fulltext/2018/03000/time_to_step_it_up__training_for_a_half_
marathon.7.aspx. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[4]
Michael J. Hamlin et al. The Effect of Sleep Quality and Quantity on Athlete’s Health
and Perceived Training Quality. 2021. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
3389/fspor.2021.705650/full. (accessed: 11.10.2023).
[5]
Dr. Michael Breus. What Happens During Sleep. 2023. URL: https://sleepdoctor.
com/sleep-faqs/what-happens-when-you-sleep/. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[6]
Jean­Philippe Chaput et al. Sleep timing, sleep consistency, and health in adults: a
systematic review. 2020. URL: https://cdnsciencepub.com/doi/full/10.1139/apnm-
2020-0032. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[7]
N S Simpson, E L Gibbs, and G O Matheson. Optimizing sleep to maximize per­
formance: implications and recommendations for elite athletes. 2016. URL: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27367265/. (accessed: 11.10.2023).
[8]
Spencer S H Roberts et al. Monitoring Effects of Sleep Extension and Restriction
on Endurance Performance Using Heart Rate Indices. 2021. URL: https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34711770/. (accessed: 11.10.2023).
[9]
W van Mechelen. Running injuries. A review of the epidemiological literature. 1992.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1439399/. (accessed: 11.10.2023).
[10]
Marie Vandekerckhove and Yu­Lin Wang. Sleep timing, sleep consistency, and
health in adults: a systematic review. 2020. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/32341948/. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[11]
R Budgett. Fatigue and underperformance in athletes: the overtraining syndrome.
2020. URL: https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/32/2/107.short. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[12]
Pritchard H. Effects and Mechanisms of Tapering in Maximizing Muscular Strength.
2015. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275036701_Effects_and_
Mechanisms_of_Tapering_in_Maximizing_Muscular_Strength. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[13]
Natalie Leah Solomon and Vlad Manea. Quantifying Energy and Fatigue: Classi­
fication and Assessment of Energy and Fatigue Using Subjective, Objective, and
Mixed Methods towards Health and Quality of Life. 2022. URL: https://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-94212-0_4. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[14]
A.J Dittner a, S.C Wessely b, and R.G Brown a. The assessment of fatigue: A prac­
tical guide for clinicians and researchers. 2003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/S0022399903003714. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[15]
Netzahualcóyotl Hernández and Jesús Favela. Chapter 9 ­ Assessing the Percep­
tion of Physical Fatigue Using Mobile Sensing. 2018. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780128121306000093. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
51
==PAGE:58==
[16]
Christina Röcke, Christiane A. Hoppmann, and Petra L. Klumb. Correspondence
Between Retrospective and Momentary Ratings of Positive and Negative Affect in
Old Age: Findings From a One­Year Measurement Burst Design. 2011. URL: https:
//academic.oup.com/psychsocgerontology/article/66B/4/411/587413. (accessed:
09.10.2023).
[17]
R. J. Thompson et al. Concurrent and prospective relations between attention to
emotion and affect intensity: An experience sampling study. 2011. URL: https://
psycnet.apa.org/record/2011-08955-001. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[18]
Frank H. Wilhelm a and Paul Grossman b. Emotions beyond the laboratory: Theo­
retical fundaments, study design, and analytic strategies for advanced ambulatory
assessment. 2010. URL: https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2009- 04472- 007. (ac­
cessed: 09.10.2023).
[19]
Talya Miron­Shatz. Evaluating multiepisode events: Boundary conditions for the
peak­end rule. 2009. URL: https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2009-04472-007. (ac­
cessed: 09.10.2023).
[20]
Amy M. Do, Alexander V. Rupert, and George Wolford. Evaluations of pleasurable
experiences: The peak­end rule. 2008. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.
3758/PBR.15.1.96. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[21]
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Penguin, 2012. ISBN: 0141033576.
[22]
Saul Shiffman, Arthur A. Stone, and Michael R. Hufford. Ecological Momentary As­
sessment. 2017. URL: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.
3.022806.091415. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[23]
Carolyn E. Schwartz et al. The clinical significance of adaptation to changing health:
A meta­analysis of response shift. 2006. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.
1007/s11136-006-0025-9. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[24]
Gregory W Schrimsher and Katie Filtz. Assessment reactivity: Can assessment of
alcohol use during research be an active treatment? 2017. URL: https://www.
scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-79956287668&origin=resultslist&sort=plf-
f&src=s&sid=4617e9d958e8ba9d20d1f4526a7da586&sot=b&sdt=b&s=TITLE%
28assessment + AND + reactivity + can + assessment % 29 & sl = 36 & sessionSearchId =
4617e9d958e8ba9d20d1f4526a7da586. (accessed: 09.10.2023).
[25]
IATA. Common Protocol for Minimum Data Collection Variables in Aviation Opera­
tions. 2004. URL: https://www.iata.org/contentassets/5f976bb3ca2446f3a40e88b18dd61fbb/
common- protocol- for- minimum- data- collection- variables- in- aviation- ops.pdf. (ac­
cessed: 09.10.2023).
[26]
Tom H. van de Belt et al. Barriers to and Facilitators of Using a One Button Tracker
and Web­Based Data Analytics Tool for Personal Science: Exploratory Study. 2021.
URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/270617107/Belt2022_
Barriers_to_and_Facilitators_of_Using_a_One_Button_Tracker_and_Web_Based_
Data_Analytics_Tool_for_Personal_Science_Exploratory_Study.pdf. (accessed:
11.10.2023).
[27]
Ida Marie TP Arendt et al. Distinguishing between rumination and intrusive memo­
ries in PTSD usind a wearable self­tracking instrument. 2021. URL: https://backend.
orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/246645113/distinguishing_between_rumination_
and_intrusive_memories_in_ptsd_using_a_wearable_self_tracking_instrument_a_
proof_of_concept_case_study.pdf. (accessed: 11.10.2023).
[28]
K J Cureton et al. Effect of experimental alterations in excess weight on aerobic
capacity and distance running performance. 1978. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/723510/. (accessed: 11.10.2023).
52
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:59==
[29]
Martin Cupkacorresponding and Milan Sedliak. Hungry runners – low energy avail­
ability in male endurance athletes and its impact on performance and testosterone:
mini­review. 2023. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10388605/.
(accessed: 11.10.2023).
[30]
Fernando Mata et al. Carbohydrate Availability and Physical Performance: Physio­
logical Overview and Practical Recommendations. 2019. URL: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6566225/. (accessed: 11.10.2023).
[31]
Dean J. Miller, Charli Sargent, and Gregory D. Roach. A Validation of Six Wear­
able Devices for Estimating Sleep, Heart Rate and Heart Rate Variability in Healthy
Adults. 2022. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/16/6317/htm. (accessed:
11.10.2023).
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
53
==PAGE:60==
54
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:61==
A
Interview guide
Overdnet ­ hvordan gik selve løbet
• Nåede du dit mål, vi drøftede ved starten af perioden?
• Blev du skadet undervejs? Hvis ja, hvornår (kan ses i træningen)?
Individets følelse af træthed (konvertere følelse til skala via OBT)
• Hvad var din overordnede oplevelse af at tracke søvn med devicet?
• Hvordan konverterede du den følelse du havde til skalaen?
• Kan du huske hvordan du vurderede din første træthed? Hvordan kom du frem til
den værdi?
• Hvis du tænker tilbage på perioden generelt, hvordan valgte du hvad du skulle
tracke? Var det i momentet, eller var du sikker før? Tænkte du tilbage på dine
tidligere trackings (relativt)
• Hvis du tænker tilbage på en specifik tracking fra i lørdags, inden løbet. Kan du
huske hvad du trackede? Hvordan kom du frem til den værdi?
– Hvordan kendte du forskel på eksempelvis 3 eller 4?
– Skulle du genbesøge skalaen løbende?
– Synes du skalaen fungerede? Var der for mange trin? For få trin? Var det
svært med springende?
– Oplvelsen med at tracke (frekvens)
Hvordan var det at bruge trackeren?
• Hvordan synes du det var at skulle bruge den så frekvent?
• Hvis det skulle være på fast basis, skulle noget så være anderledes?
• Hvordan synes du det gik med at huske at få tracket?
• Hvordan vil du selv vurdere din frekvens ift at få tracket trætheden? Procentuelt?
Udviklingsmæssige (mere i starten, slutningen, det samme?)
• Indtastede du ratings ved en fejl?
Reflektioner om opdattelsen af træthed, og brugen af data
• Udviklede din egen opfattelse af træthed sig undervejs i forløbet? Lærte du noget?
• Kiggede du på dit data undervejs i dit træningsforløb? Anderledes end normalt?
• Kan jeg få dig til at tegne hvordan du tror din træthed har set ud? (Her har jeg en
Tom visualisering identisk med den jeg får ud af deres data med)
Vis data, og gå igennem det. Træningsmængde, søvnmængde og ratings. Fokus på
mønstre, gennemsnit, varians og frekvens.
• Hvad er dine umiddelbare tanker om de to grafer?
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
55
==PAGE:62==
• Synes du de mønstre du ser her ift hvor træt du har vurderet dig selv passer med
de tanker du har, når du tænker tilbage?
• Når du ser på din tegning af hvordan du husker det?
• Synes du se udsving du ser passer med det du husker fra perioden?
• Er din frekvens højere eller lavere end du havde troet?
Åben afslutning
• Er der andet du har lyst til at dele ift træningsforløbet og brugen af apparatet?
56
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:63==
B
Transcription of interviews
B.1
A01
Overdnet ­ hvordan gik selve løbet
Q: Nåede du dit mål, vi drøftede ved starten af perioden?
A: Nej, ikke helt desværre. Jeg løb et godt løb, men kunne ikke holde den pace jeg gerne
ville. Det var varmt. 
Q: Hvad endte du med at gå efter? 
A: 1:09, og så se det an. Men faldt fra efter 15km. 
Q: Blev du skadet undervejs? 
A: Nej, ingen skader. 
Individets følelse af træthed
Q: Hvad var din overordnede oplevelse af at tracke søvn med devicet? 
A: Det var ganske lige til. Jeg glemte det i nogle perioder, men jeg synes det var fint ellers.
Det var meget med at få det husket, at lægge den et smart sted. 
Q: Kan du huske hvordan du vurderede din første træthed?
A: Nej
Q: Kan du huske en af de sidste? En specifik én? 
A: Ja, den sidste uge havde jeg et par stykker jeg husker
Q: Hvis vi tager én af dem, hvordan vurderede du din træthed i den? 
A: Hmnn. Jeg synes jeg var ret frisk, så tænkte det var en 3’er. Det havde også været
værre
Q: Besøgte du løbende skalaen igen?
A: Jeg kiggede på den da du sendte den igen, men ellers læste jeg den bare grundigt
første gang, det synes jeg virkede fint. 
Oplvelsen med at tracke
Q: Hvordan synes du det gik med at få tracket? 
A: Jeg glemte det jo en del, det er jeg ked af. 
Q: Hvordan synes du det gik med at få tracket når du huskede det? 
A: Det var vældig sjovt, jeg synes det var meget lige til. Jeg lagde den ved min hoveddør,
så gik det meget nemt. 
Q: Justerede du træningen ud fra det? 
A: Ja, lidt. Men prøvede bare at køre på. 
Q: Hvordan vil du selv vurdere din frekvens ift at få tracket trætheden? 
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
57
==PAGE:64==
A: Dårlig
Q: Hvordan tænker du? Hvordan vil du tro procentuelt? 
A: Måske 75%. Eller 50%. Deromkring
Q: Udviklede det sig under vejs? 
A: Ja, jeg var bedst i starten. Så gik jeg på sommerferie, og så en ferie mere, og så ja…
så var perioden bare gået følte jeg. 
Q: Indtastede du ratings ved en fejl?
A: Nej
Q: Ingenting? Heller ikke nogen du fotrød under vejs? 
A: Nej. Det tror jeg ikke
Reflektioner om opdattelsen af træthed, og brugen af data
Q: Udviklede din egen opfattelse af træthed sig undervejs i forløbet? 
A: Ja, jeg blev markant trættere undervejs i træningen, men jeg trænede også virkelig
meget og overtrænede fuldstændig. 
Q: Hvordan overtrænede du? Fik du en skade af det? 
A: Nej, bare fuldstændig træt. Fik ikke kigget på det, men var bare fuldstændig ødelagt
og kunne næsten ikke komme ud af døren. Eller ud af sengen.  
Q: Tænkte du over din træthed? 
A: Jeg følte mig bare træt til sidst
Q: Hvad med under vejs, når du skulle rate?
A: Det tror jeg ikke
Q: Lærte du noget?
A: Om træthed?
Q: Ja, jeg tænker på om du lærte noget om hvordan du følte din træthed? Tænkte du
over det? 
A: Hmn, nej, ikke ud over hvor træt jeg kunne være. 
Q: Kiggede du på dit data undervejs i dit træningsforløb? Anderledes end normalt?
A: Nej, ikke anderledes end normalt. Jeg kiggede mest på om jeg fulgte mit program,
men det gik fint. 
Q: Hvad med søvn? 
A: Nej
Q: Slet ikke?
A: Slet ikke. Heller ikke på uret. Og kunne ikke se noget på knappen du gav mig jo. 
Q: Kan jeg få dig til at tegne hvordan du tror din træthed har set ud? 
Q: Du må gerne fortælle hvad du tegner
58
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:65==
Q: Du tegner den som værende meget høj i slutningen, er det rigtigt? 
A: Jeg var så træt til sidst
Q: Du tegner den helt op på 6 ud af 7. Er det i gennemsnit, eller når du står op, går i seng,
efter træning? 
A: Jeg synes det var hele tiden. Måske ned på 5
[justerer]
Q: Og så lav i starten? Helt nede omkring 2
A: Ja, det tror jeg
Q: Du var meget frisk i sommeren? 
A: Ja, jeg var bare træt til sidst
Q: Vil du måske gå mig igennem det du har tegnet?
A: Sådan middel i starten, og så bare vildt træt til sidst. Jeg fik simpelthen trænet for
meget over sommeren, og det ramte mig som en hammer. Jeg har været så træt siden. 
Q: Den vokser fra uge 5 og stabiliserer sig lidt i uge 9, er det med vilje?
A: Ja, nedtrapningen gjorde mig lidt mere frisk. 
Q: Og så peak til sidst
A: Ja, efter race. Der var jeg klart trættest. 
Viser atleten det reelle data
Q: Hvad er dine umiddelbare tanker om det du ser?
A: Der er ikke så meget
Q: Hvad tænker du om det du kan se? Passer det meget godt? 
A: Ja, det passer meget godt. 
Q: Synes du de mønstre du ser her ift hvor træt du har vurderet dig selv passer med de
tanker du har, når du tænker tilbage? 
A: Nej. Eller jeg løb meget over sommeren. Men synes jeg har været trættere på det
seneste. 
Q: Når du ser på din tegning af hvordan du husker det?
A: Ikke anderledes end før.
Q: Synes du se udsving du ser passer med det du husker fra perioden? 
A: Jeg svinger mere i mine målinger. Måske var dét (pejer) hvor jeg var hjemme hos mine
forældre, der var jeg meget frisk. 
Q: Er din frekvens højere eller lavere end du havde troet? 
A: Nej, jeg var dårlig. Undskyld
Åben afslutning
Q: Er der andet du har lyst til at dele ift træningsforløbet og brugen af apparatet? 
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
59
==PAGE:66==
A: Det har været sjovt!
B.2
A03
Overdnet ­ hvordan gik selve løbet
Q: Nåede du dit mål, vi drøftede ved starten af perioden?
A: Næsten. Det var tæt på. Men jeg kunne ikke holde den til sidst. 
Q: Hvad løb du den på, hvor langt var du fra? 
A: 1:10, ville nok gerne have været under 68 (1:08). Men dagen var der ikke, sådan er
det. 
Q: Blev du skadet undervejs? Eller var der andet som bøvlede? 
A: Nej, ingenting. Har været godt løbende, kroppen har spillet, alt har været godt. Det
var bare dagen. Varmen. 
Q: Hvordan gik det med at følge din træningsplan? 
A: Godt. Det sad i skabet hele sommeren, jeg kunne nemt fokusere på bare at få trænet.
Det var kun i Frankrig [ferie] at jeg ikke kunne løbe al den kvalitet jeg havde i mente. 
Q: Hvornår var du på ferie? 
A: Midten af August, to uger med kæresten. 
Individets følelse af træthed
Q: Hvad var din overordnede oplevelse af at tracke søvn med devicet? 
A: Det var fedt. Synes det var sjovt!
Q: Hvordan sjovt? Hvad tænker du tilbage på, når du siger sjovt? 
A: Hm. Godt spørgsmål. Jeg synes det var sjovt at skulle tænke over det. Tænker ikke
så meget over det. 
Q: Kan du huske hvordan du vurderede din første træthed?
A: Måske. Kan i hvert fald huske jeg brugte skalaen. Måske 2. 
Q: Kan du huske hvordan du brugte skalaen til den rating? 
A: Jeg læste skalaen igennem, og tænkte jeg nok var en 2 eller 3. Det passede godt med
beskrivelsen. 
Q: Besøgte du løbende skalaen igen?
A: Ja, jeg kiggede på den når du sendte den hver gang. 
Q: Hvordan justerede du dine trackings løbende?
A: Justerede, altså dem jeg havde ratet? 
Q: Tænker mere ift hvordan du inddragede skalaen, som i kiggede du på den hver gang? 
A: Nej, jeg huskede meget at jeg lå i midten. Og så lidt op og ned
Q: Hvordan ratede du løbende? Tænkte du på skalaen som helhed?
A: Nej, jeg tænkte tit på det ud fra min første gennemlæsning af skalaen. Så tit omkring
de 3. 
60
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:67==
Q: Du kiggede altså tit lidt generelt, eller en dag tilbage? 
A: Generelt ja, jeg lå nok på 2­3­4.
Q: Hvor langt tækte du tilbage for at huske hvordan du havde det når du ratede? 
A: Hm. Det ved jeg ikke helt. Nok både den sidste og generelt. Lidt det hele. 
Q: Trackede du nogensinde 7 eller 1?
A: Ikke 7. Massere af 1ere. 
Q: Hvorfor ikke 7?
A: Så smadret var jeg trods alt ikke
Oplvelsen med at tracke
Q: Hvordan synes du det gik med at få tracket? 
A: Fint. Det var meget nemt. 
Q: Var det nemt nok at bruge trackeren? Få registreret det du ville, sørge for den havde
strøm? 
A: Ja, det var meget intuitivt. Fandt bare ud af den skulle ligge tæt ved sengen, så var
det fint. Det var nok mest i forbindelse med træning, særligt når jeg kom hjem, at den
glippede.  
Q: Hvordan vil du selv vurdere din frekvens ift at få tracket trætheden? 
A: Fin. Synes jeg var god
Q: Hvordan vil du tro procentuelt? 
A: 80%­85%. Måske 75%­80%. Deromkring
Q: Udviklede det sig under vejs, trackede du mere eller mindre? 
A: Det var meget stabilt synes jeg
Reflektioner om opdattelsen af træthed, og brugen af data
Q: Udviklede din egen opfattelse af træthed sig undervejs i forløbet? Kan du huske om
den ændrede sig, hvor træt du var?
A: Jeg var klart mest træt da jeg started træningen og peakede. Ferien var godt for mig,
der fik jeg slappet i poolen. Og løb ikke så meget.  
Q: Meget mere end før og efter? 
A: Ja bestemt. Jeg var så færdig. 
Q: Kan du fortælle lidt mere om det? Hvor lang tid, hvor træt var du? 
A: Jeg var bare træt hele tiden synes jeg. Ved ikke, nok tre­fire uger. 
Q: Kom det til udtryk hele tiden? Når du stod op og gik i seng? 
A: Jeg synes bare jeg var træt hele tiden, eller at jeg havde det på samme måde før og
efter løb. Det var en grundlæggende følelse af at være træt ved de sidste hårde pas. 
Q: Stoppede det op mod løbet?
A: Ja, da jeg nedtrappede. Var også bedre ved mig selv, og havde lidt færre vagter
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
61
==PAGE:68==
Q: Hvad tror du havde den største effekt på at du var friskere? Eller er det svært at sige?
Følte du, at en af dem havde en stor effekt? 
A: Mindre kvalitet [intensitet]. Og jeg fik bare mere tid til at sove, også når Trine [kæreste]
var i Aarhus. 
Q: Tænkte du over din træthed undervejs? 
Ikke rigtig. Kiggede på min søvnscore. 
Q: Anderledes end normalt?
A: Nej, jeg kigger nok altid på den. Men tænkte lidt ekstra over det. 
Q: Kan jeg få dig til at tegne hvordan du tror din træthed har set ud? Specifikt hvordan du
husker du har været træt, på den samme skala. Hvordan du husker din træthed har set
ud, og gerne fortælle lidt imens
[visualiserer]
Q: Du har tegnet den som værende opadgående i staren, et dyk og så et peak inden den
dykker igen. Kan du huske hvad der gjorde den peakede første gang? Hvorfor har du
tegnet den sådan? 
A: Bare mange kilometer hver uge, og arbejde. Løb hele tiden tror jeg. 
Q: Mange kilometer, er det en forøgelse eller hvorfor har du tegnet den stiger? 
A: Ja, flere kilometer og hårde pas. 
Q: Og så et dyk? 
A: Ja, så synes jeg. Eller så husker jeg i hvert fald ikke at jeg var så træt over sommeren.
Inden det så peakede igen med dronninge og kongepasser [de længste og sværeste
træninger frem mod eventet], de tog alt jeg havde. 
Q: Og så lav til sidst? 
A: Ja ligesom vi snakkede om før. 
Q: Den går en smule op til sidst? 
A: Ja, jeg tænkte race var med i den. Ratede den højt lige efter, det var all out mand. 
Viser atleten det reelle data
Q: Hvad er dine umiddelbare tanker om det du ser?
A: Hm. Det er lidt anderedes. Men også med lidt sving. 
Q: Synes du de mønstre du ser her ift hvor træt du har vurderet dig selv passer med de
tanker du har, når du tænker tilbage? 
A: Nogenlunde. Eller ikke helt det samme som jeg husker, ikke de samme hårde perioder.
Den svinger meget mere. 
Q: Er din frekvens højere eller lavere end du havde troet? 
A: Er det ikke meget godt?
Q: Hvad synes du?
A: Det er da super godt!
62
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:69==
Q: Jeg er meget tilfreds. 
Åben afslutning
Q: Er der andet du har lyst til at dele ift træningsforløbet og brugen af apparatet? 
A: Nej, fedt!
B.3
A05
Overdnet ­ hvordan gik selve løbet
Q: Nåede du dit mål, vi drøftede ved starten af perioden?
A: Nej. 
Q: Hvor tæt kom du på, det gik da meget godt? 
A: Løb 1:13, ville gerne godt under 69 [minutter]. Men sådan skulle det ikke være, det
vidste jeg godt. 
Q: Hvorfor tror du ikke du nåede dit mål? Satte du ud for at løbe under 69, eller havde du
justeret det til? 
A: Varmen, og min hofte. Kunne ikke holde den. 
Q: Blev du skadet undervejs? 
A: Ikke af løb. Jeg faldt på en scooter i Paris i April, min hofte har haft inflamation siden.
Det kunne jeg ikke løbe stærkt på. 
Q: Kunne du gennemføre den træning du gerne ville?
A: Nej, ikke helt. Men sådan er det altid, jeg synes jeg kom i bedre form og synes også
jeg var klar. 
Individets følelse af træthed
Q: Hvad var din overordnede oplevelse af at tracke søvn med devicet? 
A: Det var spændende at prøve. Jeg tror min baggrund i idrætsfysiologi gjorde at jeg
havde meget, hvad skal man sige, kontekst. Men det var sjovt at reflektere meget over
det. De dage jeg ikke sov så meget med mine vagter tænkte jeg meget over min træthed
da jeg var vågen [ ikke de tracket].
Q: Kan du huske hvordan du vurderede din første træthed?
A: Ja, jeg startede med 3
Q: Kan du huske den tracking præcist?
A: Ja
Q: Hvordan besluttede du det var 3?
A: Jeg læste skalaen igennem, og synes det passede godt. 
Q: Besøgte du løbende skalaen igen?
A: Nej. Jeg tog meget udgangspunkt i den fra starten af.
Q: Hvordan synes du skalaen fungerede?
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
63
==PAGE:70==
A:  Jeg synes det var fint. Der var for mange forskellige muligheder, jeg synes tit jeg både
var 3 og 4, eller 2 og 3. Men det var nemt at forstå hvor jeg cirka skulle placere mig. 
Q: Hvordan justerede du dine trackings løbende?
A: Hm. Jeg tænkte meget over hvordan jeg havde det tror jeg? 
Q: Hvordan ratede du løbende? Tænkte du på skalaen som helhed?
A: Hvordan tænker du? 
Q: Jeg tænker i forhold til, om du hver gang kiggede på din træthed isoleret? 
A: Nej, jeg tænkte tit på det ud fra min første gennemlæsning af skalaen. Så tit omkring
de 3. 
Q: Så du brugte dit første punkt som reference?
A: Ja.
Q: Hvor langt tækte du tilbage for at huske hvordan du havde det når du ratede? 
A: Hm. Det ved jeg ikke, måske bare den foregående dag. Eller samme dag. 
Q: Trackede du nogensinde 7?
A: Nej. 
Q: Hvorfor ikke? 
A: Jeg tænkte meget løbende om jeg nogensinde var en 7. Om jeg nogensinde ville
ramme den. 
Q: Var du tæt på? 
A: Ja, en stor seks en del gange
Q: Hvad med 1? 
A: Ja, den var jeg en del. Hvis jeg ikke var på nattevagt, og Jens [barn] sov godt. 
Oplvelsen med at tracke
Q: Hvordan synes du det gik med at få tracket? 
A: Fint, synes jeg. Det var meget lige til. 
Q: Hvordan vil du selv vurdere din frekvens ift at få tracket trætheden? 
A: Hm. Godt tror jeg. Jeg skrev til dig når jeg glemte det. 
Q: Hver gang?
A: Nej, i perioder. At jeg havde glemt en periode. 
Q: Hvordan tænker du? Hvordan vil du tro procentuelt? 
A: 80%. I hvert fald morgen og aften
Q: Var de nemmere at huske? 
A: Ja, jeg havde den liggende i entreen. Så tog den altid op som første og sidste. 
Q: Udviklede det sig under vejs? 
A: Hvordan tænker du? 
64
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:71==
Q: Med hvor meget du huskede at tracke?
A: Hm. Nej det tror jeg ikke? 
Q: Indtastede du ratings ved en fejl?
A: Nej
Reflektioner om opdattelsen af træthed, og brugen af data
Q: Udviklede din egen opfattelse af træthed sig undervejs i forløbet? 
A: Ja, jeg var i dårlig form i starten
Q: Kom det til udtryk i dine ratings?
A: Ja, jeg var sindssygt træt i starten
Q: Kom det til udstryk hele tiden? Også når du stod op og gik i seng? 
A: Ja, jeg var helt ekstremt træt. Jeg havde også lige startet nyt arbejde, og jeg synes
bare det var hele tiden jeg var træt. 
Q: Det er blevet bedre siden? 
A: Ja
Q: Hvorfor?
A: Jeg er bare kommet i form
Q: Tænkte du over din træthed? 
Q: Lærte du noget om din træthed?
A: Hmn, nej, ikke ud over hvor træt jeg kunne være. Jeg reflekterede meget over det da vi
snakkede om det først, og så har jeg reflekteret over det undervejs. Det har været sjovt,
vi bruger et andet system på Bispebjerg til vores patienter men der har vi også brug for
at forstå deres træthed. 
Q: Kiggede du på dit data undervejs i dit træningsforløb? Anderledes end normalt?
A: Jeg kigger altid på min søvnscore på Garmin. Den er helt off, den kan godt sige 8 timer
når jeg slet ikke har sovet
Q: Men du kigger stadig på den? 
A: Ja, jeg synes det er meget sjovt.  
Q: Kan jeg få dig til at tegne hvordan du tror din træthed har set ud? 
A: Hvordan tænker du?
Q: Sorry. Tænker på hvordan du husker du har tracket. Hvordan du husker din træthed
har set ud, og gerne fortælle lidt imens
Q: Du har tegnet den som værende meget høj i starten, og så faldende. 
A: Ja, lige præcis. Frisk til sidst. 
Q: Du tegner den helt op på 6 ud af 7. Er det i gennemsnit, eller når du står op, går i seng,
efter træning? Som vi snakkede om før 
A: Jeg, præcis
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
65
==PAGE:72==
Q: Og så lav til sidst? Helt nede omkring 2
A: Ja, det tror jeg. Eller måske ikke så lavt
[justerer]
Q: Du var meget frisk, hele tiden, til sidst
A: Ja
Q: Den skal ikke svinge mere tænker du? 
A: Nej, ikke i gennemsnit. Jeg er bare blevet friskere. Synes jeg har tracket meget kon­
tinuerligt det samme fra dag til dag, men er blevet friskere. 
Viser atleten det reelle data
Q: Hvad er dine umiddelbare tanker om det du ser?
A: Det er anderledes end jeg husker haha. 
Q: Synes du de mønstre du ser her ift hvor træt du har vurderet dig selv passer med de
tanker du har, når du tænker tilbage? 
A: Nej
Q: Når du ser på din tegning af hvordan du husker det?
A: Hm. Jeg har ratet nogle høje kan jeg godt se, men ikke så mange. Og også dem til
sidst. 
Q: Er din frekvens højere eller lavere end du havde troet? 
A: Nej, det passer meget godt
Åben afslutning
Q: Er der andet du har lyst til at dele ift træningsforløbet og brugen af apparatet? 
A: Det tror jeg ikke. Ellers skriver jeg.
B.4
A07
Overordnet ­ hvordan gik selve løbet
Q: Nåede du dit mål, vi drøftede ved starten af perioden?
A: Ja, det gjorde jeg
Q: Hvad kom du ind på? 
A: 1:16:57
Q: Og bronze til DM
A: Ja
Q: Det gik godt
A: Ja, det må jeg indrømme
Individets følelse af træthed
Q: Hvad var din overordnede oplevelse af at tracke søvn med devicet, i den periode du
var med? 
66
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:73==
A: Jeg synes det var sjovt. Super nemt. Spændt på hvad det gik ud på!
Q: Kan du huske hvordan du vurderede din første træthed?
A: Ja
Q: Kan du huske den tracking præcist?
A: 3
Q: Hvordan besluttede du det var 3?
A: Jeg læste skalaen igennem grundigt, og så synes jeg det var passende
Q: Hvordan mener du passede godt? 
A: Jeg synes bare beskrivelsen var meget passende. Og følte mig middel træt, fint tilpas. 
Q: Besøgte du løbende skalaen igen?
A: Ja, hver gang du sendte den [fredag]
Q: Hvordan justerede du dine trackings løbende?
A: Hm. Jeg synes bare jeg mærkede efter i forhold til skalen. 
Q: Så du tænkte tilbage på definitionerne fra skalaen hver gang? 
A: Ja. Og jeg lå tit på 2, 3 eller 4. Kom ikke så tit ud over dem. 
Q: Trackede du nogensinde 7?
A: Det tror jeg ikke 
Q: Hvad med 1? 
A: Ja, dem havde jeg i hvert fald et par stykker af. 
Q: Du følte dig altså som oftest 2, 3 og 4 tænker du? [bekræfter]. Hvordan kunne du
mærke forskel på om du var 2, 3 eller 4? 
A: Hm. Jeg tror igen jeg tænkte tilbage på skalaen. Jeg synes aldrig rigtig jeg var helt vildt
smadret, men nogle gange var jeg lidt mere eller mindre frisk. Hvis det giver mening? 
Q: Nu bliver det måske for specifikt, men hvad med 5? 
A: Dem havde jeg også et par stykker af, men så synes jeg jeg var for træt. 
Q: Så 2, 3, 4 var et okay sted at ligge? 
A: Ja, så synes jeg jeg var frisk nok
Oplvelsen med at tracke
Q: Hvordan synes du det gik med at få tracket? 
A: Godt. Jeg synes det var vildt sjovt. 
Q: Gjorde du noget ekstra for at huske den? 
A: Jeg synes det gik meget nemt med at få det integreret i min træningsrutine. Tracke,
træne, tracke. Og så før og inden søvn. Det var meget lige til. 
Q: Hvordan vil du selv vurdere din frekvens ift at få tracket trætheden? 
A: Ganske god. 
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
67
==PAGE:74==
Q: Var der sving i det, eller var det bare grundlæggende stabilt hvor meget du fik tracket? 
A: Nej, det tror jeg ikke. 
Q: Hvordan tænker du? Hvordan vil du tro procentuelt? 
A: 90% eller derover. Glemte det ikke så ofte. 
Q: Indtastede du ratings ved en fejl?
A: Nej, det tror jeg ikke. 
Reflektioner om opdattelsen af træthed, og brugen af data
Q: Udviklede din egen opfattelse af træthed sig undervejs i forløbet? 
A: Jeg synes det var vildt sjovt at skulle tænke over det, sætte et tal på hvordan jeg havde
det. Jeg tænker ikke så meget over det fast normalt. 
Q: Lærte du noget om din træthed ved at tracke?
A: Måske lidt at den svinger en del gange i løbet af dagen. Igen, de der 2, 3, 4. 
Q: Kiggede du på dit data undervejs i dit træningsforløb, på dit ur? Anderledes end nor­
malt?
A: Altså med søvn?
Q: Ja, du kigger altid på kilometerne og dine pas husker jeg
A: Ikke mere end normalt. Jeg kigger altid på min søvn på uret. Så det var kun dimsen
[obt] som var ny. 
Q: Kan jeg få dig til at tegne hvordan du tror din træthed har set ud? 
Q: Du har tegnet den som værende meget stabil?
A: Ja, med lidt højere træthed i starten. Men ellers meget stabilt, lå meget mellem 3 og
4. 
Q: Hvor bredt tror du du har brugt skalaen? Har det primært været 3 og 4, eller hvor meget
har du brugt 1 og 6?
A: Jeg var klart mest 3 og 4. Men også en del af de andre, eller i hvert fald nogle. I
perioder. 
Viser atleten det reelle data
Q: Hvad er dine umiddelbare tanker om det du ser?
A: Det passer meget godt
Q: Synes du de mønstre du ser her ift hvor træt du har vurderet dig selv passer med de
tanker du har, når du tænker tilbage? 
A: Ja, synes det passer rigtig godt
Q: Når du ser på din tegning af hvordan du husker det?
A: Det passer meget godt
Q: Er din frekvens højere eller lavere end du havde troet? 
A: Jeg har været rigtig god, har jeg ikke? 
68
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:75==
Q: Jo, det er så godt Stine. Tak!
Åben afslutning
Q: Er der andet du har lyst til at dele ift træningsforløbet og brugen af apparatet? 
A: Jeg kunne godt finde på at bruge den slags rating fast. Måske ikke data fra det, eller
det ved jeg ikke, men det var lærerigt at skulle tage stilling til hvordan jeg havde det så
fast. Det var rigtig fedt. 
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
69
==PAGE:76==
C
Observable visualisations
All visualisations in Observable can be found here https://observablehq.com/d/3030bc7dcadd1432
All data required is attached separately.
70
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
==PAGE:77==
Quantifying subjective fatigue to prevent overtraining
71
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
