==PAGE:1==
Machine learning methods for modelling of
dynamic systems
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
Master Thesis
September, 2023
By
Fredrik Johansson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Building 303, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/graduate/msc-programmes/
electrical-engineering
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis (30 ECTS) has been prepared over five months at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mathematics, me­
chanical engineering
Fredrik Johansson
2023­09­22
ii
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This work investigates the possibility of neural networks to model a non­linear dynamic
system, specifically an electrodynamic loudspeaker of moving coil type. Several smaller
modelling problems were exercised before attempting to model a loudspeaker. Synthetic
data from a sine wave, mass spring damper system and a simple physical loudspeaker
model were used to train different neural network models. Data was acquired from an
actual loudspeaker, specifically input voltage data and loudspeaker cone acceleration
during excitation with Gaussian pink noise bandpass filtered below 10 Hz and above 10
kHz. This dataset was used to train a neural network consisting of LSTM and feed­forward
layers and a residual model where a simple linear loudspeaker model and the LSTM/FF
network were both used to predict the cone acceleration. The accuracy and learning
behaviour were evaluated to judge the model performance. The accuracy was compared
to previous works.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Thank you to my supervisors for all the help in the learning journey that has been this
thesis.
[Finn Agerkvist], [Associate professor], [Department of Electrical and Photonics Engi­
neering Acoustic Technology]
Supervisor
[Franz Maria Heuchel], [Postdoc], [Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Acoustic Technology]
Supervisor
[Allan Peter Engsig­Karup], [Associate Professor], [Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science Scientific Computing]
Supervisor
iv
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Aim/objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Loudspeakers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Control theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Machine learning framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Residual modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Previous work
11
4
Method
13
4.1
Program structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Sine wave modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Spring mass damper system modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
Speaker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.5
Modelling from synthetic data generated from a fundamental speaker model 17
4.6
Main speaker model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.7
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Conclusion
29
6
Discussion
31
7
Further work
33
Bibliography
35
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This thesis covers the modelling of a dynamical system, specifically a moving coil loud­
speaker modelled with an artificial neural network. The project focuses on investigating
and quantifying the possibility of a neural network to model a time series of input voltage
and speaker cone acceleration. It uses a data­driven method with data acquired from
measurements of a typical loudspeaker.
A dynamical system is a physical system that evolves over time. Its state is specified by
a set of variables. The system’s behaviour is specified by a set of rules. Such variables
could be displacement, electrical potential, and temperature amongst others. The rules
are the relations of the variables and these dynamical systems are processes in motion
that evolve over time.
These systems are very common. Many things are categorised as dynamical systems.
Some examples are vehicles, bacterial growth and electronic circuits. An easy­to­understand
example is a simple electronic circuit consisting of a power source and a resistor. Some
of its state variables are temperature, electrical potential and current. The current, voltage
and temperatures of a component in an electronic circuit depend on each other and time
in respect of previous states that partly determine future states. The temperature of the
resistor depends on historical voltage and current levels across the resistor. Voltage and
current depend on each other, the resistance. But also the resistance can depend on the
temperature.
So, for each system, there exists an underlying set of rules and variables that is not known.
These variables are called latent parameters [1]. Mathematical models can describe a
dynamical system’s behaviour by expressing it as a set of equations. These equations
describe the rules and contain the variables specifying the state. However, since the
mathematical expressions rely on physical state variables, it is suggested that the vari­
ables must be known prior to discovering natural laws, and the concept of temperature
must be known prior to discovering the laws of thermodynamics [2]. This is one of the
disadvantages of physical models. For this reason, this project proposes neural networks
can model specific systems without prior expert knowledge of the system as they can in­
ternally discover the underlying rules and state variables through their inherent capacity
to learn from data.
Dynamical systems are often classified into two categories. Linear systems and non­linear
systems. The non­linear system behaves in a way that appears chaotic. The specific
distinction between a linear and non­linear system is that the latter contains one or more of
the following: a polynomial of higher order than one, a product or more complex function of
two or more system variables or a threshold function [3]. The specific type of loudspeaker
this thesis concerns itself with is of non­linear system class. This means that in order to
perform predictions on non­linear systems a more complex model is needed.
Dynamical systems models can be used to solve problems in many different fields. An
example of a field utilizing models is control theory. The model can be used to predict
future states based on the current state and any changes to any of the variables. If a
prediction can be performed, it is also possible to find out how to modify one variable to get
a desired change in another in a future state. Meaning one can achieve a specific output
from the system by controlling the input. Perhaps the most simple example is temperature
regulation in an electrical heating system. If its behaviours are known, the input voltage
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
1
==PAGE:10==
can be controlled to in turn determine the current flow into the heater element and the
energy input to the system. The model can predict the future temperature of the system
and with this knowledge, an appropriate voltage level can be set to achieve a specific
temperature. Similarly more complex systems like loudspeakers also could benefit from
modelling and control.
Moreover, traditional dynamical systems modelling has a limitation, they often neglect
complex parameters such as air friction by assumptions [4]. It is difficult to include all the
effects. Therefore, data­driven methods which do not make any assumptions or leave out
any parameters, known or not, have the possibility of achieving high­accuracy models.
The present project works with a common dynamical system, the loudspeaker, specif­
ically an electroacoustic transducer of moving coil type. This is a very common type of
loudspeaker and is found in consumer products, public announcement systems and many
other applications. This type of speaker provides a sound output when an electrical signal
input is applied on the electrical coil, by moving a cone and creating air pressure in front
of the speaker, hence producing sound.
A moving coil loudspeaker typically has a linear and non­linear region of behaviour in its
dynamics. Most often it is determined by the input signal amplitude. This means that
under low amplitude input signal conditions, its behaviour can be described with linear
system equations. Under high amplitude input signal conditions it behaves non­linear,
the output is not proportional to the input. The non­linearity is typically undesirable as the
output is not proportional to the input. This inaccuracy is called distortion. Loudspeaker
designers can attempt to reduce the non­linear behaviour. For example, by increasing
the size of the speaker, ensuring that it operates in the linear region. However, it is not
without downsides. Cost and weight can increase and efficiency can decrease when the
physical size of the speaker is increased.
Instead, it is desired to use the loudspeaker in the non­linear region so as not to be limited
to the linear region, as this would limit the sound output level of the speaker. Using the
non­linear region extends its usable range for a given size, cost and quality. For exam­
ple in automotive applications, weight is of concern, as increased weight increases fuel
consumption.
If the loudspeaker’s behaviour is modelled, it is possible to correct for the non­linear be­
haviour. It is possible to alter the input signal based on the model and achieve the de­
sired output. Meaning compensating for the non­linearities with a feed­forward strategy.
A model with sufficient accuracy can therefore lower cost and increase the performance
of a sound system, for example by allowing for a design where the linear region does not
need to be extended, which lowers costs and avoids a loss of sensitivity, which is the term
for loudspeaker efficiency. [5].
Historically there has been work on the modelling of loudspeakers using several different
modelling methods. Both physical models and neural networks have been used. Linear
and non­linear models have been used. Linear models achieve 11­16% error and non­
linear models achieve 6­7 % error [6]. Since the non­linear models include non­linearity
and achieve better accuracy, it suggests that the non­linear characteristics are a significant
part of the characteristics of a loudspeaker. Without feed forward or feedback control this
non­linearity will make a significant contribution to the distortion of the output signal.
Some companies also implemented feedback control. One example of this is the Philips
MFB audio system, which incorporates a piezoelectric sensor attached to the loudspeaker
cone. This sensor directly measures the acceleration of the cone and incorporates this
2
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:11==
measurement into feedback control. Meaning that it senses the output of the speaker and
adjusts the input to achieve the desired output. However, additional sensors and circuits
increase cost and introduce more failure points.
One of the available data­driven modelling methods is the neural network. It is a collection
of simple mathematically described entities called neurons. These are arranged in layers
to form a net­like structure where the inputs and outputs of the neurons are connected to
each other between each layer. It is a black box method that has seen increasing pop­
ularity in recent years. Neural networks have been shown to be function approximators
[7] and could therefore replace physical modelling techniques. They can do so because
they can approximate the very equation the physical model consists of. Neural network
modelling is a data drive model, meaning it relies on collected data to establish the rela­
tionships between input and output.
This work aims to use a neural network to model the loudspeaker as neural networks
have some advantages. Neural nets do not depend on expert knowledge of the system
or are limited to the known latent variables. Meaning that theoretically, they can achieve
a higher accuracy than physical models as they can take into account yet­to­be­known
latent variables and rules that they learn from the data but are not known model designers.
As the method is a black box model it does not attempt to recover the underlying state
variables or rules. Neural nets can achieve high accuracy but leave the question of how
the dynamical system works unanswered. However, other recent work has been done to
discover state variables from experimental data using machine learning [2].
1.1
Problem definition
The issue with loudspeaker non­linearity is that the acoustic result is not representative of
the input signal, meaning that the sound is not as desired. Physical models can partially
model the characteristics of the loudspeaker but leave an unknown part, which a neural
network has the potential to model accurately.
1.2
Aim/objective
The present project aims to construct, train and evaluate a neural network to investigate
its ability to accurately model nonlinear dynamical systems, in this case specifically an
electrodynamic loudspeaker.
1.3
Limitations
This work does not account for any drift of the loudspeaker characteristics due to time,
temperature, wear or any other factor.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
This chapter will present and discuss the basics of loudspeakers, a fundamental model of
a loudspeaker, control theory, neural networks and residual modelling. The basic func­
tionality of the moving­coil loudspeaker will be introduced, and the most simple linear
loudspeaker model, neural networks of different types and their training methodology and
acoustical signal sampling will be explained and discussed.
2.1
Loudspeakers
The loudspeaker is a device to produce acoustic signals. An electrodynamic loudspeaker
converts electrical energy to acoustical energy. It is driven by an amplifier which takes an
input signal from a source like a smartphone or TV and amplifies it to power the loud­
speaker. Most often the input signal source is predetermined and not specific to the
amplifier or loudspeaker. The amplifier and loudspeaker are sometimes separate, and
sometimes built into the same system, such as a TV.
In the case of an electrodynamic loudspeaker, an interaction of mechanical and electrical
components achieves the sound output. The most common type is the moving coil driver
where a coil of metal wire is attached to a cone which is suspended in a frame with a
spring­like mechanism. The speaker is put inside a box or other enclosure to prevent the
sound radiating from the rear of the cone from interfering with the desired sound radiating
from the front of the cone. When the coil is energised with an input signal voltage it creates
a magnetic field. As the coil is in direct proximity to a permanent magnet the coil generates
a force. This force in turn is pushing on the cone and displacing it. The displacement
compresses the air directly in front of the cone, producing sound pressure. The spring­
like mechanism retracts the cone towards its resting position. The sound pressure is
proportional to the acceleration of the cone. The loudspeaker introduces a phase shift,
meaning that the sound output is shifted in time in comparison to the voltage input.
Figure 2.1: Moving coil loudspeaker
The low frequencies the cone of a loudspeaker is assumed to move as a rigid body while
at high frequencies it behaves as a flexible system. [8]
2.1.1
Loudspeaker parameters
When using physical models to model loudspeakers there are some commonly used pa­
rameters that need introduction. The speaker motor force factor Bl is the product of the
magnet field strength in the voice coil gap and the length of wire in the magnetic field, it’s
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
5
==PAGE:14==
unit is Tm. It’s a measure of how strong a motor the speaker has. The DC resistance
of the speaker is referred to as Re and is measured in Ohm. The inductance of the coil
is denoted L and is measured in Henry. The moving mass of the speaker is M mass
in kilograms. The suspension stiffness is K, measured in Newtons per meter N
m. The
mechanical resistance is Rm and is measured in kg
s
The loudspeaker is a form of mass spring damper system. A spring and mass system has
a resonance frequency which determines the loudspeaker characteristics. The resonance
frequency of a loudspeaker can be calculated with the following equation.
The resonance frequency fr is the low­frequency performance limit of the loudspeaker[9]
fr =
√
K/M
2 ∗π
(2.1)
Loudspeakers as a dynamical system have some memory of previous states. These
influence the current state and future states. The memory fades as time passes and
typically it is related to the resonance frequency of the loudspeaker
2.1.2
Fundamental speaker model
Let’s introduce a fundamental speaker model. The most simple model available [6].
u = Bl ˙x + Rei + d
dt[iL]
(2.2)
Bli = Kx + Rm ˙x + M ¨x
(2.3)
Typically loudspeakers are designed for linearity, however, there is increased interest in
increasing their performance within the non­linear region [5][6]. The non­linearity is due
to several factors but mainly the force factor, compliance and inductance [10]. The force
factor is related to the coil moving inside the magnetic field, occasionally it moves partly
outside the magnetic field. When this occurs the force on the cone is reduced as the
magnetic force is reduced, as it depends on the position of the coil, also called excursion
it is a non­linear behaviour. The inductance varies with frequency, typically it increases
with frequency.
2.1.3
Acoustic signal sampling
Acoustical sound in the physical world is continuous. During digital data acquisition and
with the modelling techniques in this paper, the signals are discrete. The process of
transferring continuous functions or signals to discrete is called discretisation. An issue
might arise from this process. Commonly known as aliasing, is the the distortion of a
signal which causes the reconstructed signal to differ from the true original signal. This
can be avoided by a high enough sampling rate. According to the Nyquist theorem, the
sample rate of the signal should be at minimum twice the highest frequency of the highest
frequency present in the signal to accurately be able to reconstruct the signal from a
discrete sampling to a continuous signal as is the output from an amplifier to the actual
loudspeaker.
2.2
Control theory
To fully explain the need for non­linear models some background of control theory is
needed.
6
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:15==
2.2.1
Feed forward control
The type of control called feed­forward control is where an open loop algorithm is used to
control the system. Open loop control does not sense the state of the system and uses it
to adjust the control signal. Instead, it behaves in a predetermined way. It has knowledge
of the system in the form of a model.
Figure 2.2: Open loop feed­forward system
2.2.2
Feedback control
A more sophisticated control algorithm is the feedback control. It relies on monitoring the
output of the system. It has a sensor to actually measure the output. This measured
signal then goes into the control algorithm, effectively creating a feedback loop where
the algorithm can take into account the actual state of the system. In comparison, the
feed­forward control algorithm has no knowledge of the actual state.
Figure 2.3: Closed loop feedback system
2.3
Neural networks
Neural networks are a machine learning method and the base of deep learning. The net
consists of neurons with a simple mathematical formula. In a fully connected network of
neurons, every neuron in each layer is connected to every neuron in the previous and
next layer. Each neuron can be described by the below formula and figure.
Y 1 = tanh(w1 ∗x1 + w2 ∗x2 + ... + wn ∗xn)
(2.4)
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Neural net construction
A network usually consists of several neurons arranged in a net. The basic feed­forward
network consists of layers of several neurons. The output of the neurons of one layer
is the input for the next layer. The first layer is the data input and the last layer is the
prediction output. There can be more than one input and output.
Figure 2.5: Neural net: a combination of LSTM and FF layers
Running the network to calculate an output based on the input is called inference.
Each layer usually has an activation function. Activation functions are a function that
transforms the weighted sum of the input to the output. Several different activation func­
tions exist sigmoid, tanh, relu. Activation functions are important in neural networks as
they enable the network to have non­linearity. ReLU or rectified linear activation function
is a piecewise linear function. It outputs the input directly if it is positive, if it is negative it
outputs zero. ReLU is the most used activation function [11] and it outperforms sigmoid
and tanh activation functions [12].
The basic method of developing a neural network model is to construct a network, ac­
quire data of the system to be modelled and train, validate and test the network using the
previously acquired data.
There are several different types of neural networks. A specific type is the recurrent neural
8
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:17==
network. It differs from a feed­forward neural network in that the output of later layers is
the input of previous layers, resulting in the network having a memory. They can represent
time series such as audio or any data sequence, including dynamical systems. [13].
The basic RNN does have a problem of vanishing gradient. Instead, a network called
LSTM which stands for long short­term memory uses several gates to avoid this. [13]
vanishing gradient is where the derivative calculation of the network results in an increas­
ingly small gradient, and an increasingly small update of the weights, resulting in that
learning comes to a halt.
LSTM has difficulties modelling time series, but combined with a feed­forward network it
can do that. [13]
With data available, one can run inferences and by comparing the network prediction with
the data it is possible to calculate the error of the output compared to the acquired data.
By performing gradient calculations, the weights and biases parameters can be updated
and the error reduced. Iterating this process is called training. Each training iteration is
called an epoch.
To train the network an optimizer needs to be used. An optimizer is an algorithm which
adjusts the model’s parameters to increase the accuracy of the model. It is effectively
the entity that enables the network to learn based on the data. Some popular optimisers
are SGD (stochastic gradient descent) and Adam. SGD is standard gradient descent with
a stochastic approximation. Gradient descent is the first­order derivative optimization
algorithm that takes steps according to the calculated or approximated gradient.
Adam is an extension of SGD that introduces an adaptive learning rate and an adjustment
of the learning rate based on historical gradients.
Backwards propagation is a machine learning algorithm which adjusts the neural network
parameters with the aim of reducing the loss. For each weight, the gradient is calculated
and the weight is updated based on the gradient.
2.3.1
Synthetic data
Synthetic data is data which is created by algorithms and is used to train or validate ma­
chine learning models. Synthetic data can be used when no data is available or it is
difficult or expensive to acquire. Synthetic data can be created from a physical model, it
can be discretised if the physical model is defined as a function and numerical integra­
tion is performed. Synthetic data is useful when data from an actual system is difficult or
expensive to acquire. It is also useful in the exercise of training and validation of models
as the physical model is known and can be considered as ground truth. It is therefore
possible to correctly judge the accuracy of the trained model as there is no noise or other
factor influencing the data.
2.4
Machine learning framework
Machine learning frameworks are universal software environments intended for machine
learning applications. They contain implementations of many of the most useful methods
of machine learning such as different network architectures, optimisers, loss functions
and data types. Several of these frameworks exist, some popular ones are PyTorch, Ten­
sorFlow, Google JAX, Keras and MATLAB’s Deep Learning Toolbox. The deep learning
framework PyTorch was selected based on its popularity in the research community and
that it includes some techniques appropriate for time series modelling. PyTorch works
with neural networks, its data and training procedures in the following way. The tensor
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
9
==PAGE:18==
class is the data structure to store multidimensional arrays of numbers that have the added
advantage compared to numpy in that they can be operated on Cuda­compatible graph­
ics processing units. This allows for parrallel computing which increases the computation
speed significantly. Some nomenclature is specific to PyTorch, such as what is typically
called model input is called feature and the system true state variable of interest is called
a label. One complete training pass of the data­set is usually referred to as an epoch.
PyTorch is usually used with its python interface, although it has a C++ interface as well.
2.5
Residual modelling
It is possible to use physical models and neural networks together with modelling dynam­
ical systems. This is called residual modelling. A physical model is used to model the
main characteristics and is called the prior prediction. A neural network is used to model
the unknown, the residual of what the physical model could not describe. This is called
the posteriori prediction.
10
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:19==
3
Previous work
System identification is the practice of inferring models from observed data. Meaning
attempting to discover the underlying rules and latent parameters and creating a model of
the system. It is very important in several fields like control, statistics and machine learning
[14]. For simple systems, differential equations can be used, but for complex systems, it
becomes a difficult approach. Data­driven modelling is an alternative to physical models
[15].
Typically lumped parameter models, differential equations and finite element models are
used for the modelling of dynamical systems [16] [5].
Loudspeakers specifically have been previously modelled with physical models, both lin­
ear and non­linear [6] as well as data­driven models such as neural networks [17] [18].
Physical models of loudspeakers have achieved 6% error on speakers excited with 10
Hz­10 kHz band pass filtered pink noise[6].
Physical models do not completely capture the complexity of a loudspeaker [17]. This is
due to that they do not take into account all the underlying rules and state variables. They
usually have approximations such as no air resistance. Therefore there exists a residual
part upon which an improvement can be possible for increased sound output quality when
linearisation is applied.
Deep learning and system identification have many similarities and the power of deep
nets for standard system identification has been demonstrated [19]. This suggests that
there is a potential to model loudspeakers with neural networks.
In fact, early work has generated data from a loudspeaker model and trained a neural
network. This work was performed on low­frequencies, typical to subwoofer applications
and was based on fixed sine wave input signals between 16 and 120 Hz. [20]
Contemporary works showed that it is possible to model a loudspeaker using neural net­
works. Brunet et al predicted voltage input from the observed excursion of the diaphragm
using a feed­forward neural network [17]. This way the authors can achieve the required
input signal from the target desired output signal. This way it is possible to pre­process
the audio and create an audio file with the necessary compensation.
A later work by the same authors explored more network architectures with the same
goal of predicting voltage from excursion in a low­frequency application (20­700 Hz) [18].
Their work showed that TDNN was better than LSTM and NARX network architectures,
however, LSTM and NARX accuracy was considered acceptable. They achieved a TDNN
model with less than 2 % error.
It is difficult to compare physical models and neural networks based on these previous
works as they were performed on different frequency ranges.
For this project, the choice of modelling context needs to take into consideration previous
work if comparisons are to be made in terms of accuracy and predicted labels. In addition,
the work needs to aim to provide utility as the neural network model as a black box model
suits itself better to provide a model for a control system rather than attempting to explain
the underlying physics.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:21==
4
Method
This chapter describes the work of modelling the loudspeakers behaviour with a neural
network and the process of doing so in the attempt of exploring the possibilities of deep
learnings ability to model dynamical systems.
The chosen method for this project is to attempt to model the movement of the cone of
the loudspeaker with a neural network. The sound pressure itself was not chosen due to
the fact that several external factors to the loudspeaker affects the sound pressure. The
sound does not radiate homogenously from the loudspeakrer, room acoustics influence
the sound pressure at a listening distance from the loudspeaker. These factors and others
would extend the scope of the project beyond the aim of focusing on the core behaviour
of the loudspeaker.
Therefore this project aims to model the movement of the cone. The cone moves axisally
in and out of the speaker body. This movement can be expressed in terms of the dis­
placement of the cone. Following any displacement there is also the derivatives such as
velocity and acceleration. The acceleration of the cone is the loudspeakers entity most
closely related with the sound pressure output and was therefore chosen as the prediction
target as sound output is the finally desired metric. Therefore, this would provide the most
useful model given that the sound output is the desired function of a loudspeaker.
To further specify the work, to measure the cone movement only one point was measured
on the surface of the cone. This was due to the cone itself being subject to bending.
Bending of the cone can have different behaviour at different input signals, specifically
the frequency component of the signal. In low frequencies the cone behaves in a rigid
fashion, but at high frequencies it bends [21]. As this work concerns itself with a broad
range of frequencies, bending can be of concern. Therefore the measurement point was
chosen as the point of intersection of the cone and the dust cap, as this would be the
stiffest point of the cone and subject to the least amount of distortion.
To model the loudspeaker with neural a neural network deep learning practices were to
be followed.
For the present project it was decided to work with increasingly difficult modelling prob­
lems. By starting simple and increasing the complexity of the problems it was intended to
step by step get the different parts of the method working accordingly and finally reaching
the complexity level of the loudspeaker. Therefore, several sub problems were used.
First was to model synthetic data of a sine wave with a simple feed forward neural network.
Following that exercise a mass spring damper system was defined and synthetic data was
generated and trained on with a more complex neural network, a combination of LSTM
and feed forward neural nets. The next step was to implement a simple loudspeaker
model was generate synthetic data to use with training a LSTM/FF network combination.
Finally, the full complexity of the loudspeaker was modelled using acquired data from the
test measurement setup was used to train a model.
4.1
Program structure
The program was incrementally improved for each sub method implemented. The final
program consisted of a settings section, data generation section, dataloader, training loop
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
13
==PAGE:22==
and visualization. Python was used due to its popularity and availability as a PyTorch
interface.
4.1.1
Training loop
The training loop was as follows below. To note is that all of the training series are eval­
uated and loss is calculated for each before the backpropagation and optimiser step is
performed. The reason why the loss is accumulated is that the weight update should re­
flect all series rather than an update for each series. If the weights are updated between
each series the learning is mostly reflecting the last series, as the gradient is calculated
only for this. This means effectively that the network will not generalise.
for epoch in range(epochs_max):
lossnrmse=np.empty(0)
for samplenumber,(a,labels) in enumerate(train_dataloader):
predictions=model(a) #model([1]) model([1,2,3])
loss = loss_function(predictions, labels) #
lossnrmse=np.append(lossnrmse,NRMSE(model(a),labels))
#nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 1.0)
loss.backward() # move backward out?
optimizer.step()
optimizer.zero_grad()
loss_curve.append(np.average(lossnrmse))
lossnrmse_val=np.empty(0)
with torch.no_grad():
for samplenumber_val,(a_val,labels_val) in enumerate(val_dataloader):
lossnrmse_val = np.append(lossnrmse_val,NRMSE(model(a_val),labels_val))
loss_curve_val.append(np.average(lossnrmse_val))
4.2
Sine wave modelling
To begin the modelling journey it was decided to start small. A simple toy model was the
aim for the first exercise: the sine wave. To validate the basic program structure and use
of libraries this simple example of time series was used. The purpose was entirely to take
a first small step to start the project. Modelling a sine wave perhaps is not useful in its own
for the project but several of the basic implementation parts needs validation. The basic
conversion of numpy to tensor data formats, the training loop, the network architecture,
the training and the visualization. Sine wave time and amplitude data was generated with
the built in python math library function sin. what is usually called time t and amplitude
y is in PyTorch called features and labels. The time feature and the amplitude label was
and stored in Numpy vectors from which feature and label tensors were created.
Specifically time was discretisised into vector t representing time between 0 and 10 sec­
onds with a time step δ = 0.1. For each time step amplitude data y = sin(t) was created.
The values were stored in Numpy vectors and PyTorch DataLoader class was used to
create the necessary tensors from these vectors.
14
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:23==
A three layerfully connected feed forward network was created. The first layer had one
input, the second layer had 5 neurons and the last layer was the output layer. Tanh
activation functions were used on the first and second layer. The loss function was chosen
as mean squared error as it is suitable for regression. The optimizer was chosen to be
Adam.
4.3
Spring mass damper system modelling
Next the complexity of the system to be modelled and the modelling method were in­
creased. This exercise was to attempt to predict a time series of a simple dynamic sys­
tem: the spring mass damper. The spring mass damper system can be seen in figure 4.1
and described with equation where x, ˙x, ¨x denote displacement, velocity and acceleration
respectively and the system has the following physical constants: k spring constant [N/m],
c damping coefficient [Ns/m] and mass [m]. Ab external force Fexternal was acting on the
system.
∑
F = −kx −c ˙x + Fexternal = m¨x
(4.1)
Fexternal = np.sin((c2 + 1) ∗k ∗10)
(4.2)
Figure 4.1: Mass spring damper system
By using a time series systems which underlying physics was entirely known. The purpose
was to ensure that the program was functional before attempting more difficult challenges.
Synthetic data of the system was generated by defining the system equation as a function
and performing numerical integration of the differential equations. This is called initial
value problem solving. The scipy solve_ivp library was used with the default Runge­Kutta
method. Several time series of data were created, each with a different constant c2.
4.4
Speaker
The speaker chosen for the modelling was Peerless PLS­P830986. It is a full range driver,
meaning that it reproduces as much of the audible range as possible.
This driver was chosen as it is a small driver, which typically since it is small it needs to
be able to be used in its non­linear region.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
15
==PAGE:24==
Driver
Peerless PLS­P830986
Transducer Size
76mm
Impedance
8 Ω
Resonance Frequency
131.31 Hz
Sensitivity @ 1W/1m
84.2 dB
Frequency range
100 ­ 20000 Hz
Bl
3.3048
Re
5.3039
M
0.0035
K
2380.3505
Rm
1.0121
L
0.0002
The driver was used in a sealed enclosure with an approximate volume of 0.7L. The
enclosure was filled with fibreglass wool.
Below are two FFT plots of the input signal and the acceleration. In the figure of the input
signal it can be seen by the very steep fall offs at 10 Hz and 10 kHz that the input signal
is band pass filtered, and the slope is characteristic of pink noise.
The figure of the output signal shows the frequency response of the loudspeaker. Here
we can note the steep fall offs from the band pass filtering. More importantly there is a
fall off below the speakers resonance frequency of 131 Hz. It is difficult for the speaker
to reproduce frequencies lower than the resonance frequency. Noting the relatively flat
upper frequency range, above the resonance frequency and below the low pass filter
freqcyency, considering the pink noise input signal slope, the speaker appears to have a
relatively flat frequency response.
Figure 4.2: FFT of input signal
16
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.3: FFT of the acceleration
4.5
Modelling from synthetic data generated from a
fundamental speaker model
A fundamental speaker model was implemented. The most simple model available [6]
was chosen. This model consists of the differential equations:
u = Bl ˙x + Rei + d
dt[iL]
(4.3)
Bli = Kx + Rm ˙x + M ¨x
(4.4)
In this case the input was the applied voltage to the coil, and the output was the acceler­
ation of the speaker cone. Data was generated by discretisation of the above differential
equations. discretisation is the process of dividing a continuous system into a finite num­
ber of discrete elements. This was performed by defining it as an initial value problem.
Together with the differential equations an initial state was set d = 0 v = 0 a = 0. An
initial value solving library from Scipy was used with a set sampling rate and time span.
Several series of data were generated with white noise as an input signal. White noise
was chosen as it contains all possible frequencies and is very simple to generate. The
specific parameters were sample rate 48kHz and length of the series 0.011 s. The white
noise was low pass filtered at a frequency of 1000 hz in attempt to be low enough for
the network to learn successfully and be significantly lower than the Nyquist frequency to
avoid aliasing.
A LSTM and feed forward neural network was constructed based on previous research
on modelling of dynamical systems [13]. The network was created with the following
parameters: 2 LSTM layers followed by 2 fully connected feed forward layers. In each
layer there was 20 neurons. 3 training series were created and 3 validation series were
created. The network was trained during 2000 epochs.
4.6
Main speaker model
For the main speaker model two approaches were considered. One approach was that
the neural network would model the entire speaker. The other approach was that a phys­
ical speaker model ¨x = Pm(u) was to be implemented and used for a priori prediction.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
17
==PAGE:26==
Meaning that the physical model would perform a prediction of the acceleration based on
the measured input voltage. The priori predicted acceleration would then be subtracted
from the actual acceleration data, and the residual was to be modeled with a neural net­
work ¨x = NN(u). Meaning that a neural network was to be added to describe the part
that the classic model did not account for.
¨x = Pm(u) + NN(u)
(4.5)
Example training data generated from the model can be seen in fig ??
Figure 4.4: Fundamental speaker model synthetic data
It was chosen to mainly attempt to model the entire characteristics with the neural net­
work due to several reasons. Using multiple models would increased the complexity of
this project beyond a viable scope. In addition classical models require expert knowledge
of the system and some state variables can not be directly measured. [2]. However an
attempt was made to use the most simple speaker model in conjunction with a neural
network to perform residual modelling. The most simple speaker model introduced in the
previous section was used to predict the acceleration based on the input signal. This pre­
diction was then subtracted from the acquired data and the residual was used as training
data for the neural network.
4.6.1
Aquired data from the physical loudspeaker
Measuements were taken using a Polytec OFV­505 laser sensor, Polytec OVF­5000 vi­
brometer controller and National Instruments USB 4431 measurement device. A ease­
ment of the noise levels were taken, were the amplifier did not output any signal.
Data was recorded from the driver in its non­linear range. Pink noise between 10 hz and
10 khz at 10VRMS was input to the speaker as it is more common in loudspeaker testing
than white noise. Several parameters were recorded during the test. The current was
measured by the testing equipment. The position and velocity of the speaker cone were
measured with a laser. The acceleration of the cone was derived from the velocity data.
The data was sampled at 96 kHz, and 0.5s long recordings were taken. In total 200 files
were recorded.
The data was recorded at 96 kHz, significantly above the nyquist frequency of the pink
noise content.
18
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.5: Loudspeaker measurement data
In the training, files were picked randomly from these 200 files and assigned to either
training or validation data. It was ensured that a file could only be used once for each
session. Random selection of the files were done to ensure that the overall result of the
models during development did not suffer from faults in the data.
The entire length of each measurement file was not used for traning as it increased training
time to an unreasonable extent. Instead a snippet of data was taken starting at time 0.
Eash snippet started at time 0 due to that since a loudspeaker has a memory effect,
meaning previous states influence later states, if the start of the snippet was >0 then
an error would be introduced as it would be impossible to predict as the previous states
were unknown. Regardless of if the influence on the speaker of the previous states would
vanish later in the snippet as the speaker forgot previous states, the model error would
only approach zero, but the error would always remain. One could argue that this would
approach an insignificant level, however by always starting at time 0, an approximation
and judgement of the error would not be needed.
4.6.2
Feature scaling
The scaling of the data was considered an important factor as the voltage feature ranges
in tens of volts while the feature acceleration was on a much smaller scale. Since the
activation functions in a neural network work best in the range of [−1 : 1], for example
tanh. The features were scaled to be approximately on the range of [−1 : 1]. This way
the features could be scaled back with the same scaler, if the model would be used in a
control system.
The network was trained with different scalings applied to the features. Fixed factors were
used as in a loudspeaker application one would need to revert the scaling, and typical
batch normalization is not as straightforward to rescale. Therefore this simpler method
was used.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
19
==PAGE:28==
4.6.3
Measurement noise
When performing measurements of real world systems the measurement equipment and
sensors do not perfectly capture the states of the system. Measurement errors arising for
several different sources can be present in the acquired data. For example nearby electric
equipment can radiate electromagnetic noise that influences the sensor or measurement
equipment. When acquiring the data it is needed to attempt to ensure the quality of the
data. If the noise is high, it will be difficult to distinguish the data from the noise. The
model can not distinguish this either. Moreover when the model’s accuracy is validated
the model error can be judged against the noise.
Therefore a measurement sample of the system while in a resting state was acquired.
In this state there was no input signal to the speaker or amplifier. Therefore there was
no movement of the loudspeaker cone either. Any signal level different from zero could
therefore be considered noise, regardless of source.
The data from the noise measurement and the actual measurement was analysed by
calculating the root mean square of each measurement. The resting state input signal
RMSE amplitude was 0.00067V and acceleration was 0.00025m/s2. The RMSE amplitude
of the input signal of the actual measurement was 7.19377V and 0.00961m/s2. The input
signal was much larger than the corresponding noise level 0.00067/7.19 = 9.32276e −05.
However the acceleration measurement 0.00025/0.0096 = 0.02637 contained much more
noise, around 2.5%.
Considering that the acceleration is actually calculated from the velocity measurement,
it’s useful to investigate it’s noise as well. The velocity noise was 0.0042m/s and the
actual was 0.5676m/s which means the level was 0.0042/0.5676 = 0.0075m/s. Not it is
possible to conclude from this that the differentiation of the velocity signal to achieve the
acceleration increases the noise. Since the noise in the acceleration signal is relatively
high at around 2.6% it can not be expected that the model can achieve a better accuracy
than the noise level.
4.6.4
Downsampling & low­pass filtering
Downsampling is the process of reducing the sample rate and or sample size of the mea­
sured data. A low pass filter is a filter which psases frequency components of the signal
lower than a set cutoff frequency while blocking higher frequency components.
Typically low pass filtering should increase network performance as the complexity of the
signal would decrease as there would be fewer frequency components. In addition lower
sampling rate would allow for either more series or longer series, increasing the training
data.
It was considered wether downsampling and low pass filtering was necessary. However
since the network performed similarly to physical models, it was decided to not use down­
sampling or filtering as the aim of the project was to attempt to construct a model for real
world use, therefore, working a reduced frequency content would not be representative
of the real use case and not answer the research question.
4.6.5
Neural network
The neural network was implemented and trained in PyTorch due to its popularity and
that it contained the methods suitable for the project such as recurrent neural networks
and LSTM networks. An LSTM network with additional feed­forward layers was chosen
as it has beens shown that LSTM networks by themselves does not work well for non­
linear systems modelling [13]. Relu activation function was chosen as its shown better
performance than others like tanh [12]
20
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:29==
First the baseline parameters are introduced, and the difference i each test is mentioned
in the test section. In deep learning the hyperparameters are chosen from know­how
and experimenting. Neurons are typically between 5 and 50 neurons for this type of net.
The learning rate is typically on the magnitude of 1e −3. The computation time is very
dependent of the number of epochs and sometimes this can be increased to very large
numbers as some models loss simply plateu. In other models the loss can increase when
attempting to learn beyond the optima found. Therefore the epochs are set to a typically
large number while managing computatoin time to fit development schedule.
Parameter
base value
Number of samples
12000
Samplerate
96000
Tmax
0.125
Neurons
50
Epochs
5000
Leanring rate
0.01
Series
20
Validation series
3
Test series
3 l9
Mean squared error was chosen as the loss function for training it is one of the most com­
mon loss functions and suitable for regression [22] [23] Mean square error is the average
of the difference of the prediction and the label.
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(l −p)2
(4.6)
Note that for the results presented in the report are normalized mean square error because
it is more suitable to judge the accuracy with an error proportional to the signal amplitude.
However it is not used for training as it is not common practice or available in the PyTorch
standard implementation.
NRMSE =
√
1
n
∑n
i=1(l −p)2
1
n
∑n
i=1 l2
(4.7)
Training was performed on an older consumer desktop PC equipped with a Intel 7700k
& Nvidia GTX 1080. Training time was anywhere from 30 minutes to 12 hours for the
different models tested.
Spikes in the loss curves were often observed. This called exploding gradient. However
it was not possible to solve without compromising the accuracy of the model. Different
methods to avoid the exploding gradient was attempted: L1 & L2 regularization and gra­
dient clipping. As these methods did not work in this case, it was attempted to manually
judge the loss curve and report the results in an accurate manner. Meaning by observing
the loss curve and attempting to only report results obtained when the loss was stable.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Training loss curve
4.6.6
Parameter study
There are several different parameters that determine the accuracy of the model. Some
are related to the neural network, these are called hyperparameters and these are: batch
size, learning rate, number of neurons and number of layers. Others are the type of
activation function, the frequency range of the data.
Neurons
The number of neurons in a net can be adjusted. One experiment was made to investi­
gate. With all else kept the same except the datasets which were always randomly picked
the following results were found. 5000 epochs, 96khz sample rate, 0.01 learning rate, 20
series, 3 validation series, no downsampling, 1x voltage scaler 100x acceleration scaler.
Measurement length
The number of samples was also a part of the parameter study. It means that the network
is training on a longer snippet of the measurement. This was to experiment with the
memory properties of the speaker, it has a memory of previous states, as it is a dynamical
system, typically this is related to the speakers resonance frequency.
Learning rate
Learning rate can be important for learning stability and the ability to learn during rea­
sonable timeframes. Too fast of a learning rate can mean instable learning and too slow
learning rate and the highest possible accuracy might not be achieved within the time
given to the network to train.
4.6.7
Optimizer
Two different optimizer functions were evaluated: SGD and Adam.
4.6.8
Residual model
It was attempted to improve the accuracy of the neural network by implementing a residual
model. The most simple speaker model presented before was implemented. The speaker
input voltage signal from the acquired data was used with the initial value problem solver
to perform a prediction of the acceleration. This priori prediction was then subtracted from
the measured acceleration data, and the resulting residual acceleration data was used for
training.
22
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:31==
4.7
Results
In this chapter, the performance of the models is presented. Of main interest is the accu­
racy of the models and the ability to train them. Important to note is that the process of data
acquisition of the loudspeaker was a relatively short process, the equipment and measure­
ment software was already developed, and only the actual measurements needed to be
taken. This process was done in approximately 30 minutes. First, the result of the simple
example with the feed­forward network approximating the sine wave is presented. Sec­
ond, the mass spring damper system model is presented as a second step in modelling
complexity. Following is the synthetic data from the fundamental speaker model, where
white noise was used as an input to the speaker model and the acceleration data was
generated. Finally, the main focus is the training of the LSTM and feed­forward network
on the measurement data from an actual loudspeaker.
4.7.1
Sine: synthetic data
The simple feed­forward layer network successfully learned the simple sine wave. The
training was run for 1000 epochs and achieved a normalised mean square error of 0.0121
or 1.21 %. From the loss curve fig 4.7that the learning decreased the error and stabilized
at a low level. The prediction and label can also be examined visually fig 4.8 With this
result it was concluded that the environment and basic setup worked.
Figure 4.7: Sine example training loss
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.8: Sine prediction and label
4.7.2
Mass spring damper: synthetic data
The LSTM and feed­forward combined network was able to significantly capture the char­
acteristics of the mass­spring­damper system. From this simple exercise without much
effort in attaining a high accuracy, the model still showed a clear fit to the data as shown in
figure ?? and figure ?? where the training and validation series respectively are predicted
and compared. Analysing the loss curve 4.11 it can be seen that the validation loss is
higher than the training loss, this is not desired when creating a model.
Figure 4.9: MSD training prediction
24
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.10: MSD validation predictions
Figure 4.11: MSD loss curve
MSD
Result
Average NRMSE training loss
0.069
Average NRMSE validation
loss
0.229
4.7.3
Fundamental speaker model: synthetic data
The fundamental speaker model was not possible to perform any significant learning. The
loss plateaued at approximately NRMSE 1.0, using the same network as the data­driven
model. The training data can be seen in fig 4.12 and the loss curve 4.13 clearly shows
insufficient learning.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.12: White noise and acceleration training data
Figure 4.13: Loss curve for the fundamental speaker model
4.7.4
Data driven model
The results of the data­driven model are presented in this section. There was a signifi­
cant difference in the model accuracy depending on some of the hyperparameters tested.
The training of the models took between 30 minutes and 18 hours, depending on the
hyperparameters.
Neurons
The test with different numbers of neurons was performed with the base setting the same
for both tests, while only modifying the number of neurons for one of the tests. Hence
nets with 50 and 20 neurons were tested and the following result was g. In this particular
case, it was not beneficial to increase the number of neurons from 20 to 50.
Neurons
20
50
Training NRMSE
0.044
0.050
Validation NRMSE
0.064
0.073
Average test NRMSE
0.069
0.091
Learning rate
The test with different learning rates was performed. The slower learning rate achieved
significantly worse accuracy than the faster learning rate.
26
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:35==
Learning rate
0.001
0.01
Training NRMSE
0.233
0.050
Validation NRMSE
0.422
0.073
Test average NRMSE
0.406
0.091
4.7.5
Samples
A test was made to investigate the importance of a number of samples for each training
series. Again a balance between training time and possible accuracy was done. Two
tests were performed with all other parameters equal. One test with 5000 samples and
one test with 12000 samples. Note that the timespan was different as the sampling rate
did not change. The result is presented in the table below. It is possible to see that the
validation performance was much worse with the shorter series.
Number of samples
12000
5000
Training NRMSE
0.043
0.056
Validation NRMSE
0.0644
0.2017
Test average NRMSE
0.0689
0.1988
4.7.6
Optimiser
When comparing Adam and SGD optimisers it was clearly shown that the SGD optimiser
did not work at all. The training plateaued at the normalised mean square loss of 1.0,
meaning no significant training at all. The network only learnt to predict an output of 0 as
seen in fig ??. The lack of significant learning can be seen in the loss curve in fig 4.14
These tests were performed with the following parameters: 5 neurons, 500 epochs, 3
series and 1000 samples for faster training time. The loss curve from the Adam optimiser
instead shows significant learning, in this example, it did not obtain a high­accuracy model,
however, it succeeded in performing significant learning.
Figure 4.14: SGD loss curve
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.15: Adam loss curve
Figure 4.16: Prediction of network trained with SGD
4.7.7
Residual model
The residual model was compared with a normal model, it performed significantly worse.
Model
Net only
Residual
model
Training NRMSE
0.044
0.112
Validation NRMSE
0.064
0.302
Test average NRMSE
0.069
0.199
28
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:37==
5
Conclusion
The possibility of neural networks to model non­linear dynamical systems, specifically
loudspeakers was investigated. By creating, training and evaluating neural network mod­
els for several different modelling problems, sine wave, mass spring damper, loudspeaker
synthetic data and loudspeaker measurement data accuracy results were acquired. As
previous works exist on both loudspeaker modelling and neural network modelling the
results presented here could be set into context.
From the accuracy of the models of the sine wave, mass spring damper and the data­
driven loudspeaker modelling it was shown that the models were able to learn from the
data. This is expected as shown in previous works, as neural networks are function ap­
proximators. This work contributed to showing that it was possible also for the specific
application of loudspeakers. The novelty was the extended frequency range compared
to previous works.
In this thesis, it was shown that it was possible to fit a model to both the synthetic data and
the measured data, except for data from the fundamental speaker model. Of most inter­
est is the modelling of the loudspeaker performed on the actual measured data from the
loudspeaker. It was shown that the model could fit well, similarly to other works like [18]
but with a wider frequency range, rendering the model useful not only for subwoofer­type
loudspeakers but also such systems that cover for example the vocal range of frequen­
cies.
The best accuracy achieved by the neural net when trained on measured data was ap­
proximately 93% on the test set data. Also note that the noise was 2.6%, and that we
consider noise to be random, and not possible to predict. Therefore it can be judged
that the maximum theoretical accuracy would be 97,4%. Any higher accuracy would be
considered over fitting.
Residual modelling achieved much lower accuracy, but the root cause was not specifically
investigated. Possibly the method of simply subtracting the physical model prediction
from the label data before training was an incorrect method. It could be that the data
subtracted was actually needed for the prediction, and if the prediction was performed by
the neural net, those states would be contained in the LSTM neuron’s memory. These
states were probably needed for the calculation of other effects as there could be multi­
factor interactions.
The work performed with the specified loudspeaker suggests that a neural network can
model the output of a loudspeaker on a similar magnitude of accuracy as a physical model.
Physical models have achieved approximately 94 % accuracy while the neural net in this
thesis has an accuracy of 93 %. Although not directly comparable it is a reasonable
judgement that they perform similarly as the frequency span and type of loudspeaker
were the same.
Network hyperparameters have a significant effect on the accuracy of the model, most
importantly learning rate, optimiser and the number of samples of each time series. The
optimiser was critical as one of the two tested, SGD did not perform any significant learning
at all, while the other, Adam performed adequately.
Learning suffered from exploding gradient, therefore the result must be closely monitored
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
29
==PAGE:38==
as it is quite likely that the accuracy is low on the final epoch. However, this can be worked
around by running the training several times until a good result has been achieved.
The data set was considered large enough as the data available for training was enough to
achieve a reasonable accuracy. 200 measurement series were aquired but for the results
presented in this work 20 series were used. Not all series were used due to computation
time. Therefore the work suggests that modelling with a neural network is a feasible
method, as the data acquisition or training was not time­intensive.
30
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:39==
6
Discussion
Primarily this work shows that non­linear loudspeakers of moving coil type can be mod­
elled in a broader frequency range than previously known. This opens up the possibility
for the use of these models in wider applications than subwoofers. The applications can
be in important fields such as hearing aids.
In addition, the work of modelling with neural networks can be more generic than physical
models. If similar systems as loudspeakers exist and there exists a need for modelling
of those, this method could potentially be more straightforward to be used in those cases
as well. Some examples could be vibration equipment such as shaker tables which are
equipment used for vibration testing of products. A shaker table is driven with a coil much
as a loudspeaker, and the aim is to introduce a vibration on an object attached to the table.
A high accuracy of the vibration characteristics can enable better product development
and compliance testing.
Judging the accuracy of the model is difficult but an attempt was made. The choice of
modelling variables differed from some of the previous works. This work predicted ac­
celeration from input voltage as it was considered to provide a useful model. However,
within the scope of this project, it was wise to limit the work to one input variable and one
output variable as the project duration was very specific.
In general, what constitutes good accuracy in machine learning is yet subjective, however,
it is generally known that 90% accuracy is considered as a cut­off. Also, the comparison
with previous works that were also above 90% accuracy gave more merit to this cut­off.
The best model achieved approximately 93% accuracy on the test series which is above
this 90% threshold.
The low accuracy result of the residual modelling suggests that the method used was
perhaps incorrect as the literature shows that residual modelling achieves higher accuracy
than that. However, it was not the main focus of the work to investigate residual modelling,
but an interesting addition.
The possibility of modelling loudspeakers with deep learning allows for the use of the
models in feed­forward control to achieve a higher­quality sound. It also contributes to
the general modelling technique that is deep learning which can be used without prior
expert knowledge of the dynamical system itself and can possibly be extended to other
dynamical systems.
There were many pitfalls which prevented the model from learning at all, for example, as
shown the SGD optimiser did not manage to significantly learn at all. This is possibly a
pure programming mistake or an incorrect use of PyTorch incompatible methods.
As computation time was limited, when the highest accuracy model was found there was
limited time to run new training with more data, longer series and higher number of se­
ries. During development, there were indications that using 100 series was beneficial
compared to 20 series, but those tests lacked test series and suffered from an incorrect
calculation of the normalised mean square error. The incorrect calculation consisted of
using the same series for the denominator regardless of which series error was to be
calculated. However, since both the tests of 20 series and 100 series suffered from the
same bug, this indication can still be used as a motivation to run a learning with 100 series.
However, it was not of main focus to achieve the highest possible accuracy.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
31
==PAGE:40==
Another issue regarding accuracy was the noise introduced in the differentiation of the
velocity signal to acquire the acceleration signal. The NumPy library np.diff was used,
and it was tested that the library np.gradient performed better with approximately 1%
lower error. Again the focus was not to achieve the highest possible accuracy, so time
was not spent on re­running all the parameter searches. However, it is also an indication
of that a higher accuracy could possibly be attained if the noise was reduced.
32
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:41==
7
Further work
It is suggested to experiment with data sets acquired from other loudspeakers to validate
whether the network can be trained on other loudspeakers. The upper frequency should
be increased to 20 kHz as this is the limit of human hearing. This would therefore in­
clude all audible sounds and possibly enable full­range loudspeaker modelling. It is also
suggested to further improve the network by a deeper parameter study, possibly imple­
menting neural architecture search to find optimal parameters. As residual modelling has
been shown to perform well in other works it is also suggested to investigate further why
the accuracy was so low in this project. In addition, it is a suggestion to measure the
actual sound output and attempt to model it directly instead of the acceleration as was
modelled here. This would provide an even better model as the radiation of the sound
and the cone flexibility would be included in the model.
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Antoine Garcon et al. “Deep neural networks to recover unknown physical param­
eters from oscillating time series”. In: PLOS ONE 17.5 (May 2022). Ed. by Sheetal
Kalyani, e0268439. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0268439. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1371%2Fjournal.pone.0268439.
[2]
Boyuan Chen et al. Discovering State Variables Hidden in Experimental Data. 2021.
arXiv: 2112.10755 [math.DS].
[3]
Joshua E. S. Socolar. “Nonlinear Dynamical Systems”. In: Complex Systems Sci­
ence in Biomedicine. Ed. by Thomas S. Deisboeck and J. Yasha Kresh. Boston, MA:
Springer US, 2006, pp. 115–140. ISBN: 978­0­387­33532­2. DOI: 10.1007/978-0-
387-33532-2_3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-33532-2_3.
[4]
J. Nathan Kutz et al. Dynamic Mode Decomposition. Philadelphia, PA: Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2016. DOI: 10.1137/1.9781611974508. eprint:
https://epubs.siam.org/doi/pdf/10.1137/1.9781611974508. URL: https://epubs.siam.
org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611974508.
[5]
Finn Agerkvist. “Modelling loudspeaker non­linearities”. In: Audio engineering soci­
ety conference: 32nd international conference: dsp for loudspeakers. Audio Engi­
neering Society. 2007.
[6]
Franz Maria Heuchel and Finn T Agerkvist. “A quantitative comparison of linear and
nonlinear loudspeaker models.” In: 24th International Congress on Acoustics. 2022.
[7]
Anton Maximilian Schäfer and Hans Georg Zimmermann. “Recurrent Neural Net­
works Are Universal Approximators”. In: Artificial Neural Networks – ICANN 2006.
Ed. by Stefanos D. Kollias et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2006, pp. 632–640. ISBN: 978­3­540­38627­8.
[8]
Guangjian Ni, Stephen Elliott, and Andrew Langley. “Dynamics and Waves in Loud­
speaker Cones”. In: PROCEEDINGS OF INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON
NOISE AND VIBRATION ENGINEERING (ISMA2012) / INTERNATIONAL CON­
FERENCE ON UNCERTAINTY IN STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS (USD2012). Ed. by
P Sas, D Moens, and S Jonckheere. International Conference on Noise and Vi­
bration Engineering (ISMA) / International Conference on Uncertainty in Structural
Dynamics (USD), KU Leuven, Dept Mech Engn, Leuven, BELGIUM, SEP 17­19,
2012. 2012, pp. 4185–4192. ISBN: 978­90­73802­89­6.
[9]
B. T. G. Tan. “Fundamental resonant frequency of a loudspeaker”. In: American
Journal of Physics 50.4 (Apr. 1982), pp. 348–351. ISSN: 0002­9505. DOI: 10.1119/
1.13040. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aapt/ajp/article-pdf/50/4/348/11467257/348\
_1\_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1119/1.13040.
[10]
Karsten3 Øyen. “Compensation of Loudspeaker Nonlinearities”. In: 2007.
[11]
Andrinandrasana David Rasamoelina, Fouzia Adjailia, and Peter Sinčák. “A Review
of Activation Function for Artificial Neural Network”. In: 2020 IEEE 18th World Sym­
posium on Applied Machine Intelligence and Informatics (SAMI). 2020, pp. 281–
286. DOI: 10.1109/SAMI48414.2020.9108717.
[12]
Glorot et al. “Deep Sparse Rectifier Neural Networks”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12
(2011). ISSN: 1532­4435.
[13]
Jesús Gonzalez and Wen Yu. “Non­linear system modeling using LSTM neural net­
works”. In: IFAC­PapersOnLine 51.13 (2018). 2nd IFAC Conference on Modelling,
Identification and Control of Nonlinear Systems MICNON 2018, pp. 485–489. ISSN:
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
35
==PAGE:44==
2405­8963. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.07.326. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405896318310814.
[14]
Lennart Ljung. “SOME ASPECTS ON NONLINEAR SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION”.
In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 39.1 (2006). 14th IFAC Symposium on Identification
and System Parameter Estimation, pp. 110–121. ISSN: 1474­6670. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.3182/20060329-3-AU-2901.00009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1474667015352459.
[15]
Christian Møldrup Legaard et al. “Constructing Neural Network­Based Models for
Simulating Dynamical Systems”. In: CoRR abs/2111.01495 (2021). arXiv: 2111 .
01495. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.01495.
[16]
Daniel Gert Nielsen et al. “Estimation of Optimal Values for Lumped Elements in
a Finite Element — Lumped Parameter Model of a Loudspeaker”. In: Journal of
Theoretical and Computational Acoustics (2020). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:224942559.
[17]
Pascal M. Brunet et al. “Application of AI techniques for Nonlinear control of loud­
speakers”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 151. Oct. 2021. URL: http:
//www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=21499.
[18]
Pascal M. Brunet et al. “New application of AI techniques for Nonlinear control of
loudspeakers”. In: 24th International Congress on Acoustics.
[19]
Lennart Ljung et al. “Deep Learning and System Identification￿￿This research was
financially supported by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (SSF) via
the project ASSEMBLE (contract number: RIT15­0012) and by the Swedish Re­
search Council via the projects Learning flexible models for nonlinear dynamics
(contract number: 2017­03807) and NewLEADS ­ New Directions in Learning Dy­
namical Systems (contract number: 621­2016­06079). Ljung’s work was supported
by Vinnova’s Competence Center LinkSic.” In: IFAC­PapersOnLine 53.2 (2020).
21st IFAC World Congress, pp. 1175–1181. ISSN: 2405­8963. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2020.12.1329. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2405896320317353.
[20]
Stephen Low and Malcolm J. Hawksford. “A Neural Network Approach to the Adap­
tive Correction of Loudspeaker Nonlinearities”. In: Audio Engineering Society Con­
vention 95. Oct. 1993. URL: http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=6482.
[21]
Guangjian Ni, Steve Elliott, and Andrew Langley. “Dynamics and Waves in Loud­
speaker Cones”. In: Sept. 2012.
[22]
URL: https://machinelearningmastery.com/loss-and-loss-functions-for-training-deep-
learning-neural-networks/.
[23]
URL: https : / / towardsdatascience . com / loss - functions - and - their - use - in - neural -
networks-a470e703f1e9.
36
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:45==
Python code for the PyTorch LSTM and Feed forward network
class␣Net2(nn.Module):
␣␣␣␣def␣__init__(self):
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣super(Net2,␣self).__init__()
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣self.fc1␣=␣nn.Linear(n_neurons,n_neurons)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣self.fc2␣=␣nn.Linear(n_neurons,n_neurons)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣self.fc3␣=␣nn.Linear(n_neurons,n_neurons)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣self.fc␣=␣nn.Linear(n_neurons,␣1)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣self.lstm1␣=␣nn.LSTM(input_size=n_features,␣hidden_size=n_neurons,num_layers=1)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣self.lstm2␣=␣nn.LSTM(input_size=n_neurons,␣hidden_size=n_neurons,num_layers=2)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣self.lstm3␣=␣nn.LSTM(input_size=n_neurons,␣hidden_size=n_neurons)
␣␣␣␣def␣forward(self,␣x):
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣out␣=␣self.lstm1(x)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣#out␣=␣nn.functional.tanh(lstm_out[0])
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣out␣=␣self.lstm2(out[0])
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣#out=nn.functional.tanh(lstm_out2[0])
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣out␣=␣nn.functional.relu(self.fc1(out[0]))
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣out␣=␣nn.functional.relu(self.fc2(out))
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣out␣=␣self.fc(out)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣return␣out
Python code for the training loop
with␣alive_bar(epochs_max,length=20,spinner=None,elapsed=False)␣as␣bar:
␣␣␣␣for␣epoch␣in␣range(epochs_max):
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣lossnrmse=np.empty(0)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣for␣samplenumber,(a,labels)␣in␣enumerate(train_dataloader):
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣predictions=model(a)␣#model([1])␣model([1,2,3])
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣loss␣=␣loss_function(predictions,␣labels)␣#
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣lossnrmse=np.append(lossnrmse,NRMSE(model(a),labels))
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣#print("a␣",a,"labels␣",␣labels,"loss",loss)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣#nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(),␣1.0)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣loss.backward()␣#␣move␣backward␣out?
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣#␣#print␣loss␣to␣see␣if␣acumulate␣gradient
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣optimizer.step()
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣optimizer.zero_grad()
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣loss_curve.append(np.average(lossnrmse))
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣lossnrmse_val=np.empty(0)
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣with␣torch.no_grad():
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣for␣samplenumber_val,(a_val,labels_val)␣in␣enumerate(val_dataloader):
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣lossnrmse_val␣=␣np.append(lossnrmse_val,NRMSE(model(a_val),labels_val))
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣loss_curve_val.append(np.average(lossnrmse_val))
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
37
==PAGE:46==
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣bar()
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣bartext=str(np.average(lossnrmse))+"␣"+str(NRMSE(model(a_val),labels_val))
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣bar.text(bartext)
38
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
==PAGE:47==
Machine learning methods for modelling of dynamic systems
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 303
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/graduate/msc-programmes/electrical-engineering
