==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
ATMS-SIoT: A Remote Attestation-based Trust
Management System in Social IoT
Bahawal Waraich (s202427)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The Internet of Things (IoT) has ushered in a world teeming with diverse smart ob-
jects with unique identities and capabilities. However, this proliferation of IoT devices
has posed significant challenges in trust management, primarily due to the inherent
heterogeneity and scalability issues within the IoT ecosystem. This thesis centres on
the concept of the Social Internet of Things (SIoT), which combines IoT with social
networks, allowing smart objects to establish social relationships to collaborate and
achieve specific objectives autonomously. In particular, this thesis concentrated on
Trust management in the SIoT paradigm, where many existing approaches predomi-
nantly rely on probabilistic trust models, leaving room for improvement.
This master’s thesis undertakes the integration of Remote Attestation into a SIoT
trust management system. Remote attestation can provide a valuable non-probabilistic
metric for calculating trust. The research delves into the current landscape of trust
management in SIoT and remote attestation within the IoT domain while also provid-
ing insights into designing a novel trust model in the SIoT paradigm. Furthermore,
it investigates how this integration impacts trust assessment in the context of SIoT.
Noteworthy contributions of this thesis encompass an extensive literature review that
sheds light on the existing trust management systems in SIoT and remote attestation
approaches within IoT. The proposal of ATMS-SIoT is a novel trust management
system combining both probabilistic and non-probabilistic trust metrics.
The im-
plementation of ATMS-SIoT through simulation provides evidence of its enhanced
accuracy and reliability.
This research endeavour ultimately seeks to advance trust management in SIoT by
bridging the gap between probabilistic and non-probabilistic trust approaches.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the require-
ments for acquiring an MSc degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, October 6, 2023
Bahawal Waraich (s202427)Bahawal Waraich
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to my family
for their unwavering support and unwavering love throughout my academic journey.
Their belief in me has been an incredible source of motivation, and I am profoundly
grateful for their sacrifices and understanding.
I would also like to express my heartfelt appreciation to my girlfriend, Marie Højte
Lynggaard, for her consistent encouragement, patience, and understanding.
Furthermore, I am profoundly grateful to my mentors, with a special acknowledge-
ment to Edlira Dushku, for her invaluable guidance, expertise, and mentorship. Edlira’s
insights and dedication have been instrumental in shaping my research and academic
development.
I would also like to extend my appreciation to Nicola Dragoni for
his valuable contributions to my academic journey, which have further enriched my
growth in this field.
To all those who have contributed to my master’s thesis in various capacities, your
support has been absolutely indispensable. I deeply appreciate your involvement in
this journey, which I am honoured to share with you all.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
SIoT Paradigm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Trust in SIoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Remote Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Related Work
29
3.1
Survey of Existing Trust Management Schemes In SIoT
. . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Survery of Existing Remote Attestation Schemes In IoT . . . . . . . .
37
4
The Proposed Solution: ATMS-SIoT
45
4.1
System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Adversary Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Security Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Trust Management Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.5
Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.6
Remote Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.7
Trust Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.8
Trust Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Validation
57
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.1
Trust Convergence of Normal Device Based On Trust Update Decay
Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Trust Convergence of Nodes Device On HAS Decay Factor . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Trust Convergence of Malicious Device Trust Update Decay Factor . .
60
5.4
Trust Convergence of Malicious Device Based On HAS Decay Factor .
61
5.5
Resilience Against On-Off, Good and Bad-Mouthing Attacks
. . . . .
62
5.6
Comparision to CTMS-SIOT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.7
Implementation Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Conclusion
69
6.1
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A
Appendix
73
A.1 Implementation Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a promising paradigm which describes a new world of
billions of pervasive and heterogeneous smart objects, such as sensors, smartphones,
computers and actuators, in which everything has a unique identity. These smart
objects have distinct features, such as operating systems, platforms, communication
protocols, and computing capabilities. Despite these differences, they can communi-
cate, interact, and reach a common goal. These smart connected objects/things have
demonstrated their effectiveness in different application areas such as smart homes,
energy, e-health, mobility, agriculture, and transportation, to name a few. However,
heterogeneity and scalability are the key challenges hindering large-scale IoT adoption
in any new application domain.
In order to address these challenges of heterogeneity and scalability badly faced
by the traditional IoT, a new paradigm that mimics relationship-building ability as
a core principle has emerged, called Social Internet of Things (SIoT). SIoT refers to
the convergence of IoT and Social Networks to create a network in which objects
can establish social relationships autonomously and perform desired actions to realise
specific goals. In SIoT, the objects can interact with each other and behave like social
agents. They can request and provide the services in the network while maintaining
their individuality. SIoT offers several benefits:
1. The social network structure can be tailored to provide navigability and scala-
bility as the number of connected objects increases.
2. Models for studying social networks can be applied to reveal how objects estab-
lish social relationships and search for information and services.
3. Trustworthiness can be established among objects in the SIoT to facilitate co-
operation and service delivery.
Establishing trust within the Social Internet of Things (SIoT) largely depends on the
probabilistic trust model, known as Social Trust. The primary benefit of these trust
relationships is the enhancement of security. By employing a solid trust mechanism,
the potential risks from harmful entities within the network can be mitigated.
Numerous methodologies have been proposed to address trust management in
SIoT. These methodologies usually employ a probabilistic trust model. A select few
venture into combining both probabilistic and non-probabilistic trust calculations.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
However, a common limitation among these models is their narrow focus on Quality
of Service (QoS) metrics, such as location, energy, and computational abilities.
The introduction of Remote Attestation (RA) in IoT offers an effective approach
to non-probabilistic trust calculation. This method in IoT security aims to ascer-
tain the trustworthiness of devices within a network. The continuous integration of
IoT devices into daily operations and essential infrastructures makes ensuring their
security paramount.
Yet, the inherent constraints in many of these devices, such
as limited computational power, storage, and energy, make the implementation of
conventional security measures challenging. RA, at its foundation, leverages crypto-
graphic techniques to authenticate and validate a device’s current state. Through
this, an external body termed the verifier, can assess if the device, referred to as the
prover, remains uncompromised and authentic.
One of the most notable aspects of RA is its ability to work with devices that have
limited resources. Traditional verification methods often demand extensive computa-
tional power or high-resource operations, which might be impractical for many IoT
devices. In contrast, RA is designed to operate within these limits, offering a depend-
able verification method without imposing undue stress on the device. Moreover, RA
facilitates the prompt detection of any deviations or irregularities in a device’s oper-
ations. RA can promptly identify such discrepancies if a device veers off its standard
operational guidelines or displays indications of a breach. This technique not only
confirms the authenticity of the software operating on the device but also verifies its
unaltered state.
Implementing RA into an SIoT trust management system could provide a signifi-
cant improvement in the reliability and accuracy of such systems. Hence, This thesis
presents a detailed trust model for SIoT, integrating both Social Trust (probabilis-
tic) and Remote Attestation (non-probabilistic). This model takes into account the
inherent challenges associated with SIoT and potential trust-related threats.
1.1
Problem Statement
In order to improve the reliability and accuracy of assessing trust in devices within a
Social IoT network, it is important to consider integrating remote attestation into a
trust framework. This would create an alternative to relying solely on social trust and
QoS trust for calculating trust. A more robust SIoT trust model can be developed by
exploring this potential integration. Therefore, the aim of this thesis can be expressed
as the following: How can Remote Attestation be implemented in a Social
IoT Trust Management System?
The problem statement can be further divided into research questions:
• RQ1: What are the state-of-the-art approaches for developing a robust Trust
Management System in the Social IoT paradigm? What are their advantages
and limitations?
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Project Scope
3
• RQ2: What are the state-of-the-art approaches in Remote Attestation in IoT?
Which of these would be suited to the SIoT Paradigm?
• RQ3: How can we design a novel trust approach that improves the existing
probabilistic trust protocols in Social IoT?
• RQ4: How does the proposed trust approach enhance the overall reliability
and accuracy of the trust assessment in SIoT?
1.2
Project Scope
The thesis is concerned with integrating remote attestation into trust management in
a Social IoT context. It does not consider other aspects of Social IoT such as Service
Discovery.
1.3
Contributions
The contributions of this thesis can be summarised as follows:
• C1: This project provides a comprehensive literature review on the state-of-the-
art Trust Management Systems in the SIoT paradigm. In addition, it provides a
comparison that highlights the strengths and weaknesses of the current different
types of Trust Management Systems.
• C2: This project proposes a novel approach, called ATMS-SIoT, that integrates
a probabilistic trust approach and remote attestation protocols. The main goal
of the proposed approach is to improve state-of-the-art trust by offering a more
effective trust solution for Social IoT.
• C3: The project simulates the proposed approach using a simulation imple-
mented in Python. The experimental results show that ATMS-SIoT is more
accurate and reliable than other Trust Management Systems.
1.4
Thesis Structure
Chapter 2 serves as a foundational introduction, helping readers grasp essential
concepts. It begins by giving an overview of the Social Internet of Things (SIoT)
paradigm. Then, it dives into explaining trust in the context of SIoT. Finally, it pro-
vides a clear explanation of Remote Attestation in the broader realm of the Internet
of Things (IoT).
In Chapter 3, an in-depth literature review is presented, focusing on two key areas:
trust management schemes in the Social IoT domain and remote attestation schemes
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
within the broader IoT framework. This review explores various strategies for as-
sessing and managing trust, including models tailored to the specific needs of Social
IoT. It also delves into recent developments and challenges in remote attestation for
maintaining IoT device integrity. The insights gathered from the literature review
lay the foundation for justifying the need for a trust management system rooted in
remote attestation.
Chapter 4 shifts the spotlight to introducing the core of the thesis: the trust manage-
ment system built around remote attestation. This chapter provides a comprehensive
presentation of the network structure, system model, adversary model, security re-
quirements, and the blueprint of the trust management protocol.
In Chapter 5, the focus is on practical implementation. The proposed solution is
put to the test using a Python-based simulation to validate its effectiveness.
Ad-
ditionally, this chapter offers a rigorous security analysis of the proposed solution,
enhancing its credibility.
Lastly, Chapter 6 marks the conclusion of the thesis journey. It analyses the ob-
tained results and the overall contributions made by the work. This chapter provides
a conclusive response to the fundamental question that drove the thesis exploration.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter provides a comprehensive exploration of the characteristics inherent to
the Social Internet of Things (SIoT) paradigm. It subsequently delves deeply into
the intricate and multifaceted nature of trust within the context of SIoT, elucidat-
ing the challenges that arise. Moreover, the chapter offers a detailed exposition on
the concept of remote attestation, underscoring its significant potential in bolstering
security within the broader Internet of Things (IoT) framework.
By establishing a solid foundation, this chapter facilitates a nuanced understand-
ing of the intricate interplay between these fundamental concepts. It thereby serves
as a pivotal precursor to the forthcoming practical investigations presented within
this paper.
2.1
SIoT Paradigm
In 2001, P. Mendes [MM11] introduced the idea of socialising objects, where objects
could engage in conversations similar to human social networks. Later, another study
[GFT10] explored scenarios in which a person with a smart object could share services
with their friend’s smart objects through their social circle. This eventually led to the
development of the Social IoT (SIoT) paradigm [AIM11], where social networking con-
cepts are integrated into the IoT domain. In the SIoT, each object, known as a Social
Object, can autonomously establish social relationships with other objects according
to the rules and policies set by their owners. SIoT characteristics depend heavily on
social relationships among objects and their owners. The five main relationship types
are:
• Co-location Object Relationships (CLOR) refer to the relationships be-
tween objects that are located in the same physical space. For instance, if two
or more objects, such as sensors and actuators, provide services in a home or
industrial automation environment, they can establish a CLOR [Atz+12].
• Co-work Object Relationships (CWOR) refer to the connections between
objects that collaborate with each other in a common IoT application to achieve
a shared goal.
Unlike CLOR, CWOR emphasises the working relationships
between objects rather than their physical locations [Atz+12].
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
• Ownership Object Relationships (OOR) refer to the connections between
objects and their respective owners. For example, a person can own multiple
devices such as smartphones, tablets, and laptops, resulting in a high likelihood
of interaction between these objects [Atz+12].
• Parental Object Relationships (POR) refer to the connections between
objects that have the same manufacturer and were produced within the same
time period. For instance, two smartphones of the same model and manufac-
turer may establish a POR [Atz+12].
• Social Object Relationships (SOR) are created when two or more objects
interact with each other, similar to human relationships. For example, if two
people are friends and frequently meet, their smartphones may establish a social
connection based on the rules and policies set by the owners [Atz+12].
Additionally, there are a few less common object relationships [MS+19], such as:
• Sibling object relationships: Refer to the connections between objects that
are produced by the same manufacturer but are not of the same model or
production batch.
• Guest Object Relationships: Refer to connections between objects that
are not owned by any person within a particular location or context but are
allowed temporary access by the owner of that location or context. For example,
a person may temporarily allow guests to access their home Wi-Fi network by
providing a password. In such a scenario, the guest object relationships can be
established between the guest devices and the owner’s devices.
• Guardian Object Relationships: Refers to the connections between objects
that have a hierarchical relationship, in which one object acts as a guardian
or caretaker for another object. For example, a wearable device may act as a
guardian for a person’s health-related devices, such as a blood pressure monitor
or a glucose monitor, by tracking the data collected by these devices and alerting
the person or their healthcare provider of any concerning changes.
• Stranger Object Relationships: Refer to connections between objects that
have no prior interaction history and no pre-existing relationships. For example,
when two strangers with no prior connection come in contact with each other,
their devices may establish a stranger-object relationship.
• Service Object Relationships: Refer to the connections between objects
that interact with each other through the exchange of services. For example,
a smart thermostat in a home may establish a service object relationship with
an air conditioning unit, where the thermostat provides temperature readings
and the air conditioning unit adjusts its settings accordingly to maintain the
desired temperature.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Trust in SIoT
7
The SIoT paradigm has many desirable implications, such as improving service
discovery and composition, enhancing network viability, scalability, and navigability,
building trustworthiness among objects with similar interests, and promoting interop-
erability between heterogeneous objects. Achieving these benefits involves exploring
the social network and utilising trustworthy relationships with companion objects.
2.2
Trust in SIoT
The concept of trust is not new in the fields of psychology or computer science, but
discussing trust in detail can be challenging. Typically, a trust relationship involves
at least two entities, namely a trustor and a trustee, who rely on each other for
mutual benefit.
The context in which this relationship takes place, including the
purpose of the trust, the environment, time, location, activity, devices being used,
and their operational mode, as well as the risks involved, also play a crucial role.
Such contextual information can help characterise the background or situation of the
entities involved.
Incorporating trust into a system involves several related concepts.
The trust
value of a node reflects the quality of services it offers, with high trust values corre-
sponding to high-quality services. This measure helps anticipate the calibre of future
services provided by the node and typically ranges from 0 (untrustworthy) to 1 (trust-
worthy). A node’s reputation represents how other nodes in the system perceive it
and contributes to assessing its trustworthiness. Feedback is the response a node gives
to another node regarding the service received, conveying the service recipient’s per-
ception of the service quality. It can be either uni-dimensional or multi-dimensional
but is generally uni-dimensional for simplicity. Lastly, a node’s opinion is its overall
impression of another node based on their previous interactions. Unlike feedback,
which is given by a service user to a service provider, one node can share an opinion
about another with a third party considering using that node’s services. Opinions
contribute to forming a node’s reputation within the system.
2.2.1
Trust Properties
In literature, trust has been studied and characterised in various ways based on
different properties [Gha+20]:
• Local trust: Based on an object-object relationship and uses local information,
such as past experience and self-observation.
• Global trust: is determined by an object’s standing within the network. It’s
derived from consolidating local data from various other objects.
• Asymmetric trust: Trust levels between two parties may be different.
A
trusting party A does not imply that the trusted party B should also trust A.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
Figure 2.1: Trust Categories
• Subjective trust: Based on the observation and opinion of objects in the
network.
• Objective trust: Based on feedback from all objects, and is visible to everyone.
• Context-dependent trust: One object’s trust towards another object can
change depending on the context. This means that the trust relationship be-
tween the objects is dynamic and can be influenced by various factors such as
time.
2.2.2
Trust Related Attacks
The basic functionality and services of a network can be disrupted by malicious nodes.
These nodes can execute two types of trust-related attacks: individual attacks and
collusion-based attacks [MS+19; Sid+21].
2.2.2.1
Individual Attacks
Individual attacks are launched by a single object, and there are various forms of
individual attacks.
Here are some of the commonly observed forms of individual
attacks:
• Discriminatory Attacks (DA): Involve a node explicitly targeting other
nodes that do not share many common friends based on human intuition or
preference towards friends in SIoT structures. This type of attack is also known
as a selective behaviour attack, where a node performs well for a specific ser-
vice/node but ineffectively for other services/nodes [Mas+20].
• Opportunistic Service Attacks (OSA): These attacks see an object ele-
vating its reputation by offering high-quality service following a subpar perfor-
mance. After achieving a heightened reputation, the object may collaborate
with others to execute collusion-based strategies [Kha+21].
• On-Off Attacks (OOA): These are similar to Opportunistic Service Attacks
(OSA) but differ.
In OOA, an object provides both good and bad services
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Trust in SIoT
9
randomly to avoid being labelled as a low-reputed node and to increase its
chances of being selected as a service provider [Kha+21].
• Self-Promoting Attacks (SPA): Involve a node promoting its significance by
consistently providing positive recommendations for itself to increase its chances
of being selected as a service provider. However, once selected, the node can
then act maliciously [CKB20].
• Whitewashing Attacks (WA): This entails a node leaving and then re-
entering the network or application to reset and cleanse its tarnished reputation.
2.2.2.2
Individual Attacks
Collusion attacks refer to an attack launched by a group of objects to provide either
a high rating or a low rating to a particular object. Here are some of the common
types of collusion attacks:
• Bad Mouthing Attacks (BMA): Involve a node deliberately diminishing the
reputation of a trustworthy node within the network by providing bad recom-
mendations. This type of attack aims to decrease the chances of the trustworthy
node being selected as a service provider [MN21].
• Ballot Stuﬀing Attacks (BSA): are tactics where malicious nodes in the
network receive favourable recommendations to enhance their reputation. The
goal is to elevate the likelihood of these compromised nodes being chosen as
service providers. [MN21].
2.2.3
Trust Management Process
Trust Management Systems (TMS) are responsible for managing trust-related activi-
ties, such as trust calculation, trust gathering, trust storage, and trust updates. TMS
is essential in two scenarios: when a node (requesting node) wants to request a par-
ticular service and when a node receives information from another node (information
providing node) and needs to verify its trustworthiness. The Trust Management pro-
cess life cycle consists of five phases: Information Gathering, Trust Computation,
Trust Decision, Trust Update and Reward & Punish, as shown in the figure below:
Figure 2.2: Trust Management Process
Trust Management Systems (TMS) have the following components:
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
Figure 2.3: Trust Management Components
2.2.3.1
Information Gathering
The TMS collects data from every node within the system, which can include transac-
tional, opinion-based, subjective, or objective information. This data may be recent
or span a specific time interval. Policy-making addresses these factors. Essentially,
the information-gathering process can be characterised by two functions: Trust Com-
position (TC) and Trust Formation (TF).
Figure 2.4: Information Gathering Classification
Trust Composition (TC)
Trust Composition refers to the selection of parameters
for trust value creation, they can be of two types:
• QoS Trust: These metrics reflect the degree of assurance in a node’s capability to
furnish Quality of Service (QoS). This is evaluated based on criteria including
reliability, competence, data delivery ratio, throughput, and task completion.
[Li+19; SA18; XSC15].
• Social Trust: Social trust metrics encapsulate the behavioural aspects of nodes,
gauging the social rapport between IoT device owners. This is gauged through
dimensions like integrity, benevolence, honesty, friendship, community of inter-
est, and unselfishness [NGA14; CBG16; Xia+19b].
Trust Formation (TF)
Trust formation involves determining trust value based
on either a single factor (Single Trust) or multiple factors (Multi Trust).
There
are trust management schemes that rely on a single factor, such as adherence to
established policies or service quality, resulting in single-trust values. However, most
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Trust in SIoT
11
trust management systems consider a variety of factors when calculating trust values.
These factors can be numerous and may include QoS factors or social factors.
• Single trust: Involves using only one factor, such as quality of service, to de-
termine the overall trust. This approach is described in research papers like
[CGB16], [MK15], and [Sai+13].
• Multi trust: Considers trust as a multidimensional concept and combines var-
ious factors, including social and QoS factors, to form a single trust score.
Some research papers that follow this approach include [Tru+17c], [CBG16],
and [Xia+19b].
2.2.3.2
Trust Computation
TMS calculates the trust value of each node for a specific service after gathering
information from various nodes in the system. Trust can be calculated in two ways:
Trust Aggregation and Trust Propagation.
Figure 2.5: Trust Computation Classification
Trust Aggregation (TA)
To calculate a single trust value, information from vari-
ous parameters should be gathered and aggregated based on the measured parameters
[CKB20]. The trust aggregation process can be described as follows:
• Bayesian Inference (BI): Based on Bayes’ theorem, Bayesian theory calculates
the posterior probability of an item, given a prior probability and likelihood
function [CGB16; BCG13].
• Belief Theory (BT): Also known as Evidence theory or the Dempster-Shafer
theory, this approach aggregates evidence from multiple sources to form a belief.
Every evidence piece carries a value ranging from 0 to 1, with 0 indicating no
backing and 1 signifying complete endorsement [BCM00; YS02].
• Blockchain: The Blockchain has a crucial function in upholding privacy within
the Social Internet of Things (SIoT) context. It enables the eﬀicient and trust-
worthy execution of data access authentication and authorisation in the SIoT,
ensuring both safety and decentralisation.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
• Fuzzy Logic (FL): Contrary to Boolean logic, which limits values to either 0
or 1, fuzzy logic embraces the entire spectrum between 0 and 1. This makes it
ideal for trust aggregation, where values don’t fit neatly into binary categories.
The essence of fuzzy logic is its ability to work with varying degrees of value
membership.
By assimilating these fuzzy values, a consolidated trust value
emerges. The process involves three core stages: fuzzification, establishment of
fuzzy rules, and defuzzification. [Mah+13; Xia+19b].
• Machine Learning: Machine learning techniques utilsze both unsupervised and
supervised algorithms, including but not limited to clustering and classification.
The eﬀicacy of these techniques hinges on data, with particular attention to
its labelling. In scenarios where data lacks labels, the aggregation workflow is
twofold. Initially, unsupervised methods like k-means clustering, agglomerative
clustering, and spectral clustering step in to annotate the data. Subsequently,
supervised methods such as the support vector machine, logistic regression, and
random forest take the reins, categorising nodes/objects as either trustworthy
or the opposite. [Sag+20c; Sag+20b].
• Regression Analysis (RA): This method examines the relationships between
various objects and predicts changes in one variable concerning others. Variables
are classified as dependent and independent [Wan+14; VPR12]. There are two
types of regression analysis:
1. Linear Regression: Involves using the available information for one inde-
pendent variable to make a prediction about one dependent variable.
2. Multi Regression: This technique is employed to make a prediction on the
value of a dependent variable by utilising the data from several independent
variables
• Weighted Sum (WS): A commonly employed technique to compute aggregate
values and contrast them with other options, given specific parameters. Weights
are allocated to the projected criteria and then multiplied by the assessed cri-
teria. Depending on the criteria, weights might be either static or dynamic
[CBG16; Ade+19].
Trust Propagation (TP)
Trust propagation refers to the process of transmitting
and disseminating trust-related information throughout the network. There are three
approaches to this technique [NGA14; Sai+13]:
• Centralised: Here, a singular node takes charge of gathering trust-related data,
computing trust values, storing this information, and disseminating it through-
out the network. Nonetheless, a major vulnerability arises if the network faces
a single-point failure, potentially causing the entire trust management system
to falter.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Trust in SIoT
13
• Distributed: In this method, nodes individually perform information collection
and trust calculation. Each node processes and shares trust information across
the network, either spontaneously or upon request. This approach eliminates
the issue of single-point failure and allows for unbiased trust calculations and
information dissemination [CGB16; Che+16].
• Hybrid: This method is devised to tackle the issues inherent in both centralised
and distributed systems. Hybrid models can be divided into two primary propa-
gation types: one that is locally distributed yet globally Centralised and another
that is locally Centralised but globally distributed. By melding aspects of both
systems, hybrid schemes provide effective solutions to problems that neither
Centralised nor distributed systems can suﬀiciently resolve on their own.
2.2.3.3
Trust Decision (TD)
When multiple nodes offer a specific service, the Trust Management System (TMS)
calculates the trustworthiness values of these nodes and provides this information to
the requesting node. The requesting node then selects a service provider based on
the provided trustworthiness values. If the requesting node seeks the trustworthiness
value of an information-providing node, it can decide whether to trust the received
information based on the calculated trustworthiness value.
This decision is made
using either one of the two approaches mentioned below or a combination of both:
Figure 2.6: Trust Decision Classification
• Policy-based Trust (PBT): This method centres on decision-making pro-
cesses related to the storage, upkeep, and service sharing among nodes. Trust
relationships form in line with established policies, encompassing aspects such
as access control, credential verification, and decisions to grant or refuse access
grounded on set policies [Cha07; AC17].
• Reputation-based Trust (RBT): This approach evaluates the trustworthi-
ness of service-providing nodes based on the opinions or experiences of the
requesting node or other nodes in the network. The trust calculation consid-
ers various factors such as subjective/objective opinions, transaction history,
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
and local/global reputation. Trustworthiness is determined using ranking or
threshold functions [Cha07; LSZ18].
2.2.3.4
Trust Update (TU)
Following a transaction with the chosen service provider, the inquiring node assesses
the delivered service using predetermined criteria for future reference in decision-
making. Upon completing the transaction, the service provider’s trust ratings are
revised according to its performance. Trust Updates can occur through three meth-
ods:
• Event-Driven: Trust values undergo an update subsequent to an event or
interaction taking place [CGB16; Sai+13].
• Time-Driven: The trust values in time-based updates are not dependent on
events occurring. Instead, these values are updated at predetermined intervals
of time [Che+16; Nam+15].
• Hybrid: A hybrid approach to trust updates involves considering both event-
driven and time-driven approaches. This approach updates trust periodically
and/or in the case of an event (after an interaction).
Several studies have
explored this hybrid approach [XSC15].
2.2.3.5
Reward and Punish
Following a transaction, the requesting node rewards or punishes the service provider
node based on whether the delivered service was satisfactory or unsatisfactory. Re-
wards and punishments involve increasing or decreasing the trustworthiness value or
reputation of the service provider node. These adjustments are made based on feed-
back from the service-receiving node and recommendations from intermediary nodes
[CKB20]. There are three approaches to this:
• Cognitive Learning: Cognitive learning differs from adaptive learning, which
involves learning about a system as its environment changes dynamically by
applying new policies. Cognitive learning, in contrast, involves executing an
action based on the conditions and then evaluating the action’s impact on the
system for future learning and improvement when the same situation arises.
Cognitive learning generally consists of four stages: observation, planning, ac-
tion enforcement, and learning.
• Threshold-Based: This approach rewards a node if the service it offers sur-
passes a particular threshold and is deemed satisfactory; if not, the node is
punished. Intermediary nodes receive rewards for giving accurate positive rec-
ommendations for service providers who truly provide high-quality service, and
they are penalised if their recommendations are inaccurate.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Trust in SIoT
15
• Weighted Sum: Using the weighted sum method, nodes consider multiple
factors influencing a service provider’s quality of service, including anticipated
success and benefits from satisfactory service and expected expenses and harm
from unsatisfactory service. To determine the amount by which a node’s trust-
worthiness should be raised or lowered, weights are assigned to these factors
based on their significance or applicability, and then the weighted values are
combined.
2.2.4
Types of Trust Management Systems (TMS)
This section will discuss the four types of Trust Management Systems, which in-
clude recommendation-based, reputation-based, prediction-based, and policy-based
schemes. To provide a comprehensive comparison, we will examine the strengths and
weaknesses of each type.
2.2.4.1
Recommendation-based
These systems leverage recommendations as a trust metric to assess the trustworthi-
ness of nodes within a SIoT network. The trust determinations in these models are
derived from direct observations and the recommendations of neighbouring nodes,
ensuring a more accurate decision even without current or past direct observations.
The recommendation-based trust approach offers several benefits. For instance, it
can determine trust without previous communication or when there’s no direct obser-
vation among nodes. It also factors in the significance and influence of credible nodes
in the network before considering the information they provide. However, assessing
the reliability of a node in a constantly changing environment and creating defence
mechanisms against recommendation-based attacks, like BSA and BMA, remains a
significant challenge [Moh+19].
2.2.4.2
Reputation-based
The notion of reputation is particularly prevalent in dynamic IoT environments where
devices or nodes might be vulnerable due to misinformation or incomplete data. Es-
sentially, a node’s reputation is viewed as an anticipated behaviour towards other
nodes, derived from past experiences and gathered referral information [De +18].
Lately, reputation-based systems have been integrated into several computer science
domains, especially in distributed networks, peer-to-peer networks, and IoT environ-
ments where security, privacy, and trust are paramount.
These reputation-based
trust models are primarily used to boost the trust assessment of a node and identify
nodes that behave erratically in the SIoT network.
When it comes to pinpointing and sidelining untrustworthy nodes for future ref-
erence, reputation-based trust strategies have an advantage. However, they do come
with their set of challenges.
These include determining how past ratings impact
present trust assessments and considering how to implement a ”forgetting factor” for
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background
older ratings. This is crucial because the nature of trust can shift quickly, making it
essential to prioritise recent ratings.
2.2.4.3
Prediction-based
The prediction-based trust management model uses both current and historical obser-
vations to pinpoint and segregate misbehaving nodes. Additionally, it refines the trust
computation process to address the drawbacks of trust aggregation techniques, espe-
cially the weighted sum method [Xia+19a]. Specifically, prediction-based systems,
particularly those utilising machine learning or deep learning, excel when the trust
composition involves a higher number of trust metrics compared to the weighted sum
method. The challenge with the weighted sum approach is its inability to determine
the weights for each trust metric to achieve a unified trust score. This becomes com-
plex due to the myriad of potential weight assignments for each trust metric across
various IoT environments.
Overall, the prediction-based approach boasts the capability to offer a dependable
trust aggregation, which aids in distinguishing between different trust metrics and
results in accurate trust decisions. However, a notable drawback is the computational
cost associated with prediction models, especially in machine and deep learning. This
necessitates the development of more cost-effective and optimal solutions.
2.2.4.4
Policy-based schemes
Policy-based trust models operate based on established policies. These policies con-
sist of set rules designed to assess the trustworthiness of nodes and identify any that
might exhibit malicious behaviour due to compromise. The foundation of these poli-
cies is both the network setup and contextual data, and they can be articulated
mathematically or in linguistic terms.
However, such frameworks have not yet been implemented in SIoT. Broadly speak-
ing, policy-based trust models are better suited for IoT applications with static char-
acteristics, such as those without mobile nodes and consistent contexts in terms of
location and time. Yet, in ever-evolving environments, the management and updating
of these policies to suit various contexts can pose significant challenges.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Remote Attestation
17
2.3
Remote Attestation
This section presents the Remote Attestation (RA) system model and proceeds to
introduce an adversarial model, RA strategies and RA characteristics and presents
Swarm Attestation.
2.3.1
System Model
A typical system model for RA contains two main entities [Aa15; Amb+16; RCN14]:
• Owner or Operator: The network owner (O) assumes various key respon-
sibilities within the system. Firstly, they are accountable for setting up and
maintaining the network. Secondly, they are tasked with providing the essen-
tial cryptographic material and credentials required for the attestation process.
Additionally, the network owner may choose to delegate the responsibility of
conducting periodic attestation rounds to a third-party entity, if desired.
• Prover: a resource-constrained device that cannot be trusted. Its role is to
conduct the RA procedure and prove its trustworthiness.
• Verifier: is an external trusted entity that verifies the integrity of the prover
and has access to the prover along with prior knowledge of the legitimate con-
figurations of the prover.
Furthermore, A swarm attestation-based model could include the following addi-
tional entities:
• Aggregator: The primary role of an aggregator (A) is to facilitate communi-
cation between entities within a network and, whenever feasible, consolidate in-
puts from neighbouring nodes in the topology. In a decentralised environment,
each prover within the network has the capability to function as an aggrega-
tor[Amb+16].
The primary objective of remote attestation is to enable the verifier to establish
whether the prover is in a suitable state using a challenge-response mechanism. Upon
receiving a challenge from the verifier, the prover generates a corresponding response
based on its present state and sends it back. The verifier examines the attestation
response and determines the trustworthiness of the prover. The typical RA protocol
includes the following stages [Amb+20; ADD21b]:
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Background
Figure 2.7: Challenge-response protocol
• Challenge: Firstly, the verifier r initiates the attestation by sending a request
called the challenge to the Prover. The contents of the challenge may vary de-
pending on the specific remote attestation protocol being used, as each protocol
has its own design goals. Common elements found in these challenges include a
nonce, which is a random and unique value used to ensure freshness and prevent
replay attacks. Additionally, the Verifier may provide a fixed input when the
attested program relies on distinct inputs to ensure predictability in the attesta-
tion process. The challenge also specifies the region to be attested, which could
be the memory region, hardware configuration, program control flow, or any
other relevant measurable information. Finally, the Prover uses a designated
memory region to store and present the output of the attestation process for
further analysis and verification by the Verifier.
• Attestation: Upon receiving a request, the attestation process begins in the
prover.
The prover evaluates its internal state and produces an attestation
response based on the received challenge. Depending on the type of attestation,
the prover generates different types of attestation responses. For instance, when
checking the software’s integrity, it might be the software configuration, while
for detecting control-flow attacks, it might be the device’s control-flow path.
Finally, the prover forwards an attestation report to the verifier.
• Verification: Finally, Upon receipt of the attestation report, the verifier ver-
ifies its validity and accuracy. Message Authentication Code (MAC) or signa-
tures guarantee its validity. Comparing the attestation response to the expected
state of the prover determines its accuracy. It’s worth noting that the expected
state of the prover is typically precomputed or stored by the verifier during
device initialisation.
This typical RA model primarily applies to single-prover attestation, where each
interaction involves only one prover being attested by the verifier. Swarm Attestation,
which will be discussed later, can allow a verifier to attest multiple provers in parallel.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Remote Attestation
19
Furthermore, Remote attestation (RA) schemes in the context of IoT can rely
on either a shared secret (symmetric key k) between the verifier (V) and prover
(P) or public key cryptography techniques (e.g., traditional public key cryptography
or more complex aggregate multi-signatures). Symmetric cryptography is preferred
for resource-constrained devices as it incurs lower overhead compared to public key
cryptography, making it a suitable security solution for IoT [Aa15].
2.3.2
Types of Remote Attestation
A fundamental concept in Remote Attestation (RA) schemes is the ”root of trust,”
which serves as the foundation for the entire process. This root of trust refers to the
specific component of the prover (whether hardware, software or a combination of
both) responsible for gathering evidence that the verifier can trust. Without a root
of trust, the prover could potentially falsify evidence or present evidence generated
by another unauthorised device or network entity.
Remote attestation (RA) schemes can be broadly classified into three cat-
egories: software-based, hardware-based, and hybrid.
Software-based schemes are
implemented entirely in software and rely on strict time constraints for the prover’s
response [Spi00; Ses+05a; Ses+04a; Sha+05; ADD21a]. They assume that an adver-
sary attempting to evade detection would require additional computations, leading
to longer response times. However, these strict time assumptions are impractical for
real-world multi-hop networks due to network unreliability issues. Software-based
RA schemes also lack secure storage for device keys and attestation code, limiting
their security guarantees.
Hardware-based RA schemes utilise specialised hardware components that en-
sure secure isolation of the attestation protocol, protecting it from untrusted software
[Kil+09; Des+17; Zei+17]. For example, Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs) [AC15]
found in commercial PCs and servers provide secure cryptographic co-processors for
key protection and integrity maintenance. However, hardware-based protocols may
not be feasible for resource-constrained IoT devices due to the presence of specialised
hardware platforms.
Hybrid RA schemes aim to achieve higher security than software-based ap-
proaches without relying on specialised hardware like hardware-based protocols [Eld+12;
Koe+14; Bra+15]. They involve software/hardware co-design, using minimal hard-
ware support such as Read-Only Memory (ROM) and a Memory Protection Unit
(MPU) to ensure code and memory isolation. Examples of research platforms with
such capabilities include SMART [Eld+12], TrustLite [Koe+14], and TyTan [Bra+15].
Commercial examples include ARM TrustZone technology integrated into Arm appli-
cation processors and microcontrollers [PS19]. Hybrid approaches are more suitable
for resource-constrained IoT devices due to their minimal hardware requirements,
especially swarm RA protocols [Aa15; Ibr+16].
Furthermore, RA schemes are traditionally static, verifying the unchanging parts
of a Prover’s memory, such as program binaries, to detect malware presence. However,
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Background
dynamic RA protocols have been introduced to address runtime attacks that exploit
memory corruption vulnerabilities, such as Return Oriented Programming (ROP)
techniques. ROP attacks chain together existing code sequences (gadgets) in memory
to perform malicious computations without injecting new code. Dynamic RA schemes
trace control-flow execution at runtime, relying on a program’s control-flow graph
(CFG) to distinguish between benign and malicious path. In this paper, we will only
be focusing on static RA protocols.
2.3.3
Remote Attestation Strategies
Four high-level strategies for static remote attestation protocols, considering different
assumptions and prover capabilities, are as follows:
Interactive Remote Attestation
Figure 2.8: Interactive Remote Attestation
This is the most common type of RA. It involves an interactive protocol between
the Prover (P) and Verifier (V). It begins with the V sending a challenge c to P,
which will reply with proof of its current state. The proof is made up of a hash of P’s
current state concatenated with c. Depending on whether symmetric cryptography
or public key cryptography is being used, the proof would either be tagged or signed.
In the former, the proof is tagged using a Message Authentication Code (MAC), with
the resulting value being a value r. V will verify the integrity of P’s configuration
by recomputing, r, as a MAC using the shared, k, over s￿||N, where s￿is the expected
configuration for P. In the latter, the proof is signed using P’s private key. V then
verifies the integrity of P’s configuration by verifying the signature using P’s public
key.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Remote Attestation
21
Interactive Self-RA
Figure 2.9: Interactive Self-RA
Through the use of a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE), you can verify s
directly at P by securely installing the list of allowed states (S =s1,s2,…,sn) for P in
a write-protected area of the device. V would send a challenge, c, to P, which would
then compute a hash of its current state, s, and produce a signed or MACed token
h authenticating the result as a binary result of the attestation process, which will
then be delivered to V. Self-attestation allows for the use of a customised token to
communicate the result to V, which can help with scaling attestation collection. This
RA type requires S to be pre-installed in P’s memory and the ability to update it
securely.
Non-Interactive RA
Figure 2.10: Non-Interactive RA
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Background
In this approach, P can autonomously decide when the attestation happens and
locally generate a pseudo-random nonce. Thus, V no longer needs to initiate the
attestation process and is only required to verify the attestation response. Compared
to the two previously mentioned types of RA, this technique requires additional hard-
ware; in particular, there is a need to have a secure source of time. If we look at SeEd
[ISZ17a], which is a RA protocol that adopts this technique, it requires a reliable Real
Time Clock (RTC) and an Attestation Trigger circuit. The former is used to correctly
note the time at which the attestation result was generated, and the latter is used to
trigger the attestation process unpredictably through a pseudo-random function.
Non-Interactive Self-RA
Figure 2.11: Non-Interactive Self-RA
In Non-interactive Self-RA, P’s TEE has a list of the allowed states for P and
can perform self-attestation at an unpredictable point when triggered by the secure
hardware, usually an Attestation Trigger circuit.
2.3.4
Objectives
In order to secure IoT devices, the Remote Attestation (RA) service must ensure
that only uncompromised devices can convince the verifier of their acceptable state.
Given that the communication between the prover and the verifier occurs over an open
network, attackers will try to dodge detection through methods such as eavesdropping,
replay attacks, and forgeries [SL16]. Hence, a secure and robust RA service must
possess the following characteristics:
• Atomicity: The attestation schemes must prevent attackers from obstructing
the attestation process.
This means that the attestation process cannot be
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Remote Attestation
23
interrupted, preventing attackers from modifying the current memory or moving
malware during the execution.
• Authenticity: The prover must assure that the challenges are generated by
the authorised verifier to prevent impersonation and Denial-of-Service (DoS)
attacks.
In addition, the verifier must confirm that the responses from the
prover are genuine and trustworthy, making it impossible for an attacker to
forge a response that the verifier will accept.
• Determinacy: Each challenge should correspond to a deterministic response,
allowing the verifier to accurately predict the prover’s response content.
• Freshness: The attestation responses must accurately reflect the current state
of the prover. This means that when the prover receives a challenge from the
verifier, it must initiate a fresh process to generate a new attestation response.
Furthermore, the challenges must be refreshed regularly.
Additionally, as new applications arise, specific attestation schemes may require
the following:
• Dynamicity: Adapting to device movements and network topology changes is
essential for attestation schemes to remain effective.
• Heterogeneity: Attestation schemes should cater to diverse software and hard-
ware configurations present in complex networks.
• Scalability: Some attestation schemes are designed for large-scale networks,
demanding protocols that eﬀiciently handle numerous devices.
2.3.5
Adversary Model
The objectives of adversaries can differ depending on their type and motivations.
However, in the context of Remote Attestation (RA), the adversary’s main aim is
to go undetected during the attestation process while maintaining a presence on the
target device. The methods employed by these adversaries vary according to their
capabilities and goals.
Below are five types of adversaries with different levels of
power and distinct objectives [Abe+16]:
• Remote Adversary: The remote adversary’s goal is to infect the Prover re-
motely with malware [Abe+16]. While not physically present on the device
network, this adversary can still infect devices from a distance. Remote adver-
saries are quite common and can affect large networks of devices.
• Local Adversary: A local adversary is in close enough proximity to the Prover
to eavesdrop on and interfere with its communication [Abe+16].
This type
of adversary is typically present on the device network and possesses strong
computational capabilities.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Background
• Physical Intrusive Adversary: A physical intrusive adversary can physically
capture the Prover and can go a step further by modifying its state or hard-
ware components, like introducing additional memory [Abe+16]. This type of
adversary has significant control over the device’s physical aspects.
• Stealthy Physical Intrusive Adversary: Stealthy Physical Intrusive Adver-
sary: Such an adversary can discreetly capture the Prover and try extracting
stored data, including confidential details, from the device without evident in-
dications of interference [Abe+16].
• Physical Non-intrusive Adversary: A physical non-intrusive adversary is
even closer to the Prover physically, allowing them to mount side-channel at-
tacks [Abe+16].
This means they can gather information by observing the
device’s physical characteristics, such as power consumption or electromagnetic
emissions.
2.3.6
Swarm Attestation
Novel challenges arise when dealing with the attestation of potentially large groups
or swarms of devices.
It becomes ineﬀicient and impractical to straightforwardly
apply single-prover Remote Attestation (RA) techniques to each device within a vast
swarm that might span a considerable geographical area. To address these challenges,
Swarm attestation allows for the verifier to attest a collective of provers in a single
interaction. Utilising parallel computing and message aggregation, swarm attestation
proves to be more eﬀicient compared to single-prover Remote Attestation. Swarm
attestation has some additional properties specific to it and they are discussed below.
2.3.6.1
Aggregation Pattern
Swarm attestation involves each device generating a response that the verifier must
effectively aggregate. These responses’ three primary aggregation patterns are the
spanning tree, broadcasting, and hierarchy methods.
Spanning Tree Structure. The spanning tree structure is the most prevalent ag-
gregation pattern used in swarm attestation. In this type of aggregation pattern, the
verifier selects a device randomly to act as the initiator device. It sends an attes-
tation challenge to this initiator device, which then passes it on to its neighbouring
devices. The challenge is relayed from one node to another, eventually forming a
tree-like network structure. Parent devices await responses from their child devices.
The lower-layer nodes continuously return their current count number and individual
attestation results to the upper-layer nodes. Finally, as the root of the spanning tree,
the initiator device gathers the overall state of the entire swarm and forwards it to
the verifier. This is not the definitive manner in which the spanning tree structure
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Remote Attestation
25
is implemented. Different RA schemes may implement the spanning tree structure
with slight differences.
However, this aggregation pattern has certain limitations. It requires the network
topology to remain static during the attestation process. Additionally, the unpre-
dictability of network delays caused by multi-hop communication poses challenges in
accurately estimating the attestation time. As a result, this approach may not be
suitable for strict response-time strategies.
Broadcasting. Broadcasting is a method of aggregating attestation reports, specifi-
cally suitable for highly dynamic networks where devices can move during the attes-
tation process. The process begins with the verifier initiating attestation by sending
an initiation message to a device within its communication range. Upon receiving
the initiation message, the device checks its software integrity to determine if it’s in
an acceptable state. Subsequently, the device aggregates its attestation report with
reports received from other devices and broadcasts this combined report to all devices
within its communication range. Each receiving device follows a similar process, ag-
gregating the received reports with its own and then broadcasting the updated report
to its neighbours. After a certain period, the verifier can connect to any device in
the network to obtain the attestation result, which contains the list of all healthy
devices. While the broadcasting pattern is adopted by several Remote Attestation
(RA) schemes designed for highly dynamic networks, it comes with the drawback of
significant communication overhead due to the broadcast nature of message dissemi-
nation.
Hierarchy Hierarchy is an aggregation structure suitable for networks with devices
having varying resource capabilities. In this setup, certain devices possessing stronger
computing power or higher security features are designated as cluster head nodes.
These cluster head nodes act as intermediaries, communicating with the devices
within their respective clusters. Various schemes use different device characteristics,
such as security or performance levels, as classification criteria for selecting cluster
head nodes.
Under this aggregation pattern, devices can fall into two categories:
ordinary devices and cluster head devices. Ordinary devices send their attestation
responses to the cluster head devices, which, in turn, report to the verifier. However,
the hierarchy pattern assumes that nodes in adjacent layers can communicate in a
single hop, which might not always be feasible in practical scenarios.
2.3.6.2
Attestation Modes
When broadening the scope of attestation from an individual device to a swarm, vari-
ous attestation modes have been suggested. These modes can be classified into three
categories based on which party evaluates the state of the target prover: attested by
neighbours, attested by the verifier, and attested by the device itself.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Background
Attested by neighbours. In the attested by neighbours mode, neighbouring de-
vices act as direct observers of the target device, allowing them to attest to its state.
The attestation result of a device is obtained from its parent device in the spanning
tree structure.
This approach is advantageous because neighbouring devices only
need to provide the attestation results without transferring detailed information like
the hash value of the binary code. As a result, the attestation reports are small,
significantly reducing communication overhead. While many swarm attestations use
the ”Attested by neighbors” mode to reduce attestation report sizes, it may be sus-
ceptible to security vulnerabilities if a neighbour is compromised.
Attested by the verifier. The Attested by the verifier mode is considered more
reliable as it relies on the assessment provided directly by the verifier. However, this
mode faces the challenge of generating large attestation reports due to the detailed
information required from each device. To address this concern, a dedicated aggrega-
tion algorithm is necessary.
Attested by the device itself. The attested by the device itself mode involves the
prover (device) conducting its own assessment. To ensure the assessment’s reliability,
this mode necessitates additional hardware like a Trusted Execution Environment
(TEE). By employing this setup, the provers can gauge their own trustworthiness by
comparing their measurements with an expected state, which may be a valid software
configuration sent from the verifier or one pre-stored inside the device. Subsequently,
the provers transmit their assessment results to the verifier. This attestation mode
proves particularly advantageous in highly dynamic networks, as it mitigates the
impact of device mobility on the Remote Attestation (RA) process.
2.3.6.3
QoSA
In their research, Carpent et al. [Car+17] introduced the idea of Quality of Swarm
Attestation (QoSA) and suggested a classification system for swarm attestation. This
system comprises five categories designed to assess the depth and accuracy of the
swarm data received by the verifier.
• B-QoSA (Binary QoSA), provides the verifier with a Boolean bit that signi-
fies the overall trustworthiness of the entire swarm. With this type of attestation
result, the verifier doesn’t need to individually attest each device in the swarm
exhaustively. Instead, as soon as a compromised node is identified, the verifier
can immediately determine the final result of the swarm and halt the attestation
process for the remaining devices.
• C-QoSA (Count QoSA), enables the verifier to acquire information about the
count of normal and malicious devices within the swarm. However, the verifier
doesn’t have knowledge of the specific devices that have been compromised.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Remote Attestation
27
• L-QoSA (List QoSA), involves the verifier receiving a list of identifiers for
normal devices within the swarm. This is the most commonly adopted QoSA
in current swarm attestation schemes.
• F-QoSA (Full QoSA), provides the verifier with access to the exact attes-
tation results of each device in the swarm, as well as information about their
connectivity, also known as swarm topology.
• N-QoSA, or None QoSA, enables the swarm to autonomously identify and
exclude compromised devices. In this scenario, the verifier doesn’t need to know
the identifiers of all compromised devices within the swarm.
The verification process varies between B-QoSA, C-QoSA, F-QoSA, L-QoSA, and
N-QoSA in terms of handling the swarm as a whole or inspecting and taking actions
on compromised devices. With B-QoSA and C-QoSA, the verifier can only consider
the swarm as a whole to assess its security, and it’s incapable of inspecting and tak-
ing actions on specific compromised devices to maintain the security of the swarm.
On the other hand, F-QoSA and L-QoSA allow the verifier to remove or repair com-
promised devices to ensure security.
However, these methods often require more
detailed aggregated reports, which implies a larger message size to be transmitted
through the network. N-QoSA merges self-repair with swarm attestation, making
the swarm supporting the N-QoSA attestation robust against attacks. However, as
a trade-off, additional overheads are induced on individual devices in the swarm for
the sake of collaboratively monitoring the security of their neighbouring devices.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
This chapter aims to provide an extensive overview of the existing literature concern-
ing trust management schemes in the context of Social IoT and remote attestation
schemes in the IoT paradigm. The literature review delves into various trust man-
agement approaches, including trust evaluation models, trust management platforms,
and context-aware models tailored specifically for the Social IoT environment. Ad-
ditionally, the chapter explores the latest advancements and challenges in remote
attestation techniques used to verify the integrity and authenticity of IoT devices.
By analysing and synthesising the relevant literature, this chapter offers valuable
insights into the state-of-the-art in trust management and remote attestation.
3.1
Survey of Existing Trust Management Schemes In
SIoT
This section presents a survey of existing trust management schemes specifically de-
signed for the Social Internet of Things (Social IoT) environment. As mentioned in
section 2.2.4, trust management schemes can be classified into four types: Recommendation-
based, Reputation-based, Prediction-based, and Policy-based schemes. Additionally,
we look at trust management schemes that hybrid approach by combining two or
more types of trust management schemes together.
3.1.1
Recommendation-based
Chen et al. [CBG15] presented a trust management protocol tailored for the So-
cial Internet of Things (SIoT). This protocol is especially apt for experimental SIoT
platforms and applications, enhancing their eﬀicacy and enabling trust assessment in
fluctuating environments. It’s inherently adaptive, utilising metrics like honesty, co-
operativeness, and community interest. Recommendations underpin the direct trust
among nearby entities. To reduce the effect of skewed recommendations, a dynamic
parameter is woven into the trustworthiness calculation.
The model is judged on
convergence, accuracy, and resilience metrics. Its strengths lie in its adaptability to
shifting conditions and refining trust metrics in line with these changes. Neverthe-
less, it doesn’t suﬀiciently shield against critical attacks, such as on-off and intelligent
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Related Work
behaviour attacks. There remain challenges in selecting and calibrating crucial pa-
rameters within the model.
Nitti et al. [NGA14] proposed a trust management framework that integrates
both subjective and objective characteristics of objects. Subjective trust is rooted
in the social viewpoint of an object, covering aspects like centrality, personal experi-
ences, and feedback from neighbouring units. Meanwhile, objective trustworthiness
is anchored in a peer-to-peer network. In this model, each object’s data is stored in
a distributed hash table, accessible to every network component. The objective trust
calculation encompasses elements like centrality and both short-term and long-term
opinions across the network’s entirety. The final trust rating is derived using a static
weighted sum aggregation method. A major advantage of this model is its ability to
consider both subjective and objective traits of network nodes, proficiently spotting
malicious nodes even if they form a considerable portion of the network. Yet, the
inclusion of feedback amplifies network traﬀic overhead due to data transfer, and the
model’s adaptability to dynamic changes is limited by its preset trust parameters.
Khani et al. [Kha+18] propose a mutual context-aware trust evaluation model
that integrates three social trust metrics and two Quality of Service (QoS) metrics for
evaluating object trustworthiness. Social metrics encompass friendship-based social
similarity, community-of-interest, and relationship-based trust, while QoS metrics
involve expected and advertised QoS. The model takes into account device status,
environment, and task type for context-aware trust metric computation. A static
weighted sum aggregation technique is used to combine these distinct trust metrics.
This model’s strengths include its consideration of mutual context-awareness in trust
computation, allowing it to outperform existing trust models. It also demonstrates
effectiveness against various trust-related attacks, including but not limited to BMA,
BSA, SPA, and OOA. However, it lacks the consideration of dynamically changing
environments for fine-tuning trust parameters.
Wei et al. [Wei+21] introduce a context-aware socio-cognitive-based trust model
for service delegation within service-oriented SIoT. This model relies on competence
quantification and willingness quantification. Competence is quantified through De-
gree of Importance (DoI) and Degree of Social Relationships (DoSR), while willingness
quantification integrates Degree of Contribution (DoC) and DoSR. These quantifica-
tions consider computational power, storage, communication capabilities, and the
provider’s willingness. The final trust score is computed by aggregating these trust
parameters using a weighted sum technique. The model’s strengths lie in proposing
a context-aware socio-cognitive-based trust model for service delegation and incor-
porating adaptable and dynamic trust characteristics in the quantification process.
However, as the number of properties for trust computation increases, the model’s
convergence time also increases. Additionally, while the model integrates many trust
attributes to compute the trust score, the weighted sum aggregation lacks precision
in determining appropriate weights for each attribute.
Similarly, Xia et al. [Xia+19b][118AK] presents a context-aware trustworthiness
inference framework that employs two trust metrics: similarity trust and familiarity
trust. Familiarity trust incorporates a kernel-based nonlinear multivariate grey pre-
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Survey of Existing Trust Management Schemes In SIoT
31
diction model for direct trust computation and recommendations for indirect trust.
On the other hand, similarity trust employs metrics such as centrality and commu-
nity interest. These metrics are fused using a fuzzy logic-based aggregation approach
to derive a single trust score. The model’s resistance against various trust-related
attacks is assessed. The model integrates context-awareness, demonstrating superior
performance over two established trust models based on the weighted sum method. It
adeptly manages grey-hole and bad-mouthing attacks but does not address defences
against on-off.
3.1.2
Reputation-based
Azad et al. [Aza+20a] present a decentralised self-enforcement trust management
model. This model employs weighted reputation through feedback generation to com-
pute object trust. The process involves key generation using homomorphic encryption
for privacy preservation, sharing the public key on a bulletin board, and downloading
the key by objects. Reputation computation is achieved through weighted reputation.
Self-enforcement occurs via automatic trust updates, publicly verified by network
peers using zero-knowledge proofs. Model performance is evaluated, accounting for
the bandwidth needed for feedback commitment and communication overhead. The
presented model introduces a decentralised trust management approach that offers
trustworthiness assessment for objects within the Social Internet of Things (SIoT). A
notable feature is the incorporation of homomorphic encryption to safeguard object
privacy.
Furthermore, the model operates in a self-enforcing manner, eliminating
the necessity for a trusted third party. However, the model’s strengths are accom-
panied by a limitation. While it demonstrates robustness in various aspects, such as
decentralised trust management and privacy protection, the evaluation falls short in
terms of assessing the model’s performance in the presence of trust-related attacks,
potentially leaving vulnerabilities unexplored.
Chen et al. [Che+16] propose an energy-aware access scheme for service rec-
ommendation in the SIoT context.
This scheme considers the heterogeneous and
decentralised environment. The model employs reputation from experience, social re-
lationships (friendship and community of interest), and energy status to evaluate node
trustworthiness. Incorporating energy status enables workload distribution among
trustworthy nodes, enhancing overall performance. The scheme’s effectiveness is as-
sessed in terms of rating accuracy, dynamic behaviour, and network stability. The
model highlights its robustness by incorporating an energy-aware technique that ef-
fectively balances network workload. It achieves this by integrating the energy status
of nodes, past performance (reputation), and social relationships to determine trust
scores. Additionally, the consideration of timeliness for each transaction enhances dy-
namic performance evaluation. Nevertheless, the model lacks provisions for defence
mechanisms against trust-related attacks, which could impact its overall security.
Furthermore, although the model examines energy consumption and offers compar-
isons, the correlation between energy consumption and the number of nodes remains
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Related Work
unexplored—an important consideration for its practicality and scalability.
Truong et al. [Tru+17a] introduce a trust model known as REK, where the
trustworthiness of an object is determined by its experience and reputation. Experi-
ence computation involves three factors: 1) intensity of interactions, 2) categorisation
of interactions as cooperative, uncooperative, or neutral, and 3) the current state of
relationships. The trend of experience is then analysed, considering the development
(due to cooperative interactions), loss (due to uncooperative interactions), and decay
(due to no or neutral interactions) of experience.
Reputation is approached from
a repudiation perspective, incorporating the concept of the Google PageRank algo-
rithm. This considers both positive and negative reputation to calculate an object’s
overall reputation. The model’s evaluation focuses on its convergence achieved with
minimum iterations. The limitations of this model include the absence of combined
metric effects on trust computation and a comprehensive assessment of their impact.
Additionally, the evaluation lacks consideration of trust-related attacks, highlighting
potential vulnerabilities in the model’s robustness.
In another study, Xiao et al. [XSC15] present an optimal credit and reputation-
based trust model for SIoT. This model utilises two parameters: credit (referred to
as the guarantor) to assess an object’s communication affordability and reputation to
evaluate trustworthiness and detect misbehaving nodes. The guarantor guides object
selection for receiving services, while reputation is employed to assess trustworthi-
ness and identify misbehaving objects. Model performance is assessed by varying the
malware probability (percentage of malicious objects). The model’s computational
eﬀiciency is notable, utilising only two metrics, credit and reputation, to classify
nodes as trustworthy or untrustworthy. Moreover, all computations are centralised
on the reputation server, relieving nodes of computational responsibilities. However,
the model lacks comprehensiveness, neglecting various trust computation aspects like
trust composition, direct observations, and recommendations. Furthermore, the cen-
tralised computation system raises scalability concerns, particularly concerning the
inherently scalable nature of the Social Internet of Things (SIoT).
3.1.3
Prediction-based
Aalibagi et al. [Aal+21] propose a matrix factorisation-based trust model, visual-
ising SIoT as a bipartite graph involving service requesters and providers. A social
network among service requesters is constructed using Hellinger distance and matrix
factorisation to identify trustworthy service providers. The model is effective in miti-
gating data sparsity and cold start problems, yet its performance under trust-related
attacks and the suitability of the bipartite graph remain unexplored. The model’s
strengths encompass its ability to alleviate the cold start problem and demonstrate
effectiveness in countering malicious objects, particularly those employing Oppor-
tunistic Service Attacks (OSA). However, the model’s applicability could be further
understood. While it effectively utilises a bipartite graph, there is no discussion re-
garding its suitability over other graph types like hypergraphs.
Additionally, the
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Survey of Existing Trust Management Schemes In SIoT
33
evaluation of the trust model against various trust-related attacks beyond OSA re-
mains undisclosed.
Jayasinghe et al. [Jay+19] propose a data-centric machine learning-based trust
evaluation model. This approach leverages social trust metrics to assess node trust-
worthiness, employing machine learning-based trust aggregation to derive a single
trust score. The aggregation process involves clustering (e.g., K-means) and classi-
fication (e.g., Support Vector Machine) steps to categorise nodes as trustworthy or
untrustworthy. The model introduced offers a data-centric approach to trust eval-
uation, leveraging machine learning-based trust aggregation instead of traditional
weighted sum aggregation. This innovative technique aims to determine a singular
trust metric effectively. However, the model’s strengths are coupled with limitations.
While its unique approach is promising, the performance evaluation is lacking in
terms of testing against various trust-based attacks, potentially leaving its resilience
unexplored. Additionally, scalability and reliability concerns arise as the number of
nodes increases, highlighting a challenge that needs to be addressed.
Similarly, Marche et al. [MN21] present a trust-related attack detection model
for SIoT. The trust computation process comprises a training phase and a steady-state
phase. The training phase employs three trust metrics: computational capability, re-
lationship factor, and external opinion. This initial knowledge is then utilised by
the steady-state phase, employing incremental Support Vector Machine (SVM) to
continuously learn object behavior and quantify trust. The proposed model presents
a robust approach to trust-related attack detection using an incremental Support
Vector Machine (SVM). Trust is indicated by three scores: goodness, usefulness, and
perseverance. The model’s strengths lie in its comprehensive consideration of vari-
ous trust-related attacks during performance analysis. However, the model’s eﬀicacy
varies. It performs effectively in networks featuring a mixture of different attacks, yet
its performance deteriorates when confronted with individual attacks. The absence
of discussion regarding the simulation parameters used for performance evaluation is
an additional limitation that needs addressing.
Masmoudi et al. [Mas+20] present a deep learning model to identify malicious
nodes executing trust-related attacks. The trust computation involves trust composi-
tion with social and QoS metrics, followed by deep learning-based trust aggregation.
However, the deep learning aggregation incurs high computation power and latency
in dynamic environments.
Sagar et al. [Sag+20a] utilise social similarity for trust computation, incorpo-
rating k-means clustering and random forest classification to analyse node trust over
time. However, this solution lacks defence mechanisms against trust attacks and is
computationally intensive, resulting in high latency within dynamic environments.
The presented model introduces a trust evaluation approach driven by machine learn-
ing, enabling the observation of node behaviour over time. The model also scrutinises
the influence of each trust metric on the overall trust score. However, the model has
associated limitations. While effective, it incurs computational expenses and results
in elevated latency within dynamic environments due to the frequent training of the
machine learning model.
Additionally, the model’s strengths notwithstanding, its
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Related Work
evaluation lacks assessment against a variety of trust-based attacks, which is essen-
tial for ensuring its robustness.
3.1.4
Policy-based schemes
Al-Hamadi et al.
[AC17] propose an adaptive trust-based decision-making ap-
proach for IoT health systems. This approach considers factors like location ratings,
raters, and witness trust to evaluate node trustworthiness, thereby eliminating nodes
providing misleading information. While the system utilises static trust parameters
for computation, optimising these parameters for varying IoT environments remains
a crucial consideration. The introduced approach exhibits significant strengths, pri-
marily a trust-based decision-making system designed for IoT health systems. This
approach factors in risks, reliability trust, and health probability when making deci-
sions. Compared to traditional trust computational baseline protocols that merely
filter out untrustworthy sources, the proposed model excels by considering source
reliability and the relationship between user health and potential harm. However,
there’s a noteworthy limitation. The model’s trust computational process relies on
static trust parameters. Yet, the optimal values for these parameters within a dy-
namic environment remain unknown, leaving a potential challenge in ensuring the
model’s adaptability to changing scenarios.
Li et al. [LSZ18] introduce a policy-based security and trustworthy model named
RealAlert for estimating both node and data trustworthiness. The model establishes
policies based on contextual information to identify compromised nodes and mislead-
ing data, with evaluation conducted under different trust attack scenarios. However,
the context-dependent nature of the model’s policies necessitates continuous human
expertise to adapt to highly dynamic IoT applications. The model introduced ex-
hibits notable strengths, primarily its policy-based approach to ensuring security and
trustworthiness. This approach evaluates both user and data trustworthiness. Fur-
thermore, the model effectively detects three types of trust attacks, specifically BMA,
BSA, and OOA. However, there is a limitation to consider. The model’s reliance on
context-dependent policies means that for highly dynamic IoT applications, frequent
policy updates are necessary—either before or after every transaction. This require-
ment for frequent policy adjustments could potentially impact the model’s eﬀiciency
and effectiveness in rapidly changing environments.
In their paper, Chen et al. [Che18], a trust management model combines max-
imum ratio combining (MRC) and selection combining (SC) to assess node trust-
worthiness. This process involves weighting parameters in the MRC step, followed
by transferring the output to SC for a final trust score.
While the model shows
promising performance, its evaluation on a limited number of nodes raises scalability
concerns. Additionally, the absence of a defence mechanism against trust attacks is
noteworthy. The model showcases notable strengths, primarily introducing a trust
management system that capitalises on both maximum ratio combining (MRC) and
source combining (SC) concepts to enhance IoT security. Performance evaluation
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Survey of Existing Trust Management Schemes In SIoT
35
of the model is conducted using QoS-based trust scores, comparing results with and
without MRC-based trust. The integration of MRC within the trust system demon-
strates strong performance across various QoS levels. However, limitations exist. The
evaluation’s scope is confined to a limited number of nodes, potentially undermining
the model’s scalability. Additionally, the model doesn’t address defence mechanisms
against various types of trust-related attacks, suggesting a potential area for further
enhancement.
Magarino et al.
[Gar+19] present an enhanced security framework employ-
ing prioritisation rules, digital certificates, and trust and reputation policies. These
policies are interaction-dependent and reputation stems from network nodes’ recom-
mendations. The framework effectively detects hijacked nodes supplying deceptive
information, with performance outperforming comparable approaches. Nevertheless,
the model’s evaluation lacks an assessment of its resilience against trust-related at-
tacks. The framework introduced demonstrates notable strengths, primarily its en-
hanced security approach that leverages prioritisation rules, certificates, and trust
management policies to identify hijacked nodes within the network effectively. This
approach showcases improved performance compared to control methods that lack
trust and reputation mechanisms for detecting hijacked nodes. However, there is a
limitation that needs to be acknowledged. The model’s evaluation is not comprehen-
sive, as it lacks an assessment against a range of trust-related attacks such as BMA,
BSA, OOA, and others. This omission leaves uncertainties regarding its effectiveness
in broader attack scenarios.
3.1.5
Hybrid Techniques
Jayasinghe et al. [Jay+16] proposed recommendations plus reputations-based trust
computational model to foster trustworthy associations among SOs in SIoT. To cal-
culate trust scores of objects, the authors proposed a robust algorithm that considers
three trust metrics. The first metric, knowledge, is computed based on subjective
properties such as community interest, honesty, cooperativeness, and user experience.
The second metric, recommendation, is based on opinions from social relationships
and friends. The third metric, reputation, is computed based on other people’s (both
human and object) opinions. The authors disregarded the knowledge metric due to its
biased, subjective properties and focused only on recommendation and reputation for
trust calculation. The page ranking concept was used for numerical modelling and
to assess the effectiveness of the proposed trust model in establishing trustworthy
relationships between objects of SIoT.
On the other hand, Truong et al. [Tru+17b] proposed a comprehensive trust
model called REK, which leverages three trust indicators: reputation, experience,
and knowledge. The authors identified three influential factors: the trustor’s propen-
sity, the trustee’s trustworthiness, and environmental risks. Reputation, which is the
public opinion of a trustee, is computed by collecting feedback from participants in
transactions about completing a given task, both positive and negative, and aggregat-
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Related Work
ing it to present an estimate of the trustee’s trustworthiness to the public. Experience,
which considers previous transactions with a trustee, is computed based on trust at-
tributes, including the current state of the relationship, the intensity of interactions,
and the values of interactions (uncooperative, cooperative, and neutral). Knowledge,
which is a direct trust, is computed using three types of attributes: ability, benevo-
lence, and integrity.
Truong et al. [TUL16] proposed a trust platform for Social Internet of Things
(SIoT), which is built on recommendations, reputation, and knowledge. Recommen-
dations are based on personal opinions and social relationships, while reputation is
determined by feedback from others. Knowledge refers to the trustworthiness of first-
hand information about an object, based on community interest, honesty, experience,
and cooperativeness. The platform has four components, and its effectiveness was
evaluated through a car-sharing service. Trust is calculated using a fuzzy-based algo-
rithm, and recommendations and reputations are measured using a reputation-based
system.
Azad et al. [Aza+20b] introduced a self-enforcing trust management system
that calculates and updates the trustworthiness of participants without the need for
third-party assistance. In this system, each participant’s trust score is determined by
executing the steps of the protocol. To ensure that participants adhere to the protocol
strictly, zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) are employed. A public bulletin board (PBB)
is utilised in the proposed approach, which contains feedback values of IoT devices
and users who have interacted with the participants in the past. Encrypted trust
scores of objects are then aggregated using multiparty computation (SMC) settings.
The authors created a Java prototype employing the BouncyCastle cryptographic
library for evaluation purposes.
Abderrahim et al. [AES17] have introduced a centralised trust management
system, CTMS-SIOT, that consists of a local TMS in each object and a central
TMS on a trust server. They have used a decision tree tool for the selection of the
most trustworthy objects that can provide the required service for each context. The
credibility of the objects predicted by the decision tree is determined by computing the
social similarity using the Jaccard Index. The network consists of objects with various
capabilities that can form social relationships and are used only by their owners.
The service server is responsible for service discovery, while the trust management
server receives feedback from network entities and calculates the contextual trust
and reputation. The TMS server has two modules: the trust module for computing
contextual trust and reputation, and the learning module for classifying behaviour.
The performance of the proposed system is compared with other systems to evaluate
its eﬀiciency.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Survery of Existing Remote Attestation Schemes In IoT
37
3.2
Survery of Existing Remote Attestation Schemes In
IoT
In this section, we delve into the existing remote attestation schemes in IoT. Examin-
ing both the literature surrounding single prover attestation and swarm attestation.
3.2.1
Single Prover Attestation
We will conduct an evaluation of various Single Prover Attestation protocols, each
belonging to one of the three domains previously described: hardware-based, software-
based, and hybrid attestation. While these protocols represent only a subset of all
remote attestation protocols available, they have been chosen to encompass different
use cases and approaches for achieving remote attestation.
3.2.1.1
Software-based Remote Attestation
SWATT [Ses+04b] is a software-based attestation system designed for legacy devices,
providing protection against mobile malware. It utilises the challenge-response pro-
tocol’s received challenge as input to a pseudo-random generator (PRG). The Prover
then computes the checksum of random memory segments based on the PRG’s result.
Additionally, timing checks are incorporated to detect adversaries attempting to ma-
nipulate the checksum code or memory content, as such actions cause a significant
slowdown in the checksum function. If manipulation is detected, the Verifier becomes
aware of the adversary’s interference. However, SWATT acknowledges that due to the
lack of immutability, adversaries can alter the memory-content verification function.
Still, it assumes a secure design to ensure the function’s failure when the device’s
memory content doesn’t match the expected content. SWATT can be implemented
in existing networks without requiring dedicated hardware, allowing for some level of
attestation.
Pioneer [Ses+05b] guarantees the integrity of the attestation function by comput-
ing an initial checksum of both the attestation function and the checksum code. This
checksum incorporates a Verifier-generated challenge to prevent pre-computation. For
memory attestation, Pioneer utilises hash functions, computing a hash of the relevant
memory region to be sent to the Verifier. The checksum code is designed to be non-
parallelisable and optimised, preventing any modifications that could speed up the
process and enable adversaries to manipulate the attested memory.
SCUBA [Ses+06] employs stronger assumptions compared to SWATT and Pio-
neer, assuming the presence of ReadOnly memory on the device. Unlike other pro-
tocols, SCUBA relies on a public key infrastructure for communication between the
Prover and Verifier. During attestation, a MAC is computed using a pseudorandom
generator that derives a key from the challenge provided by the Verifier, without
requiring a shared secret. SCUBA allows for code updates on the device by tracking
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Related Work
modifications to the attested code region. The Verifier sends code patches for specific
memory regions to the Prover, and the Prover installs these patches accordingly.
SCUBA, although categorised as a software-based RA protocol, could be argued
to fit more into the hybrid RA category due to its reliance on hardware assumptions,
specifically the presence of ROM on the device [Ses+06]. In contrast, SWATT and
Pioneer’s verification functions are designed to increase running time upon tampering
attempts, achieving this without making hardware assumptions like SCUBA. How-
ever, both SWATT and Pioneer still require extensive knowledge of the underlying
system, such as the CPU’s model, clock speed, and instruction set architecture.
Pioneer distinguishes itself from SWATT by supporting complex CPU architec-
tures [Ses+05b]. SWATT lacks support for sophisticated CPU features like virtual
memory and branch predictors [Ses+04b]. Additionally, SWATT’s operating time be-
comes prohibitive on systems with large memories [Ses+05b], as it checks the entire
memory during the attestation process.
3.2.1.2
Hardware-based
While cost-effective and widely adopted due to their reliance on non-specific hardware
support, software-based solutions often rely on strong assumptions that create a gap
between the assumptions and the capabilities of adversaries. There is a growing need
for hardware-based attestation to address this, which offers enhanced security with
more reasonable assumptions. Hardware-based attestation schemes leverage tamper-
resistant hardware modules such as TPM, PUFs, and SGX.
TPM (Trusted Platform Module) serves as a root of trust for computing systems,
enabling attestation schemes to ensure the trustworthiness of the attestation response.
TRAP [THJ11] is a hardware-based RA protocol designed specifically for wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) and relies on Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs). It assumes
that each device (Prover) in the WSN is equipped with TPMs. To establish communi-
cation between the Verifier and Prover, symmetric keys are utilised, which are shared
before the deployment of the devices. The main threat addressed in TRAP is the
Time-Of-Check-To-Time-Of-Use (TOCTTOU) attack, a common attack against RA
protocols that occurs when a device’s state changes between the time it generates
the attestation (Time-Of-Check) and the time the verifier receives and acts upon the
attestation (Time-Of-Use). During this time gap, an attacker could potentially com-
promise the system or manipulate its components, leading to a mismatch between
the attestation and the actual system state. It can lead to unexpected or malicious
behaviour in the software system.
Intel’s SGX (Software Guard Extensions) introduces a hardware-enforced isolated
execution environment called an enclave for software execution. Enclaves guarantee
the trusted execution of the attestation protocol, enhancing security in hardware-
based attestation scenarios.
OPERA [CZL19] is a remote attestation protocol that relies on Intel SGX. Its pri-
mary goal is to enhance openness, privacy, and performance, addressing some of the
limitations of the Intel-centric attestation model. The main application of OPERA
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Survery of Existing Remote Attestation Schemes In IoT
39
is in cloud computing, where it can support both centralised attestation for confi-
dential cloud computing and privacy-preserving blockchains, as well as decentralised
attestation, allowing enclave programs on the same SGX platform to attest to one
another. However, since Intel controls the root secrets of SGX platforms, OPERA
needs to trust Intel to establish a faithful chain of trust for identifying SGX platforms
and their protected software. Notably, the OPERA attestation model has undergone
formal verification using ProVerif.
Hardware-based attestation offers higher security compared to software-based ap-
proaches, as the tamper-resistant hardware ensures the integrity of attestation re-
sponses. However, hardware-based solutions are not feasible for IoT devices that lack
customised hardware components during production.
3.2.1.3
Hybrid
To overcome the limitations of hardware-based and software-based attestation, hybrid
attestation schemes combine the strengths of both, aiming to mitigate their respec-
tive drawbacks. Hybrid attestation schemes leverage commonly available hardware
components such as Read-Only Memory (ROM), Field-Programmable Gate Array
(FPGA), Memory Protect Unit (MPU) or Micro-Controller Unit (MCU).
Various lightweight hardware architectures have been proposed for hybrid-based
attestation schemes that focus on protecting secret keys and enforcing access control,
such as TyTan, TrustLite and SMART. In SMART, a Prover calculates a Message
Authentication Code (MAC) for the targeted attestation region to ensure authentic-
ity and integrity. SMART utilises ROM and MPU components. ROM safeguards
stored data from tampering, including attestation protocols and keys.
The MPU
regulates access to critical data, ensuring that only the attestation code can read the
secret key. TrustLite and TyTAN extend and enhance the capabilities of the SMART
architecture. These proposals introduce features like interrupt handling, real-time
guarantees, dynamic configuration, and boot attestation based on the integrity of a
root of trust.
SeED [ISZ17b] is an example of a hybrid remote attestation protocol. In SeED,
the Prover does not receive incoming traﬀic from the Verifier as it uses a non-
interactive RA strategy, reducing the risk of Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks. Instead,
the Prover initiates the attestation protocol based on a Real-Time Clock. This feature
makes SeED well-suited for resource-constrained devices, as it demonstrates eﬀiciency
in terms of power consumption and communication. SeEd can be implemented to use
both SMART and TrustLite hardware architecture.
ERASMUS [CTR18] is a remote attestation (RA) protocol that employs periodic
self-measurement by the Prover. The Verifier collects and verifies these measurements
from the Prover. ERASMUS is primarily designed for safety-critical systems that do
not need on-demand RA, as it relies on periodic measurements to ensure the system’s
integrity. ERASMUS utilises SMART hardware architecture which is extended with
a Reliable Read-Only Clock (RROC) needed to perform verifier authentication and
prevent replay, reorder and delay attacks.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Related Work
3.2.2
Swarm Attestation
The existing Swarm Attestation protocols are presented, their functionality is de-
scribed, and an overview of the discussed protocols is shown in the table below.
SEDA. A protocol devised by Asokan et al. [Aa15], illuminates the hurdles in
achieving scalability with remote attestation for vast collections of low-end devices.
To address this challenge, the authors introduced SEDA, a powerful solution enabling
collective attestation in a scalable manner. The core concept of SEDA revolves around
an (overlay) spanning tree rooted at the verifier, which eﬀiciently facilitates attesta-
tion.
The protocol comprises two distinct phases: an offline phase and an online phase.
During the offline phase, two critical operations take place. Firstly, the Device Ini-
tialisation, orchestrated by the owner (or operator) denoted as O, occurs in a secure
environment. This initialisation furnishes provers with their expected correct config-
urations, ci, tailored to each prover Pi. These configurations are signed by O, thus
bolstering their authenticity. Furthermore, the provers obtain their credentials during
this phase. Secondly, the Device Registration is undertaken, wherein nodes establish
secure pairwise keys with their neighbouring devices (typically wirelessly reachable
ones) using their obtained credentials.
The online phase is triggered by V, the verifier, who disseminates an attestation
request across the swarm, thereby instigating the creation of the spanning tree. Sub-
sequently, each prover in the network validates the authenticity of the request before
propagating it to its children within the spanning tree structure. As the attestation
process progresses, each prover Pi assesses its children using the shared keys estab-
lished during the offline phase. Then, an ”accumulated” result is transmitted to the
parent node, indicating whether the subtree rooted at Pi adheres to the correct con-
figuration (1) or not (0). Through this synchronised effort, SEDA eﬀiciently executes
collective attestation for the large swarm of low-end devices.
LISA. The protocol was introduced by Carpent et al. [Car+17], offers two ver-
sions, LISA￿and LISAs, which build upon the foundation of SEDA while addressing
scalability and resilience against physical adversaries. Both LISA protocols operate
within a spanning tree topology, providing eﬀicient communication and coordination
among swarm devices.
LISA￿, the asynchronous variant, employs Finite State Machines (FSMs) to facil-
itate the attestation process within the swarm. Unlike SEDA, where collaboration
extends to various phases, LISA￿focuses solely on propagating attestation requests
and responses. To enhance security, provers in LISA￿carefully verify the session of an
attestation response before forwarding it to the parent node in the tree, safeguarding
against reply attacks or the dissemination of outdated messages to the verifier.
On the other hand, LISAs, the synchronous counterpart, bears a resemblance
to SEDA. In LISAs, nodes collectively aggregate attestation response messages by
attesting each child in the spanning tree, sending only their own attestation and a
list of attested children upstream in the tree.
Both LISA protocols utilise a shared master key among all swarm devices, stream-
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Survery of Existing Remote Attestation Schemes In IoT
41
lining the swarm attestation process. However, it is crucial to consider the risk asso-
ciated with a single compromised node potentially compromising the entire network.
To address this concern, especially in scenarios involving physical attackers, the au-
thors propose the use of a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) to establish trust among
entities. This introduces additional complexity but mitigates the risks of total com-
promise.
Nevertheless, it is essential to acknowledge that LISA￿and LISAs mandate full
connectivity among nodes during the attestation process. This requirement may limit
their applicability in dynamic networks or settings where intermittent connectivity
among nodes is prevalent. The authors, however, have made commendable efforts in
formally defining the necessary connectivity requirements, specifying the time nodes
must remain connected for the protocols to function successfully.
SheLA. In their paper, Rabbani et al. proposed SHeLA [Rab+19], an innovative
and scalable attestation scheme tailored for large IoT networks characterised by het-
erogeneity, meaning a swarm comprising nodes communicating via different wireless
protocols. The paper elucidates an architecture and a protocol facilitating remote at-
testation of IoT devices operating within a swarm, while accounting for the mobility
of the provers. To achieve this objective, the authors introduce an edge computing
layer strategically positioned between the verifier and the swarm network. To cater
to different regions, multiple edge verifiers are deployed, allowing swarm nodes the
freedom to join or leave the network as required. Each edge verifier (V) retains infor-
mation about every swarm-registered P, P that temporarily operates as guests, and
all other V. The root V maintains comprehensive information about all the other
edge verifiers and the swarm’s P.
The attestation process in SHeLA unfolds in two distinct phases: an offline phase
and an online phase. During the offline phase, P within the network are equipped
with attestation-related details and duly registered with an edge V. Subsequently, in
the online phase, edge verifiers conduct attestation of the underlying IoT devices by
leveraging a spanning tree approach. A noteworthy advantage of SHeLA over most
other Remote Attestation (RA) schemes lies in its ability to support device mobil-
ity. Thanks to the inherent redundancy of the edge verifiers, the swarm nodes can
remain temporarily unavailable or concealed from one or more edge devices without
disrupting the attestation process. Consequently, P is not required to remain static
even during attestation. Moreover, SHeLA enables the root V to gather comprehen-
sive information on the health status of each individual network device. This sets it
apart from conventional schemes, where attestation granularity is limited to a binary
outcome for the entire swarm. The authors confidently claim that SHeLA fulfils all
the properties of Quality of Swarm Attestation (QoSA) proposed by Carpent et al.
[Car+17].
SANA. Ambrosin et al. [Amb+16] introduced the SANA protocol as a promising
solution, addressing several limitations of its predecessor, SEDA. A key highlight of
SANA is its reliance on an ingenious cryptographic technique known as Optimistic
Aggregate Signatures (OAS) to eﬀiciently aggregate attestation results from a net-
work using untrusted aggregators. This multi-party signature scheme ensures that
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Related Work
SANA can handle attestation reports from any number of signers with ease, thanks
to its concise signature size and swift verification process. Additionally, SANA im-
plements a token system assigned by the network owner to verifiers, which effectively
safeguards against DoS attacks by allowing only legitimate verifiers to initiate at-
testation requests for devices within the network. Notably, SANA ensures that the
attestation report is publicly verifiable, offering crucial insights into compromised
devices within the network.
Despite its noteworthy advancements over SEDA, SANA still faces certain chal-
lenges. One such obstacle is its requirement for full connectivity among devices within
the network. Moreover, the adoption of the aggregate signature scheme introduces
considerable overhead, particularly on low-end devices, leading to significant compu-
tational burdens. Nonetheless, SANA stands as a remarkable step forward in the
domain of network attestation, addressing multiple limitations and offering enhanced
security measures.
SeED. In the study outlined in [ISZ17a], the SeED protocol presents an intrigu-
ing approach to attestation by allowing provers to initiate the process, in contrast
to verifier-initiated protocols like SEDA . This unique design leads to reduced en-
ergy costs, minimised communication overhead, and faster run-time compared to its
counterparts. Moreover, SeED offers additional protection against Denial of Service
(DoS) attacks on end devices, shielding them from potential malevolent actions by
malicious verifiers.
It’s worth noting that SeED itself is not a Complete Remote Attestation (CRA)
protocol; instead, it relies on SEDA to eﬀiciently deliver attestation reports to the ver-
ifier. The security of SeED is contingent on a secure random seed, shared during the
initial device bootstrapping phase between each device and the central orchestrator,
denoted as ”O.” To ensure robustness, end devices (provers) securely store this shared
seed in a Memory Protection Unit (MPU). This shared seed plays a crucial role in gen-
erating a pseudo-random sequence of times for executing attestation, thwarting any
attempts by a mobile attacker, AdvMSW, to predict the next scheduled attestation
round.
Each device within the network generates its respective attestation report based
on the randomly generated time, and these reports are eﬀiciently delivered to the
verifier using SEDA. As a result, SeED inherits the same limitations as SEDA, but
its innovative approach brings substantial improvements in terms of energy eﬀiciency,
communication, and security against potential DoS attacks. The SeED protocol repre-
sents a notable advancement in the realm of attestation, offering a valuable alternative
to traditional verifier-initiated methodologies.
PADS. In their recent work, Ambrosin et al. [Amb+18] introduced PADS, a
protocol that shares a focus with SALAD in addressing highly dynamic swarm topolo-
gies. PADS transforms the challenge of attesting a swarm of devices into a consensus
problem, embracing a novel approach to attain attestation. Each prover in PADS
undertakes self-attestation using a non-interactive technique akin to SeED (Type 3
attestation). Subsequently, the prover broadcasts its attestation report to neighbour-
ing devices (i.e., those within its communication range) multiple times. This report
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Survery of Existing Remote Attestation Schemes In IoT
43
comprises a bitmap representation of the network’s health status, from the prover’s
perspective, and is securely signed by the device’s Trusted Execution Environment
(TEE). Devices eﬀiciently integrate the received network information from their neigh-
bours using the AND operator, merging their knowledge and gradually converging to
the true state of the network over time.
V, the verifier, can then query any arbitrary device or a selected subset of them
for the Complete Remote Attestation (CRA) result. PADS offers a significant advan-
tage over other CRA schemes in terms of resiliency with respect to changes in the
network topology. Since devices continue broadcasting their ”view of the network”
for a specific duration, lost transmissions do not adversely impact the result collec-
tion process. Notably, PADS does not rely on a spanning tree for attestation, further
distinguishing it from conventional approaches.
Furthermore, PADS allows attestation reports to provide ”partial” knowledge of
the network, offering a novel concept known as ”coverage” to quantify the complete-
ness of the information provided in the report. This introduces a valuable dimension
to the protocol, enhancing the understanding of the network’s health status. PADS
stands out as an innovative and resilient solution for attesting highly dynamic swarm
topologies, offering a fresh perspective on addressing the challenges of network attes-
tation.
3.2.3
Discussion
A thorough examination of the current literature reveals various remote attestation
schemes tailored for IoT devices.
These schemes are primarily designed to assess
the integrity of devices in a network. Some focus on single prover attestation, with
methods ranging from purely software-based solutions such as SWATT, Pioneer, and
SCUBA, to hardware-based approaches leveraging TPMs and Intel’s SGX, and fi-
nally, hybrid solutions like SeED and ERASMUS that blend the strengths of both
hardware and software-based methods. Furthermore, when it comes to swarm attes-
tation, where a vast collection of devices needs to be attested collectively, protocols
like SEDA, LISA, SeEd, SheLA, and PADS come to the forefront. However, there as
has not yet been an attempt to implement remote attestation into the SIoT paradigm.
This is likely due to both paradigms being emerging fields of study.
A survey of existing trust management schemes in SIoT has shown that they can
be categorised into Recommendation-based, Reputation-based, Prediction-based, and
Policy-based schemes. Some studies have even taken a hybrid approach, combining
elements from multiple categories. For instance, Jayasinghe et al.
[Jay+16] have
proposed a model that leverages both recommendations and reputations, whereas
Truong et al.
introduced a comprehensive trust model called REK that incorpo-
rates reputation, experience, and knowledge.
Azad et al.
[Tru+17b] presented a
decentralised self-enforcement trust management model, emphasising feedback and
reputation. There are some trust management that employ non-probabilistic metrics
in trust computation, such as Chen et al. [Che18], Khani et al. [Kha+18], and Mas-
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Related Work
moudi et al. [Mas+20]. Nevertheless, they are limited to Quality of Service (QoS)
metrics such as energy, computational capabilities and bandwidth. Although these
metrics can be useful to some degree in assessing the trustworthiness of a device, they
can not be used to effectively to determine if a device is malicious.
In the SIoT trust management domain, most methods lean towards probabilistic
systems.
Yet, these probabilistic systems can introduce uncertainties.
Therefore,
lacking a non-probabilistic trust management system tailored specifically for SIoT
presents a compelling case for a non-probabilistic Remote attestation-based Trust
Management System for SIoT.
Given the landscape of SIoT and the existing remote attestation protocols, there’s
a compelling case for designing a Remote attestation-based Trust Management Sys-
tem for SIoT that is non-probabilistic in nature. Such a system would offer a deter-
ministic approach to assess and manage trust among devices in SIoT, ensuring more
reliable interactions and collaborations in the network.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
The Proposed Solution:
ATMS-SIoT
The model proposed in this paper is called ATMS-SIoT, it is outlined in this sec-
tion. The section presents the proposed network structure and the trust evaluation
model and outlines how the devices interact. Our solution uses a Fog-enhanced IoT
architecture that utilises fog nodes positioned at the edge of the IoT network. These
nodes assume certain tasks to alleviate the computational burden on IoT devices and
minimise the volume of data transmitted through the network.
4.1
System Model
Our system has three main entities: SIoT Server, Trust Agent, and SIoT Device. The
figure below shows the proposed network structure:
Figure 4.1: Network Structure
• Trust Agent: Trust Agents are fog-nodes deployed at the edge of the SIoT
network. They are responsible for facilitating the interaction between two nodes
by trust computation. Furthermore, the Trust Agent acts as the verifier in the
remote attestation process.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 The Proposed Solution: ATMS-SIoT
• SIoT Server: SIoT Server is the network operator and is responsible for de-
ploying SIoT Devices and Trust Agents into the network. It’s responsible for
securely bootstrapping the RA protocol on each device. Furthermore, the SIoT
Server stores a table with the identifiers of each SIoT Device and Trust Agent.
• SIoT Devices: A set of devices that are deployed in the network connected
to a Trust Agent through which they send access requests. These devices will
interact with each other to provide or request services.
4.2
Adversary Model
Within Fog-enhanced IoT systems, both SIoT devices and fog nodes are susceptible to
various forms of attacks. However, this particular study specifically excludes attacks
targeting fog nodes and instead concentrates on attacks directed at IoT devices. The
assumption is made that adversaries possess the motivation to carry out these specific
types of attacks:
• Bad-Mouthing Attack: Malicious devices send dishonest recommendations
in an attempt to decrease the trust level of good nodes [Sha+20; For+20;
Abd+16].
• Denial of Service (DoS) Attack: In this form of attack, malicious devices
deliberately inundate the system with numerous fraudulent requests, aiming to
disrupt its regular operations [Sha+20; For+20; Abd+16].
• Ballot Stuﬀing Attack: Malicious devices send fabricated positive feedback
in order to enhance the reputation of other malicious devices [Sha+20; For+20;
Abd+16].
Following the adversary model outlined in [Abe+16] and [Amb+20], especially
aligning with swarm and non-interactive attestation approaches such as [ISZ17b],
[CRT18], [Aa15], and [Amb+16], we envision an adversary possessing the subsequent
capabilities.
Communication Adversary (Advcomm) An Advcomm has full control of the
communication channels between Vrf and Prf so it has the ability to manipulate, dis-
card, delay, and intercept the messages exchanged between devices. In the following,
we outline some of them. Note that the common assumption in such attacks is that
Vrf is unaware of when to expect an attestation response.
• Delay Attacks: The easiest method for Advcomm to avoid being detected is
to postpone the attestation response sent by Prv until Advcomm completes its
attack execution and accomplishes its objective.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Adversary Model
47
• Dropping Attacks: Given that Vrf identifies compromised Prv instances ex-
clusively based on receiving an attestation response that signifies a measure-
ment of malicious software, Advcomm has the option to discard any attestation
responses that do not indicate a state of benign software.
• Record and Play Attacks: In a more advanced attack scenario, adversaries
could record and discard legitimate attestation responses, then replay them
during an attack in an attempt to deceive the Vrf into believing that Prv is in
a secure state.
Software Adversary (Advsw): An Advsw takes advantage of a vulnerability in
the software of a Prv and compromises the Prv by executing malicious code. Advsw
may perform the following attacks:
• Fake Measurements: Advsw has the capability to intercept and alter the
process responsible for measuring the software state. This allows for the cre-
ation of a deceptive attestation response that appears benign, even if it doesn’t
accurately represent the genuine software state on Prv.
• Forged Measurements: Utilising software methods, Advsw can extract the
attestation key that is utilised for validating attestation outcomes. With access
to the attestation key, Advsw gains the ability to fabricate attestation responses
at will, regardless of the actual state of Prv.
• Pre-Generated Measurements: Through manipulating Prv’s clock, Advsw
can deceive Prv into generating future measurements of the current benign
software state. These manipulated measurements can be stored and used as
attestation responses sent to Vrf when an attack is executed.
Mobile Adversary (Advmob): Advmob can potentially evade detection by ex-
ploiting the precise time interval between attestation measurements.
Specifically,
Advmob monitors Prv to determine the constant time interval between measurements.
Subsequently, Advmob infects Prv by installing malware after a successful attestation.
Just before the attestation protocol is executed again, Advmob restores the original
benign software state. By repeating this process, Advmob can sustain the infection
on Prv for an extended period without being detected.
Assumptions. We proceed with the assumption that an adversary Advsw doesn’t
compromise the hardware-protected memory. Aligning with the assumptions made
in other RA schemes [22P] and [11P], we exclude physical adversaries from consider-
ation. Our scope excludes Denial of Service (DoS) and Distributed Denial of Service
(DDoS) attacks, as we depend on a non-interactive attestation approach where the
Vrf doesn’t initiate the attestation request.
Device Requirements.Following prevalent assumptions in state-of-the-art RA
schemes [HDD21; ISZ17a], we adopt the premise that a Prv contains four trusted
components:
==PAGE:58==
48
4 The Proposed Solution: ATMS-SIoT
• Real Time Clock (RTC): To ensure that a measurement of Prv’s software is
linked to its creation time, the use of a real-time write-protected clock (RTC)
is essential. This clock cannot be altered by a software-only adversary, making
it reliable for maintaining the accuracy of attestation responses and preventing
the generation of responses based on outdated software measurements. RTC
plays a role in enforcing timely attestation response generation and preventing
responses from being created using old software measurements. The concept of
RTC has been previously applied to detect physical attacks in [ISZ17a] and to
address denial of service (DoS) attacks in attestation protocols [ISZ17a].
• Read-Only Memory (ROM): To ensure the integrity of the code used for
measurements, the attestation code and the attestation key can be stored in
ROM. This approach helps protect against tampering and unauthorised modi-
fications.
• Memory Protect Units (MPU): To maintain the confidentiality of the attes-
tation key and attestation times, the implementation requires a basic Memory
Protection Unit (MPU). The MPU ensures that these sensitive details are ac-
cessible in read-only mode exclusively to the protocol code.
• Attestation Trigger: In a secure non-interactive attestation scheme, it’s cru-
cial that even the entity initiating the attestation process (such as the operating
system) remains unaware of the attestation time. To achieve this, a dedicated
timeout circuit is essential. This circuit oversees and updates a timer value
stored within a secure register.
SMART. The remote attestation protocol implements a modified version of
SMART. In particular, the scope of the MPU rules is extended to regulate access
to a limited section of the re-writable memory. This reserved memory, subject to
restricted access, becomes essential for storing the intermediate data of the proto-
col. This space is primarily utilised to hold the internal state of the Pseudo-Random
Number Generator (PRNG) as well as the attestation time.
4.3
Security Requirements
In order to present a specific method for calculating trustworthiness, it is essential
to analyse the significant requirements of trust evaluation.
From a security and
availability perspective, the following properties need to be satisfied.
• Integrity: It is crucial that all transaction data and interaction results are
recorded completely and stored effectively. Furthermore, the data should be
easily retrievable.
Maintaining a complete and valid service history, as well
as trust-related information is essential for preventing attacks such as self-
promoting attack (SPA), bad-mouthing attacks (BMA), ballot stuﬀing attack
(BSA), and whitewashing attack (WA).
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Trust Management Protocol
49
• Computability: Since the interaction between the service provider (SP) and
service recipient (SR) occurs without human intervention, the trustworthiness
should be quantifiable and computed deterministically and uniquely through
the trust computation module.
• Flexibility: Each service recipient (SR) may have different requirements for
services based on different environments, and the social relationships among
SRs and service providers (SPs) may vary. As a result, the trustworthiness of
the same SP may differ between different SRs. Therefore, the calculation of
trustworthiness should be flexible enough to account for these variations.
4.4
Trust Management Protocol
4.4.1
Bootstrapping Phase
The SIoT server is responsible for registering both new Trust Agents and new SIoT
devices to the network. This allows the SIoT server to have an overview of the entire
network and the associated hash values. The process for each is defined below:
• Trust Agent: SIoT server registers the new Trust Agent with all other Trust
Agents in the network, who all, in turn, update their Trust Agents table by
including a new entry for TAi with all relevant data.
• SIoT Device: SIoT server registers the new device with a specific TAi, which
updates its Trust Score & HAS table by including a new entry for SDi.
The SIoT server will ensure that each SIoT device is initialised with an attestation
key and random seed that are unique to each SIoT Device - Trust Agent pair (i.e. No
pair of SIoT Device - Trust Agent share the same attestation key or random seed to
another).
Once the devices have been registered with a Trust Agent, they will lack any
interaction data needed for trust computation. To compensate for this, the device
initiates artificial interactions over a set period of time before becoming active.
4.4.2
Active Phase
Once the devices have become active, they are able to interact with each other.
4.4.2.1
Attestation
When it is time for attestation, the SIoT device (Prover) will generate a measurement,
h, of its software and will then concatenate h with the current time, which will all be
authenticated with a MAC based on the shared attestation key. The SIoT device will
then send this message to the Trust Agent (Verfier). The Trust Agent will perform
four checks:
==PAGE:60==
50
4 The Proposed Solution: ATMS-SIoT
1. The attestation response has been received within the time limit
2. The attestation response is authentic (i.e. verifies the MAC)
3. The attestation response is fresh (i.e the concatenated time corresponds to the
attestation time)
4. The measurement, h, matches an acceptable software state.
If any of these checks fail, the Trust Agent can conclude that the SIoT device has
failed the attestation and will give an attestation score of 0. On the other hand, if
all the checks succeed, the Trust Agent can conclude that the SIoT device has passed
the attestation and will give an attestation score of 1.
4.4.2.2
Trust Score Computation
Trust computation for any Nodei is performed by its respective Trust Agent. The
trust score for a given Nodei will be stored in the Trust Score & HAS table. At
the end of each interaction, the node, which was the service requester, will evaluate
the interaction as Successful, Uncertain or Failed. The next time a trust score is
calculated, it will use the evaluation of the previous interaction as part of the trust
computation.
Interactions Between Nodes Connected To The Same Trust Agent:
Figure 4.2: Interaction Between NodeK & NodeJ
NodeK →Trust Agent: NodeK requires a service to be performed by NodeJ and
If NodeK has interacted with NodeJ before, it sends its interaction history to the
Trust Agent.
Trust Agent →NodeK: The Trust Agent then calculates the Trust Score. If the
Trust Score is above a given threshold, it informs NodeK that it can begin interaction
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Tables
51
with NodeJ and sends the calculated trust score of NodeK. Else, it informs NodeK
to find another Service Provider.
NodeK ←→NodeJ: NodeK and NodeJ interact with each other (NodeJ provides
the service requested by NodeK)
NodeK →Trust Agent: After the interaction is complete, NodeK evaluates the
interaction and sends its evaluation to the Trust Agent. NodeK can evaluate the
interaction in three categories: Successful, Uncertain, and Failed interaction. NodeK
will keep interaction history for a subset of nodes for a predetermined time set by the
system.
4.5
Tables
Our solution uses three tables. One table is stored at the SIoT Server, and the other
two tables are stored at the Trust Agent. The columns of each of these tables are
summarised in this section.
The following table is stored at the SIoT Server and is used to keep track of all
the SIoT Devices and Trust Agents in the network.
SIoT Server Table
IDDevice
The identifier of each SIoT Devicei
IDT rustAgent
The identifier of each TrustAgenti
Table 4.1: SIoT Server Table
The following two tables are stored at the Trust Agent. The Trust Score & HAS
Table stores all the information related to each of the SIoT Devices registered with a
Trust Agent.
Trust Score & HAS Table
IDNode
The identifier of each SIoT Devicei registered with this Trust Agent
HAS
A value that reflects the current and past attestation result of IDNode
Ti
The trust value of any given Nodei from the perspective of IDNode
Table 4.2: Trust Score & HAS Table stored at the Trust Agent
The Trust Agents Table stores the identifier of all the Trust Agents in the network.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 The Proposed Solution: ATMS-SIoT
Trust Agents
IDT rustAgent
The identifier of all Trust Agents in the network
Table 4.3: Trust Agents Table stored at each Trust Agent
4.6
Remote Attestation
A non-interactive form of RA was chosen in order to reduce communication over-
head. The system enables the SIoT device (Prover) to trigger the attestation process
autonomously, removing the need for the Trust Agent (Verifier) to initiate the pro-
cess.
The RA protocol proposed by Ibrahim et al., in their paper titled ”Secure
Non-Interactive Attestation for Embedded Devices (SeED)”, which was discussed in
3.2.2, in particular, was chosen to be implemented.
In SeED, both the SIoT device and Trust Agent will share two secrets:
1. Attestation Key used to authenticate the attestation responses.
2. A random seed that the Pseudorandom Number Generator (PRNG) will use to
generate a random attestation time (timer) that triggers the next attestation
process.
The Trust Agent will expect the attestation response to be at a certain expected
time, called ”the agreed time”. Since both the Trust Agent and the SIoT Device
have their own clocks, they may not be perfectly in sync; they might be a bit fast
or a bit slow compared to each other. This difference is the ”maximum clock skew”.
Furthermore, the time to send the attestation response from the SIoT device to the
Trust Agent will be called the ”maximum time required to transmit the response”.
Consequently, considering these factors, the Trust Agent expects to get the attes-
tation response from the SIoT Device at any time between a little before the agreed
time (the agreed time minus the maximum clock skew) and a little after the agreed
time (the agreed time plus the maximum clock skew, plus the maximum time required
to transmit the response).
4.7
Trust Computation
The trust score calculation comprises several factors: Direct Experience, Indirect
Experience, Social Object Relationships and Historical Attestation Score. Each of
these factors is given its own respective weight, wi, between 0 and 1, with the sum of
all the weights equaling 1. Trust Score of NodeJ from NodeK perspective.
TrustScorekj =w1(DEkj) + w2(IEkj) + w3(SORkj) + w4(HASj)
(1)
==PAGE:63==
4.7 Trust Computation
53
4.7.1
Direct Experience
Dirichlet distribution is used to compute direct observation as our model uses multi-
valued satisfaction levels, where Dirichlet distribution is a more appropriate choice
rather than the conventional beta distribution. Additionally, Dirichlet distribution
has been shown to be more effective than beta distribution in an IoT context [JH07].
When a nodek computes the trust value of nodej, the notation DEkj is used to sig-
nify the direct experience value nodek has on nodej. Taking the interactions between
nodek and nodej into account, the three parameters used to represent the observa-
tions are, respectively, the following: SISkj, is the score given for the number of
successful interactions with nodej, UISkj, is the score given for the number of uncer-
tain interactions with nodej and FISkj, is the score given for the number of failed
interactions with nodej.
The following equation is used for direct experience:
DEkj =
(SISkj + 1)
(SISkj + UISkj + FISkj + 3
(2)
Where SIS is the Successful Interaction Score, UIS is Uncertain Interaction Score,
and FIS is the Failed Interaction Score.
Successful Interaction Score for nodej from the perspective of nodek is determined by
multiplying the Reward Factor, the number of successful interactions and the sum of
the weights of all interactions together:
SISkj =(RewardFactor)
N
∑
L=1
(IWL)
(3)
Uncertain Interaction Score for nodej from the perspective of nodek is determined by
multiplying the Neutral Factor, the number of uncertain interactions and the sum of
the weights of all interactions together:
UISkj =(NeutralFactor)
N
∑
L=1
(IWL)
(4.1)
Failed Interaction Score for nodej from the perspective of nodek is determined by
multiplying the Neutral Factor, the number of uncertain interactions and the sum of
the weights of all interactions together:
FISkj =(PunishmentFactor)
N
∑
L=1
(IWL)
(4)
Where IWL is the sum of the weights of all interactions, it hinders an object from
performing well on low-weight services to improve their trust score, only to exhibit
negative behaviour on critical services.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 The Proposed Solution: ATMS-SIoT
4.7.2
Indirect Experience
The indirect experience value for a nodej is based on the recommendations provided
by other nodes regarding Nodej. This calculation involves summing up the recom-
mendations (Rij) given by various nodes (i) about Nodej and then dividing the total
sum by the number of recommendations (n). Recommendations are the trust scores
of Nodej from the perspective of the recommender.
The indirect experience IEkj is computed by NodeK for NodeJ with the following
equation:
IEkj =
n∑
i=1
Rij
n
(5)
Where Rij is the recommendations sent by Nodei about NodeJ and n is the number
of recommendations.
4.7.3
Social Object Relationship
Social Object Relationship (SOR) represents the extent of the relationship be-
tween Node K and Node J. This relationship is quantified using a value that ranges
between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates no relationship, and 1 signifies a strong relation-
ship.
Social Object Relationship
Parental Object Relationships (POR)
0.5
Co-work Object Relationships (CWOR)
0.6
Social Object Relationships (SOR
0.7
Co-location Object Relationships (CLOR)
0.8
Ownership Object Relationships (OOR)
0.9
Table 4.4: The types of SOR and their values
4.7.4
Historical Attestation Score
A Historical Attestation Score (HAS) aims to enable the trust computation to consider
attestation results beyond the recent attestation result. A weighted sum method is
used to evaluate the HAS value, as shown by the equation below:
HASnewj = (1 −λ)HASj(Previous) + λASj
(6)
==PAGE:65==
4.8 Trust Update
55
4.8
Trust Update
Trust values are updated during each interaction using the following equation:
Tnewkj(t) = (1 −δ)Tkj(Previous) + δTkj(Latest)
(7)
==PAGE:66==
56
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Validation
This paper has taken the approach of implementing a simulation in Python, which
is an approach used by numerous other papers [Sag+22]. The simulation comprises
50 SIoT devices and 5 Trust Agents in the network. In the simulation, each SIoT
Device requests a random service from another random SIoT Device, which we refer
to as an interaction. The SIoT devices can each provide four services: S1, S2, and S3.
Each of these services was given different weights. Our study focused on assessing
the effectiveness of our proposed model in identifying nodes’ behaviour. Throughout
the analysis, we systematically adjusted the percentage of malicious nodes, ranging
from 20% to 80%, to gauge the impact of different levels of malicious nodes on our
model’s performance.
Furthermore, social object relationships between devices were assigned randomly,
and malicious devices performed Bad Mouthing, Good Mouthing and On-Off attacks.
In terms of remote attestation, devices that were malicious would fail the attestation,
and non-malicious devices would pass the attestation.
The simulation parameters are shown in the table below:
Parameters
Values
Number of SIoT Devices
50
Number of Trust Agents
5
Simulation Duration
60 Minutes
Table 5.1: Simulation Parameters
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Validation
5.1
Trust Convergence of Normal Device Based On
Trust Update Decay Factor
In this section, we explore the impact of the Trust Update decay factor, denoted as δ,
on the trust values of non-malicious SIoT devices. Figure 5.1 illustrates our findings,
showing that with δ = 0.8, it took 4 minutes for the SIoT device to reach a trust
score of 0.8. In contrast, when δ = 0.5, it required 13 minutes to achieve the same
trust score.
Figure 5.1: Effects of Trust Update Decay Factor on Non-Malicious Device
These results highlight that incorporating more recent trust values (using a higher
δ) in the trust evaluation process leads to a faster convergence of trust values, better
reflecting the actual status of the nodes.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Trust Convergence of Nodes Device On HAS Decay Factor
59
5.2
Trust Convergence of Nodes Device On HAS
Decay Factor
We investigate the impact of the Historical Attestation Score decay factor, denoted
as λ, on the trustworthiness of a non-malicious SIoT device by altering its value from
0.5 to 0.8. As illustrated in Figure 5.2, we observe that when λ = 0.8, the SIoT
device achieved a trust score of 0.8 within 5 minutes. Conversely, λ = 0.5 required
10 minutes to attain the same trust score.
Figure 5.2: Effects of HAS Decay Factor on Non-Malicious Device
Our findings demonstrate that incorporating more recent Historical Attestation
Scores (by increasing λ) in the trust evaluation process results in a quicker convergence
of trust values toward the true status of the nodes.
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Validation
5.3
Trust Convergence of Malicious Device Trust
Update Decay Factor
Figure 5.3: Effects of Trust Update Decay Factor on Malicious Device
Figure 5.3 illustrates the duration needed to identify malicious nodes.
In just 3
minutes, when δ = 0.8, trust decreases rapidly from 0.5 to 0.3, in contrast to the
7-minute duration needed to reach the same trust level when δ = 0.5. These results
show that increasing the value of δ to include more recent direct observations in the
trust assessment accelerates the convergence to the lowest trust value.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Trust Convergence of Malicious Device Based On HAS Decay Factor
61
5.4
Trust Convergence of Malicious Device Based On
HAS Decay Factor
Figure 5.4: Effects of HAS Decay Factor on Malicious Device
We investigate the impact of the Historical Attestation Score decay factor, denoted
as λ, on the trustworthiness of a malicious SIoT device by altering its value from 0.5
to 0.8. As illustrated in Figure 5.4, we observe that when λ = 0.8, the SIoT device
achieved a trust score of 0.8 within 4 minutes. Conversely, λ = 0.5 required 6 minutes
to attain the same trust score. Although having a higher λ value does not have a
significant impact on the trust score, nevertheless, we do see an improvement in the
convergence of the trust score.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Validation
5.5
Resilience Against On-Off, Good and
Bad-Mouthing Attacks
We evaluated the resilience of ATMS-SIoT against On-Off, Good, and Bad-Mouthing
attacks by varying the percentage of malicious devices within the network. A sim-
ilar methodology was employed by Bao et al.[SHA20]. Malicious devices were pro-
grammed to execute all three forms of attacks. Figure 5.5 presents the simulation
results, where we manipulated the percentage of malicious nodes, ranging from 30%
to 80%.
Figure 5.5: Resilience of Non-Malicious Device Against Attacks
Figure 5.5 clearly illustrates the effectiveness of ATMS-SIoT in mitigating all
three aforementioned types of attacks. Notably, there is no significant impact on the
trust score of non-malicious devices until the proportion of malicious devices exceeds
70%. Even in this scenario, the trust score of the device experiences only a marginal
decrease, from 0.8 to 0.7.
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Resilience Against On-Off, Good and Bad-Mouthing Attacks
63
Figure 5.6: Resilience of ATMS-SIoT against attacks
Furthermore, Figure 5.6 demonstrates that malicious devices fail to regain their
initial trust score value of 0.5, even when the network consists of 60% or more mali-
cious devices.
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Validation
5.6
Comparision to CTMS-SIOT
We compare the performance of ATMS-SIoT against CTMS-SIoT [AES17], which
was mentioned in 3.1.5.
((a)) CTMS-SIoT
((b)) ATMS-SIoT
Figure 5.7: Comparison of CTMS-SIoT & ATMS-SIoT - Non-Malicious Device
Figure 5.7 shows that it takes a non-malicious device between 10 and 15 minutes
to reach a trust score value equal to 0.8 for CTMS-SIoT, whereas ATMS-SIoT only
takes 4 minutes to reach the same score.
((a)) CTMS-SIoT
((b)) ATMS-SIoT
Figure 5.8: Comparison of CTMS-SIoT & ATMS-SIoT - Malicious Device
Similarly, Figure 5.8 shows that for a malicious device, it takes around 10 and 15
minutes to reach a trust score value equal to 0.3, whereas it only takes ATMS-SIoT
3 minutes to reach the same score.
==PAGE:75==
5.7 Implementation Details
65
Hence, ATMS-SIoT outperforms CTMS-SIoT when it comes to trust convergence.
It is important to note that CTMS-SIoT results in a higher trust score for non-
malicious nodes and a lower trust score for malicious nodes. However, this could be
the result of CTMS-SIoT not having implemented the common forms of attacks in
the behaviour of the malicious devices. In fact, Abderrahim et al. [AES17] do not
mention which forms of attacks have been implemented but rather just refer to the
devices carrying ”malicious behaviour”.
5.7
Implementation Details
In this section, we break down the source code for the implementation of ATMS-SIoT
in Python. To enable multiple devices to interact at the same time, the code uses
multi-threading. The entirety of the code can be found in Appendix A.1
Figure 5.9: Screenshots of the simulation running
5.7.1
SIoT Device
The SIoTDevice class modelled a device in our Social Internet of Things (SIoT) sys-
tem. Each device was given a unique device_id. The services attribute was a
dictionary that listed the functions each device could perform, along with their im-
portance or weight. We had also included a malicious flag to mark if a device was
harmful or benign. There was an interactions dictionary to track how devices in-
teracted over time. To understand the relationships between devices, we used the
sor_relations dictionary, starting with random relationship values from our pre-
defined list, SOR_VALUES. We also kept a trust_scores dictionary that showed how
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Validation
much a device trusted other devices, initialised to a default value of INITIAL_TRUST_-
VALUE.
Devices start off by being in the bootstrapping phase. The trust_agent attribute
linked a device to a trust agent that calculated the trust score. Because multiple de-
vices might have tried to interact at the same time, we added locks (interactions_-
lock, sor_relations_lock, and trust_scores_lock) to prevent data issues. The
main way devices communicated was through the interact method, which used the
_interaction_logic to decide the outcome of their interaction. For troubleshoot-
ing, including identifying race conditions, we added logging to track when devices
interacted, as shown in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Screenshots of the logs
The code for the SIoT Device class can be found in Appendix A.1.1.
5.7.2
Trust Agent
The TrustAgent class serves as a central component to manage and compute trust
scores for devices in a Social Internet of Things (SIoT) environment. Upon initial-
isation, it sets up a list of associated devices, initialises default trust scores (has_-
values), and employs locks to ensure thread-safe operations. Trust scores between
devices are initialised using the initialise_trust_scores methods, with every pair
of distinct devices starting with an INITIAL_TRUST_VALUE. The update_trust_score
method logs and updates trust scores for devices based on interactions, while the com-
==PAGE:77==
5.7 Implementation Details
67
pute_average_trust and compute_and_export_avg_trust methods calculate and
optionally export average trust scores.
Registering a new device is achieved through the register_device method, which
also sets the device’s trust agent and global mode. The heart of the trust computa-
tion lies in the direct and indirect experiences between devices. Direct experiences,
derived from the calculate_direct_experience method, are based on past inter-
actions between devices. In contrast, the calculate_indirect_experience method
considers trust recommendations from other devices, which the gather_recommenda-
tions method handles. Recommendations are weighted differently if they come from
malicious devices. Lastly, the get_attestation_score method provides a binary
attestation for a device, indicating if it’s malicious.
The code for the Trust Agent class can be found in Appendix A.1.1.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The research presented in this thesis spans various areas, primarily focusing on remote
attestation and trust management within Social IoT. To rearticulate the problem de-
fined in section 1.1, this thesis aims to determine if integrating remote attestation
into the trust management system of SioT can enhance the accuracy and reliability of
trust assessments. This central problem was dissected into several research inquiries,
each delving into facets of Remote Attestation in IoT or trust management systems in
Social IoT. The subsequent sections of this chapter present key findings and learnings
from addressing these inquiries and conclude with a comprehensive discussion on the
resolution of the initial problem statement.
RQ1: What are the state-of-the-art approaches for developing a robust
Trust Management System (TMS) in the Social IoT paradigm? What are
their advantages and limitations?
Designing a robust Trust Management System for SIoT presents considerable chal-
lenges due to the environment’s ever-changing dynamics, diverse components, and
issues related to scalability. To answer this question, we dissect the various elements
that constitute a Trust Management System, exploring the merits and demerits of
the techniques implemented within these components in section 2.2.3. Subsequently,
in section 2.2.4, we provide a comprehensive overview of the distinct Trust Man-
agement Schemes, including Recommendation-based, Reputation-based, Prediction-
based, and Policy-based approaches. This is followed by an in-depth analysis of the
current state-of-the-art for each of these schemes.
To summarise the findings in the aforementioned section. Recommendation-based
Systems utilise recommendations to assess the trustworthiness of nodes in a SIoT net-
work. They derive trust from both direct observations and the recommendations of
neighbouring nodes.
Their main strength lies in determining trust without prior
interactions or direct observations and acknowledging the value of credible nodes.
However, these systems grapple with the challenge of ensuring node reliability in
evolving environments and defending against specific recommendation-based attacks.
Second, Reputation-based Systems emphasize reputation as an anticipated behaviour
in dynamic IoT settings, drawing from past interactions and referrals. While these
systems have made strides in multiple computer science domains, their main chal-
lenge revolves around the impact of historical ratings on present trust levels. Third,
Prediction-based Systems merge current and past data to identify anomalous nodes
==PAGE:80==
70
6 Conclusion
and counter the limitations of traditional trust aggregation techniques. Machine learn-
ing and deep learning models within this category excel when managing numerous
trust metrics.
However, the diﬀiculty in determining weight assignments for each
trust metric across diverse IoT contexts, coupled with computational costs, persists.
Lastly, Policy-based Systems rely on established policies rooted in network config-
urations and contextual information. Ideal for static IoT applications, their major
hurdle is updating and implementing these policies in the dynamic landscapes of SIoT.
RQ2: What are the state-of-the-art approaches in Remote Attestation in
IoT? Which of these would be suited to the SIoT Paradigm?
We conducted a survey of the existing remote attestation protocols in IoT to an-
swer this question. In section 2.3, we introduce the two different types of remote
attestation, namely, Single Prover Attestation and Swarm Attestation. For each, we
provide a foundational understanding of the system model, adversarial model and the
different remote attestation strategies. We determined that Swarm Attestation is the
better solution for integrating into SIoT. Single Prover Attestation is not as eﬀicient
for networks with a large number of devices, like SIoT. In section 2.3.6, we examine
the unique properties of Swarm Attestation and analyse the various aggregation pat-
terns and attestation modes. Lastly, in section 3.2, we look at the state-of-the-art
remote attestation schemes in IoT.
RQ3: How can we design a novel trust approach that improves the existing
probabilistic trust protocols in Social IoT?
In section 4, The ATMS-SIoT protocol is designed to use both probabilistic and non-
probabilistic for trust assessment. In particular, it’s a fusion of recommendation-based
and reputation-based trust management systems, which serve as the probabilistic as-
pect of the protocol. Remote attestation is integrated into the trust assessment to
serve as the non-probabilistic part of the protocol.
RQ4: How does the proposed trust approach enhance the overall reliability
and accuracy of the trust assessment in SIoT?
In order to prove that the proposed solution can, in fact, improve the reliability and
accuracy of the trust assessment in SIoT. We implemented the solution and carried
out a simulation in Python.
The performance of the proposed solution was eval-
uated in terms of the duration it took for the trust values of both malicious and
non-malicious devices to converge. In particular, for malicious devices, evaluated the
resilience of the system against trust-related attacks such as Bad-Mouthing, Ballot
Stuﬀing and On-Off Attacks. Furthermore, we compared the solution to an existing
trust management system to see if it could outperform it. The results of the valida-
tion analysis showed that the system was resilient to the aforementioned trust-related
attacks and outperformed the existing trust management system.
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Future Works
71
Problem Statement: How can Remote Attestation be implemented in a
Social IoT Trust Management System?
This thesis highlights the relatively unexplored field of trust management within the
Social IoT paradigm. It demonstrates the potential for trust management systems
to integrate remote attestation, which can enhance trust computation’s reliability
through non-probabilistic metrics. The research findings aﬀirm that Social IoT trust
management systems can derive substantial benefits from the inclusion of remote
attestation.
6.1
Future Works
6.1.1
Blockchain
Blockchain technology holds substantial potential for enhancing ATMS-SIoT. Al-
though limited research has explored its application in SIoT and Remote Attesta-
tion, blockchain presents a promising opportunity. By shifting from ATMS-SIoT’s
centralized architecture to a decentralized one, blockchain can provide increased secu-
rity, immutability, and transparency. It fosters trust among IoT devices, guarantees
data integrity, and streamlines interactions through smart contracts. Decentraliza-
tion mitigates single points of failure, while blockchain’s interoperability and fraud
prevention capabilities benefit SIoT ecosystems. Furthermore, blockchain empowers
data ownership and privacy, reinforcing its potentially pivotal role in fortifying and
elevating IoT network trustworthiness.
6.1.2
Simulation Improvements
The simulation for ATMS-SIoT was implemented in Python. Although this has been
an approach taken by several other studies that have presented an SIoT trust manage-
ment system, the lack of information on how exactly the simulation was implemented
in many studies has made making earnest comparisons diﬀicult. Furthermore, this
issue was exacerbated due to the lack of datasets specific to the SIoT domain since
comparisons would not be as accurate due to the randomness in the generated data.
Therefore, it could be beneficial to implement ATMS-SIoT using a network simulator
such as OMNeT++, which is an approach used by many other studies in the SIoT
domain.
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Implementation Code
The code has been included as part of the submission along with the entirety of data
from the simulation runs.
A.1.1
SIoT Device
1
import threading
2 from constants import *
3 import random
4 from collections import defaultdict
5 import logging
6
7
8 class SIoTDevice:
9
def __init__(self, device_id, malicious=False, trust_agent=None,
global_mode=False):
10
self.device_id = device_id
11
self.services = SERVICE_WEIGHTS
12
self.malicious = malicious
13
14
# Interaction history with other devices
15
self.interactions = defaultdict(list)
16
# Social Object Relationships with other devices
17
self.sor_relations = defaultdict(
18
lambda: random.choice(list(SOR_VALUES.values()))
19
)
20
# Trust scores from this device's perspective
21
self.trust_scores = defaultdict(lambda: INITIAL_TRUST_VALUE)
22
23
self.bootstrapping = False
24
# This will hold the reference to the trust agent this device is
associated with.
25
self.trust_agent = trust_agent
26
27
# By default, we'll assume devices are not in global mode.
28
self.global_mode = global_mode
29
30
# Locks for different attributes
31
self.interactions_lock = threading.Lock()
==PAGE:84==
74
A Appendix
32
self.sor_relations_lock = threading.Lock()
33
self.trust_scores_lock = threading.Lock()
34
35
def get_associated_trust_agent(self):
36
return self.trust_agent
37
38
def set_global_mode(self, mode):
39
self.global_mode = mode
40
41
def interact(self, other_device , bootstrapping=False, lock=True):
42
if lock:
43
with self.interactions_lock:
# Locking the interactions section
only if lock is True
44
logging.info(
45
f"{threading.current_thread().name} acquired
interactions_lock for {self.device_id}"
46
)
47
service, weight, result = self._interaction_logic(
48
other_device , bootstrapping
49
)
50
self.interactions[other_device.device_id].append(
51
(other_device.device_id, self.device_id, weight, result)
52
)
53
logging.info(
54
f"{threading.current_thread().name} released
interactions_lock for {self.device_id}"
55
)
56
else:
57
service, weight, result = self._interaction_logic(
58
other_device , bootstrapping
59
)
60
self.interactions[other_device.device_id].append(
61
(other_device.device_id, self.device_id, weight, result)
62
)
63
return service, weight, result
64
65
def _interaction_logic(self, other_device , bootstrapping):
66
service = random.choice(list(self.services.keys()))
67
weight = self.services[service]
68
highest_weight_service = max(self.services, key=self.services.get)
69
70
# If the current device is malicious and not in bootstrapping phase
71
if self.malicious and not bootstrapping:
72
if service == highest_weight_service:
73
result = "Failed"
74
else:
75
# For all other services, the interaction is successful
76
result = "Successful"
77
else:
78
result = random.choices(
79
["Successful", "Uncertain", "Failed"], weights=[0.7, 0.2,
0.1], k=1
80
)[0]
81
82
return service, weight, result
==PAGE:85==
A.1 Implementation Code
75
A.1.2
Trust Agent
1
from constants import *
2 from collections import defaultdict
3 import threading
4 import logging
5 import csv
6 import random
7 import logging
8
9 import time
10 start_time = time.time()
11
12 class TrustAgent:
13
def __init__(self):
14
self.devices = {}
15
self.has_values = defaultdict(lambda: INITIAL_HAS_VALUE)
16
self.device_lock = threading.Lock()
# Lock for accessing/modifying
devices
17
# Lock for accessing/modifying has_values
18
self.has_values_lock = threading.Lock()
19
self.global_mode = False
# By default, global_mode is False
20
self.trust_scores_from_others = defaultdict(lambda: defaultdict(
float))
21
self.lock = threading.Lock()
# Define the lock here
22
23
def set_global_mode(self, mode):
24
self.global_mode = mode
25
26
def get_global_mode(self):
27
return self.global_mode
28
29
def get_associated_devices(self):
30
return self.devices.values()
31
32
def initialize_trust_scores(self):
33
for device in self.devices.values():
34
for other_device in self.devices.values():
35
if device != other_device:
36
device.trust_scores[other_device.device_id] =
INITIAL_TRUST_VALUE
37
38
def initialize_trust_scores2(self):
39
with self.lock:
# Acquire lock to ensure thread-safety
40
device_ids = self.devices.keys()
41
for device_id in device_ids:
42
for other_device_id in device_ids:
43
if device_id != other_device_id:
44
self.trust_scores_from_others[device_id][
==PAGE:86==
76
A Appendix
45
other_device_id
46
] = INITIAL_TRUST_VALUE
47
48
def update_trust_score(self, from_device_id , to_device_id , trust_score):
49
# Call this method whenever a trust score is computed or updated
50
with self.lock:
51
self.trust_scores_from_others[to_device_id][from_device_id] =
trust_score
52
logging.info(
53
f"Updated trust score from {from_device_id} to {to_device_id
}: {trust_score}"
54
)
55
56
def compute_average_trust(self, device_id):
57
with self.lock:
58
try:
59
total_trust = 0
60
total_devices = 0
61
for other_device_id , trust_score in self.
trust_scores_from_others[
62
device_id
63
].items():
64
if other_device_id != device_id:
# Exclude the device
itself
65
total_trust += trust_score
66
total_devices += 1
67
average_trust = total_trust / total_devices if total_devices
> 0 else 0
68
69
logging.info(
70
f"Computed average trust for {device_id}: {average_trust
} based on {total_devices} devices"
71
)
72
return average_trust
73
except Exception as e:
74
logging.error(f"Error computing average trust: {e}")
75
return None
76
77
def compute_and_export_avg_trust(self):
78
timestamp = time.time() - start_time
79
with open("average_trust.csv", "a", newline="") as file:
80
writer = csv.writer(file)
81
for device_id in self.devices:
82
average_trust = self.compute_average_trust(device_id)
83
if average_trust is not None:
84
writer.writerow([timestamp, device_id, average_trust])
85
86
def register_device(self, device):
87
logging.debug(
88
f"[register_device] Trying to acquire lock for registering
device {device.device_id}"
89
)
90
acquired = self.device_lock.acquire(timeout=5)
91
if acquired:
92
logging.info(
==PAGE:87==
A.1 Implementation Code
77
93
f"[register_device] Acquired lock for registering device {
device.device_id}"
94
)
95
device.trust_agent = self
# Set the trust agent for the device
96
# Set the global mode for the device
97
device.set_global_mode(self.global_mode)
98
self.devices[device.device_id] = device
99
self.device_lock.release()
100
logging.info(
101
f"[register_device] Released lock after registering device {
device.device_id}"
102
)
103
else:
104
logging.warning(
105
f"[register_device] Couldn't acquire lock for registering
device {device.device_id} in time!"
106
)
107
108
def calculate_indirect_experience(
109
self, service_requester_id , service_provider_id , siot_server
110
):
111
recommendations = self.gather_recommendations(
112
service_provider_id , service_requester_id , siot_server
113
)
114
result = sum(recommendations) / len(recommendations) if
recommendations else 0
115
logging.info(
116
f"[calculate_indirect_experience] Indirect experience calculated
: {result}"
117
)
118
return result
119
120
def compute_trust_score(self, service_requester , service_provider ,
siot_server):
121
logging.info(
122
f"Starting trust score computation for {service_provider.
device_id} from perspective of {service_requester.device_id}
"
123
)
124
try:
125
interactions_kj = service_requester.interactions[
service_provider.device_id]
126
de = self.calculate_direct_experience(interactions_kj)
127
ie = self.calculate_indirect_experience(
128
service_requester.device_id, service_provider.device_id,
siot_server
129
)
130
sor = service_requester.sor_relations[service_provider.device_id
]
131
132
with self.has_values_lock:
133
attestation = self.get_attestation_score(service_provider)
134
135
has = (1 - DECAY_FACTOR) * self.has_values[
136
service_provider.device_id
==PAGE:88==
78
A Appendix
137
] + DECAY_FACTOR * attestation
138
139
self.has_values[service_provider.device_id] = has
140
141
latest_trust_score = (
142
WEIGHTS["DE"] * de
143
+ WEIGHTS["IE"] * ie
144
+ WEIGHTS["SOR"] * sor
145
+ WEIGHTS["HAS"] * has
146
)
147
148
# Acquiring lock before modifying trust_scores
149
with service_requester.trust_scores_lock:
150
previous_trust_score = service_requester.trust_scores[
151
service_provider.device_id
152
]
153
updated_trust_score = (
154
1 - DELTA
155
) * previous_trust_score + DELTA * latest_trust_score
156
service_requester.trust_scores[
157
service_provider.device_id
158
] = updated_trust_score
159
logging.debug(
160
f"Updated trust score for {service_provider.device_id}
from perspective of {service_requester.device_id}: {
updated_trust_score}"
161
)
162
163
logging.info(
164
f"The following value for {service_provider.device_id} from
perspective of {service_requester.device_id}: DE: {de},
IE: {ie}, SOR: {sor}, HAS: {has}, Prev TV: {
previous_trust_score}, New PV: {updated_trust_score}"
165
)
166
167
log_message = f"{service_requester.device_id} has the following
stored trust values:\n"
168
for device_id, score in service_requester.trust_scores.items():
169
log_message += f"
{device_id}: {score}\n"
170
logging.info(log_message)
171
# logging.info(f"Updated trust scores for {device_k.device_id}:
{device_k.trust_scores}")
172
except Exception as e:
173
logging.error(f"Error in compute_trust_score: {e}")
174
175
self.update_trust_score(
176
service_requester.device_id, service_provider.device_id,
updated_trust_score
177
)
178
179
return (
180
de,
181
ie,
182
has,
183
sor,
==PAGE:89==
A.1 Implementation Code
79
184
attestation ,
185
previous_trust_score ,
186
latest_trust_score ,
187
updated_trust_score ,
188
)
189
190
def calculate_direct_experience(self, interactions):
191
sum_of_weights = sum(weight for _, _, weight, result in interactions
)
192
logging.info(f"[calculate_direct_experience] Sum of weights: {
sum_of_weights}")
193
194
total_interactions = len(interactions)
195
successful_interactions = sum(
196
1 for _, _, weight, result in interactions if result == "
Successful"
197
)
198
uncertain_interactions = sum(
199
1 for _, _, weight, result in interactions if result == "
Uncertain"
200
)
201
failed_interactions = sum(
202
1 for _, _, weight, result in interactions if result == "Failed"
203
)
204
205
logging.debug(
206
f"[calculate_direct_experience] Total number of interactions: {
total_interactions}"
207
)
208
logging.debug(
209
f"[calculate_direct_experience] Number of successful
interactions: {successful_interactions}"
210
)
211
logging.debug(
212
f"[calculate_direct_experience] Number of uncertain interactions
: {uncertain_interactions}"
213
)
214
logging.debug(
215
f"[calculate_direct_experience] Number of failed interactions: {
failed_interactions}"
216
)
217
218
sis = REWARD_FACTOR * successful_interactions * sum_of_weights
219
logging.info(
220
f"[calculate_direct_experience] SIS (Successful Interactions Sum
): {sis}"
221
)
222
223
uis = NEUTRAL_FACTOR * uncertain_interactions * sum_of_weights
224
logging.info(
225
f"[calculate_direct_experience] UIS (Uncertain Interactions Sum)
: {uis}"
226
)
227
228
fis = PUNISHMENT_FACTOR * failed_interactions * sum_of_weights
==PAGE:90==
80
A Appendix
229
logging.info(
230
f"[calculate_direct_experience] FIS (Failed Interactions Sum): {
fis}"
231
)
232
233
result = (sis + 1) / (sis + uis + fis + 3)
234
logging.info(
235
f"[calculate_direct_experience] Direct experience calculated: {
result}"
236
)
237
return result
238
239
def gather_recommendations(
240
self, service_provider_id , service_requester_id , siot_server ,
global_mode=False
241
):
242
recommendations = []
243
244
# Debug logs
245
logging.debug(f"Looking for trust agent for device: {
service_provider_id}")
246
for ta in siot_server.trust_agents:
247
logging.debug(f"Trust Agent {id(ta)} devices: {list(ta.devices.
keys())}")
248
249
# Acquire lock before accessing shared resources
250
acquired = self.device_lock.acquire(timeout=5)
251
if acquired:
252
logging.info(
253
f"Acquired lock for gathering recommendations for {
service_provider_id}"
254
)
255
try:
256
trust_agent = next(
257
ta
258
for ta in siot_server.trust_agents
259
if service_provider_id in ta.devices
260
)
261
262
# Debug logs
263
# logging.debug(f"Found trust agent {id(trust_agent)} for
device {service_provider_id}")
264
# logging.debug(f"Devices in found trust agent: {list(
trust_agent.devices.keys())}")
265
266
device = trust_agent.devices[service_provider_id]
267
268
if (
269
self.global_mode
270
):
# If in global mode, gather recommendations from all
devices
271
recommending_devices = [
272
d
273
for ta in siot_server.trust_agents
274
for d in ta.devices.values()
==PAGE:91==
A.1 Implementation Code
81
275
]
276
else:
# Otherwise, only from those associated with the same
trust agent
277
recommending_devices = list(trust_agent.devices.values()
)
278
279
for recommending_device in recommending_devices:
280
if (
281
recommending_device.device_id != service_provider_id
282
and recommending_device.device_id !=
service_requester_id
283
):
284
recommendation = None
285
if device.malicious and recommending_device.
malicious:
286
recommendation = HIGH_TRUST_SCORE
287
elif recommending_device.malicious and not device.
malicious:
288
recommendation = LOW_TRUST_SCORE
289
else:
290
recommendation = recommending_device.
trust_scores[
291
service_provider_id
292
]
293
recommendations.append(recommendation)
294
except Exception as e:
295
logging.error(f"Error in gather_recommendations: {e}")
296
finally:
297
self.device_lock.release()
298
logging.info(
299
f"Released lock after gathering recommendations for {
service_provider_id}"
300
)
301
else:
302
logging.warning(
303
f"Couldn't acquire lock for gathering recommendations for {
service_provider_id} in time!"
304
)
305
306
logging.info(
307
f"[gather_recommmendations] Recommendations for {
service_provider_id}: {recommendations}"
308
)
309
return recommendations
310
311
def get_attestation_score(self, device):
312
score = 0 if device.malicious else 1
313
logging.info(
314
f"[get_attestation_score] Calculated attestation score for {
device.device_id}: {score}"
315
)
316
return score
==PAGE:92==
82
A Appendix
A.1.3
SIoT Server & Constants
1
# Constants
2 REWARD_FACTOR = 1
3 PUNISHMENT_FACTOR = 2
4 NEUTRAL_FACTOR = 0.5
5 INITIAL_TRUST_VALUE = 0.5
6 INITIAL_HAS_VALUE = 1
7 DECAY_FACTOR = 0.8
8 #Trust Update
9 DELTA = 0.8
10 HIGH_TRUST_SCORE = 0.9
11 LOW_TRUST_SCORE = 0.2
12 WEIGHTS = {"DE": 0.3, "IE": 0.15, "SOR": 0.05, "HAS": 0.5}
13 SERVICE_WEIGHTS = {"S1": 0.8, "S2": 0.6, "S3": 0.2}
14 SOR_VALUES = {
15
"Parental Object Relationships (POR)": 0.5,
16
"Co-work Object Relationships (CWOR)": 0.6,
17
"Social Object Relationships (SOR)": 0.7,
18
"Co-location Object Relationships (CLOR)": 0.8,
19
"Ownership Object Relationships (OOR)": 0.9,
20 }
1
class SIoTServer:
2
def __init__(self, trust_agents):
3
self.trust_agents = trust_agents
A.1.4
Simulation
1 import json
2 import logging
3 from constants import *
4 from siot_device import SIoTDevice
5 from trust_agent import TrustAgent
6 from siot_server import SIoTServer
7 import random
8 import threading
9 import time
10 import csv
11 from datetime import datetime
12
13 # Set up logging configuration
14 logging.basicConfig(filename='simulation_logs.log', filemode='w', level=
logging.DEBUG,
15
format='%(asctime)s - %(levelname)s - %(message)s')
16
17 start_time = time.time()
18 stop_simulation = threading.Event()
==PAGE:93==
A.1 Implementation Code
83
19 exit_flag = False
20
21
22 # Prepare the CSV file
23 def prepare_csv():
24
csv_filename = "simulation_data.csv"
25
csv_header = ["Time_Elapsed", "Service_Requester", "Service_Provider", "
Service", "Weight", "Result", "Prev_Trust", "New_Trust", "
Updated_Trust", "DE", "IE", "HAS", "SOR", "Attestation", "
Recommendation", "Trust_Scores"]
26
with open(csv_filename , 'w', newline='') as file:
27
writer = csv.writer(file)
28
# Write the header
29
writer.writerow(csv_header)
30
31
32 def save_to_csv(data):
33
with open('simulation_data.csv', 'a', newline='') as file:
34
writer = csv.writer(file)
35
# Assume data is a flat dictionary
36
writer.writerow(data.values())
37
38
39 def save_initial_entry_to_json(scenario, simulation_duration):
40
current_datetime = datetime.now().strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S')
41
42
# Gather constants in a dictionary
43
constants = {
44
"REWARD_FACTOR": REWARD_FACTOR ,
45
"PUNISHMENT_FACTOR": PUNISHMENT_FACTOR ,
46
"NEUTRAL_FACTOR": NEUTRAL_FACTOR ,
47
"INITIAL_TRUST_VALUE": INITIAL_TRUST_VALUE ,
48
"INITIAL_HAS_VALUE": INITIAL_HAS_VALUE ,
49
"LAMBDA": DECAY_FACTOR ,
50
"TRUST_THRESHOLD": TRUST_THRESHOLD ,
51
"DELTA": DELTA,
52
"HIGH_TRUST_SCORE": HIGH_TRUST_SCORE ,
53
"LOW_TRUST_SCORE": LOW_TRUST_SCORE ,
54
"WEIGHTS": WEIGHTS,
55
"SERVICE_WEIGHTS": SERVICE_WEIGHTS ,
56
"SOR_VALUES": SOR_VALUES
57
}
58
59
data = {
60
"Date_Time": current_datetime ,
61
"Simulation_Duration": simulation_duration ,
62
"Scenario": scenario,
63
"Constants": constants
64
}
65
66
with open('simulation_data.json', 'a') as file:
67
json.dump(data, file)
68
file.write("\n")
# Newline for separation
69
70
==PAGE:94==
84
A Appendix
71 def save_to_json(data):
72
with open('simulation_data.json', 'a') as file:
73
json.dump(data, file)
74
file.write("\n")
# Newline after each entry for readability
75
76 def print_log(message):
77
logging.info(message)
78
print(message)
79
80
81 def log_network_structure(trust_agents):
82
print_log(
83
"Logging the network structure at the start of the simulation.")
84
for ta in trust_agents:
85
# You can customize this if your TrustAgent has a unique identifier.
86
print_log(f"Trust Agent ID: {id(ta)}")
87
for device in ta.devices.values():
88
malicious_status = "Malicious" if device.malicious else "Benign"
89
print_log(
90
f"Device ID: {device.device_id}, Status: {malicious_status}"
)
91
print_log("End of network structure logging.")
92
93 def setup_devices(scenario):
94
"""Setup SIoT devices based on the scenario."""
95
logging.info("Setting up SIoT devices.")
96
97
total_devices_per_ta = scenario["number_of_devices_per_TA"]
98
malicious_devices_per_ta = scenario["number_of_malicious_devices_per_TA"
]
99
global_mode = scenario.get("global_mode")
100
101
devices = []
102
for i in range(scenario["number_of_trust_agents"]):
103
for j in range(total_devices_per_ta):
104
is_malicious = j < malicious_devices_per_ta
105
# Passing global_mode during device initialization
106
devices.append(SIoTDevice(
107
f"Device_{i}_{j}", is_malicious , global_mode=global_mode))
108
109
110
return devices
111
112 def assign_devices_to_agents(devices, trust_agents , scenario):
113
devices_per_ta = scenario["number_of_devices_per_TA"]
114
start = 0
115
for ta in trust_agents:
116
for j in range(devices_per_ta):
117
ta.register_device(devices[start + j])
118
start += devices_per_ta
119
ta.set_global_mode(scenario.get("global_mode"))
120
ta.initialize_trust_scores()
121
122
==PAGE:95==
A.1 Implementation Code
85
123 def bootstrapping_phase(trust_agents , devices, siot_server , global_mode=
False):
124
"""Perform bootstrapping phase."""
125
logging.info("Starting bootstrapping phase.")
126
for trust_agent in trust_agents:
127
for device in trust_agent.devices.values():
128
with device.interactions_lock:
129
logging.info(
130
f"{threading.current_thread().name} acquired
interactions_lock for {device.device_id}")
131
132
if global_mode:
133
potential_partners = [d for d in devices if d != device]
134
else:
135
potential_partners = [
136
d for d in trust_agent.devices.values() if d !=
device]
137
138
for other_device in potential_partners:
139
for _ in range(2):
# At least 2 interactions
140
service, weight, result = device.interact(
141
other_device , bootstrapping=True, lock=False)
142
logging.info(
143
f"{threading.current_thread().name} released
interactions_lock for {device.device_id}")
144
logging.info("Bootstrapping phase complete.")
145
146 def device_interaction(device, devices, siot_server):
147
print_log(f"{device.device_id} becoming active.")
148
global_mode = device.global_mode
149
while not exit_flag:
150
delay = random.uniform(0, 30)
151
time.sleep(delay)
152
153
# Changes made here:
154
if global_mode:
155
service_provider = random.choice(
156
[d for d in devices if d != device])
157
else:
158
potential_devices = list(
159
device.trust_agent.get_associated_devices())
160
service_provider = random.choice(
161
[d for d in potential_devices if d != device])
162
163
trust_agent_sp = next(
164
ta for ta in siot_server.trust_agents if service_provider.
device_id in ta.devices)
165
166
print_log(f"{device.device_id} requested a service from {
service_provider.device_id}")
167
168
trust_agent_sp.compute_trust_score(device, service_provider ,
siot_server)
169
service, weight, result = device.interact(service_provider)
170
trust_agent = device.get_associated_trust_agent()
==PAGE:96==
86
A Appendix
171
trust_agent.compute_and_export_avg_trust()
172
173
174
print_log(f"{device.device_id} provided a service from {
service_provider.device_id} with Service: {service}, Weight: {
weight}, Result: {result}")
175
print_log("Interaction Complete")
176
177 def active_phase(devices, siot_server , simulation_duration):
178
print_log("Starting active phase.")
179
global exit_flag
180
threads = []
181
for device in devices:
182
t = threading.Thread(target=device_interaction , args=(
183
device, devices, siot_server))
184
t.daemon = True
# Set the thread as a daemon
185
t.start()
186
threads.append(t)
187
188
# Wait for the duration of the simulation
189
time.sleep(simulation_duration)
190
exit_flag = True
191
return threads
192
193 def run_simulation(scenario):
194
simulation_duration = 7200
# for 120 minutes
195
logging.info("Starting simulation with scenario: %s", scenario)
196
save_initial_entry_to_json(scenario, simulation_duration)
197
198
trust_agents = [TrustAgent()
199
for _ in range(scenario["number_of_trust_agents"])]
200
devices = setup_devices(scenario)
201
202
# Assign devices to trust agents
203
assign_devices_to_agents(devices, trust_agents , scenario)
204
205
# Log the network structure
206
log_network_structure(trust_agents)
207
siot_server = SIoTServer(trust_agents)
208
209
for ta in trust_agents:
210
ta.initialize_trust_scores2()
211
212
# Bootstrapping Phase
213
global_mode = scenario.get("global_mode")
214
bootstrapping_phase(trust_agents , devices, siot_server , global_mode)
215
216
# Active Phase
217
threads = active_phase(devices, siot_server , simulation_duration)
218
219
# Wait for all threads to complete
220
for t in threads:
221
t.join(timeout=10)
222
223
for device in devices:
==PAGE:97==
A.1 Implementation Code
87
224
logging.info(
225
f"{device.device_id} had {len(device.interactions)} interactions
.")
226
227
# Print trust scores at the end of the simulation
228
for device in devices:
229
logging.info(f"Trust Scores for {device.device_id}:")
230
for other_device_id , trust_score in device.trust_scores.items():
231
logging.info(f"
{other_device_id}: {trust_score}")
232
233 scenario = {
234
"number_of_devices_per_TA": 10,
235
"number_of_malicious_devices_per_TA": 2,
236
"number_of_trust_agents": 5,
237
"global_mode": False
238 }
239
240 run_simulation(scenario)
==PAGE:98==
88
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[Aa15]
N. Asokan and et al. “SEDA: Scalable Embedded Device Attestation.”
In: Proc. 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (CCS).
2015, pages 964–975.
[Aal+21]
S. Aalibagi et al. “A Matrix Factorization Model for Hellinger-based
Trust Management in Social Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing (2021), pages 1–1.
[Abd+16]
W. Abdelghani et al. “Trust Management in Social Internet of Things:
A Survey.” In: 16th International Conference on. 2016.
[Abe+16]
Tigist Abera et al. “Things, Trouble, Trust: On Building Trust in IoT
Systems.” In: Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Design Automation Con-
ference. 2016, pages 1–6.
[AC15]
W. Arthur and D. Challener. A Practical Guide to TPM 2.0: Using the
Trusted Platform Module in the New Age of Security. 1st. Apress, 2015.
[AC17]
Hamza Al-Hamadi and I-Rong Chen. “Trust-Based Decision Making for
Health IoT Systems.” In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 4.5 (2017),
pages 1408–1419.
[ADD21a]
S. F. J. J. Ankergård, E. Dushku, and N. Dragoni. “State-of-the-Art
Software-Based Remote Attestation: Opportunities and Open Issues for
Internet of Things.” In: Sensors 21.5 (2021).
[ADD21b]
Sigurd Frej Joel Jørgensen Ankergård, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola Drag-
oni. “State-of-the-Art Software-Based Remote Attestation: Opportuni-
ties and Open Issues for Internet of Things.” In: Sensors 21.5 (2021).
issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s21051598. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/21/5/1598.
[Ade+19]
AA Adewuyi et al. “CTRUST: A dynamic trust model for collabora-
tive applications in the internet of things.” In: IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 6.3 (2019), pages 5432–5445.
[AES17]
O B Abderrahim, M H Elhedhili, and L Saidane. “CTMS-SIoT: A context-
based trust management system for the social Internet of Things.” In:
13th International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Con-
ference (IWCMC). 2017, pages 1903–1908.
==PAGE:100==
90
Bibliography
[AIM11]
Luigi Atzori, Antonio Iera, and Giacomo Morabito. “SIoT: Giving a
Social Structure to the Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Communications
Letters 15.11 (2011), pages 1193–1195.
[Amb+16]
M. Ambrosin et al. “SANA: Secure and Scalable Aggregate Network
Attestation.” In: Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security
(CCS). 2016, pages 731–742.
[Amb+18]
M. Ambrosin et al. “PADS: Practical Attestation for Highly Dynamic
Swarm Topologies.” In: Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Secure Internet Things
(SIoT). 2018, pages 731–742.
[Amb+20]
Moreno Ambrosin et al. “Collective Remote Attestation at the Inter-
net of Things Scale: State-of-the-Art and Future Challenges.” In: IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22.4 (2020), pages 2447–2461. doi:
10.1109/comst.2020.3008879.
[Atz+12]
L. Atzori et al. “The social internet of things (siot)–when social networks
meet the internet of things: Concept, architecture and network charac-
terization.” In: Computer Networks 56.16 (2012), pages 3594–3608.
[Aza+20a]
M. A. Azad et al. “Decentralized Self-Enforcing Trust Management Sys-
tem for Social Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal
7.4 (2020), pages 2690–2703.
[Aza+20b]
M. A. Azad et al. “Decentralized self-enforcing trust management system
for social Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Internet Things J. 7.4 (2020),
pages 2690–2703.
[BCG13]
Feng Bao, I-Ren Chen, and Jin Guo. “Scalable, adaptive and survivable
trust management for community of interest based internet of things
systems.” In: 11th IEEE International Symposium on Autonomous De-
centralized Systems (ISADS). 2013, pages 1–7.
[BCM00]
Malcolm Beynon, Brian Curry, and Peter Morgan. “The Dempster–
Shafer theory of evidence: An alternative approach to multicriteria deci-
sion modelling.” In: Omega 28.1 (2000), pages 37–50.
[Bra+15]
F. Brasser et al. “TyTAN: Tiny Trust Anchor for Tiny Devices.” In:
Proceedings of the 52nd Design Automation Conference DAC ’15. 2015,
pages 1–6.
[Car+17]
X. Carpent et al. “Lightweight Swarm Attestation: A Tale of Two LISA-
S.” In: Proc. ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (ASIACCS).
2017, pages 86–100.
[CBG15]
R. Chen, F. Bao, and J. Guo. “Trust-based service management for social
Internet of Things systems.” In: IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput.
13.6 (2015), pages 684–696.
[CBG16]
I Chen, F Bao, and J Guo. “Trust-Based Service Management for Social
Internet of Things Systems.” In: IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
Secure Computing 13.6 (2016), pages 684–696.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
91
[CGB16]
I Chen, J Guo, and F Bao. “Trust management for SOA-based IoT and
its application to service composition.” In: IEEE Transactions on Ser-
vices Computing 9.3 (2016), pages 482–495.
[Cha07]
Abhijit Chakrabarti. Managing Trust in the Grid. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, 2007, pages 215–246.
[Che+16]
Zhiping Chen et al. “A Scheme of Access Service Recommendation for the
Social Internet of Things.” In: International Journal of Communication
Systems 29.4 (2016), pages 694–706.
[Che18]
J. I. Chen. “Embedding the MRC and SC Schemes into Trust Man-
agement Algorithm Applied to IoT Security Protection.” In: Wireless
Personal Communication 99.1 (2018), pages 461–477.
[CKB20]
R. K. Chahal, N. Kumar, and S. Batra. “Trust Management in Social
Internet of Things: A Taxonomy, Open Issues, and Challenges.” In: Com-
puter Communications 150 (2020), pages 13–46.
[CRT18]
X. Carpent, N. Rattanavipanon, and G. Tsudik. “Remote attestation
via selfmeasurement.” In: ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst. 24.1
(2018).
[CTR18]
Xavier Carpent, Gene Tsudik, and Norrathep Rattanavipanon. “Eras-
mus: Eﬀicient Remote Attestation via Self-Measurement for Unattended
Settings.” In: 2018 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference &
Exhibition (DATE). 2018, pages 1191–1194.
[CZL19]
Guoxing Chen, Yinqian Zhang, and Ten-Hwang Lai. “OPERA: Open Re-
mote Attestation for Intel’s Secure Enclaves.” In: Proceedings of the 2019
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
2019, pages 2317–2331.
[De +18]
P. De Meo et al. “Providing Recommendations in Social Networks by
Integrating Local and Global Reputation.” In: Information Systems 78
(2018), pages 58–67.
[Des+17]
G. Dessouky et al. “LO-FAT: Low-Overhead Control Flow Attestation
in Hardware.” In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual Design Automation
Conference 2017 (DAC ’17). 2017, pages 1–6.
[Eld+12]
K. Eldefrawy et al. “SMART: Secure and Minimal Architecture for (Es-
tablishing Dynamic) Root of Trust.” In: Proceedings of the 19th Annual
Network & Distributed System Security Symposium NDSS ’12. 2012,
pages 1–15.
[For+20]
Giancarlo Fortino et al. “Trust and Reputation in the Internet of Things:
State-of-the-Art and Research Challenges.” In: IEEE Access 8 (2020),
pages 60117–60125.
[Gar+19]
I. Garcia-Magarino et al. “Security in Vehicles with IoT by Prioritization
Rules, Vehicle Certificates, and Trust Management.” In: IEEE Internet
of Things Journal 6.4 (2019), pages 5927–5934.
==PAGE:102==
92
Bibliography
[GFT10]
D. Guinard, M. Fischer, and V. Trifa. “Sharing using social networks
in a composable web of things.” In: 8th IEEE International Conference
on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PERCOM
Workshops). 2010, pages 702–707.
[Gha+20]
S. M. Ghafari et al. “A Survey on Trust Prediction in Online Social
Networks.” In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pages 144292–144309.
[HDD21]
R. M. Halldórsson, E. Dushku, and N. Dragoni. “ARCADIS: Asynchronous
Remote Control-Flow Attestation of Distributed IoT Services.” In: IEEE
Access 9 (2021), pages 144880–144894.
[Ibr+16]
A. Ibrahim et al. “DARPA: Device Attestation Resilient to Physical
Attacks.” In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Security &
Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks (WiSec ’16). 2016, pages 171–
182.
[ISZ17a]
A. Ibrahim, A.-R. Sadeghi, and S. Zeitouni. “SeED: Secure Non-Interactive
Attestation for Embedded Devices.” In: Proc. 10th ACM Conf. Security
Privacy Wireless Mobile Netw. (WiSec). 2017, pages 64–74.
[ISZ17b]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Shaza Zeitouni. “SeED: Se-
cure Non-Interactive Attestation for Embedded Devices.” In: Proceedings
of the 10th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and
Mobile Networks. 2017, pages 64–74.
[Jay+16]
U. Jayasinghe et al. “RpR: A trust computation model for social Inter-
net of Things.” In: Proc. Int. IEEE Conf. Ubiquitous Intell. Comput.
Adv. Trust. Comput. Scalable Comput. Commun. Cloud Big Data Com-
put. Internet People Smart World Congr. (UIC/ATC/ScalCom/CBD-
Com/IoP/SmartWorld). Toulouse, France, 2016, pages 930–937.
[Jay+19]
U. Jayasinghe et al. “Machine Learning-based Trust Computational Model
for IoT Services.” In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing 4.1
(2019), pages 39–52.
[JH07]
A. Jøsang and J. Haller. “Dirichlet Reputation Systems.” In: Availability,
Reliability and Security, 2007. ARES 2007. The Second International
Conference on. IEEE, 2007, pages 112–119.
[Kha+18]
M. Khani et al. “Context-Aware Trustworthy Service Evaluation in So-
cial Internet of Things.” In: International Conference on Service-Oriented
Computing (ICSOC). 2018, pages 129–145.
[Kha+21]
W. Z. Khan et al. “Trust Management in Social Internet of Things: Ar-
chitectures, Recent Advancements, and Future Challenges.” In: IEEE
Internet of Things Journal 8.10 (2021), pages 7768–7788.
[Kil+09]
C. Kil et al. “Remote Attestation to Dynamic System Properties: To-
wards Providing Complete System Integrity Evidence.” In: 2009 IEEE/I-
FIP International Conference on Dependable Systems & Networks. 2009,
pages 115–124.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
93
[Koe+14]
P. Koeberl et al. “TrustLite: A Security Architecture for Tiny Embedded
Devices.” In: Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Computer
Systems EuroSys ’14. 2014, pages 1–14.
[Li+19]
Xiaohua Li et al. “Wirelessly powered data aggregation for IoT via
over-the-air function computation: Beamforming and power control.” In:
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 18.7 (2019), pages 3437–
3452.
[LSZ18]
Wei Li, Houbing Song, and Fanzi Zeng. “Policy-based Secure and Trust-
worthy Sensing for Internet of Things in Smart Cities.” In: IEEE Internet
of Things Journal 5.2 (2018), pages 716–723.
[Mah+13]
Prashant N Mahalle et al. “A Fuzzy Approach to Trust Based Access
Control in Internet of Things.” In: International Conference on Wire-
less Communication, Vehicular Technology, Information Theory and
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Technology (Wireless VITAE). 2013,
pages 1–5.
[Mas+20]
Moez Masmoudi et al. “Deep Learning for Trust-Related Attacks Detec-
tion in Social Internet of Things.” In: Advances in E-Business Engineer-
ing for Ubiquitous Computing. Springer International Publishing, 2020,
pages 389–404.
[MK15]
Camille VanLe Mendoza and Jorn H Kleinschmidt. “Mitigating On-Off
Attacks in the Internet of Things Using a Distributed Trust Management
Scheme.” In: International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks 11.11
(2015), pages 1–8.
[MM11]
P. Mendes and P. P. Mendes. “Social-driven internet of connected ob-
jects.” In: Internet Architecture Board (IAB) workshop on Interconnect-
ing Smart Objects with the Internet. 2011.
[MN21]
Camille Marche and Michele Nitti. “Trust-Related Attacks and Their De-
tection: A Trust Management Model for the Social IoT.” In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Network and Service Management 18.3 (2021), pages 3297–
3308.
[Moh+19]
V. Mohammadi et al. “Trust-based Recommendation Systems in Internet
of Things: a Systematic Literature Review.” In: Human-centric Comput-
ing and Information Sciences 9 (2019), pages 1–61.
[MS+19]
R. MS et al. “Social Internet of Things (SIoT): Foundations, Thrust
Areas, Systematic Review and Future Directions.” In: Computer Com-
munications 139 (2019), pages 32–57.
[Nam+15]
Sasanka Namal et al. “Autonomic trust management in cloud-based and
highly dynamic IoT applications.” In: ITU Kaleidoscope: Trust in the
Information Society. 2015, pages 1–8.
==PAGE:104==
94
Bibliography
[NGA14]
M. Nitti, R. Girau, and L. Atzori. “Trustworthiness management in the
social internet of things.” In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering 26.5 (2014), pages 1253–1266.
[PS19]
S. Pinto and N. Santos. “Demystifying Arm TrustZone: A Comprehen-
sive Survey.” In: ACM Comput. Surv. 51.6 (2019).
[Rab+19]
M. M. Rabbani et al. “SHeLA: Scalable Heterogeneous Layered Attesta-
tion.” In: IEEE Internet Things J. 6.6 (December 2019), pages 10240–
10250.
[RCN14]
M. Rubenstein, A. Cornejo, and R. Nagpal. “Programmable Self-Assembly
in a Thousand-Robot Swarm.” In: Science 345.6198 (2014), pages 795–
799. url: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/345/6198/795.
[SA18]
Xiaojun Sun and Nirwan Ansari. “Dynamic resource caching in the IoT
application layer for smart cities.” In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal
5.2 (2018), pages 606–613.
[Sag+20a]
S. Sagar et al. “Towards a Machine Learning-driven Trust Evaluation
Model for Social Internet of Things: A Time-aware Approach.” In: 17th
EAI International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Com-
puting, Networking and Services (MobiQuitous). 2020, pages 283–290.
[Sag+20b]
Sandeep Sagar et al. “A time-aware similarity-based trust computational
model for social internet of things.” In: IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GlobeCom). 2020, pages 1–6.
[Sag+20c]
Sandeep Sagar et al. “Trust computational heuristic for social internet
of things: A machine learning-based approach.” In: IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC). 2020, pages 1–6.
[Sag+22]
Subhash Sagar et al. Understanding the Trustworthiness Management
in the Social Internet of Things: A Survey. 2022. arXiv: 2202.03624
[cs.SI].
[Sai+13]
YB Saied et al. “Trust management system design for the internet of
things: A context-aware and multi-service approach.” In: Computers &
Security 39 (2013), pages 351–365.
[Ses+04a]
A. Seshadri et al. “SWATT: Software-Based Attestation for Embedded
Devices.” In: IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2004. Proceed-
ings. 2004. 2004, pages 272–282.
[Ses+04b]
Arvind Seshadri et al. “SWATT: Software-Based Attestation for Em-
bedded Devices.” In: IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2004.
Proceedings. 2004. 2004, pages 272–282.
[Ses+05a]
A. Seshadri et al. “Pioneer: Verifying Code Integrity and Enforcing Un-
tampered Code Execution on Legacy Systems.” In: Operating Systems
Review (ACM) 39.5 (2005), pages 1–16.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
95
[Ses+05b]
Arvind Seshadri et al. “Pioneer: Verifying Code Integrity and Enforcing
Untampered Code Execution on Legacy Systems.” In: Proceedings of
the Twentieth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. 2005,
pages 1–16.
[Ses+06]
Arvind Seshadri et al. “SCUBA: Secure Code Update by Attestation in
Sensor Networks.” In: Proceedings of the 5th ACM Workshop on Wireless
Security. 2006, pages 85–94.
[Sha+05]
M. Shaneck et al. “Remote Software-Based Attestation for Wireless Sen-
sors.” In: Security and Privacy in Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks. Springer,
2005, pages 27–41.
[Sha+20]
A. Sharma et al. “Towards Trustworthy Internet of Things: A Survey on
Trust Management Applications and Schemes.” In: Computer Communi-
cations 160 (2020), pages 475–493.
[SHA20]
Behshid Shayesteh, Vesal Hakami, and Ahmad Akbari. “A Trust Man-
agement Scheme for IoT-Enabled Environmental Health/Accessibility
Monitoring Services.” In: Int. J. Inf. Secur. 19.1 (2020), pages 93–110.
issn: 1615-5262. doi: 10.1007/s10207- 019- 00446- x. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10207-019-00446-x.
[Sid+21]
Sahibzada Ali Siddiqui et al. “A survey of trust management in the
internet of vehicles.” In: Electronics 10.18 (2021), page 2223.
[SL16]
Rodrigo Vieira Steiner and Emil Lupu. “Attestation in wireless sensor
networks: A survey.” In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 49.3 (2016),
pages 1–31.
[Spi00]
D. Spinellis. “Reflection as a Mechanism for Software Integrity Verifica-
tion.” In: ACM Transactions on Information and System Security 3.1
(2000), pages 51–62.
[THJ11]
Hailun Tan, Wen Hu, and Sanjay Jha. “A TPM-Enabled Remote Attes-
tation Protocol (TRAP) in Wireless Sensor Networks.” In: Proceedings of
the 6th ACM Workshop on Performance Monitoring and Measurement
of Heterogeneous Wireless and Wired Networks. 2011, pages 9–16.
[Tru+17a]
N. B. Truong et al. “From Personal Experience to Global Reputation
for Trust Evaluation in the Social Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). 2017, pages 1–7.
[Tru+17b]
N. B. Truong et al. “From personal experience to global reputation for
trust evaluation in the social Internet of Things.” In: Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM). Singapore, 2017, pages 1–7.
[Tru+17c]
Ngoc Truong et al. “Toward a trust evaluation mechanism in the social
internet of things.” In: Sensors 17.6 (2017), page 1346.
==PAGE:106==
96
Bibliography
[TUL16]
N. B. Truong, T.-W. Um, and G. M. Lee. “A reputation and knowledge
based trust service platform for trustworthy social Internet of Things.”
In: Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Innovat. Clouds Internet Netw. (ICIN). Paris,
France, 2016, pages 104–111.
[VPR12]
R Venkataraman, M Pushpalatha, and TR Rao. “Regression-based trust
model for mobile ad hoc networks.” In: IET Information Security 6.3
(2012), pages 131–140.
[Wan+14]
Yanting Wang et al. “Logittrust: A logit regression-based trust model for
mobile ad hoc networks.” In: 6th ASE/IEEE International Conference
on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust. 2014, pages 1–10.
[Wei+21]
L. Wei et al. “On Designing Context-Aware Trust Model and Service
Delegation for Social Internet of Things.” In: IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 8.6 (2021), pages 4775–4787.
[Xia+19a]
H. Xia et al. “An Attack-Resistant Trust Inference Model for Securing
Routing in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks.” In: IEEE Transactions on Ve-
hicular Technology 68.7 (2019), pages 7108–7120.
[Xia+19b]
Hao Xia et al. “Trustworthiness inference framework in the social in-
ternet of things: A context-aware approach.” In: IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications (INFOCOM). 2019, pages 838–846.
[XSC15]
Hao Xiao, Navdeep Sidhu, and Bruce Christianson. “Guarantor and rep-
utation based trust model for social internet of things.” In: International
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC).
2015, pages 600–605.
[YS02]
Bin Yu and Munindar P Singh. “An evidential model of distributed
reputation management.” In: Proceedings of the first international joint
conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems: part 1. ACM.
2002, pages 294–301.
[Zei+17]
S. Zeitouni et al. “ATRIUM: Runtime Attestation Resilient Under Mem-
ory Attacks.” In: 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-
Aided Design (ICCAD). 2017, pages 384–391.
