==PAGE:1==
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Flu-
ency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick
Questions
Master Thesis
September, 2023
By
Rune Munch Nisbeth
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Metin Ozer, 2019
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
?iiTb,ffrrrX+QKTmi2X/imX/Ff
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, user expe-
rience, cognitive experiments.
Rune Munch Nisbeth - s152683
Signature
Date
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In design, we often try to make it as easy as possible for the user by presenting ma-
terial cognitively fluent, because of numerous positive effects. However we do not yet
know whether the effects of cognitive fluent material is dependent on context. This the-
sis explores how locational context and cognitive fluency affect our ability to detect trick
questions, while understanding how this may have implications for the way we should
design.
We investigate this through a cognitive experiment of between-subjects design where 39
students try to detect trick questions with fluent and disfluent fonts inside and 46 students
try the same outside. In addition, qualitative interviews with five young adults were used
to examine user preferences within cognitive fluency.
The experiment showed that there was a significant interaction effect between cognitive
fluency and locational context, where participants outside detected more trick questions
with a fluent font, as opposed to inside where participants detected more trick questions
with a disfluent font. Through the qualitative interviews, we shed light on different aspects
of efficiency, usability and satisfaction associated with cognitive fluency, where user pref-
erence could be seen as a trade off between effectiveness (performance) and efficiency
(usability and effort).
We found that the effects of cognitive fluency on detecting trick questions is dependent on
locational context, which suggests that more studies should investigate whether cognitive
fluency is context-dependent in other tasks and aspects of context.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Rune Munch Nisbeth, MSc Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor, DTU
For supervising this thesis with valuable feedback, good spirit, and indispensable knowl-
edge.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cognitive Biases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Cognitive Fluency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Dependencies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Context and Cognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Cognitive Fluency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Defining Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Methods and Theories for Designing with Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Cognitive Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Qualitative Interviews
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Results
27
4.1
Outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.3
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Thematic Analysis of Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5
Discussion
46
5.1
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
56
A The Questions
61
B Information Letter
62
C Letter of Consent
63
D The Locations
64
D.1 Library [Inside] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
D.2 Building 324 [Inside] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
D.3 Garden in building 101 [Outside] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
D.4 Matematiktorvet [Outside] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
D.5 Around building 342 [Outside] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
v
==PAGE:7==
E
The Interview Guide
70
F
The Transcripts
72
F.1
Interview 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
F.2
Interview 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
F.3
Interview 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
F.4
Interview 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
F.5
Interview 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Cognitive Biases
Many people may feel that they are in control of what they do, think and say, but in 2011
Daniel Kahneman published his very popular book ”Thinking, Fast and Slow”, where he
shared his thoughts on how humans have two systems in the brain, one of which is au-
tonomous and the other more rational. He further explained that the vast majority of our
decisions and thoughts are processed by the autonomous system, which despite its speed
and unconsciousness is full of errors. These errors can be categorised into labels, each
of which is a cognitive bias [1]. The landscape of biases have been outlined by Buster
Benson, in the infographic he named The Cognitive Bias Codex, which is displayed in
figure 1.1
Korteling and Toet define cognitive bias in the Encyclopedia of Behavioral Neuroscience
as ”systematic cognitive dispositions or inclinations in human thinking and reasoning that
often do not comply with the tenets of logic, probability reasoning, and plausibility”. In
other words, systematic ”errors” in reasoning that often go against logic, probability, and
plausibility [2].
And in design, including User Experience Design, it makes good sense to familiarise
oneself with some key cognitive biases, as design should accommodate for users who
makes errors rather than tailor to the users who always reads the user manual from cover
to cover - because they exist...
But to be specific, here are many examples of how an expanded understanding of cog-
nitive bias helps designers to create even better user experiences. If cognitive biases
are systematic errors that the brain’s autonomic system makes, then by knowing this,
one can anticipate how several of these cognitive biases shape the user’s perception,
interpretation, and interaction.
For example the halo effect, states that impressions created in one area influence opinions
in another area, which can make users perceive an aesthetically pleasing interface as
more usable [3]. This common misconception is called the Aesthetic-Usability Effect [4].
The Aesthetic-Usability Effect can be an important consideration, which could lead to UX
researchers unveiling more usability problems.
Anchoring effect and framing effect are well known to change people’s understanding
quite significantly. Anchoring effect, refer to the use of a reference point or ”anchor” when
making an decision or judgement. Framing effect, refer to the impact of how options is
perceived differently purely by the way they are presented. For example, Tversky and
Kahneman found that participants answered 60% to 120% higher, when asked to multi-
ply the numbers from 1 to 8 when they were presented in descending order rather than
ascending order [5]. They also found that 72% of the participants in their study chose a
positive framing rather than a negative framing of a hypothetical medical treatment [6].
By understanding how these biases affect users perception, designers can guide users’
perception so that they can make decisions that are more true to themselves.
Cognitive biases can also help designers create more personalised experiences. For in-
stance the endowment effect that states that people value items greater when they posses
them rather than when they do not and the mere-exposure effect, which states that peo-
ple develop preferences for things, just because they are more exposed to them [7][8].
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
1
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.1: Shows Buster Benson’s infographic from 2016 of cognitive biases categorised
in the four categories; Need to Act Fast, What Should We Remember, Too Much Infor-
mation, and Not enough Meaning.
By understanding these biases, designers can more easily identify what a particular user
would value, and tailor the experience towards that.
Cognitive biases are not only useful for UX designers, but also for UX researchers. The
confirmation bias can both be prevalent in users seeking to confirm their belief during
testing, but it can also be prevalent in the researcher wanting to confirm their hypothesis
[9]. Understanding that can alter the usability test or call for more objective data.
Cognitive biases can also provide a framework for ethical considerations, such as the
misuse of the scarcity effect, where ”low stock” messaging is used to promote a product
or service [10]. Or decoy effect, where one option is added just to make another (often
the pricier) option more desirable [11]. These biases can be used to manipulate the user
into making a decision they would not otherwise have made. The same may be said for
the framing effect, which is slightly more neutral in scope than the other two [12].
1.2
Cognitive Fluency
Amongst the cognitive biases is a particular bias called cognitive fluency. Cognitive flu-
ency is the subjective experience of ease or difficulty associated with completing a mental
task [13]. There are multiple effects observed from this bias. Tversky & Kahneman found
that easily retrieved (fluent) instance are perceived as frequent [5], which also goes hand-
in-hand with fluently names being more often judged as famous [14]. Furthermore names
that are easy to pronounce form more positive impressions [15]. Other effects are that
fluent words are more frequent being judged as ”old” words, and fluent statements are
more often judged as being true [16]. For instance the statement “Orsono is a city in
Chile“ were more likely to be judged true when the color contrast of the print font made
them easy rather than difficult-to-read [17]. Not only is fluently processed material be-
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
2
==PAGE:10==
lieved to be more true it is also held with greater confidence of the reader and is also less
likely to be scrutinized [18][19][20]. Similarly disfluent processed information reduce the
confidence of the reader and also foster decision deferral [21].
In addition to the many positive effects of cognitive fluency bias, there are other guiding
UX principles based on making the interface as easy to understand as possible. Follow-
ing the guiding principles should enhance the interface’s effectiveness, efficiency and/or
satisfaction, when considering the users and the context. Here are some examples sum-
marized by Yablonski in his book ”Laws of UX” that demonstrate just that [22]:
1. Jakob’s law state that users prefer a website to work the same way as all the other
websites they already know. Following the logic that frequent processed material is
also fluent processed material, users satisfy interfaces that are fluently processed.
2. Law of Prägnanz states that people will perceive and interpret ambiguous or com-
plex images as the simplest form possible, because it is the interpretation that re-
quires the least cognitive effort. Again users are most satisfied when it is as easy
(fluent) as possible.
3. Hicks law states that the time it takes to make a decision increases with the number
and complexity of choices. E.g. Efficiency is reduced with more complex (disfluent)
choices.
1.3
Dependencies
While all the above mentioned effects of the cognitive fluency bias is almost exclusively
positive effect there is also tasks where the effects of cognitive fluency are negative.
For instance, Whittlesea found that words presented cognitive fluent are more often being
misjudged as familiar even though they are novel, compared to words presented cognitive
disfluent [23]. Song & Schwarz found that people are better at detecting trick questions
when the question is presented in a dysfluent font [24].
The other effects cognitive fluency explained above are generally seen as positive, but it
of course depends on the purpose. If the task is for a brand to sound trustworthy, familiar,
and famous, then yes, a fluent name or catchphrase is the way to go, but if the task is for
the user to identify whether a word is novel or previously seen or distinguish trick questions
from regular questions, then fluently processed material is not beneficial.
So whether the effects of cognitive fluency are considered to be positive or negative de-
pends on the task. Tasks can in UX otherwise be known as goals, which make up one
component of the definition by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). In
2006 ISO presented a standard named “Ease of operation of everyday products”, which
is now known as “Ergonomics of human-system interaction”. Both in 2006 and now the
context of use is a central component in the standard. The standard currently defines
usability as the “extent to which a system, product or service can be used by specified
users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a spec-
ified context of use”. Usability is thus about the effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction
of a product from the perspective of a user, their goals and context of use [25]. Apart
from goals, context is also one of the factors to consider in usability and with good rea-
son. Many studies have already highlighted the importance of understanding the context
of use and several user experience frameworks and definitions mention context as one
of the components affecting user experience [26][27][28][29][30][31][32].
Cognitive fluency has many positive effects and is implicitly embedded in several design
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
3
==PAGE:11==
guiding principles. While many argue that context is an important pillar of user experience,
no one has yet attempted to look at whether the effects of cognitive fluency is dependent
on the locational context. Therefore, we will try to understand if cognitive fluency is de-
pendent on locational context, which brings us to our initial research question.
Do the effects of cognitive fluency depend on locational context?
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Related Work
This chapter explores two important topics. The first topic examines situations when cog-
nitive processes have been shown to change in response to certain contextual changes.
Then we investigate if there is any cases where the effects of cognitive fluency have also
been shown to change according to context.
This first topic of related work was mainly explored using the snowballing method, with
three studies in particular providing the basis for the exploration. The first study is ”Flu-
ency and the detection of misleading questions: Low processing fluency attenuates the
Moses illusion” from 2008 by Hyunjin Song and Norbert Schwarz, which mainly assisted in
reviewing literature of the topics of cognitive fluency. The second study is ”The Learned
Interpretation of Cognitive Fluency” from 2006 by Christian Unkelbach, which primarily
assisted the literature review of methods to measure and manipulate cognitive fluency
while also exploring the contextual side of cognitive fluency. The third and final study is
”Moses, money, and multiple-choice: The Moses illusion in a multiple-choice format with
high incentives” from 2020 by Felix Speckmann and Christian Unkelbach, which primarily
assisted the literature review on experimental design.
The second topic explores practices and theories that seek to integrate context into design
and other sciences. It also considers how these approaches can offer insights into how
contextual factors should be studied and examined. Furthermore this topic explores if any
of these theories and practices can be used to research the contextual part of this study.
The exploration of different practices and theories that incorporate context in design is
a relatively large topic. The narrative review method is regarded as an effective method
that offers an introductory overview of the diverse subjects where design has developed
a practice or theory that incorporate context, without taking too long or being too compre-
hensive. The narrative review started with searches around ”context and design”, which
inspired for new search topics and also some snowballing started from different studies.
2.1
Context and Cognition
Lets dive into the first topic of previous studies that have shown contextual factors affecting
cognition.
Several studies have showed that heat and cold have shown negative effects on cognitive
processes [33][34][35]. One study that implicated the stress implied with temperature
made 17.000 safety observations over 14 months, where the relationship between unsafe
behaviours and temperature had an U-shaped curve, meaning that towards both ends of
the temperatures measured there were observed the most amount of unsafe behaviour.
And in the middle between 17 and 23 degrees Celsius there were observed the least
amount of unsafe behaviour [36]. Here unsafe behaviour is an indication of impaired
cognitive functions. Specific cognitive functions, such as memory, vigilance, reaction time,
and decision making have been shown to degrade under exposure of cold temperatures
from -20 to 10 degrees celsius [37][38][39].
Not just cognitive functions depend on the context. So do cognitive biases. Framing ef-
fect is one of the more researched cognitive biases. It claims that the framing of an option
influences how individuals will perceive that option. Moreover it expects that individuals
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
5
==PAGE:13==
choose an risk-averse option, when presented with a “gain frame” and risk seeking op-
tion, when presented with a “loss frame”. When the framing effect was measured about
gambles framed in terms of either gains or losses, the context of time pressure increased
the findings of the effect [40].
Locational context such as simply being outside or inside has also examined cognitive
differences. While it is simplistic to look at locational context as whether an individual is
inside rather than outside, some direct or indirect measures of locational context, can give
it more perspective. Here are two studies that investigated the effects of inside versus
outside with other direct or indirect measures of context. The Saadi 2020 study uses
noise, carbon monoxide, temperature, humidity, amount of surrounding people, heart rate
variability, and LF/HF which is a measure of the balance between the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous system [41]. The 2018 Bailey study uses EEG to assess mental
states [42].
Saadi found improvements in psychological, physiological well-being and cognitive capa-
bilities when the women were in urban parks rather than at home. More specifically,
women experienced stronger positive emotions, weaker negative emotions, and per-
formed better in a backwards digit-span task when they were in urban parks rather than
at home [41].
Bailey found that participants performed significantly better on a Stroop test when walking
rather than not walking and that the outdoor environment had an additional positive influ-
ence. In addition, they found that the outdoor walking session induced a more meditative
state than the indoor session [42].
2.2
Cognitive Fluency
Cognitive fluency have many different effects as mentioned earlier. Whether these ef-
fects are given as positive or not was studied by Unkelbach in 2006. Might these biases
be learned from the environment? The study showed that the cognitive bias of perceiv-
ing cognitive fluent words as old words, is indeed susceptible to the prior knowledge an
individual has learned by their environment. When participants were trained to learn that
cognitive fluent names were new instead of the traditional bias that perceives cognitive
fluent names as old, they had a higher probability of judging a low fluency name as being
old rather than a high fluency name. The fluency was manipulated by colour contrast in
the first experiment and by mental rotation in the second experiment [43].
Unkelbachs study implies that cognitive fluency bias has a contextual factor, where the
environment determines or has an influence on the direction of the bias. His study might
very well be the closest study of contextual factors on the cognitive fluency bias.
2.2.1
How to Manipulate and Measure Fluency
Previous research has investigated several methods for manipulating cognitive fluency in
order to evaluate its impact on human perception and decision-making. These studies
used a variety of methods to manipulate fluency. We will look at five different techniques
used here:
1. Color Contrast: One way of manipulation involves changing the color contrast be-
tween font color and background. Contrasting colors is used as the fluent condition
whereas low contrasting colors are used as the disfluent condition [43].
2. Text Font: Researchers have also used different text fonts as a means to manipulate
fluency. Font choice can impact readability, with some fonts being easier to process
than others [24][17].
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
6
==PAGE:14==
3. Mental Rotation: Another intriguing approach involves mental rotation, where partic-
ipants are presented with objects that are rotated. The greater the rotation the more
difficult to process. Thus little rotation is used for the fluent condition and greater
rotation used for the disfluent condition [43].
4. Pronunciation Ease: Some studies have assessed fluency by subjectively judging
the ease of pronunciation. Researchers select words, names or phrases that vary
in their phonetic complexity, aiming to determine how the ease of pronunciation
impacts cognitive processing [15].
5. Exposure: Another manipulation method is the concept of repeated exposure. High
exposure is used for the fluent condition where low exposure is used for the disfluent
condition [19][43].
These are just some of they methods to manipulate fluency in order to observe the effects,
but to know if the manipulations actually make it more or less fluent to process a stimuli
some studies have used different metrics such as:
1. Time of completion: This metric involves measuring the time it takes for participants
to complete a task or respond to a stimulus. Faster response times often indicate
increased cognitive fluency, as participants are able to process and react to infor-
mation more quickly and efficiently [20].
2. Subjective Feeling (measured by Likert Scale): Researchers have also used sub-
jective assessments from participants to understand their perceived level of fluency
[24].
With these metrics, studies have been able to quantitatively assess the impact of fluency
manipulations.
2.3
Defining Context
Before delving too much into the different methods that capture or use context to inform
design decision, we need to take a look at what it really is.
The ISO standard is once again a defining entity in the world of UX and they do provide
some explanations of what context consist of. They state that context of use is a combina-
tion of users, goals, and tasks, resources, and environment. Where environment is noted
as including technical, physical, social, cultural and organizational environments [25].
Jumisko-Pyykkö and Vainio did a systematic literature review of over 100 publications
from 2000 to 2007 and several existing models of context categories. That resulted in a
framework for capturing use context for Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) fields. The
framework considers context in the categories of physical, task, social, temporal, technical
and information context [44].
The similarities between the two definitions of context is that they both divide context into
categories. They agree that context include physical, task, social, and technical cate-
gories. The ISO standard emphasises users, goals, cultural and organizational compo-
nents as part of context, where Jumisko-Pyykkö and Vainio emphasise a temporal compo-
nent of context. Jumisko-Pyykkö and Vainio don’t disagree to users, goals, cultural, and
organizational components to be part of context, but neither do they think they should be
categories of their own.
To summarize, context is the surrounding settings of an event, which for analytical pur-
poses can be divided into categories. For HCI those categories may include users, goals,
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
7
==PAGE:15==
and tasks, resources, technical, physical, social, cultural, organizational, and temporal.
2.4
Methods and Theories for Designing with Context
Context is a large entity that encompasses everything we do. Therefore, we will take a
look at which theories and practices where context plays a greater role. They include
both larger well-known theories like behaviourism, but also smaller and less established
practices like context aware computing.
In figure 2.1, we have outlined the practices and theories for incorporating context into
design, which was found during the narrative review. There is a connection between
behaviourism and behavioural design due to the practice of behavioural design being
inspired by behaviourism.
Figure 2.1: Shows the theories and practices that incorporate context into deign found
through the narrative review
Let’s have a look at the different theories and practices and how they incorporate context.
2.4.1
Behaviourism and Behavioural design
Behavioral psychology, or behaviorism, focus on studying and understanding behavior.
The theory is that behaviors are learned through conditioning and that they can be modi-
fied or changed through various techniques.
B. Skinner’s work on operant conditioning and the concept of reinforcement played a sig-
nificant role in shaping the field. Skinner’s experiments with animals, such as the famous
Skinner box, demonstrated how behavior could be shaped through positive and negative
reinforcement [45].
Another influential figure in behavioral psychology is Ivan Pavlov, known for his experi-
ments on classical conditioning. Pavlov’s research with dogs showed how an association
could be formed between a neutral stimulus (such as a bell) and a reflex response (such
as salivation) through repeated conditioning [46].
Behavioral design is an approach to design that applies principles from behavioral psy-
chology to create products, services, and experiences that influence human behavior [47].
It is often used to encourage desirable behaviors, or discourage undesired behaviour. The
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
8
==PAGE:16==
design often revolves around creating interventions. Some examples of behavioral de-
sign interventions include: Setting the default option to the desired behavior, using social
influence such as group pressure, providing feedback and rewards for desirable behavior,
making the desired behavior easier to accomplish [48].
The context in behavioural design describes where the behaviour or intervention take
place. Nielsen, Daalhuizen, & Cash did a thorough literature review, where they con-
clude that behavioural design models and theories describe two different kinds of context;
physical and social [49].
2.4.2
Activity Theory
Activity Theory (AT) is a theoretical framework for analyzing and understanding human
activity in its surrounding context. A fundamental principle in Activity Theory is that human
action can only be understood within its sociocultural and historical context [50].
It was initially developed in the 1920s and 1930s by Russian psychologist Vygotsky as
a framework for understanding how humans learn and develop through their interactions
with their environment. Since then it has been applied to the fields of psychology, soci-
ology, and human-computer interaction to understand how individuals interact with their
environment and engage in goal-directed activities. According to activity theory, humans
are constantly engaged in activities driven by their motivations, goals, values, and are
influenced by their social and cultural contexts [51][52].
It was further developed by Engeström, with the expansion of the activity system [53].
The Activity System
The activity system is illustrated as a triangle with a term on each side and each corner,
which can be seen in figure 2.2. It consists of the seven concepts; subject, object, tools,
community, division of labour, rules, and outcome.
Figure 2.2: Shows the activity system developed by Engeström. It consist of 6 compo-
nents with relationships between each other depicted by the arrows. To the right is the
outcome.
The subject is the person executing the task, the object is goal or motive of the activity,
and the tools are both physical and psychological tools used by the subject to achieve the
goal. The rules refers to both written and unwritten restrictions that control and restrain the
subject’s activity. The community includes all of the actors who collaborate with the subject
and share the same object, and the division of labour refers to how work is distributed
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
9
==PAGE:17==
between the subject and the members of the community, the outcome is what is achieved
by the activity. [50].
The Activity Network
The central activity is the activity under observation, which can be described by the activity
system. However the activity system can also be used to describe the activities around the
central activity. There are four four other activity systems that make up the activity network,
namely; the subject-producing activity, the object activity, the tools-producing activity, and
the community-producing activity. In particular, three of these could prove useful for this
project. The tools-producing activity, could be used to understand how the tool in the form
of the experiment might work against the participant. The community-producing activity
could also explain how the activity system around the community creates a community that
either benefits or hinders the central activity. Finally, it could be relevant to understand
how the object activity creates an object that may not be desired by the subject of the
central activity (the participant of the experiment) [54].
Contradictions
Contradictions are tensions or inconsistencies in the activity systems. They can be classi-
fied into primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary contradictions. A primary contradic-
tion is a contradiction within an component, a secondary contradiction is a contradiction
between two components, the tertiary contradiction is between the object of the central ac-
tivity and the object of a culturally more advanced form of the central activity. Quaternary
contradictions is between the central activity and its neighbor activities [55].
2.4.3
Distributed Cognition
Distributed cognition is a theoretical framework that proposes that cognitive processes
are not exclusive to humans, but distributed across multiple individuals, artifacts and the
environment they interact with. This means that cognitive processes are not exclusively
performed by people, but instead are distributed across different elements of the sur-
rounding environment. The Norman Door is a good example of how distributed cognition
view cognitive processes of objects, where the cognitive process of understanding how
to open the Norman Door is distributed between the individual opening the door and the
door itself [56].
Distributed cognition allows the analysis to include all the significant features in the envi-
ronment that is being used to accomplish a task. Otherwise it is similar to the framework
of individual cognition, but the central key here is that cognition is distributed over a range
of media and over a number of people [57][58].
In general, distributed cognition focuses on establishing stable design principles that can
be used consistently across a variety of design issues and on providing finely detailed
evaluations of specific products [59][60].
2.4.4
Situated Action Models
Situated action models analyses the activity that a subject performs in an environment.
The focus is on the actor, the setting and the interaction, but the individual parts are not
analysed separately. A setting is described as a relationship between actors and the
arenas in which they perform. An arena is a stable institutional framework [61]. The
theory has a slightly behaviouristic approach, in that the actor’s actions are seen partly
as a reaction to the environment in which the actor acts. Very much like behaviourism,
where it is widely believed that actions are reactions to the surrounding environment.
Goals, plans, and mental representations are not part of the analysis in the situated action
models. In fact, situated action models view goals as the subjects reflections of why they
did something after they have done it [62].
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
10
==PAGE:18==
2.4.5
Context-Aware Computing
Context-aware computing is a more practical approach to context, where context is pri-
marily what a mobile device can capture using sensors and data from the user. In this
methodology, context covers location of use, the collection of nearby people, hosts, and
accessible devices. as well as to changes to such things over time. But it also covers
lighting, noise level, network connectivity, communication costs, communication band-
width and even the social situation: e.g., whether you are with your manager or with a
co-worker [63].
It is an interesting way of trying to capture context as well as a mobile device is able to. It
is also very adaptive and temporal as it can measure changing contexts over time.
Doug Lenat, a computer scientist and researcher, have tried to formalize context from
the perspective of software. He argues that there can be many dimensions of context,
but nonetheless he formalized 12 dimensions and called them the top 12 dimensions of
Context-Space. It is also noticeable that he talks about them as just one level of abstrac-
tions and that there are 100 sub-dimensions that is comprised into the 12 top dimension
[64]. The top 12 dimensions of context is:
1. Absolute Time: a particular time interval in which events occur
2. Type Of Time: a non-absolute type of time period, such as “just after eating”
3. Absolute Place: a particular location where events occur, such as “Paris”
4. Type Of Place: a non-absolute type of place, such as “in bed”
5. Culture: linguistic, religious, ethnic, age-group, wealth, etc. of typical actors
6. Sophistication/Security: who already knows this, who could learn it, etc.
7. Topic/Usage: drilling down into aspects and applications – not subsets
8. Granularity: phenomena and details which are (and are not) ignored
9. Modality/Disposition/Epistemology: who wants/believes this content to be true?
10. Argument-Preference: local rules for how to resolve pro-con argument disputes
11. Justification: are things in this context generally proven, observed, on faith…
12. Let’s: local bindings of variables etc. that hold true in that context
2.4.6
Contextual Design
Contextual Design is a 7-step process formalized by Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. It
forces a user-centric approach, where the first and most important step is the contextual
inquiry, where the designers familiarize themselves with the users and their work by shad-
owing and interviewing the user while they are working. The observations and knowledge
gained from the inquiry is interpretet through the development of work models, an affinity
diagram, and storyboards, which lay the groundwork for the redesign that fits the users
natural flow of work and their environment. At the end the redesign is prototyped and
tested with users [65].
Contextual inquiry Comming from the roots of activity theory and ethnography, Contex-
tual Inquiry is a method that tries to unveil the context around the product and emphasize
that users are complex human beings and not information processors or system compo-
nents. It tries to learn what motivates people to take actions, especially in the context of
interacting with machines and systems, are seen as social actions, taking into account the
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
11
==PAGE:19==
individual characteristics and abilities of the individual. Contextual Inquiry can be seen as
a “quick and dirty” version of long term ethnographic field studies [66].
Personas A persona is a hypothetical but specific “character” in a specific work role. The
persona help designers focus on specific user characteristics rather than trying to design
for all users or even for the “average” user. A persona is a story and description of a
realistic individual who has a name, a life, and a personality, allowing designers to limit
design focus to something very specific [66]. Personas are a way of bringing different
archetypes into the design process and can make several of the scenarios more realistic
and often add a greater level of detail to the design discussions. Personas are often
used in the plural. You can have one or more primary personas and secondary personas,
where you want to optimise the experience for the primary personas without harming
the experience for the secondary personas. Personas often have different work roles in
relation to the design that is being developed and are based on user research.
Scenarios A scenario is a description of a usage situation with specific users in a specific
usage context. A depiction of an important use situation that happens over time. They
can serve as a test to see how a particular design will fit a key scenario and thus validate
the design or modify it depending on how optimally the design fulfils the requirements of
that scenario [66][65].
Contextual design models Contextual design models are models that describe the con-
text of an activity. There are 10 different models, each addressing a different dimension
of the context. The five original models are: The Flow Model, Cultural Model, Physi-
cal Model, Sequence Model, and Artifact Model. To them, Karen Holtzblatt added five
models that she calls the experience models: Day-in-the-Life Model, Relationship Model,
Collaboration Model, Collaboration Model, Identity Model, and Sensation Board. It is not
necessary to use all 10 models. It is much more practical to choose the models that fit
the project [67].
2.4.7
Ethnographic Fieldwork
Is a method where the researcher places themselves in the environment of the subjects
being studied. Mainly the researcher observe the participants, but interviewing might
complement the observations or take part of the observations. Important to note is that the
researcher is both an insider and an outsider of the group of subjects being studied. The
researcher will go beyond ordinary engagement in the group or social setting to observe
the activities, people, and physical setting of a given situation [68]. Participant observation
in ethnography can rather nonchalant be described as “hang around, talk to folks, and try
to get sense of what is going on” [69].
A major difference for ethnographic fieldwork compared to the other practices described
here is the time frame. The ethnographic fieldwork goes on for months, years, in some
cases for a lifetime, where compared to contextual inquiry which can be done in sessions
of a few hours each [68][65].
2.5
Discussion
Ethnographic fieldwork is very much about understanding cultural rules and, from a design
perspective, how users interact with a tool. Therefore, it is a great tool for understand-
ing users and their actions, which is also one of the purposes of participatory design.
Ethnographic fieldwork could be a good way for this study to try to understand how con-
text changes the effects of cognitive fluency, but ethnographic fieldwork often requires a
relatively long time-frame, which can be difficult to realise in this thesis. Sperschneider
and Bagger further argues that there is a lack of universal fieldwork recipes, which in turn
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
12
==PAGE:20==
draws attention to the process. However for this study a framework for describing context
is highly sought after [68].
In behavioral design, there are many models and theories, some of which use the social
and physical context as part of the analysis. Because none of the theories have been
strongly favored by the community of behavioural designers, Nielsen, Daalhuizen, and
Cash has tried to bring together the components from previous models into a model they
call The Behavioural Design Space. Despite the fact that behavioral design wants to cre-
ate a holistic system of interventions, the authors themselves believe that this is difficult
to achieve with their framework [49]. Due to this lack of viewing behavior holistically be-
tween multiple components, this model is not considered ideal for explaining the effect of
context on cognitive fluency. That said, it is possible that there is a model from behavioral
design that could be used.
Contextual design is a thorough and relatively long process that takes several steps to
gather and analyse contextual data and then create contextual design. Although the full
process is too time-consuming for this study, some of its methods for describing context
may be applicable. Personas are not thought to be relevant for this study as cognitive
fluency bias is thought to be consistent across people. Contextual inquiry is a ”quick
and dirty” version of ethnographic fieldwork, which could make sense as more traditional
ethnographic fieldwork takes too long for the scope of this thesis. However, it is more a
method for collecting data than a model for describing data. Scenarios could be good for
explaining how context affects cognitive fluency, but prior to describing a scenario, the
context must be understood and analysed, which scenarios is not a method for. Contex-
tual design models however do describe context, that could be acquired by the contextual
inquiry and later used for describing scenarios. The three methods could then be excellent
in trying to explain the context that changes the effects of cognitive fluency. But there are
10 contextual models, and even though it isn’t necessary to use all 10 models to explain
the affecting context, then the combination of several models seems comprehensive.
Context aware computing is exciting because it focuses on what the computer can per-
ceive from context and therefore takes a very concrete approach to how technical devices
can recognise and adapt to different contexts. However, it seems that in its current stage,
it focuses more on understanding the context than how the context changes the usage or
situation around the device. Therefore, it doesn’t seem to be a good tool to explain why
context changes the effects of cognitive fluency.
Situated action models, emphasizes behavior as a result of the situation, a little like be-
haviorism. While there are good reasons to understand activity as an unconscious action,
it’s hard not to believe that all actions are conscious. That users don’t have goals that in-
fluence their actions. For instance how do we account for variable responses to the same
situation?
Bonnie argues that activity theory and distributed cognition are similar in many ways, and
that they may eventually merge. She sees a difference in how the two theories view
people. Activity theory views people as moral beings, which is not the case in distributed
cognition. She believes that it is more reasonable to view humans as moral beings and
tools as mediators of human cognition and activity. In addition to this view, activity theory
also has a clear framework through the activity system, which makes it possible to both
describe and understand the effect of context on activity. For these two reasons, activity
theory is preferred over distributed cognition [62].
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
13
==PAGE:21==
2.6
Research Question
It has previously been suspected that cognitive fluency is indeed dependent on con-
text. Partially because there are so many different effects of cognitive fluency, some
researchers have hypothesized that cognitive fluency is first a non-specific experience,
which then becomes a specific experience when interpreted in a given context [70][71][72].
Unkelbach further hypothesize, that because the experience is inferred from the context, it
does make sense that cognitive fluency by itself can influence such diverse characteristics
as frequency, fame, liking, truthfulness, feeling of knowing, and time [43].
So there is strong reason to believe that context do change the effects of cognitive flu-
ency. We are interested in whether cognitive fluency is dependent on locational context,
how context impacts our design choices and in particular how it may modulate some of
the guidelines we use to design User Experiences with. This brings us to the research
question:
How does locational context and cognitive fluency affect our ability to
detect trick questions?
With the sub-research questions:
1. Does the locational context of sitting outside in urban parks versus inside in dedi-
cated study areas change our ability to detect trick questions?
2. Does locational context change the effects of cognitive fluency on detecting trick
questions?
3. How can it change the way we design?
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
14
==PAGE:22==
3
Methodology
In this thesis, two primary methods are used, namely a cognitive experiment and qualita-
tive interviews. In this section, we will go through how these two methods were set up,
conducted and analyzed.
3.1
Cognitive Experiment
3.1.1
Participants
The participants used for this cognitive experiment were young adults in the age of 18-35
years. They were presumably students who happened to be in the selected locations on
the campus of the Technical University of Denmark. There were no assumptions about the
effect size, however the influence of cognitive fluency had been subject for research by
Song & Schwarz in 2008 [24]. But with another independent variable being location and
changes to the experiment setup, the amount of participants required for such a study was
difficult to estimate. Previous studies on detection of trick questions have used between 20
and 40 per condition, and with limited resources it was decided to aim for 100 participants,
which concludes to 25 participants per condition. [73].
3.1.2
Ethical Considerations
When conducting an experiment, it is imperative to communicate clear expectations to
the participants. It is equally important to ensure that they are fully aware of their rights
to withdraw from the experiment at any time if they feel uncomfortable or simply choose
not to continue. Because of these ethical considerations, participants were asked to read
an information letter explaining their rights, the purpose of the experiment, how and what
data there will be stored. For reference, the information letter can be found in Appendix
B.
Before proceeding with the experiment, participants were asked to read and sign an in-
formed consent form. Given that the experiment was conducted digitally, participants
were required to acknowledge that they understood their rights and provide an electronic
signature with their name. The consent form is available in Appendix C.
To uphold privacy and anonymity, all recorded data, including responses to questions
and demographic information, were fully anonymized and dissociated from any informa-
tion that could help identify them. Apart from their responses to the questions, the only
additional data collected was age, gender, English proficiency, whether they were sit-
ting inside or outside, and feedback related to the experiment. Importantly, the consent
form was kept separate from the questionnaire to ensure that participants could not be
identified based on their responses.
Furthermore, for data privacy and protection, no information was shared outside the re-
search group, and all data will be deleted once the thesis is completed.
3.1.3
Experimental Design
The purpose of the experiment is to find out if our cognitive abilities, in this case to de-
tecting trick questions, change when changing the context (sitting inside versus outside)
and the cognitive fluency of the question (whether the question appears in a font that is
easy to read rather than difficult to read). Therefore, the number of questions detected
is the dependent variable and the location of the experiment and the cognitive fluency of
the questions are the independent variables.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
15
==PAGE:23==
The experiment is designed so that location is between subject, meaning that each partic-
ipant can only participate either inside or outside. But at the same time, cognitive fluency
is within subjects, meaning that all participants receive questions that are cognitive fluent
(in a font that is easy to read) and cognitive disfluent (in a font that is difficult to read). This
results in a nested design where participants at the top level are divided into outside and
inside and in the step below they receive a series of questions that are equally divided
between cognitive fluent and disfluent presented questions.
In addition to the independent variables, there are other confounding factors that will be
controlled for during the experiment. This is done to generate valid and reliable results,
which increase the internal validity and, simultaneously, enhancing the credibility of the
experiment. For this experiment the confounding factors controlled for are:
Gender: All genders are allowed to participate, and they were asked in a multiple choice
format to simplify data handling. There were four choices; Female, Male, Non-binary /
third gender, and prefer not to say. The distribution of genders was sought after to be
equal between male and female.
Age: Because some cognitive abilities decline at around 20 years of age, for this exper-
iment, a limit has been set for the age of the participants to be under 35 years of age to
ensure that cognitive abilities are in order. While this may be conservative, it hardly ex-
cludes anyone as the target group for the experiment is university students. Furthermore
the minimum accepted of a participant is 18 years.
Day of the week & time of day: Since this experiment exclusively involves participants
from the university, the data collection was confined to weekdays only. The usage and
atmosphere of the outdoor and indoor facilities at the university change throughout the
day, with the busiest and most crowded times usually being around lunchtime. Therefore,
the experiment will only be conducted from 11:00 to 16:00 o’clock, where the facilities are
being used as they were intended to.
Weather: Just as time of day, weather conditions may also influence the environment,
particularly for outdoor facilities, and possibly for indoor facilities as well. To ensure con-
sistency and control for potential weather-related variations, I will exclude days with rain,
unusually cold or hot temperatures, and strong winds from the experiment.
Events or similar: For both the indoor and outdoor facilities there could be hosted events
that can alter the usual environment of these locations. Therefore, the experiment will not
be conducted during the presence of such events or similar occurrences to avoid any
potential interference with the experiments conditions.
Location on campus To study the difference in context, two different contexts had to be
used. The main delimiter of the difference is the intended use of the space. For indoor
spaces their intended use had to be studying and for outdoor spaces their intended use
had to be ”taking a break” from studying. Two indoor locations was used and three outdoor
locations was used. Images of the locations can be seen in appendix D
3.1.4
Setting up the experiment
It’s time to go into a little bit more detail about how the experiment will be carried out, now
that the dependent, independent and controlled variables have been identified. First off,
it has been decided that a digital tool will be used to conduct the experiment because it
simplifies gathering of precise data, such as duration, saves the researcher from having to
manually code every response, and enables the participants to complete the experiment
on their own smartphone and thus in their natural environment.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
16
==PAGE:24==
A Tool for a Digital Experiment
The tool chosen for the task of running an digital experiment is Qualtrics. Qualtrics pro-
vides valuable metadata, including the duration of the experiment and timestamps of the
start and ending times. This metadata is essential to detect outliers for instance partici-
pants who did not finish the experiment in the desired duration. Furthermore, the platform
offers the option of randomizing the ordering of both questions and answers. This ran-
domization eliminates potential order bias, ensuring that participants encounter questions
in different sequences. By doing so, Qualtrics helps to minimize systematic effects that
could arise due to the specific order of questions or response options, resulting in more
reliable and unbiased data.
The skip logic feature in Qualtrics allow for customizing the survey flow based on par-
ticipants’ responses. By bypassing instructions that they were already read through the
information letter. This should make for a more efficient experience while optimizing data
collection.
Qualtrics has several response options like sliders, multiple-choice, and text entry. This
lets the survey fit to the exact needs of the experiment, and different data types.
The final feature that made qualtrics a relevant tool is that the survey can be accessed via
a QR code, which should make it easy for participants to complete the experiment and
sign the consent form on their own smartphone.
For those reasons, qualtrics was an easy choice to host an digital experiment. One limita-
tion of Qualtrics is its maximum limit of 30 questions in a single survey for the free version.
This constraint ultimately decided that there was only gonna be 20 trials per participant
instead of 40 which was used by Speckmann and Unkelbach [73]. With 20 trials there are
10 questions left for demographic questions and instructions which each take take op a
”question” slot.
The Trick and Non-trick Questions
The 20 questions that will take part in this experiment is a subset of the 40 questions use
by Speckmann & Unkelbach in 2021 [73].
First the 10 trick questions was subjectively chosen based on these two criteria:
1. Firstly, the topic of the question had to be somewhat common knowledge. Otherwise
the participants would have no clue whether it was a trick question or not. This
left out questions that did not fit the audience. Like American history questions or
questions about certain characters from movies that were either old or had a danish
counterparts, so that the English character names weren’t known.
2. The wording that made the question a trick question also had to be ”obvious”. Whether
Germany won or lost the second world war is generally known, but whether Mario
is the mascot of Nintendo or Sony is perhaps not as generally known.
This approach was influenced by a similar strategy employed by Unkelbach, who replaced
certain questions due to cultural knowledge differences between the USA and Germany
[73]. The goal was to ensure that the chosen questions were both accessible and effec-
tively demonstrated the participants ability to detect trick questions.
The process of selecting the additional 10 non-trick questions followed a similar approach
to that used for the trick questions. However, since the 10 most suitable questions had
already been chosen for the trick questions, the available options for the non-trick ques-
tions were slightly limited. Consequently, their alignment with the two criteria used for
selection was not as strong as with the trick questions.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
17
==PAGE:25==
The final set of questions can be seen in appendix A.
Multiple-choice
Although Speckmann and Unkelbach, believed that ”the multiple-choice format should
substantially reduce the amount of detected trick questions, as the correct response
(”can’t say”) is available on every trial”, they found during their study that this should
not be the case when compared to Reder & Kusbit’s results [73][74]. They actually found
the participants detected even fewer trick questions in their multiple choice format. This
comparison should not be taken too literally though, as it can be challenging to compare
studies because they vary on a number of aspects, including the period of data collection,
the participants, and the stimuli.
The multiple choice format was chosen for this experiment, as it do not require to code
the participants’ responses while also reducing the effort for the participants.
Each question has four response options. A correct response if the question is regular,
an alternative response option that is always incorrect, ”Can’t say” which is equivalent to
expressing the question is a trick question, and ”Don’t know,” which pretty much speaks
for itself. Response options three and four were always ”Can’t say” and ”Don’t know”.
The alternative response option was provided as the first option for 10 randomly chosen
questions, and as option number two for the remaining 10 questions.
Half of the questions was presented in the difficult to read font “Brush Script MT“ and
the other half presented with the easier to read font ”Arial”. The two fonts can be seen
in figure 3.1 and 3.2. For the second data collection, the questions with the difficult to
read font was changed to the easy to read font and vice versa. Because some tablets or
browsers might not have these fonts available, forcing them to use fallback fonts, images
containing the questions in the proper font was used instead of text.
Figure 3.1: Shows examples of the Arial font used for the fluent questions.
Figure 3.2: Shows examples of the Brush Script MT font used for the dysfluent questions.
Finally, it was configured in Qualtrics that the questions should appear in a random order
for each trial. This is to protect the experiment against order effects, which could be a
systematic error that could, for example, cause the last questions to be detected more
often than the first, because the participant became better at detecting trick questions by
each question they answered. Additionally, it also hid the fact that the study was about
the difference between the two fonts, which would have been more obvious if every other
question was in a different font.
In addition to the questions in the experiment, participants were asked to answer some de-
mographic questions and whether they participated in the experiment outside or inside.
The demographic questions included the participant’s age, gender, and English profi-
ciency. Age and English proficiency were used as criteria for participation as explained
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
18
==PAGE:26==
under the controlled variables and gender was attempted to be kept equal between men
and women, as explained under the controlled variables.
Apart from the information provided by the information letter, additional instructions was
provided right after the information letter and consent form. The instructions read ”First
a few demographic essentials and then 20 trivia questions. It is possible that some of
the questions may be ill-formed and, if taken literally, cannot be answered. In that case,
please select the response option ‘Can’t say’. Your googling skills are presumably very
good, but not relevant to this experiment, so you can select ”don’t know” if you’re unsure
of the response. Before i leave you off to it, i have to say that the questions have been
taken from 2 different questionnaires, so sorry for the bad dump of different layouts”. It is
similar to how Speckmann and Unkelbach instructed their participants [73].
Pilot testing
Piloting the experiment was considered valuable because it could improve the survey
design and data quality. During the pilot test, several insightful comments were received,
which highlight the significance of this process:
Participants mentioned the absence of a ”don’t know” response option, which was also
utilized by Speckmann & Unkelbach in their study in 2021 [73]. The ”don’t know” option
allows participants to skip a question concerning something they simply would not know
to be trick or not due to the content, not being something they are familiar with.
Feedback indicated the need to increase the font size from 16 to 22 for the ”Brush Script
MT” font as it was tiny compared to the Arial font. The arial font size was kept at 16, but
in actual size the fonts were somewhat equal.
There were reports of some questions being ambiguous when they weren’t intended too.
For instance question 14; Guacamole might not be the only Mexican dip with mashed
avocados. This was considered a low risk, and thus the questions remained the same.
Valuable feedback suggested providing more guidance and appropriate response options
for the English proficiency question. Instead of simply asking for ones level of English it
was phrased as ”How well do you read and understand English?”, which leads to more
accurate and meaningful data on participants’ English proficiency.
Some participants also expressed a desire to view their results upon completion. Although
it was not feasible to fulfill this request, it was addressed at the end of the experiment,
with an explanation that there were 10 trick questions that should have been answered
with ”Can’t say.”
One participant was unsure of whether it was allowed to use google due to the difficulty of
the questions. Other participants did not feel that the difficulty was an issue. Nevertheless
it was added to the instructions that googling was not allowed.
The second sampling
The reason for the second sampling was that the questions that were previously presented
in a difficult-to-read font should now be presented in an easy-to-read font. It could be that
the trick questions that were presented in a difficult-to-read font also were the questions
that are generally more difficult to detect, which could be a confounding factor.
When given the opportunity to change, there were a couple of issues with the flow of the
first data collection, that could be corrected, without changing the outcome for the second
data collection.
The two different QR codes for the consent form and the experiment were rather con-
fusing, as the majority of participants anticipated to get directly to the experiment via the
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
19
==PAGE:27==
first QR code, despite being told that there was a separate QR code for the experiment
itself. Because both the QR code for the consent form and the experiment began with the
Information letter due to its importance, seeing the information letter twice caused some
confusion.
After seeing the information letter in the experiment came some instructions on how to use
the different response options, but it could be mistaken for an extension of the information
letter.
To correct for these issues in the second round of data collection, participants were asked
to read the information letter on paper and then to give their consent on another physical
paper. They could then scan the QR code and go directly to the experiment. The exper-
iment began by asking if they had read the information letter; if they had not, they were
shown a digital copy of the information letter; otherwise, they were led to the instructions,
which were marked more clearly with a heading compared too the first data collection.
3.1.5
Experimental procedure
During the data collection of the experiment, data was gathered on specific dates and
times. The first set of data collection took place on the 12th, 13th, and 14th of June,
between 11 am and 4 pm, while the second set of data collection took place on the 21st and
22nd of June within the same time of day. The experiment was conducted at the campus
of the Technical University of Denmark, consisting of three outside spaces (The outdoor
space in building 101, Matematiktorvet, and the outdoor area around the building 342) and
two inside spaces (The library and building 324). It may not provide much information on
the areas, however pictures from there can be found in appendix D.
Throughout the experiment, the weather was consistently good. All three days of the first
set of data collection had complete sunlight. During the second set of data collection,
the weather remained mostly sunny. Based on the data from DMI, the reported tempera-
tures was persistently between 20 degrees and 27 degrees Celsius every day of the data
collection.
Participants in the experiment were primarily single individuals or smaller groups with a
maximum of five people. The recruitment process simply involved approaching potential
participants, asking for their attention and thereafter participation.
When approached, potential participants were asked if they were willing to complete a
survey in a quiz format, with the incentive of receiving a small bag of candy. The purpose
of the experiment was explained as assessing whether the questions was eligible for a
cognitive test. Prior to the experiment, participants were provided with two forms: one
for the letter of consent containing the information letter too, and the other for the actual
experiment. Participants were instructed to read the information letter carefully and to
indicate when they had signed the consent form.
When directed to the experiment, participants were informed about the importance of
reading the instructions carefully, which would ensure them to answer the questions prop-
erly. The researcher stayed beside the subject throughout the experiment in case further
explanations or reminders of the rules were needed. The most common question during
the experiment, was how to answer a trick question.
Upon completion of the experiment, participants were thanked and debriefed. During the
debriefing, the true purpose of the experiment was explained. Participants were instructed
that it was impossible to view their performance, but that half of the questions should
have been answered with ”Can’t say.” The debrief aimed to provide participants with a
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
20
==PAGE:28==
comprehensive understanding of the research’s goal.
3.1.6
Pre-Processing
There’s no way around data pre-processing. In this case, the data comes from two sep-
arate Qualtrics surveys; one from the first data collection and another from the second
data collection. The goal of the pre-processing is to create one or more data sets that is
ready for subsequent analysis.
For reference an overview of the extracted data from Qualtrics can be seen in figure 3.3.
17 columns was used for metadata, 4 columns for demographic questions, 20 columns
for the experiment and lastly 1 column for feedback.
Figure 3.3: An overview of the data set extracted from Qualtrics.
The data was processed in accordance with the 12 steps outlined below.
1. Filtering out unneccesary data. In this case it is 15 out of 17 columns of metadata
from Qualtrics. The only two columns, that are kept is the duration in seconds from
experiment start to finish and participant id. The data filtered out contains, start
and end timestamps, participant specific data such as email, sur and family name
(which were not recorded), Latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates, and other such
as distribution channel and user language.
2. Filtering out duplicate column names. The three first rows were three different
headings for the corresponding column. It was deemed unnecessary and only the
first of the three rows were kept.
3. Renaming columns. The names of all the columns was unfortunately the respond-
ing question id’s which did not make a lot of sense. Thus all of columns was renamed
from for instance ”Q03_1” to ”Age”.
4. Adding set column. Adding a column to both of the data sets named ”set”, which
declares from wich data set the particular response is comming from. ”1” for the first
data set and ”2” for the second data set.
5. Appending the two data sets together. As the data collection was split in two, thus
two different data sets extracted from Qualtrics, they had to be appended together
to form one data set containing all responses.
6. Converting string values to integers. Duration, which is measured in seconds
and age was extracted as string values, and thus had to be converted into integer
values to enable quantitative analysis.
7. Removing outliers. Removing outliers as explained in the results section.
8. Pivoting the data set. Going from each row being the responses from one partici-
pant, to each row being one participants response to one question of the experiment.
Thus 20 rows per participant.
9. Adding a distorted column. Adding a column declaring whether the question was
a trick question or not.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
21
==PAGE:29==
10. Adding a cognitive fluent column. Adding a column declaring the questions with
the easy to read font as fluent with the value True, and the questions with a difficult
to read font as dysfluent with the value False.
11. Adding a response option column. Going from responses such as ”Trumpet”, to
integer values between 1 and 4. 1 being the correct response to regular questions,
2 being an false alternative, 3 eqauls the ”Can’t say” option which is correct for trick
question and lastly, 4 which corresponds to the ”Don’t know” option.
12. Adding a accuracy column. Adding a accuracy column, with True when the partic-
ipant correctly identified the trick question or answered the regular question correctly
and false otherwise.
An example of the resulting data set from the data pre-processing can be seen in figure
3.4.
Figure 3.4: The resulting data frame from the data pre-processing.
3.1.7
Statistical Tests
Linear Mixed-Effects Regression (LMER)
The purpose of the experiment was to find out whether the amount of detected trick ques-
tions depends on cognitive fluency, which has already been proven by Song & Schwartz
and similarly whether it depends on whether you are sitting outside or inside. In addition,
whether there is an interaction effect between the two independent variables [24].
So how do you determine whether either location, cognitive fluency or an interaction be-
tween them has an effect on how many trick questions an individual can detect?
To choose the right statistical method, there are three important factors to take into account
for this data set:
1. The experiment has repeated measurements for each participant, which means that
each measurement is not independent of each other. If one participant answered
radically different from the others, but wasn’t an outlier, this may affect the results.
2. The overall data is not balanced between conditions. If you look at the figure 4.1
you can see that the overall data is not balanced between location, set or gender.
3. Another significant feature of the experiment and the resulting data is that there is
more than one independent variable. Not all statistical models allow for more than
one independent variable.
All of these factors are handled by Linear Mixed-Effects Regression Model (LMER), which
makes it a suitable fit for the data we have in hand. With Linear Mixed-Effects Models,
you can account for repeated measures for each participant by declaring their individual
differences as a random effect. This removes some of the variability from the model,
making it more accurate. In other words, it corrects for participants who are generally
better or worse at finding trick questions.
LMER Models can handle unbalanced data, meaning that it do not need to have an equal
amount of measurements for participants outside compared to inside, which is not the
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
22
==PAGE:30==
case for this data.
Furthermore, LMER Models allows for more than one independent variable as we have;
location & cognitive fluency.
D’Agostino and Pearson’s test & Q-Q plot
The Linear Mixed-Effects Regression model makes the assumption that its residuals are
normally distributed. A Q-Q plot and a D’Agostino and Pearson’s test are used to examine
the distribution of the residuals from the LMER model. The Q-Q plot provides a visual plot
from which one can see how closely it follows a normal distribution and for which quantiles
of the residuals follow a theoretical normal distribution to a lesser or greater degree. The
D’Agostino and Pearson’s test provides a statistical perspective on whether the residuals
are normally distributed.
White’s Test
The Linear Mixed-Effects Regression model makes the assumption that its residuals are
homoscedastic with regard to the fixed variables. The White’s test, which looks for het-
eroscedasticity in the residuals in relation to the fixed variables of the model, is used to
evaluate this assumption. This approach provides an statistical measurement of the ho-
moscedasticity assumption and helps in determining the robustness of the results of the
LMER model.
Paired and Unpaired T-test
In addition to the LMER model paired t-test will be used to determine whether the differ-
ences observed between the within-subject conditions (fluent vs disfluent) in the exper-
iment are statistically significant and not just due to chance or individual variability. It is
not used to compare answers for participants inside too those outside. An unpaired t-test
will instead be used in that case.
Mann–Whitney U test
For the cases where the number of either correct answers or detected trick questions is
not nominally distributed, the non-parametric test Mann-Whitney U test will be used. It
evaluates whether the distributions of measurements in the two groups are similar or not.
By comparing observations, it determines if any significant differences exist between the
groups, making it a robust method for analyzing non-normally distributed data.
The Bonferroni method
The Bonferroni method will be used to correct the confidence interval. When you create
a family of tests in a post-hoc analysis to determine which groups are different from the
others, you also increase the chance that one or more of the individual results from the
tests are false positives, also known as type 1 error. Instead of having a higher probability
of finding false positive results, you can reduce the alpha value so that you also reduce
the chance of the result being false positive. The formula for the method can be seen in
the equation 3.1, where the original alpha is corrected by dividing by the number of tests
(k) performed.
Bonferroni −correctedα = α
k
(3.1)
3.2
Qualitative Interviews
3.2.1
Participants
The qualitative interviews included 5 participants, all of whom fell within the same age cri-
teria as the quantitative experiment, namely 18 - 35 years of age. Four of the participants
were males, and one of the participants were female. They all had sufficient self-reported
English reading and understanding capabilities. All participants were either students or
had completed their education.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
23
==PAGE:31==
3.2.2
Semi-structured interview w. experiment trial
Semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions and an experiment trial was con-
ducted with the purpose of capturing users preferences and their qualitative reasoning for
their preferences.
The interview included a slightly modified version of the experiment. Instead of having the
cognitive fluent and disfluent questions mixed within each other in random ordering, they
were divided so that the participants started with either the 10 cognitive fluent questions
and then the 10 disfluent questions or vice versa. This allowed participants to assess and
feel what it was like to answer either cognitive fluent questions and then cognitive disfluent
questions, making it easier for them to compare in the end. In addition, the demographic
questions were moved from the experiment to the interview as well as several instructions,
including the information letter. In this way, the experiment was very simple and hopefully
the feeling during the experiment would be easier to recall for the participant. Otherwise,
the experiment was similar in terms of multiple choice and random ordering of questions
for both cognitive fluent and disfluent respectively, to avoid ordering effects.
After the experiment trial, five essential questions were the core of the interview. The five
questions were:
1. Which font (italic or regular) would you prefer to use if you had to repeat the exper-
iment and why?
2. Was your preference based on any of the following parameters (Performance, Us-
ability, Familiarity, Excitement, Effort)? Can you rank the parameters from most to
least important for your choice? Why this ranking?
3. Are there any situations or tasks where you would choose differently? Why?
4. Do you think you answered the first 10 or the last 10 questions more correctly and
why?
5. There is a study that shows that you are actually better at detecting trick questions
if the font is difficult to read. Would you choose differently if you knew that and why?
The first question is to understand their preference, and reasons for that preference. The
second questions is an elaboration of why they would prefer one over the other, while
having concrete parameters to talk about. Andre and Wickens argues that these six pa-
rameters are common, and in order to determine if there is a dissociation in preference
and performance the metric of preference and performance should be the same [75]. The
third question gets an perspective of the scope of the preference. The fourth question
seeks to understand if they generally thought they performed better with one font and if
they had any reasoning behind why. The fifth question try to understand their willingness
to change their preference.
3.2.3
Procedure
The interview began with screening questions to assess whether the interviewee was
qualified to participate in the interview. They were then instructed to carry out the modi-
fied experiment. Following the experiment, participants were asked about their font pref-
erences, what they valued about the font in this particular exercise, if they would choose
another font for other scenarios, and if they would choose the disfluent font, when told that
it would probably improve their score. Following the interview, participants were thanked
for their time and debriefed. If they wished, they could additionally be shown the results
to the experiment. The questionnaire can be seen in appendix E.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
24
==PAGE:32==
3.2.4
Data analysis
Because of its potential to discover repeating themes and patterns within qualitative data,
thematic analysis is becoming an increasingly popular method in qualitative research. It is
an iterative process of organising, analysing, and categorising qualitative content in order
to extract valuable insights. Because of its adaptability and flexibility, thematic analysis
is appropriate for a wide range of research enquiries and data sources, allowing for the
examination of complex research questions [76].
The process is often summarized in these six steps:
1. The process begins with getting oneself familiar with the data by transcribing and
carefully reading it through. This step promotes a deep grasp of the content by
revealing repeated ideas, concepts, or emotions of the participants.
2. Next step is to program initial codes or categories, which are related to certain quotes
in the data. These codes encapsulate core concepts, enabling data segmentation
into manageable sections.
3. The third stage is to revisit the codes such that each code is more in line with the
quotes to which it belongs.
4. By grouping related codes, themes emerge as meaningful clusters of information.
Themes provide a high-level context, offering a structural framework to interpret the
data.
5. Just as with the codes, the themes are also revisited. By rearranging, trimming,
eliminating, aggregating, or separating, the themes become more defined and the
data is structured such that a story may be told from it.
6. The last step of the process is to transform the identified themes into a cohesive nar-
rative. This narrative, which is supported by relevant quotes, demonstrates remarks
with the voices of participants.
Visually, all six steps of the process were expressed, as seen in figure 3.5.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.5: Shows the six steps of the thematic analysis as depicted in Miro. Top right
is the rather trimmed collection of raw data categorised in the five questions or groups of
questions. Bottom left is the same data, but structured in the initial codes. Top center is
the structure of the revised codes. Bottom center is initial themes. Top right is the revised
themes. And lastly bottom right is the Narrative with selected quotes.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
26
==PAGE:34==
4
Results
The results chapter is divided into four sections, three of which are devoted to a review of
the results from the cognitive experiment and the last section is devoted to the results from
the qualitative interviews. The three sections on the results from the cognitive experiment
are first a review of the outliers that have been sorted out based on different criteria, then
a review of how the participants and their answers are distributed according to several
aspects, and finally the results from the statistical analyses. The section presenting the
results from the qualitative interviews presents the narrative which was the result of the
thematic analysis.
4.1
Outliers
Before we start looking at how the data is distributed and whether or not locational context
do affect cognitive fluency bias with statistical tests, we must first filter out those who either
did not manage to complete the experiment properly, were outside the target group, or
did not understand the instructions and experiment setup for a variety of reasons.
There is no data on those who refused to participate in the experiment, but of those who
participated (104), 12 did not complete the experiment which is a dropout rate of 12%.
The first data collection (set 1) had 10 incomplete responses out of 66 the participants
and for the second data collection (set 2) two out of 39 participants did not complete
the experiment. That is approximate dropout rates of 15% and 5% for set 1 and set 2
respectively.
Of the 92 who completed the experiment, there were also some whose answers could not
be used. Certain requirements for the participants and their responses was set before the
data collection. Participants had to be between 18 and 35 years of age, and they also
had to be able to read and understand English at a self reported level of ’neither good
or bad’ or better. Two participants were over 35 years old, while none of the participants
were under 18 years old. None of the participants had declared themselves to be poor
or very poor at reading and understanding English. Therefore, only two participants were
not suitable for the study.
In addition to the requirements for the participants, there were also some requirements
for the responses, which will be listed here:
1. A participant must use ”Can’t say” once.
2. A participant must complete the experiment within 15 minutes.
3. A participant must spend more than 2 minutes to complete the experiment.
The first requirement is whether the participant has used the ’Can’t say’ option during the
experiment. It is based on the assumption that participants will at least detect one trick
question. It’s a bit hard to know if this is a fair assumption in advance, but at least it’s more
conservative than not excluding them. Thus if they did not use the ’Can’t say’ option, their
answer will be excluded. Seven participants did not use the ’Can’t say’ option and their
answers are therefore excluded. When looking at figure 4.6, many participants only used
the ”Can’t say” option twice, suggesting the threshold should not have been higher than
one.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
27
==PAGE:35==
Similarly, it could be argued whether the participants have understood the instructions if
they did not use the ’Don’t know’ response option. There are 15 participants who did not
use the ’Don’t know’ response option, which corresponds to around 16% of the completed
responses. This is a large proportion who should not have understood this response op-
tion, which can also be argued to be more self-explanatory than the ’Can’t say’ response
option. In addition, the questions were chosen for the experiment on the basis that they
should be the easier of the 40 questions used by Speckmann & Unkelbach [73], to min-
imise this risk. Therefore, they are not considered as outliers.
The last two requirements for the responses are that the participant spent a minimum of
2 minutes and a maximum of 15 minutes to complete the experiment. Fortunately, all re-
sponses were completed within this time frame and therefore no responses are removed
for this reason. This criterion should identify two groups of participants: those who rushed
through the experiment without making a genuine effort, and those who didn’t finish it im-
mediately and might have had the opportunity to search for answers online. Because the
experiment was conducted on the participants’ own phones, the researcher had to rely on
the participants’ when they stated that they were done with the experiment, which leaves
room for the possibility that some didn’t finish the experiment on the spot. When looking
at the distribution of completion times in figure 4.3, it appears that no one completed the
experiment unreasonably fast. However, a maximum duration of 15 minutes (or 900 sec-
onds) might be on the higher side, considering that a reasonable majority of participants
completed the experiment in under 9 minutes.
4.2
Distributions
With the outliers removed, we can now look at what the distribution of participants and
responses looks like. We can start by looking at the distribution of participants. The three
most obvious questions here are; how many participants took the experiment outside
versus inside? how many participants took part in the first data collection versus the
second? and what is the gender distribution?
The three questions and their answers are summarised in figure 4.1. Here it is shown
that 39 participants took the experiment inside versus 46 participants outside. Strangely
enough, it’s actually the same distribution between women and men with 39 women
against 46 men. In the two columns in the middle of figure 4.1 it can be seen that 48
participants took part in the first data collection versus 37 in the second data collection.
Here it can be seen that the experiment is not completely balanced on any of the three
parameters, even though this was attempted during data collection.
When we look at the age distribution of the participants, we can see that it is similar to what
you would expect from the students of a university. The vast majority are between 20 and
30 years old. When looking at figure 4.2, it can be seen that the 25th percentile, median
and 75th percentile are 22, 23 and 25 years old respectively. The youngest participants
are 19 years old and the oldest participants are 38 years old. The two participants who
was 38 years old was excluded from the analysis.
The time it takes to complete the experiment also varies for the participants and here it is
interesting to see if there is a large or small variance. In addition, it is also interesting to
see if there is a difference between set 1 and set 2, as the procedure for the experiment
was changed slightly in the hope of reducing confusion and increasing the quality of the
responses. Assessing quality based solely on the duration of the experiment can be
challenging. However, if the procedure effectively reduced confusion, it might be reflected
in shorter response times. It’s worth noting that the procedure introduced an additional
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: Shows the distribution of the participants location, set and gender.
choice for participants: confirming whether they had read and understood the information
letter.
By looking at figure 4.3 one can see that there is some variation in completion time, with
the fastest participant taking around 160 seconds to complete, which is 5 times faster
than the slowest participant with a completion time of around 800 seconds. Both the
fastest and slowest participant did set 1, that also contains around 60% of the total amount
of participants. Otherwise the completion time of set 1 and set 2 looks similar with the
largest difference being the longer tail for set 1 meaning more participants in the slower
end compared to set 2. Furthermore the minimum completion time is approximately 30
seconds shorter for set 1 compared to set 2 alongside with approximately 30 second
shorter 25th percentile. Because the 2 distributions look similar it can be hard to judge
whether the slight changes to the procedure actually made a difference to completion time
or confusion.
Moving on to looking at figure 4.4 displaying the questions and there number of ”Can’t say”
responses, equivalent to how many participants believed a question was a trick question.
The blue bars are the questions that are designed to be trick questions and the green are
the questions, which are designed not to be trick questions. Thankfully the trick questions
(blue) are also reported as being a trick question much more often than the the non-trick
questions (green), indicating that the participants understood the task as well as they were
able to distinguish the intended trick questions from the non-trick questions.
Of the trick questions, question two ”What year did Germany win World War II?” appeared
to be the easiest to detect, while question four ”Who won numerous Emmy awards for his
breakthrough album ”Thriller”?” and five ”What phrase followed ”To be or not to be” in
Macbeth’s famous soliloquy?” appeared to be the most difficult to detect. Of the non-trick
questions, not a single participant suspected question 14 ”What is the name of the Mexi-
can dip made with mashed-up avocados?” of being a trick question, while 15 participants
incorrectly suspected question 17 ”Who is the Roman god of war after whom a famous
candy bar is named?” of being a trick question, which is only one less than question 4,
which was a trick question.
As to why these questions was reported rarely or more often as trick questions may be be-
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.2: Shows the distribution of the participants age in a rain cloud and box plot.
Every dot is a participant, and the curve to the left resembles the concentration of partici-
pants.
Figure 4.3: Shows the raincloud plots for the completion time of first (set 1) and second
(set 2) data collection. The completion time is measured in seconds.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.4: Shows how many ”Can’t say” responses each question have received, which
corresponds to how many participants believed each question to be a trick question. Q1
- Q10 (blue) are trick questions. Q11 - Q20 (green) are not trick questions.
cause of the topic of the question is more common knowledge than others. For instance,
it is plausible that more people know whether Germany won or lost the second world war,
than whether the award Michael Jackson won for his album ”Thriller” is called Emmy or
Grammy.
To gain an overview of the participants’ responses across all conditions, refer to table 4.1
for a detailed breakdown. This table displays the distribution of participants’ responses,
presented as percentages across the four response options. For example, the % column
on the far left, show that 36.6% of the participants answered correctly for the regular ques-
tions, whereas only 20.5 answered correctly ”Can’t say” for the trick questions. Another
interesting note about this column is that there were 2.5% more ”Don’t know” answers for
the regular questions than for the trick questions. This is also partly reflected in the fact
that there were 0.7% more ”Wrong 2” answers for the trick questions compared to the
regular questions.
However, in the second to left most % column, across both regular and trick questions,
there have been consistently fewer ”correct” and ”Wrong 1” answers when the question
was presented in the disfluent font. Instead there have been consistently more ”Can’t
say” and ”Don’t know” answers when the font was disfluent.
In the the % column next to Location, that same trend is present, where the participants
who were outside consistently answered fewer ”Correct” and ”Wrong 1” answers, but
more ”Can’t say” answers. The trend does not hold for ”Don’t know” answers, as it did for
cognitive fluency.
It can be difficult to grasp anything form the right most % column which is also the most
granular distribution of the results, and statistical test will assist in capturing the interesting
information that is not readily visible from this table.
To assess the participants’ performance in the experiment, one can have a look at figure
4.5. This figure illustrates the number of correct answers by each participant, including
both detecting trick questions and correctly answering regular questions. There is a con-
centration of participants towards the middle and fewer participants at both ends. The
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
31
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.1: Shows how the participants responded to the questions in percentage. The
response option ’Correct’ is correct for the regular questinos and ’Wrong’ is always wrong.
’Can’t say’ is the correct response for trick questions. ”Wrong 1” is the trap in other words
the incorrect option, which would have been correct if the question was regular. ”Wrong
2” is always wrong.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
32
==PAGE:40==
median number of correct answers is 11, the minimum is 6 and the maximum is 18. The
lower quartile is 10 and the upper quartile is 13. Baseline is 1/3 or 6.67 as every question
is considered to have 3 options. There seem to be disproportionately few participants with
12 correct answers, and although the exact amount is not visible from the figure, it is only
half as many as the amount of participants with 11 and 13 correct answers.
Figure 4.5: Shows a raincloud plot of how many correct answers the participants had.
Without ”Don’t know”, there were three response options. If one would answer a random
option for each question, one would statistically answer one third of the questions cor-
rectly, corresponding to 6.67.
To answer correctly, the participant also needs to detect the trick questions. But in reality,
the participant could detect all the trick questions by simply answering ”Can’t say” to all
questions. Sure, half of the answers would be wrong, but when we only look at how
many trick questions the participants detected, it’s a good idea to get an idea of how the
participants have used the ”Can’t say” response option. In figure 4.6, one can see exactly
how many times each participant answered ”Can’t say”. The figure shows that many
participants answered ”Can’t say” relatively few times. The median is 5, the lower quartile
is 3 and the upper quartile is 7. Two participants answered ”Can’t say” 12 times, which is
the most of all. The minimum number of ”Can’t say” responses from a participant is 1 as
those who did not answer ”Can’t say” a single time were considered outliers. To refresh
there was 10 trick questions that would have been answered correctly with ”Can’t say”.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.6: Shows a raincloud plot of the amount of reported trick questions per partici-
pant.
4.3
Statistical Analysis
4.3.1
Linear Mixed Effects Regression model
Detecting Trick Questions
The apparent model to test whether location and or cognitive fluency have an effect on
how well participants are able to detect trick questions is:
Detected trick questions ∼location ∗cognitive fluency + (1|participant)
(4.1)
Detected trick questions as the outcome variable, location and cognitive fluency as the
fixed effects, and participant as random effect.
The results of the Linear Mixed-Effects Regression (LMER) model is shown in the table
4.2.
Condition
Coeff
Std. Error
z
p
Σ Coeff
Σ Std.
Inside & Disfluent
2.33
0.20
11.398
0.000
2.33
0.20
Outside & Disfluent
-0.01
0.28
-0.034
0.97
2.32
0.34
Inside & fluent
-0.52
0.24
-2.151
0.031
1.81
0.31
Outside & fluent
0.77
0.33
2.331
0.020
2.56
0.53
Participant variance
0.55
0.25
Table 4.2: Table of the results of the LMER model of detected trick questions. The two
columns to the left are the summed coefficients and standard errors.
Looking at the results displayed in table 4.2, the model estimate that participants detect an
average of 2.33 out of five trick question, when they are sitting inside with only disfluent
questions. If the participant is still sitting inside but instead read fluent questions they
detect 1.81 trick questions out of five. This is a significant difference from inside disfluent
with a p-value of 0.031.
The Coefficients are plotted in figure 4.7.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.7: Shows an interaction plot of the coefficients from the LMER model of detecting
trick questions. Red is disfluent questions, blue is fluent questions.
Another significant finding from the model is that by sitting outside and having the easy
to read font, the model estimates the participant detect 2.56 trick questions. This is the
interaction effect of both changing the location from inside to outside and changing the
cognitive fluency from disfluent to fluent. This is a significant difference from inside dis-
fluent with a p-value of 0.02.
Correct Answers to Regular Questions
Only half of the questions are trick questions, while the other half are regular questions.
And while it is interesting to look at how location and cognitive fluency affect the ability to
detect trick questions, it is equally interesting to see if it has the same effect on the ability
to answer regular questions.
This can be tested with the LMER model, where only the regular questions are included:
correct answer regular questions ∼location ∗cognitive fluency + (1|participant) (4.2)
Correct answers to regular questions is the outcome variable and cognitive fluency, and
location are the independent variables with the participants as the random effect.
The results of the model can be seen in table 4.3.
Condition
Coeff
Std. Error
z
p
Σ Coeff
Σ Std.
Inside & Disfluent
3.84
0.17
22.179
0.000
3.84
0.17
Outside & Disfluent
-0.51
0.23
-2.182
0.029
3.33
0.29
Inside & fluent
0.04
0.21
0.169
0.866
3.87
0.27
Outside & fluent
0.40
0.29
1.402
0.161
3.76
0.46
Participant variance
0.29
0.17
Table 4.3: Table of the results of the LMER model of answering the regular questions
correctly. The two columns to the left are the summed coefficients and standard errors.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
35
==PAGE:43==
From the p-values displayed in table 4.3, it appears that the only condition that the LMER
model found to be significant was outside disfluent compared to inside disfluent, with a
p-value of 0.029. The model estimates that the effect of being outside rather than inside
when the font is disfluent is that the participants outside answer half a question less cor-
rectly out of five, which is displayed by the coefficients. In addition, the model estimates
that the fluent font is favorable when sitting outside. The coefficients from the model are
plotted in an interaction plot in figure 4.8, which shows that in addition to the difference
between inside disfluent and outside disfluent, there is also a relatively large difference
between outside fluent and outside disfluent.
Figure 4.8: Shows an interaction plot of the coefficients from the LMER model of correct
answers to regular questions. Red is disfluent questions, blue is fluent questions.
Answering Correctly to Both Trick and Regular Questions
How about both detect trick questions and answer the regular questions correctly. For
example, if you are just very sceptical about all the questions and therefore answer that
all questions are trick questions, you will detect all the trick questions, but also incorrectly
perceive all the regular questions as trick questions. Instead, we can look at how many
correct answers the participants had; i.e. how many of the trick questions they detected
and how many of the regular questions they answered correctly. This will be referenced
to as the number of correct answers.
Similarly, the LMER model can be used to estimate the effects of location and cognitive
fluency on the number of correct answers. The model is basically the same as for detect-
ing questions and correct answers to regular question as shown in equation 4.1 and 4.2,
but with correct answers as the outcome variable. The model can be seen in equation
4.3.
Correct answer ∼location ∗cognitive fluency + (1|participant)
(4.3)
The results of the Linear Mixed-Effects model on correct answers is shown in the table
4.4.
When looking at the summed coefficients one can see that the model estimates that 5.90
out of 10 questions are answered correctly if you are sitting inside and the font is difficult
to read.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
36
==PAGE:44==
Condition
Coeff
Std. Error
z
p
Σ Coeff
Σ Std.
Inside & disfluent
5.90
0.27
22.218
0.000
5.90
0.27
Outside & disfluent
-0.46
0.36
-1.282
0.200
5.44
0.45
Inside & fluent
-0.46
0.28
-1.674
0.094
5.44
0.39
Outside & fluent
1.11
0.38
2.971
0.003
6.09
0.65
Participant variance
1.27
0.36
Table 4.4: Table of the results of the LMER model of correct answers.
As with detected trick questions, there is also a significant interaction effect. The model
estimates that if you sit outside with questions in the fluent font rather than inside with
questions in the disfluent font, you answer almost 0.2 more questions correctly i.e. 6.08
out of 10 questions. Although this is not a large gain it should be considered in the per-
spective that if you only change location or cognitive fluency, you would answer about
0.46 fewer questions correctly. This is significant with a p-value of 0.003.
The Coefficients are plotted in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.9: Shows an interaction plot of the coefficients from the LMER model of number
of correct answers. Red is disfluent questions, blue is fluent questions.
Assumptions of Linear Mixed Effects Regression model
As with any other statistical model, the Linear Mixed Effect Regression model also makes
some assumptions about the data to be fitted. These include assumptions such as;
1. Linearity
2. No Multicollinearity
3. Homoscedasticity
4. Normality of Residuals
Linearity
As both of the fixed variables are categorical; sitting outside versus inside and cogni-
tive fluent versus disfluent, there will always be an linear relationship with the dependent
variable, whether it is the amount of detected trick questions or the number of correct
answers.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
37
==PAGE:45==
No Multicollinearity
Multicollinearity refers to a correlation between two or more of the independent variables.
In this case, both independent variables are categorical and if there were to be a correla-
tion between the two variables, then they should have a relation to each other. Meaning
one should be able to predict if a person is sitting inside or outside, based on the questions
being fluent or dysfluent and vice versa. The experimental design is such that there will
always be 10 cognitive fluent and 10 cognitive disfluent questions regardless of whether
the participant is sitting inside or outside. Therefore there is no collinearity between the
two independent variables.
Homoscedasticity
Homoscedasticity means that there is an equal spread over the variable’s range. For the
statistical method of the LMER model it is assumed that homoscedasticity is present in
its residuals. Here, White’s test is used to test for homoscedasticity based on the models
residuals and the independent/fixed variables. The test resulted in p-values of 0.54 for
the model of detected trick question (equation 4.1), 0.19 for the model answering the
regular questions correctly (equation 4.2) and 0.28 for the model of both detecting trick
question and correctly answering the regular questions (equation 4.3). As all p-values are
above the 5% significance level, we cannot reject that homoscedasticity is present for the
residuals of any of the models.
Normal Distributed Residuals
Both a Q-Q plot and the D’Agostino-Pearson Test is used to assess whether the resid-
uals appear to be normal distributed. For the model on detecting trick questions the
D’Agostino-Pearson Test resulted in a p-value of 0.06 whereas for correctly answering
the regular questions it resulted in a p-value of 0.025, and lastly for the model of both
detecting trick questions and correctly answering the regular questinos it resulted in a p-
value of 0.72. For detecting trick questions and number of correct answers model there is
not sufficient evidence to say that the residuals does not come from a normal distribution.
However, for correct answers to regular questions the p-value is below 5% and therefore
it do not meet the assumption of the residuals being normal distributed. This is also visible
from the Q-Q plot in the middle of figure 4.10 where both ends of the sample quantiles do
not align witht the theoretical quantiles. However for the two other Q-Q plots, the residual
quantiles lies pretty much on top of the theoretical quantiles, with the exception of the
lower quantiles from the ”detecting trick quenstions” model, which is also reflected in the
p-value of 0.06 in the D’Agostino-Pearson Test. It is not enough deviation from a nor-
mal distribution to reject the possibility of them having a normal distribution. Because the
residuals aren’t normal distributed for the model of correct answers to regular questions,
there might be reason to believe that the results are not as strong in their foundation as
they could otherwise have been.
Figure 4.10: Q-Q plots of the residuals from the Linear Mixed Effects Regression of the
two models descibed in equtions 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
38
==PAGE:46==
4.3.2
Post-Hoc analysis
Through the LMER models we found that several conditions was significantly better or
worse at both detecting trick questions and correctly answering the regular questions.
But all conditions was compared to the baseline which was set to inside disfluent. Thus
there are three comparisons that haven’t been made which may very well be significant.
The three comparisons are inside fluent with outside fluent, inside fluent with outside
disfluent, or outside fluent with outside disfluent. In addition, the LMER models also did
not compare outside with inside of both questions in fluent and disfluent font. Therefore,
this post-hoc analysis will investigate the comparisons that the LMER model did not. In the
post-hoc comparisons we will utilize paired and unpaired t-test, when the data is normal
distributed according to the D’Agostino and Pearson’s test. If it is not normally distributed
the Mann–Whitney U test is used to determine the comparisons significance.
It is important to notice that when performing multiple statistical tests on the same data,
the chance of finding one or more false positive results increase. To account for that, we
use the Bonferroni method to correct the confidence interval so that we reduce the chance
of finding false positive results.
Using the Bonferroni method, explained in formula 3.1 and realised here in formula 4.4,
one can see that the corrected α value representing the confidence interval ends up at
0.0167 instead of 0.05.
Bonferroni corrected α = 0.05
3
= 0.0167
(4.4)
Detecting Trick Questions
Because the distributions of detected trick questions per participants are not normally
distributed when tested with the D’Agostino and Pearson’s test, the non-parametric Mann-
Whitney U test is used to test if the difference between the groups is significant.
The results for the 3 comparisons can be seen in table 4.5.
Coeff
Group 1
Coeff
Group 2
p
1.81
Inside & fluent
2.56
Outside & fluent
0.009
1.81
Inside & fluent
2.32
Outside & disfluent
0.058
2.56
Outside & fluent
2.32
Outside & disfluent
0.212
Table 4.5: Post-hoc results of detecting trick questions. The table shows the resulting
p-value of the Mann-Whitney U test of the two groups, and for reference their respective
coefficients from the LMER model.
By looking at the coefficients plotted in figure 4.7, one can see that there is a relatively large
difference between inside fluent (1.81) and outside fluent (2.56) and the Mann-Whitney U
test results in a p-value of 0.009 which is less than the significance level of 0.0167 and
the difference is therefore significant.
The other two comparisons do not have a p-value that is less than the corrected signifi-
cance level and therefore no significant difference can be concluded from those compar-
isons.
Regular Questions
The D’agostino and Pearson’s test did not find sufficient evidence to reject that correctly
answered regular questions per participant comes from a normal distribution. Therefore a
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
39
==PAGE:47==
paired t-test is used to assess whether the difference between outside fluent and outside
disfluent is significant. For the two other comparisons a unpaired t-test is used.
The results for the 3 comparisons can be seen in table 4.6.
Coeff
Group 1
Coeff
Group 2
p
3.87
Inside & fluent
3.76
Outside & fluent
0.611
3.87
Inside & fluent
3.33
Outside & disfluent
0.025
3.76
Outside & fluent
3.33
Outside & disfluent
0.040
Table 4.6: Post-hoc results of correct answers to regular questions. The table shows the
resulting p-value of the t-tests assessing the significance of the differences between the
two groups. The coefficients from the LMER model is shown for reference.
As shown in table 4.6 non of the t-tests resulted in a p-value below the bonferroni corrected
alpha of 0.0167 and therefore non of the differences of the groups is found to be significant.
However the comparison between inside fluent vs outside disfluent and outside fluent vs
outside disfluent resulted in p-values below the original significance level of 5%.
Total Number of Correct Answers
The distribution of number of correct answers per participant is normal distributed via the
D’Agostino and Pearson’s test. This can enlarge be due to the fact that there is twice
as many trials per participant compared to when we were only looking at trick questions.
Therefore we can use the parametric unpaired t-test to asses whether the differences are
significant or not. For the comparison of outside fluent versus outside disfluent a paired
t-test is utilized as this is within subject thus paired samples.
The results of the t-tests can be seen in table 4.7.
Coeff
Group 1
Coeff
Group 2
p
5.44
Inside & fluent
6.09
Outside & fluent
0.064
5.44
Inside & fluent
5.44
Outside & disfluent
0.998
6.09
Outside & fluent
5.44
Outside & disfluent
0.025
Table 4.7: Post-hoc results of number of correct answers aka. detecting trick questions &
correctly answering regular questions. The table shows the results of the t-tests assessing
the significance of the differences between the groups. The coefficients from the LMER
model is shown for reference.
In table 4.7 one can see that the paired t-test between outside fluent versus outside dis-
fluent resulted in a p value of 0.025 which would have been significant with the original
significance level of 5%, but with the Bonferrino corrected significance level of 1.67% it is
no longer significant. The comparison of inside fluent vs outside disfluent is far from sig-
nificant, which is also indicated by the very minimal difference seen by the coefficients in
figure 4.9. The difference between inside fluent and outside fluent has a p-value of 0.064
which is not less than the corrected significance level, and is therefore not significant,
even though on figure 4.9 it seems to have as big an effect as the difference between
outside fluent and outside disfluent. The reason why the two test do not have the same
p-value is primarily due to the fact that the test between outside and outside is a paired
t-test and the other is an unpaired t-test.
Comparing Outside and Inside with Both Fonts
We would like to compare outside and inside on questions with both fluent and disfluent
fonts to find out if locational context changes the number of detected questions and the
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
40
==PAGE:48==
Comparison
p
Detected trick questions
0.056
Correct answer to regular question
0.055
Table 4.8: Post-hoc analysis between outside and inside of both fluent and disfluent fonts.
number of correct answers to regular questions. Since the distribution of the number of
detected trick questions is not normally distributed, the Mann-Whitney U test is used to
assess if there is a difference in the number of detected trick questions between outside
and inside. The distribution of the number of correct answers to regular questions is
normally distributed and an unpaired t-test is used to find out if there is a difference in the
number of correct answers to regular questions between outside and inside.
The results from table 4.8, show that there is neither a significant difference in the amount
of detected trick questions nor the amount of correct answers to regular questions, al-
though both p-values are only just above the 95% significance level. It should be noted
that the Bonferroni corrected significance level does not need to be taken into account for
these comparisons, as they are independent from the previous statistical tests.
4.3.3
Summary
When it comes to detecting trick questions, we found that there were two conditions that
stood out from the rest. Inside fluent detected the fewest trick questions with a predic-
tion from the LMER model of 1.8 out of 5 and outside fluent detected the most with an
prediction of 2.6 out of 5. Inside disfluent and outside disfluent were about equal with an
prediction of 2.3 out of 5. Both the worst condition (inside fluent) and the best condition
(outside fluent) were significantly different from inside disfluent and each other.
When it comes to answering the regular question correctly, the story is slightly different.
Here we found that outside disfluent answered the least amount correct with a prediction
from the LMER model of 3.3 out of 5 whereas the other three conditions had a prediction of
3.8 or 3.9 out of 5. If you ignore the bonferroni corrected alpha, then outside disfluent was
significantly worse compared to the three other conditions. If you don’t ignore it, outside
disfluent is only significantly worse than inside disfluent.
The analysis of the combined task of both detecting trick questions and answering cor-
rectly to regular questions revealed that outside fluent is predicted by the LMER model
as the best performing condition with 6.1 out 10 correct. Inside disfluent is the second
best conditions with 5.9 correct out of 10. Inside fluent and outside disfluent are the worst
conditions with a prediction of 5.4 out of 10. Only the interaction effect was found to be
significant, even though the post-hoc comparison of outside fluent and outside disfluent
had a p-value of 0.025.
When comparing the participants outside to the participants inside on questions with both
fluent and disfluent fonts, there is no significant difference in the amount of detected trick
questions nor the amount of correct answers to regular questions.
4.4
Thematic Analysis of Interviews
The qualitative interviews have been analysed through the method of thematic analysis,
resulting in a narrative that tells the story of a few themes that apply to the qualitative data.
Without further ado, the narrative will now be presented.
4.4.1
The Narrative
During the thematic analysis it became clear that there were three distinct themes;
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
41
==PAGE:49==
1. The Cognitive Fluent Font is Just Easier
2. Both Usability, Performance and Effort are Key Drivers for Preference
3. High Fluency is Not Always the Preference
All three themes will be presented with quotes and then discussed.
The Cognitive Fluent Font is Just Easier
The first theme, which was almost inevitable, is of course that the participants described
how they felt the difference between the two fonts. This was partially what the interview
was about. When there are only two different fonts, as is very clear in the experiment,
it’s only natural to compare the two. The two different fonts used in the experiment were
Arial, which from now on will be referred to as fluent, and Brush Script MT, which from
now on will be referred to as disfluent.
If you’re unfamiliar with the fonts, this quote may tease for their differences.
”The first (fluent font) is just normal, easy and straightforward.”
Aside from the teaser, you can have a look at the two different fonts in figure 3.1 and 3.2
and form your own impressions.
Starting with the fluent font, the participants described it as easy to read, that it requires
less effort, and is also more pleasant.
”I would prefer the normal (fluent). It was just easier to read.”
”If it’s about reading, the regular (fluent) one just requires less effort.”
”Perhaps effort is what i value the most. As with the first (fluent), you were just
reading it. It was pleasant to read.”
These quotes don’t need much interpretation as they are pretty self-explanatory.
When participants describe the disfluent font, the differences between the fonts become
even more apparent. In addition to being more difficult and less comfortable to read, it also
takes longer time, creates more uncertainty and sometimes results in questions having to
be read multiple times.
”I am convinced that it took longer time with the italic (disfluent) one.”
”It could be hard to decipher at times.”
”There was a word that made me think, does it say Finland... I don’t know.”
”There were times when I was unsure of what it said and had to read it several
times.”
To conclude, the fluent font is described as easy to read, requires less effort and is even
comfortable. In contrast to the disfluent font which is described as slower to read and
hard to decipher, which result in uncertainty and having to read some questions multiple
times.
Both Usability, Performance and Effort are Key Drivers for Preference
We’ve just gone through how the participants described the two different fonts, which has
highlighted their differences, but what drives their preferences to choose one or the other.
Participants were asked to rank six different parameters on which to measure the font. The
six parameters were presented in the following order; Performance, Usability, Familiarity,
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
42
==PAGE:50==
Excitement, Comfort, and Effort. The participant was instructed that it was allowed to
have multiple parameters on the same priority.
These are typical parameters that users base their preferences on and, according to An-
thony and Wickens, are important to specify when you want to investigate whether user
preferences are in line with what is best for them. So a user may value usability over per-
formance, and therefore have a preference that doesn’t make them perform better, which
could be concluded as the user not knowing what is best for them, but since the user is
basing their preference on usability, this conclusion would be wrong [75].
After the participants had ranked the parameters, they were then asked to explain why
they had ranked them the way they had.
By summing the rankings, one can get a slightly naive overview of which parameters
were preferred and less preferred. Counting 1 point for every time a parameter is the first
priority for a participant, 2 points for the second priority and so on.
When summing up the priorities, usability, performance and effort are ranked highest with
7, 9 and 9 points respectively. This is followed by comfort and familiarity with 13 and
16 points. Excitement is prioritised the lowest with 20 points. Although this is indicative
of which parameters is preferred over others, their resulting scores should not be taken
to literal as only continuous variables should be summed and not a ranking or rather
ordinal variable. However, it does group the parameters where usability, performance
and effort are the highest prioritised parameters, followed by comfort and familiarity, and
finally excitement as the least prioritised parameter.
It’s safe to say that some of these parameters overlap, such as effort and comfort, where
it can be argued that a font that requires less effort is also perceived as comfortable. Or
that a font that is more usable/easier to read also requires less effort. However for the
participants usability, performance and effort are the highest prioritised variables as these
have the most obvious benefits to them in this given situation:
”Performance is most important in this quiz format.”
”It’s important that you can actually use it for something. That it’s easy and
intuitive.” (usability and effort)
So why isn’t performance the top prioritized parameter? Two participants did not prioritise
performance and were subsequently asked why, to which this answer captured both of
their reasons:
”You want as many points (correct answers) as possible, but you first want it
to be as easy as possible so you don’t have to spend unnecessary resources
on reading the question.”
Here it can be discussed that the participants might be primed by their previous answer
that they would choose the fluent font because it was easier to read. Therefore, the
participants could be prone to defend that opinion by also prioritising usability and effort.
Nevertheless, it could also be a very valid opinion to prioritise usability and effort over
performance. Perhaps because the participants have a perception that better usability
means better performance.
”With performance, there are some of the others implicitly inside.”
Or because they don’t believe there can be much difference in performance between the
two different fonts.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
43
==PAGE:51==
”I don’t feel like there should be a performance gain or drop, but if the test was
on time i sure would have chosen the first (fluent) one.”
Later, the participants were informed that they would actually detect more trick questions
with the disfluent font, the opinion that ”better usability equals better performance” was
challenged. However, even with the information provided, two participants were still in
doubt whether or not they would repeat the quiz with the disfluent font.
”I wouldn’t choose the (disfluent) font because I would read it quite carefully
anyway.”
”I tell myself that I’m better than everyone else. I can easily just do it with the
regular one.”
Although the last quote is said with some sarcasm, the opinion was still rather true.
The three remaining participants wanted to change their previous opinion and repeat the
experiment with the disfluent font;
”Yes, because you want to get the right answer even though it’s annoying to
read.”
”Yes. It’s probably because you spend more time reading it, so you detect
more trick questions. That makes sense to me.”
It is therefore likely to convince participants to go against their own opinion if they can gain
an advantage from it. Instead of simply explaining that a previous study had shown the
benefit of the disfluent font for detecting trick questions, showing the study and its effect
size might have been more convincing.
In addition to the qualitative comments, it should be noted that all 5 participants preferred
the fluent font immediately after the experiment ended, but that 3 out of 5 changed their
minds after being told that they would detect more trick questions with the disfluent font.
Interestingly, only 2 out of the 3 who thought performance was most important changed
their minds. It can be concluded that usability, performance and effort are the most im-
portant parameters for the participants in the given task and that excitement is the least
important parameter.
All in all, it can perhaps be summarised as a trade-off where the participants partly want
the best performance, without neglecting the importance of usability.
”For example, if it only gives a marginally better score, but it’s a lot more hassle,
I might not choose it (disfluent font).”
High Fluency is Not Always the Preference
So, as shown in the previous theme, usability and effort are prioritised by the participants
and intuitively, they may also believe it offers better performance. But there are also cases
where it’s not their top priority.
In some cases participants would prefer an italic font. Maybe not because it’s disfluent
and harder to read, but perhaps because it has a more artistic feel.
”I also think it looks nicer.”
”Perhaps I would choose it for weddings or celebrations, for example on invi-
tations or table cards. A little more decorative.
”Perhaps it could be for professional purposes on social media. For something
that need a certain look and feel.”
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
44
==PAGE:52==
It can also have a more personal touch:
”In situations where you write to yourself or someone you know. If it’s private.”
So there are situations where participants don’t think it needs to be as easy as possible,
but are willing to sacrifice some usability if they can gain something else.
”I could use it if I needed to create some excitement for a specific brand such
as a Tivoli.”
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
45
==PAGE:53==
5
Discussion
This chapter begins by presenting the findings in perspective of similar studies. It then
delves into the interaction effect observed between cognitive fluency and locational con-
text. Following this, the chapter addresses the limitations of this thesis’s work, concluding
with recommendations for future research.
5.1
Findings
Let’s start by comparing the results from this study with the results from Song & Schwartz,
which are the results from the participants inside.
Song & Schwartz argue that when the font is fluent, the question seems more familiar, and
therefore people believe their first association more. On the other hand, when the font is
disfluent, the question seems less familiar, making people less likely to believe their first
association [24]. When the question is regular, it benefits the participant to trust their first
association, but when the question is a trick question, it doesn’t benefit the participant
to trust their first association. This reasoning may partially apply to the findings of this
experiment. The inside participants did detect significantly more trick questions when the
font was disfluent compared to fluent, just like the experiments from Song & Schwartz.
However the inside participants did not answer more incorrectly to the regular questions
when the font was dysfluent compared to fluent, which is the findings and reasoning from
Song & Schwartz. However this might be explained by our experiments use of multiple
choice. So even though the participants may be less inclined to believe in their first asso-
ciation when the font is disfluent, they will be confirmed in that association when it is one
of the multiple choices.
Although we found that the inside participants detected more trick questions when the
font was disfluent like Song & Schwartz, it was not in the same order of magnitude. They
found that trick questions with a disfluent font were detected 40% of the time whereas trick
questions with a fluent font was only detected 17.5% of the time. From the analysis of our
experiment, the LMER model estimates that inside participants detect 2.35/5 = 47% of the
trick questions when the font was disfluent and 1.81/5 = 36% of the trick questions when
the font was fluent. The reason that the magnitude of our experiment might be different
could be due to repeated trials, possibly easier trick questions, and multiple choice.
When comparing the results with Song & Schwartz, we only look at the effect of cognitive
fluency for the participants inside. What is new for this study is that we look at the effects
of locational context, i.e. the difference between being inside and outside. And here it is
both interesting to see if locational context in itself changes the amount of detected trick
questions and how it changes the effects of cognitive fluency. Let’s start by looking at
whether locational context changes the amount of detected trick questions. The effects
of locational context depend somewhat on how you choose to isolate locational context.
For example, you could argue that the purest comparison is when including responses
from questions with both fluent and disfluent fonts. You could also argue that questions
are most often displayed with fluent fonts, which then makes the most natural comparison
include only questions with the fluent font. We will take a look at both comparisons.
When including both questions with fluent and disfluent fonts, the statistical tests from
the post-hoc analysis concluded that there were no significant difference in the amount
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
46
==PAGE:54==
of detected trick questions or the amount of correct answers to regular questions, when
comparing outside and inside.
Using the summed coefficients from the LMER model to compare outside with inside
when the font is fluent, the participants outside detected 0.75 (15%) more trick questions
compared to inside, which was found significant during the post hoc analysis with a p-
value of 0.009. No difference was found in the number of correct answers to the regular
questions.
If, on the other hand, we examine how locational context influences cognitive fluency and
how these two variables interplay, our analysis, including the LMER models for detecting
trick questions and number of correct answers, revealed an interaction effect. The activity
system from activity theory is employed to try to acquire an overview while also making
an overall discussion of the outcomes from the experiment for both locational context and
cognitive fluency and the qualitative interviews.
5.1.1
Activity Theory
Activity theory and the activity system was introduced in the related work section, and
we will now dig into how those components are assigned in the activity of answering a
question correctly whether that is detecting trick questions or correctly answering regular
questions.
As mentioned before, the experiment design leaves us with four conditions, therefore
some of the components differ depending on the condition. However the four compo-
nents (subject, object, rules, and division of labour) remain the same no matter the condi-
tion. The other two components (tools and community) have some parts that remain the
same no matter the condition and other parts that differ, which we will go over. Therefore
the components that do not change will be discussed first and the the components that
do change depending on the condition will be discussed after, even though it might be
contrary to how the order of the components might else be explained.
Subject
The subject is the one performing the activity, which in this case is the participant. To
be more specific, it is most likely a student at the Technical University of Denmark aged
between 18 and 35 years old.
Object
Object is the goal, which is to answer each of the questions correctly. This means detect-
ing the trick questions and correctly answering the regular questions.
Rules
The basic rules are that the participant should answer the experiment to the best of their
abilities, whilst not communicating or cooperating with anyone. They are not allowed to
google either. If they assume a question to be a trick question they should answer ”Can’t
say” and if they simply do not know the answer of the question they should respond with
the option ”Don’t know”. They can ask to have the rules repeated or clarified by the
researcher, like ”When should the don’t know option be used?”.
Division of labour
The participant must answer the question on their own, but can take the opportunity to
have some of the rules outlined or clarified by the researcher if they feel a need thereof.
Tools
As mentioned, tools are one of the components that differ depending on the condition.
But lets first cover the parts that stays the same throughout the conditions. No matter the
condition the tool is a Qualtrics survey, opened in browser application on the participants
personal smartphone.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
47
==PAGE:55==
The thing that do depend is the way that each question is presented. They can either be
presented with a difficult to read font (disfluent), see figure 3.2 for reference, or a easy to
read font (fluent) which can be seen in figure 3.1.
Fluent is the easy-to-read font, which gives participants better conditions to quickly and
relatively effortlessly read the questions. It is therefore perceived as the easier or less
difficult condition of the two.
Disfluent, on the other hand, is difficult to read, which results in certain words being read
very slowly because it is simply difficult to decipher which letters make up the word. It
therefore slows down reading speed and also forces some questions to be read two or
more times. It is described as difficult and cumbersome compared to the other font (fluent).
Community
Within the community is the researcher who is assisting the process and also instantiating
the activity. Otherwise the community exist of the nearby people and the environment.
Community-Producing Activity
Activity theory emphasize that activity happens in a socio-cultural context, and thus one
cannot avoid considering the surrounding people and environment that makes up the
community of which the activity takes place. But the surrounding environment itself can
be thought of as its own ecosystem which in itself is an activity of producing that par-
ticular environment. This is called the community-producing activity in activity theory.
The community-producing activity system consist of the same components as the central
activity system with its own subjects, tools, outcome, rules, community and division of
labour.
Most notably within the community-producing activity is the rules which decide how the
subjects and the community act and uses the environment.
Inside The indoor locations used in this study are study locations where the intended
use is for participants to immerse themselves into their studies, which most commonly re-
volves around reading, discussing, thinking, googling, drawing etc. The indoor spaces are
more restricted, where participants are expected to be somewhat quite, focused, minding
their own business, and overall less disturbing.
Outside When the participant is seated outside, they are less restricted in terms of rules.
For the specific outdoor locations used in the experiment, their intended use is to accom-
modate for the students to evade their otherwise usual study environments. That include
eating lunch, playing games such as basketball, and hanging out. It is allowed to make
noise, interrupt, play games etc.
To conclude the rules within the community-producing activity influence the outcome of
the community that ”host” the central activity. Therefore the community of the central
activity can be descibed as more quite and less disturbing for inside and more loud and
unpredictable for outside. With that said, previous studies have found that outside spaces
or urban parks can foster stronger positive emotions and relaxation [42][41].
Outcome
The outcome in this particular activity is generalized to be the predicted probabilities for
the condition to detect a trick question and answer a question correctly regardless of it
being a trick question or not. The probabilities are derived from the coefficients of the
Linear Mixed Effects Regression model. For instance the LMER model for detecting trick
questions predict that the inside fluent condition detect 1.81 out of 5 trick question, which
correspond to 36%.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
48
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.1: Shows the four activity systems of the four conditions. Blue arrows mark
”default” relationship. Such as the fluent questions within the tools relationship with the
subject or the outside communities relationship with the subject. Green arrows mark the
alternative relationships between the subject and outside or disfluent. The outcome is
the LMER models prediction in percent of detecting trick question (TRK) and correctly
answering regular questions (REG).
The four conditions and their activity systems
The four different conditions are inside fluent, inside disfluent, outside fluent, and outside
disfluent. The activity systems for all four conditions can be seen in figure 5.1.
To mark the different relationships between the components of the activity system, the
color blue will be used for the baseline and green for the alternative. It is chosen that the
fluent font and inside is baseline and marked with blue, which means that disfluent and
outside is marked with green.
Through the qualitative interviews, we learn that participants spend more mental resources
reading the disfluent font, which also results in repetitive reading of some question and
slower reading speed. Intuitively, this is against the goal of answering the question cor-
rectly, as it naturally works against the speed of answering the question and adds extra
complexity to the task. By looking at the outcome in figure 5.1, comparing the top row to
the bottom row is equal to comparing fluent to disfluent. One can see that participants
detect more trick questions in the disfluent compared to fluent font, when the participants
are located inside. This can be reasoned by the disfluent font provoking a more analytical
processing style as Song & Schwartz argues [24]. And while this reasoning may apply to
inside, it does not apply to outside, where the fluent font is predicted to detect the most
trick questions.
But detecting trick questions is only half of the story. Correctly answering the regular
questions, is the other half of the task. Here there is no significant difference between the
fonts, when located inside. When located outside, participants is predicted to have fewer
correctly answered regular questions when the font is disfluent. Actually the outside disflu-
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
49
==PAGE:57==
ent condition is estimated to have significantly fewer correctly answered regular questions
compared to any of the three other conditions, if we ignore the bonferroni corrected alpha
in the post-hoc analysis.
So why is there an interaction between locational context and cognitive fluency
We should start by saying that we don’t have enough data to support any claims about why
there is an interaction between locational context and cognitive fluency. These sugges-
tions is solely based on the qualitative interviews, experimental results, and reasonable
assumptions about the locational context which is holistically analyzed through activity
theory.
Schwartz’ argues that participants use a more analytical processing style when the ma-
terial is disfluent, which means that adding extra load from the disfluent font benefits rea-
soning tasks. This is the case from previous studies and our study, when participants are
located inside, however we found that improved detection of trick questions can also be
achieved by being located outside with the fluent font. Through activity theory, we believe
that the outside community is more unpredictable and disturbing, which in turn also could
add extra load, even though previous studies have shown that being in natural environ-
ments can foster more positive emotions and relaxation [42][41]. This suggests that the
performance gain from extra load can come from multiple sources including context, call-
ing for a more holistic approach to examine the added load. From educational research
comes cognitive load theory, which looks at multiple sources of cognitive load, and sug-
gest that minimal load is optimal for learning. Cognitive load theory divides cognitive
load into three categories; intrinsic, extraneous and germane load. Intrinsic is associated
with the load of content, extraneous load is associated with the way the content is pre-
sented, and germane load is associated with the load required to store the information. By
combining Schwartz’ theory and cognitive load theory, the benefit from extra load can be
generalize into the amount of combined intrinsic and extraneous load. If the combined in-
trinsic and extraneous load is too low, one will not invoke the analytical processing style.
On the other hand, if the combined intrinsic and extraneous load becomes too high it
may exceed a beneficial limit for ”simpler” tasks such as answering regular questions. It
is therefore important to match the intrinsic and extrinsic load to the reasoning tasks in
question. For example, if it’s about answering relatively easy questions in multiple choice,
the intrinsic and extrinsic load doesn’t need to be very high. However, if you need to detect
trick questions, a higher combination of the intrinsic and extrinsic load is beneficial. If the
intrinsic and extrinsic load becomes to high however, it can cause the participant to over-
think the simpler reasoning tasks of answering regular questions, as demonstrated by the
lower amount of correctly answered regular questions for the outside disfluent condition.
This is similar to the Yerkes-Dodson law, stating that performance increase with greater
arousal, but only up to a point where performance then decrease with greater arousal,
which makes a bell-shaped relationship if depicted graphically.
5.1.2
Implications for Design
First of all, the results confirm that designers should always test in the appropriate context,
as it is easy to think that some guiding principles, such as that cognitive fluent material is
most effective for the user, are universal, which turned out not to be the case when the
task was to detect trick questions.
If we assume that detecting trick questions is the same task as finding errors in general,
then we can conclude from the results of the experiment that if the user is sitting inside
they would be more effective in detecting errors with a less fluent presentation. But even if
disfluent material is the most effective for the task at hand, it doesn’t mean that it provides
a better user experience. Through the qualitative interviews we learn that the improved
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
50
==PAGE:58==
effectiveness of the disfluent material comes at the expense of efficiency and satisfaction
as it takes longer time, requires more mental resources, feels uncomfortable and cre-
ates more uncertainty for the user, although this uncertainty can be a beneficial factor
for improved effectiveness. This is very important because even if the user wants to be
effective, it does not overshadow their desire to achieve their goals efficiently, which was
expressed in their high prioritization of usability of effort in the qualitative interviews. How-
ever some user were willing to sacrifice some satisfaction and efficiency for the improved
effectiveness of the disfluent material, when the benefits were clearly stated to them.
Through activity theory, we propose that cognitive load theory can be used as means to
analyze the total cognitive load. It can be used as a new perspective on design, where
cognitive load must be adjusted to suit the task, where some tasks has a lower optimal
range and other a higher optimal range of cognitive load.
A last note, is that even though participants outside had fewer correct answers to regular
questions, this does not extrapolate to regular questionnaires as they do not have trick
questions within them.
5.2
Limitations
There are several factors that could have improved the internal and external validation
of the study. Several of the methods could have been utilized better which could have
improved the findings of the study. The use and improvements of the methods will now
be discussed.
5.2.1
Experimental Design
It would have been interesting to see if time could have been an explanatory variable.
This was also investigated during the data analysis and the results were not significant.
This part of the data analysis was not included in the report because only the total time
spent on the entire questionnaire was recorded, which seems a bit shallow. However, if
response time for each question had been recorded, this analysis would be more appro-
priate. Furthermore, certain responses could have been discarded, if the response time
was too high or low.
Some trick questions were harder to detect than others, and similarly, some regular ques-
tions were also falsely believed to be trick questions more often than others, which is
reflected in figure 4.6. Therefore, it is natural to think that the number of detected trick
questions depends on whether the participants know the answer to the question in its
regular form where it is not a trick question i.e. whether Germany won or lost the second
world war. Speckmann and Unkelbach investigated this. Whether the reason participants
did not detect trick questions was due to lack of knowledge, by having them answer an
open-ended version of the same question. This showed a very small but significant re-
duction of 4% fewer detected trick questions [73]. This study uses a subset of 20 out of
their 40 questions, so there’s reason to believe that the difficulty of the questions doesn’t
make much of a difference when you also factor in that participants had five trials for each
condition and that the fluency of the questions was swapped half way through the data
collection. With that said, the variance of the questions could have been included in the
LMER model, which would have made predictions more accurate.
Half of the questions were presented in a disfluent font and the other half in a fluent font.
As just mentioned the fluency of each question was swapped approximately half way
through the data collection, so that the questions that were presented in a fluent font in
the first half of the data collection were presented in a disfluent font in the second half. This
should ensure a balanced design between the first half and the second half of the data
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
51
==PAGE:59==
collection. However, this was not successful as there were 48 eligible responses from the
first half of the data collection and 37 from the second half of the data collection, which is
23% fewer than the 48 responses from the first data collection. If all the trick questions
that were first presented in the fluent font were generally more difficult to detect, this would
influence the results to favor the disfluent font, because there then would have been fewer
trials with the generally more difficult trick questions in the disfluent condition. Because
there is an unbalanced design between the two, this may hinder the internal validation of
the experiment.
The experiment was disguised as trying to assess if some questions was eligible for a
cognitive test, but along the way, participants realized that it was about detecting trick
questions anyway. Since this was inevitable, it might not have been necessary to create
a disguise for the experiment. Besides, Speckmann and Unkelbach found that it makes
little difference, when it was further emphasized in the instructions and the ”Can’t say”
response option, that there is trick questions present in the questionnaire [73].
5.2.2
Qualitative Interviews
Part of the interview was to measure the participants’ preference of font type and a rank-
ing of six parameters for the font (performance, usability, familiarity, effort, excitement,
comfort). This is quantitative data unless you ask why the participant has that preference
or why they ranked the parameters as they did. And while the qualitative questions were
also asked, the quantitative preference and ranking was certainly used in the conclusions
of the narrative. However, since only five participants were used for the interview, there is
a lot of uncertainty in the validation of these preferences. There are certainly more quali-
fied estimates of how many participants are needed to measure preference, but Nielsen
Norman Group suggests around 40 participants for quantitative user research [77]. It
would have been easier to include these two questions in the actual experiment with the
85 participants, to get enough data.
To analyze the collected data from the qualitative interviews, thematic analysis was used.
Although thematic analysis is a versatile method, it may be a somewhat comprehensive
method that is best suited for larger amounts of data from multiple sources. After all, the
resulting themes from the analysis contained statements from several different questions
and codes, suggesting that the thematic analysis is justified.
There may have been a bias in the ranking of the six parameters due to the setup of the
interview guide. Participants were first asked why they had a preference for a font, then
asked to rank the parameters for what values they wanted from a font. Since the most
obvious difference between the two fonts was that one was easier to read, this became an
opinion that participants could be prone to ”defend” in the subsequent question of ranking
the parameters. Participants could therefore be biased to rank usability and effort higher
than if they hadn’t just stated that these two traits were basis for their preference. It can
be difficult to create a neutral interview guide, but swapping these two questions could
have been beneficial.
5.2.3
Activity Theory
Activity theory was used to provide an overview of the results as an effect of both cognitive
fluency and the locational context of being inside or outside. Although Activity Theory
offered an interesting way of looking at actions in context from a perspective that has also
been used in previous HCI studies, there may be other theories or methods that would be
as good or better. Although a narrative review of theories and practices introduced several
different methods for incorporating context into design, a systematic review would likely
and more reliable have found the theories and practices that could have been as good or
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
52
==PAGE:60==
better at describing and understanding how context plays a role in the changed effect of
cognitive fluency.
A main attribute of activity theory is it’s analytical power to understand contradictions
(where the problem emerges), which was only partially used by marking the relation be-
tween the tool and subject with blue for fluent or green for disfluent and likewise the relation
between the subject and community with blue for inside and green for outside [78]. It is not
quite the same as the regular use of contradictions, which looks at a specific cause that
created a conflict in a particular situation. Contradictions was not properly used, because
no data was collected on why participants answered incorrectly, only that they answered
incorrectly. Effie Law used two participants per observation, which made it more natural
for the participants to talk about the task, from which data could have been collected to
understand individual contradictions [79]. Using two participants per qualitative interview
could have provided data to understand contradictions. However there is two obvious con-
tradictions that could appear when participants did not detect a trick question. The first
being them not knowing, and the other being them not reading the question adequately.
One can only speculate as to which of the contradictions was the cause.
Activity theory puts great emphasis on context, which is also why the method was chosen,
but there is very little data recorded about the context, which reduces the analytical power
of the method. Although the contextual differences and effects of being inside and outside
can be found in other studies, they may not be the same for this particular study. Quali-
tative questions about the environment could have been included in the experiment itself,
as well as in the qualitative interviews. This would have improved the analytical power of
the analysis through Activity Theory. Instead reasonable assumptions and conclusions
from other studies was used during the analysis.
The proposal to use cognitive load theory in order to align cognitive load with the optimal
range for the task comes from the analysis of the activity system. It is worth noting that
this analysis is built on several assumptions about the community and is derived from
insights gathered through just five qualitative interviews. Therefore, we suggest that this
theory needs further investigation before it can be confirmed. The observed effects could
be due to other causes. For instance, other studies have found that being outside do
improve some cognitive abilities which may be due to the restorative benefits of being in
natural environments which is highlighted by the attention restoration theory [80][41][42].
But this fails to explain why outside disfluent isn’t the best condition, since they both get
the restorative benefits of being outside while provoking the analytical processing style by
the disfluent font. It may be because the effect of cognitive fluency bias is inferred from
the context, as Unkelbach suggests [43].
Saadi highlights that although several studies have identified positive effects associated
with visiting or being in parks, few have examined the potential underlying mechanisms.
She suggests that further research should focus on exploring these mechanisms in greater
depth [41].
5.3
Future Work
We suggest that future work could revolve around how cognitive load theory can be used
to design for different tasks with consideration of the environment and context. Further-
more, we suggest that this research could use pupil dialation as a measurement of cog-
nitive load which have been successful previously [81].
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
53
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusion
In this study, we delved into the relationship between locational context and cognitive flu-
ency. We sought to understand how they impact our ability to detect trick questions as
well as respond to regular questions. Through an cognitive experiment with 85 partic-
ipants, followed by statistical analyses with linear mixed effects regression models and
a post-hoc analysis of t-tests and Mann-Whitney U-tests, we sought to understand the
relationship between locational context and cognitive fluency.
To complement the quantitative analysis, we conducted five qualitative interviews to gain
valuable insights into users’ perspectives on cognitive fluency. Using the methodology of
thematic analysis, we explored individual preferences in cognitive fluency. This qualitative
part of the study provided greater insight into possible reasons for the effects found from
the qualitative methods, as well as important perspectives for design choices.
The combination of these different analytical approaches, complemented by well-founded
assumptions about the locational context, accumulated into an analysis guided by activ-
ity theory. This holistic approach made it possible to compare the results from the other
methods in a single model. The holistic overview allowed us to put our results into per-
spective of other theories, as well as derive valuable insights that can play a role in design
considerations.
We asked ourselves three specific research questions, which were:
1. Does the locational context of sitting outside in urban parks versus inside in dedi-
cated study areas change our ability to detect trick questions?
2. Does locational context change the effects of cognitive fluency on detecting trick
questions?
3. How can it change the way we design?
The answer to the first question, it depends on whether you include both cognitive fluent
and disfluent questions or if you only include cognitive fluent questions. After all, most
applications use a cognitive fluent font instead of a disfluent one. At the same time, you
could also argue that the purest comparison includes both cognitive fluent and disfluent
question. We will let the reader decide which of the two they think is more appropriate
and provide answers to both. When only including cognitive fluent questions, we found
through the statistical analysis that locational context has a significant effect on the amount
of trick questions detected, with 15% more trick questions detected outside. If you include
both cognitive fluent and disfluent questions, we found no significant difference between
being outside and inside.
For the second question, we found through the statistical analysis of the cognitive experi-
ment that there was an interaction effect between locational context and cognitive fluency.
More specifically, the inside participants detected the most trick questions with disfluent
font, whereas the outside participants detected the most trick questions with fluent font,
confirming that locational context does change the effects of cognitive fluency on detecting
trick questions.
For the third and final research question, we confirmed the importance of testing designs in
the intended context. In addition, we shed light on different aspects of efficiency, usability
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
54
==PAGE:62==
and satisfaction associated with cognitive fluency, where user preference could be seen
as a trade off between effectiveness (performance) and efficiency (usability and effort).
Finally, we proposed that cognitive load theory can be used to analyze the total load for
a given task in a given context to try to match the optimal load that provides the best
effectiveness. We recognize this suggestion as uncertain, as we believe more studies
are needed to confirm this theory.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
55
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. macmillan, 2011.
[2]
Johan E Korteling and Alexander Toet. “Cognitive biases”. In: Encyclopedia of be-
havioral neuroscience (2020).
[3]
Halo Effect. In: Cambridge University Press Dictionary. URL: ?iiTb,ff/B+iBQM`vX
+K#`B/;2XQ`;f/B+iBQM`vf2M;HBb?f?HQ@2772+i (visited on 07/08/2020).
[4]
Kate Moran. The Aesthetic-Usability Effect. ?iiTb,ffrrrXMM;`QmTX+QKf`iB+H2bf
2bi?2iB+@mb#BHBiv@2772+if. Accessed: in 2023. 2017.
[5]
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases: Biases in judgments reveal some heuristics of thinking under uncertainty.”
In: science 185.4157 (1974), pp. 1124–1131.
[6]
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. “The framing of decisions and the psychology
of choice”. In: science 211.4481 (1981), pp. 453–458.
[7]
Daniel Kahneman, Jack L Knetsch, and Richard H Thaler. “Experimental tests of the
endowment effect and the Coase theorem”. In: Journal of political Economy 98.6
(1990), pp. 1325–1348.
[8]
Robert B Zajonc. “Mere exposure: A gateway to the subliminal”. In: Current direc-
tions in psychological science 10.6 (2001), pp. 224–228.
[9]
David M Marsh and Teresa J Hanlon. “Seeing what we want to see: Confirmation
bias in animal behavior research”. In: Ethology 113.11 (2007), pp. 1089–1098.
[10]
Arunesh Mathur et al. “Dark patterns at scale: Findings from a crawl of 11K shopping
websites”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3.CSCW
(2019), pp. 1–32.
[11]
David Robson. Employing the “decoy effect” could bend others to your will, improve
your finances, and more. ?iiTb,ffrrrX##+X+QKfrQ`FHB72f`iB+H2fkyRNy3yR@i?2@i`B+F@
i?i@KF2b@vQm@Qp2`bT2M/. Accessed: in 2023. 2019.
[12]
Jamie Luguri and Lior Jacob Strahilevitz. “Shining a light on dark patterns”. In: Jour-
nal of Legal Analysis 13.1 (2021), pp. 43–109.
[13]
Daniel M Oppenheimer. “The secret life of fluency”. In: Trends in cognitive sciences
12.6 (2008), pp. 237–241.
[14]
Larry L Jacoby et al. “Becoming famous overnight: Limits on the ability to avoid
unconscious influences of the past.” In: Journal of personality and social psychology
56.3 (1989), p. 326.
[15]
Simon M Laham, Peter Koval, and Adam L Alter. “The name-pronunciation effect:
Why people like Mr. Smith more than Mr. Colquhoun”. In: Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology 48.3 (2012), pp. 752–756.
[16]
William A Johnston, Kevin J Hawley, and John M Elliott. “Contribution of perceptual
fluency to recognition judgments.” In: Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
ing, Memory, and Cognition 17.2 (1991), p. 210.
[17]
Rolf Reber and Norbert Schwarz. “Effects of perceptual fluency on judgments of
truth”. In: Consciousness and cognition 8.3 (1999), pp. 338–342.
[18]
Duane T Wegener. The Role of Meta-Cognition in Social Judgment. 2007.
[19]
Heather M Claypool et al. “The effects of personal relevance and repetition on per-
suasive processing”. In: Social Cognition 22.3 (2004), pp. 310–335.
[20]
Teresa Garcia-Marques and Diane M Mackie. “The feeling of familiarity as a regu-
lator of persuasive processing”. In: Social cognition 19.1 (2001), pp. 9–34.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
56
==PAGE:64==
[21]
Nathan Novemsky et al. “Preference fluency in choice”. In: Journal of marketing
research 44.3 (2007), pp. 347–356.
[22]
Jon Yablonski. Laws of UX: Using psychology to design better products & services.
O’Reilly Media, 2020.
[23]
Bruce WA Whittlesea, Larry L Jacoby, and Krista Girard. “Illusions of immediate
memory: Evidence of an attributional basis for feelings of familiarity and perceptual
quality”. In: Journal of Memory and Language 29.6 (1990), pp. 716–732.
[24]
Hyunjin Song and Norbert Schwarz. “Fluency and the detection of misleading ques-
tions: Low processing fluency attenuates the Moses illusion”. In: Social cognition
26.6 (2008), pp. 791–799.
[25]
ISO. Ergonomics of human-system interaction — Part 11: Usability: Definitions and
concepts. 2018.
[26]
Heli Wigelius and Heli Väätäjä. “Dimensions of context affecting user experience
in mobile work”. In: Human-Computer Interaction–INTERACT 2009: 12th IFIP TC
13 International Conference, Uppsala, Sweden, August 24-28, 2009, Proceedings,
Part II 12. Springer. 2009, pp. 604–617.
[27]
Eleni Christopoulou. “Context as a necessity in mobile applications”. In: Mobile com-
puting: concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications. IGI Global, 2009, pp. 65–
83.
[28]
Judy York and Parag C Pendharkar. “Human–computer interaction issues for mobile
computing in a variable work context”. In: International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 60.5-6 (2004), pp. 771–797.
[29]
Wuping Zheng and Yufei Yuan. “Identifying the differences between stationary office
support and mobile work support: a conceptual framework”. In: International Journal
of Mobile Communications 5.1 (2007), pp. 107–122.
[30]
Marc Hassenzahl and Noam Tractinsky. “User experience-a research agenda”. In:
Behaviour & information technology 25.2 (2006), pp. 91–97.
[31]
Jodi Forlizzi and Shannon Ford. “The building blocks of experience: an early frame-
work for interaction designers”. In: Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing
interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques. 2000, pp. 419–
423.
[32]
Masao Kakihara, Carsten Sorensen, and Mikael Wiberg. “Fluid interaction in mo-
bile work practices”. In: The Interaction Society: Practice, Theories and Supportive
Technologies. IGI Global, 2005, pp. 171–193.
[33]
Chris Hocking et al. “Evaluation of cognitive performance in the heat by functional
brain imaging and psychometric testing”. In: Comparative Biochemistry and Physi-
ology Part A: Molecular & Integrative Physiology 128.4 (2001), pp. 719–734.
[34]
Claudia Marrao et al. “Physical and cognitive performance during long-term cold
weather operations”. In: Aviation, space, and environmental medicine 76.8 (2005),
pp. 744–752.
[35]
S Bandelow et al. “The effects of exercise, heat, cooling and rehydration strategies
on cognitive function in football players”. In: Scandinavian journal of medicine &
science in sports 20 (2010), pp. 148–160.
[36]
Jerry D Ramsey et al. “Effects of workplace thermal conditions on safe work behav-
ior”. In: Journal of safety Research 14.3 (1983), pp. 105–114.
[37]
LE Banderet et al. “Effects of various environmental stressors on cognitive perfor-
mance”. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Military Testing Associ-
ation. 1986, pp. 592–597.
[38]
Lawrence A Palinkas. “Mental and cognitive performance in the cold”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Circumpolar Health 60.3 (2001), pp. 430–439.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
57
==PAGE:65==
[39]
Warren H Teichner. “Reaction time in the cold.” In: Journal of Applied Psychology
42.1 (1958), p. 54.
[40]
Lisa Guo, Jennifer S Trueblood, and Adele Diederich. “Thinking fast increases fram-
ing effects in risky decision making”. In: Psychological science 28.4 (2017), pp. 530–
543.
[41]
Diana Saadi et al. “There’s no place like home? The psychological, physiological,
and cognitive effects of short visits to outdoor urban environments compared to
staying in the indoor home environment, a field experiment on women from two
ethnic groups”. In: Environmental research 187 (2020), p. 109687.
[42]
Andrew W Bailey et al. “Cognitive benefits of walking in natural versus built envi-
ronments”. In: World Leisure Journal 60.4 (2018), pp. 293–305.
[43]
Christian Unkelbach. “The learned interpretation of cognitive fluency”. In: Psycho-
logical Science 17.4 (2006), pp. 339–345.
[44]
Satu Jumisko-Pyykkö and Teija Vainio. “Framing the context of use for mobile HCI”.
In: International journal of mobile human computer interaction (IJMHCI) 2.4 (2010),
pp. 1–28.
[45]
Burrhus Frederic Skinner. The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. BF
Skinner Foundation, 2019.
[46]
P Ivan Pavlov. “Conditioned reflexes: an investigation of the physiological activity of
the cerebral cortex”. In: Annals of neurosciences 17.3 (2010), p. 136.
[47]
Pramod Ratnakar Khadilkar and Philip Cash. “Understanding behavioural design:
barriers and enablers”. In: Journal of Engineering Design 31.10 (2020), pp. 508–
529.
[48]
S. Michie, L. Atkins, and R. West. The Behaviour Change Wheel: A Guide to De-
signing Interventions. Silverback Publishing, 2014.
[49]
Camilla KE Bay Brix Nielsen, Jaap Daalhuizen, and Philip J Cash. “Defining the
behavioural design space”. In: International Journal of Design 15.1 (2021).
[50]
Amanda Quek and Hanifa Shah. “A Comparative Survey of Activity-Based Methods
for Information Systems Development.” In: ICEIS (5). 2004, pp. 221–232.
[51]
Olav W. Bertelsen and Susanne Bødker. “Activity Theory”. In: HCI models, theories,
and frameworks: Toward a multidisciplinary science. Ed. by John M Carroll. Elsevier,
2003. Chap. 11, pp. 291–324.
[52]
Liam J Bannon and Susanne Bødker. “Beyond the interface: Encountering artifacts
in use”. In: DAIMI Report Series 288 (1989).
[53]
Nor Hazlina Hashim and Michael L Jones. “Activity theory: A framework for qualita-
tive analysis”. In: (2007).
[54]
Yrjo Engestrom. “Activity theory as a framework for analyzing and redesigning work”.
In: Ergonomics 43.7 (2000), pp. 960–974.
[55]
Oliver Ding. Activity System: Four levels of contradictions. URL: ?iiTb , f f rrr X
+iBpBivMHvbBbXM2if7Qm`@H2p2Hb@Q7@+QMi`/B+iBQMbf (visited on 10/13/2021).
[56]
Colin Das. Norman Doors: Explained. 2022.
[57]
John M Carroll. HCI models, theories, and frameworks: Toward a multidisciplinary
science. Elsevier, 2003.
[58]
Edwin Hutchins. “Distributed cognition”. In: International Encyclopedia of the Social
and Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier Science 138 (2000), pp. 1–10.
[59]
Donald A Norman. The psychology of everyday things. Basic books, 1988.
[60]
Bonnie A Nardi and Craig L Zarmer. “Beyond models and metaphors: Visual for-
malisms in user interface design”. In: Journal of Visual Languages & Computing
4.1 (1993), pp. 5–33.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
58
==PAGE:66==
[61]
Jean Lave. The culture of acquisition and the practice of understanding. Vol. 88.
Institute for Research on Learning Palo Alto, CA, 1988.
[62]
Bonnie Nardi. “Studying Context: A Comparison of Activity Theory, Situated Action
Models, and Distributed Cognition”. In: Context and consciousness: Activity theory
and human-computer interaction. Ed. by Bonnie Nardi. University of Toronto Press,
1998. Chap. 4.
[63]
Bill Schilit, Norman Adams, and Roy Want. “Context-aware computing applications”.
In: 1994 first workshop on mobile computing systems and applications. IEEE. 1994,
pp. 85–90.
[64]
Doug Lenat. The dimensions of context-space. 1998.
[65]
Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. “Contextual design”. In: interactions 6.1 (1999),
pp. 32–42.
[66]
Rex Hartson and Pardha S Pyla. The UX Book: Process and guidelines for ensuring
a quality user experience. Elsevier, 2012.
[67]
Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. “From Data to Insight: Contextual Design Mod-
els”. In: Contextual design. Ed. by Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. ACM New
York, NY, USA, 1999. Chap. 11, pp. 109–126.
[68]
Werner Sperschneider and Kirsten Bagger. “Ethnographic fieldwork under industrial
constraints: Toward design-in-context”. In: International Journal of Human-Computer
Interaction 15.1 (2003), pp. 41–50.
[69]
Harry F Wolcott. Ethnography: A way of seeing. Rowman Altamira, 1999.
[70]
Bruce WA Whittlesea. “Illusions of familiarity.” In: Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 19.6 (1993), p. 1235.
[71]
Lawrence L Jacoby, Colleen M Kelley, and Jane Dywan. “Memory attributions”. In:
Varieties of memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving (1989),
pp. 391–422.
[72]
Robert F Bornstein and Paul R D’Agostino. “The attribution and discounting of per-
ceptual fluency: Preliminary tests of a perceptual fluency/attributional model of the
mere exposure effect”. In: Social Cognition 12.2 (1994), pp. 103–128.
[73]
Felix Speckmann and Christian Unkelbach. “Moses, money, and multiple-choice:
The Moses illusion in a multiple-choice format with high incentives”. In: Memory &
cognition 49 (2021), pp. 843–862.
[74]
Lynne M Reder and Gail W Kusbit. “Locus of the Moses illusion: Imperfect encoding,
retrieval, or match?” In: Journal of Memory and Language 30.4 (1991), pp. 385–406.
[75]
Anthony D Andre and Christopher D Wickens. “When users want what’s not best
for them”. In: Ergonomics in design 3.4 (1995), pp. 10–14.
[76]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Thematic analysis. American Psychological As-
sociation, 2012.
[77]
R. Budiu and K. Moran. How Many Participants for Quantitative Usability Studies: A
Summary of Sample-Size Recommendations. ?iiTb,ffrrrXMM;`QmTX+QKf`iB+H2bf
bmKK`v@[mMi@bKTH2@bBx2bf. Accessed: in 2023. 2021.
[78]
O Bertelsen and S Bødker. Activity theory (2002). HCI Models, Theories and Frame-
works.
[79]
Effie Lai-Chong Law and Xu Sun. “Evaluating user experience of adaptive digital ed-
ucational games with Activity Theory”. In: International journal of human-computer
studies 70.7 (2012), pp. 478–497.
[80]
Matt P Stevenson, Theresa Schilhab, and Peter Bentsen. “Attention Restoration
Theory II: A systematic review to clarify attention processes affected by exposure
to natural environments”. In: Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part
B 21.4 (2018), pp. 227–268.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
59
==PAGE:67==
[81]
Pauline van der Wel and Henk Van Steenbergen. “Pupil dilation as an index of effort
in cognitive control tasks: A review”. In: Psychonomic bulletin & review 25 (2018),
pp. 2005–2015.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
60
==PAGE:68==
A
The Questions
These are the questions used in the experiment.
1. With which instrument did Lance Armstrong become famous?
2. What year did Germany win World War II?
3. What kind of meat is in the McDonald’s sandwich known as the Whopper?
4. Who won numerous Emmy awards for his breakthrough album ”Thriller”?
5. What phrase followed ”To be or not to be” in Macbeth’s famous soliloquy?
6. Who found the glass slipper left at the ball by Snow White?
7. What is the name of the instrument that by measuring the angle of the sun’s shadow
on a calibrated dial, indicates the temperature?
8. What is the name of the man in the red suit and long white beard who gives out
birthday presents from his sleigh?
9. What is the name of the famous prize issued by Finland for contributions to science
and peace?
10. How many animals of each kind did Moses take on the Ark?
11. Gorbachev was the leader of what communist country?
12. What country was Margaret Thatcher prime minister of?
13. What is the name of Leonardo da Vinci’s famous painting of a woman that is dis-
played in the Louvre in Paris?
14. What is the name of the Mexican dip made with mashed-up avocados?
15. Who is the architect of the famous Eiffel Tower in Paris?
16. How long did Sleeping Beauty fall asleep for, after poking her finger on a spindle?
17. Who is the Roman god of war after whom a famous candy bar is named?
18. What country is famous for cuckoo clocks, chocolate, banks and pocketknives?
19. Which part of his body did artist Van Gogh allegedly cut off?
20. In which movie does Arnold Schwarzenegger travel back in time to save Sarah Con-
nor?
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
61
==PAGE:69==
B
Information Letter
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
62
==PAGE:70==
C
Letter of Consent
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
63
==PAGE:71==
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
64
==PAGE:72==
D
The Locations
D.1
Library [Inside]
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
65
==PAGE:73==
D.2
Building 324 [Inside]
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
66
==PAGE:74==
D.3
Garden in building 101 [Outside]
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
67
==PAGE:75==
D.4
Matematiktorvet [Outside]
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
68
==PAGE:76==
D.5
Around building 342 [Outside]
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
69
==PAGE:77==
E
The Interview Guide
This is a qualitative interview to help me in my research for my Master’s thesis. Are you
okay with this interview being audio and video recorded?
The audio and video will not be shared with others, but are for the researcher and super-
visor to interpret, analyze and discuss. Your statements will remain anonymous, meaning
they will not appear with your name or any other information that could identify you. Only
anonymous transcribed statements can be included in the thesis report. You can leave
the interview whenever without giving a reason. Is it okay for you that this interview will
be recorded?
How old are you?
How well do you read and understand english?
1. Poorly
2. Neither poorly or well
3. Well
If you are not sitting indoors, then please do.
I’ve prepared an experiment, which is more like a multiple choice quiz than anything else.
It’s up to you to get as many correct answers as possible. There may be ill-formed ques-
tions which, if taken literally, cannot be answered. In that case, the correct response is
‘Can’t say’. Another response option is ”Don’t know”, which ”removes” the question from
your trial. ”Don’t know” is neither a correct or an incorrect response. You are encouraged
to answer ”Don’t know” if you don’t know the answer. Is the objective clear?
Please go through this experiment on your smartphone.
Which font would you prefer to use if you had to repeat the experiment and why? The
italic or regular font?
Was that based on any of the following parameters? and can you rank them from most
to least important for your choice? Why? Feel free to add any attributes to the list. It is
allowed to have multiple attributes on the same priority.
1. Performance - (The one that gives you the highest score)
2. Usability - (The one that is the easiest to use)
3. Familiarity - (The one that is most familiar to you)
4. Excitement - (The one that excites you the most)
5. Comfort - (The one that you feel most comfortable with)
6. Effort - (The one that requires the least amount of effort)
Are there any situations or tasks where you would choose differently? Why?
Do you think you answered the first 10 or the last 10 questions more correctly? and why?
There is a study that shows that you are actually better at recognising trick questions if
the font is difficult to read. Would you choose differently if you knew that? Why?
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
70
==PAGE:78==
Do you want to know your results?
The purpose of the experiment was to research whether detection of misleading questions
depends on cognitive fluency, which in this case was manipulated with different fonts.
Does that affect your willingness to participate in this interview?
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
71
==PAGE:79==
F
The Transcripts
Here are the transcripts of the five qualitative interviews. All interviews were conducted
and transcribed in Danish. The transcripts only include the answers to the five essential
questions and not the screening questions or the questions related to the debriefing.
[R] = Questions asked by the researcher.
[P] = Answers from the person being interviewed.
F.1
Interview 1
[R] Hvilken skrifttype ville du foretrække at bruge, hvis du skulle gentage eksperimentet,
og hvorfor? Skråskrift eller den almindelige skrifttype?
[P] Almindelig. Den var nemmere at læse.
[R] Var det baseret på nogle af følgende parametre? Og kan du rangere dem fra vigtigst
til mindst vigtig for dit valg? Hvorfor? - Du må gerne tilføje flere attributter til listen. Per-
formance (The one that gives you the highest score) Usability (The one that is the easiest
to use) Familiarity (The one that is most familiar to you) Excitement (The one that excites
you the most) Comfort (The one that you feel most comfortable with) Effort (The one that
requires the least amount of effort) [SVAR 1=a hvis Performance er vigtigst]
[P] Performance er vigtigst i det her quiz format.
1. Performance
2. Usability, Effort
3. Excitement
4. Comfort
5. Familiarity
[R] Er der nogen situationer eller opgaver, hvor du ville vælge anderledes? Hvorfor?
[P] Ville aldrig vælge lige præcis den skrifttype pga. dårlig usability. Men kunne godt
gå på kompromis ift. performance hvis man gerne vil skabe excitement eller familiarity.
Excitement for et brand som f.eks. tivoli. Ellers kunne familiarity være godt for et andet
brand.
[R] Tror du, du besvarede de første 10 eller de sidste 10 spørgsmål mere korrekt? Og
hvorfor?
[P] De første 10 (dysfluent), det var nemmere spørgsmål.
[R] Der er en undersøgelse, der viser, at du faktisk er bedre til at genkende “trick” spørgsmål,
hvis skriften er svær at læse. Ville du vælge anderledes, hvis du vidste det? Hvorfor?
[P] Minder mig om don normann reference.
Uklare trafikregler giver færrest ulykker.
Måske ville jeg som designer bruge noget andet end skrifttypen, for at få folk til at fokusere
mere omkring en specielt opgave. Derfor måske, men stadig ikke. Svært at forstå for
brugere og min chef. Satisfaction for brugere. Brugerne ville blive frustrerede, og derfor
skabe en dårlig oplevelse. Hvis det bare er quizzen, så ja, så får jeg flere korrekte. Men
nej, fordi der var et ord, hvor jeg tænkte; står der Finland der, det ved jeg ikke. Jeg ville
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
72
==PAGE:80==
ikke vælge den (dysfluent) skriftype fordi jeg alligevel ville læse det ret nøjsomt. Jeg ville
alligevel læse det forkert med den svære skrifttype.
F.2
Interview 2
[R] Hvilken skrifttype ville du foretrække at bruge, hvis du skulle gentage eksperimentet,
og hvorfor? Den kursiverede eller den almindelige skrifttype?
[P] Almindelig, nemmere at læse. Margaret Thatcher kunne ikke læses (dysfluent).
[R] Var det baseret på nogle af følgende parametre? Og kan du rangere dem fra vigtigst
til mindst vigtig for dit valg? Hvorfor? - Du må gerne tilføje flere attributter til listen. Per-
formance (The one that gives you the highest score) Usability (The one that is the easiest
to use) Familiarity (The one that is most familiar to you) Excitement (The one that excites
you the most) Comfort (The one that you feel most comfortable with) Effort (The one that
requires the least amount of effort) [SVAR 1=a hvis Performance er vigtigst]
[P] Familiarity og Excitement er lidt ligegyldige.
1. Performance, Effort, Usability
2. Comfort
3. Familiarity, Excitement
[R] Er der nogen situationer eller opgaver, hvor du ville vælge anderledes? Hvorfor?
[P] Bryllup eller højtideligheder: invitationer, bordkort - ikke sangtekster. Dekorativt. Citat
ved bestemte tilfælde.
[R] Tror du, du besvarede de første 10 eller de sidste 10 spørgsmål mere korrekt? Og
hvorfor?
[P] Meget det samme. Måske svarede jeg de sidste forkert (dysfluent) på de første 10
svarede jeg en enkelt gang ”don’t know ” i stedet for ”can’t say”.
[R] Der er en undersøgelse, der viser, at du faktisk er bedre til at genkende “trick” spørgsmål,
hvis skriften er svær at læse. Ville du vælge anderledes, hvis du vidste det? Hvorfor?
[P] Ja, fordi man gerne vil svare rigtigt på trods af at det er irriterende at læse.
F.3
Interview 3
[R] Hvilken skrifttype ville du foretrække at bruge, hvis du skulle gentage eksperimentet,
og hvorfor? Den kursiverede eller den almindelige skrifttype?
[P] Den første fordi det er nemmere for mig at tyde hvad der står (fluent). For det meste
kunne jeg godt regne ud af hvad der skulle stå, men man brugte ekstra tid på det (dysflu-
ent). (dysfluet) Det er en skrifttype man ikke normalt ville se eller bruge.
[R] Var det baseret på nogle af følgende parametre? Og kan du rangere dem fra vigtigst
til mindst vigtig for dit valg? Hvorfor? - Du må gerne tilføje flere attributter til listen. Per-
formance (The one that gives you the highest score) Usability (The one that is the easiest
to use) Familiarity (The one that is most familiar to you) Excitement (The one that excites
you the most) Comfort (The one that you feel most comfortable with) Effort (The one that
requires the least amount of effort) [SVAR 1=a hvis Performance er vigtigst]
[P] Det er nemmere at forstå hvad man skal. Rune konkluderede: ”Man bruger færre
ressourcer på at læse og har derfor flere ressourcer til at tænke.”
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
73
==PAGE:81==
1. Usability, familiarity, fordi det er nemmest og det man kender.
2. Comfort også lidt i samme boldgade som det første
3. Effort færre ressourcer på spørgsmålet.
4. Performance, fordi det betyder mere for mig en excitement. Man vil gerne have så
mange point som muligt, men man vil først have at det er nemt så nemt som muligt,
så man ikke skal bruge unødvendige ressourcer på at læse spørgsmålet.
5. Excitement
[R] Er der nogen situationer eller opgaver, hvor du ville vælge anderledes? Hvorfor?
[P] Afhænger af, hvem man skriver til. Hvis man skulle skrive til en bestemt person, hvor
man ville bruge den anden skrifttype. Men umiddelbart nej. Jeg kan ikke komme i tanke
om en situation, hvor jeg ville gøre det.
[R] Tror du, du besvarede de første 10 eller de sidste 10 spørgsmål mere korrekt? Og
hvorfor?
[P] Jeg tror faktisk at det var dem med den svære skrifttype. Emnerne i spørgsmålene
med den svære skrifttype kendte jeg mere til.
[R] Der er en undersøgelse, der viser, at du faktisk er bedre til at genkende “trick” spørgsmål,
hvis skriften er svær at læse. Ville du vælge anderledes, hvis du vidste det? Hvorfor?
[P] Ja. Det er jo nok fordi at man bruger længere tid på at læse det, så derfor fanger man
flere trick spørgsmål. Det giver mening for mig. Man skimmer måske spørgsmålet mere,
når det er nemt læseligt.
F.4
Interview 4
[R] Hvilken skrifttype ville du foretrække at bruge, hvis du skulle gentage eksperimentet,
og hvorfor? Den kursiverede eller den almindelige skrifttype?
[P] Den almindelige. Den kursive kunne godt være svær at tyde til tider. Der var tid-
spunkter hvor jeg var i tvivl om hvad der stod og skulle læse det flere gange (kursiv). Den
almindelig er normalt og nemt og ligetil. Der var nogle barrierer ved den kursive. Det tog
længere tid. Med den normale kunne jeg være usikker på, hvad det var jeg skulle svare
på. Så det blev sådan lidt noget gætteværk.
[R] Var det baseret på nogle af følgende parametre? Og kan du rangere dem fra vigtigst
til mindst vigtig for dit valg? Hvorfor? - Du må gerne tilføje flere attributter til listen. Per-
formance (The one that gives you the highest score) Usability (The one that is the easiest
to use) Familiarity (The one that is most familiar to you) Excitement (The one that excites
you the most) Comfort (The one that you feel most comfortable with) Effort (The one that
requires the least amount of effort) [SVAR 1=a hvis Performance er vigtigst]
[P] Ja jeg kan godt rangere dem.
1. Performance,
2. Usability,
3. Effort,
4. Comfort
5. Familiarity
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
74
==PAGE:82==
6. Excitement
Vigtigt at man rent faktisk kan bruge det til noget. At det er nemt, intuitivt. Usability og
effort. Performance, der er nogle af de andre implicit indeni. Man burde vælge den man
præstere bedst med. Det skulle være meget besværligt, hvis jeg vil gå på kompromis
med performance. Hvis det f.eks. kun giver en marginalt bedre score, men det er meget
mere besværligt, ville jeg måske ikke vælge det. Comfort er lidt i slipstrøm med usability.
Excitement, den der er mindst væsentlig.
[R] Er der nogen situationer eller opgaver, hvor du ville vælge anderledes? Hvorfor?
[P] Det skulle være til noget festligt, så kan den måske noget mere. Større bogstaver,
rent praktisk. Det kan godt blive lidt sløret at se på når skriften er lille. En invitation kunne
det være fordi den har et mere festligt udtryk. Mere glad og livlig på en eller anden måde.
grafisk Social media professionelt. Noget der skulle have det udtryk. I en kontekst hvor
det ikke kræver så meget tekst, fordi det kræver mere at læse. Hvis det er en større
roman, giver det måske ikke så meget mening. Men hvis det er noget mindre, kan man
godt gøre den ekstra indsats for at få tydet det. Man skal omvendt også have tid til at
læse det. Hvis man scroller hurtigt forbi, er det ikke sikkert at jeg ville fange det fordi man
skulle bruge ekstra tid på at tyde det.
[R] Tror du, du besvarede de første 10 eller de sidste 10 spørgsmål mere korrekt? Og
hvorfor?
[P] Lidt det samme. Jeg er overbevist om at det har taget længere tid med kursive. Mere
usikker i kursiv. Var det nu også det jeg læste.
[R] Der er en undersøgelse, der viser, at du faktisk er bedre til at genkende “trick” spørgsmål,
hvis skriften er svær at læse. Ville du vælge anderledes, hvis du vidste det? Hvorfor?
[P] Ja, det ville jeg jo nok. Noget med at man gøre sig mere umage, så fanger man flere
trick spørgsmål. Jeg bilder mig ind at jeg er bedre end alle andre. Jeg kan sagtens bare
gøre det med den almindelige.
F.5
Interview 5
[R] Hvilken skrifttype ville du foretrække at bruge, hvis du skulle gentage eksperimentet,
og hvorfor? Den kursiverede eller den almindelige skrifttype?
[P] Den almindelige skrifttype. Den med skråskrift er fint nok, men jeg skal koncentrere
mig for at læse det. Jeg tænkte ikke over det den almindelige skrifttype, men med den
anden (kursiv) tog det meget længere tid at læse spørgsmålet.
[R] Var det baseret på nogle af følgende parametre? Og kan du rangere dem fra vigtigst
til mindst vigtig for dit valg? Hvorfor? - Du må gerne tilføje flere attributter til listen. Per-
formance (The one that gives you the highest score) Usability (The one that is the easiest
to use) Familiarity (The one that is most familiar to you) Excitement (The one that excites
you the most) Comfort (The one that you feel most comfortable with) Effort (The one that
requires the least amount of effort) [SVAR 1=a hvis Performance er vigtigst]
[P] Måske Effort. Med den første (almindelig) der læste man det bare. Det var behageligt
at læse. Jeg føler ikke at der skulle være et performance gain eller drop, men hvis testen
var på tid er der måske noget om det. d (Excitement) kan godt komme i bunden. Effort,
comfort og usability er på toppen top, men måske ikke lige i den rækkefølge.
1. Effort, Comfort, Usability
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
75
==PAGE:83==
2. Performance, Familiarity
3. Excitement
[R] Er der nogen situationer eller opgaver, hvor du ville vælge anderledes? Hvorfor?
[P] Så skulle det være, hvis man skrev et brev eller et digt. Noget man skriver til en selv
eller andre. Hvis det er privat. Kunne også være en invitation / fødselsdags invitation. Et
brev, Digt, eller Invitation Skråskrift er lidt mere personligt. Man har lidt mere tid til at læse
det. Man læser også lidt langsommere. Jeg synes også, det ser pænere ud.
I skolen er der en standard også i forhold til hvor svært det skal være at læse. Hvis det
handler om at læse, er den almindelig bare mindre krævende.
[R] Tror du, du besvarede de første 10 eller de sidste 10 spørgsmål mere korrekt? Og
hvorfor?
[P] Jeg tror faktisk jeg har det sidste (skråskrift). Man skulle lige i gang. Der var et
spørgsmål om Van Gogh har mistet sit øre, der var jeg ikke helt sikker på om det var
Van Gogh. Sådan havde jeg det med nogle af dem. For nogle spørgsmål vidste jeg godt,
at det ikke var den person der havde gjort det. Der var der i hvert fald 1 spørgsmål som
jeg var i tvivl om i de første (almindelige). Men det var meget godt delt ud. Jeg føler, at
jeg gennemskuede nogle af dem, som var løgn i den anden del (skråskrift).
[R] Der er en undersøgelse, der viser, at du faktisk er bedre til at genkende “trick” spørgsmål,
hvis skriften er svær at læse. Ville du vælge anderledes, hvis du vidste det? Hvorfor?
[P] Ja, det ville jeg nok. Måske er det fordi det er sværere at læse. Jeg skulle i hvert fald
læse noget to gange. Det går måske også lidt langsommere, så man når måske at tænke
lidt mere. Jeg var mere sikker på nogle af mine svar med den svære skrifttype, det er
svært at vurdere om det var pga skrifttypen.
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
76
==PAGE:84==
The Effects of Locational Context and Cognitive Fluency Bias on Detecting Trick Questions
77
==PAGE:85==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
?iiTb,ffrrrX+QKTmi2X/imX/Ff
