==PAGE:1==
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User
Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
Master Thesis
September, 2023
By
André Castelli Zacharias
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Technology
Entrepreneurship.
André Castelli Zacharias ­ s210925
Signature
Date
ii
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
12/09/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Neural, physiological, and behavioral signals synchronize between individuals engaging
with a common natural stimuli. Inter­subject correlation (ISC) has been observed across
different signals, using a variety of stimuli, but it has yet to be applied to interactive expe­
riences. Motivated by the application of biometric methods in games user research, and
considering the lack of affective datasets that fit the requirements for ISC analysis, and
have active user participation, this master’s thesis aims at building the foundations for a
psychophysiological dataset for affect and engagement analysis, and at conducting anal­
yses of inter­subject correlation. The dataset created includes multimodal physiological
signals, such as EEG, PPG, and EDA, recorded from wireless low­cost off­the­shelf de­
vices, and self­assessments of arousal, valence, and dominance. During the experiment,
subjects were playing a game that requires active participation and contains moments of
time­locked stimuli. Software was developed to stream and save data, control the ex­
periment, and identify events in the game. A series of validations were conducted to
verify the quality of the data, and correct implementation of the methods. The validations
confirmed the proper execution of the analysis methods on publicly available data. The
best­performing PPG channel was identified, and it was found that the data quality was
insufficient for ISC analysis. ISC analysis was held on EEG data from previous studies,
and the results were replicated. The method was also applied to EEG data from another
affective dataset, with a lower signal­to­noise ratio, and then applied to the preprocessed
collected data. The analysis failed to reproduce the components of neural activity that
maximize ISC. This research shows that the ISC analyses are sensitive to noise and that
the hardware used for recording physiological signals does not provide data with the nec­
essary quality.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors Ivana Konvalinka and Sada­
sivan Puthusserypady, who have helped to shape my academic journey, and immensely
contributed to all parts of this research. I would also like to thank the people at Affecture
for bringing meaning and fun to the effort. Lastly, a special thanks to those who love me
most, for the unrestricted support.
iv
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Biometrics in User Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Affect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Engagement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Inter­Subject Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7
Motivations and Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Materials and Methods
11
2.1
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Data Collection System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3
Inter­Subject Correlation Analysis of Collected Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3
Results
31
3.1
ISC­HR Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.2
PPG Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3
CorrCA Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.4
CorrCA Validation on low­cost devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.5
Analysis of Collected Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4
Discussion
49
4.1
Results Interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Bibliography
55
A Appendix
59
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Physiological signals offer valuable quantitative insights into the human experience. Par­
ticularly, models for affect and engagement hold significant importance for user research
applications. Previous studies have observed that physiological signals synchronize be­
tween individuals when engaging with a common natural stimulus [1, 2, 3], and that the
levels of inter­subject correlation can inform about the engaging quality of the stimulus [4].
Although much has been developed in this direction, the application of biometric methods
for user research in interactive experiences, such as video games, remains a challenge.
The majority of available psychophysiological datasets have no active user participation
[5]. Furthermore, inter­subject correlation analyses, require a temporal alignment of the
stimulation across subjects [6], which is not always present in interactive experiences.
This research aims at building the foundations for a multimodal, psychophysiological
dataset with active user participation, for affect and engagement analyses, using low­cost
hardware. It also aims at conducting inter­subject correlation analysis, with validations of
data quality and methods.
1.1
Context
Biometrics, such as electroencephalography (EEG), electrocardiography (ECG), photo­
plethysmography (PPG), electrodermal activity (EDA), and eye­tracking have been used
to study and make inferences about the human experience. Beyond being adopted by the
academic fields of human­computer interaction, human factors, psychophysiology, and
others, biometrics has paved its way into industrial and entrepreneurial contexts. Physi­
ological recordings and their analyses are often included in the suite of methods for user
research (UR) [7], and this research, in particular, is motivated by biometric applications
in game user research (GUR).
Although the development process of a video game can be quite different for each game
studio, it is considered good practice to frequently test games in development. This task
is done by the fields of quality assurance (QA), and games user research (GUR). QA is
the domain concerned with technical errors, glitches, and failures in the execution of the
game code. Conversely, GUR informs game design decisions by understanding the user
experience (UX) and interactions. GUR employs traditional UR methods, such as obser­
vations, think­aloud, focus groups, interviews, and questionnaires, while also integrating
biometrics, telemetry, and more [8].
Generally, traditional methods rely on the player’s ability to accurately recall and explain
their own experience, which constitutes a limitation. There is an inevitable failure in mem­
ory between the gameplay and the posterior interview, or questionnaire. The results are
also limited by aspects that can consciously be accessed by the individuals testing the
game. Therefore, the information obtained through traditional methods is often incom­
plete and biased.
To facilitate comprehension, findings from GUR have been divided into three categories:
Gameplay, Emotional Immersion, and Usability. As example, a gameplay finding could
be that the difficulty of the game makes a certain audience frustrated, or that the pace of
the game is too slow. For emotional immersion, that the players do not connect with a
game character, or that a certain part of the game is not engaging. And lastly, a usability
finding could be that players do not use a certain command unless a tutorial is added, or
that the menu navigation is frustrating.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
1
==PAGE:10==
In an EDA study [9], Mirza­Babaei found that traditional methods are well­suited to identify
usability issues, while the majority of issues within the gameplay, and emotional immer­
sion categories were only found with a biometric approach. Thus demonstrating biomet­
rics’ unique value proposition in GUR. Psychophysiological signals are often continuously
available, overcoming the dependence on the user’s memory, and avoiding breaks in the
sense of the presence of gamers.
1.2
Biometrics in User Research
Benefited by advances in sensor technology, signal processing, and machine learning, a
growing number of papers have been published connecting physiological measurements,
with cognitive states, and their implications on the user experience [10]. The most used
physiological signals in UR are:
• Electroencephalography (EEG): a neuroimaging technique that captures electrical
activity on the scalp. Electrodes are usually placed following the 10­20 system and
capture potentials generated by the synchronous firing of neurons in the brain. The
signal is often categorized by different frequency bands including Delta (0.5­4 Hz),
Theta (4­8 Hz), Alpha (8­13 Hz), Beta (13­30 Hz), and Gamma (30­100 Hz). When
compared to other neuroimaging techniques, EEG is minimally invasive, has high
temporal resolution, low spatial resolution, and low signal­to­noise ratio. Common
noise sources in EEG include eye blinks, eye movements, heartbeat, muscle activ­
ity, interference from power lines and electronic devices.
• Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG): a non­invasive technique that captures the heart’s
electrical signals. Its signal is often described by the P­wave representing atrial de­
polarization, the QRS complex for ventricular depolarization, and the T­wave indi­
cating ventricular repolarization. Interbeat intervals and heart rate variability (HRV)
are features commonly extracted from ECG. HRV measures the variation in time
between successive heartbeat analyses and has become increasingly relevant in
assessing autonomic nervous system activity and overall well­being. Beyond its
clinical applications, ECG provides insight into emotional responses, stress, and
cognitive processing.
• Photoplethysmography (PPG): an optical technique used to measure changes in
blood volume within tissue. It emits a light on the skin and detects its reflection.
PPG is commonly used for continuous monitoring due to its convenience and non­
invasiveness. It measures heart rate and arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2), and
it is commonly found in fitness trackers and wearable technology. It is affected by
sensor placement, skin pigmentation, and ambient light.
• Electrodermal Activity (EDA): also known as Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), mea­
sures the electrical conductance of the skin. It is primarily influenced by the sym­
pathetic nervous activation of sweat glands. EDA fluctuations are associated with
stress, excitement, and arousal. It is affected by humidity, temperature, and individ­
ual differences. It is also commonly found in wearable technology.
• Eye­tracking: measures and analyzes the movement of the eyes. It can give infor­
mation about dwell time, scan paths, saccade rate, and pupil dilation. Eye­tracking
provides insight into visual perception, decision­making, information processing,
and user interfaces. Different techniques include head­mounted, remote, and mo­
bile systems.
Besides collecting one or many of these physiological signals, studies often gather screen
2
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:11==
and frontal videos, mouse and keyboard usage logs, and self­reports. Over the past ten
years, biometric research has been able to predict levels of confusion of individuals using
data visualization software, with eye­trackers [11]; to evaluate the usability of a website,
with EEG analysis [12]; or levels of sleepiness [13] and engagement [14] when watching
videos.
In the realm of games, EEG and standardized questionnaires were used to evaluate the
quality of experience of an online game [15], and the effects of visual quality and fatigue
were observed in the physiological data. Using a platform game, McMahan et al. eval­
uated player task engagement, and arousal [16]. The ratio of (Beta/(Alpha + Theta)),
calculated as power across all channels, was presented as indicative of engagement lev­
els, as it significantly increased during relevant game events when compared to normal
events [17]. Another study classified the player’s mental workload and attention level dur­
ing a virtual maze game with four difficulty levels [18]. Lastly, Murray [19] recorded PPG,
EDA, and facial action units while participants were playing the first episode of the game
The Wolf Among Us, the same game used as stimuli in this thesis. With a focus on con­
textualizing player choices, he developed an encoding schema and a visual data mining
tool. Although these tools were not utilized, some of his conceptualizations around the
game were useful in this thesis.
1.3
Affect
Another relevant line of research for UR applications addresses the connections between
physiology and affect. Affect, or core affect, refers to ”consciously accessible elemental
processes of pleasure and activation, has many causes, and is always present” [20]. It
is considered a psychological primitive, or an elemental ingredient common to all psy­
chological states, and it is crucial to our conscious experience. Affect is realized by the
integration of exteroceptive sensory information from the environment with homeostatic
and interoceptive information from the body [21].
Affect is often described by two distinct dimensions: arousal and valence. Arousal refers
to the level of activation, where low arousal represents low activation levels or sleepiness.
Valence is the dimension regarding pleasure, where low valence represents unpleasant­
ness. The specific names, nature, and quantity of these dimensions remain a subject of
discussion. Occasionally, the third dimension of dominance is also considered, referring
to levels of control or influence, where low dominance represents helplessness. A range
of techniques have been used for measuring affect. These methods can be organized
around the following approaches: self­report, physiological measurement, and observa­
tional approaches [22]. The research conducted in this master’s thesis benefits from all
three approaches.
One widely used tool for affective self­reports is the Self­Assessment Manikin (SAM) [23].
SAM is a non­verbal pictorial technique that assists self­reports and considers the three
dimensions of affect previously described (fig. 1.1). There are five pictograms for each
dimension, where one feature of the manikin gradually changes. For example, the manikin
representing valence goes from a smiling face to a frowning one.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Self­assessment Manikin (SAM), taken from the original article [23] for va­
lence, arousal, and dominance, in this order. Valence (top) and Arousal (middle) are
shown in decrescent order, with high levels on the left and low levels on the right. Domi­
nance (bottom) is shown in crescent order, with low values to the left
Although the precise mapping between physiology and affect is an ongoing exploration,
the connection between the two is widely evidenced. With a central emphasis on building
effective and reliable models of affect, the field of affective computing [24] has attracted
increasing attention, scientific effort, and interest from the GUR community.
1.4
Engagement
Connected to affect, engagement is a central concept in game and play studies. Although
engagement is a cognitive state that lacks a rigorous definition, it has been defined in
the context of user research as “the emotional, cognitive, and behavioral connection that
exists, at any point in time and possibly over time, between a user and a resource” [25].
Engagement has also been defined, in neuroscientific research, as “emotionally laden
attention” [4], which is the practical definition considered in this research.
In gaming studies, engagement has also been conceptualized as the result of a process.
The player engagement process [26] is described by four components (Objectives, Activ­
ities, Accomplishments, and Affect) and its interactions. In this non­linear process, users
perform a range of activities in the pursuit of objectives that can be either extrinsically
defined by the game or intrinsically created by the player. The accomplishment of these
objectives, as well as the activities performed constantly shape the player’s affect, which
subsequently alters the objectives.
Engaged users are motivated to begin playing, to continue the experience, and to return
to it in the future. Researchers have also argued [27] that engagement is a prerequisite
4
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:13==
for other important concepts for game design such as Immersion [28], Flow [29], and Fun
[30]. Therefore, engaging users is a central ambition for most interactive experiences,
including games.
As a consequence of it, a lot of research has been done towards improving the ways
of measuring engagement. I would argue that the methods for measuring engagement,
just as those for measuring affect, can be organized around self­report [27], physiological
measurement [4], and observational approaches [31]. A common challenge to all these
approaches is that the engagement process might be broken by the measurement itself.
Since many self­report approaches interrupt the experience, they tend to be applied less
frequently during stimulation, or only in retrospect, after the user interaction is over. This
master’s thesis uses inter­subject correlations as a non­invasive physiological measure­
ment for assessing engagement.
1.5
Inter­Subject Correlations
Neural, physiological, and behavioral signals synchronize between individuals engaging
with a common natural stimulus. Inter­subject Correlation (ISC) was first observed in a
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study [3], where participants were exposed
to sections of a movie. Results showed significant voxel­wise ISC across participants,
in areas beyond the auditory and visual cortices. Interestingly, it was discussed that ISC
tends to increase in more emotionally salient moments and that the method might be used
for tracking attentional differences among various populations. Similar findings have been
replicated using different signals and other kinds of stimuli, such as auditory narratives [1],
music [32], advertisement [33], instructional videos [34], and lectures [35].
Recent research suggests that ISC is the result of effective cognitive processing during
common stimulation [2]. The more engaging the stimulation is, the more it will guide
cognitive processes, which would increase the correlation in neuroimaging data, cap­
tured by the ISC analysis. Additionally, ISC emerges not only in neuroimaging but also in
other physiological and behavioral signals, provided there is a robust coupling between
brain signals and the other signal in question. Statistically significant ISC were found in
neuroimaging modalities such as EEG, magnetoencephalography (MEG) [36], functional
near­infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) [37], as well as heart rate, gaze position, pupil size,
and saccade rate [2]. In contrast, due to less coherent brain­body connections, ISC failed
to appear in respiration and head movements.
In a 2021 article, Pérez et al. [1] showed that ISC is modulated by attention and predictive
of memory performance. In one of the experiments, 27 subjects watched 5 educational
videos twice, while their ECG was recorded. The first time they watched, they were asked
to pay attention to the video; the second time, they were instructed to silently count back­
ward in steps of 7, with the aim of distracting subjects from viewing the videos. An ANOVA
showed strong fixed effects of attention, fixed effects of the video, and a random subject
effect. Videos were also analyzed individually, and a pairwise t­test showed a significant
drop in ISC when subjects were distracted. Another experiment from the same article
showed correlations between ISC and performance on a free recall questionnaire about
the content of audio narratives. Succeeding experiments concluded that ISC was not
modulated by the influences of attention on heart­rate variability (HRV) nor synchronous
breathing. In conclusion, ISC applied to ECG data is a robust indication of the conscious
processing of narratives.
Although ISC calculated on heart rate or fMRI reliably indicates conscious processing
during common natural stimuli, it fails to indicate precisely when synchronization occurs.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
5
==PAGE:14==
To address this, Parra, Haufe, and Dmochowski [6] leveraged the high temporal resolution
of EEG to obtain inter­subject correlations in time. The method applied is more formally
described in section 2.3.2. Conceptually, Correlated Component Analysis (CorrCA) is an
algorithm designed to find dimensions in multivariate data that maximize the correlation
between repetitions. In EEG, CorrCA finds the spatial filters, or linear combinations of
electrodes, so that the filtered outputs are correlated sources.
CorrCA has been used in EEG studies with common natural stimuli, to calculate ISC,
but also intra­subject correlations across repeated viewings. Interestingly, the top three
correlation­maximizing components present a remarkable level of agreement across dif­
ferent stimuli, and across different studies [4, 34, 38]. Figure 1.2 highlights these simi­
larities. Figures 1.2a and 1.2c come from the same study, where Dmochowski et al. [4]
exposed participants to two critically acclaimed movies, and one amateur control depicting
an outdoor scene with no noteworthy action. Each video was shown twice. Figure 1.2a
shows the components that maximize the intra­subject correlation. It indicates how con­
sistent are these components, for the same individual, across the three movies shown,
including the control. Figure 1.2c shows components that maximize ISC, and illustrates
the effect of prior exposure on neural correlation. Here it is worth noting how similar are
the components responsible for correlations across viewings of the same individual, and
across subjects.
Analogous components were also found by different studies. Figure 1.2b shows compo­
nents that maximize ISC, while subjects were exposed to narrative videos. In this study,
Cohen, Henin, and Parra [38] found that higher ISC predicted the duration of time viewers
were willing to commit to the videos. Lastly, fig. 1.2d shows the components that maximize
ISC across different modalities of the same stimuli. This study [34] compared audio­visual
stimulation, with only audio, only video, and the analysis done on the combination of these
modalities. The results show that spatial distributions are preserved across modalities,
especially for the first two components. This research also found that each component
is independently predictive of memory performance. It is worth commenting that, due to
reasons explained in section 2.3.2, the sign of the correlation is arbitrary, and thus the
difference in the sign between studies do not alter the fact that the spatial distribution is
replicated.
While ISC is a robust physiological metric for engagement, which appears in different
neural, physiological, and behavioral signals, and has been replicated in multiple studies,
it is important to acknowledge the requirements imposed for the experiment design and
its limitations when considering it for GUR. The data for ISC calculations assumes that
multiple people are exposed to a common time­locked stimulus. The time­locked aspect
is even more important when considering ISC in time. The resulting peaks and valleys in
ISC can only be interpreted given that at any point in time, all subjects were exposed to
the same part of the video, movie, advertisement, or lecture.
Likely because of this, all ISC studies that I found left the participants in a passive role,
watching stimuli with no influence or agency. In contrast, video games are interactive
experiences where players become active participants. Much of the appeal of games
is due to their possibilities for decision­making, exploration, collaboration or competition,
and creativity. This active participation is what allows players to experience a sense of
responsibility, agency, pride, remorse, and a unique degree of identification with charac­
ters. Although active participation is a common aspect, games vary in their degrees of
freedom. For example, games in the open­world category, like Grand Theft Auto, or Red
Dead Redemption, are so free that is unlikely that two players will ever experience the
6
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:15==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.2: Top three maximally correlated components, obtained through CorrCA in EEG
data while subjects are exposed to different stimuli in different studies. Components are
shown in descending order, from most correlated (C1) to least correlated (C3). 1.2a shows
the components that maximize intra­subject correlations [4]. 1.2b shows the components
with maximal ISC, when subjects were exposed to the same narrative videos [38]. 1.2c
are the components that maximize ISC, during the first and second viewing of ”Bang!
You’re Dead”. This, together with 1.2a, highlights the congruence of the projections max­
imizing intra and inter­subject correlations [4]. 1.2d are components that maximize ISC,
with varying presentations of stimuli [34]. The left­most column shows results after com­
bining responses across all stimuli; the middle­left column shows results from only audio
stimulation; the middle­right column shows results from audio and visual stimulation; and
the right­most column shows results from only visual stimulation.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
7
==PAGE:16==
exact same. Other games, like The Wolf Among Us, or the Walking Dead series have
more constrained decisions, and are filled with cut­scenes, which are moments where
players are passively watching a scene.
To evaluate player engagement, ISC will be conducted on heart rate, given enough data
quality, and on EEG, by applying CorrCA. Even though only the recordings during time­
locked events will be analyzed in this thesis, the affective self­assessments, narrative
decisions, and free exploration moments of the game are also of interest for future re­
search. Besides the ISC analysis, this thesis aims at creating the foundations for a rich
multimodal dataset for GUR, which is inspired by affective datasets such as AMIGOS [39],
DEAP [40], and DREAMER [41].
1.6
Datasets
Reliable and publicly available datasets are a key ingredient for current technological
development. Much of the advances in data science and machine learning, in the most
varied fields of application, rely on rich and well­documented datasets. The same is true
for automated affect and emotion recognition tasks, and because of this, multiple studies
[5] have created and published datasets that combine physiological signals with labels
regarding emotions or affect after some stimulus, often also including some classification
algorithms. I will refer to datasets with these characteristics as affective datasets.
Some examples of affective datasets are: the dataset for Affect, personality, and Mood
research on Individuals and GrOupS (AMIGOS) [39]; Database for Emotion Analysis us­
ing Physiological signals (DEAP) [40]; a database for emotion recognition through EEG
and ECG signals from wireless low­cost off­the­shelf devices (DREAMER) [41]; Multi­
modal Analysis of Human Nonverbal Behaviour in real­world settings–Human­Computer
Interaction (MAHNOB­HCI) [42]; and a MEG­based multimodal database for DECoding
AFfective physiological responses (DECAF) [43]. Commonly, passive stimulation is used
to evoke emotions in affective datasets, which include video and movie clips, music, and
the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) [44]. Moreover, active stimulation for
affective datasets has been explored through the utilization of video games and virtual
reality in a few articles.
In 2018, Yang et al. [45] published a dataset that used FIFA 2016 as stimulation. The game
was chosen because it has short repeated events (goal, penalty, shooting...), a close rela­
tion between emotion and events, and changeable difficulty levels. They recorded ECG,
EDA, electromyography (EMG), respiration, body movement with a 3­axis accelerom­
eter, facial recording, game screen recording, and meta­information about player skill
level, game difficulty, and game resulting score. Another affective dataset that used video
games as stimuli [46] was created to develop affective camera control in games. It used
a three­dimensional prey/predator PacMan­like game named Maze­Ball, and recorded
EDA, and blood volume pulse. A third study used virtual reality as active stimulation [47].
In this case, the stimulus was an architectural environment and not a game. The ex­
periment collected EEG and ECG while modifying three design variables in the virtual
environment: illumination, color, and geometry.
Support vector machines (SVM), artificial neural networks (ANN), k­nearest neighbors
(KNN), and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) are worth mentioning as some of the best­
performing algorithms for affective or emotional classification throughout studies.
As
stated before, ISC analysis has not yet been applied to affective datasets with active
participation. Due to limitations explained in section 1.5, this can only be done in the time­
locked parts of the game, and therefore the current datasets with active participation [45,
8
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:17==
46, 47] are not suitable. This master’s thesis will limit itself to ISC analysis of time­locked
events, but the affective dataset created here was designed to allow future researchers
to explore the performance of the above­mentioned classification models, which can also
be trained on data collected during narrative choices, and free exploration.
1.7
Motivations and Objectives
Biometrics are now included as an important tool for finding gameplay and emotional im­
mersion issues in games [9]. To propel the adoption of biometric analysis in user research,
I have, during my Master’s in Technology Entrepreneurship, co­founded Affecture. The
startup has directly benefited from the outcomes and the research process of this thesis
and will continue the efforts here started.
Affect and engagement are two important aspects of the gaming experience. Recent
studies observed that physiological signals from multiple individuals correlate when peo­
ple are exposed to common natural stimuli. ISC is a metric that captures how well the
stimuli guide the cognitive processing of different subjects, and has been proposed as a
physiological metric of engagement. ISC has been analyzed with a variety of stimuli, but
has not yet been applied to games. A challenge in this regard is that the method requires
time­locked stimuli, which is not always present in games.
Furthermore, publicly available affective datasets are essential resources for the biometric
evaluation of the user experience, but the datasets rarely have active user participation,
which negatively impacts technology development for GUR. The few affective datasets
with active participation lack moments of time­locked stimulation, and thus are not suitable
for ISC analysis. In order to promote the adoption of these methods by real game studios,
the price and convenience of the system used for data collection were prioritized in this
research.
The lack of ISC studies with active participation and the requirement for time­locked stimuli
poses a challenge for using ISC as an engagement metric in GUR, but also, is partially
what motivates this Master’s Thesis. I aim to conduct ISC analyses on collected data from
active participants playing a game. I chose to use The Wolf Among Us as stimuli because
it is an acclaimed choice­based narrative game, in which players’ choices interfere with
the narrative, giving a sense of control, but there are also multiple cut­scenes where the
players’ choices have no influence, becoming a common time­locked stimulus. The Wolf
Among Us offers a mix of time­locked events, narrative decisions, and free exploration.
In the process, I will design and conduct an experiment, develop the necessary software
for recording and storing data, preprocessing and analyzing it. A series of validations will
be held to confirm the efficacy of the methods. In favor of low cost, and convenience,
the database uses wireless low­cost off­the­shelf devices, as done in DREAMER [41].
Because of it, data quality will also be assessed, in comparison with high­end devices.
Chapter 2 focus first on the experiment and then on validations. I introduce informa­
tion about participants, the task and stimuli, then I describe the resources used for data
collection, and how the dataset is structured. I then describe the methods used for prepro­
cessing and ISC analysis. And lastly, the procedure and material used in each validation.
In chapter 3, I present the main results from the thesis. I first show the results from the
validations, as they informed the analysis done on collected data, and then the results
from CorrCA on the collected EEG data. I also illustrate the preprocessing steps and
some of the noise found in the data. Lastly, chapter 4 includes the interpretation of re­
sults, limitations of this research in regards to sample size, quality of the devices used,
and the implications of the results for GUR applications, concluding this thesis.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
9
==PAGE:18==
Motivated by the application of biometric methods in games user research, and consid­
ering the lack of affective datasets that fits the requirements for ISC analysis, and has
active user participation, this master’s thesis aims at:
1. Building the foundations for a psychophysiological dataset for affect and engage­
ment analyses.
• Stimulation should require active user participation
• Stimulation includes time­locked and not­time­locked moments
• Multimodal physiological signals are recorded from wireless low­cost off­the­
shelf devices
• Subjects self­assess arousal, valence, and dominance before, after, and during
the stimulation
2. Conducting ISC analysis on ECG and EEG during time­locked stimulation
• Validate ISC methods on available datasets
• Validate the data quality from low­cost off­the­shelf devices
• Conduct ISC analysis on the collected data, given sufficient data quality
10
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:19==
2
Materials and Methods
This chapter begins with a focus on the experiment and data collection and then moves to
analysis and the validations carried out. In section 2.1, I introduce information about the
participants, experiment task and procedure, and then I describe the game used as stim­
uli, with the moments of time­locked stimuli and affective self­assessments. Section 2.2
contains technical information about the hardware and recording software developed to
conduct the experiment, it also describes the data collected. Section 2.3 describes the
steps conducted during preprocessing of the collected data and formally describes corre­
lated component analysis (CorrCa). Lastly, section 2.4 describes separately the materials
and methods for validations of the ISC analysis on heart rate data, the validation of the
heart rate data collected, the validation of the CorrCA method on datasets from previous
ISC studies, and the validation of the method with a dataset with lower signal­to­noise
ratio (SNR). Links to code and data are in the Appendix.
2.1
Experiment
The first main objective of this thesis is to create a psychophysiologcial dataset for af­
fect and engagement analysis with a focus on game user research applications. For
that, I designed and conducted an experiment with 11 volunteers, in which participants
played a game, and occasionally self­assessed their affective state. During gameplay,
physiological data, mouse­clicks, and a video were recorded. This section describes the
participants, the experiment task and procedure, the game used as stimuli, and how self­
assessment was conducted. It includes a description of the time­locked segments used
for ISC analysis, and of the moments that triggered self­assessment.
2.1.1
Participants
The dataset created during this research was built with the help of 11 volunteers (06 male),
with ages ranging from 20 to 30. All participants gave written informed consent before
the recordings and confirmed being right­handed, proficient in English, not having any
psychiatric or neurological condition, and not taking any psychotropic medication. The
participants also declared to never have played or watched the game used as stimuli.
Participants were informed about their rights, the purpose of this research, the methods in
layman’s terms, ethical considerations, data storage and handling, and the experimental
procedure. They were also introduced to game controls, and to the concepts of arousal,
valence, and dominance before starting the recording.
Participants consented to have their data collected and were aware of the level of anonymiza­
tion for the different types of data.
Self­assessment and mouse­click data were fully
anonymized, while the physiological data was pseudo­anonymized, that is, stored not in
connection to the participant’s name or any other information that might identify them.
The video recording was non­anonymized as it includes the participant´s face.
Non­
anonymized data was only shared among researchers, while the pseudo and fully anonymized
data were stored in the DTU repository.
2.1.2
Task and Procedure
At first, participants were given a written participation information letter which was also
verbally presented. They had the opportunity to clarify any doubts before signing the
informed consent form and starting the recordings. The participation information letter
and the informed consent form can be found in the Appendix.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
11
==PAGE:20==
The participant’s task was to play a section of the game The Wolf Among Us, while multi­
modal data was passively recorded. At five different times, participants had to self­assess
their levels of arousal, valence, and dominance. Physiological data was recorded from
an EEG headset, and a multimodal bracelet, that participants wore at all times. The
game screen, face camera, and the time and cursor position of left mouse clicks were
also stored. Recordings lasted less than 20 minutes per participant, including data during
stimulation and self­assessments. The introduction and hardware set­up lasted another
15 minutes per participant.
2.1.3
Stimuli
This experiment uses the first part of the first episode of The Wolf Among Us as stimuli.
This part lasts around 18 minutes, with individual variations, starting at the very beginning
of the game and ending when Episode I: ”Faith” is shown on the screen. The Wolf Among
Us is an exemplar of the choice­based cinematic adventure game sub­genre. The game
was released by Telltale Games in 2013. In it, players act like Bigby Wolf, the Sheriff of
a town populated by fairy­tale characters who have to disguise themselves as humans.
Other three characters appear in the section of the game used in the experiment: Mr.Toad,
Woodsman, and Faith. The game consists of emotionally charged and dramatically con­
textualized choices, rather than skill­based or strategic challenges [19]. According to the
creators of the game, the player tailors the story by selecting narrative options.
Murray [19] describes this game in three types of gameplay: choosing between narrative
options, free­roam exploration, and quick­time events (fig. 2.1). During narrative choices
(fig. 2.1a), the player is presented with four choices and a red bar at the bottom. The
red bar shrinks with time and it represents the amount of time left for the choice. The
choices made in­game will impact the narrative. During free­roam exploration moments
(fig. 2.1b), players can engage with elements of the environment through mouse clicks,
and move around with the ‘w’, ‘a’, ‘s’, ‘d’ keys. The third type of gameplay, quick­time
events (fig. 2.1c), happens at violent or risky parts of the game. The player is prompted
with specific keyboard keys which have to be quickly pressed. These three types of game­
play will be collectively referred to as active gameplay.
Moments of active gameplay are intercalated with cutscenes, where the players passively
watch the narrative developing. Player choices do affect some cutscenes and the over­
all history of the game. Although, in the first part of the first episode, the consequences
are less apparent. Hence, there are cutscenes shown to every player, irrespective of
their actions during active gameplay, constituting time­locked stimulation. In contrast,
active gameplay is not locked in time across different users. Players differ in their nar­
rative choices, time spent on each choice, actions taken during free­roam exploration,
and reaction times during quick­time events. The Wolf Among Us was chosen as stimuli
since it presented an emotionally­charged interactive narrative, that required active user
participation and had both time­locked and not­time­locked moments.
12
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:21==
(a) First narrative choice in The Wolf Among Us. The user interface presents four choices and a
red bar represents time. Here, Sheriff Bigby (on the right) encounters Mr. Toad (on the left) not
disguised as a human. In this town, it is a rule that fables use a magic potion to look human. Mr.
Toad asks for the Sheriff to open an exception. It is up to the player to enforce the rules, or open
an exception for Mr. Toad.
(b) First free­roam exploration moment in The Wolf Among Us. In this type of gameplay, users are
able to interact with items in the environment. The user interface here shows ”Phone” as the item,
and ”Use” as the action.
(c) Quick­time event included in the first episode of The Wolf Among Us. Here Woodsman (cen­
tered) is threatening the Sheriff with a razor. The ’a’ key is prompted on the screen, which means
the player has to quickly press ’a’ to dodge the attack.
Figure 2.1: Screenshots of the three types of gameplay during the first episode of The
Wolf Among Us.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
13
==PAGE:22==
Although data was recorded throughout the whole experiment, only some time­locked
moments were selected for the ISC analysis. I mapped all the cutscenes shown to every
player independently of their choices and selected those that lasted more than 25 sec­
onds. The first 25 seconds of the game were disconsidered due to transient noises in
the beginning of the recordings. In total, eight 25­seconds­long moments were selected
for analysis, which will be referred to as trials. Table 2.1 contains the approximate time of
gameplay in which the trials occurred, and the context of what was happening in the game.
During tests with the ISC method, I found that the ISC values tend to increase with longer
segments of data. Therefore, in order to enable comparisons of between segments, all
trials have the same length.
Table 2.1: Eight 25­seconds­long trials of time­locked stimulation, used for ISC analysis.
The table contains the Trial Number, Approximate time of gameplay, and context. The
approximate time of gameplay varies according to differences during active gameplay
and previous self­assessments, although the trial length is always 25 seconds.
Trial
Number
Approximate
time
of
gameplay
Context
0
25 s ­ 50 s
Initial credits followed by a taxi going through a
city at night while the radio is on.
1
1 min 50 s ­ 2 min 15 s
Bigby arrives at Tenement Building and finds Mr.
Toad not disguised as a human. This trial ends
when the first narrative choice is presented.
2
8 min 55 s ­ 9 min 20 s
Bigby falls on Mr.
Toad’s car after throwing
Woodsman out of the window. This trial is fol­
lowed by a narrative choice, in dialogue with Mr.
Toad.
3
10 min 20 s ­ 10 min 45 s
The trial starts when Faith uses an axe to stop
Woodsman from suffocating Bigby. This trial fol­
lows a quick­time event, and arguably the climax
of the episode used as stimulus.
4
11 min 42 s ­ 12 min 07 s
Faith gets her purse. Gory scene of Bigby taking
the axe out of Woodsman’s body.
5
12 min 57 s ­ 13 min 22 s
The trial starts when Bigby says ”I feel like we’ve
met before”. Then he notices that Woodsman
has escaped the scene.
6
16 min 15 s ­ 16 min 40 s
Final credits
7
16 min 40 s ­ 17 min 05 s
Final credits
2.1.4
Affective Self­Assessment
Participants had to self­assess their current affective state five times during the experi­
ments, in moments other than those shown in Table 2.1. Participants had to rate arousal,
valence, and dominance from 1 to 9 according to the Self­Assessment Manikin (SAM).
The assessment was done on the computer through a pop­up window (fig. 2.2) controlled
by the recording software, described in section 2.2.3. The game was automatically paused
whenever the self­assessment window appeared, and resumed when the user clicked on
”Submit and Continue”. This button would only work if participants rated all three dimen­
sions of affect. Participants did not know when the window would appear.
14
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.2: Pop­up window shown to participants for the self­assessment of their cur­
rent levels of arousal, valence, and dominance. The name of the dimension and a short
question that reminds the concept are shown for each dimension, followed by the corre­
sponding SAM numbered from 1 to 9, and selection buttons. At the bottom is a green
”Submit and Continue” button.
Before the experiment, participants were verbally introduced to the concepts of arousal,
valence, and dominance and had the opportunity to raise questions. These are the de­
scriptions used:
• Arousal refers to the level of activation or energy experienced. When you feel calm,
relaxed, or even sleepy, you are experiencing low arousal (rated 1). On the other
hand, when you feel excited, alert, or anxious, your arousal level is high (rated 9).
• Valence represents the pleasantness or unpleasantness of an emotional experi­
ence. When you feel negative emotions like sadness, anger, or fear, you are ex­
periencing low valence (rated 1). Conversely, when you feel positive emotions like
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
15
==PAGE:24==
happiness, joy, or contentment, your valence level is high (rated 9).
• Dominance refers to the level of control or influence you feel over a situation or
emotion. When you feel overwhelmed or helpless, your dominance level is low
(rated 1). In contrast, when you feel in charge and empowered, your dominance
level is high (rated 9).
Table 2.2 shows the five moments during the experiment where participants self­assessed
their affective state. The first and last self­assessments were intended to capture the
participant’s state at the beginning and end of the experiment. The second and third
assessments intend to capture how active gameplay influenced the participants’ affect.
The second self­assessment happens before the free­roam exploration moment in this
episode, and before the quick­time event where Bigby fights Woodsman. The third self­
assessment follows this fight. Lastly, the fourth self­assessment moment was chosen
because of its connection with social behavior in the game. This moment happens after
an interaction between Bigby and Faith, and precedes the decision of giving or not giving
money to Faith, after she has been robbed by Woodsman.
Table 2.2: Five moments for affective self­assessment, with approximate time of gameplay
and context. ”Approximate time of gameplay” varies according to differences during active
gameplay and previous self­assessments.
Self­
assessment
Number
Approximate
time
of
gameplay
Context
0
1 min 04 s
The self­assessment window appears right after the first
time Bigby Wolf’s face is shown. Bigby is in the backseat
of a taxi, going through an urban scene. This precedes
any active gameplay.
1
4 min
After hearing noises and Mr. Toad’s suspicion of violence,
Bigby heads upstairs to investigate the case. This is right
before the only free­roam exploration moment in the ex­
periment.
2
8 min
The fight between Bigby and Woodsman seems to cease.
This is after the first quick­time event in the game.
3
13 min 50 s
This trigger follows Bigby and Faith’s dialogue, largely
controlled by narrative choices. And proceeds the deci­
sion of giving or not giving money to Faith.
4
17 min 10 s
This trigger marks the end of the experiment, after the
ending credits are shown to the player.
The self­assessment data includes the values from 1 to 9 corresponding to the partici­
pant’s levels of arousal, valence, and dominance, and the beginning and end times of the
assessment, for each of the five moments described in table 2.2.
2.2
Data Collection System
Aside from affective self­assessment data, the dataset consists of physiological signals,
movement­related data, and video recordings. This section describes the hardware used
for collecting data, the software developed to control the experiment, and how the data
was stored in four DataFrames and one video file (fig. 2.3).
16
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: Block diagram describing the data collection system. This diagram shows the
flow of data from inputs, in orange boxes, through processes, symbolized by purple rect­
angles, to the files saved, in green parallelograms. The data from the sensors Ultracortex
and Emotibit is also specified. The video processing part shows that clock.html, camera,
game, and the self­assessment window are inputs to OBS (Open Broadcaster Software),
which saves the data as a video. df_selfeval stores data from the self­assessment win­
dow; df_ultracortex stores EEG data from the Ultracortex; df_aux stores markers from
both sensors; df_emotibit stores interpolated PPG, IMMU, EDA, and temperature data
from the Emotibit.
2.2.1
Hardware
Physiological data recorded during the experiment includes EEG, PPG, EDA, and temper­
ature. Movement­related data includes data from an inertial and magnetic measurement
unit (IMMU) as well as the time of click and cursor’s placement at every left mouse click.
Besides the computer and the mouse used for the game, an EEG headset and a multi­
modal bracelet were used for data recording. The choice of hardware was constrained
to wireless low­cost off­the­shelf devices in order to maximize the usability of this system
in GUR scenarios. It was assumed that GUR teams would value low set­up times and
costs. The prioritization of convenience and affordability negatively impacts data quality
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
17
==PAGE:26==
and the robustness of the system.
EEG data was recorded with an Ultracortex Mark IV, produced by OpenBCI, using the
CitonDaisy Board with 16 dry electrodes. According to OpenBCI’s documentation [48],
“the Ultracortex is an open­source, 3D­printable headset [...] for recording research­grade
brain activity (EEG)”. CytonDaisy is a bioamplifying board capable of sampling 16 EEG
channels at 125Hz. The system communicates wirelessly to a computer through a USB
dongle using RFDuino radio modules. The 16 dry and passive EEG channels were placed
on a medium­sized 3D­printed structure [49] prior to this research. The system is powered
by four 1.5V AA batteries that were recharged after 5 recordings. The electrodes are
spring­loaded and can be screwed into the 3D­printed structure to adjust size. The 16
electrodes were placed according to the 10­20 system and a reference electrode was
connected to the participant’s left ear lobe.
PPG, EDA, temperature, and 9­axis IMMU data were recorded by an Emotibit with the
Emo board and Adrafruit Feather M0 module. The Emotibit is “a wearable sensor mod­
ule for capturing high­quality emotional, physiological, and movement data. Easy­to­use
and scientifically­validated [...]” [50]. The system was powered by a 400mAh lithium­ion
battery, and data was transmitted through wifi. The sensor was strapped to the partic­
ipant’s left forearm with the SD card slot closer to the elbow. The IMMU data consists
of an accelerometer, a gyroscope, and a magnetometer channel for each of the three
spatial dimensions. PPG data is formed by three channels with varying wavelengths: in­
frared, red, and green. The IMMU and PPG data are sampled at 25Hz. The EDA and
temperature data are each given by a single channel, and sampled at 15Hz.
(a) Electrode placement of the 16 elec­
trodes on OpenBCI Ultracortex Mark IV with
CitonDaisy board.[51]
(b) Components and features of the Emotibit
wearable sensor.[52]
Figure 2.4: Hardware used for recording EEG, PPG, EDA, 9­axis IMMU, and temperature
data
The Emotibit Emo board and the Essential Kit (Adafruit Feather M0, lithium­ion battery,
18
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:27==
microSD card, card reader, Micro USB cable, and three Emoti­strech straps of different
lengths) costs 364.98 USD [52]. The bundle containing the Ultracortex Mark IV Print­It­
Yourself Headset 16­channel, CytonDaisy board, and EEG Dry Comb Electrodes costs
2599.99 USD [53]. Excluding the costs of 3D printing, and the computer, the whole sensor
system costs 2964.97 USD when bought online from the OpenBCI Shop.
This system includes only open­source, wireless, low­cost, off­the­shelf hardware. The
system also benefits from a low setup time, taking less than five minutes per participant.
The setup consisted of strapping the Emotibit to the left forearm, adjusting the size of the
Ultracortex headset, and checking for a good connection of the EEG sensors. Before each
recording, EEG sensors were adjusted until there were no channels marked as ”Railed”
by the OpenBCI GUI.
A gaming laptop was responsible for simultaneously running The Wolf Among Us, the
recording software, and Open Broadcaster Software (OBS). The computer is an ASUS
GL503VD with a 4­core Intel i5­7300HQ processor, 16GB RAM, and a GeForce GTX
1050M graphics card. This computer had no performance issues.
2.2.2
Data
With this setup, each recording collects EEG, PPG, EDA, 9­axis IMMU, temperature, self­
assessments of arousal, valence and dominance, and auxiliary data. For every partici­
pant, four .csv files were created, separately containing Emotibit resampled data, Ultra­
cortex data, self­assessments, and auxiliary data. At the completion of each recording, a
directory is created containing the .csv files for a specific participant. The directories are
named as ”Subject_YY”, where YY is the index of the recording. Before being saved as
.csv files, the data is stored in four Pandas DataFrames named df_emotibit, df_ultracortex,
df_selfeval, and df_aux.
EEG Data
The Ultracortex data is stored by df_ultracortex. It contains 16 columns corresponding to
channels placed according to the 10­20 system on the following locations: Fp1, Fp2, C3,
C4, P7, P8, O1, O2, F7, F8, F3, F4, T7, T8, P3, P4. This DataFrame has size 125*t x 16,
where t represents the duration of the recording in seconds, and 125 corresponds to the
sampling frequency. Data is given in µV.
Emotibit Data
The Emotibit offers 14 channels of multimodal data, that are stored in df_emotibit. The
channels are described in table 2.3. The Emotibit data nominally has two different sam­
pling frequencies: 15Hz for ’eda1’ and ’temp’ and 25Hz for the other 12 channels. How­
ever, in practice, the sampling frequencies have small deviations from the nominal values,
resulting in a different amount of samples across sensors. In order to keep the 2D matrix
format, the channels were linearly interpolated to match the length of the ’ppg_3’, pre­
serving its data. The green PPG channel was chosen as a reference after finding that it
provided the best data for detecting heart rate, as described in section 2.4.2. PPG data
has no universally standardized unit as other measurements. The absolute values are
given in raw or relative units and depend on the specific sensor and calibration. The
manufacturer uses raw units as unit, which is the unit included in table 2.3.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 2.3: Metadata about df_emotibit, containing 9­axis IMMU data, three channels of
PPG, one of EDA, and a temperature channel. This DataFrame has 14 columns, and a
length depending on the duration of the recording in seconds t, and the actual sampling
frequency for the channel ’ppg_3’ ppg_3_fs.
Size
Columns
Units
Description
ppg_3_fs*t x 14
’accel_X’
g/s
Accelerometer data on the X axis
’accel_Y’
g/s
Accelerometer data on the Y axis
’accel_Z’
g/s
Accelerometer data on the Z axis
’gyro_X’
°/s
Gyroscope data on the X axis
’gyro_Y’
°/s
Gyroscope data on the Y axis
’gyro_Z’
°/s
Gyroscope data on the Z axis
’mag_X’
µT
Magnetometer data on the X axis
’mag_Y’
µT
Magnetometer data on the Y axis
’mag_Z’
µT
Magnetometer data on the Z axis
’ppg_1’
raw units
PPG data from red light
’ppg_2’
raw units
PPG data from infrared light
’ppg_3’
raw units
PPG data from green light
’eda1’
µS
Upsampled EDA data
’temp’
°C
Upsampled temperature data
Self­assessment Data
The results from the affective self­assessments are stored in df_selfeval. This DataFrame
has five columns and five rows. Each row represents one of the five self­assessment
moments described in table 2.2. It contains the values from 1 to 9 corresponding to the
self­assessment of arousal, valence, and dominance, as well as the time of when the
pop­up window appeared, pausing the game, and the time when the pop­up window was
closed, after subjects pressed ”Submit & Continue”, resuming the game.
Table 2.4: Metadata about df_selfeval. This DataFrame has a fixed size of 5x5 and con­
tains information from the affective self­assessments, with the selected values for arousal,
valence, and dominance, and pop­up and submit times
Size
Columns
Units
Description
5 x 5
‘popup_time’
s (unix time)
Unix time when the pop­up window appears,
pausing the game
‘submit_time’
s (unix time)
Unix time when the person clicks ”Submit &
Continue” after self­assessing, resuming the
game
‘arousal’
n ∈[1, 9]
Self­assessment of arousal from 1 to 9 at that
moment
‘valence’
n ∈[1, 9]
Self­assessment of valence from 1 to 9 at that
moment
‘dominance’
n ∈[1, 9]
Self­assessment of dominance from 1 to 9 at
that moment
Auxiliar Data
The last DataFrame, df_aux, stores auxiliary data. It contains both information about left
mouse clicks and about certain game events. This DataFrame has five columns, and
20
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:29==
its length is the number of left mouse clicks made during recording plus 8. The rows
corresponding to mouse clicks contain unix time, the corresponding samples on both the
Ultracortex and the Emotibit at the time the button was pressed, as well as the X and Y
position of the cursor on the screen. This information is enough to capture every narrative
decision made during the experiment, and segment the data based on participant’s clicks.
Auxiliary data is also used after recordings for segmenting the data into the trials presented
in table 2.1. The eight rows beyond the number of clicks are markers corresponding to the
moment when a certain game event is detected, as described in section 2.2.3. These rows
can be identified by absurd values in the ’y_mouse’ column, such as ­1 or none. These
values are absurd since the cursor position in the vertical direction is always positive and
existing. The detected game events were saved with unix time, samples on both sensors,
with a ­1 on ’y_mouse’. The eight markers correspond, in this order, to the beginning of
the recording, to the end of trial 1, to the beginning of trials 2 to 6, and to the end of the
recording. This covers every trial except for 0 and 7, because they do not need their
specific markers. Trial 0 starts 25 seconds after the recording and game. Trial 7 starts 25
seconds after trial 6 has been detected.
Table 2.5: Metadata about df_aux, containing auxiliary data such as mouse clicks and
game events.
Size
Columns
Units
Description
(n_clicks + 8) x 5
’unix_time’
s (unix time)
Unix time on the press of the left
mouse button, or at detection of
an event
’sample_125Hz’ sample index
Sample on the Ultracortex data
corresponding to the click or
event
’sample_25Hz’
sample index
Sample on the Emotibit 25Hz
data corresponding to the click
or event
’x_mouse’
pixels
Cursor position on the horizontal
direction from left to right
’y_mouse’
pixels
Cursor position on the vertical
direction from bottom to top
2.2.3
Recording Software
A recording software (section 2.2.3) was developed in Python to stream and save the data,
resample the Emotibit data, detect game events, and control the self­assessment pop­up.
This recording software uses unix time in order to synchronize the different sources of
data. Unix time is defined as the amount of seconds since January 1st, 1970 at UTC.
Unix time is also present in the video recordings, facilitating the contextualization of the
data with the video.
The data streaming from both sensors was done through the BrainFlow library [54]. Brain­
Flow supports both the CytonDaisy and the Emotibit board. In order to start recording, the
software first connected with the sensors, then printed a message asking for the investi­
gator to manually start recording in OBS and type ”start”. OBS is the software responsible
for recording the video. After that, the software waits for two left mouse clicks to effec­
tively start the datastream. These first two mouse clicks should open the game, and start
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
21
==PAGE:30==
it. This way the game and the data recording begin at the same time, after OBS has
started recording the video.
Every left mouse click during the recording was saved, as described in table 2.5. Brain­
Flow allows markers to be set on the sensors while data is being streamed. Markers are
saved as a separate channel on the sensor’s data and can store a float. This feature was
used to mark the time of mouse clicks, and the samples when a game event was detected.
At the end of each recording, the rows that had been marked are identified and used to
populate the ’unix_time’, ’sample_125Hz’ and ’sample_25Hz’ columns of df_aux. Besides
responding to mouse clicks, the recording software constantly run an image comparison
process, to detect game events.
Event Detector
One of the main challenges when developing the recording software was to be able to
accurately detect the moments in the game. This was necessary to identify moments of
time­locked stimuli for the segmentation of trials, and moments that should trigger an af­
fective self­assessment. Because I did not have access to the source code of The Wolf
Among Us, and because there were variations during active gameplay, an image pro­
cessing routine was implemented. The strategy that worked best consisted of an image
comparison between the current image on the screen and a set of game events.
The events consist of a set of .png images of size 1920x1080, in a specific order, shown in
section 2.2.3. Each image is a print screen of The Wolf Among Us in full­screen mode, of a
specific frame that should trigger either an affective self­assessment window to pop­up, or
a marker that represents time­locked stimulation to be set on both sensors. Section 2.2.3
shows how the 11 events used in this experiment connect with self­assessment described
in table 2.2 and the trials described in table 2.1.
Table 2.6: This table shows how 11 game events are connected to self­assessments,
listed in table 2.2, or to trials, found in table 2.1, depending on their trigger type.
Event name
Trigger type
Number
00_start
Self­assessment
Self­assessment 0
01_firstdecision
Trial end
Trial 1
02_goingupstairs
Self­assessment
Self­assessment 1
03_fightstops
Self­assessment
Self­assessment 2
04_wolfoncar2
Trial start
Trial 2
05_faithsaveswolf
Trial start
Trial 3
06_faithpurse
Trial start
Trial 4
07_wevemetbefore
Trial start
Trial 5
08_givehermoney
Self­assessment
Self­assessment 3
09_credits
Trial start
Trial 6
10_end
Self­assessment
Self­assessment 4
Event detector is a routine that runs constantly as data is being recorded. It is a compari­
son between the bottom 1000 pixels of the current image on the screen and a comparison
template. A template is a 1000x1920x3 array, created by converting the .png file to ’RGB’
style, and then selecting only the bottom 1000 pixels. The choice of cropping the bottom
1000 pixels was made to ignore differences in the window title bar, which can change
depending on the computer and operational system.
Before the recording starts, 00_start.png is converted into the first template. After that,
22
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:31==
the software constantly prints the screen, and selects the bottom 1000 pixels, resulting in
the same 1000x1920x3 shape of the template. The mean square error (MSE) between
the two images is calculated, as shown in eq. (2.1), and compared to a dynamic threshold.
If the MSE is higher than the threshold, it means that the event has not happened in the
game yet, so the screen is printed again, and the process repeats.
MSE =
1
1000 × 1920 × 3
1000
∑
i=1
1920
∑
j=1
3
∑
k=1
(screen_image(i, j, k) −template(i, j, k))2
(2.1)
When the MSE is below the threshold, it means that the frame just appeared on the screen.
This first triggers an action and then causes a new template to be set, using the next .png
image following the order shown in section 2.2.3. If the trigger type is Self­assessment,
the action is to show the affective self­assessment window, pausing the game. If not, unix
time and the samples on both sensors are saved, and ­1 is set to the ’y_mouse’ column
of df_aux, indicating that the event corresponds to a trial.
The threshold is dynamically set for each template. This was necessary since different
templates had different brightness levels, hindering the usage of a fixed threshold. Darker
templates have lower mean values, which increases the MSE, which increases the sensi­
tivity of the system and causes the false detection of events. To fix that, the threshold had
to consider the brightness level of the template. The threshold is defined as the mean of
the template plus a tolerance, as shown in eq. (2.2).
threshold = tolerance +
1
1000 × 1920 × 3
1000
∑
i=1
1920
∑
j=1
3
∑
k=1
(template(i, j, k))
(2.2)
A tolerance is added to the threshold to account for variations between the frame used
as template, and the screen capture closest to it. Tolerance also accounts for the mouse
cursor. Each iteration of the event detector routine takes some time. When an event
is not detected, each cycle takes on average 201ms on the laptop used for recording.
Therefore it can be considered that the event detector has a sampling frequency of about
5Hz. Assuming the system only detected the event in the closest screen capture from the
actual event, the inaccuracy of the system can be up to 5 samples on the Emotibit data,
and up to 25 samples on the Ultracortex data.
During the recording of the first volunteer, with a tolerance of 15, the system failed to
recognize the fifth event, and therefore the recording could not be segmented into trials.
When investigating the issue, I found that the image used as event was at the begin­
ning of a visual fade­in. A fade­in is when the image starts darker and progressively
becomes brighter, the technique is commonly used in visual media to create a gradual
transition. Even though the objects on the screen were stable, the quick changes in bright­
ness caused the event detector to fail. The data from this recording was not included in
any analysis, the tolerance was set to 16, and the frame used for the event was changed
to another frame one second later, that is 04_wolfoncar2. The event detector did not fail
at detecting any other event after these changes.
This event detector was created since I could not use the game itself to trigger actions
during the experiment, nor could I use fixed timestamps, because of individual differences.
It allows this system to detect events in the game without having its source code. It is
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
23
==PAGE:32==
important to mention that this event detector was not designed for any game. The Wolf
Among Us has a slow pace and a high visual continuity between frames when compared
to, for example, competitive first­person shooter games. Also, all the events were frames
taken from cutscenes, and therefore the player could not alter or control what was being
shown on the screen.
Open Broadcaster Software
The developed recording software was responsible for streaming and saving the physio­
logical, movement­related, self­assessment, and auxiliary data. It was also responsible
for controlling the self­assessment pop­up window and constantly running the event de­
tector. In parallel to it, the Open Broadcaster Software (OBS) was running, responsible
for recording the game screen and face camera. OBS is a free and open­source software
for video recording and live streaming. OBS can record from multiple sources with the
use of scenes. An OBS scene is a template that organizes different visual sources in a
spatial layout, this way only one video file is necessary to save the game screen and face
camera.
In this experiment a single scene (fig. 2.5) was used for every recording. This scene has
four sources: the face camera, positioned on the top­left; the game screen, positioned
on the bottom­right; the self­assessment window, positioned below the face camera, and
unix time positioned on the top­right. The self­assessment window is only present in the
video when the window is open, therefore during a self­assessment while the game is
paused.
Figure 2.5: Video recording of the experiment, done through OBS. Top left corner has
the face camera, and the top right corner has unix time in ms, the time of the recording,
and the date. The bottom right has the recording of The Wolf Among Us, and the bottom
left has the self­assessment window. The self­assessment window only appears on the
video, when the person is self­assessing, and therefore the game is paused.
Unix time was added to the video to facilitate the contextualization of the data. Unix time is
displayed in ms, followed by the time in HH:MM:SS format, and the date in DD/MM/YYYY
format. OBS is not able to get unix time directly from the computer, so unix time was
accessed through an HTML file named clock.html. This file allowed OBS to get the current
24
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:33==
unix time from the internet. The file was edited to display the time in the desired format,
and the time in the local timezone. Since the unix time on OBS was taken from the internet,
and the unix time on the recording software from the computer, there are differences
between the two. Although the unix time present on the video file is not as precise as the
one used by the recording software, having unix time on the screen makes connecting
the data to the stimuli much easier.
2.3
Inter­Subject Correlation Analysis of Collected Data
This thesis intended to conduct ISC analysis on the heart rate and EEG data collected.
Inter­subject correlation has been proposed as a physiological marker of engagement,
which has interesting applications for user research. Before executing the ISC analyses,
a series of tests were made to validate the methods and data quality, and those are de­
scribed in section 2.4. Because of teh results from these validations only EEG data will
be analysed from the collected data. Previous sections show how the data was collected,
and what was the experiment design. This section describes the steps and methods ap­
plied for the analysis of ISC on collected EEG data. First the preprocessing steps are
defined, then CorrCA, the methods for obtaining ISC from EEG, is described.
2.3.1
Preprocessing
After the recordings were completed, the collected data passed through a preprocessing
routine before being analysed. In preparation for CorrCA, the EEG data collected passed
through filtering, segmentation, removal of bad channels and artifacts. EEG is renowned
for its low signal­to­noise ratio (SNR), primarily because of the inherently weak electrical
signals generated by the brain. In addition to this, the use of low­cost devices in this study
adds to the challenge of maintaining signal integrity. The data found in df_ultracortex is
in its raw format, and corresponds to the full experiment recording, which lasts around 18
minutes. For CorrCA, we want to increase SNR, and segment the data into the eight trials
(table 2.1). The preprocessing was done with MNE [55], an open­source Python package
for exploring, visualizing, and analyzing human neurophysiological data.
The data from df_ultracortex was loaded as an MNE raw object, with metadata about sen­
sors and sampling frequency and then filtered. At first, a high­pass with cutoff frequency at
0.5Hz, and a notch filter at 50Hz was applied, following the preprocessing steps reported
by Dmochowski et al. [4] and Cohen and Parra [34]. The signal’s power spectral density
(PSD) showed a rise at the frequencies around 50Hz, and a peak at 25Hz, which is not
expected in EEG, and therefore more intense filters were applied. In the end, the data
from each subjected passed through a band­pass filter with the lower pass­band edge at
0.5Hz and the upper pass­band edge at 40Hz, and a notch filter at 25Hz. The 0.5Hz limit
was set to eliminate DC offset, slow drifts, muscle and respiration artifacts. The 40Hz limit
was set to eliminate the power line, and higher frequency interferences. The notch filter at
25Hz was applied to eliminate the peak at that frequency, this peak has been discussed
in OpenBCI’s forum, and appears to be common across users of the CytonDaisy board.
After filtering, the data was segmented into the trials. The markers necessary for seg­
mentation are saved in df_aux. This DataFrame contains the starting sample of the trials,
the segmentation selected the 3125 samples after the sample marked in ’sample_125Hz’,
corresponding to 25 seconds at the sampling frequency of 125Hz. After this, each of the
8 trials, for each of the 10 subjects were preprocessed individually. After filtering and seg­
menting the data, bad channels were removed from the trials through visual inspection.
At this stage, I decided to discard the data from Subject_11, because at the end of the
recording six out of the sixteen electrodes were marked as bad, and therefore this sub­
ject’s data was not included in the last steps of preprocessing or analysis. The segments
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
25
==PAGE:34==
were then ready for an Independent Component Analysis (ICA).
ICA is a blind source separation technique that aims at splitting statistically independent
components from multivariate data. ICA was performed on all trials mainly to remove eye
blink and eye movement artifacts. Up to three independent components were removed
from trials. The signal was then reconstructed, and the channels marked as bad were lin­
early interpolated, and therefore the EEG data was ready for CorrCa. After preprocessing,
the data for the analysis was saved in a list of length 8, where each item represents a trial
of common time­locked stimuli, and contains a 10x16x3125 array with EEG data, formed
by 10 subjects, 16 EEG channels, and 3125 samples.
During preprocessing it was notices that multiple trials had short segments with strong
influence of noise. The noise was usually a burst, shown in section 3.5.2. These trials
were flagged as bad, and the analysis was done once again without the flagged trials. The
analysis was also redone with the trials concatenated, as a 10x16x25000, where 25000
represents the total number of samples from the 8 trials. The data was also re­referenced
to the average of the electrodes, which yielded no difference in results.
2.3.2
ISC of EEG
After preprocessing, the EEG data is ready for ISC analysis. As mentioned before, ISC
is interesting because it can be an indicative of the engaging quality of the stimuli. The
method for obtaining ISC in multivariate data, such as EEG, is called Correlated Compo­
nents Analysis (CorrCA). This method accomplishes the goal of identifying directions in
multivariate data that are reliably reproduced across repetitions. When applied to EEG,
CorrCA linearly decomposes the signal capturing dimensions with maximal correlation be­
tween subjects. The method is didactically described by Parra, Haufe, and Dmochowski
[6]. The following calculations consider a single trial, with N subjects, D channels, and T
samples. For the data collected in this research N = 10, D = 16, T = 3125.
The goal of CorrCA is to identify the projection vector v ∈RD that linearly combines the
D EEG channels in a way that the correlation between N subjects is maximized:
yI
i = vT xiI
(2.3)
ISC, referred to as ρ, is defined here as the ratio of between­subject covariance rb, and
the within­subject covariance rw:
ρ =
1
N −1
rb
rw
(2.4)
Equation (2.5) follows from inserting eq. (2.3) into eq. (2.4):
ρ =
1
N −1
vT RBv
vT RW v
(2.5)
where RB and RW are the between­subject and within­subject covariance matrices of xk
i ,
and are defined as:
26
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:35==
RB
=
T
∑
i=1
N
∑
I=1
N
∑
k=1,k̸=I
(xI
i −xI
∗)(xk
i −xk
∗)T
(2.6)
RW
=
T
∑
i=1
N
∑
I=1
(xI
i −xI
∗)(xI
i −xI
∗)T
(2.7)
Where I is one individual, ¯xI
∗is the sample­mean vector for subject I. The (N −1)−1
scaling factor in eq. (2.4) is necessary so that ρ ≤1. To simplify the notation, section 2.3.2
omits the scaling factor of (T −1)−1N−1.
The projection vector v that maximizes ρ is found as the solution of
∂ρ
∂vT = 0, which leads
to:
RBv = ρRW v
(2.8)
Given an invertible RW , the projection with maximal ISC is given by v1, the eigenvector
of R−1
W RB, and the ISC is given by the eigenvalue ρ. Moreover, CorrCA intends to find
all different projections that capture a significant ISC. Therefore the goal is to find all
projection vectors V = [v1, ..., vD] so that the cost function eq. (2.9) is maximized. This
is done so that the components aare mutually uncorrelated, a constsraint similar to those
applied in ICA.
J(V) =
D
∑
d=1
ρd =
D
∑
d=1
vT
d RBvd
vT
d RWvd
(2.9)
The solution to this problem is given by the eigenvector matrix V that satisfies the eigen­
value eq. (2.10) where Λ is a diagonal matrix with ISC values for each subject ρd of the
projections of the data yd = vT
d x:
RBV = RWVΛ
(2.10)
Therefore CorrCA is a method that provides eigenvectors that represents projections of
EEG data that are mutually uncorrelated and maximize the ratio of between­subject co­
variance, and within­subject covariance. The ISC value for each projection is given by its
eigenvalue, with the last projection capturing the smallest ISC.
It is worth mentioning that the sign of any eigenvector is arbitrary, therefore if vd is a so­
lution, then −vd also is. reversing the sign of vd implicates in reversing the sign of yI
d.
Therefore, components that have opposite signs while keeping the same spatial distribu­
tion are considered the same.
A more efficient way of computing CorrCA comes from the understanding that the total
covariance RT = RB + RW , and that RT can be calculated through 2.11, where ¯x∗
i is the
mean across subjects, and ¯x∗
∗is the grand mean. This way RB can be calculated through
RW and RT , which do not requires summation over pairs, reducing the order of operations
from N2 to N.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
27
==PAGE:36==
RT = N2
T
∑
i=1
(¯x∗
i −¯x∗
∗)(¯x∗
i −¯x∗
∗)T
(2.11)
With the ISC projections and values calculated, it remains unkown weather the ISC values
are statistically significant. The statistical significance is found in the distribution of the
maximal eigenvalue for CorrCA done on multiple circular shifts of the original data. A
circular shift is scrambling the original data in time for each subject. Then the ISC values
are calculated from the scrambled data and appended to a list. This list captures the
distribution of maximal eigenvalues of shifted data, the threshold is defined by the β­th
percentile of this distribution, with β being the confidence level. The analysis done in this
thesis considered a significance level of 5%, and 200 circular shifts when calculating the
statistical significance threshold.
Yet these calculations provide one set of components and ISC values per trial, and fail
to capture the ISC dynamics during the trial. For this experiment, this would mean to
understand how the ISC values fluctuates for a specific component over the period of
stimulation, that indicates which parts of the stimulation are more engaging. To find ISC
over time, first it is necessary to find the components that maximize ISC for the entire
trial. Then the ISC is calculated on segments of the data done through a sliding window.
The segmented data is projected onto the component space found for the whole trial, and
then ISC is calculated on the projected data. This analysis used a 2­second long sliding
window with 80% overlap, and found 60 data points for the three maximally correlated
components for each 25­second trial.
2.4
Validation
Besides the ISC analysis done on the collected and preprocessed EEG data, data and
method validations were conducted in four different ways: ISC­HR method was validated
on the ECG from the DREAMER dataset; PPG data was validated in comparison to data
collected from the Firstbeat; CorrCA method was validated on the dataset from two pre­
vious studies that used the same method; and the CorrCA method was tested on EEG
captured by a wireless, low­cost, off­the­shelf device, also from the DREAMER dataset.
2.4.1
ISC­HR Validation
Due to insufficient data quality of the heart rate data collected, ISC was not analysed
on heart rate data. However, a script for the method was developed and validated with
publicly available data. This first validation intended to check whether the method for
obtaining ISC values from heart rate behaved as expected.
ISC of Heart Rate
To get the inter­subject correlation of heart rate (ISC­HR), first a correlation matrix is cal­
culated. The matrix contains the Pearson’s correlation calculated on the equidistantly
sampled corrected R­R intervals for each pair of subjects, as shown in eq. (2.12), where
i and j are two of N subjects. X(k) represents the k­th data point of the R­R data of
variable X, and ¯X and is the mean of variable X.
ρ(Xi, Xj) =
∑N
k=1(X(k)
i
−¯
Xi)(X(k)
j
−¯
Xj)
√∑N
k=1(X(k)
i
−¯
Xi)2 ∑N
k=1(X(k)
j
−¯
Xj)2
(2.12)
Equation (2.13) shows the calculation of ISC of heart rate (ISC­HR) for a subject in one
given a trial. The ISC­HR for subject i is computed as the Pearson’s correlation between
28
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:37==
that subject’s interpolated R­R data (Xi) and all other subjects’ data (Xj), where i is one
of N subjects, and j goes through all N subjects except for i.
ISCHR(i) =
1
N −1
N
∑
j=1,j̸=i
ρ(Xi, Xj)
(2.13)
Validation
The method described above was applied to data present in the affective dataset DREAMER
[41]. This dataset is formed by ECG and EEG data during affective elicitation by means
of audio­visual stimuli. Physiological data was recorded from 23 participants while they
watched 18 film clips of 65 to 393 seconds of duration. Self­assessments of arousal, va­
lence, and dominance were also collected after each clip. DREAMER also opts for wire­
less low­cost off­the­shelf devices for data collection. ECG was recorded from a SHIM­
MER wireless sensor at 256Hz. In the validation of the ISC­HR, the method is applied
to the ECG channel that provides the potential difference from the right side under the
collarbone to the left side of the rib cage.
Before the validation of the method, the ECG data available on DREAMER dataset was
preprocessed with BioSPPy. First a band­pass from 3Hz to 45Hz was applied, then onsets
were identified, and the R­R intervals calculated and corrected. The corrected R­R data
was then linearly interpolated and sampled at a fixed rate of 10Hz. This process was
repeated for every subject and trial present in the DREAMER dataset. This validation,
done on each of the 18 trials separately, calculates and plots the correlation matrix, then
plots the distribution of ISC for each subject, and calculates the ISC­HR values as defined
in eq. (2.13).
2.4.2
PPG Validation
In order to understand if the heart rate information extracted from Emotibit’s PPG chan­
nels was suitable for the ISC­HR analysis, simultaneous recordings were made with the
Emotibit and the Firstbeat Bodyguard 2. In this validation, first the best PPG channel for
extracting R­R intervals is identified, then the interpolated R­R intervals extracted from the
Emotibit are compared to the data provided by the Firstbeat. Four simultaneous recording
were completed, three lasting five minutes and one lasting ten, done on the same subject
at rest. The different sensors started at different times, but ended at the same second,
and were synchronized this way.
Firstbeat Bodyguard 2 is an ECG sensor with 1000Hz of sampling frequency. One elec­
trode was placed on the right side of the body, under the collarbone, and the other was
placed on the rib cage, as oriented by the user manual. The Firstbeat was only used
for validation, and not during the experiment described in section 2.1.2. The Firstbeat
offers artifact corrected R­R intervals, which were considered as the accurate represen­
tation of the heart dynamics and used as ground truth when comparing to the R­R interval
extracted from the Emotibit.
As mentioned in section 2.2.2, the Emotibit data passes through a linear interpolation be­
fore being saved to df_emotibit. With the exception of ’ppg_3’, all channels are resampled
from a 1D interpolation at regular intervals. The data from ’ppg_3’ was preserved because
it provided the best results when extracting R­R intervals.
This conclusion came after comparing the R­R interval extracted from the three PPG
channels before any interpolation. The R­R interval extraction was done with BioSPPy
[56], a toolbox for biosignal processing in Python, that bundles together various signal
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
29
==PAGE:38==
processing and pattern recognition methods. First the raw PPG data is filtered through a
band­pass from 1Hz to 8Hz, then onsets are identified. Values below 300ms, which would
represent a heart rate of 200bpm, were marked as false beats. Values above 1500ms,
which would represent a heart rate of 40bpm were marked as missed beats. False and
missed beats were removed, the percentage of outliers was calculated, and then the
signal without outliers is linearly interpolated.
The best performing PPG channel was defined as the one with less outliers detected. The
interpolated R­R interval extracted from the best performing PPG channel is then visually
compared to the artifact corrected R­R intervals from Firstbeat.
2.4.3
CorrCA Validation
To guarantee that the CorrCA algorithms worked properly, the method was first applied
on data coming from two studies that also used CorrCA. Both datasets were available at
Parra Lab’s website [57]. The first, referred to as SuperBowl data, was collected by Dmo­
chowski et al. [33] in 2014. In it 12 volunteers had their EEG data recorded while watching
10 clips of advertisement from the SuperBowl 2012 edition, in a darkened, electrically and
acoustically shielded room. The other dataset, referred to as Sundays at Roccos data,
was collected by Cohen, Henin, and Parra [38] in 2017, the dataset contains 18 subjects
that were watching the video Sundays at Rocco’s. Both studies recorded EEG with 64
active channels from a BioSemi ActiveTwo System, with sampling frequency of 512Hz
and 24­bit resolution. Additionally, SuperBowl data was recorded with four electrooculog­
raphy (EOG) channels, and Sundays at Roccos data with six EOG channels, that were
used in their preprocessing.
Although both studies report having multiple trials, the dataset available contained only
one trial for each study. Due to the high quality of the sensors used, precautions for
environmental noise, and the successful application of CorrCA previously, both datasets
were considered suitable for validating the algorithm. Before the validation, the data for
each individual is filtered from 1Hz to 60Hz, bad channels are removed and interpolated.
The power spectral density is checked before and after preprocessing. CorrCA is then
conducted on both datasets, calculating and plotting the top three components, their total
ISC values, and ISC over time with a sliding window of five seconds and 80% overlap.
This validation expects the components to have a similar shape as those found by the
original studies.
2.4.4
CorrCA Validation on low­cost device
After validating that the method itself works, the same algorithm will be applied on the
EEG data from DREAMER dataset. This validation is a stress test for the method, when
data with lower SNR is used. EEG from DREAMER dataset was recorded with the Emotiv
EPOC system, with 14 passive electrodes, and sampling rate of 128Hz. The data was
filtered from 0.5Hz to 40Hz, and bad channels were removed and interpolated.
CorrCA is conducted on this data in the same manner as in the Sundays at Roccos and
Superbowl data, calculating top three components, total ISC per component and the ISC
over time with a sliding window of five seconds and 80% overlap. This validation expects
the components to resemble those found by other studies, and expects the components
to be consistent across trials, as shown in the literature.
30
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:39==
3
Results
3.1
ISC­HR Validation
First the method for calculating the ISC of heart rate data was validated on ECG data
from the DREAMER dataset. After preprocessing, the method was applied on all 18 trials,
across 23 subjects. Figure 3.1 shows the results from the trial with highest mean ISC­HR
across subjects.
Figure 3.1: Inter­subject Correlation of heart rate, calculated across 23 subjects during
trial 8 of the DREAMER dataset. The Correlation Matrix, on the left, contains Pearson’s
correlation coefficients for every pair of subjects. The ISC­HR subfigure, on the right,
shows the ISC­HR value and box plot of the correlation coefficients for every subject. The
ISC­HR value, for each subject is equal to the mean, shown as the orange line in each
box.
3.2
PPG Validation
To validate the PPG data, it was first necessary to find the best performing PPG channel.
Figure 3.2 shows a comparison between two of the three PPG channels from the Emotibit,
at the same recording. Notice that, for this test, the PPG data was not resampled, as done
in by the recording software after data collection. Consistently, more onsets were detected
on ’ppg_3’. The grey areas in the R­R intervals plots represents values below 300ms and
above 1500ms, which are considered outside of the proper range of R­R for this subject at
rest. When comparing the R­R intervals, I concluded that the onsets detected on ’ppg_3’
did not represent falsely detected beats, as none of the R­R intervals are below 300ms,
and that ’ppg_2’ and ’ppg_1’ had more missed beats. Therefore ’ppg_3’ was identified
as the best channel, and the interpolation done by the recording software used ’ppg_3’
length as reference, maintaining the integrity of this signal.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Preprocessing of ’ppg_2’, the red light PPG
channel from the Emotibit.
The plot shows
multiple sections without any onset, represent­
ing a heartbeat, being detected. As a conse­
quence R­R values reached a maximum value
of 19918ms, where values above 1500ms are
considered missed beat. 32.3% of data points
were considered outliers.
(b) Preprocessing of ’ppg_3’, the green light
PPG channel from the Emotibit. The plot shows
more onsets detected throughout the whole
recording, which were not characterized as false
beats, shown by the lower grey area on R­R In­
tervals plot. With 26.1% of data points marked
as missed beats, this channel was identified as
the better performing one.
Figure 3.2: Comparison between two out of three PPG channels from the Emotibit. The
recording lasted 10 minutes and both sensors were measured on the same subject at the
same time. The Onset detection plots show the filtered PPG signal in blue and detected
onsets as vertical red lines. If correctly detected these onsets should correspond to heart­
beats. The R­R Intervals plots shows the R­R values in ms. The data points in the gray
area are classified as outliers for being outside the expected range. The figure shows
’ppg_3’ as the best performing channel.
Even though ’ppg_3’ performed better then the other channels, it was important to vali­
date whether the R­R intervals extracted from it could be used for ISC­HR analysis. To
be usable, the R­R intervals had to represent real heart dynamics, for that the artifact
corrected R­R intervals were used as ground truth. Figure 3.3 shows the R­R intervals
extracted from ’ppg_3’, outlier detection and removal, interpolation, and the R­R intervals
from the Firstbeat device. Results show that 26.1% of samples were considered outliers
and dropped. For the same recording ’ppg_2’ had 32.3%, and ’ppg_3’ 34.9% of samples
dropped. The intention was to apply the validated ISC­HR method on the collected data
for every trial. Considering that the trials are 25 seconds long, and the high rate of sam­
ples marked as outliers, it was decided that the interpolated R­R intervals extracted from
the Emotibit did not represent true heart dynamics, and was not suitable for the ISC­HR
analysis.
32
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.3: This figure shows three plots from ’ppg_3’, and at the bottom, one from with
collected from the Firstbeat, considered as ground­truth. The first plot shows R­R intervals
calculated as the difference between onsets. The second plot shows the same signal
without the values below 300ms or above 1500ms. And the third plot shows the R­R
intervals after interpolation. This figure shows that the interpolated R­R does not resemble
the fourth plot, which shows the artifact corrected R­R intervals from the Firstbeat device.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
33
==PAGE:42==
3.3
CorrCA Validation
To validate the CorrCA algorithms for EEG data, the method was applied to data that have
previously been used for CorrCA, and that has a high SNR. First the data was filtered,
and then bad channels were removed and interpolated, and then CorrCA was executed.
For Sundays at Rocco’s data, less then 6 channels were removed per subject. For the
Superbowl data, data from two subejcts were discarded for having more than 47 channels
marked as bad. One other recording had 14 channels removed, and the others had 6
or less. As examples, fig. 3.4 shows the PSD plot of data from the first subject after
preprocessing, from the Sundays at Rocco’s dataset, and from Superbowl dataset.
Figure 3.4: PSD plot of two signals from different datasets, after preprocessing. The top
plot corresponds to the Sundays at Rocco’s dataset, and the bottom one to the Superbowl
data. These plots show the expected PSD for EEG data, without any abrupt peaks, with a
slight descent towards higher frequencies. The plot also shows the effect of the band­pass
filters.
The results are shown in fig. 3.5 for Sundays at Rocco’s dataset, and fig. 3.6 for the
Superbowl dataset, along with the components found by the authors of the respective
studies. This validation shows that the top three components can be computed, for the
whole trial, along with their ISC values, with descending magnitudes. The figures also
show these components can be used for the analysis of ISC over time, and the statistical
significance levels.
The components shown in section 3.3 were interpreted as representing visual, auditory
and supramodal processes. Although the authors were careful with the interpretation, as
the first and second component are also capture supramodal responses [34]. The differ­
ences in the spatial distribution of components, when compared to the original studies,
could be connected to differences in preprocessing, as discussed in section 4.1. The
components found satisfactorily resemble the ones from the original studies, especially
the first component.
34
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:43==
(a) Results from CorrCA on Sundays at Rocco’s dataset. The topographic maps show the
spatial distribution of the components that maximize ISC. The ISC values are written above
the respective components.
The ISC values over time shows the statistical significance
threshold, and the ISC value calculated on a 5­second window for each component. This
can be understood as the instantaneous values of the ISC.
(b) Topographic maps of the top three components from the original study
[38]. Yellow corresponds to positive correlation and blue to negative. The
color scale, ISC values, and ISC over time were not reported.
Figure 3.5: Results from the validation of CorrCA on Sundays at Rocco’s dataset com­
pared to the results from the original study. The comparison shows a satisfying reproduc­
tion of the correlated components, especially for the first.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Results from CorrCA on Superbowl dataset. The topographic maps show the spatial distri­
bution of the components that maximize ISC. The ISC values are written above the respective
components. The ISC values over time shows the statistical significance threshold, and the
ISC value calculated on a 5­second window for each component. This can be understood as
the instantaneous values of the ISC.
(b) Topographic maps of the top three components from the original
study [33]. the ISC values, and ISC over time were not reported.
Figure 3.6: Results from the validation of CorrCA on Superbowl dataset compared to the
results from the original study. The comparison shows a strong prefrontal component for
the third component, which is likely linked to eye artifacts. The first component has the
frontocentral pole shifted to the left. And the second loses the bilateral temporal distribu­
tion.
3.4
CorrCA Validation on low­cost devices
After securing that the implementation of CorrCA works, the method was tested on the
DREAMER dataset. This dataset has EEG from a wireless low­cost off­the­shelf device,
with 14 passive electrodes, and therefore a lower SNR is expected, being a closer com­
parison to the data collected in this research. During preprocessing, the lower SNR was
apparent. Figure 3.7 show the PSD plot for two subjects at the same trial after prepro­
cessing. The top plot, regarding subject 2, shows a recording that was considered good
for the dataset, while the bottom plot, regarding subejct 0, represents a recording with
more noise. The peaks seen in the PSD for subject 0 appears also for other subjects in
multiple trials.
36
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.7: PSD from two subjects from the DREAMER dataset, for trial 8. The top plot
represents a better signal, channels with similar power, and no peak. The bottom plot
shows a PSD with multiple peaks, and a bigger difference in power between channels.
The cause of these peaks is unknown, but it is safe to consider it as noise.
CorrCA was conducted on the EEG data from DREAMER, regardless of the identified
noises in the data. The results can indicate how well the CorrCA performs with less chan­
nels, shorter recordings, and lower quality of data. The results found could not be directly
compared to other studies since there is no previous study that reports the results of
CorrCA on DREAMER data. Figure 3.8 contains the results for two of the 18 trials. Com­
ponents 1 and 2 from trial 5, and component 3 from trial 8 shows a strong predominance
of the frontal electrodes AF3 and AF4. Component 1 from trial 8 has a strong predomi­
nance of the right temporal electrode T8. And the occipital electrodes O1 and O2 have
strong participation in components 2 and 3 from both trials. The components found are
not consistent across trials, and do not resemble those found in the literature. Therefore
this validation reveals that noise does affect the quality and interpretability of the results,
and indicates a challenge for the application of CorrCA on the collected data.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Results from CorrCA on DREAMER dataset for trial 5. The topographic maps show the
spatial distribution of the components that maximize ISC. The ISC values are written above
the respective components.
The ISC values over time shows the statistical significance
threshold, and the ISC value calculated on a 5­second window for each component. The
components fail at reproducing the expected distribution.
(b) Results from CorrCA on DREAMER dataset for a trial 8. The components fail at repro­
ducing the expected distribution.
Figure 3.8: Results of CorrCA validation on DREAMER dataset for two trials. The valida­
tion done on DREAMER results in components that are not consistent across trials and
that do not resemble those found in the literature. This shows that CorrCA did not perform
well for this dataset.
38
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:47==
3.5
Analysis of Collected Data
This section presents the results for the ISC analysis done on the collected EEG data.
First a few examples of unusual noise in the data will be shown, then the preprocessing
steps are illustrated with an example, and lastly, the correlated components are presented
with ISC values, ISC values over time, and statistical significance levels.
3.5.1
Preprocessing
Figure 3.9: Time domain EEG signal containing 16 channels over 8 seconds, before any
preprocessing.
To illustrate the quality of the data and demonstrate the preprocessing steps, one subject
was selected as an example. Figure 3.9 shows the subject’s raw data from seconds 25 to
33, with a strong presence of periodic signals, which should largely reduce after the first
preprocessing step.
Figure 3.10: PSD of the same signal before and after filtering. The filter applied limits the
bandwidth of the signal and reduces the contribution of 25Hz and 50Hz components.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.10 shows the PSD plot before and after filtering. The PSD before filtering ex­
poses the periodic signals seen on fig. 3.9. The time domain signal after filtering is shown
in fig. 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Time domain signal after filtering. This shows that filtering reduces the con­
tribution of periodic signals, and increases SNR. The signal from Fp1 has two valleys at
28s and 32s that correspond to eye blinks. The same is not observed on Fp2.
After filtering, the periodic signals at 25Hz and 50Hz are attenuated, but their interference
remains visible on channels P7, F7, F8, F4 and T7. Eye­blink artifacts also become
visible, although only on Fp1. Typically eye­artifacts are most visible on Fp1 and Fp2,
simultaneously. The data is then segmented into trials. The segment shown in the figures
is from 25s to 33s, corresponding to trial 0 from 0s to 8s. The next preprocessing steps
consists of identifying and eliminating bad channels. Despite the presence of noise, no
channels were marked as bad for the first trial of this subject.
Next, ICA was conducted on the filtered and segmented data. The time domain repre­
sentation of the independent components is shown in fig. 3.12, and the topographic maps
shown in fig. 3.13. Components ICA002 and ICA003 were identified as eye­artifacts, and
removed from the data. The topographic map of these components also show the atypical
predominance of the eye artifacts on Fp1, and not on Fp2.
40
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.12: Time domain signal for each independent component. ICA003 captures the
eye blinks observed in fig. 3.11. ICA002 captures other eye artifacts not visible in this
segment of the data. This segment shows the first 8s of the first trial, which corresponds
to the signal shown on fig. 3.9.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.13: Topographic maps corresponding to the independent components resulting
from ICA. Shows ICA002 and ICA003 with a predominance of Fp1.
After removing the selected independent components, the signal is reconstructed, and
in case any channels are marked as bad, those channels are interpolated. Figure 3.14
shows the reconstructed signal, with a reduced but significant presence of noise. After
this process is repeated for every trial, across subjects, the collected data is ready for
CorrCA.
42
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.14: Time domain signal after preprocessing. This gives an idea of the data
quality, and when compared to fig. 3.9, shows how preprocessing improved the quality of
the signal.
3.5.2
Unusual Noise
Eye or muscle artifacts and interference from power line are some of the most common
and expected sources of noise. This subsection focuses on segments of the data with
unusual or task­specific noise, that was discovered during preprocessing. The first exam­
ple is connected to quick­time events in the game. As mentioned in table 2.1, trial 3 starts
after a quick­time event that is arguably the climax of the episode. In this quick­time event,
the game protagonist is in a risky situation, and the player has to press a key repeatedly
to survive. Figure 3.15 shows the time­domain signal before and after this quick­time
event starts, at 735s. The signal is completely lost, during the quick­time event, exposing
a challenge of conducting data collection with active subject participation. Although this
segment was not part of a trial, and therefore not used in CorrCA, some of the noise was
present in the beginning of trial 3.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.15: Time domain EEG signal that shows before and after a quick­time event
starts in the game, at 735s. This image shows the signal being overshadowed by noise.
Figure 3.16 shows a different shape of noise, which was found for multiple subjects, mul­
tiple times during gameplay. This burst has appeared across all channels, as shown in
the figure, and sometimes only on few channels. It lasts around 2 seconds, where during
the first second it rises in magnitude, then there is a peak, and then the magnitude de­
creases. Most occasions of this burst happened during active gameplay, and therefore
outside of the trials, but not all. The data shown in fig. 3.16 was taken from a trial, after
segmentation, and before ICA.
Figure 3.16: Time domain EEG signal of characteristic burst. This burst has appeared for
multiple subjects, throughout the recording. The cause of it in undetermined.
44
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:53==
The two noises described above were found across subjects. Aside from those, some
recordings had unexpected artifacts that were subject­specific. For one of the record­
ings, data quality got progressively worse with time, and became unusable. Figure 3.17
shows data from Subject_09 after filtering, for trial 2, which happens around nine minutes
after the experiment starts. The data from Subject_09 was completely discarded during
preprocessing.
Figure 3.17: Time domain EEG signal for Subject_09. The plot shows channels C3, C4,
P7, P8, O2, and F3 with much lower amplitude. Channels F4, T7, and T8 are highly
correlated, and F8 has a strong artifact with a cycle of 1s. This shows an example of bad
quality data found in the data recorded. This data was discarded and not considered in
the analysis.
As shown in section 3.5.1, preprocessing substantially improves the quality of the data,
but not all noise is removed. The trials that had bursts or other strong interference after
preprocessing were flagged.
3.5.3
CorrCA Results
CorrCA was conducted twice on the data after preprocessing, the first time including the
flagged trials, and the second time excluding them. Figure 3.18 and fig. 3.19 are examples
of the results obtained excluding flagged trials. The results come from fewer subjects, as
some have been flagged mainly due to bursts and other transient noise that could not be
cleaned in preprocessing.
Similar to the validation done with the DREAMER dataset, the components that maxi­
mize ISC in the collected data are not consistent across trials, and fail to reproduce the
components that have been found by multiple studies, using different stimuli. Given the
results, I cannot affirm that the correlated components represent reliable dimensions of
neural activity across subjects. In consequence, the ISC values cannot be understood as
indicatives of engagement level and the variation in ISC over time is likely not linked to
variations in the engaging quality of the stimuli.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.18: Results from CorrCA applied to the collected data after preprocessing, and
excluding trials with bursts, for trial 0. The topographic maps show the spatial distribution
of the components that maximize ISC. The ISC values are written above the respective
components. The ISC values over time shows the statistical significance threshold, and
the ISC value calculated on a 5­second window for each component. The components
fail at reproducing the expected distribution, and therefore cannot be interpreted as com­
ponents of correlated neural activity.
46
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.19: Results from CorrCA applied to the collected data after preprocessing, and
excluding trials with bursts, for trial 2. The topographic maps show the spatial distribution
of the components that maximize ISC. The ISC values are written above the respective
components. The ISC values over time shows the statistical significance threshold, and
the ISC value calculated on a 5­second window for each component. The components
fail at reproducing the expected distribution, and therefore cannot be interpreted as com­
ponents of correlated neural activity.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
47
==PAGE:56==
48
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:57==
4
Discussion
Previous research demonstrates that neural, physiological and behavioral signals syn­
chronize between individuals when engaging with a common natural stimuli. Inter­subject
correlation is a metric that has been proposed as a marker of engagement, here defined as
emotionally laden attention. Motivated by the application of biometric methods in games
user research, and considering the lack of affective datasets that fits the requirements for
ISC analysis, and has active user participation, this master’s thesis aimed at building the
foundations for a psychophysiological dataset for affect and engagement analysis, and at
conducting analyses of inter­subject correlation. The dataset created includes multimodal
physiological signals recorded from wireless low­cost off­the­shelf devices, and affective
self­assessments. Subjects were exposed to stimuli that requires active participation and
contains moments of time­locked stimuli. A series of validations were conducted to verify
the quality of the data, and proper execution of the methods.
To accomplish the research objectives, I have designed an experiment where participants
play the game The Wolf Among Us, while multimodal data is recorded from an Ultracor­
tex EEG headset, and an Emotibit multimodal bracelet, as well as video recordings from
game and face, mouse clicks, and affective self­assessments. I created a recording soft­
ware to stream and save data from both sensors, and control the experiment, and an
image processing routine to detect game events without having the game source code.
The experiment was conducted on 11 volunteers, the data was preprocessed, and in this
process a significant presence of noise was observed. The ISC­HR method was applied
to an available affective dataset, R­R intervals were extracted from preprocessed PPG
channels, and compared to data from a more reliable device. The CorrCA method was
validated on data from two previous ISC studies, and the validated method was then
tested on data with lower SNR, and applied to the collected data.
4.1
Results Interpretation
The ISC­HR validation intended to verify the proper execution of the method, and the
results came as expected. The correlation matrix presents diagonal symmetry, and the
individual items correspond to the pair­wise Pearson’s correlation coefficient, which ex­
plains the maximum value of 1 in the matrix diagonal, where the correlation coefficient
is calculated on identical signals. The ISC­HR per subject was also calculated and plot­
ted. These results allow comparisons between subjects and between trials. Lower ISC
indicates that conscious processing of the stimulus differs among subjects. It is known
that ISC is predictive of memory performance, and that it decreases when subjects are
distracted [1]. A lower ISC could be caused by the subject being less attentive, or the
content being less engaging.
The PPG validation was conducted to identify the best performing PPG and to evaluate
whether the extracted R­R intervals represented true heart dynamics. It was found that
PPG channels using a green light performed better than the ones using red and infrared
lights, which is in accordance to other PPG comparisons [58]. Notice that these three
lights are physically placed next to each other below the Emotibit device, and so I consid­
ered that they were exposed to the same conditions of ambient light, skin pigmentation
and sensor placement. Light with lower frequency, in this case red and infra­red, have
better penetration on the skin, but are also more prone to interference from muscles and
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
49
==PAGE:58==
tendons. Maeda, Sekine, and Tamura [59] argues that green light PPG sensors can sense
larger blood vessels without too much interference from deeper tissues.
This validation showed that the green light produced a PPG signal that allowed for better
detection of onsets, which corresponds to heart beats. In fig. 3.2, no onsets were de­
tected on the red light PPG channel for over 20 seconds, and the large amount of missed
beats from all channels motivated a comparison with a more reliable source of R­R inter­
vals. After defining the best performing PPG channel, the signal was preprocessed, R­R
intervals were extracted and compared to those coming from a Firstbeat device. During
preprocessing, over a quarter of data points were marked as outliers, excluded and inter­
polated. The R­R data extracted from the PPG was loosely connected to the one used
as ground truth.
Due to technical issues that I will later explain, the Emotibit data was partially or fully miss­
ing for four subjects. Considering that the trials on the recorded data are 25 seconds long,
that there would be less subjects for some trials, that over a quarter of the data points are
marked as outliers, and the signal do not capture variations seen in the data used as
ground truth, I concluded that the R­R intervals extracted from the Emotibit did not rep­
resent true heart dynamics satisfactorily. Initially, the ISC­HR method was developed for
the application on the collected heart rate data from the Emotibit, but after this validation,
it was decided that the ISC­HR analysis would not be conducted on the collected data.
Aside from heart rate, ISC analyses were carried on EEG data. The datasets from two
previous studies [38] [33] were used, in order to verify if the method produced sensible
results. Both original studies presented the components, but not the ISC calculated over
time. Also, the studies report multiple conditions and trials, and it is unclear which specific
condition corresponds to the data. Since the components found are consistent across
trials, and studies this did not affect the validation.
The literature reports that the first component is very consistent across trials, different
stimuli [32], and stimulus modalities [38], and that the second and third components are
slightly less congruent. The validation done on Sundays at Rocco’s data successfully re­
produced the first component, marked by a dipolar distribution consisting of frontocentral
and occipital poles. The second component found in this validation has a weaker pres­
ence of bilateral poles at the temporal electrodes, and a stronger participation of occipital
electrodes, when compared to the component originally reported. Lastly, the third com­
ponent presents an asymmetry between hemispheres, which is often observed in that
component. However, Cohen and Parra [34] showed that the third component depends
on the stimulus modality, changing for audio­only, video­only and audio­visual stimuli. It
was assumed that the data obtained corresponds to stimuli in the audio­visual condition.
I interpreted that the differences between the components found in the validation, and
in the original study are mainly caused by differences in preprocessing. Both Sundays
at Rocco’s and Superbowl datasets were preprocessed with a high­pass filter at 1Hz, a
notch filtered at 60Hz, the signal was down sampled to 256Hz, and eye­movement related
artifacts were corrected by linearly regressing out the EOG channels from all EEG chan­
nels. In contrast, the preprocessing I made band­passed the signal from 1Hz to 60Hz,
and eye artifacts were not removed, as the EOG channels were not available, and ICA
was not conducted.
The same method was applied to the Superbowl data. This dataset had more channels
removed and interpolated, less subjects, and a shorter trial. As mentioned before, during
preprocessing, the data from two subjects was removed due to excessive amounts of bad
channels. Results show a first component with the expected frontocentral pole, but with
50
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:59==
an tendency towards the left side, and the occipital pole, but with a tendency towards
the right side. The second component calculated did not present the predominance of
temporal channels, as expected. And the third component presents a strong participation
of prefrontal electrodes, suggesting a response to eye­related artifacts. It was considered
that the disparities in the components, when compared to the original study, could be
explained by differences in sample size, bad channels removal, and preprocessing. And
so I concluded that implementation of the method worked.
Since the method worked, I wanted to stress­test it on data with lower SNR. The DREAMER
dataset collected EEG data during common natural stimuli using wireless low­cost off­
the­shelf devices. When compared to the hardware used for Sundays at Rocco’s and
Superbowl datasets, DREAMER collected data at a lower sampling rate with 14 instead
of 64 channels, and passive instead of active channels. Therefore it was expected that the
data quality would be more similar to the collected data. During preprocessing, I noticed
that multiple recordings from the DREAMER dataset produced a PSD curve with multiple
peaks across the frequency domain. This was attributed to noise, as these peaks are not
expected in EEG data.
CorrCA on the DREAMER dataset generated components that are not similar to those
seen in the literature and that are not consistent across trials. CorrCA aims at capturing
reliable sources of correlated neural activity from conscious processing of the stimuli. In
this case the sources are not reliable, and are likely not representing sources of neural
activity. Results could be driven by eye­artifacts, poor connection of the electrodes with
the scalp, movement and muscle artifacts, and other undetermined external sources of
noise. The peaks in the PSD curve could also drive these results, as they were observed
for different subjects. Although these peaks do not represent neural activity, it can be
a source in the EEG signal that correlates across subjects, which would be captured by
CorrCA. From this validation I concluded that CorrCA is sensitive to noise, and that results
are not interpretable for lower signal­to­noise ratio.
After the validations, I conducted the ISC analysis on the collected data. The results
from the CorrCA validation on the DREAMER dataset indicates the challenge of applying
the method to data with low SNR. Therefore preprocessing was carried more carefully,
with the application of ICA for eye­related artifact removal. The results of CorrCA on the
collected data also failed to produce reliable components that match the ones reported in
the literature. I concluded that these components did not represent sources of correlated
neural activity. In consequence, I cannot extrapolate the connections between ISC and
engagement [1] [4] to these results. And so the interpretation of the results, and the
implications for user research are very limited.
This analysis was done again with a few variations of the data. First, the dataset was
conducted on all preprocessed data, then it was conducted only on the recordings that
were not flagged for having bursts or other strong noise, these results are presented
in section 3.5.3. Then the analysis was carried on the concatenated data, as if all trials
happened one after the other, without interruptions. And finally the data was re­referenced
to the average of all electrodes, which did not alter results. The results of these variations
were not presented, as they also consisted of unreliable components that did not match
the expectations.
4.2
Limitations
Preprocessing exposed different types of noise in the data beyond the expected eye,
muscle, and power line artifacts. First, there were hardware specific artifacts, such as the
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
51
==PAGE:60==
peak at 25Hz, observed by multiple users of the CytonDaisy board. Second, the signal
is highly sensitive to movement, especially head movements. The Ultracortex electrodes
are spring­loaded to increase the pressure applied by the electrode on the scalp. I spec­
ulate that this feature also increases the magnitude and duration of the effects of head
movements on the signal. This potentially explains the noise observed during quick­time
events in the game. Third, bursts appeared across all subjects, multiple times per record­
ing. At first, these bursts were understood as being connected to mouse­clicks, because
some bursts happened right after clicks. More careful investigation showed that not every
click had a correspondent burst in EEG, and that not every burst corresponded to a click.
The delay between a click and the peak of the burst was also not consistent. Therefore
there is not enough evidence to classify these characteristic bursts as mouse­click noises,
and further investigation is necessary to determine the cause of this and other types of
noise observed in the data.
Besides affecting the quality of the data, low­cost devices also created challenges during
data recording. The Emotibit stopped streaming data during the experiment four times.
And since the experiment required that participants were playing the game for the first
time, the experiment could not be repeated with the same subjects. The reason for this
error remains unknown, but I can affirm that it was not caused by battery issues, as the
battery was fully charged, and the Emotibit was on after the data streaming stopped.
Since the Emotibit transmits data through wifi, I suppose that this error might have been
cause by losing the connection momentarily. And because the Emotibit only connects
with wifi before the recording starts, the sensor would remain disconected for the rest of
the recording.
The quality of results might also have been impacted by sample size. The initial dataset
contained 18 minutes of recording from 11 subjects, but the analysis was made on eight
segments of 25 seconds each, or 200 seconds total. Because of the Emotibit disconnect­
ing during trials, the dataset available for analysis consists of 7 full recordings. Regarding
EEG data, the dataset after preprocessing and excluding trials flagged for having bursts,
was composed of 6 subjects or less, depending on the trial. Although sample size is likely
to improve the quality of results, it seems insufficient given the data quality. The validation
of CorrCA on the DREAMER dataset, with a large sample size and low SNR, performed
worse than the validation with the Superbowl dataset, with a small sample size and better
quality of data.
Another limitation of this study is connected to the imprecision of the event detector. As
mentioned in section 2.2.3, one image comparison takes on average 201ms, and the
detection could happen at frames before or after the intended one, depending on the
continuity between frames. This algorithm was sufficient for this experiment, but might not
be usable for other games. Games with low visual continuity between frames, or where
the player controls the camera could cause the event detector to fail. A more efficient
solution would be to use the game itself to mark events, this was not possible since the
game source code was not available.
4.3
Conclusion
The limitations and findings of this research have some implications for the games user re­
search context. First, the CorrCA results from DREAMER and the collected data suggest
that low­cost off­the­shelf devices are not capable of producing the data quality necessary
for interpretable results. This implies the cost of hardware is likely above 3000 USD, if the
intention is to collect EEG data, apply CorrCA and use ISC as a metric of engagement. It
is worth mentioning that more expensive EEG devices could implicate in the usage of wet
52
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:61==
electrodes, which affects the convenience of the system and increases set­up time. The
decision of hardware also depends on the user research goal. EEG has a high temporal­
resolution and allows the analysis of ISC over time, but it is also more expensive and more
sensitive to noise. An ECG­only system would be cheaper and more robust to noise, but
it would not provide information on how the ISC varies during a given trial.
It also became clear in this research that these methods can only be applied in some
situations. The stimuli has to be common across all subjects, and this is often not the
case in games, since they are interactive experiences. In the context of GUR, the method
can be applied to cut­scenes, as it was in this research. This means that this method is
better suited for story­rich, and cinematic games, or other types of media, such as videos,
movies, and lectures.
The method is also affected by the amount of movement that the players produce. As
shown before, movement can cause strong artifacts that can overshadow the actual sig­
nal. In part, this means that data might be lost in interesting moments of the game, where
players are prone to reacting physically to the game. Besides data being lost, weaker
movement artifacts, coming from eyebrows or eye movements could be reliably corre­
lated across subjects, and therefore would be captured by CorrCA.
As an example, jump scare moments in a horror game can reliably induce subjects to
contract the jaw muscle, move backwards, raise eyebrows, and blink. As these actions
interfere with EEG data, CorrCA could identify a component that captures the artifacts
created by the startle response. This component would represent a correlation of behav­
ior, and not neural activity as intended. In this case it might be interesting to use signals
that are less prone to these artifacts, such as ECG.
Another general concern when using biometric methods in user research is that the record­
ing system can affect the experience itself. It is reasonable to think that players are more
self­conscious when wearing an EEG headset, knowing that they are being recorded.
This has to be taken in consideration when introducing subjects to the experiment, and
when analysing their behavior.
Due to limitations of time and data quality, this research did not analyse EDA, the videos,
in­game decisions, or the affective self­assessments, that have already been recorded.
Future research could analyse whether the affective self­assessments can predict behav­
ior in the game, or the other way around. Another line of research would be to investigate
the effects of active gameplay in the ISC of time­locked moments. Because the CorrCA
results on collected EEG were not interpretable, this dataset cannot be used for that goal.
And, in case the use of low­cost hardware is a requirement, it is interesting to further in­
vestigate the sources of noise, and the contribution of preprocessing techniques. Future
research could also investigate the performance of ISC analysis in cooperative games,
where two or more players are simultaneously interacting in a shared virtual environment,
but from different perspectives. In this case, the interpretation of ISC has to be reexam­
ined, as it might respond to the coherence of the stimuli between players, and not to the
coherence of the conscious processing of it.
This thesis accomplished the goals of building the foundations for a psychophysiological
dataset for affect and engagement analyses, with certain requirements, and conducting
ISC analysis and validation on the collected data. The software developed for data record­
ing and analysis can be applied in future research, with the awareness of its limitations.
Validations have shown that the methods work, but that the data quality provided by low­
cost off­the­shelf devices is insufficient for the intended analysis. In conclusion, this thesis
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
53
==PAGE:62==
hopes to inform GUR in regards to the feasibility of ISC analysis with games, its usage
as a quantitative metric for engagement, and limitations regarding context, stimuli, and
hardware.
54
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Pauline Pérez et al. “Conscious processing of narrative stimuli synchronizes heart
rate between individuals”. In: Cell Reports 36.11 (2021).
[2]
Jens Madsen and Lucas C Parra. “Cognitive processing of a common stimulus syn­
chronizes brains, hearts, and eyes”. In: PNAS nexus 1.1 (2022), pgac020.
[3]
Uri Hasson et al. “Intersubject synchronization of cortical activity during natural vi­
sion”. In: science 303.5664 (2004), pp. 1634–1640.
[4]
Jacek P Dmochowski et al. “Correlated components of ongoing EEG point to emo­
tionally laden attention–a possible marker of engagement?” In: Frontiers in human
neuroscience 6 (2012), p. 112.
[5]
Paweł Jemioło et al. “Datasets for Automated Affect and Emotion Recognition from
Cardiovascular Signals Using Artificial Intelligence—A Systematic Review”. In: Sen­
sors 22.7 (2022), p. 2538.
[6]
Lucas C Parra, Stefan Haufe, and Jacek P Dmochowski. “Correlated components
analysis­extracting reliable dimensions in multivariate data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08881
(2018).
[7]
Lennart E Nacke. “Games user research and physiological game evaluation”. In:
Game user experience evaluation. Springer, 2015, pp. 63–86.
[8]
Anders Drachen, Pejman Mirza­Babaei, and Lennart E Nacke. Games user re­
search. Oxford University Press, 2018.
[9]
Pejman Mirza­Babaei et al. “Understanding the Contribution of Biometrics to Games
User Research.” In: DiGRA conference. Citeseer. 2011.
[10]
Edgar Banuelos­Lozoya et al. “A Systematic review for cognitive state­based QoE/UX
evaluation”. In: Sensors 21.10 (2021), p. 3439.
[11]
Sébastien Lallé, Cristina Conati, and Giuseppe Carenini. “Predicting Confusion in
Information Visualization from Eye Tracking and Interaction Data.” In: IJCAI. 2016,
pp. 2529–2535.
[12]
Stefano Federici et al. “Bio­behavioral and Self­report User Experience Evaluation
of a Usability Assessment Platform (UTAssistant).” In: VISIGRAPP (2: HUCAPP).
2019, pp. 19–27.
[13]
Sebastian Arndt et al. “Using electroencephalography to analyze sleepiness due
to low­quality audiovisual stimuli”. In: Signal Processing: Image Communication 42
(2016), pp. 120–129. ISSN: 0923­5965. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.image.2016.
01.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092359651600014X.
[14]
Arno Libert and Marc M Van Hulle. “Predicting premature video skipping and viewer
interest from EEG recordings”. In: Entropy 21.10 (2019), p. 1014.
[15]
Justus Beyer et al. “Using electroencephalography and subjective self­assessment
to measure the influence of quality variations in cloud gaming”. In: 2015 Seventh
International Workshop on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX). 2015, pp. 1–
6. DOI: 10.1109/QoMEX.2015.7148120.
[16]
Timothy McMahan, Ian Parberry, and Thomas D. Parsons. “Evaluating Player Task
Engagement and Arousal Using Electroencephalography”. In: Procedia Manufac­
turing 3 (2015). 6th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Er­
gonomics (AHFE 2015) and the Affiliated Conferences, AHFE 2015, pp. 2303–
2310. ISSN: 2351­9789. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.376.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2351978915003777.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
55
==PAGE:64==
[17]
Timothy McMahan, Ian Parberry, and Thomas D. Parsons. “Modality specific as­
sessment of video game player’s experience using the Emotiv”. In: Entertainment
Computing 7 (2015), pp. 1–6. ISSN: 1875­9521. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.entcom.2015.03.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1875952115000026.
[18]
Jérémy Frey et al. “Framework for electroencephalography­based evaluation of
user experience”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 2016, pp. 2283–2294.
[19]
John T Murray. Telltale hearts: encoding cinematic choice­based adventure games.
University of California, Santa Cruz, 2018.
[20]
James A Russell and Lisa Feldman Barrett. “Core affect, prototypical emotional
episodes, and other things called emotion: dissecting the elephant.” In: Journal of
personality and social psychology 76.5 (1999), p. 805.
[21]
Lisa Feldman Barrett and Eliza Bliss￿Moreau. “Chapter 4 Affect as a Psychologi­
cal Primitive”. In: vol. 41. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. Academic
Press, 2009, pp. 167–218. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)00404-8.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0065260108004048.
[22]
Kimberly B Rogers and Dawn T Robinson. “Measuring affect and emotions”. In:
Handbook of the sociology of emotions: Volume II (2014), pp. 283–303.
[23]
Margaret M Bradley and Peter J Lang. “Measuring emotion: the self­assessment
manikin and the semantic differential”. In: Journal of behavior therapy and experi­
mental psychiatry 25.1 (1994), pp. 49–59.
[24]
Rosalind W Picard. Affective computing. MIT press, 2000.
[25]
Simon Attfield et al. “Towards a science of user engagement (position paper)”. In:
WSDM workshop on user modelling for Web applications. Vol. 1. Citeseer. 2011.
[26]
Schoenau­Fog Henrik. “The player engagement process­an exploration of continu­
ation desire in digital games”. In: Think Design Play: The fifth international confer­
ence of the Digital Research Association (DIGRA). 2011, p. 18.
[27]
Henrik Schoenau­Fog. “Hooked!–evaluating engagement as continuation desire in
interactive narratives”. In: Interactive Storytelling: Fourth International Conference
on Interactive Digital Storytelling, ICIDS 2011, Vancouver, Canada, November 28–1
December, 2011. Proceedings 4. Springer. 2011, pp. 219–230.
[28]
Emily Brown and Paul Cairns. “A grounded investigation of game immersion”. In:
CHI’04 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. 2004, pp. 1297–
1300.
[29]
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Flow: The psychology of happiness. Random House, 2013.
[30]
Andrew K Przybylski, C Scott Rigby, and Richard M Ryan. “A motivational model of
video game engagement”. In: Review of general psychology 14.2 (2010), pp. 154–
166.
[31]
K Ann Renninger and Jessica E Bachrach. “Studying triggers for interest and en­
gagement using observational methods”. In: Educational Psychologist 50.1 (2015),
pp. 58–69.
[32]
Jens Madsen et al. “Music synchronizes brainwaves across listeners with strong
effects of repetition, familiarity and training”. In: Scientific reports 9.1 (2019), p. 3576.
[33]
Jacek P Dmochowski et al. “Audience preferences are predicted by temporal relia­
bility of neural processing”. In: Nature communications 5.1 (2014), p. 4567.
[34]
Samantha S Cohen and Lucas C Parra. “Memorable audiovisual narratives syn­
chronize sensory and supramodal neural responses”. In: ENeuro 3.6 (2016).
[35]
Andreas Trier Poulsen et al. “EEG in the classroom: Synchronised neural recordings
during video presentation”. In: Scientific reports 7.1 (2017), p. 43916.
56
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:65==
[36]
Kaisu Lankinen et al. “Intersubject consistency of cortical MEG signals during movie
viewing”. In: NeuroImage 92 (2014), pp. 217–224.
[37]
Yichuan Liu et al. “Measuring speaker–listener neural coupling with functional near
infrared spectroscopy”. In: Scientific reports 7.1 (2017), p. 43293.
[38]
Samantha S Cohen, Simon Henin, and Lucas C Parra. “Engaging narratives evoke
similar neural activity and lead to similar time perception”. In: Scientific reports 7.1
(2017), p. 4578.
[39]
Juan Abdon Miranda­Correa et al. “Amigos: A dataset for affect, personality and
mood research on individuals and groups”. In: IEEE Transactions on Affective Com­
puting 12.2 (2018), pp. 479–493.
[40]
Sander Koelstra et al. “Deap: A database for emotion analysis; using physiological
signals”. In: IEEE transactions on affective computing 3.1 (2011), pp. 18–31.
[41]
Stamos Katsigiannis and Naeem Ramzan. “DREAMER: A database for emotion
recognition through EEG and ECG signals from wireless low­cost off­the­shelf de­
vices”. In: IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics 22.1 (2017), pp. 98–
107.
[42]
Mohammad Soleymani et al. “A Multimodal Database for Affect Recognition and
Implicit Tagging”. In: IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 3.1 (2012), pp. 42–
55. DOI: 10.1109/T-AFFC.2011.25.
[43]
Mojtaba Khomami Abadi et al. “DECAF: MEG­Based Multimodal Database for De­
coding Affective Physiological Responses”. In: IEEE Transactions on Affective Com­
puting 6.3 (2015), pp. 209–222. DOI: 10.1109/TAFFC.2015.2392932.
[44]
Peter J Lang, Margaret M Bradley, Bruce N Cuthbert, et al. “International affective
picture system (IAPS): Technical manual and affective ratings”. In: NIMH Center for
the Study of Emotion and Attention 1.39­58 (1997), p. 3.
[45]
Wenlu Yang et al. “Physiological­based emotion detection and recognition in a video
game context”. In: 2018 International joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN).
IEEE. 2018, pp. 1–8.
[46]
Georgios N Yannakakis, Héctor P Martı́nez, and Arnav Jhala. “Towards affective
camera control in games”. In: User Modeling and User­Adapted Interaction 20 (2010),
pp. 313–340.
[47]
Javier Marı́n­Morales et al. “Affective computing in virtual reality: emotion recog­
nition from brain and heartbeat dynamics using wearable sensors”. In: Scientific
reports 8.1 (2018), p. 13657.
[48]
OpenBCI Documentation. Ultracortex Mark IV. Accessed: 28/08/23. URL: https :
//docs.openbci.com/AddOns/Headwear/MarkIV/.
[49]
OpenBCI Documentation. Ultracortex Mark IV, 3D­printed Parts. Accessed: 28/08/23.
URL: https://docs.openbci.com/AddOns/Headwear/MarkIV/#3d-printed-parts-1.
[50]
Emotibit website. Accessed: 28/08/23. URL: https://www.emotibit.com/.
[51]
Saad Arif, Saba Munawar, and Hashim Ali. “Driving drowsiness detection using
spectral signatures of EEG­based neurophysiology”. In: Frontiers in physiology 14
(2023), p. 1153268.
[52]
OpenBCI Shop. Emotibit. Accessed: 28/08/23. URL: https://shop.openbci.com/
products/emotibit?_pos=2&_fid=61f232b64&_ss=c.
[53]
OpenBCI Shop. Print­It­Yourself Neurotechnologist Bundle. Accessed: 28/08/23.
URL: https://shop.openbci.com/products/d- i- y- neurotechnologists- starter- kit?
variant=16117684338760.
[54]
BrainFlow website. Accessed: 28/08/23. URL: https://brainflow.org/.
[55]
MNE website. Accessed: 04/09/23. URL: https://mne.tools/stable/index.html.
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
57
==PAGE:66==
[56]
BioSPPy website. Accessed: 05/09/23. URL: https://biosppy.readthedocs.io/en/
latest/index.html#.
[57]
Parra Lab’s website. Accessed: 05/09/23. URL: https://www.parralab.org/corrca/.
[58]
Y Maeda et al. “Comparison of reflected green light and infrared photoplethysmog­
raphy”. In: 2008 30th annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in
medicine and biology society. IEEE. 2008, pp. 2270–2272.
[59]
Yuka Maeda, Masaki Sekine, and Toshiyo Tamura. “The advantages of wearable
green reflected photoplethysmography”. In: Journal of medical systems 35 (2011),
pp. 829–834.
58
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix
All code can be found at https://github.com/Castelli0/MScThesis.
The preprocessing, validations and analysis is stored in MScThesis/Analysis.
The recording software is stored in MScThesis/DataRecorder.
The data used for the PPG validation can be found at MScThesis/Data/ppg­ecg_test
The data collected during the experiment was uploaded to DTU repository, with the con­
sent of the volunteers, and is stored in WOLF_dataset.zip
A Psychophysiological Analysis of User Engagement with Inter­Subject Correlation
59
==PAGE:68==
Informed consent form 
 
Project title: Psychophysiological database for affective evaluation and inter-subject 
correlation for games user research 
Investigator: André Castelli Zacharias, MSc. student in Technology Entrepreneurship at DTU. 
 
I can confirm that: 
• I was satisfactorily informed about the study concerned both verbally and in writing 
by means of the participant information letter. 
• I have had the opportunity to put forward questions regarding the study and these 
questions have been answered satisfactorily. 
• I have carefully considered my participation in the experiment. 
• I participate of my own free will. 
 
I understand that: 
• My participation is voluntary, and I have the right to withdraw from the experiment at 
any time without having to give a reason. 
• My privacy is protected according to Danish law and European guidelines (GDPR; EU 
2016/679) 
• My consent will be sought every time I participate in a new experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I give my consent to take part in this experiment:  
 
Full name:    _____________________________________  
 
Date, place:  _____________________________________ 
 
Signature:     _____________________________________ 
 
==PAGE:69==
Participant information letter 
 
Project title: Psychophysiological database for affective evaluation and inter-subject 
correlation for games user research 
Investigator: André Castelli Zacharias, MSc. student in Technology Entrepreneurship at DTU. 
 
Dear participant, 
In this letter, we will inform you about the purpose of the experiment and the procedures. It 
is important that you read the letter carefully. If you have any questions, do not hesitate to 
contact the investigator (andre.castelli0@gmail.com) for clarification. 
 
Your rights as a participant 
Your participation in this experiment is voluntary. This means that you can leave the 
experiment at any point in time without consequences for yourself, and without having to give 
a reason. We will ask you for informed consent to participate after you have been informed 
about the experiment. 
 
Research purpose 
Biometrics has proven its value in user research, neuromarketing, and behavioral research. 
Much of the development for these applications depends on datasets with physiological 
recordings during affective stimuli. Current available datasets use audio-visual stimuli that 
leave participants in a passive role, such as videos and pictures. This creates challenges for 
applying biometric research in contexts where subjects have active participation, such as 
video games. 
Although biometrics has been used in games user research [1], and is used by many game 
studios, there is no available dataset that uses games as stimuli. This research aims at creating 
and analyzing a multimodal dataset for affective analysis with active participant involvement.  
 
Methods 
The dataset you are helping to build will be used for different kinds of analyses, as explained 
in the next section. This master’s thesis is mainly interested in inter-subject correlations (ISC), 
which is a measure of how different people’s physiological responses correlate when exposed 
to a common stimulus, in this case, a video game. ISC has been used to investigate audience 
preferences [2], attention [3], and engagement [4]. 
A plausible interpretation for the connection between ISC and engagement is that whenever 
the stimulus becomes more emotionally salient and engaging, subjects will present major 
stimulus-driven responses contrary to internally oriented activity, increasing the similarity 
between subjects, and therefore the ISC. 
Levels of ISC will be calculated from neural activity (EEG) through Correlated Component 
Analysis [5], after pre-processing. And from heart activity (PPG) through Pearson’s Correlation 
coefficient of the inter-beat intervals across subjects, given a satisfying data quality. The ISC 
will then be compared to a statistical significance level. 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria 
• Only healthy, aged 18-35, right-handed participants will be included. 
• Participants must be proficient in English. 
• Participants must have never played or watched gameplays of “The Wolf Among Us”. 
• Participants must not have any psychiatric or neurological condition, and not take any 
psychotropic medication. 
 
Ethical considerations 
Written informed consent will be obtained from each participant before the experiment. 
Participants may at any time withdraw their consent, without having to justify their decision. 
All data recorded and methods are non-invasive and provide no risk or negative effects to the 
participants. The sensors used in the experiment might leave temporary marks on the left arm 
and forehead, due to the pressure applied. 
The video game used in this experiment is adult classified (PEGI 18). Although the content of 
the game is animated with non-realistic style, subjects will be exposed to scenes of violence 
and gore, consumption of alcohol and tobacco, bad language, and references to prostitution. 
 
Data storage and handling 
All physiological data (EEG, PPG, EDA, temperature), movement related data (IMMU, mouse 
click’s position and time), and affective self-assessments, will be pseudo-anonymized 
(physiological data) or fully anonymized (movement, and self-assessments), that is, stored not 
in connection with your name or any other information that would allow to identify you. For 
this, your data will be stored under a handle (number code). Personal information such as 
your name and email address will not be stored. 
Non-anonymized data (video recordings of screen and face) will also be collected, and the 
connection to the physiological data will be kept until the completion of the study. 
The pseudo and fully anonymized data will be stored in DTU repository (with consent from 
participants), but the videos will only be available to the researchers, and Affecture, the 
company founded by the investigator. 
In the future, this data might be used for machine learning training and validation, facial 
expression recognition, analyses of in-game decisions, and other inter-subject analyses. The 
results will be used in the investigator’s master’s thesis and could be used for commercial 
purposes by Affecture. 
 
Experiment procedure 
During this experiment, which is expected to last around 30 minutes, you will be playing the 
first episode of the game “The Wolf Among Us”. Your data will be recorded during the whole 
experiment, as mentioned in the previous section. At certain points in the game, you will be 
asked to self-assess your affective state. 
 
In order to improve the quality of the data recorded, we ask you to: 
• Pay attention to the game until the investigator tells you that the experiment is over. 
• Move only when necessary. That is, for using the mouse and keyboard. Try not to move 
your head or legs. We recommend you to keep your left hand over the ‘w’, ‘a’, ‘s’, ‘d’ 
keys, and your right hand over the mouse at all times. 
==PAGE:71==
• Talk only if necessary. Talking will affect the experiment and will likely result in the 
disqualification of your recording. 
• Try to keep your face relaxed and avoid clenching your jaw or raising your eyebrows.  
• Do not press the ‘esc’ key. 
• Have fun! 
 
Affective Self-Assessment 
At different points in this experiment, you will be asked to self-assess your current levels of 
arousal, valence, and dominance. These concepts will be explained to you by the investigator. 
 
The game will automatically be paused, and a window like the following image will appear on 
your screen. Choose a number between 1 and 9 that represents your current levels of arousal, 
valence, and dominance, respectively. Answer according to your current affective state. 
 
 
 
After rating, click on “Submit and Continue” and the game will automatically resume. 
Each self-assessment should not take longer than one minute. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
How to play 
“The Wolf Among Us” is a choice-based game that contains three types of gameplay: narrative 
choices, free-roam exploration, and quick-time events. 
 
The first is choosing between narrative options. You will be presented with four choices, and 
a red bar at the bottom. The red bar represents the amount of time you have left, you must 
choose before the bar disappears. Use your mouse left-click to choose one of the four options. 
The choices you make in-game will impact the narrative. 
Notice we are not analyzing your choices, and they do not matter for this experiment. Feel 
free to choose as you like. 
 
 
The second gameplay is free-roam exploration. Use the keys ‘w’, ‘a’, ‘s’, ‘d’ to walk around. Use 
your mouse to engage with items in the environment. If you hover the cursor above a certain 
==PAGE:73==
item, you will see on the bottom-left corner the name of the item, and the action. Left-click to 
perform the action. 
 
 
The third type of gameplay is quick-time events, which happen at violent or risky parts of the 
game. In this type of gameplay, you will have to react to in-game prompts as fast as you can. 
If ‘w’, ‘a’, ‘s’, ‘d’ appears, press the corresponding key on your keyboard. Only one key will 
appear at a time.  
 
 
If ‘q’ appears, repeatedly press the key ‘q’ as fast as you can. Keep pressing it until the green 
contour has filled the letter. The green contour will increase according to the speed at which 
you repeatedly press the ‘q’ key. Notice you cannot hold the key. 
==PAGE:74==
 
Lastly, red circles can appear during quick-time events to interact with the environment. Your 
mouse controls the large circle. Bring it to one of the smaller circles with a dot inside and left-
click to perform the action. The red bar at the bottom represents the amount of time you have 
left to make a choice, just like when choosing between narrative options (first type of 
gameplay) 
 
This game requires no prior experience, or expertise with videogames. There are no right, or 
wrong choices and we are not evaluating your decisions or in-game performance. 
If you fail to react during quick-time events, you will face a “game over” screen and the option 
to replay from checkpoint. If that happens, simply left-click on “replay from checkpoint”. This 
will not affect the experiment. 
 
At the end of the game, the credits for the game will be shown. This does not mean the 
experiment is over. Keep watching the credits, and keep playing the game until the investigator 
asks you to stop. 
 
If you have any questions about the experiment, the methods or your safety and rights, do 
not hesitate to contact the investigator (andre.castelli0@gmail.com) for clarification. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
References (Participant Information Letter) 
[1] Mirza-Babaei, P., Long, S., Foley, E., & McAllister, G. (2011, January). Understanding the 
Contribution of Biometrics to Games User Research. In DiGRA conference. 
 
[2] Dmochowski, J. P., Bezdek, M. A., Abelson, B. P., Johnson, J. S., Schumacher, E. H., & Parra, 
L. C. (2014). Audience preferences are predicted by temporal reliability of neural 
processing. Nature communications, 5(1), 4567. 
 
[3] Pérez, P., Madsen, J., Banellis, L., Türker, B., Raimondo, F., Perlbarg, V., ... & Sitt, J. D. (2021). 
Conscious processing of narrative stimuli synchronizes heart rate between individuals. Cell 
Reports, 36(11). 
 
[4] Dmochowski, J. P., Sajda, P., Dias, J., & Parra, L. C. (2012). Correlated components of 
ongoing 
EEG 
point 
to 
emotionally 
laden 
attention–a 
possible 
marker 
of 
engagement?. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 6, 112. 
 
[5] Parra, L. C., Haufe, S., & Dmochowski, J. P. (2018). Correlated components analysis-
extracting reliable dimensions in multivariate data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08881. 
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk/
