==PAGE:1==
Heat recovery from data centers to green-
houses
Ernesto Ros Rausell
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Thermal Energy, De-
partment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of engineering thermo-
dynamics.
Ernesto Ros Rausell - s212284
Signature
Date
Thesis title
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
Thesis title
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Ernesto Ros Rausell, MSc Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Baris Burak Kanbur, [Co-supervisor], [DTU]
[Brian Elmegaard], [Main-supervisor], [DTU]
Thesis title
v
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
The rapid advancement in technology and data management, exemplified by data cen-
ters such as Meta/Facebook and Microsoft in Denmark, has led to a significant surge in
energy consumption and land utilization. Denmark, with its low latency and robust fiber
connectivity, has become a hotspot for data center growth.
The substantial energy demand of these data centers, coupled with their expanding pres-
ence, poses challenges in terms of energy sustainability and CO2 emissions reduction.
Leveraging excess heat from data centers as a valuable resource, especially through
district heating systems, emerges as a critical solution.
The adoption of liquid cooling systems in data centers holds promise for substantial reduc-
tions in both energy consumption and CO2 emissions related to cooling. This innovative
technology not only enhances energy efficiency but also has the potential to benefit the
greenhouse industry by supplying heat.
This study focuses on the establishment of an energy synergy between data centers and
greenhouses, harnessing untapped heat resources. To achieve this, a Python-based
optimization code will be developed to determine the optimal combination of components,
including thermal energy storage tanks and heat pumps.
The ultimate goal is to provide a technically precise and versatile solution for heat recov-
ery, optimizing costs and enhancing sustainability. This research addresses the evolving
landscape of data center growth and greenhouse needs, aiming to contribute to a more
efficient and sustainable energy future.
vi
Thesis title
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Description
Unit
Q
Heat transfer
MW
Qrec
Heat recovery
MW
Qdem
Energy demand
MWh
QHL
Heat loss
MWh
QHL,p
Heat loss in pipes distribution
MWh
Qh,HP
Heat pump capacity, condenser
MW
Qc,HP
Heat pump capacity, evaporator
MW
QHP
Heat pump capacity
MW
Qbp
Back up system capacity
MWh
Qh,bp
Back up system for heating
MWh
Qc,bp
Back up system for cooling
MWh
Qex,cool
Extra cooling backup in DC
MWh
V max,TEST
Maximum volume of the storage tank
MWh
Qmax,TEST
Maximum heat capacity of the storage tank
MWh
QHL,TEST
Heat losses in the TEST
m3
ρw
Density of the water
kg/m3
ρa
Density of the air
kg/m3
Cw
p
Specific heat capacity of water
J/(kg·K)
T cond
Temperature of the condenser in the heat pump
ºC
T evap
Temperature of the evaporator in the heat pump
ºC
T H,TEST
Hot water temperature in the TEST
ºC
T C,TEST
Hot water temperature in the TEST
ºC
η
Efficiency
adimensional
ηCarnot
Carnot’s Efficiency
adimensional
T outdoor
Ambient temperature
ºC
T indoor
Indoor temperature
ºC
P elec
Electricity price
DKK
Table 1: List of symbols
Thesis title
vii
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
DC
Data center
EH
Excess heat
DH
District heating
IT
Information technology
HP
Heat pump
TES
Thermal energy storage
TEST
Thermal energy storage tank
STES
Seasonal thermal energy storage
EED
Energy efficiency directive
PUE
Performance usage effectiveness
MRSS
Mechanical refrigeration sub-system
TCSS
Terminal cooling sub-system
V CRC
Vapour compressor refrigerant cycle
HD
Heat demand
HL
Heat loss
HDC
Heat demand coefficient
HR
Heat recovery
EC
Extra cooling
SOC
State of charge of the tank
PP
Pinch point
GH
Greenhouse
COP
Coefficient of performance
COPHP
Coefficient of performance
COPbp
Coefficient of performance
COPc
Coefficient of performance for Carnot’s cycle
COPH
Coefficient of performance for heating
OPEX
Operating expenses
CAPEX
Total expenditures
Table 2: List of abbreviations
viii
Thesis title
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Motivation and background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Potential hurdles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methodology and input data
7
3
State of the art
8
3.1
Data centres
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Heat pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Thermal energy storage (TES)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Traditional greenhouses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Study case
20
4.1
Location and technical specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2
Heat recovery system in the DC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Temperatures in the systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Greenhouses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
Energy balance in the TEST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6
Energy balance of the entire system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Economic parametres
32
6
Optimization results
34
6.1
Strategy 1. Air-to-water and liquid cooling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
Strategy 2. Air-to-water and liquid cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7
Discussions
51
8
Conclusions
53
Bibliography
55
A Appendix
59
Thesis title
1
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
1
List of symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
2
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
4.1
Temperatures in the system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Energy demand for the reference case.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Parameters for Strategy 1 and 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1
Definition of each ecnonomic parametre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Determination of each economic parametre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.1
Strategy 1. Paremetes of the sensitivity Analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
Strategy 1. Optimal results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.3
Sensitivity of the best configuration in the air-to-water system. . . . . . . . . 43
6.4
Strategy 2. Parameters of the sensitivity analysis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.5
Strategy 2 Optimization Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
2
Thesis title
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
3.1
Air cooling configuration strategies in IT racks. [9]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Liquid cooling in IT rack densities. [12].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Liquid cooling schematics in DCs [15]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Heat pump basic working principle [16]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5
Vapour compressor refrigeration cycle [16]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.6
Industrial heat waste sources [18]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.7
Investment cost per unit m3 for Pit and Tank TES [21]. . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.8
Investment cost for Pit and Tank TES in the function of storage volume m3
[22]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.1
Map location of the DC and greenhouses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Strategy 1. Air to water heat recovery system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Strategy 1. Liquid to water heat recovery system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Strategy 1. HP implementation in the heat recovery system. . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Strategy 2. Air-to-water heat recovery system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.6
Strategy 2. Liquid-to-water heat recovery system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.7
Correlation between energy demand and ∆T. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.8
Greenhouses energy consumption for one-year period.
. . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.9
Greenhouses energy consumption representative sample: Two-Day Sample. 27
6.1
Strategy 1. CAPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Strategy 1. CAPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . 36
6.3
Strategy 1. OPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
. . . . . . . . 37
6.4
Strategy 1. OPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . . 38
6.5
Strategy 1. TOTEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . . 39
6.6
Strategy 1. TOTEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . 40
6.7
Strategy 1. OPEX and CAPEX intersection air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
42
6.8
Strategy 1. Energy balance in the air-to-water system. . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.9
Strategy 2. CAPEX relation with Vtank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.10 Strategy 2. CAPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . . 45
6.11 Strategy 2. CAPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . 46
6.12 Strategy 2. OPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
. . . . . . . . 47
6.13 Strategy 2. OPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . . 48
6.14 Strategy 2. Energy balance in the air-to-water system. . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.15 Strategy 1. HP operation in detail.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.16 Strategy 2. HP operation in detail.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Thesis title
3
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
This chapter includes a brief introduction of the project background and aim. It provides an
overview of the increasing demand for technology and data management, particularly in
the context of data centers (DCs). The aim of the project is to study the techno-economic
feasibility and system optimization of an energy synergy between new DCs and green-
houses. The chapter highlights the potential benefits of establishing an energy agreement
between both entities, such as economic revenue for DCs and a reliable and cost-effective
heat resource for greenhouses. Potential hurdles and challenges related to the project
implementation and data gathering are also mentioned.
1.1
Motivation and background
As time goes by, more technology and data management are needed for all kinds of
purposes such as social media servers, where thousands of users’ information is stored
and processed by massive servers. Examples of this are Meta/Facebook data centers
(DCs) in Odense and Esbjerg [1], and Microsoft in Leopardstown, Dublin, Ireland [2].
Information processed in DCs requires huge amounts of non-stop energy supply and big
land areas. As an example, the United States electricity use for DCs accounted for 2 %
of the national electricity consumption in the USA.
In [3] the the expected evolution in DC power consumption from 2023 to 2026 is presented.
Denmark is experiencing massive growth in DCs. This is because of the country low
latency and excellent fibre connectivity such as the international cable system Havfrue,
connecting Denmark directly with the United States [3].
Most of Denmark’s projects are built in the countryside where their requirements are ful-
filled easily. Jutland Island accommodates many of them. Some DCs built in Denmark
are presented below.
• Apple, in Viborg: Apple is constructing a 166,000 m2 data center in Viborg, which
is expected to consist of a total of 6-8 data halls. The first set of halls is already
completed. One of the halls is being expanded by an additional capacity of up to 20
MW. The rated capacity of the DC is around 50 MW [3, 4].
• Google, in Fredericia: The first hall of 46,000 m2 is completed and in operation in
Fredericia. The total land amounts to 750,000 m2.
•
Prime Data Centers, in Sæby:Prime Data Centers have announced a 124 MW
planned campus in Sæby [3].
• Meta, in Odense: Meta’s data center in Tietgenbyen in Odense is fully operational,
which totals up to 85,000 m2 [3].
Due to their energy requirements and the massive growth, the Danish Energy Council on
Climate Change in 2019 stated that they will increase the country’s total energy consump-
tion by 17 % in 10 years. Therefore, it is necessary to study and implement measures in
the energy system to adapt power consumption to the production of renewable energies.
Otherwise, the CO2 emissions reduction goal of 70 % by 2030 will not be achievable. It
has also been recognized by the European Commission that by 2030, DCs will account
for 3.2 % of the total electricity demand in the EU. However, Europe is under immense
pressure to reduce energy demand [3].
4
Thesis title
==PAGE:13==
Reusing excess heat (EH) from cooling is a crucial measure to consider. This can be
achieved by utilizing the excess heat from DCs as a green energy source. District heating
(DH) systems and Copenhagen Airport have already implemented this measure. The
Energy Efficiency Directive (EED) proposes that all DCs exceeding 1 MW should adopt
this approach. Additionally, European DCs with an installed Information Technology (IT)
power demand of a minimum of 100 kW or 500 kW will be required to report energy
performance [3].
Data centers IT racks release significant amounts of heat due to Joule’s effect which re-
mains constant most of the time. The new generation of cooling systems utilizes mineral
liquid as a refrigerant that can reach higher temperatures than traditional air refrigeration
systems due to their specific heat capacity. These systems can operate with tempera-
tures up to 60 ºC [3]. The operational temperatures of the refrigerants are based on the
operational temperatures of IT components such as motherboards that typically operate
from 60 ºC to 70 ºC to avoid exceeding the maximum temperature of 90 ºC [5]. The energy
removed from IT racks is conservative and follows the equation below. Consequently, the
power consumption of the pumps, which is directly related to the mref, is notoriously de-
creased for the same amount of heat (Qrefr) removed from the IT severs when increasing
the T out
refr and the Cp of the refrigerant.
Qrefr = ˙mrefr · Cp · (T out
refr −T in
refr)
(1.1)
Liquid cooling can be groundbreaking in reaching the CO2 climate goals and reducing
energy demand. Its application can potentially reduce DC power consumption for cooling
by up to 90 % and decrease CO2 emissions by 45 % [3]. Liquid cooling can allow for
higher Performance Usage Effectiveness (PUE) of DC and enables higher recovery tem-
peratures that can be utilized to meet the thermal demands of third parties. Increasing
recoveries will improve the overall energy system that includes DCs and greenhouses
when analyzing the Coefficient of Performance (COP) of heat pumps. Future PUEs are
envisioned to be from 1.1 to 1.3, being 1 the ideal scenario [3].
The Jutland countryside has the highest density of Danish greenhouses. One of their
main challenges is meeting the thermal energy demand to maintain the proper indoor
conditions that account for approximately 80 %, on average, of their yearly energy con-
sumption of a greenhouse [6]. Currently, traditional boilers and district heating systems
supply the majority of this thermal energy. However, based on current district heating
regulations, the hot water supply is often supplied at higher temperatures than necessary
for the greenhouses. Similar inefficiencies occur with traditional boilers due to the char-
acteristics of the heating systems. As a solution, supply temperatures can be reduced by
utilizing excess heat from industrial processes such as DCs.
Despite having higher temperatures in DCs when using a mineral liquid for cooling, the
recovered temperature must be increased. A heat pump (HP) can supply the remaining
heat, as has been done in industrial low-heat recovery projects, to reach the desired
temperature for the demand. In these types of systems, HPs are commonly combined with
thermal energy storages (TES). The strategy is to operate the heat pump when electricity
prices are low and store that heat when prices are high.
The present research aims to study the effects of establishing an energy agreement be-
tween DCs and greenhouses, and it is believed that this will be beneficial in obtaining
economic revenues for DCs and a reliable and cheap heat resource for greenhouses,
together with taking advantage of an unused heat source.
Thesis title
5
==PAGE:14==
1.2
Aim of the project
The aim of this master’s thesis is to study the techno-economic feasibility and system
optimization of an energy synergy between new DCs and greenhouses. To achieve this
goal effectively, an industrial HP will be installed near the data center, along with a ther-
mal energy storage tank (TEST). The HP will have convenient access to the electricity
supply, allowing it to increase the temperature with high energy performance. Typically,
a minimum COP of 3 can be achieved. The implementation of a TEST will theoretically
help to reduce electricity price fluctuations resulting from the operation of the HP.
To carry out the study, parametric simulations will be conducted using Python software.
These simulations will consider energy prices and various technical variables to facilitate
system optimization.
1.3
Potential hurdles
Through completion of the Master thesis ”Data centre excess heat to greenhouse heating,”
the following learning objectives and skills are expected to be acquired:
1. Developing an innovative and specific solution that can be applied to the energy
savings industry by reusing waste heat.
2. In-depth understanding of energy savings in big-scale buildings, and their relevance
in supplying third-party energy demands.
3. Deep understanding of energy savings significance in the big-scale industrial sector
from an economic perspective.
4. Learning and developing a linear optimization model to use parametric studies in a
programming language.
5. Identifying the specific variables that have the bigges impact on the energy perfor-
mance and the economic assessment of the system.
6. Developing and practicing critical thinking when reading literature reviewing.
7. Being objective and assessing the simulation results.
8. Accomplishing an entire engineering project from the beginning and facing all the
challenges such as the lack of information from clients/suppliers.
Starting from
knowing which one is the problem that needs to be solved and how it is going to be
managed; and finishing by collecting all the information required, performing several
tests and simulations, assessing all the results, and writing a final document where
all these key points are shown.
6
Thesis title
==PAGE:15==
2
Methodology and input data
The methodology consists of minimizing the operation and investment costs through an
energy synergy created by Data Centers (DCs) and greenhouses. This will be done by
developing an optimization code in Python. To accomplish this, information such as the
heat recovery in the DC for both liquid and air-to-water cooling systems, along with the
greenhouse yearly consumption must be gathered to be implemented in Python. The
analysis of the system contemplates two strategies, both involving a TEST. The objec-
tive of incorporating the TEST as a variable is to determine the optimal strategy for heat
storage by minimizing overall system costs.
Strategy 1. In this approach, the TEST stores the heat recovered from the DC and two
HPs full-fill the entire energy demand. The main HP is a water-to-water that utilizes the
stored heat as a heat source and is situated in the cold side of the heat pump. Additionally,
an air-to-water HP functions as a backup.
Strategy 2. In this case, the TEST is positioned on the hot side of the main HP, resulting
in a higher overall tank temperature for this scenario. Unlike the first strategy, placing the
TEST on the hot side of the main HP leads to supply the greenhouses with heat from the
TEST instead of the main HP.
Ultimately, inputting all data into the optimization code, a parametric study is conducted,
evaluating various TEST volumes and HP sizes to analyze their impact on system costs
for this specific case. The optimal combination is the one that reaches the lowest TOTEX
value.
Thesis title
7
==PAGE:16==
3
State of the art
In this chapter a state of the art review is done for data centres excess heat recovery,
large-scale heat pumps, thermal energy storage implementation in energy systems, and
traditional greenhouses. Based on this research, a realistic model can be simulated and
optimized.
3.1
Data centres
The adoption of the cloud, investment in artificial intelligence and growth in 5G connectivity
are the main drivers fueling the data growth in Europe. As a result of that, by 2030,
the European Commission estimates that data centres will account for 3.2 % of the total
electricity demand within the EU [3]. The data centre industry is set to be faced with
increased regulations in Europe, requiring DCs to report their operational details, energy
usage and overall environmental performances.
The EED proposal for the EU includes specific demands for DCs, which are set to make
it a requirement for future data centre builds exceeding 1 MW to recycle the excess heat.
Furthermore, the EED and European DCs agreed that if there is an IT power demand of
a minimum of 500 kW, DCs must report the following bullet points [3]:
• Annual incoming and outgoing data traffic
• Amount of data stored and processed
• Temperature set points
• Power, water, and carbon usage effectiveness
• Energy reuse factor
• Use of renewable energy
• Cooling effectiveness ratio
One of the most important performance factors to consider when analyzing DC energy
usage is the PUE. PUE measures the energy efficiency of a DC and is defined as the to-
tal consumed power rate (including the server power rate) in the DC to the power server
consumption. A PUE value of 1 represents the highest energy performance [7]. Common
PUE values typically range from 1.1 to 1.4. Cooling demand significantly impacts PUE,
accounting for approximately 40 % of the total energy consumption. Therefore, energy-
efficient strategies have gained importance in addressing the economic challenges asso-
ciated with cooling loads in data centers [8].
A standard DC cooling system consists of two main components: the mechanical refrig-
eration sub-system (MRSS) and the terminal cooling sub-system (TCSS) [9]. The MRSS
is responsible for removing heat from the IT racks within the DC, while the TCSS trans-
fers the heat to the outdoor environment. DC cooling systems can be classified as either
air-cooled or liquid-cooled systems.
Air cooling systems.
Air cooling systems are the most extended cooling systems in DCs exisiting in a broad
range of DCs capacities that can reach even 124 MW as stated in chapter Methodol-
ogy and innput data [2] for the Prime Data Centers, in Sæby. Air-cooling has been the
8
Thesis title
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.1: Air cooling configuration strategies in IT racks. [9].
traditional choice for data centers in cold weathers such as Scandinavian’s countries.
However, the low heat removal capacity of air (37 W/cm2) makes air-cooled systems im-
practical and inefficient for modern data centers with higher rack densities [8]. According
to a global study by Uptime Institute, DCs rack densities are expected to increase from an
average of 6 kW to 8 kW in 2022 to 12 kW to 15 kW in 2027, driven by the deployment of
hyper-scale infrastructure [3]. With the proliferation of Artificial Intelligence applications,
rack densities can easily surpass 20 kW to 30 kW and, in some cases, even exceed 50
kW [3]. Due to the fact that this is the most common cooling system in DC, it is utilized in a
broad range of DC capacities, being suitable for all kind of DC power sizes. The working
principle for this sort of systems is based on taking cold air from outside and circulating it
through the IT racks. One of the most commons strategies is to recirculated it more than
once until it acquires a maximum temperature.
The cooling strategy inside the IT racks has plenty of configurations which differs depend-
ing on the desired indoor temperatures and other specific particularities of each case. As
a an example, some of the air circulation strategies along the IT rask are shown in Figure
3.1. In that case, it is released or recovered for third parties uses, making them open-
cooling system.
Depending on the cooling configuration different exhaust temperatures are reached. From
the heat recovery perspective, the optimal strategy represents higher temperatures in the
IT rack exhaust air. DCs with an efficient air cooling system typically supply the cold air at
25 ºC, being 28 ºC the maximum, and 40 ºC temperature for the exhaust air. Additionally,
it is also established that a captured waste heat range from 35 ºC to 45 ºC in servers is
more than sufficient for reuse in heating needs, establishing an inlet-outlet temperature
range between 25 ºC and 40 ºC [10].
Liquid cooling.
Liquid cooling has a higher specific heat capacity than air, experiencing 30 % of energy
savings by using mineral oil, refrigerants or water [5, 11]. According to a 2021 survey by
the Uptime Institute, it becomes more economical and efficient with rack densities of over
20 kW [3]. Figure 3.2 provides a better clarification of the IT rack densities that commonly
Thesis title
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: Liquid cooling in IT rack densities. [12].
commonly use liquid cooling.
Both direct and indirect liquid technologies, which are the two liquid cooling techniques,
are experiencing over 30-year-on-year market growth. However, despite of not being
as mature as the air cooling, they have the potential to reach PUEs values of less than
1.1 [3]. Nowadays, only indirect liquid technology is currently used in real DCs such as in
Academica, a Finnish based IT company that installed a 2-MW DC refrigerated with water
thorough a plate-heat exchanger, and Future-tech in St Andrews University, Scotland, with
a 270 kW liquid cooling system [13]. In both DCs, they reuse the EH to heat dwellings. As
seen, this is not used in DC-big scales. Nevertheless, the fact only existing in small scale
provide some advantages such as modularization. As explained in [14], combined with
the deployment of micro-modules, the advantage of productization and modularization
can be exploited. Applied to this thesis, it could give new opportunities to small-scale
greenhouses in such a way that a several liquid-cooling modular DCs could be placed
nearby. Additionally, reaching higher temperatures turns into higher quality excess heat
than air-to-water systems, enabling to reach up 50-60 ºC [10].
In addition to this, Figure [15] summarizes most of the liquid cooling systems in DCs.
Indirect-cooling systems.
Rear-door heat exchanger/Cold-plate liquid cooling: Passive or active heat exchangers
replace the rear door of the IT equipment rack with a liquid heat exchanger. These sys-
tems can be used in conjunction with air-cooling systems to cool environments with mixed
rack densities [12]. The cold plate liquid cooling mainly transfers the heat from the heating
element of the server to the circulating coolant indirectly through the liquid cooling plate.
The circulation process is shown in the part C of Figure [15]. First, a manifold is arranged
on the liquid cooling cabinet to convey the coolant to each liquid cooling computing node.
Second, the inlet and outlet are connected with quick connectors, and the main connector
is connected to the built-in or external coolant distribution unit (CDU). Third, the CDU is
connected with the outdoor cooling unit, thus completing the liquid cooling cycle of the
whole cabinet. Compared with traditional air-cooled servers, this technology significantly
improves the energy utilization efficiency of DCs, with lower noise, and the installation
10
Thesis title
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.3: Liquid cooling schematics in DCs [15].
and maintenance are basically the same as that of air-cooled servers [15].
Direct-to-chip liquid cooling: Direct-to-chip cold plates sit atop the board’s heat-generating
components to draw off heat through single-phase cold plates or two-phase evaporation
units. These cooling technologies can remove about 70-75 % of the heat generated by
the equipment in the rack, leaving 25-30 % that must be removed by air-cooling systems
[12].
Spray liquid cooling: Spray liquid cooling is a liquid cooling technology in which the server
is modified to deploy the corresponding spray device, and the coolant is directly sprayed
on the surface of the heating element through the nozzle to absorb heat and is then dis-
charged. Because it is a targeted cooling technology, compared with immersion liquid
cooling, the required dose of coolant is lower, and the implementation is more econom-
ical. As shown in the part D of Figure [15], the sprayed liquid cooling system mainly
includes a liquid cooling cabinet, heat exchanger, circulation pump, and outdoor cooling
unit. The liquid cooling cabinet is connected to the heat exchanger through piping, i.e.,
the heat of the heat-generating components of the server in the cabinet is absorbed by the
coolant and cooled down in the heat exchanger. Sprayed liquid cooling has the features of
high device integration, high energy efficiency, and low noise. Compared with air-cooled
DCs, the total energy consumption of sprayed liquid-cooled DCs can be reduced by 25.8
% [15].
Direct-cooling systems.
Regarding the direct liquid cooling/liquid immersion, there are two types of systems: single-
phase and two-phase immersion cooling.
Single-phase liquid immersion: Direct cooling/liquid immersion cooling is a technology
used to cool electronic components by submerging them directly in a specialized dielec-
tric fluid that removes excess heat from the electric components without damaging or
decaying them. After removing the excess heat from the IT racks, this mineral oil is circu-
Thesis title
11
==PAGE:20==
lated throughout pumps that pump it to heat ex changer where releases all the heat and
is cooled down. This is commonly done by a fan coil, where the liquid refrigerant passes
through the coil and the air moved by the fan cools it down. Another solution is found
when using a heat recovery system. In that case, the mineral oil exchanges heat in a HE
to a secondary fluid, normally water. As a result and contrary to air-cooled systems, liquid
immersion works in a closed-loop where the refrigerant is constantly heated, cooled and
pumped. However, despite of being a promising heat recovery measure, it is still under
research, and hence not being commercialized yet excepting for 2-MW Alibaba Winter
Olympics Cloud Data Center developed by Alibaba Group in 2020 [14]. Single-phase
liquid immersion is shown in the schematic A in Figure [15].
Two-phase liquid immersion: The working principle is similar to the single-phase since
both systems place IT racks inside a container full of mineral oil. Nevertheless, in this case
the liquid reaches the phase change by reaching the boiling temperature of the dielectric.
As a result, the vapor bubbles are condensed via condenser pipes in the cooling system
[8]. The two-phase liquid-immersion cooling method is one of the promising direct DC
cooling methods since it can achieve better temperature uniformity thanks to the latent
heat transfer on the server surface without a chip or server level complex water piping
system [8]. The two-phase liquid-immersion cooling systems have been being tested for
commercial purposes by some ICT companies such as Submer Inc., GIGABYTE TM ,
and 3M TM ; however, there is still no system-scale academic study that performs the
thermal management with environmental and economic aspects in detail [8]. Two-phase
liquid immersion is shown in the schematic B in Figure [15].
Liquid cooling offers several advantages over air cooling in DCs. It has a higher specific
heat capacity than air, resulting in approximately 30 % energy savings when using liquids
such as mineral oil, refrigerants, or water [5, 11]. According to a 2021 survey by the
Uptime Institute, liquid cooling becomes more economical and efficient, especially with
rack densities exceeding 20 kW [3]. Both direct and indirect liquid cooling technologies
are experiencing significant market growth year-on-year, with over % growth rate. These
liquid cooling technologies have the potential to enable data center operations to achieve
a PUE of less than 1.1 [3]. Immersion cooling has emerged as a promising solution for
cooling electronic components in data centers, providing efficient heat dissipation and
improved energy efficiency.
Last year, Intel introduced an open intellectual property immersion liquid cooling system
and reference design [3]. This will entail an increase in data centre power uses. Liq-
uid cooling is a highly efficient cooling infrastructure that reduces energy consumption,
decreases water usage and provides a platform for high-grade reusable heat, making it
ideal for heat reuse in DCs. According to Intel, immersion cooling with energy reuse could
reduce carbon emissions by 45 % [3]. Furthermore, from the cooling power consumption
standpoint, colocation provider GlobalConnect introduced a smaller set-up of immersive
cooling technology to its customers in their site in Copenhagen, reducing their DC power
consumption for cooling by up to 90 % [3].
In immersion cooling systems, the heat generated by servers is extracted at a high tem-
perature, up to 60 ºC, making it a useful byproduct that can be easily transported [3].
Different temperatures are reached depending on cooling track configurations and cool-
ing systems [5]. Some data centres are adopting hybrid cooling solutions that use both
air-cooling and liquid cooling. Meta focuses on liquid cooling to build smaller facilities, and
GlobalConnect offers immersive cooling in Copenhagen DC. However, challenges such
as distance to the grid, low-grade heat, and a lack of a financially viable business model
12
Thesis title
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4: Heat pump basic working principle [16].
must be solved to make the reuse of excess heat feasible. Municipal support and the
ability of district heating companies to distribute excess heat also play a role in enabling
data centres to reuse their heat.
3.2
Heat pumps
The energy conversion process of an HP is shown in Figure3.4. HP converts low heat
(Q2) at a low temperature (T1) into heat (Q1) at a higher temperature (T2) using power
(P). To do so, a vapour compression refrigeration cycle (VCRC) where a closed circuit
with a refrigerant is pumped, expanded and compressed is utilized.
The main components of an HP are the evaporator, compressor, condenser, expansion
device, pipes and refrigerant, which are presented in Figure3.5.
The primary benefit of the VCRC is that it takes advantage of the latent heat inside the
closed VCRC system. The pipes contain the refrigerant and connect all the different com-
ponents. The refrigerant will expand (evaporate) where the low heat resource is located,
taking the energy required for the phase change from Q2. As a result, Q2 losses heat
and its temperature decreases. Then, the refrigerant is compressed in the compressor.
Afterwards, the refrigerant condenses in the condenser and releases heat (Q1) to the
environment. Finally, the pressure of the refrigerant is released in the expansion device,
returning it to its initial pressure in the evaporator. Figure 3.5 illustrates a basic scheme
of a heat pump.
3.2.1
Performance indicators
There are three main performance indicators when studying an HP.
Carnot cycle: A Carnot cycle considers the inlet and outlet temperatures of two streams
such as the heat source and the heating supply of the heat pump. Both temperatures are
considered to be constant. It represents the theoretical performance limit of a heat pump
or chiller operating between reservoirs with limited capacity. Real plants are capable of
reaching secondary performances (Carnot’s cycles performances) ranges between 39 %
and 50 % of the limit [17], meaning that
Equation 3.1 describes the maximum COPC that a HP can reach as a function of the
evaporator and condenser temperatures.[16].
COPC =
T1
T1 −T2
(3.1)
Thesis title
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.5: Vapour compressor refrigeration cycle [16].
COPH and COPc: The coefficient of performance is calculated as the ratio of useful
heat generated to consumed electricity. To differentiate between the heating and cooling
COP, the coefficient of performance of a chiller is abbreviated as COPc. Equation 3.2
details COP calculation as the ratio of the cooling load to consumed electricity in the
compressor. Both factors describe the efficiency of the plant operation. When heat losses
are neglected, they are related as expressed in equation 3.3.
COP =
Qsupplied
W compressor
(3.2)
COPH = COPc + 1
(3.3)
Both COPC and COPH are related to each other by Carnot’s efficiency cycle which for
this study case is fixed at 0.45. Equation 3.4 expresses the relation between both COPs.
COP = COPC · ηCarnot
(3.4)
SPF: The Seasonal Performance Factor is defined as the ratio of the total heat output
delivered by the HP during the heating season to the total amount of electrical energy
consumed by the HP during the same period. The SPF takes into account both the ef-
ficiency of the HP and the performance of the heating distribution system. It provides a
measure of the overall energy efficiency of the heating system over the course of a heating
season.
3.2.2
Heat waste as a heat source for large-scale HPs
Excess heat is a heat source with higher temperatures than other natural heat sources.
EH potential is identified for various industrial sectors such as DCs, and geothermal or
combined heat and combined heat and power. They are commonly used as a heat re-
source for industrial HPs that supplies DH networks as shown in Figure 3.6.
Despite not having high temperatures, EH from thermal processes could potentially supply
5 % of the existing heat demand (HD). The potential use is particularly higher in industrial
areas where it can be integrated into local DH networks. The total supply of DH by EH
has been estimated to be 1.36 TWh/year, whith 36 % of that requiring an HP to increase
14
Thesis title
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.6: Industrial heat waste sources [18].
the temperature. To enable and distribute investments and ensure long-term stability,
agreements between the industrial partner and the DH company are necessary [16].
3.3
Thermal energy storage (TES)
Currently, the heating sector accounts for 50 % of Europe’s final energy consumption, and
this is expected to remain the same in the future according to forecasts [19]. Heat demand
is typically influenced by climate temperatures, experiencing higher demand during colder
periods. As a result of temperature fluctuations, heat demand does not follow a consistent
pattern over time, varying on an hourly, daily, weekly, and monthly basis.
In response to this, heat suppliers must ensure sufficient coverage of the heat demand at
all times, leading to peaks in the generation that directly impact energy prices and supply
temperatures. In some cases, the water supply temperature is overheated to face peak
demands. However, higher temperatures imply bigger thermal losses in the distribution
system, resulting in lower energy performance.
To mitigate energy prices and performances, some systems have been designed to re-
duce peak demand and achieve more stable production curves. TES is a well-known
technology in DH to store heat at different time scales and sizes. It enables the storage of
heat at different time scales and capacities. TES typically involves storing a volume of hot
material, commonly water, in a reservoir. DH systems often consist of hot water volumes
that are heated by a diverse range of heat sources, including excess heat, renewable
energies (such as solar collector fields), or large-scale heat pumps [19]. TES can be im-
plemented in DH networks or for private consumption. The benefits of TES include the
following:
Thesis title
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.7: Investment cost per unit m3 for Pit and Tank TES [21].
• Reduced investment and usage of peak capacity
• Smoother operation of equipment and reduced running costs
• Flexible load shifting to utilize non-dispatchable variable renewable energy or elec-
tricity with lower prices
DH aims to minimize temperatures in the pipe distribution system, lowering heat losses.
The next generation of DH, referred to as the 4th generation, is planned to operate in a
range within 50 ºC to 60 ºC for the supply temperature [18]. Reducing supply tempera-
tures allows heat from renewable energies and other low-heat resources such as DCs to
participate.
Both types of TES discussed in the following subchapters demonstrate a favourable bal-
ance of techno-economic performance compared to other TES technologies [20]. As
shown in Figure 3.7, both systems illustrate an investment cost reduction when increas-
ing the volume of the TES.
3.3.1
Thermal energy storage tank
TEST is a cylindrical storage tank typically used to balance heat energy systems and is
located near the heat source. TEST is relatively cheap compared to other TES technolo-
gies such as PTES, it has stable performance, and can be directly connected to the DH
system.[19] Installing TEST reduce investment and usage of peak capacity, smoother
equipment operation and lower running costs. It also allows flexible load shifting to use
non-dispatchable variable renewable energy or electricity with lower prices. In Sweden,
104 out of 167 DH systems have installed central TES units [19].
They are typically installed vertically on the ground or even buried. However, burying
the system results in lower heat losses due to the lower conductivity of the ground. In
both cases, the tank is typically made of stainless steel or reinforced concrete and is
surrounded by thick insulation. Maintaining good stratification temperatures in the stored
water is essential for achieving high energy performance and minimizing thermal losses.
The working principle of a TES involves filling the tank from the bottom with a low flow
rate, which prevents mixing within the tank and ensures stratification. The temperature
16
Thesis title
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.8: Investment cost for Pit and Tank TES in the function of storage volume m3
[22].
gradient within the tank increases with height, with the highest temperature found at the
top where the inlet is located. This working principle helps to minimize heat losses (HL) at
the bottom and in the walls of the tank. Additionally, compared to a non-stratified system, a
stratified system has a higher energy content in the tank since the maximum temperature
is higher.
Based on the described principle, the higher the tank, the better stratification. Conse-
quently, the larger the ratio H/D is, the better the system performance is. However, in-
creasing H/D entitles higher prices. Figure 3.8 represents when is more convenient to
change from a TEST to a pit TES.
3.4
Traditional greenhouses
Greenhouses are characterized by their structural and functional features. Covering ma-
terials (also known as glazing) substantially impact plant yield in a greenhouse system.
The properties of the cladding material determine the quality of light transmitted into the
greenhouse, and radiation transmittance can be enhanced qualitatively and quantitatively.
Greenhouse cladding materials should have the following properties: high transmittance
for visible light and low transmittance for long-wave radiation, low light transmittance drops
due to global radiation (extended lifespan), and wind resistance. The properties collec-
tively contribute to increasing the indoor temperature by harnessing solar heat gains,
thereby creating favourable climate conditions for crop growth [23].
The most typically utilized materials are glass, strong polymers such as polycarbonate,
and fibreglass-reinforced plastics. As glazing is the only material used for the walls and
roof, thermal heat losses are huge, making heating the major cost involved in green-
Thesis title
17
==PAGE:26==
houses during cold seasons, which is typically done by burning fossil fuels [24]. On the
other hand, thermal demand is considerably reduced during hot periods. In fact, overheat-
ing temperatures are reached and cooling systems must be implemented. Overheating
temperatures and therefore cooling power are mostly influenced by the building design.
The primary greenhouse designs can be classified into closed and semi-closed. Closed
designs maximize the utilization of the solar heat gain but may lead to higher overheat-
ing temperatures, increasing the cooling demand. However, overheating can be stored
in seasonal and tank TES systems and used when heating is demanded [24]. A study
conducted in Norway on a closed greenhouse design investigated summer overheating
temperatures and found that using short-time and seasonal TES systems resulted in a
90 % reduction in fossil fuel usage after one year of operation. During working hours, fan
coils were employed to maintain the greenhouse temperature just below the allowable
limit [25].
Indoor setpoint temperatures
The temperature of the plant surface is influenced by various heat exchange mechanisms,
including convection from the surrounding air, radiation from nearby surfaces, and latent
heat exchange through transpiration. It is crucial for growers to create suitable indoor
conditions tailored to the specific needs of each vegetable.
Each type of crop requires different temperatures. Therefore, it is not possible to establish
a general temperature. Indoor temperatures in greenhouses are normally set from 17 ºC
to 27 ºC, which have been proven to be ideal for plant growth without focusing on a specific
variety [24].
Based on the report [26] where a Danish large commercial greenhouse was studied to
improve its energy consumption, it is found that glasshouses have three main different
processes. Indoor setpoint temperature is different based on each process requirements.
• Rooting area: Croop roots are cut to grow a small network of roots, and its indoor
temperature range is from 22 ºC to 24 ºC.
• Propagation area: Its purpose is to grow the plants from cuttings with small roots
into small actual plants. Temperature is set to 19 ºC during the day, and 21 ºC during
the night.
• Short-day area: Plants are grown to the required size and height. Temperature is
set to 19 ºC during the day, and 21 ºC during the night.
Heating systems in Greenhouses
In cold weathers, higher interior air temperatures are necessary for optimal plant develop-
ment, which can be achieved by maintaining the greenhouse effect or using any heating
technology. Heating systems are designed to address heat losses, primarily throw the
glass surface.
Because of the low temperature required in the supply, a water-based floor heating sys-
tem is proposed for this master’s thesis. This system allows for reaching maximum supply
temperatures of 40 ºC that results in lower energy consumption compared to other sys-
tems that require temperatures ranging from 50 ºC to 90 ºC [27]. In greenhouses, there
are two primary types of floor heating: flood floors and in-ground heating [28].
A flooded-floor system utilizes the concrete floor as a radiant surface by embedding hot
water pipes within it. This allows for the radiant heat to be emitted from the floor and
transferred directly to the greenhouse, as well as to the plants themselves. Additionally,
18
Thesis title
==PAGE:27==
the system can heat the irrigation water to prevent root shock. The direct contact between
the root zone and the warm floor ensures optimal control of soil and plant temperatures.
The main advantages of this technology are presented in the following bullet points:
• Heating zones can be separated for individual climate control for different crops
• Best for providing uniform heating to the entire crop
• Heated concrete floor cuts down on condensate on the poly roof, which allows more
solar energy to pass through the poly, conserving energy
• Maximizes growing area by eliminating the need for walkways, more plants per
square foot
The main difference between flooded-floors and in-ground heat relies on pipe distribution
and supply temperatures. In-ground distributes the heat along the pipes buried in the
growing bed. Therefore, the heat source is closer to the plant, allowing it to reduce the
temperature.
Thesis title
19
==PAGE:28==
4
Study case
This chapter includes the general characteristics of both the DC system and the green-
houses, as well as their location, distance, and the systems that compose the energy
system. Regarding the DC, the heat recovery system for both cases is also represented
and explained.
4.1
Location and technical specifications
This master’s thesis evaluates two DCs cooling systems located in Tarup, near the city of
Fredericia.
Air-to-water DC. It is a 4-air-to-water-DC heat recovery building where each of the DC
buildings consists of 6 MW of IT power, totaling 24 MW, and remains constant throughout
the year. They are designed to operate at nominal values without interruption.
Liquid cooling DC. For this case, the amount of heat recovery is reduced to 2 MW. This
number is based on the current liquid-cooling DCs that exists nowadays presented in the
State of the art.
In order to prevent malfunctions and issues with the servers, the DC implements a backup
cooling system to reduce and maintain the IT rack temperatures at a constant level for
both cases.
A heat recovery system is employed to capture the excess heat released by all the IT
racks, which is then utilized to provide energy services for local greenhouses located
6.65 km away from the DC. Figure ?? shows the distance and location between them. It
is assumed that one unit of electric energy equals one unit of heat, meaning that 1 W/s
equals 1 J of heat. Nevertheless, in the air-to-water system, should the air temperature in
the IT racks not exceed a maximum level, it can be recirculated until reaching its maximum
threshold. This behavior explains the fact that the heat from the IT racks is not entirely
recovered. The cooling system is capable of recovering the entire excess heat due to
Joule’s effect, which accounts for up to 85% of the total IT racks’ heat [29], representing
approximately 20 MWh for the air-to-water system and 2 MW in liquid cooling, assuming
there are no heat losses in the heat recovery
As commented in the previous 2 chapter, this thesis approaches two strategies regarding
the excess heat processing from the DC depending on how the TEST is connected to the
DC and HP.
In both cases, the HP raises the water temperature to meet the clients’ heat requirements,
whose profile is not constant and is shown in Figure 4.8, experiencing a year-peak demand
of 13.12 MWh.
4.2
Heat recovery system in the DC
All the diagrams presented in this chapter represent different components of the energy
system. The parameters utilized in the schematics and calculations are based on actual
projects, serving as references for the system design. To maintain confidentiality, the
specific project details are presented within ranges. After presenting the ranges, a single
value will be selected from those ranges to design the base case. In addition to this, some
temperatures are also checked with research documents that are presented in The state
of the art chpater.
20
Thesis title
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.1: Map location of the DC and greenhouses.
Both systems present the following assumptions for heat recovery:
• Heat recovery (QHR) is constant.
• Water temperatures remain constant, Tw
1 and Tw
2 , enabling to use Carnot’s efficiency.
• For a better heat transfer a counter-flow heat exchanger is utilised.
• Heat losses in the heat exchangers are not considered since in reality they would
be in the range of kWh.
• Pinch point (PP) in heat exchangers is 5 K.
• There are two stratification layers in the TEST.
• 85 % and 100 % of electric consumption in the IT racks is recovered in the air-to-
water and liquid cooling, respectively.
It is important to clarify that a smaller pinch point can be achieved by utilizing two heat
exchangers. This enables the reduction of the temperature difference from the primary to
the secondary side. In this configuration, one HE handles 1/3 of the load while the other
handles 2/3. This approach enables sizing the HEs for a smaller flow rate, which in turn
allows for a potential reduction in the temperature difference. This is because the HEs do
not need to operate at 100 % load for each of them.
Thesis title
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.2: Strategy 1. Air to water heat recovery system.
4.2.1
Strategy 1. TEST in the cold side of the HP
Air-to-water cooling heat recovery system
The air-to-water DC system assumes that the cooling system utilises the outside air with
treatments that guarantees specific levels of relative humidity and inlet temperature. Out-
door air temperature, which is defined as Ta,out
1
, is not consistent over time, and therefore
it strongly impacts the heat recovery capacity defined in Equation 1.1 because of ∆T.
In response to that, the air-mass flow rate is based on the outside temperature to adjust
the QHR to design conditions, and the system assumes that post-DC-air temperature re-
covery is constant. Nevertheless, this is out of the scope since the study starts after the
heat recovery, but needs to be explained for a better understanding of the heat recovery
diagram in Figure 4.2. All the temperatures are detailed in 4.1.
Liquid cooling heat recovery system
The liquid cooling system assumes that the operating conditions are the design ones. This
means that temperatures, mass flow rates and heat recovery have a consistent pattern
over time inside a close loop as presented in Figure 4.3. All the temperatures are detailed
in 4.1.
Heat pump implementation
The HP system is installed near to the heat source, which is the TEST. As shown in Figure
4.4, the water is extracted from the top of the tank (denoted as T1) since it contains the
hottest layer within the TEST. T1 is then cooled down in the evaporator, transferring its heat
to the refrigerant inside the VCRC. The heat extracted from T1 is subsequently transferred
to the condenser to heat up the return water from the greenhouse, denoted as T r
gh.
4.2.2
Strategy 2. TEST in the hot side of the HP
4.3
Temperatures in the systems
Greenhouse supply temperature are the same in both strategies. As a result of that the
only difference is the water temperature contained in the TEST as illustrated in Table
4.1. It also details all temperature ranges that a cooling system and heat recoveries can
experience in DCs. The ranges show standard temperatures whilst the T ref present the
22
Thesis title
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.3: Strategy 1. Liquid to water heat recovery system.
Figure 4.4: Strategy 1. HP implementation in the heat recovery system.
Figure 4.5: Strategy 2. Air-to-water heat recovery system.
Thesis title
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.6: Strategy 2. Liquid-to-water heat recovery system.
actual value for this study case. Because T r
gh depends on how big heat losses are in the
GH based on outside temperatures they are not calculated.
Table 4.1: Temperatures in the system.
Air-to-water
Liquid-to-water
Tmin
Tmax
Tref
Tmin
Tmax
Tref
Ta
2
26
33
30
Tl
2
35
45
43
Ta′
2
20
25
20
Tl
1
20
25
20
Tw
1
25
30
25
Twl
1
35
40
37
Tw
2
15
20
15
Twl
2
15
20
15
Ts
gh
25
40
40
Ts
gh
25
40
40
4.4
Greenhouses
This master’s thesis explores various scenarios involving several greenhouses to model
multiple energy demands. Nevertheless, there is a dependence between the DC cooling
system and the demand size.
Air-to-water cooling systems are commonly implemented in large DCs due to their high
heat recovery capacities, making them ideal for larger greenhouse configurations.
Conversely, liquid cooling is more commonly used in small DCs as stated in the state
of the art. Therefore, this cooling system will be studied in small greenhouses. One
motivation for implementing liquid cooling on a small-scale is the evolving technology that
enables the creation of mobile DC modules. The relevance of their study in this master’s
thesis lies in the fact that these new mobile DC modules can be conveniently placed close
to greenhouses with scarce of infrastructure. This mobility provides an advantage over
standard air-to-water DCs that require a fixed infrastructure. Additionally, they could also
reduce supply temperatures due to the fact that they are located in-site and do not require
long distances insulated pipes.
Energy consumption
The energy consumption of greenhouses has been modeled using the ”Heat Degree Days
(HDD)” approach as defined in Equation 4.1. This approach involves conducting a sim-
24
Thesis title
==PAGE:33==
Energy (MWh/day)
Day
Gartnerivej 5
H8 Åsum
Holevvej 7
Søndegade 61
Søndegade 67
Tokkendrup 5
TOTAL (MWh/day)
1
61.00
32.60
16.80
19.27
3.61
0.46
133.74
2
57.00
29.21
13.39
14.79
2.50
0.16
117.05
3
54.5
40.40
18.39
18.03
4.44
0.86
82.12
4
64.70
36.87
17.80
26.21
5.55
0.88
152.01
5
53.89
28.90
15.39
18.43
3.61
0.44
120.66
6
47.00
25.90
13.39
16.24
2.50
0.32
105.35
7
62.29
28.81
16.89
21.06
2.77
0.46
132.28
8
59.00
22.09
14.50
20.06
2.50
0.24
118.39
9
52.30
22.00
13.39
16.07
2.50
0.30
106.56
10
43.60
23.40
13.00
12.51
1.94
0.05
94.50
11
41.29
21.18
12.80
11.38
1.38
0.05
88.08
12
43.33
23.00
13.69
13.84
1.94
0.04
95.84
13
35.10
25.31
13.60
11.98
2.22
0.06
88.27
14
30.50
20.28
12.10
12.86
2.22
0.05
78.01
15
41.79
18.59
12.70
18.80
2.22
0.05
94.15
16
38.00
16.50
11.69
18.49
1.66
0.05
86.39
17
34.90
15.90
10.50
12.21
1.38
0.05
74.94
18
28.59
10.81
7.60
8.98
0.27
0.01
56.26
19
40.70
14.18
9.20
17.31
0.83
0.04
82.26
20
30.50
9.81
8.19
8.81
0.27
0.00
57.58
21
37.00
12.28
8.50
11.09
0.00
0.01
68.88
22
37.50
11.71
8.39
11.25
0.83
0.04
69.72
23
24.29
10.40
6.20
9.19
0.27
0.03
50.38
24
31.00
13.28
9.10
12.67
1.94
0.05
68.04
25
4.80
9.90
8.19
9.58
0.27
0.01
32.75
26
28.50
12.59
8.10
14.58
0.27
0.01
64.05
27
50.89
16.00
11.80
11.61
1.66
0.16
92.12
28
34.60
15.60
11.09
11.19
1.11
0.20
73.79
29
26.89
11.90
12.70
15.48
0.27
0.00
67.24
30
22.89
12.31
8.70
9.36
0.55
0.04
53.85
Table 4.2: Energy demand for the reference case.
ple study where the heat load in greenhouses depends on the temperature difference
between the air outside and inside during a specific period, which in this case is a year.
The indoor temperature is considered as a desired parameter, and based on the tem-
perature difference (∆T) between the outside and inside, along with the heat demand
coefficient (HDC) of the greenhouse, a basic energy demand case is established using
weather data. The HDC is a value typically determined by factors such as heat loss,
heating system, and greenhouse size. To obtain the outside temperature a synthetic and
standard weather climate file for Denmark was utilized.
Qdem
t
=
(
T indoor
t
−T outdoor
t
)
· HDD
∀t ∈T, t
(4.1)
For this scenario, the inside temperature is maintained at 24 ºC throughout the year, and
the HDC is calculated to be 0.3426 MW/ºC. The HDD approach takes into account the
daily energy demand of the six greenhouses during June, whose consumption, taken from
a summary report in the Lillegaard Teknik’s database, is presented in the table below (see
Table 4.2).
To calculate the HDC the average value of ∆T was calculated for every day and plotted
together with the daily consumption divided by 24 to convert it to hourly demand. By
applying a linear regression function in Excel, the linear equation that relates the hourly
demand with ∆T is presented in Figure 4.7. It presents the correlation between both
parameters and the HDC, which is 0.3426 and represents. To validate how accurate this
approach is, the coefficient of determination (R2) determines how the demand varies in
Thesis title
25
==PAGE:34==
function of ∆T. The closer the R2 to the unit is, the stronger the dependence of the
demand to ∆T is. Consequently, based on the result, the approach can be applied to the
study.
Figure 4.7: Correlation between energy demand and ∆T.
Finally, the hourly energy demand is calculated by multiplying HDC times ∆T for every
hour of the year. Figure 4.8 shows the energy demand of the GHs using the HDD approach
for a year span. In there, the evolution of the demand shows a trend where the lowest
thermal energy consumption is encountered in the middle of the representation, where
the warmest months are located.
To demonstrate the variability of the demand throughout a day, Figure 4.9 illustrates the
demand behavior for a two-day interval. It is observed that peak values are reached
during darker hours when there is no sun and heating losses are highest, corresponding
to 13.12 MWh for the year-peak. Conversely, the lowest consumption occurs from 36 to
37 hours, corresponding to noon.
Data center
The DC is assumed to operate under nominal conditions, ensuring that the heat recovery
does not vary and the temperatures in Table 4.1 remain constant. Therefore, should the
TEST is completely full or there is no greenhouse demand, the DC switches from the
heat recovery (HR) mode to the extra cooling backup system. This also leads the Python
optimization code to decide should it is more convenient channelling EH to the TEST or to
release it. The optimal solution considers the objective function presented in 4.9, the state
of charge of the tank and the energy balance in the greenhouse for all possible cases.
TEST and HP
It is assumed that there is no heat loss in the TEST, either to the environment or within
the layers. The initial state of charge (SOC) of the TEST is set up at 0. The minimum and
maximum allowable SOC values for the TEST are 0 and 1, respectively.
For the strategy 1, when SOC reaches the minimum threshold the HP disconnects as
there is no energy remaining in the TEST from the energy point of view. Consequently, the
26
Thesis title
==PAGE:35==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
time (h/year)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Energy (MWh)
Greenhouses energy demand
Figure 4.8: Greenhouses energy consumption for one-year period.
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
time (h/year)
8.75
9.00
9.25
9.50
9.75
10.00
10.25
10.50
Energy (MWh)
Representative sample greenhouses energy demand
Figure 4.9: Greenhouses energy consumption representative sample: Two-Day Sample.
Thesis title
27
==PAGE:36==
backup system, which is the same reversible HP a with secondary air-to-water evaporator
HE, takes over to cover the demand.
All the specifications and characteristics for both air-to-water and liquid immersion case
are summarized in Table 4.3. Empathising on the condenser temperatures, it is shown
that Tcond remains constant and its value is 5 ºC superior to the Ts
gh due to the PP. Because
a heating floor technology is chosen, the Ts
gh is set up at 40 ºC, which is the maximum to
operate with this system. On the other hand, the temperature in the evaporator is defined
as the Tevap - PP. It leads to a higher COP value when using liquid cooling that lower the
OPEX costs.
As seen in Table 4.3 both COPs are quite hight. This is due to the fact that the effort done
by the compressor, which is the difference between the Tcond and Tevap, is minimum. In
order to corroborate these values, both COP results are compared with a HP case report
[17]. In there, different COP outcomes are presented as a function of their temperature
lift. COP values results are ranged between 1.6 and 5.8 with a temperature lift of 130 K
to 25 K, respectively [17]. Considering the 25 K lift and the fact that ηCarnot values are in
the range from 40-50 %, obtaining a 7.16 COP for 20 K lift seems reasonable.
Finally, it is essential to emphasize that the parametres marked with ”Y” present the the
key outcomes of the optimization process.
4.5
Energy balance in the TEST
Strategy 1
The energy balance in the TEST is defined in Equation 4.2. It represents how much heat
the tank has at each time. In that equation, SOC takes into account the last SOC state,
and applies it to the actual time.
SOCt = SOCt−1 +
[
Qrec −Qex,cool
t
]
−
[
Qdem
t
+ Qhl]
∀t ∈T, t ̸= 0
(4.2)
Qdem
t
is the amount of heat that the greenhouse demands to the condenser side of the HP.
Therefore, it can be subsituted by its corresponding absorbed heat from the evaporator,
which is located in the TEST. By doing this, the demand is expressed as a function of the
COPh and the heat provided by the condenser as detailed in the Equation 4.3. In there,
it is differentiated between variables and parameters. As mentioned at the beginning of
this chapter, all the temperatures in the system as well as heat recovery and heat losses
remain constant. Consequently, those are the parameters, whilst Qex,cool
t
and QHP
t
are
the variables the values of which minimize the overall costs when performing the energy
balance in the TEST. Qex,cool
t
is the extra cooling capacity, and QHP
t
is the heat supplied
by the condenser at each time step.
SOCt = SOCt−1 +
[
Qrec −Qex_cool
t
]
−
[
Qh,HP
t
·
(
1 −
1
COP
)
+ Qhl
]
∀t ∈T, t ̸= 0
(4.3)
The optimization code considers the initial SOC when time is set to zero along with its
minimum value as specified in Table ??. The SOCmax is attained when the TEST reaches
its maximum capacity, determined by Equation 4.4.
28
Thesis title
==PAGE:37==
Strategy 1
Strategy 2
Air-to-water
Liquid cooling
Air-to-water
Liquid cooling
DC
DC
HR
20
2
MWh
HR
20
2
MWh
EC
f(t)
f(t)
MWh
EC
f(t)
f(t)
MWh
TEST
TEST
V TEST
Y
Y
m3
V TEST
Y
Y
m3
ρw
1.000
1.000
kg/m3
ρw
1.000
1.000
kg/m3
Cpw
4.186
4.186
J/(kg·K)
Cpw
4.186
4.186
J/(kg·K)
Qmax,TEST
Y
Y
MWh
Qmax,TEST
Y
Y
MWh
SOCmin
0
0
MWh
SOCmin
0
0
MWh
SOCmax
Y
Y
MWh
SOCmax
Y
Y
MWh
QHL, TEST
0
0
MWh
QHL, TEST
0
0
MWh
T H, TEST
0
0
MWh
T H, TEST
0
0
MWh
T C, TEST
0
0
MWh
T C, TEST
0
0
MWh
HP
HP
Qhp,max
Y
Y
MW
Qhp,max
Y
Y
MW
T cond
45
45
◦C
T cond
45
45
◦C
T evap
25
32
◦C
T evap
25
32
◦C
ηCarnot
0.5
0.5
-
ηCarnot
0.45
0.45
-
COPh
7.16
11.02
-
COPh
7.16
11.02
-
Greenhouses
Greenhouses
Qdem
peak
13.12
3.04
MWh
Qdem
peak
13.12
3.04
MWh
Ts
gh
40
40
ºC
Ts
gh
40
40
ºC
Back up
Back up
Qbp
Y
Y
MW
Qbp
Y
Y
MW
Pipes
Pipes
QHL,p
0
0
MWh
QHL,p
0
0
MWh
Table 4.3: Parameters for Strategy 1 and 2.
Thesis title
29
==PAGE:38==
Qmax,TEST = V max,TEST · ρw · Cw
p · (∆T)1
(4.4)
Strategy 2
Strategy 2 only considers the condenser and the demand as the inputs and outputs to the
tank, respectively. Consequently, the SOC equation is defined as in Equation 4.5.
SOCt = SOCt−1 +
[
Qh,HP
t
−Qtank,out
t
]
∀t ∈T, t ̸= 0
(4.5)
Qtank,out
t
is the amount of heat that the greenhouse demands to the TEST.
4.6
Energy balance of the entire system
Strategy 1
Equation 4.6 shows the energy balance for the entire system, which consists of defining
that the demand must be fully covered by the production for any given time.
Qdem
t
= Qh,HP
t
+ Qh,bp
t
(4.6)
As shown in Equation 4.6, the demand is covered by the HP and backup system: QHP
and Qbp, respectively. Nevertheless, the main system is the QHP
t , whilst the the backup
is only utilized when there is insufficient energy in the TEST or when the energy price for
operating the backup system is more favorable than for the heat pump.
Strategy 2
In contrast to the Strategy 1, because of the fact that the TEST is now placed after the
HP, there are two main energy balances in the system.
The first energy balance is focused on the secondary side of the HE of the DC, where the
evaporator of the HP is installed as presented before in Figure 4.5.
DC balance
Qrec
t
= Qc,HP
t
+ Qex,cool
t
(4.7)
Finally, the second takes places in the demand. As stated in Equation 4.5, the Qtank,out
t
is
the amount of heat that the greenhouse demands to the TEST. Therefore, all the energy
that the tank is not able to supply must be covered by the backup system as defined below.
Qdem
t
= Qtank,out
t
+ Qc,bp
t
(4.8)
1Temperature difference between the cold and hot water layers in the TEST, with values corresponding to
Tw
2 and Twl
2 in Table 4.1.
30
Thesis title
==PAGE:39==
The decision on when and which systems should operate is defined in the objective func-
tion, which is the equation optimized by the program. The objective function aims to min-
imize the overall energy consumption of the system. Equation 4.9 defines the objective
function in Python.
Due to the fact that backup system, which is a secondary evaporator HE added to the the
reversible main HP, consists of an air source HP, and the energy conversion efficiency
depends on the environmental air temperature, its COP will be lower compared to the HP
linked to the TEST due to the standard cold temperatures. This prioritizes the operation
of the heat pump over the backup system as higher energy consumption results in lower
energy efficiency.
OPEXt =
[
Qh,HP
t
COP H,HP +
Qbp
t
COP C,bp +
Qbp
t
COP H,bp + Qex,cool
t
∗ηex,cool2 · P elec
t
]
∀t ∈T
(4.9)
2ηex,cool is the fan efficiency, which is defined as the ratio between the power consumption of the fan and
the heat dissipation [30].
Thesis title
31
==PAGE:40==
5
Economic parametres
In this chapter, all the economic parameters that enable the comparison of all scenarios
are presented and explained. As explained in the Methodology and Input Data chapter,
TOTEX is the parameter that must be optimized, and this optimization leads to the optimal
configuration.
OPEX: Operational expenditure refers to the ongoing operational expenses incurred by
the operation of the system, the equation of which was presented in Equation 4.9 as the
objective function that the code must minimize. Its outcome is in DKK.
CAPEX: Capital expenditure represents the system investment, which includes the extra
cooling, both HPs and TEST over their entire lifetime (LT). The importance of considering
each lifetime component lies in the devaluation of the investment throughout the years.
To do so, a discount rate (d) must be applied too. This process is called annualization of
the investment and must be applied to every equipment investment. It is defined in the
equation below [31].
CAPEXannual = I · i ·
(1 + i)LT
(1 + i)LT −1
(5.1)
TOTEX: Total expenditure is defined as the sum of the OPEX, CAPEX and Maintenance
& Operation (M&O) activities in the entire system. As mentioned, TOTEX includes all the
expenditures of the system, which are presented in Table 5.1 to identify and clarify them
for this specific project. The equation that defines each of them is presented in Table
5.2, together with their corresponding references. Nevertheless, the justification of some
parameters is explained in the text below.
• Itank: The equation provided in [32] refers to a large hot water tank with a ∆T of 55
K. For this specific project, a small-scale with ∆T equal to 30 K is more appropriate.
Typically, small-scale tanks are used for hydraulic heating systems in buildings. Yet,
in this case, the tank size is expected to be larger due to the higher ∆T experienced.
Consequently, utilizing the investment equation designed for a large hot water tank
is more appropriate.
• 7.45: This value is reiterated in the table. The reason to this is to convert from Euros
(€) to Danish Krone (DKK).
• Qh,bp: The capacity of the backup system, which is the secondary evaporator HE, is
the outcome of the peak demand that it covers. It is a value provided by the Python
optimization code.
• 18 %: This is the equivalent percentage of an evaporator based on the break down
values for a reversible HP [33]. This percentage applies to the total investment cost
of a HP for the specific capacity. The fact of costing the 18 % of what an entire HP
would, this percentage applies to all the associated costs of the backup.
• 80 in Iextra_cooling: This value is the power consumption of the dry cooling tower,
which is in the range of 49 and 107 €/kW [34].
• 11 % in the O&M_fix_extra_cooling refers to the associated M&O costs of a fan coil
cooling system [35].
32
Thesis title
==PAGE:41==
Table 5.1: Definition of each ecnonomic parametre.
Component
Annual Cost (DKK/year)
Tank Investment (CAPEX)
Itank
HP Investment (CAPEX)
Ihp
Backup Pump Investment (CAPEX)
Ibp
Extra Cooling Investment (CAPEX)
Iextra_cooling
Fixed Tank Operation and Maintenance
OM_fix_tank
Fixed HP Operation and Maintenance
OM_fix_hp
Fixed Backup Pump Operation and Maintenance
OM_fix_bp
Fixed Extra Cooling Operation and Maintenance
OM_fix_extra_cooling
Variable HP Operation and Maintenance
OM_var_hp
Variable Backup Pump Operation and Maintenance
OM_var_bp
Objective Value (OPEX)
OPEX
Table 5.2: Determination of each economic parametre.
Component
Equation
Reference
Itank
7450 · V 0.53 · 7.45
[32]
Ihp
0.73 · Qh,HP · 106 · 7.45
[36]
Ibp
0.73 · Qh,HP · 106 · 7.45 · 18%
[36, 33]
Iextra_cooling
Qex,cool · 7.45 · 80 · 1000
[34]
O&M_fix_tank
8.6% · QTEST · 7.5
[32]
O&M_fix_hp
2000 · 7.5 · Qh,HP
[36]
OM_fix_bp
2000 · 7.5 · Qh,bp · 18%
[36, 33]
O&M_fix_extra_cooling
0.11% · Iextra_cooling
[35]
O&M_var_hp
1.8 · 7.5 · Qh,HP
[36]
O&M_var_bp
1.8 · 7.5 · Qh,bp · 18%
[36, 33]
LThp
20 years
[36]
LTbp
20 years
[36]
LTtank
40 years
[32]
LTex,cooling
15 years
[35]
d
5%
[31]
Thesis title
33
==PAGE:42==
6
Optimization results
After conducting an iterative analysis as mentioned in methodology and input data chapter,
which involved various tank volumes and HP capacities, the optimal configuration that
consistently yielded the lowest TOTEX across all cases was identified.
6.1
Strategy 1. Air-to-water and liquid cooling.
The characteristics of the iterative analysis that was conducted for both cases is presented
in the table below. In there, it is considered that the maximum threshold for the HP slightly
surpasses the peak demand detailed in Table 4.3. This is because of the fact that its COP
is superior than the backup. Consequently, the system will always prioritize the main HP
operation as defined in Equation 4.9. Hence, it must have enough capacity to cover the
peak demand, which in turn is the worst scenario for the HP.
However, the bigger the HP is, the higher the CAPEX is, and the same occurs when
increasing Vtank. Thus, there is a linear relation between higher capacities and grater
CAPEX. These both effects are seen when analyzing both cases in Figure 6.1 and 6.2.
As a result of that, the minimum and maximum CAPEX outcomes are reached on the
bottom-left and top-right sides, respectively. Yet, Figure 6.1 does not present a significant
influence of the Vtank. In fact, the most relevant parametre is QHP .
Yet, Figure 6.1 reflects a bigger influence of the HP size than Vtank. This is as a result
of the disparity in the investment costs, where the expenses associated to HP are larger.
To illustrate the additional investment expenses associated with larger HP capacities and
tank volumes for air-to-water case, both investment trends were plotted when using the
same tank volume for different HP capacities and vice versa. By doing this, the results
showed that CAPEXV = 3,100*V+1,987,200 and CAPEXHP =157,000*QHP +1,822,700,
meaning that Ihp represents 50.64 times more influence on the total CAPEX. Moreover,
the reason why Vtank has bigger impact on liquid cooling CAPEX is due to the fact that
QHP increase is significantly smaller because of smaller demands.
Contrary to CAPEX, OPEX increases when QHP and Vtank does it too, which is only
partially shown in Figure 6.3 and Figure ??. None of them show the effect of increasing
Vtank, but only the QHP . The reason to this is a combination of factors.
First of all, increasing TEST volume results in bigger tank capacities, which is the heat
source for the HP where the evaporator is located. Consequently, the bigger the capacity
of the tank, the more energy the evaporator can take. This is essential due to the fact
that should the TEST does not have enough energy, the backup must replace the main
HP. This implies an increase in the operational costs of the system because of the lower
Table 6.1: Strategy 1. Paremetes of the sensitivity Analysis.
Scenario
Variable
Down
Up
Iterations
Units
Air-to-Water
Vtank
50
500
20
m3
QHP
0
14
30
MW
Liquid Cooling
Vtank
50
500
10
m3
QHP
0
3.5
20
MW
34
Thesis title
==PAGE:43==
0.00
0.48
0.97
1.45
1.93
2.41
2.90
3.38
3.86
4.34
4.83
5.31
5.79
6.28
6.76
7.24
7.72
8.21
8.69
9.17
9.66
10.14 10.62 11.10 11.59 12.07 12.55 13.03 13.52 14.00
HP Capacity (MW)
50.00
73.68
97.37
121.05
144.74
168.42
192.11
215.79
239.47
263.16
286.84
310.53
334.21
357.89
381.58
405.26
428.95
452.63
476.32
500.00
Volume (m3)
CAPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
CAPEX (DKK)
1e7
Figure 6.1: Strategy 1. CAPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
Thesis title
35
==PAGE:44==
0.00
0.18
0.37
0.55
0.74
0.92
1.11
1.29
1.47
1.66
1.84
2.03
2.21
2.39
2.58
2.76
2.95
3.13
3.32
3.50
HP Capacity (MW)
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
250.00
300.00
350.00
400.00
450.00
500.00
Volume (m3)
CAPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
CAPEX (DKK)
1e6
Figure 6.2: Strategy 1. CAPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis.
36
Thesis title
==PAGE:45==
0.00
0.48
0.97
1.45
1.93
2.41
2.90
3.38
3.86
4.34
4.83
5.31
5.79
6.28
6.76
7.24
7.72
8.21
8.69
9.17
9.66
10.14
10.62
11.10
11.59
12.07
12.55
13.03
13.52
14.00
HP Capacity (MW)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Volume (m3)
OPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
OPEX (DKK)
1e7
Figure 6.3: Strategy 1. OPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
backup COP. Moreover, increasing QHP results in less backup operational times, which
is the main reason to experience the lowest OPEX on the right-hand side in both OPEX
figures. Additionally, not only increasing the tank capacity results in lower OPEX results,
but also when increasing the QHP .
Secondly, the weight of each variable on OPEX result is not qualitative. As conducted in
the CAPEX results evaluation, the influence of both QHP and Vtank on the OPEX is also
plotted in Excel. Consequently, their respective trend-lines define the relation between
the variables and the outcome. By doing this, a bigger impact on OPEX is found when
increasing the QHP . OPEXV = 21.448 · V 2 −937.45 · V + 9 × 106 and OPEX(QHP ) =
8324 · (QHP )2 −389945 · QHP + 1 × 107.
Finally, the optimum configuration for each case is presented in Table ??. In there, the
lowest TOTEX is reached when having the minimum tank volume, and QHP is half of
the peak demand. This outcome was expected due to the fact that CAPEX maximum
thresholds are on the left-hand side, and the opposite occurs for the OPEX. Consequently,
for the air-to-water since the tank was not as rellevant as the HP capacity, the lowest
TOTEX is presented in a vertical range just in the middle of Figure 6.5 shows. Having
a small influence of the tank enables not to see its TOTEX increase from bottom to top,
but the minimum is found on the bottom. Different configurations of Qmax, TEST, Qrec,
Vmax, TEST, and Qh,HP were evaluated to see if it was only this configuration in specific.
The worst scenario was when the peak demand was twice the HR in DC. This means that
HR and Qdem
peak was 10 MWH, and 19.68 MWh, respectively. At this case, a bigger tank
would be expected. However, the analysis showed that TOTEX was inversely proportional
Thesis title
37
==PAGE:46==
0.00
0.18
0.37
0.55
0.74
0.92
1.11
1.29
1.47
1.66
1.84
2.03
2.21
2.39
2.58
2.76
2.95
3.13
3.32
3.50
HP Capacity (MW)
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
250.00
300.00
350.00
400.00
450.00
500.00
Volume (m3)
OPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
OPEX (DKK)
1e6
Figure 6.4: Strategy 1. OPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis.
38
Thesis title
==PAGE:47==
0.00
0.48
0.97
1.45
1.93
2.41
2.90
3.38
3.86
4.34
4.83
5.31
5.79
6.28
6.76
7.24
7.72
8.21
8.69
9.17
9.66
10.14 10.62 11.10 11.59 12.07 12.55 13.03 13.52 14.00
HP Capacity (MW)
50.00
73.68
97.37
121.05
144.74
168.42
192.11
215.79
239.47
263.16
286.84
310.53
334.21
357.89
381.58
405.26
428.95
452.63
476.32
500.00
Volume (m3)
TOTEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
TOTEX (DKK)
1e7
Figure 6.5: Strategy 1. TOTEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
to Vtank. Based on that, the closer the Vtank is to zero, the lower the TOTEX. On the other
hand, in the liquid cooling system, bigger influence of the tank size allows to perfectly
visualize the optimal TOTEX in Figure 6.6 in the middle of the bottom. Spite of that,
as in air-to-water, different configurations were conducted without success, the optimal
configuration was at the same point.
The fact of reaching the optimum TOTEX in the middle for both cases can be explained by
considering target is to minimiz OPEX, which reaches its maximum and minimum when
the capacity of the HP is at its minimum and maximum, respectively. The result obtained
for OPEX entails the necessary QHP . This resulting value will be the maximum possible
that can cover the entire demand as previously explained. However, this leads to the as-
sociated CAPEX being at its maximum. It is important to remember that higher HP capac-
ities result in higher CAPEX expenditures. Consequently, considering that the system’s
objective is to minimize OPEX, the HP capacity that fulfills both economic parameters is
found right in the middle.
A further investigation regarding whether there is any benefit to implementing the tank in
Thesis title
39
==PAGE:48==
0.00
0.18
0.37
0.55
0.74
0.92
1.11
1.29
1.47
1.66
1.84
2.03
2.21
2.39
2.58
2.76
2.95
3.13
3.32
3.50
HP Capacity (MW)
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
250.00
300.00
350.00
400.00
450.00
500.00
Volume (m3)
TOTEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
TOTEX (DKK)
1e6
Figure 6.6: Strategy 1. TOTEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis.
40
Thesis title
==PAGE:49==
Strategy 1
Variable
Air-to-water
No tank
Liquid cooling
Units
Qh,HP
6.56
7
1.66
MWh
Qh,bp
6.56
6.12
1.36
MWh
Vtank
50
0
50
m3
OPEX
5,876,207
5,677,322
668271
DKK
CAPEX
4,174,951
4,227,470
921,547
DKK
TOTEX
10,181,026
10,114,906
1,619,988
DKK
Table 6.2: Strategy 1. Optimal results.
the system was conducted. Thus, the code was modified to simulate a scenario without
tank. The simulation results, which are summarized in Table 6.2, revealed that there was
no advantage to adding a TEST as a thermal resource for the HP. It is worth noting that,
despite expecting lower OPEX in the case with a tank, the opposite occurs. This can be
explained by considering that Qh,HP is lower. This is because of the number of iterations
when conducting the sensitivity analysis. Contrary to this, the ”no tank” case do not use
the optimization system, but establishes that Qdem is primary covered by Qh,HP , only using
Qh,bp to cover Qdem - Qh,HP . By doing this, the exact Qh,HP is reached. Consequently, this
implies that air-to-water Qh,HP and Qh,bp values are not as much accurate as in the ”no
tank” case. Therefore, in the tank case, the auxiliary system must increase its power and
operate for a longer period, leading to higher OPEX due to its lower COP. Additionally, this
is strongly related to a higher CAPEX for the ’no tank’ scenario, as demonstrated earlier,
where the most influential factor in CAPEX variation is Qh,HP .
It is worthy nothing to mention that the minimum TOTEX is the result of the OPEX and
CAPEX functions intersection. That is presented in Figure 6.7, where both CAPEX and
OPEX for the air-to-water case with a Vtank value equal to 50 m3 and the entire range of
QHP are plotted. The value of QHP at the intersection point does not correspond to the
optimum shown in Figure 6.5, but it is slightly shifted to the right. The reason for this is
that the variation of CAPEX in the iterative process is much greater than that of OPEX.
As a result, as can be seen in Figure 6.7, the point is shifted.
From an energy point of view, there is no apparent benefit in connecting the tank directly
to a constant heat-source. Since the main purpose of the TEST is to buffer demand,
it should be integrated into the energy variable component of the system. This is the
standard strategy utilized when having a variable demand. Moreover, one of the main
reasons to install a TEST is because the demand is larger than the production, which is
not this case. Instead, it can be more interesting to integrate the TEST in the condenser
of the HP in such a way that it. This strategy, Strategy 2, promotes to operate at full power
when electricity price is lower. In these periods the HP will generate as much as it can
and dump it into the tank for later consumption. This is a key difference between Strategy
1 and Strategy 2.
Another reason is that the HP must supply the immediate demand at any time. The heat
source cannot mitigate the operational time, and thus, the HP will cover the demand in-
dependently of the electricity price, which is disadvantageous. This is shown in the fig-
ure below, where despite having a TEST, the HP must meet the instantaneous demand.
Therefore, there is no other advantage apart from increasing the COP of the HP.
Thesis title
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.7: Strategy 1. OPEX and CAPEX intersection air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
4000
4010
4020
4030
4040
4050
4060
4070
time (h/year)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
MWh
Energy balance
Q_hp
Q_dem
SOC
Pelec
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Price (DKK/MWh)
Figure 6.8: Strategy 1. Energy balance in the air-to-water system.
42
Thesis title
==PAGE:51==
Parametres
TOTEX
T H, TEST
-0.1277 · T H, TEST + 14.091
T C, TEST
0.1158 · T C, TEST + 5.6346
T s
gh
0.136 · T s
gh + 4.9891
Table 6.3: Sensitivity of the best configuration in the air-to-water system.
Table 6.4: Strategy 2. Parameters of the sensitivity analysis.
Scenario
Variable
Down
Up
Iterations
Units
Air-to-Water
Vtank
10
60
12
m3
QHP
1
14
28
MW
Liquid Cooling
Vtank
5
30
11
m3
QHP
0.5
3.5
10
MW
6.1.1
Sensitivity of the parameters’ influence on the best configuration.
In this section, the influence of different temperatures of the system on the final TOTEX
result for air-to-water is discussed. To do this, three sensitivity analyses will be conducted
to examine the impact of T H, TEST, T C, TEST, and T s
gh.
Below, the following table summarizes the relationship between TOTEX and each param-
eter used in the sensitivity study. In this way, thanks to the slope of each equation, the
impact can be appreciated. Based on the results obtained, the supply temperature to
the greenhouse has the most significant effect on TOTEX. Furthermore, since its slope is
positive, it indicates that higher T sgh results in increased TOTEX. This is because T sgh
is closely related to T cond. Therefore, if T cond increases for the same T evap, the COP
obtained in the HP decreases, thus increasing OPEX costs. The opposite occurs when
analyzing T H, TEST. As T evap depends on it, an increase in T H, TEST will raise T evap, im-
proving both the COP and the capacity of the TEST while enabling a lower tank cost for
the same capacity.
Finally, increasing T C, TEST raises TOTEX costs simply because the ∆T in the tank de-
creases, negatively affecting its capacity and, consequently, increasing the OPEX and
CAPEX of the tank.
6.2
Strategy 2. Air-to-water and liquid cooling
This strategy is based on storing hot water for later consumption, and it is expected that
the tank volume will play a more significant role than in strategy 1. Therefore, the sen-
sitivity analysis includes more iterations on the tank volume (Vtank) for liquid cooling, as
shown in the table below, with the aim of obtaining more detailed results due to the fact
that the range is smaller. As can be seen, compared to the volumes studied in Strategy
1, these are much smaller. This is because, prior to obtaining this table, many other sen-
sitivity studies were conducted to narrow down the areas where tank implementation is
relevant. Thus, the upper and lower limits for each tank are based on previous scenarios
that delineate the zones where TOTEX begins to increase. As expected, due to higher
demand in the air-to-water system, the tank volume needs to be larger than in the liquid
cooling system.
As can be seen in the following figures, the OPEX and CAPEX for each case follow the
Thesis title
43
==PAGE:52==
10
20
30
40
50
60
Vtank (m3)
4.152
4.153
4.154
4.155
4.156
DKK
1e6
CAPEX representation in function of Vtank
CAPEX(Vtank)
Figure 6.9: Strategy 2. CAPEX relation with Vtank.
same trend as in Strategy 1 when increasing tank and HP capacities. Nevertheless, the
relationship between QHP and Vtank with CAPEX and OPEX changes compared to the
previous strategy.
For the air-to-water case in Strategy 2, it is found that the relationship between Vtank and
CAPEX is insignificant, and it follows a polynomial relationship of order 6 as shown below:
OPEX(Vtank) = 0.1801 · (Vtank)6 −6.0697 · (Vtank)5 + 79.253 · (Vtank)4 −504.52 · (Vtank)3 +
1613.3 · (Vtank)2 −2304 · Vtank + 4 × 106.
It is important to highlight the fact that this is for the entire range of Vtank in the simulation.
The function representation below shows how the slope of the function increases abruptly
after a volume greater than 51 m3. The explanation for this can be based on what was
mentioned earlier in the Economic Parameters chapter, the equation used for Itank is for
large-capacity tanks, as defined in the citation. Consequently, it is expected that, after a
certain volume, the slope changes. However, since the optimal value for TOTEX is found
when Vtank is equal to 55.45 Vtank, the function could be approximated to a straight line,
resulting in OPEX(Vtank) = 74.71 * Vtank + 4E+06.
In the case of HP, the relationship obtained is as follows: OPEXQHP = 156,619 QHP +
2E+06.
Finally, the TOTEX value for the air-to-water case is reached at the average value of QHP ,
which is 6.76 MW. However, the value of Vtank is no longer zero; the optimal value is found
to be 55.5 m3. The following Table 6.5 details the optimal configurations for both cases.
Similarly, liquid cooling reaches its configuration with 12.5 m3 and 1.85 MW.
The reason why the tank volume is no longer zero is because this solution is more optimal,
despite having slightly higher HP capacity. As can be seen in the following graph, the
HP provides energy based on optimizing OPEX. Therefore, the system will always try to
operate when energy is cheap to meet demand and even store for the more expensive
hours of energy. Consequently, implementing a tank to directly supply consumption allows
for the optimization of the system’s operating zones.
This is reflected in Figure 6.14 during the second peak of SOC at hour 4010, where the
44
Thesis title
==PAGE:53==
1.00
1.48
1.96
2.44
2.93
3.41
3.89
4.37
4.85
5.33
5.81
6.30
6.78
7.26
7.74
8.22
8.70
9.19
9.67
10.15
10.63
11.11
11.59
12.07
12.56
13.04
13.52
14.00
HP Capacity (MW)
10.00
14.55
19.09
23.64
28.18
32.73
37.27
41.82
46.36
50.91
55.45
60.00
Volume (m3)
CAPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
CAPEX (DKK)
1e7
Figure 6.10: Strategy 2. CAPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
Table 6.5: Strategy 2 Optimization Results
Strategy 2
Air-to-water
Liquid cooling
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Qh,HP
6.76 MWh
Qh,HP
1.82 MWh
Qh,bp
6.36 MWh
Qh,bp
1.2 MWh
Vtank
55.5 m3
Vtank
12.5 m3
OPEX
5,857,193 DKK
OPEX
614,373 DKK
CAPEX
4,152,733 DKK
CAPEX
896,300 DKK
TOTEX
10,139,895 DKK
TOTEX
1,542,381 DKK
Thesis title
45
==PAGE:54==
0.50
0.83
1.17
1.50
1.83
2.17
2.50
2.83
3.17
3.50
HP Capacity (MW)
5.00
7.50
10.00
12.50
15.00
17.50
20.00
22.50
25.00
27.50
30.00
Volume (m3)
CAPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
CAPEX (DKK)
1e6
Figure 6.11: Strategy 2. CAPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis.
46
Thesis title
==PAGE:55==
1.00
1.48
1.96
2.44
2.93
3.41
3.89
4.37
4.85
5.33
5.81
6.30
6.78
7.26
7.74
8.22
8.70
9.19
9.67
10.15
10.63
11.11
11.59
12.07
12.56
13.04
13.52
14.00
HP Capacity (MW)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Volume (m3)
OPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
OPEX (DKK)
1e7
Figure 6.12: Strategy 2. OPEX heat map air-to-water sensitivity analysis.
Thesis title
47
==PAGE:56==
0.50
0.83
1.17
1.50
1.83
2.17
2.50
2.83
3.17
3.50
HP Capacity (MW)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Volume (m3)
OPEX Heat Map (DKK)
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
OPEX (DKK)
1e6
Figure 6.13: Strategy 2. OPEX heat map liquid cooling sensitivity analysis.
48
Thesis title
==PAGE:57==
4000
4010
4020
4030
4040
4050
4060
4070
time (h/year)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
MWh
Energy balance
Q_dem
Q_hp
SOC
Pelec
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Price (DKK/MWh)
Figure 6.14: Strategy 2. Energy balance in the air-to-water system.
electricity price is low. This leads to the operation of the HP, as observed in its representa-
tion. In there, it can be seen that the HP not only meets the demand but also fills the tank
to its maximum capacity. That is why the SOC shows an increase from zero to maximum.
Later, as the electricity cost rises, the HP reduces its production below demand, leading
to the tank making up the difference and emptying, as reflected in the drop in SOC.
This method of operation is repeated for the rest of the hours of the year, thus optimizing
the HP’s operating times.
As previously mentioned, despite having a slightly higher QHP than Strategy 1, OPEX
has been reduced due to the operating periods when the energy price is more feasible.
As can be seen in Figure 4.4, the operation of the HP in Strategy 1 is much higher than in
Strategy 2 for the same demand. What happens is that for the first strategy, the HP must
meet the demand regardless of the price.
Thesis title
49
==PAGE:58==
4000
4010
4020
4030
4040
4050
4060
4070
time (h/year)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Energy (MWh)
Strategy 1. HP operation.
Figure 6.15: Strategy 1. HP operation in detail.
4000
4010
4020
4030
4040
4050
4060
4070
time (h/year)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Energy (MWh)
Strategy 2. HP operation.
Figure 6.16: Strategy 2. HP operation in detail.
50
Thesis title
==PAGE:59==
7
Discussions
Con the increasing use of artificial intelligence and internet-reliant platforms, more data
centers are required. The primary challenge in these data centers, where information
is processed, is the power supply. Data centers require a significant amount of uninter-
rupted electrical power. Therefore, they must be located in areas with ample access to
high-voltage networks and in locations where these facilities can be situated, such as the
rural areas of the Jutland peninsula in Denmark, where the majority of Denmark’s green-
houses are located. These greenhouses are also significant energy consumers, but in this
case, they require thermal energy to maintain ideal growing conditions. Closed-circuit cul-
tivation systems like these often use heat sources of fossil origin or even DH. However,
the main disadvantage of DH is that the supply temperature is much higher than required,
necessitating heat dissipation to make it usable and not the most sustainable option.
Traditionally, these data centers have been cooled using external air circulation systems
that remove excess heat as they pass through IT racks and release it outdoors. However,
these systems have maximum heat extraction capacities, so beyond certain IT power den-
sities, traditional systems can no longer maintain ideal conditions. As a result, increasing
IT power in data centers leads to larger data centers. Nevertheless, new cooling sys-
tems that can eliminate more excess heat are being implemented, such as liquid cooling
technology. Unlike traditional air cooling systems, liquid cooling is not widely adopted
in the industry. Therefore, there are not many data centers that have incorporated it at
present. However, it should be noted that the power ranges in data centers that have
already implemented liquid cooling are much lower than traditional ones. One advantage
of these systems is that they are very compact, resulting in mobile data centers that can
be installed in modules. In addition, one of the advantages of liquid cooling, as it recovers
excess heat at higher temperatures, is the reuse of this heat. However, the quality of the
recovered heat is not high enough to be used in district heating systems. Therefore, new
solutions such as supplying local greenhouses may be essential to meet the new energy
sustainability regulations that will be applied to data centers.
Given the location of both DC and greenhouses GH, a heat recovery system in the DC has
been studied to supply the GH’s heat demand. However, since the recovered heat does
not have a high temperature, a heat pump is required. The study presents two supply
strategies that require a TEST, and both traditional and liquid cooling systems are tested.
The first strategy involves installing the TEST in the data center and receiving heat directly
from the recovery system. Subsequently, the evaporator extracts enough energy to supply
the GH. The second strategy studies the tank in the condenser part, which supplies heat
to the GH. By analyzing both strategies, it is concluded that only the second strategy
makes TEST installation feasible.
The results show that the best scenario for Strategy 1 is when there is no storage, and
the evaporator directly extracts heat from the DC. This is because the primary function of
a tank is buffering, usually installed to directly meet demand. Otherwise, it is found that
the HP offers no improvement beyond enhancing the HP’s COP. As seen in Figure 6.15
and Figure 6.16, for the same demand and the same period, Strategy 1 follows the same
pattern as demand. Meanwhile, Figure 6.16 reflects less consistent operation with many
fluctuations. The latter is the effect that the TEST has on production by being installed in
the variable part of the system, i.e., the demand. This strategy (Strategy 2) promotes HP
Thesis title
51
==PAGE:60==
operation during times when energy is cheaper and encourages tank charging for later
use during periods of high electricity prices. This is reflected in a reduction in operating
expenses compared to Strategy 1.
The optimal results obtained in all cases have shown that the optimal configuration is
one in which either the tank is very small or not feasible for implementation. It might have
been expected that a larger tank would lead to higher revenues. However, the most critical
factor in the total expenditure has always been the HP’s capacity. It has consistently had a
greater influence on determining total capital expenditure and, consequently, on TOTEX.
As discussed in the Optimization Results chapter, the tank’s CAPEX is focused on large-
capacity TESTs, which do not apply to this system. To have a large-capacity TEST in
this system, given the low temperatures in recovery and demand, it would have been
necessary to increase the volume to unfeasible levels. Therefore, it could be concluded
that an equation for small-capacity TESTs might have resulted in higher optimal volumes,
with the tank’s CAPEX being more relevant and its impact on TOTEX also more significant.
52
Thesis title
==PAGE:61==
8
Conclusions
Throughout this project, various strategies involving different refrigeration systems for
data centers and greenhouse demands have been meticulously evaluated. The culmi-
nation of the findings allows to draw the following nuanced conclusions:
In a deeper dive into the technical aspects, it becomes evident that the volume of the
thermal energy storage tank assumes a paramount role, particularly when addressing
scenarios characterized by lower heat demand. In such contexts, the investment required
for the heat pump is comparatively less substantial when juxtaposed against the scale of
the tank. Consequently, both capital costs follow a parallel trajectory, exhibiting similar
variations throughout the iterative assessment process.
Within the context of the strategies under scrutiny, it is notable that Strategy 1’s incor-
poration of the thermal storage tank may not yield substantial benefits. The tank’s core
function, which centers on the storage of thermal energy, remains underutilized in this
specific configuration. This underutilization diminishes its significance concerning overall
system efficiency and cost dynamics.
When scrutinizing capital costs, specifically when comparing Strategy 1 with Strategy
2, both of which are grounded in air cooling, apparent differences may not immediately
surface. However, a more granular analysis could potentially unveil distinctions within the
specific components comprising these costs.
A similar subtlety emerges when assessing operation costs in the context of Strategy 1
and Strategy 2, both reliant on air cooling mechanisms. Initial observations might not
reveal glaring discrepancies, but a more meticulous examination could unveil variations
within the individual cost elements.
A pivotal distinction comes to light when considering the total cost implications between
Strategy 1 and Strategy 2, both rooted in air cooling paradigms. Strategy 2 distinctly
outperforms Strategy 1, showcasing TOTEX enhancements across a diverse spectrum
of thermal storage tank volumes. This compellingly suggests that Strategy 2 could offer
a more comprehensive economic advantage and a broader range of optimal tank volume
configurations compared to Strategy 1.
Furthermore, as society delve into the future landscape of data centers, scalability and
expansion strategies become increasingly critical. As data centers continue to burgeon
in size and significance, the capability to optimize heat recovery strategies assumes
heightened importance, ensuring their long-term sustainability and cost-effectiveness in
a rapidly evolving industry.
Beyond the financial aspects, it’s imperative to recognize that these heat recovery strate-
gies not only carry economic benefits but also make significant contributions to environ-
mental sustainability. By curbing carbon emissions and facilitating the integration of re-
newable energy sources, these strategies align with broader environmental objectives.
Collaborative initiatives within the industry can serve as conduits for valuable insights,
fostering standardization and propelling technological innovations.
Moreover, in the realm of future data center endeavors, site selection should transcend
considerations of high-voltage grid accessibility to encompass the feasibility of implement-
Thesis title
53
==PAGE:62==
ing efficient heat recovery solutions. The strategic placement of data centers holds the
potential to significantly influence the efficacy of heat recovery efforts.
Looking ahead, the liquid cooling technology holds promise for future data centers, par-
ticularly for mobile data centers. The compact nature of liquid cooling systems and their
potential to efficiently supply heat to greenhouses can make them a compelling choice for
sustainable and flexible data center solutions.
In summary, these findings underscore the importance of comprehensive planning and
analysis when implementing data center heat recovery strategies. Considering economic,
environmental, and technological factors, along with potential advancements like liquid
cooling, can lead to more efficient and sustainable data center operations in the future.
54
Thesis title
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Dan Swinhoe. Meta/Facebook to expand Odense data center campus in Denmark.
12/05/2023. 2021. URL: https://www.datacenterdynamics.com/en/news/metafacebook-
to-expand-odense-data-center-campus-in-denmark/.
[2]
Dan Swinhoe. Microsoft: Dublin Data Center. 12/05/2023. URL: https : / / www .
datacenters.com/microsoft-dublin.
[3]
Merima Dzanic- Head of Strategy Operations- DDI. Kurt Henriksen- PR Communications-
BlueSail. “Danish Data Center Market 2023-Trends, Investment Analysis Growth
Opportunities”. In: (2021). 12/05/2023. URL: https://www.datacenterindustrien.dk/
knowledge-hub.
[4]
Baxtel. APPLE DENMARK VIBORG. 12/05/2023. URL: https://baxtel.com/data-
center/apple-denmark-viborg.
[5]
Andreu Carbó et al. “Experimental and numerical analysis for potential heat reuse
in liquid cooled data centres”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 112 (2016),
pp. 135–145.
[6]
Scott Sanford. “Reducing greenhouse energy consumption-An overview”. In: Uni-
versity of Wisconsin-Extension, Cooperative Extension (2011).
[7]
Alexander S. Gillis. “Tech Target, Data Center”. In: (2022). 15/05/2023. URL: https:
//www.techtarget.com/searchdatacenter/definition/power-usage-effectiveness-PUE.
[8]
Baris Burak Kanbur et al. “Two-phase liquid-immersion data center cooling system:
Experimental performance and thermoeconomic analysis”. In: International Journal
of Refrigeration 118 (2020), pp. 290–301.
[9]
Qingxia Zhang et al. “A survey on data center cooling systems: Technology, power
consumption modeling and control strategy optimization”. In: Journal of Systems
Architecture 119 (2021), p. 102253.
[10]
Khosrow Ebrahimi, Gerard F Jones, and Amy S Fleischer. “A review of data center
cooling technology, operating conditions and the corresponding low-grade waste
heat recovery opportunities”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 31
(2014), pp. 622–638.
[11]
GD Chethana and B Sadashive Gowda. “Thermal management of air and liquid
cooled data centres: A review”. In: Materials Today: Proceedings 45 (2021), pp. 145–
149.
[12]
VERTIV. Liquid cooling options in data centers. 03/09/2023. URL: https://www.
vertiv.com/en-emea/solutions/learn-about/liquid-cooling-options-for-data-centers/#:
~:text=Liquid%20cooling%20leverages%20the%20higher,more%20effective%20than%
20using%20air.
[13]
Future-tech. Treat your data center as an energy source. 05/09/2023. July 29, 2010.
URL: https://www.future-tech.co.uk/treat-your-data-centre-as-an-energy-source/.
[14]
Jie Li- Xiao Wang- Liang Guo- Lina Xe- Shanyuan Gao- Fangyi Mei- Hongtao Zhu-
Zhiming Luo. “Innovative Data-Centre Cooling Technologies in China-Liquid cooling
solutions”. In: (January 2021). 03/09/2023. URL: https://www.datacenterindustrien.
dk/knowledge-hub.
[15]
Hongwei Chen Dong Li. Current Status and Challenges for Liquid-Cooled Data Cen-
ters. 03/09/2023. 5July 2022. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2022.952680.
[16]
Henrik Pieper. Optimal Integration of District Heating, District Cooling, Heat Sources
and Heat Sinks. DTU Mechanical Engineering, 2019.
Thesis title
55
==PAGE:64==
[17]
Cordin Arpagaus et al. “High temperature heat pumps: Market overview, state of the
art, research status, refrigerants, and application potentials”. In: Energy 152 (2018),
pp. 985–1010.
[18]
Henrik Lund et al. “Perspectives on fourth and fifth generation district heating”. In:
Energy 227 (2021), p. 120520.
[19]
Yichi Zhang, Pär Johansson, and Angela Sasic Kalagasidis. “Applicability of thermal
energy storage in future low-temperature district heating systems–Case study us-
ing multi-scenario analysis”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 244 (2021),
p. 114518.
[20]
Tianrun Yang et al. “Seasonal thermal energy storage: A techno-economic literature
review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 139 (2021), p. 110732.
[21]
Abdulrahman Dahash, Fabian Ochs, and Alice Tosatto. “Techno-economic and ex-
ergy analysis of tank and pit thermal energy storage for renewables district heating
systems”. In: Renewable Energy 180 (2021), pp. 1358–1379.
[22]
Jianhua Fan. Class Notes on Topic Design and construction of thermal energy stor-
ages. Class notes taken from PowerPoint. 2022.
[23]
NSWGovernment. Department of primary industries. -. URL: https://www.dpi.nsw.
gov.au/agriculture/horticulture/greenhouse/structures-and-technology/covers.
[24]
A Badji et al. “Design, technology, and management of greenhouse: A review”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production (2022), p. 133753.
[25]
Halime Ö Paksoy and Beyza Beyhan. “Thermal energy storage (TES) systems for
greenhouse technology”. In: Advances in thermal energy storage systems. Elsevier,
2015, pp. 533–548.
[26]
Zheng Ma, Jonas Korsgaard, and Bo Nørregaard Jørgensen. “Optimization of green-
house production process: an investigation of energy efficiency potentials”. In: 2019
6th International Conference on Dependable Systems and Their Applications (DSA).
IEEE. 2020, pp. 365–370.
[27]
Royal Brinkman. Royal Brinkman. -. URL: https://royalbrinkman.com/knowledge-
center/technical-projects/types-of-greenhouse-heating.
[28]
GGS Structures. In-floor heating. -. URL: https://ggs- greenhouse.com/heating-
systems/floor-heating.
[29]
Energy.gov. Business Norway. 11/08/2023. URL: https : / / businessnorway . com /
articles/sustainability-heats-up-in-norwegian-data-centre-industry.
[30]
Carlos Alberto Romero Piedrahita and Yamid Alberto Carranza Sánchez. “Elemen-
tos de diseño de sistemas de enfriamiento de motores de combustión interna”. In:
Scientia et technica 1.34 (2007).
[31]
Roger Padullésa et al. “Potential for optimal operation of Industrial Heat Pumps with
Thermal Energy Storage for emissions and cost reduction”. In: 36th International
Conference on Efficiency, Cost, Optimization, Simulation and Environmental Impact
of Energy Systems. ECOS. 2023.
[32]
GGS Structures. Technology Data for Energy Storage, large hot water tank. 2015.
URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-data.
[33]
George Kosmadakis and Panagiotis Neofytou. “Reversible high-temperature heat
pump/ORC for waste heat recovery in various ships: a techno-economic assess-
ment”. In: Energy 256 (2022), p. 124634.
[34]
Matteo D’Antoni, Davide Romeli, and Roberto Fedrizzi. “Techno-economic analysis
of air-to-water heat rejection systems”. In: Eurosun Conference. 2014.
[35]
Kyuman Cho et al. “Economic analysis of data center cooling strategies”. In: Sus-
tainable Cities and Society 31 (2017), pp. 234–243.
56
Thesis title
==PAGE:65==
[36]
GGS Structures. Technology Data for Industrial Process Heat, Heat pump, up to 60
°C. 2015. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-
data.
Thesis title
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Thesis title
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix
Thesis title
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University
of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
Tlf.
45XXXXX
departmentwebsite
