==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Generating Synthetic Structural Magnetic
Resonance Images for Age Trajectory Esti-
mation in Longitudinal Settings
Nanna Bak Markers (s164262)
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this project the aim is to generate realistic subject-specific 3D synthetic structural
images by DL-based diffeomorphic registration. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
brain scans from the LIve active Successful Ageing (LISA) study are used for the
analysis. From the LISA study 91 subjects are collected, each having five MRI scans
over the course of seven years: baseline (B), 1 year follow-up (1y), 2 year follow-up
(2y), 4 year follow-up (4y), and 7 year follow-up (7y).
The stationary velocity field (SVF) of the flow from the moving image, Im, to
the fixed image, If, is extracted from a pre-trained network called SynthMorph. The
SVF is integrated stepwise to generate N deformation fields, ϕt used to transform Im
into a series of artificial images, It. The generated images are between Im and If in
age.
The similarity between It and the original MRI scans are determined by the three
similarity measures mean absolute error (MAE), peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR)
and normalised cross correlation (NCC), and used to determine a subject-specific age
trajectory. The trajectory line show a good linear dependency between ageing and
integration of SVF, indicating the diffeomorphic registration describes age related
shrinking of the brain.
Further analysis is made into the predictive power of the SVF. A regression anal-
ysis with elastic net (EN) and support vector regression (SVR) models are trained to
predict changes in gait speed over a period of four years. However, non of the models
performed significantly better than training on random responses.
Other predictive value is investigated by extrapolating past If. Here, analysis
shows that integration are no longer linearly dependent on age because further inte-
gration are not yielding a better match.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Formålet med dette projekt er at generere realistiske, personspecifikke, 3D, kunstige,
strukturelle billeder ved brug af DL-baseret diffeomorphic image registration.
Til
analysen bruges MR scanningsbilleder af hjernen fra studiet LIve active Successful
Ageing (LISA). I alt er 91 personer inkluderet i datasættet til denne rapport. Hver
har fem scanninger, der er lavet over syv år. Det drejer sig om en baseline scanning,
(B), og opfølgende scanninger efter et, to, fire og syv år - forkortet henholdsvis 1y,
2y, 4y og 7y.
Et stationary velocity field (SVF) kan vise flowet fra et billede til et andet - fra Im
til If. Et sådan SVF udtrækkes fra et DL-netværk kaldet SynthMorph, og herefter
integreres det i N step for at danne deformation fields, ϕt, som kan flytte Im over i
en række af kunstige billeder, It, som ligger i retningen mod If. De kunstige billeder
vil simulere forsøgspersonens hjerne i en alder mellem Im og If.
De kunstige billeders sammenlignelighed med de oprindelige scanningsbilleder
bliver vurderet med tre similarity measures: mean absolut error (MAE), peak signal-
to-noise ratio (PSNR) og normalised cross correlation (NCC). Disse resultater bruges
herefter til at tegne en personspecifik alderskurve. Denne kurve viser en klar lineær
sammenhæng mellem alder og integration af SVF, hvilket viser at diffeomorphic im-
age registration fanger aldersrelaterede ændringer i hjernen.
Det analyseres også om SVF kan bruges til at træne en regressionsmodel til
forudsigelse af ændringer i gait speed fra B til 4y.
Elastic net (EN) og support
vector regression (SVR) bruges her, men der findes kun ringe prædiktionsværdi og
resultaterne er ikke signifikant bedre end at træne på randomiserede gait speed.
Videre analyse af prædiktionsevnen i SVF undersøges ved at ekstrapolere forbi If
i alder. Igen findes ikke nogen prædiktionsværdi, da matchet ikke bliver bedre ved
yderligere integration af SVF.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master of Science degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU). It was made at the Danish Research Center
for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) at Hvidovre Hospital in collaboration with the
department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science (DTU Compute).
Supervisors
Postdoc, Sadaf Farkhani∗
Associate Professor, Kristoffer Hougaard Madsen†∗
Associate Professor, Esben Thade Petersen‡∗
∗DRCMR, Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Centre for Functional
and Diagnostic Imaging and Research, Copenhagen University Hospital - Amager and
Hvidovre
† DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Tech-
nical University of Denmark
‡ DTU Health Tech, Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Den-
mark
Silkeborg, October 25, 2023
Nanna Bak Markers (s164262)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to all of my supervisors on this project.
Without your ideas, encouragement and interest in my work, it would not have been
possible.
A special thanks to Sadaf Farkhani for her encouragement and dedication to the
project. Your availability through the process has been deeply appreciated.
I would like to thank Kristoffer Hougaard Madsen for his guidance, ideas and helpful
feedback. Thank you for your help to explore the data.
I would also like to acknowledge the great help, many ideas and good humour from
Esben Thade Petersen in the first part of the project.
Also thank you to the people from DRCMR for dedicating time and resources for me
to do my project. And a final appreciation for my nearest colleagues at the home
oﬀice, Kristian and the boys, thank you for your great patience.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Generative Brain Ageing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
DL-based Diffeomorphism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Theory
5
3.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.1
FLAIR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.1
Diffeomorphic Registration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Convolutional Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.1
U-Net Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.2
Feature Extraction in Pre-trained Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.1
Bias and Variance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.2
Cross Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.3
Support Vector Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.4
Elastic Net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Similarity Measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Materials & Method
15
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.1
Description of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
SVF Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
Image Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Similarity Score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.6
Average Brain Deformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.7
Age Related Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.7.1
Model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Results
25
5.1
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.1
MNIST data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2
Brain data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Age Trajectories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Stationary Velocity Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Predictive Power of SVF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Discussion
37
6.1
Longitudinal Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Healthy Brain Ageing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Prediction on Future Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Conclusion
41
A
Digit Generation
43
B
Brain Generation
45
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context and Motivation
In the recent decades, Deep Learning (DL) techniques have shown superior perfor-
mances in classification and segmentation tasks within different applications, includ-
ing medicine. However, DL algorithms require a large annotated dataset to learn
contexts of the input data, and the amount of labelled data necessary grows dramat-
ically in longitudinal datasets. In such settings it is anticipated that data-hungry
DL algorithms will be able to achieve higher accuracy by augmenting the learning
process using a synthetic longitudinal dataset generated from expected changes in
the images. In order to generate longitudinal image datasets, a diffeomorphic regis-
tration module will be beneficial [1]. Diffeomorphic registration is a way to explore
a smooth and continuous coordinate transformation map from one time point to an-
other in the subject level. Having two Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans
from a subject at different time points, multiple images for that specific interval can
be synthesised by diffeomorphic registration. Here, we expect that DL can learn the
velocity field that map between images via diffeomorphic registration [2]. Altogether,
the combination of diffeomorphic registration and learning of velocity fields can en-
sure a flexible and reliable data generation within subjects, and this can be used for
improving segmentation and classification tasks as well as healthy age estimation.
Looking at data generation in a longitudinal setting is going to provide information
on how the brain of the individual is changing over time. This can help improve
the classification or segmentation algorithms which are solving problems that are
developing specific to the subject. The brain can be changing due to many reasons
- surgery or illness being the major causes for dramatic changes, however, ageing in
the healthy brain is also visible and quantifiable.
The modelling of healthy ageing in individual subjects are currently based on
information from brain tissues as grey matter (GM), white matter (WM), and cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF) [3]. Using the information given in the diffeomorphic registra-
tion might add valuable information to healthy ageing models. The artificial data is
generated by integration at different time points between two MRIs of known subject
age. With suﬀiciently small integration steps the generated images with the highest
similarity to existing intermediate scans are found. From this it is sought to estimate
the speed of ageing in the individual and the trajectory of healthy ageing in general.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Problem Statement and Objectives
The aim of this project is to generate realistic subject-specific 3-Dimensional (3D)
synthetic structural images by diffeomorphic image registration. The generated syn-
thetic images will be used to estimate an ageing trajectory of the brain in subject-level
and using the deformation fields it will be investigated if there exist any predictive
information in the diffeomorphic registration of an intra-subject image pair. For cali-
brating and testing performance of the developed tools we will use an existing dataset
including follow-ups with MRI scans of senior healthy participants.
This will be addressed by the following objectives.
1. Gain information of ageing in the brain and how it is imaged using MRI.
2. Understand and implement the diffeomorphic algorithm on a simpler dataset
such as MNIST.
3. Understand and implement a combination of DL-based model and diffeomorphic
module for estimating age and generating artificial images using a pair of 3D
MRI scans in subject-level as the input of the model.
4. Assess the performance of the registration model by performing visual inspec-
tions and statistical evaluations such as the mean absolute error (MAE), peak
signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), and normalised cross correlation (NCC) which
show good performance on intra-modality image similarity.[1]
5. Estimate age trajectories of brain morphology by age estimation of synthetic
images within subjects created by integration of stationary velocity fields from
diffeomorphic registrations.
6. Evaluate the predictive power of the deformation fields by estimating gait speed
measures.
1.3
Thesis Overview
The thesis contains seven chapters in which the work of the project is described.
Following the Introduction the project background is presented, including the work
that is the backbone of this project. In Chapter 3 a theoretical overview on MRI and
image registration is given as well as theory about the used models and evaluation
metrics. In the following chapter the proposed method is described, starting with
velocity field extraction and image generation, followed by age trajectory estimation
and gait speed prediction. The results are presented in Chapter 5, and discussed in
Chapter 6, and finally, a conclusion on the project can be found in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
Ageing of the healthy brain is a field that has been investigated in several papers
focussing on the changes in different areas of the brain[4][5]. Simplified it is seen
as a decrease in brain volume and an increase in ventricular area. In some papers
the brain areas are traced manually in MRI scans and some uses semi-automated
techniques. A fully automated labelling approach is presented in [3], which opens up
for the possibility of quantifying the effects that ageing has on the entire brain. They
find that the decrease in the overall brain volume is linearly dependent with age.
2.1
Generative Brain Ageing
This linear relationship between ageing and brain volume decrease is used in [1], where
an image generation model is fitted to estimate the age of an artificial brain image.
Taking two MRI scans of the same brain at different ages a series of artificial images
are created in the intermediate timespan between age(Im) and age(If). Assuming
a linear decrease in brain volume with age, the age of an artificial image can be
estimated as:
age(It) = age(Im) + t[age(If) −age(Im)],
(2.1)
where Im and If are the younger and older brain image, respectively, and It is the
artificial image at time t. Several methods exists - also DL-based methods - that
can determine age in brain images with high accuracy. This method, however, opens
for the possibility of generating an artificial brain of a certain age. It is, however,
restricted by the age of the two existing images used as input.
2.2
DL-based Diffeomorphism
Using a diffeomorphism for image registration can be advantageous in terms of gener-
ating artificial images. One of the recent DL-based method for making a diffeomorphic
registration is made by [2]. Here, a fully convolutional network is trained on synthetic
images of arbitrary contrasts. Thus, making the model very robust toward differences
in contrast. One of the goals for this method is to register effortlessly between image
modalities in medical brain images.
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Background
They have trained two available sets of model weights, one trained on random
shapes, and one trained on synthetic brain images. The image pairs used for training
the brain model are generated from anatomical brain maps to ensure correct anatomy,
but the contrast in the images are arbitrary as shown in Figure 2.1. It is evident that
the brain data is far from any normal MRI contrast and in som of the images the left
and right brain hemisphere are not even the same. This makes the trained weights
very invariant to differences in contrast and can look past lesions and even map
between modalities.
Figure 2.1: Synthetic training data used to train the two versions of pre-trained
SynthMorph network. The contrasts are deliberately arbitrary to make
the model invariant to contrast[2].
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
In this chapter the basics about MRI will be covered as well as how the brain is
represented in FLAIR MRI, which the current dataset consists of. Then the theory
behind the diffeomorphic image registration and U-net structured deep learning algo-
rithms will be described, and finally, tools for estimation of age and predictive power
of deformation fields are covered.
3.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
When doing medical imaging there are several imaging modalities to consider. MRI
are a popular choice when looking at different kinds of soft tissue as in neuroimaging.
MRI uses magnetism and radio waves to generate images with contrasts between
soft tissue types. A magnetic field is applied to align hydrogen atoms as they have
a magnetic proton kernel. Then radio waves excites the hydrogen and as they fall
back the hydrogen returns measurable radio waves. This signal is used to make a 3D
representation of the brain where each voxel of the volume describes an area of the
scanned brain. There are two commonly used terms, when talking about MRI. These
are the repetition time (TR) and the echo time (TE). TR describes the time between
pulse sequences. A short TR gives smaller signals as magnetisation is not completely
recovered. TE is the time between delivering the pulse and measuring the signal. A
long TE will result in a loss of magnetisation and signal.[6]
Using this knowledge of TR and TE different settings can be combined, and the
same biological structure will appear very differently in images using different settings.
The most commonly used settings are the T1-weighted contrast (T1) and T2-weighted
contrast (T2). In T1 there are both short TR and TE and T2 settings have long TR
and long TE. A 2D representation of both contrasts are shown in Figure 3.1 showing
a certain slice of the brain. Here it can be seen how some areas are almost opposite
in contrast. In T1 the gray matter is darker than white matter and that is opposite
in T2, where fluid is very bright compared to the dark fluid in T1. However, in both
T1 and T2 bone and air are dark due to lack of protons.
==PAGE:18==
6
3 Theory
Figure 3.1: Examples of T1-weighted, T2-weighted and FLAIR images of the same
brain showing how different they are in contrast[7].
3.1.1
FLAIR
A sequence within the T2 settings is called FLAIR, which is short for fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery. In this sequence the fluids, which is bright in a normal T2 image,
is set to null, by applying a very long TR and TE. This can be advantageous in cases
where the fluids outshine the areas of interest. T2 is a good sequence for exploring
different kinds of pathology in the brain as plaques coursed by multiple sclerosis
or white matter lesions. Using the FLAIR subsetting to T2 the contrast to these
pathologies becomes greater when the contrasts of fluids are suppressed.
3.2
Image Registration
In image registration the goal is to transform one image to the same coordinate
system as another image. The image to be transformed will be called the moving
image, denoted Im in the following sections, and the image to be registered to will
be called the fixed image, denoted If.
There are several ways of doing such an
image registration and the method to be chosen depends on the diﬀiculty of the task.
The methods for aligning images can be categorised as intensity-based or feature-
based. Common for the intensity-based methods is that they are matching images by
intensity patterns and intensity-based dissimilarity measures. On the other hand the
feature-based methods find corresponding features in an image pair and use them to
transform Im onto the space of If.[8]
The transformation itself can be computed in different ways. An aﬀine transforma-
tion is one of the simpler choices. It is a linear transformation including translation,
rotation, scaling and shearing, and it can be described by a system of linear equations,
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Image Registration
7
that is written traditionally in math as
 y
1

=

A
b
0
· · ·
0
1
  x
1

,
(3.1)
where A is a matrix and y, x and b are vectors. When it comes to image transforma-
tions the system is often rewritten to create an overall aﬀine transformation matrix
A
x′ = Ax.
(3.2)
In a 3D case, x and x′ are four element vectors describing the three dimensional
positions in Im and If with a 1 in the end as [x1 x2 x3 1]T . The matrix A is the aﬀine
transformation matrix with 12 parameters describing translation, rotation, scaling
and shearing.[8]
3.2.1
Diffeomorphic Registration
Good image registration methods are important for many medical image analysis
tasks, no matter if it is classification, regression or segmentation tasks. When working
with medical images the registration should not only be smooth and continuous, it
also needs to preserve topology, as the depicted tissue otherwise could fold and overlap
in the moved image and making analysis impossible. Topology can be preserved by
mapping with a deformation field that is both invertible and differentiable.
Such properties are found in diffeomorphic image registration.
Here, the flow
from one image into another is described. There are several ways to compute such a
deformation field, some better than others, but all quite heavy to compute. An eas-
ier way is proposed as the DARTEL method[9]. DARTEL stands for ”Diffeomorphic
Anatomical Registration using Exponentiated Lie algebra”. It is an image registration
technique using a local optimisation scheme solved by a Levenberg-Marquardt strat-
egy. An Eulerian velocity framework allows for parametrisation of the calculations
using velocity fields at different time points in the flow of the the diffeomorphism
from Im to If. The diffeomorphism evolves by
dϕ
dt = v(t)(ϕ(t)),
(3.3)
where v(t) is a velocity field at time t and ϕ is the diffeomorphic transformation. The
initial conditions, ϕ(0), are the identity transform. By having the velocity field it is
possible to find the final deformation field by integrating to t = 1
ϕ(1) =
Z 1
0
v(ϕ(t))dt.
(3.4)
The integration can be solved by the use of the Euler method, where the solution
is estimated by taking a series of small time steps, h, and adding to the previous
solution as follows:
ϕ(t+h) = ϕ(t) + hv(ϕ(t)),
(3.5)
==PAGE:20==
8
3 Theory
which is equivalent to
ϕ(t+h) = (x + hv) ◦ϕ(t),
(3.6)
where x is a map of spatial locations.[9] Using four steps the solution is given by
ϕ(1/4) = x + v(x)/4
ϕ(2/4) = ϕ(1/4) ◦ϕ(1/4)
ϕ(3/4) = ϕ(1/4) ◦ϕ(2/4)
ϕ(4/4) = ϕ(1/4) ◦ϕ(3/4)
(3.7)
A larger number of steps than 4 is needed in order to obtain a good and accurate
solution. Doing many steps are heavy to compute and therefore scaling and squaring
can be used take suﬀiciently small steps but only computing few calculations. This
approach works if the number of steps is a power of 2.
ϕ(1/4) =x + v(x)/4
ϕ(1/2) =ϕ(1/4) ◦ϕ(1/4)
ϕ(1) =ϕ(1/2) ◦ϕ(1/2).
(3.8)
In DARTEL it is ensured that the deformation is diffeomorphic, because in group
theory it is possible to characterise ϕ as a member of Lie Algebra, which produce
deformations as exponentials, thus ϕ(1) = Exp(v). Like for real numbers, this means
that the deformation is always positive and it implicitly assures that the transforma-
tion can be done both forward and inversely.[9]
3.3
Convolutional Neural Network
One of the methods used most often when it comes to learning based techniques
for images is the convolutional neural network (CNN). Using an architecture with
multiple convolution blocks the images are transformed to features, which are more
suited to solve the task at hand. For simplicity a 2D image consisting of pixels will
be used as example in this section, but the theory can be applied to a 3D volume of
voxels as well.
The input, f(t), to a convolution layer is either an input image or the feature
maps outputted from another convolution layer. The input is then convolved with a
filter, g(t), as follows.
(f ∗g)(t) =
Z ∞
−∞
f(τ)g(t −τ)dτ
(3.9)
Usually a number of different filters are used in order to capture enough features from
the image or intermediate feature maps. Convolving a 2D image with n 2D kernels
will result in n 2D feature maps stacked along a third dimension.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Convolutional Neural Network
9
Due to both computational reasons as well as reasons regarding the features found
by the network, the spatial dimension is usually downsampled. This is either done
using a pooling layer or by applying the convolution with a longer stride. When using
pooling for downsampling, a layer is added after the convolution layer. Here, values
of neighbouring pixels are combined. The most commonly used pooling method is a
2 × 2 max-pooling, where the largest value of four neighbouring pixels are preserved
in the new intermediate feature map. Adding a pooling layer increases the number
of computations and strided convolution is a way to avoid that. To halve the spatial
resolution of the image or the intermediate feature map, the filter is added to every
other pixel in a row and only in every other row.[10]
A common strategy in a CNN is to add a ReLU (Rectified Linear Units) layer
after convolution. It performs a non-linear mapping, which can speed up the training
of the CNN. The simplest ReLU layer is given by
f(x) = max(0, x) =
(
x
if x > 0
0
otherwise,
(3.10)
where all negative values are mapped to zero and the positive values are preserved.
Another version of this is called Leaky ReLU. This allows for a small gradient for
negative values of x, which can be beneficial during training.
f(x) = max(αx, x) =
(
x
if x > 0
α · x
otherwise. ,
(3.11)
where α is a fixed parameter in the range (0, 1), but usually small as α = 0.2.
3.3.1
U-Net Architecture
As the name indicate the U-Net structure is a CNN architecture where the spatial res-
olution decreases towards a latent space of features, before increasing again towards
the output. It is widely used in computer vision applications and medical segmenta-
tion tasks where the original image size and resolution needs to be preserved in the
output. The image resolution is downsampled in convolution blocks as mentioned
in the above section and then upsampled again to original image size. The depth of
the output is controlled by the filters and the spatial information is preserved across
the U-Net by skip connections, where features are concatenated or added with the
upsampled features of the same resolution. The downsampling part of the CNN is
called the encoder and this is where the relevant features are extracted, and the up-
sampling part is called a decoder, which is where the e.g. segmentation mask is build.
An example of a simple U-Net is shown in Figure 3.2. Here the input and output
images are of size 128 × 128 pixels.[10]
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Theory
Figure 3.2: U-Net; a small CNN with U-Net structure and skip connections. The
input and output images have size 128 × 128 pixels.
3.3.2
Feature Extraction in Pre-trained Model
Training of DL models tend to be very data consuming as many internal weights are
updated and many features are handled. However, it is sometimes possible to take
advantage of networks that have already been trained. Depending on the task it is
either possible to do transfer learning or feature extraction. Transfer learning is a
way to train an existing model with new data and new layers but without having to
train the model from scratch. If the model is already trained for the correct type
of data and the wanted information already lies within the network, it is possible to
extract the features needed. These feature can then be used in a classifier or regression
layer more suited for the given task. Both methods are good when lacking data or
computational power, or when task or data are similar to a pre-trained model.
3.4
Model Selection
When solving a prediction problem using machine learning (ML) techniques there are
many models to choose from and for each model there are one or more parameters to
tune. This section will describe some of the important considerations when it comes
to selecting the best model for the problem at hand.
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Model Selection
11
3.4.1
Bias and Variance
When training any sort of ML model it is desired to have as low a prediction error as
possible. The prediction error is lowered by increasing the complexity of the model.
However, when the model becomes too complex the prediction error on unseen test
data will start increase. This is called overfitting and is when the model is fitted
too well to the training data and thus, generalises poorly to new data. An overfitted
model will have a low bias and a high variance, which means it will perform correctly
on average but usually not quite right. On the other hand, a model with high bias
and low variance will be underfitted and not suﬀiciently complex to hit the target. A
model like that will never predict correctly but usually almost and also generalises
poorly to new data.
Trying to improve the model and at the same time avoid overfitting to the data,
the dataset can be split into a training, validation and test set. This method ensures
that there are always unseen data left completey out of the tuning of a model. The
model is trained on the training set, validated on the validation test and then tuned
to perform better. When the model performs well enough it can be tested on the
unseen test set to see if the model generalises well.[11]
3.4.2
Cross Validation
A way to minimise the chance of overfitting to the data is by using cross validation
(CV) to validate the model performance. It is a way of training the model iteratively,
using all data in terns as both training and testing. CV is advantageous when the
dataset is insuﬀicient in size and therefore, setting aside a separate test set is not
possible. For a k-fold CV the data is split randomly into k folds. The model is then
trained on k −1 folds and tested on the kth fold. This process is repeated k times
ensuring all data have been tested on once. When selecting the number of folds, k, it
is a bias/variance trade-off. Too many folds as in a leave-one-out CV could introduce
variance as the training sets have a high overlap but at the same time be unbiased.
Having too few fold might instead introduce bias to the problem while lowering the
variance.
An even more robust method for the CV setup is a nested CV as shown in Figure
3.3. It is a good tool when model hyperparameters need to be tuned within a CV.
Nested CV works as a normal CV, but using an inner and outer loop. The outer
CV is split into kouter folds and for every iteration the training data is split into
kinner folds. The inner CV is training to find the best hyperparameters. The best
performing model is the output to the outer CV, where the model is validated on the
test set of the outer CV.
3.4.3
Support Vector Machine
Support vector machines (SVM) are supervised learning models. They are most often
used for classification tasks but also applicable in regression analysis. In classification
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Theory
Figure 3.3: A nested cross validation setup; showing kouter = 5 and kinner = 3 with
colours marking the test sets.
it is a method, where the error is minimized by separating classes with a linear decision
boundary and creating the largest possible margin between the classes. The boundary
and margins are hyperplanes in a N-dimensional space, where N is the number of
features. The data points that are closest to the separating hyperplane are called
support vectors. These are used to ease computation as the model only considers
points close to the margin when finding the best fit. Through these support vectors
the boundary hyperplanes are drawn, thus outlining the margin with width ϵ.
A similar approach is used when analysing continuous data with a support vector
regression (SVR). Instead of finding the hyperplane to separate classes it is sought to
find the hyperplane that captures as many data points as possible. This is illustrated
in Figure 3.4. The data points should ideally lie between the boundary hyperplanes,
so they lie within the margin area. The best capturing hyperplane can be described
as
y = wx + b
(3.12)
The solution is found by
min 1
2||w||2
(3.13)
with the margin constraints
yi −wxi −b ≤ϵ
wxi + b −yi ≤ϵ.
(3.14)
It is possible to add a regularisation parameter C into the model. The parameter
C regularises how much the model is penalised for points outside the margin.[11,
pp. 434-437]
==PAGE:25==
3.5 Similarity Measures
13
Figure 3.4: Illustration of linear SVR, where data points are coloured to indicate
differences in numerical values, support vectors are marked in black
circles and might be located both on and outside the margin called the
ϵ-tupe.
3.4.4
Elastic Net
Another supervised learning model for regression analysis is the elastic net method
(EN). This method is a regularised regression method that combines the shrinkage of
Ridge regression and the sparsity of Lasso. In short Ridge uses shrinkage by L2-norm,
reducing irrelevant features, and Lasso shrinks using L1, which introduces sparsity in
the feature space. Using these two the EN model can be written as
min
β
1
2n∥Y −Xβ∥2
2 + λ
1
2(1 −α)∥β∥2
2 + α∥β∥1

,
(3.15)
where two parameters λ and α controls the amount of overall regularisation and ratio
between sparsity and shrinkage. Because of the sparsity and shrinkage, the model
works well on high dimensional feature spaces, and even when the number of features
are much higher than the number of samples, p >> n.[11, pp. 661-664]
3.5
Similarity Measures
When evaluating the performance of an image registration method it can be advanta-
geous to look at a score for likeness between images. Three such scores that perform
well when comparing images of the same modality are presented here.
The mean absolute error (MAE) is as the name indicates the mean value of the
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Theory
unsigned differences between two images. MAE is computed as follows:
MAE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
|I1(i) −I2(i)|,
(3.16)
where I1 and I2 are the two images to be compared, and N is the number of pixels
or voxels in the image. MAE is a good measure for direct inter-modality comparison,
but using it to compare image pairs should be done with care, as the measure is very
sensitive to differences in contrast.[12]
In the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) the relative differences are quantified.
PSNR is computed as a dB value where the differences are relative to the dynamic
range of the MRI.
PSNR = 10log10
 Q2
MSE

,
(3.17)
where Q is the maximum intensity of the images and MSE is the mean squared error
of the two images. [12]
The last similarity measure described here is the normalised cross correlation
(NCC). This is a measure used in signal processing and template matching in com-
puter vision. The advantages are that it is less sensitive to changes in illumination of
the images.[13]
NCC =
PN
j=1(ˆI1(j)ˆI2(j))

hPN
j=1 ˆI2
1(j) PN
j=1 ˆI2
2(j)
i1/2
(3.18)
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Materials & Method
In this chapter the data is described, as well as the process of preparing the data for
the task at hand. It will be described in detail how the stationary velocity fields (SVFs)
are extracted from a pre-trained network, and how they are turned into deformation
fields by integration and used to transform the moving image, Im, into the fixed
image, If. It will be described how stepwise integration allows for longitudinal data
to be generated and how this is used to investigate ageing. The proposed method is
shown in Figure 4.1, where three overall paths for the extracted SVFs are described.
4.1
Description of Data
In this thesis there will be used two datasets. The main data is from a longitudinal
MRI study and the secondary dataset consists of handwritten digits.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the proposed method; SVF extraction leads to generation
of deformation fields, ϕt, image transformations, It, and age trajectory
estimation. Extracted SVFs are also used to investigate average brain
deformation and prediction on change in gait speed.
==PAGE:28==
16
4 Materials & Method
The longitudinal MRI study is called The LIve active Successful Ageing (LISA)
study [14], and it is a study of the healthy ageing process and the relation to physical
activity in retirement-age individuals. The study includes a relatively large cohort of
450 subjects. They are between 60-72 years old at the time of the baseline scan, B,
and have a planned long-term follow-up at 1, 2, 4, 7 and 10 years after the baseline
scan. People with severe or poorly regulated diseases were excluded from the study as
well as people with physical disabilities, which could impede their training ability.[14]
The subjects are submitted to different training programs, tested and scanned.
Much of which is out of the scope for this project. The LISA data used for this
project are the T2 FLAIR scans and a measure called gait speed, which is a 400
meter walk test measured in seconds[14]. The gait speed measure is available for the
first four sessions and there are a total of 91 subjects, at the time of this project,
who have had all of the following scans: baseline (B), 1 year follow-up (1y), 2 year
follow-up (2y), 4 year follow-up (4y), and 7 year follow-up (7y). They will be the
basis of this project and the distribution of the initial age of the included subjects
can be seen in Figure 4.2.
The secondary dataset used in this project is the handwritten digit dataset MNIST.
It is a very large database containing images of the numbers from zero to nine all
written by hand. The images are grayscale with pixel values ranging from 0 to 255 and
all images are 28 × 28 pixels large and an example of some of the digits are shown in
Figure 4.3. There are separate training and testing datasets with 60,000 and 10,000
images, respectively, which means it is well prepared for larger classification tasks.
However, in this project only a few digits from the MNIST database will be used in
order to ease the visualisation of the image registration.
Figure 4.2: Distribution of the age of the subjects from the LISA study at the time
of the baseline scan.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Preprocessing
17
Figure 4.3: Examples of handwritten digits from MNIST[15].
4.2
Preprocessing
Before the scans are ready for further use they are taken through the preprocessing
pipeline as shown in Figure 4.4. Here the brains in the scans are stripped from their
surroundings, leaving only what is inside the skull. Then all scans are registered to
the same space, to ensure comparability in the outputted deformation fields. Finally,
the volumes are arranged in the right order and size, so it corresponds to the training
data used to train the pre-trained algorithm.
First, the best skull-stripping for this data is achieved with the methods from
FreeSurfer build into the framework by FSL. The details of the skull-stripping is
beyond the scope of the project and here it is just used as a preprocessing tool.
When working with longitudinal data it is important to ensure alignment between
scans that could later be used for comparison. The alignment is necessary, as it is
Figure 4.4: The preprocessing pipeline showing a slice of the original MRI volume,
the preprocessing steps and a slice in the final volume, which is ready
for further study.
==PAGE:30==
18
4 Materials & Method
desired to compare scans within the same subject but also to compare the created
deformation fields between the subjects.
The alignment should be done without
loosing the information embedded in the brain structure in the form of shrinkage or
enlargement of areas. One way to align the scans, and at the same time preserve
subject specific information, is to register the baseline scans to a template (The
baseline scan of the first subject is used).
The transformation used to align the
baseline scan of a subject, is then used to align the follow-up scans of the same subject.
This ensures that differences between baseline and follow-up will be preserved after
the registration.
After the alignment, the scanned volumes are prepared in size and value to be
used in a pre-trained network. Brain scans saved in the NIfTI file format are usually
saved with a certain brain orientation. In these files the matrix indices [i, j, k] of the
volume are called [R, A, S], which are short for the anatomical terms Right, Anterior
and Superior. This means that the first axis points to the right, the second points
in anterior direction, and the third towards superior direction. In this project the
volumes need indices [i, j, k] to be oriented as [L, S, A], meaning Left, Superior and
Anterior. It is therefore necessary to flip the direction on the first axis, and to swap
the second and third axes. This can be denoted with a simple aﬀine transformation
A =


−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1


(4.1)
With the correct orientation, the data is then scaled to range between zero and one
by a min/max-normalisation given as
x′ =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x),
(4.2)
where x is the original value and x′ is the normalised value. After preprocessing all
MRI scans, the five scans look as shown in Figure 4.5, where all scans are shown for
a single subject in the dataset.
4.3
SVF Extraction
We will be using a pre-trained network called SynthMorph for finding the diffeomor-
phism describing the flow between two images. As described in section 2.2 Synth-
Morph is a fully convolutional U-Net structured network trained on synthetic images
to register two brain images of any contrast. The input to the model is Im and If,
both 3D volumes, and the output is the deformation field, a 4D field covering the
same spatial dimensions as the input sizes and with a fourth dimension describing the
three directions of the deformation. An overall illustration of the network can be seen
in Figure 4.6. Here, the red indicates the encoder blocks and blue the decoder blocks.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 SVF Extraction
19
Figure 4.5: The five MRI scans of one subject in the LISA dataset, shown after
preprocessing.
In the encoder there are four blocks each featuring a 3D convolution with n = 256
filters. Furthermore, a LeakyReLU layer with α = 0.2 performs a non-linear mapping
and the downsampling is done during convolution with a stride-2 implementation.
After the encoder the spatial resolutions is 1/16 of the input size. The decoder have
three blocks of upsampling, where each have a 3D convolution layer, an upsampling
layer and a skip connection. Three further convolution layers lead to the velocity
field, v, at half resolution of the input. Lastly, v is integrated and upsampled to
the final deformation field, ϕ. The integration scheme include scaling and squaring
and integration at three different resolutions before combining them additively and
upsample.[2]
Figure 4.6: The fully convolutional U-Net-structured network of SynthMorph. En-
coder (red): 3D convolutions with n = 256 filters and stride-2 followed
by LeakyReLU (0.2). Decoder (blue): 3D convolution followed by up-
sampling and a skip connection. All kernels are 3 × 3 × 3.
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Materials & Method
The network is trained on two set of synthetic data as shown in Figure 2.1 and the
weights are saved in two separate set of model weights. During training of the network
they use label maps along with the input image pair. These are used to calculate the
training loss, which is a soft Dice metric indicating how much overlap the moved and
fixed label maps have. It is assumed that the model trained on random shapes will
work well with the MNIST digit dataset and the model trained on synthetic brain
data will work well with the LISA brain data.
For the scope of this project SynthMorph is used as a pre-trained network for
feature extraction. The input for the model are B and 7y for each of the 91 subjects.
The feature to be extracted is v, a SVF marked in Figure 4.7 immediately after the
convolution layers and before layers of integration. In the network the SVF is used
in half resolution and only upsampled after the integration module. This means that
the extracted SVF is at a wrong resolution to be used at the input scans. The first
thing to do is therefore to upsample the SVF in the three spatial dimensions using
an interpolation approach. Now the SVF is ready to be moved to the integration
module.
4.4
Image Generation
In this section the SVF, v, extracted from the network in section 4.3 is used to generate
the diffeomorphic deformation field, ϕ, by solving the following ordinary differential
equation (ODE)
dϕ
dt = v(ϕ(t)).
(4.3)
Figure 4.7: Schematic illustration of SynthMorph network, showing where the SVF
is extracted from the pre-trained network and upsampled to full size, v.
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Image Generation
21
The solution is parametrised as mentioned in section 3.2.1 and solved stepwise. This
allows for extracting the deformation field at any time, t, between Im and If and
thus simulate the brain at an age in between.
The integration module is created to have a suﬀiciently large number of steps to
make a good estimate and to allow for extraction of N deformation fields at equal
distance. Because we want equal distance between deformation fields, it it not possible
to do scaling and squaring to speed up calculations. However, the computation time
is not of the essence for this project. A stopping point, s, is defined for stopping
the stepwise integration at t = s.
Thus, making it possible to integrate beyond
t = 1. Initially, integrating beyond t = 1 is not for extrapolation purposes, but a
necessity in order to reach the desired result. The SyntMorph algorithm has a more
elaborate integration scheme and it is incorporated as a part of the trained network.
As described in section 2.1 the article on generative ageing [1] uses a similar extraction
method from a pre-trained network, and here a suﬀicient stopping point is found at
s = 1.8. In this project it is decided to set the stopping point at s = 3 to ensure the
deformation is suﬀiciently evolved.
In Figure 4.8 the steps for the integration module are shown, where the SVF
between B and 7y is integrated in steps for t = [0, s] and the N deformation fields are
generated. Then Im = B is transformed with each of the generated deformations into
N moved volumes, It. To add more depth in the analysis of the results the procedure
was repeated for B →1y and B →4y, such that three SVFs and corresponding series
of moved volumes are generated for every subject. But unless it is stated otherwise
the SVF used in the following is describing the flow B →7y.
Figure 4.8: Integration module for deformation field generation and image transfor-
mation; the extracted SVF, v, is integrated in N steps, generating series
of deformation fields, ϕt. Finally, the moving image Im is transformed
and N images, It, are generated.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Materials & Method
4.5
Similarity Score
Having generated a series of artificial images, It, for every subject, we will verify
that the image quality is good and analyse what kind of information might lie in the
deformation and resulting images.
Visual inspections are performed by looking at a random section of moved images
to see if the results look like a brain or if anything looks suspiciously wrong.
In
addition to this the image quality was also evaluated by the similarity measures
MAE, PSNR and NCC (see section 3.5). These have been chosen as they show good
performance on comparing images of the same image modality and contrast[1]. Using
these similarity scores an age trajectory is estimated for each subject by calculating
how similar each generated image is to all five original scans. The integration point
tMAE for the best match found by MAE for one original scan is as follows:
tMAE = arg min
t
MAE = arg min
t
1
n
n
X
i=1
|If(i) −It(i)|,
(4.4)
and the same procedure is used for tP SNR and tNCC, however, these are of course
maximised. The optimal integration step for each original scan is found as the mean
of the ideal integration point found by the three similarity scores
topt == tMAE + tP SNR + tNCC
3
,
(4.5)
resulting in five points per subject. Each point is the integration point, t, for the
best matching image as a function of the years passed after baseline. This result will
indicate whether we can simulate progressing age by integration on SVF. Also, with
the ageing of the brain a decrease in brain size is expected and this decrease happens
in a linear way [3]. Therefore, it is also expected that the age trajectories will show
a linear fit if no known neurological disease is present.
4.6
Average Brain Deformation
Three SVFs has been made for each subject - B −1y, B −4y and B −7y. Looking at
how much these differ in underlying information an average visualisation based on all
subjects is made for each of the three SVFs. In order to visualise the three deforming
directions in an image the magnitude of the deformation is found by using a 2-norm,
discarding the directional information. SVFs are moved to a common space to allow
for a direct comparison between subjects and for this the MNI space is chosen, and
an average over all subjects are found for each voxel in SVF.
The similarity scores are also used to investigate differences in the generated SVFs.
Therefore, a series of images are produces for both B −1y and B −4y to be compared
with B −7y. Initially the stopping for integration is s = 3 as previously. The best
matching artificial image from B −1y and B −4y are found for each of the original
==PAGE:35==
4.7 Age Related Predictions
23
MRI scans. For both SVFs this leads to an extrapolation of sorts, as the artificial
images are compared to original scans beyond what is covered by the deformation.
4.7
Age Related Predictions
Further analysis is made to investigate what predictive power the deformation field
could have on predicting decrease in neurological function or future development of
the brain. The feature space for these investigations is the SVF, but in the following
it will be masked to remove most of the background. The mask covers 1, 098, 647
voxels in the spatial dimensions and it is found by blur with a Gaussian kernel,
threshold all above zero, and dilate with a 5 × 5 kernel on the baseline scan of the
first subject. Masking is done because it removes meaningless features and highly
correlated background deformations, and because it reduces the feature space with
160×160×192×3
1,098,647×3
= 4.47, which makes it much faster to work with. The deformation
that happens outside the brain area is deemed to be non-essential to the prediction
model.
The response to be predicted is based on the value gait speed.
Each subject
have a gait measure at time B, 1y, 2y and 4y. Only four subject lack values - three
subjects are missing one value and one subject is missing three values. The subjects
with one missing data point are handled by inserting a mean value as substitute and
the subject missing three values is removed from the dataset. Because the SVF is
assumed to describe changes in the brain over time, we will be predicting the changes
in gait speed from B to 4y.
Three model setups are trained and tested as shown in Table 4.1. The models
are EN and linear SVR, as these are good for handling high dimensional feature
spaces. For both models hyperparameters need to be tuned. This is done in a grid
search, testing the different combinations of parameters. For the EN model there
are two parameters to be tuned - the regularisation parameter λ and the parameter
α describing ratio between shrinkage and sparsity. The SVR are only tuned with
respect to the parameter C, describing how much the data points outside the margin
contribute to the loss.
Although it is a high dimensional problem regarding the feature space, there are
only 90 data points to use when fitting the models. Therefore, the models are trained
in a nested cross validation setup, where hyperparameters are tuned and validated in
a 3-fold inner loop and the model is tested in a 5-fold outer loop. Both EN and SVR
train using the masked velocity fields as features. Another SVR is trained using the
inner product of the feature matrix, thus, training on a 90 × 90 feature matrix, also
called the Gram matrix. This is an attempt on a speed-up version of the SVR, as
SVR classifies using dot products of the features. All models and the nested CV is
implemented using scikit learn library in python.[16]
Before training the data is split randomly in five folds - in turn training on four and
testing on one. In every iteration the training data is again split into three subfolds
- in turn training on two and leaving one subfold for testing. Inside the 3-fold CV
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Materials & Method
Table 4.1: Overview of regression methods and specifications.
Model
Feature space
Response
kinner
kouter
Grid search
EN
SVF masked
∆Gait
3
5
λ = [0.1, 1.0]
α = [0.1, 0.5, 0.9]
SVR
SVF masked
∆Gait
3
5
C = [1, 5, 10]
SVR Gram
Gram matrix
∆Gait
3
5
C = [1, 5, 10]
the hyperparameters are tested using a grid search approach. The mean is removed
from the data inside the model pipeline in order not to violate the assumption of
independence between CV results. The final model score is found as the mean R2
over the five outer loops.
4.7.1
Model validation
Several statistical methods are available for testing significance of a model perfor-
mance. However, many statistical tests have underlying assumptions - like normally
distributed data or equal variance.
We want to test with a significance level on
α = 0.05, whether the model score is significantly different than a model score trained
on random responses.
To do so, the gait speed is randomly shuffled and thereby the connection be-
tween the velocity fields and the gait speed measures are eliminated. Now the model
is trained again learning patterns in a dataset, where input and responses are un-
connected. The test should ideally include all possible combinations of input and
response - an exhaustive permutation test. However, it is not feasible to compute
when having 90 samples as it would lead to 90! iterations. Due to limited time re-
sources it is decided to run for 1000 iterations or until enough scores have violated
the premiss - hence more than 0.05 · 1000 = 50 iterations should have a better score
than the original model. If this happens we can not be discarding the hypothesis that
the model and random training comes from the same distribution.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Results
In this chapter the results of the data generation method will be shown using a
handwritten digit dataset (MNIST) for easier visualisation as well as images from
the longitudinal MRI study LISA. Furthermore, the resulting age trajectories will be
shown and the predictive power of the SVF will be estimated using both a comparison
of SVFs and a regression model approach.
5.1
Data Generation
The first step in generating new images are to lead the scanned volumes through
the preprocessing pipeline as described in section 4.2, where they are skull-stripped,
registered, resampled and normalised.
5.1.1
MNIST data
Generation of artificial longitudinal data on brain MRI shows very small changes
in the images.
Therefore, the method is tested on the handwritten digit dataset
MNIST. In Figure 5.1 the result from using SynthMorph network as it is on two
handwritten digits of the number four are shown. No alterations have been made in
the SynthMorph pipeline to produce this result and the model used has been trained
on the random shapes dataset as described in section 2.2. From the figure it is seen
that the moved image, Im ◦ϕ, is a good transformation of Im into If.
Knowing that the pre-trained network works well with the digit data, the flow
from Im to If is extracted from the network as SVF. The velocity field is integrated
stepwise and used to transform Im in N = 30 steps. The total number of images
are shown in Appendix A and Figure 5.2 displays every fifth generated image. A
smooth flow from Im to If is seen, but the integration proceed too long. Therefore,
the best match is found between the artificial images and the fixed image using the
three similarity measures MAE, PSNR and NCC. All measures are calculated for all
30 generated images and the resulting trajectories are plotted in Figure 5.3, where
the optimal integration stopping point is also marked by an orange vertical line at
topt = 2.2.
==PAGE:38==
26
5 Results
Figure 5.1: Two handwritten digit images from MNIST, Im and If, as input to
SynthMorph and the resulting moved image, Im ◦ϕ.
Figure 5.2: Every fifth generated image in a series of N = 30 integrating to s = 3.0.
The full series of generated images can be seen in Appendix A.
Figure 5.3: Plot of MAE, PSNR and NCC between artificial images and the fixed
image for N = 30 images generated by integrating SVF to s = 3.0. The
ideal integration step is marked with the orange vertical line.
==PAGE:39==
5.1 Data Generation
27
5.1.2
Brain data
As for the brain data, Figure 5.4 shows the input to the model from LISA dataset.
The difference between the two images show very slight differences to be detected
by the network.
The negative differences are seen to be along the edges and the
ventricles, where the brain shrinkage is most visible. Then SVF is extracted between
B and 7y for the subject and integrated stepwise as before with N = 30 steps and
stopping point s = 3.0. Images from all integration steps are showed in Appendix
B and every fifth image can be seen in Figure 5.5. Again the similarity scores are
calculated for every artificial image to the fixed and the integration steps for each are
found. The ideal integration step is then calculated.
topt = tMAE + tP SNR + tNCC
3
= 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3
3
= 1.53
(5.1)
To investigate the changes further, Figure 5.6 shows the ventricles of the two input
images, Im and If, and the difference between the two. The same is shown for the
first and last moved images, I0.1 and I3.0. This done to see if the deformations are
comparable to real life changes.
Figure 5.4: The moving image, Im, and fixed image, If, from LISA dataset used
as input to the model shown together with the difference in the two,
If −Im.
Figure 5.5: The series of transformed images based on stepwise integration of ve-
locity field.
==PAGE:40==
28
5 Results
Figure 5.6: Zoomed in images of the ventricles, showing from the top Im and If
with seven years in between and in the bottom I0.1 and I3.0 as they
are the least and most integrated images. To the right the differences
between the two top image and and two bottom images are shown.
Figure 5.7: Plot of MAE, PSNR and NCC between artificial brain images and the
fixed image for N = 30 images generated by integrating SVF to s = 3.0.
The ideal integration step is marked with the orange vertical line at
t = 1.53.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Age Trajectories
29
5.2
Age Trajectories
For all 91 subjects the procedure from section 5.1.2 is repeated with all five scans.
Thus, determining how far the SVF should be integrated to achieve a satisfying result
at synthesising a certain age. For each subject this can be shown as in Figure 5.8,
where the curves show the similarity scores for each original image, and the optimal
integration step for each image is marked in the line. Notice, that topt is growing
when the age is increasing. This gives an indication on how well this method can
synthesise a longitudinal dataset. In Figure 5.9 topt is plotted as a function of years
after baseline, and the resulting age trajectory is marked by an orange line as the
mean of the ideal integration points found by MAE, PSNR and NCC, which are also
plotted in the figure. The linear dependency between age and integration on SVF
is investigated by fitting a linear regression to each subject-specific mean trajectory
line. The resulting R2-scores are reported in Table 5.1.
Figure 5.8: Trend of three similarity scores for one subject, showing a curve for
each original scan. The optimal integration steps, topt are marked in
red stars.
Table 5.1: Linear regression results; each subject-specific trajectory line is fitted
with a linear regression. R2-scores show how well the linear dependency
between age and integration step is.
R2 < 0.9
0.9 < R2 < 0.95
R2 > 0.95
12
23
65
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Results
Figure 5.9: Age trajectory for one subject, showing the best match between artificial
and original images measures with MAE, PSNR and NCC. The optimal
integration step is found as a mean of the three and marked with an
orange line.
5.3
Stationary Velocity Fields
Looking at the extracted SVF the directional information regarding the deformation
lies in the fourth dimension in the output. There are three directions and they are
located as described in the preprocessing section: left/rigt, superior/inferior and an-
terior/posterior, where left, superior and anterior are in the positive direction. Figure
5.10 shows images of these three direction. The colors indicate positive and negative
directions of the deformation and values close to zero are white to minimize the noise
in the visualisation. An average SVF model is made to see if there is an overall trend
in the deformation as expected. The average models for B −7y can be seen in Figure
5.11 visualised in GlassBrain by Nilearn. The same is done for B −4y and B −1y
in Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13, respectively. Common for all figures are the strong
signal in the area close to the ventricles.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Predictive Power of SVF
31
Figure 5.10: Directional dimension of SVF; showing the three directions the defor-
mation happens in. Most values are close to zero.
5.4
Predictive Power of SVF
The predictive power of the SVF is investigated with three regression model setups.
Input to the models are SVF B −7y for 90 subjects and the response to be predicted
is the change in gait speed. Table 5.2 show the resulting score for all three models,
computed as the mean R2-score for the kouter = 5 CV folds, and Figure 5.14 shows
how the three models predict the changes in gait speed. The computation time is
stated in the table as it varies a lot for the different models.
The models are validated with an approach inspired by permutation tests. Because
of limited time resources it is not possible to make the desired number of iterations.
EN is run for 97 iterations before the limit of 50 permutation scores performing better
Figure 5.11: B −7y; An average SVF model, made from magnitude of deformation
by registering the norm of SVF to MNI space and averaging over all
SVFs.
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Results
Figure 5.12: B −4y; An average SVF model, made from magnitude of deformation
by registering the norm of SVF to MNI space and averaging over all
SVFs.
Figure 5.13: B −1y; An average SVF model, made from magnitude of deformation
by registering the norm of SVF to MNI space and averaging over all
SVFs.
Table 5.2: Prediction scores for the three models trained to predict change in gait
speed from SVF.
Model
R2-score
CPU time [s]
EN
-0.08
332.1
SVR
-0.09
900.8
SVR Gram
-0.18
0.046
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Predictive Power of SVF
33
Figure 5.14: Prediction of change in gait speed; showing how the three regression
models predict change in gait speed compared to the true values.
is reached, and the results are distributed as shown in Figure 5.15, where a skewed
normal distribution is fitted to the results. The same is done for SVR and SVR using
Gram matrix and the performance is shown in Figure 5.16 and 5.17. Although, due
to the high computation time for SVR, the permutation test is here only done for 100
iterations. All test results are reported in Table 5.3, where it is seen that non of the
models perform significantly better than training on random responses.
The predictive power regarding future brain deformation is also investigated. Fig-
ure 5.18 show the optimal integration point for the sessions for all 91 subjects com-
paring between images generated with the three SVFs. For B −1y the mean of the
optimal integration point is below 0.5, and the match does not improve by further
integration when moving passed 1y. For B −4y integration improves on the best
match found up until 4y. When moving passed 4y the linear increase stops.
Table 5.3: Permutation test results; EN running to stopping criteria, SVR running
100, and SVR Gram running for all 1000 iteration.
Model
Iterations
Mean
Violations
Significance
EN
1000 (97)
-0.10
51
51
1000 > 0.05
SVR
100
-0.13
36
36
100 = 0.36 > 0.05
SVR Gram
1000
-0.21
232
232
1000 = 0.23 > 0.05
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Results
Figure 5.15: Dense histogram of 97 permutation test results.
Re-training 1000
nested CV EN with unconnected responses, but process is killed after
97 iterations as the stopping criteria is met. Skewed normal distribu-
tion is fitted with a blue line and original EN score is marked in green.
Figure 5.16: Dense histogram of 100 permutation test results. Re-training of nested
CV SVR with unconnected responses. Skewed normal distribution is
fitted with a blue line and original SVR score is marked in green.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Predictive Power of SVF
35
Figure 5.17: Dense histogram of 1000 permutation test results.
Re-training of
nested CV SVR with Gram matrix with unconnected responses.
Skewed normal distribution is fitted with a blue line and original SVR
Gram score is marked in green.
Figure 5.18: Boxplot showing the optimal integration point for all subjects using
the three extracted SVFs.
==PAGE:48==
36
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
Using the theory about diffeomorphic image registration it has been possible to gen-
erate a sequence of artificial images based on two images from the same subject.
Furthermore, this longitudinal image data have been used to illustrate the linear age-
ing of the brain in healthy individuals. The information that lies within the velocity
fields used for deformation has also been investigated by predicting gait speed changes.
However, no strong prediction power has been detected in these trials. Lastly, differ-
ent deformation fields have been generated using varying time spans and the signal
is seen to be stronger when the time span is larger.
6.1
Longitudinal Data Generation
In a more and more data driven world lack of data is an issue in many fields of research
but especially when working with medical image analysis, enough data can be hard
to come by. There are several DL-based method on how to generate random images
from e.g. label maps, making realistic synthetic images. However, when synthesising
longitudinal brain images it is important to have information about the changes that
happen over time. Looking at the results in both section 5.1.2 and 5.2 it is seen that
the generated images in this project are realistic to look at and that by integration
they simulate some changes in the brain that look age related. Thus, meaning this
method not only generates artificial images but they also appear to be longitudinal
and subject-specific.
Assuming that stepwise integration on SVF can be used to generate images that
show a smooth morphing from one image to another, it was first tested on MNIST
data for easy visualisation of the changes. Appendix A show all N = 30 generated
images and the changes between any neighbouring images are small.
Looking at
the overall changes, we see that the digit changes characteristics but looks like the
number four at all images. The final few images when t approaches the integration
stopping point the digit becomes more and more unrealistic to look at. The best
match between If and It is found to be at t = 2.2 and the digit in that image is very
similar to the one found by SynthMorph in Figure 5.1.
The performance on the brain data is a bit harder to verify as the brain only
changes slightly over the course of seven years. Figure 5.6 shows that the difference
between Im and If lies primarily in the enlargement of the ventricles. The change
in ventricle size is seen as a negative difference as the voxels change from gray to
==PAGE:50==
38
6 Discussion
black. This is a difference that is also detected in the deformation, when looking
at the differences between I0.1 and I3.0. Positive differences are also found between
the moving and fixed image. This is, however, due to change in contrast within the
brain area. Changing contrast is both because of scanning sessions but also because
of e.g. white matter lesions growing. Neither can be detected by the SynthMorph
network, as it is highly invariant to contrasts. Because of the invariance to contrast
it is not possible to use the generated dataset for longitudinal studies of lesions in the
brain. A brain lesion would be visible in all generated images, but as the model is
not detecting lesions, the lesion will not grow with increasing integration.
6.2
Healthy Brain Ageing
The ageing of the healthy brain is a field that is important and interesting to inves-
tigate. Because knowing how the healthy brain ages makes it possible to understand
when it deviates from normal due to illness affecting the brain. An attempt to de-
scribe the healthy ageing brain is done in this project by estimating individual age
trajectories for the subjects. The assumption is that when a person ages normally
the trajectory will show a linear fit, and if some illness is affecting the brain, then the
trajectory will start to curve. As shown in Table 5.1 most of the age trajectories have
a linear fit, which is expected due to the known health of the participants and the
overall linear decrease in the brain volume with age. The subjects that does not have
a high R2-score are investigated for curving trajectories, however, it is found to be
coursed by outliers in the integration step calculations. Further work into detecting
neurological degenerative illnesses from age trajectories, will need more data. The
data should ideally include participants with different but known health status and
longitudinal data covering a longer timespan.
The age trajectories are subject specific as the optimal integration points are found
by comparing to the MRI scans of the subject. This can be used for finding a trend in
the rate of ageing as described above. Another way of using these information could
have been to determine a new integration stopping point, snew, based on all subjects.
Then the model would no longer be subject specific, and the generated images could
then be generated to have a certain age. This is closer to the approach taken in [1].
6.3
Prediction on Future Development
With this project we also wants to see what possible informations could be extracted
from SVFs made from the pre-trained SynthMorph network. The SVFs are used in
an attempt to predict changes in gait speed for 90 subjects, because one subject was
removed due to missing values. Gait speed is a measure, that has been shown to
decline with age and also being affected by neurological deceases. Assuming that
there are information in the SVF showing rapid decline in brain volume or changes in
certain areas of the brain, this could be used to predict on changes in gait speed. The
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Prediction on Future Development
39
result of the prediction was a negative R2-score for all models, meaning it predicts
rather badly. The models would have gained a higher score by predicting the mean
change in gait. The bad prediction score can be caused by a lot of things. An obvious
reason would be overfitting because there are so few data points. However, the risk
of overfitting should be minimised by the use of nested CV. Because of the small
number of subjects the number of folds in CV needs to be a smaller one also. If k in
k-fold CV becomes too large for a small dataset we will approach the performance of
leave-one-out CV, which might tend to overfit. This is why kouter=5 and kinner=3 in
this prediction.
The bad prediction can be coursed by an insuﬀicient connection between trained
features and response to be predicted. The gait speed measurements are only four
years apart, which might not make it a sound measure for decline in brain function.
This substantiates the result from the permutation test. The permutation test shows
that the model does not score significantly better than the models trained on randomly
permuted responses. It is assumed that even though the permutation test is not done
exactly by the book, it is enough to show that the results are not significant.
As the regression models in this project does not provide a solid prediction result,
we turn to visualisation to see the information within the SVFs.
Visualising the
SVFs is a diﬀicult task as there are three directional dimensions used to describe the
deformation. While the directions are interesting, the magnitude of the deformation
will also provide useful insight into the nature of the deformation. The magnitude
is determined using a 2-norm and an average SVF is visualised in GlassBrain. This
is presented in Figure 5.11, 5.12 and 5.13 and we are able to see through the SVF
from all sides. The visualisation show that the main trend in the SVFs are around
the ventricles as expected. The signal is strongest in the SVF with the largest time
span, B −7y, which is also expected as a longer time span would mean bigger changes
in the brain. The larger the changes in the brain are, the better the ratio between
signal and noise in the SVFs will be. This might indicate, that the proposed model
will need a suﬀiciently large timespan between Im and If, in order to create a nice
result.
Knowing that the diffeomorphic registration detects some age related shrinkage
of the brain, we want to know whether this can be used for extrapolation purposes.
Looking into Figure 5.18 three SVFs with different timespan are compared. B −7y
is comparing generated images to original scans that are younger than If in age.
However, both B −4y and B −1y are compared to one or more of the original scans
that are old than their respective If. This can be viewed as an extrapolation. For
both SVFs poor extrapolation properties are seen as the best match between artificial
image and original scan is no longer improving by increased integration. Thus, the
linear dependency between age and integration is gone.
The brain changes seen
over one year is very small and therefore are the deformations in B −1y also small.
Extrapolating by integrating beyond If = 1y might therefore mean integrating on a
very noise-filled SVF, why the generated images are an increasingly bad match to the
original scans. For B −4y a small improvement is seen by integration when moving
towards 7y. however, it is not enough to uphold the linear relationship between age
==PAGE:52==
40
6 Discussion
and integration. Extrapolation might be improved by larger timespan between input
images as the signal-to-noise ratio will be improved too, or it might be constructed
in a way, that it is constrained by the ages of the input image pair.
6.4
Future Work
This project has touched upon many methods related to the extracted velocity fields
and for every door opened, others had to close.
This leaves both loose ends and
obvious journeys to embark on. For one the generated longitudinal dataset should
be tested to see if it could help augment an existing algorithm. The dataset could
possibly be improved by using transfer learning on SynthMorph network, retraining
the model with e.g. lesion maps to make it less invariant to certain contrasts. As
mentioned before, the age trajectories showing linear relationship between age and
ideal integration step, might be useful in detecting neurological deceases. More data is
needed to know if there are a possibility of early intervention or prediction of severity
of illness. Lastly, the prediction value of the velocity field might be enhanced by using
advanced feature selection or extraction of features from the SVF before using it in
a regression or classification model. Furthermore, it could be tested if an average
SVF model could be used to generate future brain images using only one MRI scan
as input.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project, artificial structural MRI have successfully been generated using a
DL-based diffeomorphic registration. The artificial images are produced using a step-
wise integration method, thus, creating a subject-specific longitudinal image dataset.
Similarity measures are used to verify the result by comparing to the intermediate
scans and finding the integration point where the best match is generated.
It is
seen that with increasing subject age, the ideal integration point also increases. This
relationship supports the conclusion that the dataset is indeed longitudinal.
The ideal integration points, that are found by similarity scores, are also used to
explore the trajectory of ageing. For each subject an age trajectory is drawn and a
linear regression is fitted to the trajectory lines. Others have found the volume of the
brain to be decreasing linearly with increasing age and the same linear dependency is
found between integration and age. This means that diffeomorphic registration can
capture the decline in the brain volume as the brain ages.
Three regression models have also been trained to predict changes in gait speed.
Due to the high dimensional problem elastic net and support vector regression is
used for the analysis. However, no good prediction have been found in either of the
models. The result is verified by a permutation test, showing that the performance
of the models are not significantly better than training on random responses. The
predictive power with regard to predicting future brain development is also evaluated.
Two SVFs describing the flow over a timespan of one year and four years are used
to simulate an extrapolation, but further integration is not capable of improving the
match when integrating passed the fixed image. This indicates that the proposed
model either is constrained by the ages of the moving and the fixed images or that
it requires a large age span between the image pairs to gain a large enough ratio
between signal and noise.
==PAGE:54==
42
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX A
Digit Generation
==PAGE:56==
44
A Digit Generation
Figure A.1: All N = 30 generated images of the MNIST registration, It = Im ◦ϕ(t).
Integration step t is written over each image.
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX B
Brain Generation
==PAGE:58==
46
B Brain Generation
Figure B.1: All N = 30 generated images of the brain registration, It = Im ◦ϕ(t).
Integration step t is written over each image.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Fu, A. Tzortzakakis, J. Barroso, E. Westman, D. Ferreira, and R. Moreno,
“Generative aging of brain images with diffeomorphic registration,” 05 2022.
[2]
M. Hoffmann, B. Billot, D. N. Greve, J. E. Iglesias, B. Fischl, and A. V. Dalca,
“Synthmorph: learning contrast-invariant registration without acquired images,”
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 543–558, 2022.
[3]
K. B. Walhovd, A. M. Fjell, I. Reinvang, A. Lundervold, A. M. Dale, D. E.
Eilertsen, B. T. Quinn, D. Salat, N. Makris, and B. Fischl, “Effects of age on
volumes of cortex, white matter and subcortical structures,” Neurobiology of
Aging, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1261–1270, 2005.
[4]
T. Jernigan, S. Archibald, C. Fennema-Notestine, A. Gamst, J. Stout, J. Bonner,
and J. Hesselink, “Effects of age on tissues and regions of the cerebrum and
cerebellum,” Neurobiology of aging, vol. 22, pp. 581–94, 07 2001.
[5]
N. Raz, K. Rodrigue, D. Head, F. Gunning-Dixon, and J. Acker, “Differential
aging of the human striatum: Longitudinal evidence,” AJNR. American journal
of neuroradiology, vol. 24, pp. 1849–56, 11 2003.
[6]
J. W. Hanson, “Introduction to magnetic resonance imaging.”
[7]
D. C. Preston, “Magnetic resonance imaging (mri) of the brain and spine: Ba-
sics.”
[8]
M. Haidekker, Image Registration, pp. 350–385. 2011.
[9]
J. Ashburner, “A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm,” NeuroImage,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 95–113, 2007.
[10] H. Shaziya and K. Shyamala, “Pulmonary ct images segmentation using cnn
and unet models of deep learning,” in 2020 IEEE Pune Section International
Conference (PuneCon), pp. 195–201, 2020.
[11] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The elements of statistical learning:
data mining, inference and prediction. Springer, 2 ed., 2009.
==PAGE:60==
48
Bibliography
[12] H. Emami, M. Dong, S. P. Nejad-Davarani, and C. K. Glide-Hurst, “Generat-
ing synthetic cts from magnetic resonance images using generative adversarial
networks,” Medical Physics, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 3627–3636, 2018.
[13] Y. Lei, J. Harms, T. Wang, Y. Liu, H.-K. Shu, A. B. Jani, W. J. Curran, H. Mao,
T. Liu, and X. Yang, “Mri-only based synthetic ct generation using dense cy-
cle consistent generative adversarial networks,” Medical Physics, vol. 46, no. 8,
pp. 3565–3581, 2019.
[14] C. S. Eriksen, E. Garde, N. L. Reislev, C. L. Wimmelmann, T. Bieler, A. K.
Ziegler, A. T. Gylling, K. J. Dideriksen, H. R. Siebner, E. L. Mortensen, and
M. Kjaer, “Physical activity as intervention for age-related loss of muscle mass
and function: protocol for a randomised controlled trial (the LISA study),” BMJ
Open, vol. 6, no. 12, 2016.
[15] P.-T. Yap, X. Jiang, and A. Kot, “Two-dimensional polar harmonic transforms
for invariant image representation,” Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 32, pp. 1259 – 1270, 08 2010.
[16] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel,
M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-
sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12,
pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
