==PAGE:1==
Revolutionizing Authentication:
Body Evoked Potential Protocol for EEG­based
User Authentication
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Revolutionizing Authentication:
Body Evoked Potential Protocol for EEG­based User Authentication
Master Thesis
November, 2023
By
Jiaxuan Wu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared about 5 months at the SPTAGE lab, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science,
machine learning and Electroencephalography (EEG).
Jiaxuan Wu ­ s212625
Signature
Date
ii
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This research presents a pioneering study in the field of EEG­based authentication, focus­
ing on the development and analysis of a proof­of­concept dataset using Muse S. Although
limited in size and diversity, this dataset lays the groundwork for future research, offer­
ing an initial insight into the capabilities of EEG data in user authentication. Our findings
demonstrate the considerable potential of EEG as an effective and stable authentication
factor, suggesting its viability as a reliable alternative to traditional authentication meth­
ods.
We introduce a novel BEP­based authentication system that showcases distinct advan­
tages over conventional authentication methods. This system consistently produces unique
EEG features across different subjects, which are effectively used to train transformer­
based deep learning models. Notably, the system can decode keystroke dynamics accu­
rately without requiring a frequency domain transformation. This capability is a significant
step forward in developing sophisticated authentication systems.
Our experiments also reveal the efficiency of the BEP­based system in generating a 256­
bit secure session key, achieving a new user registration time of approximately 18 seconds
with a success rate exceeding 99.99%. However, the study acknowledges limitations due
to the small sample size and potential demographic biases, emphasizing the need for
further research to expand the dataset and explore its generalizability.
This research paves the way for practical, user­friendly EEG­based authentication solu­
tions, offering significant advantages in security, user experience, and adaptability. Such
systems have promising applications in various sectors, especially in high­security en­
vironments. The advancements in EEG technology and deep learning algorithms high­
lighted in our study are expected to enhance the effectiveness and accessibility of EEG­
based authentication solutions, transforming the landscape of user authentication and
opening new avenues for future development in this exciting field.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Jiaxuan Wu, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor Cybersecurity Engineering, DTU
Advisor of this thesis.
Weiyang Chiu, Postdoc Cybersecurity Engineering, DTU
Advisor of this thesis.
iv
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to EEG equipment market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Importance of Researching EEG Data Security Issues
. . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Gap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research Scope, Questions and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Literature Review
9
2.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Thematic Analysis of EEG­based Authentication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Research Gaps of current researches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Background
13
3.1
Background on Authentication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Background on Brain­Computer Interfaces (BCIs) and Electroencephalo­
gram (EEG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Body Evoked Potential (BEP) Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Autonomic Device Pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Methodology
23
4.1
Research Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Methodological Approach for Research Question 1: EEG Signals as Shared
Secret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Methodological Approach for Research Question 2: Stability and Effective­
ness of EEG Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Methodological Approach for Research Question 3: Balancing Usability
and Security in EEG­Based Authentication Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.5
Methodological Approach for Research Question 4: Unique Advantages of
EEG­Based Authentication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.6
Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.7
Data Collection and Analysis Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
System Design
43
5.1
Adversary Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Design Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3
System Design of BEP­based Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.4
Usecase 1: Key Renewal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.5
Usecase 2: Key Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Evaluation
47
6.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Revolutionizing Authentication:
v
==PAGE:8==
6.3
Validation of Hypotheses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.4
Security Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.5
Bit Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7
Discussion
63
8
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
vi
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to EEG equipment market
The field of Brain­Computer Interface (BCI) is undergoing rapid development, with an in­
creasing number of applications in areas such as neural engineering, robot control, gam­
ing, entertainment, and security sectors [1]. These advancements significantly improve
the quality of life for individuals, particularly those living with chronic disabilities and their
caregivers.
The EEG (Electroencephalography) market is a sub­segment of the medical equipment
market and is usually referred to as the EEG equipment market. The EEG equipment mar­
ket comprises various EEG machines, EEG analysis software, and related services. EEG
devices are commonly used for the diagnosis and research of epilepsy, sleep disorders,
brain tumors, stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, and other neurological disorders.
The EEG (Electroencephalography) equipment market has seen significant development
over the past few decades. In the past, EEG devices were primarily used in hospitals and
specialized medical research institutions; they were generally large and required profes­
sional technicians to operate. EEG has been an essential tool in diagnosing and research­
ing brain diseases such as epilepsy and sleep disorders. With technological advance­
ments, EEG equipment has become more sophisticated, compact, and portable, even
extending to user­friendly, home­based portable EEG devices equipped with advanced
analysis software. The market demand has been growing, not only due to increased at­
tention to brain health but also because of the expanding applications of EEG equipment
in researching and treating other diseases like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. Overall, the
EEG equipment market has experienced significant growth and expansion over the past
few decades, with expectations for continued growth in the future.
As the EEG industry continues to develop, security is becoming an increasingly impor­
tant concern. With advancements in technology, there is a growing amount of sensitive
and personal health data being collected, stored, and transmitted by EEG devices. This
data needs to be protected from unauthorized access and potential cybersecurity threats.
Additionally, as EEG devices are integrated into more complex healthcare systems, the
potential for security breaches and data compromises increases. It is vital for industry
stakeholders to prioritize security measures and implement robust protocols to safeguard
patient data and maintain the integrity of EEG results. The development and adherence
to industry­wide security standards will be crucial in addressing these challenges and
ensuring the safety and privacy of patients’ data.
To be more specific, EEG devices collect and store patients’ brain activity data, which is
highly sensitive personal health information. This data can include not only the raw EEG
signals but also derived information such as cognitive states, emotional states, and poten­
tially even information that could be used to infer thoughts or memories. Without proper
security measures, this data could be accessed by unauthorized individuals, leading to
privacy breaches. In the worst­case scenario, this sensitive information could even be
used for malicious purposes such as blackmail, identity theft, or other criminal activities.
Furthermore, EEG devices require a precise electromagnetic environment to function cor­
rectly. Interference from other electronic devices or electromagnetic fields can result in
inaccurate EEG data, which could lead to misdiagnoses and inappropriate treatment de­
cisions. Thus, it is crucial to implement proper security protocols and take necessary
Revolutionizing Authentication:
1
==PAGE:10==
precautions to safeguard patient data and ensure the accuracy of the EEG results. This
includes encrypting data, securing data transmission channels, and regularly updating
and patching systems to protect against cybersecurity threats.
However, as the technology gains traction, it becomes increasingly vulnerable to newly
emerging forms of attacks. Several studies have explored the potential risks associated
with BCI applications, identifying cybersecurity as a significant concern. For instance,
research [2] has indicated that wireless BCI systems are susceptible to EEG signal tam­
pering or attacks during transmission, potentially leading to system malfunctions. In the
context of EEG­based authentication, tampered EEG data could deceive the authentica­
tion system, posing a critical security risk [3].
Surprisingly, this crucial issue has largely been overlooked in existing studies on EEG­
based authentication systems [4]. These studies often replicate the workflow of traditional
biometric authentication systems, which involves collecting EEG data from subjects and
using machine learning algorithms for classification. However, such approaches fail to
account for the unique cybersecurity challenges associated with BCIs. For example, BCI
devices often lack a shared secret with users’ laptops or smartphones, making them sus­
ceptible to Man­in­the­Middle (MITM) attacks during device pairing [5].
1.2
The Importance of Researching EEG Data Security Issues
If data security problems are properly tackled, there will be significant benefits for both
the providers and users of EEG technology. For the suppliers, improving data security
can boost customer trust and enhance the company’s reputation. Compliance with data
protection and privacy regulations will also mitigate legal risks and potential fines. Fur­
thermore, superior data security measures can be a market differentiator, attracting more
customers. On the demand side, users will benefit from greater protection of their per­
sonal and health information, reducing the risk of unauthorized access. Addressing elec­
tromagnetic interference will improve the accuracy of EEG data, leading to more precise
disease diagnoses and more effective treatments. In summary, solving the data security
challenges in EEG devices will safeguard user privacy, improve medical services quality,
enhance supplier market competitiveness, and ensure regulatory compliance.
Data security problems are worth researching because they pose significant risks to in­
dividuals’ privacy and can have severe consequences for both users and providers of
technology. In the context of EEG devices, the data collected is highly sensitive as it
relates to individuals’ brain activity, which can reveal information about their mental and
emotional state. If this data falls into the wrong hands, it could lead to privacy breaches,
identity theft, and even blackmail. Furthermore, data security is critical to ensuring the
integrity and reliability of EEG data, which is used for medical diagnosis and treatment.
Inaccurate data due to security breaches or electromagnetic interference can result in
misdiagnoses and ineffective treatments, potentially causing harm to patients. Addition­
ally, data security is also a legal and ethical obligation for technology providers. Failure to
protect user data can result in legal penalties, damage to reputation, and loss of customer
trust. Therefore, addressing data security challenges is crucial to safeguarding individu­
als’ privacy, ensuring the accuracy and reliability of EEG data, and maintaining the trust
and integrity of the EEG technology industry.
The problem of data security in EEG devices still exists and is difficult to resolve due to
several reasons:
1. Insufficient Awareness of Data Sensitivity: A major factor in the neglect of EEG
data security could be the lack of awareness about the sensitivity of such data. Many
2
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:11==
people might not understand how much personal information EEG data can reveal,
and therefore might underestimate the importance of protecting this data. Addition­
ally, as EEG technology is often associated with the medical and research fields,
some developers and users might focus more on the functionality of the devices
rather than their data security.
2. Cybersecurity Threats: The constantly evolving nature of cybersecurity threats
means that security measures that are effective today may not be sufficient tomor­
row. Continuous research and development are required to stay ahead of potential
cyber­attacks.
3. Cost: Implementing robust data security measures can be expensive. For smaller
companies or research institutions, the cost can be a significant barrier to ensuring
the security of EEG data.
4. Regulatory Challenges: The regulatory landscape for data security is continuously
evolving. Keeping up with and complying with these changing regulations while also
ensuring the security of the data can be challenging for EEG device providers.
5. Technical Complexity: EEG devices collect and process complex brainwave data,
which requires advanced algorithms and security protocols to protect. The integra­
tion of these advanced security measures with the existing technology is a significant
challenge.
6. Human Error: Data security is not just about technology; it also involves human
practices. Mistakes such as weak passwords, unsecured data sharing, or lack of
regular software updates can lead to vulnerabilities in data security.
1.3
Research Gap
One main approach relies on the detection and classification of motor imagery. Utilizing
intrinsic oscillatory brain signals and motor imagery for authentication necessitates sev­
eral seconds to establish Event­Related Desynchronization (ERD) patterns. Moreover,
users often require training to become accustomed to this method [6]. This contradicts
one of the primary advantages of biometric systems over password­based systems: the
elimination of the need to remember passwords [7]. For instance, current methods often
require individuals to engage in imagined movements, increasing both cognitive workload
and the time required for authentication, which can last up to 10 seconds. Therefore, there
is a pressing need for alternative approaches that can enhance the Information Transfer
Rate (ITR), ideally requiring less time and mental effort [6].
Another major type of BCI systems measures the P300 component of a Visual Evoked
Potential (VEP), which occurs in response to flashed columns or rows of letters [8, 9]. One
major drawback of these ’visual’ methods is that they require subjects to maintain gaze
control for an extended period during the enrollment phase. Another significant limitation
is the variability of EEG wave features, which can change over time due to factors such as
health, emotional state, and age. Consequently, these methods are inherently unreliable
for high­security applications.
Generally speaking, the current landscape of EEG (Electroencephalography) authentica­
tion methods reveals a significant gap in terms of user effort and practicality, especially
when compared to password­based systems and other biometric methods. One of the
primary issues is that these methods require substantial user effort, which is primarily fo­
cused on applications for individuals with illnesses or disabilities. This specificity in appli­
Revolutionizing Authentication:
3
==PAGE:12==
cation means that EEG authentication systems are not necessarily practical or convenient
for everyday users.
Firstly, the use of EEG for authentication is inherently more complex than traditional meth­
ods. It involves the measurement of brainwave patterns, which requires specialized equip­
ment and often a controlled environment to ensure accuracy. This complexity is accept­
able and even advantageous in medical or assistive contexts, where users, often with
disabilities or health issues, benefit from hands­free operation and other unique features
of EEG­based systems. However, for the general population, this setup is cumbersome
compared to the simplicity of entering a password or using a fingerprint.
Secondly, EEG patterns, while unique to each individual, can vary due to numerous factors
like emotional state, health conditions, and even time of day. This variability means that
the system might require frequent recalibrations or adjustments, adding to the user effort.
In contrast, passwords and other biometric systems like fingerprint or facial recognition
offer a more consistent and user­friendly experience.
Moreover, the privacy concerns associated with EEG data are more significant than those
with passwords or other biometrics. EEG data can potentially reveal sensitive information
about a person’s neurological state or health conditions, posing a risk if the data is not
securely handled.
Finally, the cost and infrastructure required for EEG authentication are also factors that
limit its practicality for regular users. The need for specialized equipment and possibly ex­
pert oversight for setup and maintenance makes it a less feasible option for widespread
use compared to more straightforward technologies like password­based or other biomet­
ric systems.
1.4
Research Scope, Questions and Objectives
Due to limitations of research funding and research time, we cannot solve all the problems
mentioned above. Here we mainly focused on figuring out the potential of non­invasive
head­mounted device, called Muse S1, to realize a novel and promising EEG­based au­
thentication paradigm. Current commercial EEG devices are already very affordable for
most ordinary people and have abundant applications. Thus we want to figure out a new
EEG­based authentication paradigm based on the commercial EEG device Muse S. Then
we need to collect data from subjects and made dataset by ourselves. However, the size
of dataset won’t be very large and good in diversity, and the dataset is served as a proof
of concept instead of a product that can be put into use immediately.
The primary objective of this research is to explore innovative paradigms in EEG (Elec­
troencephalography) technology for authentication purposes, with the aim of expanding
the EEG equipment market by demonstrating its advantages over traditional authentica­
tion methods. This exploration is structured around several key aspects:
1. EEG as a Unique Authentication Factor: We aim to investigate the potential of
EEG signals as a unique and secure shared secret in authentication systems. This
involves examining the human ability to control brain waves, the correlation between
emotional states and EEG patterns during authentication, and the feasibility and
accuracy of passive EEG­based authentication.
2. Effectiveness and Stability of EEG Features: This research seeks to determine
the effectiveness and stability of EEG features for authentication. We will explore
1https://choosemuse.com/products/muse-s-gen-2
4
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:13==
how emotional states affect EEG signal stability, identify stable EEG features that
effectively differentiate individuals, and examine the relevance of static versus dy­
namic features in EEG­based authentication systems.
3. Balancing Usability and Security: A critical aspect of this research is to under­
stand how to balance usability with security in EEG­based authentication systems.
This includes investigating the impact of password length on vulnerability to attacks
like shoulder surfing, comparing different input methods for their security resilience,
and evaluating the time efficiency of these systems in both enrollment and authen­
tication phases.
4. Unique Advantages of EEG­based Authentication: Finally, we aim to identify
and evaluate the unique advantages of EEG­based authentication systems. This
involves studying the influence of body voltage on EEG potential, examining the
high­fidelity synchrony of EEG signals due to systemic electrical connectivity in the
body, and assessing the comparative advantages of EEG­based systems over tra­
ditional authentication methods.
Through addressing these aspects, this research intends to provide a comprehensive
understanding of EEG technology’s potential in the field of authentication, highlighting its
advantages and paving the way for its broader application and market expansion.
Specifically, we aim to address research questions in the following aspects:
Q1: How can EEG signals function as a unique and secure shared secret in authentication
systems?
Q1.1: Control Over Brain Waves: Examining human ability to control brain waves
and its implications for EEG­based authentication.
Q1.2: Emotional State Detection During Password Input: Investigating the correla­
tion between emotional states and EEG patterns during authentication.
Q1.3: Feasibility of passive authentication: Exploring the feasibility and accuracy of
passive authentication using EEG signals.
Q2: Are EEG features effective and stable to be used for authentication?
Q2.1: Stability with Emotional Variability: Exploring how emotional states affect the
stability of EEG signals.
Q2.2: Identification of Stable Features: Identifying EEG features that are effective
and stable in differentiating individuals.
Q2.3: Feature Relevance in EEG Authentication: In EEG­based authentication sys­
tems, static features related to consistent individual neural patterns are more
crucial and stable than dynamic features.
Q3: How to balance usability and security for EEG­based authentication systems?
Q3.1: Password Length Impact: Investigating how password length influences the
vulnerability of EEG­based systems to shoulder surfing attacks.
Q3.2: Authentication Method Efficiency: Comparing different input methods for their
resilience to security threats like shoulder surfing.
Q3.3: Enrollment and Authentication Duration: Evaluating the time efficiency of EEG­
based systems in both enrollment and authentication phases.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
5
==PAGE:14==
Q4: What are the unique advantages of EEG­based authentication?
Q4.1: Body Voltage Influence on EEG: Voltage fluctuations in other parts of the body
cause changes in EEG potential.
Q4.2: High­Fidelity EEG Synchrony: Voltage changes in parts of the body other than
the brain result in high­fidelity synchronous alterations in EEG recordings, sug­
gesting a strong systemic electrical connectivity within the body.
Q4.3: Comparative Advantage Over Traditional Methods: Evaluating scenarios where
EEG­based systems could supersede current authentication methods.
1.5
Contribution
In summary, this research contributes to the field of EEG­based authentication by ex­
ploring new paradigms, addressing the balance between usability and security, and high­
lighting the unique advantages of EEG signals in authentication systems. Despite the
acknowledged limitations, this study lays the groundwork for future research and poten­
tial commercial applications in EEG­based authentication.
This is the overview of our research contributions:
1. Opening New Avenues for Market Expansion of EEG Devices: This research marks
one of the initial efforts to utilize the commercially available, non­invasive Muse S
EEG device in the realm of authentication. By focusing on this affordable and acces­
sible device, the study aims to pave the way for practical EEG­based authentication
solutions that can be adopted by a broader user base.
2. Developing a Novel EEG­based Authentication Paradigm: Through the exploration
of EEG signals as a unique and secure authentication factor, this research con­
tributes to the development of a new paradigm in EEG­based authentication. This
includes utilizing the characteristics of electrical potential synchronization, the hu­
man body is used as a channel for key sharing, enabling authentication and inter­
connection between EEG devices and other electronic devices.
3. Insights into EEG Signal Stability and Emotional Variability: The study offers valu­
able insights into the stability of EEG features for authentication, particularly in the
context of emotional variability. Identifying stable EEG features that effectively differ­
entiate individuals contributes to the field’s understanding of how static and dynamic
EEG features can be utilized in authentication systems.
4. Balancing Usability with Security in EEG Authentication: By investigating aspects
such as the impact of password length and different input methods, this research
contributes to the critical discourse on how to balance usability and security in EEG­
based authentication systems. This is particularly relevant in the context of enhanc­
ing user experience without compromising security.
5. Assessment of the Unique Advantages of EEG­based Authentication: The research
provides an assessment of the unique advantages of EEG­based authentication
over traditional methods. This includes examining the influence of body voltage
on EEG potential and the high­fidelity synchrony of EEG signals, thus offering a
comparative perspective.
6. Proof of Concept Dataset Creation: Despite limitations in size and diversity, the
creation of a dataset from Muse S users serves as a proof of concept. This dataset
6
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:15==
can be a valuable resource for future research and development in the field, setting
a foundation for more extensive studies.
1.6
Structure of the Thesis
Paper Structure.
This thesis is organized into eight main chapters to provide a com­
prehensive understanding of our research. Following this introductory chapter, Chapter
2 presents a detailed Literature Review, where we explore existing research and theoret­
ical frameworks relevant to our study, highlighting gaps that our research aims to fill. In
Chapter 2, we delve into the Background of the topic, laying the groundwork of key con­
cepts and technical aspects essential for understanding the subsequent content. Chapter
4 outlines our Methodology, describing the research design, data collection methods, and
analytical procedures employed in our study. Chapter 5, System Design, details the ar­
chitecture and components of the proposed system, explaining the rationale behind our
design choices. In Chapter 6, we present an Evaluation of our system, analyzing the data
and results obtained from our experiments. This is followed by a thorough Discussion
in Chapter 7, where we critically analyze our findings, compare them with existing litera­
ture, and discuss the broader implications and limitations of our work. Finally, Chapter 8
concludes the thesis, summarizing the key findings, reflecting on the research objectives,
and suggesting avenues for future research.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:17==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Methodology
We follow the forward snowballing strategy mentioned in [10] to find newer research that
has built upon or responded to our identified papers.
The following is the snowballing process:
1. Start the Literature Search: Begin by identifying a preliminary set of papers that are
relevant to your topic. This set forms the basis of your literature review.
2. Evaluate the Papers: Assess the initial set of papers for relevance, determining which
should be included or excluded from your review based on your criteria.
3. Begin Snowballing: With your selected papers, initiate the snowballing process, which
has two parts: backward snowballing and forward snowballing.
4. Backward Snowballing:
4.1 Look at the titles in the reference list of each paper you’ve included.
4.2 Examine the place of reference to understand the context in which the paper is
cited.
4.3 Review the abstracts of the papers referenced to determine their relevance.
4.4 If a referenced paper seems relevant, read the full paper.
5. Forward Snowballing:
5.1 Look at the titles of papers that cite your source paper.
5.2 Review the abstract of those citing papers to assess relevance.
5.3 Check the place of the citation in the citing paper to understand the context.
5.4 If a citing paper is relevant, read the full paper.
6. Iterative Process: Repeat the backward and forward snowballing steps iteratively. In
each iteration, you can decide to exclude papers or tentatively include them for further
consideration. Continue this process until no new relevant papers are found.
7. Final Inclusion of Papers: Before a paper is added to your new set of references, its
full text should be read and evaluated to ensure it is pertinent to your review. The final
decision to include a paper should be made after this full review.
8. End of Snowballing: When no additional papers are identified through the snowballing
process, the procedure is complete.
During the process, the basic criteria whether a paper is included is:
• Research Scope: Is the research scope of this article related to our research? Is it
a new approach compared to our identified papers?
• Publication Venue: Is it published in a place where relevant papers may be pub­
lished? Which quartile is the article in? Is this article published in a Q1 journal or at
high­quality conferences?
Revolutionizing Authentication:
9
==PAGE:18==
• Diversity: Is it ensured that the references represent a range of perspectives on
the topic, involving papers that use different methodologies or that reach different
conclusions, to enrich the understanding and presentation of the topic?
We start from the papers collected in [11] and [12]. After snowballing, several well­known
EEG­based authentication approaches are selected in Table 2.1.
Protocol
Literature
Resting states
[13, 14, 15, 16]
Visual stimuli
[17, 18, 19, 20, 21]
Acoustic stimuli
[22, 23]
Motor Imaginary
[24, 25, 26, 27]
Multi­Modal
[28, 29, 30]
Table 2.1: EEG­BASED USER AUTHENTICATION PROTOCOLS
2.2
Thematic Analysis of EEG­based Authentication
In this section, we delve into the diverse protocols used in EEG (Electroencephalography)
studies, focusing particularly on their application in EEG­based authentication. EEG pro­
tocols are methodologies designed to elicit specific brain responses that can be recorded
and analyzed. The choice of protocol is crucial as it significantly influences the nature
and quality of the data collected. We will explore and compare various protocols, in­
cluding Resting States, Visual Stimuli, Acoustic Stimuli, Motor Imagery, and Multi­Modal
approaches, highlighting their implications in the context of EEG­based authentication
systems.
We categorized the referenced studies into distinct protocols and subsequently high­
lighted the parallels and contrasts between their protocols and ours.
• Resting State Protocols: Resting state protocols involve recording EEG data
while the subject is at rest, typically with eyes closed or open but not actively engag­
ing with any specific task. This state is used to capture the baseline brain activity,
which can be indicative of an individual’s unique neural patterns. In terms of authen­
tication, resting state data can offer a stable and consistent signal but might lack the
complexity and specificity provided by task­based protocols.
• Visual Stimuli Protocols: Visual stimuli protocols engage the subject with visual
inputs, such as flashing lights or images on a screen. These stimuli elicit specific
brainwave patterns, such as Steady­State Visually Evoked Potentials (SSVEPs),
which are consistent and can be easily identified. For authentication purposes, vi­
sual stimuli can be highly effective as they produce distinct and repeatable EEG
patterns. However, they require the subject’s active participation and can be influ­
enced by external factors like lighting conditions.
• Acoustic Stimuli Protocols: Similar to visual protocols, acoustic stimuli proto­
cols use sound to elicit brain responses. These can range from simple tones to com­
plex auditory sequences. The resulting brainwave patterns are useful for authenti­
cation as they can be uniquely tied to how an individual processes sound. However,
the effectiveness of these protocols can be affected by the subject’s hearing ability
and ambient noise levels.
• Motor Imagery Protocols: Motor imagery protocols involve the subject imagining
the movement of specific body parts without physical movement. This protocol is
10
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:19==
particularly interesting for authentication as it generates unique brain patterns based
on personal experiences and motor skills. The challenge lies in accurately captur­
ing and distinguishing these imagined movements from real ones and other mental
activities. In comparison to the visual stimuli, although mental tasks do not require
special devices for stimulation, they still need some simple equipment to generate
a clue for the individual to initialize the task. The main drawback of this method is it
requires much user effort to log in.
• Multi-Modal Protocols: Multi­modal protocols combine elements from various
protocols, such as visual and acoustic stimuli or motor imagery and resting states,
to capture a more comprehensive range of brain activities. These protocols can
enhance the robustness and security of EEG­based authentication systems by pro­
viding a richer set of data. However, they also increase the complexity of data
collection and analysis.
After the comprehensive literature review, we confirmed that the Body Evoked Potential
(BEP) protocol we proposed is not only innovative but also possesses distinct advantages.
2.3
Research Gaps of current researches
Comparing these protocols, we find that each has its strengths and limitations in the con­
text of EEG­based authentication. Resting state protocols are less intrusive but may not
provide sufficiently distinctive data. Task­based protocols, including visual, acoustic, and
motor imagery, offer more specific and varied brainwave patterns but require active par­
ticipation from subjects and are more susceptible to external influences. Multi­modal pro­
tocols offer a balance by combining multiple data sources but increase the complexity of
the authentication system.
Peers in the industry have made significant efforts to address the data security issues
associated with EEG devices, such as applying encryption technologies, improving data
access controls, and continuously updating cybersecurity measures. However, the prob­
lem has not been fully resolved due to various reasons. Firstly, current encryption and
data protection technologies have limitations and cannot completely prevent risks of hack­
ing attacks and data leakage. Secondly, human factors, such as password setting and
data sharing behaviors, can potentially lead to security vulnerabilities. Thirdly, the legal
regulations and supervision for data security are still not comprehensive enough, resulting
in insufficient investment in data security by some companies. Fourthly, the diversity of
EEG devices and systems makes it difficult to implement unified security standards, and
interoperability issues between different devices also affect the overall effectiveness of
data security. Lastly, the constantly evolving nature of cybersecurity threats means that
existing security measures may quickly become obsolete, requiring continuous updates
and upgrades.
Another point worth noting is the limitations of current EEG­based authentication methods.
One main approach relies on the detection and classification of motor imagery. Utilizing
intrinsic oscillatory brain signals and motor imagery for authentication necessitates sev­
eral seconds to establish Event­Related Desynchronization (ERD) patterns. Moreover,
users often require training to become accustomed to this method [6]. This contradicts
one of the primary advantages of biometric systems over password­based systems: the
elimination of the need to remember passwords [7]. For instance, current methods often
require individuals to engage in imagined movements, increasing both cognitive workload
and the time required for authentication, which can last up to 10 seconds. Therefore, there
is a pressing need for alternative approaches that can enhance the Information Transfer
Revolutionizing Authentication:
11
==PAGE:20==
Rate (ITR), ideally requiring less time and mental effort [6].
Another major type of BCI systems measures the P300 component of a Visual Evoked
Potential (VEP), which occurs in response to flashed columns or rows of letters [8, 9]. One
major drawback of these ’visual’ methods is that they require subjects to maintain gaze
control for an extended period during the enrollment phase. Another significant limitation
is the variability of EEG wave features, which can change over time due to factors such as
health, emotional state, and age. Consequently, these methods are inherently unreliable
for high­security applications.
Generally speaking, the current landscape of EEG (Electroencephalography) authentica­
tion methods reveals a significant gap in terms of user effort and practicality, especially
when compared to password­based systems and other biometric methods. One of the
primary issues is that these methods require substantial user effort, which is primarily fo­
cused on applications for individuals with illnesses or disabilities. This specificity in appli­
cation means that EEG authentication systems are not necessarily practical or convenient
for everyday users.
12
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:21==
3
Background
In this section, we first provide the essential background knowledge needed to understand
the principles behind Authentication, Brain­Computer Interfaces (BCIs), Body Evoked Po­
tential and Autonomic Key Generation methods.
3.1
Background on Authentication
Authentication plays a crucial role in today’s digital landscape, acting as a fundamental
pillar of trust in online activities such as transactions, communications, and data storage.
It acts as a shield for individual privacy, thwarting unauthorized access to sensitive per­
sonal and corporate information. In an era where cyber threats are increasingly prevalent,
authentication serves as the foremost line of defense. It guarantees that only authorized
individuals can access particular digital assets. This protection is vital not only for main­
taining the integrity of digital communications but also for supporting economic stability.
It achieves this by building user confidence in digital platforms, thereby establishing itself
as an essential element of contemporary digital infrastructure.
3.1.1
Concepts and Definitions of Authentication
Before presenting the different authentication methods, we give some definitions and con­
cepts. The definition of authentication process [31]:
• The claimant is the entity that authenticates to the system, in order to use the ser­
vices. It could be a person or an Information System (IS);
• The monitor is the entity that provides an authentication service. It asserts the iden­
tity of a claimant (or reject it in case of a wrong authentication) and checks if it can
grant him/her the use of the required service;
• The Information System (IS) provides services, such as an access to a computer ac­
count, an application, a door unlocking or a network printer, and will let the claimant
use its services if the monitor correctly authenticated it (with a given required level
of trust).
Before authentication, the claimant typically provides the IS an identity anyway (e.g. a
username or an email address), and a proof (e.g. password) given to assert a monitor
that he/she is the identity he/she provided. This is called registration process. After the
registration, certain granted privileges (e.g. services or accesses) is given to the identity.
3.1.2
Importance of Authentication
Information systems design places significant emphasis on security as a fundamental as­
pect, with the goal of ensuring confidentiality, privacy, authorization, authentication, non­
repudiation, and integrity. These elements serve as key pillars in establishing a robust
and secure system. However, these principles have been compromised nowadays re­
sulting to nearly $1 trillion losses caused by cybercrime [32]. [33] listed several significant
data breach events. One of the important aspects in the security of information systems
relates to User Authentication (UA).
In the current era of cloud­based computing and globalized services, user authentication
has become increasingly crucial from both a user­centric and service provider perspective.
As customers become more and more aware of the importance of data security, whether
service companies have strong user authentication will significantly affect their industry
competitiveness.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
13
==PAGE:22==
3.1.3
Classification of Traditional Methods
The authentication process can be based on a combination of one or more authentication
factors. The four widely recognised factors to authenticate humans are:
1. Something the user knows (e.g. a password, a PIN code, the user’s nickname).
The system based on this factor is called Password­based system.
2. Something the user owns (e.g. a USB token, a phone, a smart card, a software
token, a navigator cookie). The system based on this factor is called Token­based
system.
3. Something the user is (e.g. a fingerprint, DNA fragment, voice pattern, facial recog­
nition). The system based on this factor is called Biometric system.
4. Something the user do (e.g. a signature, how a user types, swipes on a touchscreen,
or even how a user walks). The system based on this factor is called Behavior­based
system.
When multiple factors are used in tandem (like a password and a fingerprint), it’s referred
to as multi­factor authentication (MFA), which is considered to be more secure than relying
on a single factor.
3.1.4
Benefits and Limitations of Traditional Systems
Password­based systems is one of the earliest and most prevalent forms of digital authen­
tication. On the upside, passwords are relatively easy to implement, cost­effective, and
can be changed or updated by users with minimal hassle. They allow for quick access
without the need for specialized equipment or technology, making them a versatile choice
for various platforms. However, they come with significant downsides. Passwords are
susceptible to a variety of attacks, including brute­force, dictionary attacks, replay attacks,
shoulder surfing attacks, and phishing. Human tendencies to choose weak passwords or
reuse them across multiple platforms further exacerbate vulnerabilities. Additionally, the
increasing number of online services has led to password fatigue, where users struggle to
remember a growing array of passwords, often leading to insecure practices like writing
them down or using overly simplistic combinations.
Token­based systems usually provide an added layer of security through two­factor au­
thentication, especially when combined with something the user knows. Tokens, being
physical or digital devices, are harder for potential intruders to replicate, making unautho­
rized access more challenging. Furthermore, since the token often generates a unique
code for each session, capturing a code doesn’t provide perpetual access. However,
token­based systems have their drawbacks. They introduce potential inconvenience to
users who must carry or maintain access to the token. If a physical token is lost or a
digital token (like a smartphone app) becomes inaccessible, the user could be locked out.
Additionally, implementing token­based authentication can be more costly and complex,
requiring distribution, maintenance, and potential replacement of tokens.
Biometric systems capitalize on inherent characteristics like fingerprints, facial patterns,
or voice recognition, making duplication or forgery immensely challenging. Unlike pass­
words or tokens, biometrics can’t be forgotten, lost, or easily transferred, leading to a
smoother and potentially more secure user experience. However, there are notable draw­
backs. Biometric data, once compromised, cannot be changed like a password or re­
placed like a token. Privacy concerns arise, as collecting and storing such intimate data
presents risks if there are breaches. Additionally, environmental factors, like lighting for
facial recognition or dirt on a fingerprint scanner, can hinder performance. Lastly, imple­
14
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:23==
menting biometric solutions can be cost­intensive, requiring specialized equipment and
software.
Behaviour­based systems authenticate users by analyzing unique patterns in their ac­
tions, such as keystroke dynamics or swiping gestures. The key benefit of this approach
is its subtlety; users aren’t required to remember anything or carry an extra device, as
the system simply observes their natural interactions. Since these behaviors are often
unconscious and consistent, they can be difficult for potential intruders to mimic. Addi­
tionally, behavior­based authentication can adapt over time, learning and refining its un­
derstanding of a user’s habits. However, there are challenges. Behavioral patterns can
be influenced by external factors; for instance, a user’s typing rhythm might change due
to fatigue, injury, or stress, potentially leading to false negatives. Consistency in behavior
might also vary more among individuals than biometric traits, increasing the system’s com­
plexity. Moreover, similar to biometrics, behavior­based systems raise privacy concerns,
as continuous monitoring might be perceived as intrusive or overly surveillance­oriented.
Table 3.1 evaluated and illustrated different authentication methods.
Table 3.1: A comparative evaluation across different authentication methods.
Scheme
Usability
Deployability
Security
Memorywise Effortless
Physically Effortless
Efficient­to­use
Easy­to­Recover
Easy­to­change
Low Identification Cost
Low Device Cost
Resilient­to­SSA
Resilient­to­Phishing
Resilient­to­Theft
Password
×
✓
✓
×
✓
✓
✓
×
×
×
2FA
✓
×
✓
×
✓
×
✓
✓
×
✓
Biometrics
✓
✓
✓
×
×
×
×
✓
✓
✓
Token
✓
✓
✓
×
×
✓
×
✓
✓
×
Traditional EEG
✓
×
×
×
×
×
×
✓
✓
✓
✓= offers benefit; ×= does not offer benefit
3.1.5
The Current Trends and Future of Authentication
The first overall trend is of course to increase the security of information systems through
a secure authentication of the individual. Meaning that we want to be as sure as possible
that the claimant is not an impostor. Developing effective methods to prevent an attacker
from obtaining a user’s authenticate input data and reusing it later to attack the authen­
tication system. Such replay attack is particularly critical for the user authentication in
biometric systems and Internet of Things.
The second overall trend is the ease of use. The different authentication solutions that
could be deployed must be very simple to use for a client. Authentication is part of the
human machine interface for any software applications.
The third overall trend of user authentication on mobile devices is to develop new au­
thentication approaches based on the integrated multi­factor authentication metrics (i.e.,
Revolutionizing Authentication:
15
==PAGE:24==
knowledge, biometrics, and ownership) collected by the embedded sensors in mobile de­
vices [34].
The fourth overall trend is biometric system becomes more popular. The generalization
problem exposed. When such system meets unseen presentation attacks, its perfor­
mance drops significantly. In addition, the demographic bias also limits the wide use of
the technology.
3.2
Background on Brain­Computer Interfaces (BCIs) and
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
3.2.1
Introduction of BCI and EEG
Brain is the source of our thoughts, emotions, senses, and memory. The complexity of
brain gives us the intelligence as human beings, and makes us unique in the nature.
Recently, the brain science and BCI becomes more and more mature in business. The
definition of BCI [1]:
• The central nervous system (CNS) receives sensory inputs and produces appropri­
ate motor outputs. Its natural outputs consist of muscle activity and hormones.
• An Electroencephalogram (EEG) is data that captures and records the electrical
activity of the brain originated from the CNS.
• A Brain­computer interface (BCI) is a system that records CNS activity (e.g. EEG
data) and translates it into artificial output that replaces, restores, enhances, sup­
plements, or improves natural CNS outputs (e.g. actionable commands); it thereby
modifies the interactions of the CNS with the rest of the body or establishes a com­
munication link between the CNS and the external world.
Figure 3.1: Brain­computer interface (BCI) design and operation.
3.2.2
BCI­IoT Scenario
Figure 3.2 depicts a typical BCI­IOT system [35].
16
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: BCI­IoT
References [36] and [37] delve into the critical considerations necessary for selecting an
IoT platform, with a particular emphasis on security, a paramount factor in this decision­
making process. Security in the IoT context encompasses a broad spectrum of measures,
including cloud network security, data encryption, application authentication, secure ses­
sion initiation, as well as device­specific safeguards like authentication and up­to­date
certification1.
A pressing question arises: Why are IoT sensors/devices inherently vulnerable? As high­
lighted in 2, a significant part of the issue stems from the non­modification of default pass­
words and login credentials. Initially, vendors set default credentials to facilitate easy
setup for subsequent users. However, these defaults are frequently not updated down the
supply chain, ultimately reaching consumers unchanged. Consequently, data transmitted
by these devices may remain unencrypted and susceptible to interception. Moreover, in
many IoT environments, such as smart homes, devices are interconnected without isola­
tion, leading to a scenario where a single compromised device can jeopardize the entire
network.
Addressing the challenge of updating certification and login credentials is not straight­
forward. One must consider the inherent limitations of many IoT devices, characterized
by their low processing power and limited memory. These constraints are a result of
a trade­off: higher processing power and memory capacity increase costs and energy
consumption, which are typically undesirable for IoT applications. Thus, devices are de­
signed to meet the bare minimum requirements for functionality, which often precludes
the capability for sophisticated, over­the­air updates.
In conclusion, to ensure the security of BCI­IoT systems, several key elements are es­
sential:
• Rigorous user authentication
• Robust data encryption
• Regularly updated login credentials
1https://www.leverege.com/blogpost/iot-security-why-we-need-to-be-securing-the-internet-of-things
2https://www.leverege.com/blogpost/internet-of-things-security-issues-and-barriers-to-change
Revolutionizing Authentication:
17
==PAGE:26==
• Effective low­resource computing solutions
These components collectively contribute to a more secure and reliable IoT ecosystem,
addressing both technological and procedural vulnerabilities.
3.2.3
The Potential Risks and Future of BCI
According to [38], the Brain­Computer Interface (BCI) field has seen remarkable progress.
From enabling people with paralysis to move computer mice in 2006, the technology has
evolved to control robotic arms by 2012. Originally driven by medical research, BCI’s
potential is now extending into sectors like education, gaming, marketing, the military,
and security. These advancements are not only enhancing the quality of life for those
with chronic disabilities but also benefiting their caregivers. Significantly, the evolution of
BCI technology is increasingly influenced by non­medical tech giants, whose substantial
funding capabilities are accelerating research.
[3] delves into the potential risks associated with BCI applications, highlighting cyberse­
curity as a major concern. [39] demonstrates how minimal adversarial noise can lead
to errors in EEG­based BCI spellers. [2] addresses the risk of EEG signal tampering in
wireless BCI systems, which can disrupt system functionality. The authors propose a
security block to detect tampering and authenticate EEG signals at the receiver’s end.
Furthermore, [40] and [41] introduce the concept of neuronal cyberattacks, a new threat
type capable of disrupting neuronal activity. [42] presents a side­channel attack method
capable of extracting pin codes from EEG signals.
To achieve the vision of ”Connected Minds, Unimpeded Action,” future BCI systems must
fulfill five key criteria: accuracy, efficiency, stability, user­friendliness, and security. This
means developing systems with precise brain intention decoding algorithms, high­speed
information processing and feedback response, robust device performance with anti­
interference features, a comfortable and easy­to­use interface, and secure procedures
for implantation, data collection, and information transmission.
3.3
Body Evoked Potential (BEP) Principle
3.3.1
EEG Paradigms
BCI paradigms, which are essentially frameworks or methods for translating brain activity
into meaningful outputs, have been developed over the years to make the process more
effective and interpretable. They often optimize the conversion of specific neural signals
into predictable and reliable commands. Some common BCI paradigms include [43]:
• Resting State Protocols: Resting state protocols involve recording EEG data
while the subject is at rest, typically with eyes closed or open but not actively engag­
ing with any specific task. This state is used to capture the baseline brain activity,
which can be indicative of an individual’s unique neural patterns. In terms of authen­
tication, resting state data can offer a stable and consistent signal but might lack the
complexity and specificity provided by task­based protocols.
• Visual Stimuli Protocols: Visual stimuli protocols engage the subject with visual
inputs, such as flashing lights or images on a screen. These stimuli elicit specific
brainwave patterns, such as Steady­State Visually Evoked Potentials (SSVEPs),
which are consistent and can be easily identified. For authentication purposes, vi­
sual stimuli can be highly effective as they produce distinct and repeatable EEG
patterns. However, they require the subject’s active participation and can be influ­
enced by external factors like lighting conditions.
18
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:27==
• Acoustic Stimuli Protocols: Similar to visual protocols, acoustic stimuli proto­
cols use sound to elicit brain responses. These can range from simple tones to com­
plex auditory sequences. The resulting brainwave patterns are useful for authenti­
cation as they can be uniquely tied to how an individual processes sound. However,
the effectiveness of these protocols can be affected by the subject’s hearing ability
and ambient noise levels.
• Motor Imagery Protocols: Motor imagery protocols involve the subject imagining
the movement of specific body parts without physical movement. This protocol is
particularly interesting for authentication as it generates unique brain patterns based
on personal experiences and motor skills. The challenge lies in accurately captur­
ing and distinguishing these imagined movements from real ones and other mental
activities. In comparison to the visual stimuli, although mental tasks do not require
special devices for stimulation, they still need some simple equipment to generate
a clue for the individual to initialize the task. The main drawback of this method is it
requires much user effort to log in.
• Multi-Modal Protocols: Multi­modal protocols combine elements from various
protocols, such as visual and acoustic stimuli or motor imagery and resting states,
to capture a more comprehensive range of brain activities. These protocols can
enhance the robustness and security of EEG­based authentication systems by pro­
viding a richer set of data. However, they also increase the complexity of data
collection and analysis.
3.3.2
Somatosensory (Tactile) Paradigm
There are also less common EEG­based BCI paradigms, such as Somatosensory (tac­
tile) paradigm [6] and [44]. Tactile sensors are used to stimulate parts of body (in different
frequency) while the EEG signals are recorded for classification and generating control
commands. Unlike the common BCI paradigms, Somatosensory­based EEG­based au­
thentication has not been explored. There is big potential to defeat other paradigms in
user authentication, because the change voltage potential in the side channel is direct
and stable.
Figure 3.3: Concept of EEG Application based on Somatosensory (Tactile) Paradigm.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
19
==PAGE:28==
3.3.3
Body Evoked Potential (BEP) Paradigm
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a medical imaging technique used to record the elec­
trical activity of the brain. It is a non­invasive method in which electrodes are placed on
the scalp to detect and measure the minute electrical voltages generated by brain cells
(neurons) during communication. As illustrated in Figure 3.4, when a charged button is
touched by a person’s finger, it induces changes in the body’s electrical potential. This,
in turn, leads to variations in the steady­state voltage observed in the EEG data.
Figure 3.4: Observed Potential Change in EEG
This electrified button does not actually require specialized design. A common example
encountered in daily life is the keyboard of a charging laptop. A Switching Mode Power
Supply (SMPS) is an efficient method for power conversion that controls voltage output by
switching the current at high frequencies. This switching operation can generate harmon­
ics, which are integer multiples of the original switching frequency. While these dominant
harmonics typically manifest in the high­frequency range, there are instances—such as
when an SMPS is designed to operate at 100 kHz—where harmonics or intermodulation
products may appear in lower frequency ranges, such as between 100 Hz and 120 Hz,
as shown in Figure 3.5.
20
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: Observed harmonics in EEG
3.4
Autonomic Device Pairing
Autonomic Device Pairing leverages a shared secret observation between communicat­
ing parties to independently generate matching keys, eliminating the need for third­party
intervention [45]. In recent years, researchers have explored various contexts for this se­
cret observation, including vibrations from handshakes [46, 47], user heartbeats [48, 49],
and user gait [50, 51]. Although the specific algorithms for key extraction from these ob­
served signals differ, all these techniques share a similar foundational model and signal
processing pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: General pipeline of device pairing
A workstation refers to a computing device such as a laptop or smartphone, while a BCI
device can be a headset or headband capable of collecting and transmitting EEG data
to the workstation. The device pairing process, as illustrated in Figure 3.6, begins with
the workstation sending a request to the BCI device to initiate pairing. Upon confirmation
from the BCI device, a 30­second data collection phase commences. During this phase,
users are instructed to randomly and continuously keystroke a designated button on the
workstation. The BCI device records EEG data, while the workstation captures keyboard
data.
In the preprocessing phase, both devices independently perform data alignment, scaling,
and segmentation without inter­device communication. The EEG data is then fed into a
transformer auto­encoder, followed by a hash function, to generate a session key. On
the workstation side, key generation is more straightforward. It involves analyzing the
segments of button states: ’0’ is output if the button is consistently released, ’1’ is output if
Revolutionizing Authentication:
21
==PAGE:30==
the button state changes (i.e., from released to pressed or vice versa), and ’2’ is output if
the button is consistently pressed. After analyzing all segments, the workstation hashes
the resulting string to obtain its session key. If key generation is successful, fully matched
symmetric session keys should be generated. Otherwise, the device pairing process
restarts, looping through the pipeline until a symmetric key is successfully generated.
22
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:31==
4
Methodology
4.1
Research Overview
This thesis aims to investigate the potential of using electroencephalogram (EEG) sig­
nals for creating secure, efficient, and user­friendly authentication systems. The research
focuses on understanding the dynamics of EEG signals in various states, their stability,
usability in authentication systems, and how these systems could revolutionize current
authentication methodologies.In order to reach the research goals, we plan to divide the
big questions into smaller pieces of research questions.
Q1: How can EEG signals function as a unique and secure shared secret in authentication
systems?
Q1.1: Control Over Brain Waves: Examining human ability to control brain waves
and its implications for EEG­based authentication.
Q1.2: Emotional State Detection During Password Input: Investigating the correla­
tion between emotional states and EEG patterns during authentication.
Q1.3: Feasibility of passive authentication: Exploring the feasibility and accuracy of
passive authentication using EEG signals.
Q2: Are EEG features effective and stable to be used for authentication?
Q2.1: Stability with Emotional Variability: Exploring how emotional states affect the
stability of EEG signals.
Q2.2: Identification of Stable Features: Identifying EEG features that are effective
and stable in differentiating individuals.
Q2.3: Feature Relevance in EEG Authentication: In EEG­based authentication sys­
tems, static features related to consistent individual neural patterns are more
crucial and stable than dynamic features.
Q3: How to balance usability and security for EEG­based authentication systems?
Q3.1: Password Length Impact: Investigating how password length influences the
vulnerability of EEG­based systems to shoulder surfing attacks.
Q3.2: Authentication Method Efficiency: Comparing different input methods for their
resilience to security threats like shoulder surfing.
Q3.3: Enrollment and Authentication Duration: Evaluating the time efficiency of EEG­
based systems in both enrollment and authentication phases.
Q4: What are the unique advantages of EEG­based authentication?
Q4.1: Body Voltage Influence on EEG: Voltage fluctuations in other parts of the body
cause changes in EEG potential.
Q4.2: High­Fidelity EEG Synchrony: Voltage changes in parts of the body other than
the brain result in high­fidelity synchronous alterations in EEG recordings, sug­
gesting a strong systemic electrical connectivity within the body.
Q4.3: Comparative Advantage Over Traditional Methods: Evaluating scenarios where
EEG­based systems could supersede current authentication methods.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
23
==PAGE:32==
As mentioned in the above research questions, our research include 4 key research areas:
1. EEG Signals as Shared Secret: The study examines the feasibility of using EEG
signals as a shared secret in authentication processes. This involves understand­
ing whether individuals can control specific brain waves, detecting emotional states
during password input, and assessing the capability of EEG to reflect physical inter­
actions like keystrokes and mouse movements.
2. Stability and Effectiveness of EEG Features: An integral part of the research is to
determine the stability and effectiveness of EEG features. This includes exploring
how emotional states might impact the stability of EEG signals, identifying which
EEG features can reliably distinguish individuals, and evaluating the short­term and
long­term consistency of these features.
3. Balancing Usability and Security: Another critical aspect of this research is to find a
balance between usability and security in EEG­based authentication systems. This
includes analyzing how the complexity of mental tasks (akin to password length)
affects system performance, comparing different authentication methods for their
effectiveness against common security threats, and evaluating the time efficiency in
both enrollment and authentication phases.
4. Unique Advantages of EEG­Based Authentication: The study also aims to uncover
the unique benefits that EEG­based authentication might offer over traditional meth­
ods. This involves exploring the feasibility of password­less and continuous au­
thentication systems, and assessing whether EEG­based methods can replace or
augment current authentication approaches in specific scenarios.
By exploring above aspects of EEG­based authentication, we can provide novel insights
and practical solutions for enhancing security in this increasingly digital world.
4.2
Methodological Approach for Research Question 1: EEG
Signals as Shared Secret
4.2.1
Objective
The primary objective for this section of the research is to explore the viability of using
EEG signals as a shared secret in authentication systems. This involves investigating the
extent of human control over brain waves, the ability of EEG to detect emotional states
during password input, and its capacity to reflect physical interactions like keystrokes or
mouse movements.
4.2.2
Hypotheses
Hypothesis 1.1: Individuals can learn and demonstrate control over specific EEG pat­
terns through concentration or relaxation exercises, and the change can be obvious enough
to mimic others’ EEG patterns.
This hypothesis is based on the principle that brain activities, such as those seen in med­
itation or concentration, can change EEG patterns.
Hypothesis 1.2: EEG signals can reliably indicate emotional states (happy, sad, etc.)
during a mental task (like imagining a password), and these emotional states are reflected
in distinguishable EEG patterns.
The hypothesis is grounded in the concept that different emotional states generate distinct
brain activities, which can be captured through EEG.
24
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:33==
Hypothesis 1.3: Feasibility of passive authentication: Passive authentication using EEG
is feasible and can achieve high accuracy.
Since Passive Brainwave Authentication System doesn’t require any active task perfor­
mance or mental effort from the user, such a system could be more convenient and po­
tentially minimize operational errors during the authentication process. However, for the
system to be effective, the resting­state brainwave features must exhibit sufficient inter­
individual variability to ensure accuracy and security in identity verification.
4.2.3
Experimental Design
EEG data were acquired using Muse S Bluetooth­based wireless headband with 4 chan­
nels and keystroke/Mouse/touchpad data were acquired using a laptop keyboard/mouse.
Participants:
Recruit a diverse group of individuals with varying levels of experience in
controlling brain activity (e.g., meditation practitioners and novices). Involve participants
with varying levels of proficiency in using keyboards, mice, or touchpads.
This is our Participant Recruitment of experiment settings
• number: 15–30
• gender: male and female
• tasks: 6
• ages: 20–40
• records: 10 for each task, 60 for each participant
Tasks:
In order to investigate neural signatures of different emotions and stable patterns
over time, we design a new emotion experiment to collect EEG data, which is different
from other existing publicly available datasets. In our experiments, we guide the partic­
ipants through language to imagine some sad or happy scenes, and then ask them to
maintain the sad or happy state while entering the password. In each session, the user
was typing a user predefined password 10 times and EEG and keystroke data were ac­
quired simultaneously. Thus, a total of 60 trials were collected per user, summing up to
600 trials for all ten users.
This is our tasks of experiment settings:
• Enrollment with keyboard with happy mood for at 10 times
• Enrollment with keyboard with sad mood for 10 times
• Enrollment with mouse with happy mood for 10 times
• Enrollment with mouse with sad mood for 10 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with happy mood for 10 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with sad mood for 10 times
4.2.4
Data Analysis
Feature Extraction
According to [52] and [53], the authors have found several different
features and combinations are efficient for EEG­based emotion recognition: power spec­
tral density (PSD), differential entropy (DE), differential asymmetry (DASM), and Event­
Related Desynchronization (ERD) features from EEG. According to five frequency bands:
delta (1­3Hz); theta (4­7Hz); alpha (8­13Hz); beta (14­30Hz); and gamma (31­50Hz), we
Revolutionizing Authentication:
25
==PAGE:34==
compute the traditional PSD features using Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and
Welch’s Method of Averaged Periodograms.
The differential entropy feature is defined as follows [13 Differential entropy feature for
EEG­based emotion classification]:
h(X) = −
Z ∞
−∞
1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

log

1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

dx = −1
2 log(2πeσ2)
, where X submits the Gauss distribution N(µ, σ2), σ is the standard deviation of the EEG
signal segmentation, x is a variable, and π and e are constants.
We compute differential asymmetry (DASM) features as the differences and ratios be­
tween the DE features of asymmetry channels (AF7­AF8, TP9­TP10, TP9­AF7, TP10­
AF8). DASM can be expressed as
DASM = DE(Xleft) −DE(Xright)
and
DCAU = DE(Xfrontal) −DE(Xposterior)
Event­Related Desynchronization (ERD) refers to a decrease in the power of a specific
frequency band of brain waves compared to a baseline. For example, when a person
is engaged in a motor task, there is typically a decrease in the power of alpha (8­13 Hz)
and beta (13­30 Hz) frequencies over the motor cortex. This decrease, or desynchroniza­
tion, signifies increased neural activity in that region. The percentage power decrease or
increase in a particular frequency band from the reference interval (R) to the activation
interval (A) was determined as:
ERD = ([R −A]/R) × 100%
.
Testing Hypothesis 1.1: Control Over EEG Patterns
1. Procedure: Participants will undergo exercises designed to induce concentration or
relaxation states. The EEG patterns during these exercises will be recorded using
the Muse S headband. Participants will also be asked to attempt mimicking another
individual’s EEG pattern after observing it.
2. Data Analysis: Compare EEG patterns during concentration and relaxation exer­
cises with baseline EEG data. Assess whether participants can mimic others’ EEG
patterns by comparing their EEG data to that of the individual they are mimicking.
Use statistical analysis to determine if the changes in EEG patterns are significant.
Testing Hypothesis 1.2: Emotional States Indication
1. Procedure: During each session, participants will be guided to imagine scenar­
ios that elicit happy or sad emotional states. They will then maintain these emo­
tional states while entering a predefined password. EEG and keystroke data will be
recorded simultaneously.
2. Data Analysis: Analyze the EEG data to identify patterns corresponding to happy
and sad states. Use pattern recognition or machine learning algorithms to distin­
guish between these emotional states. Determine if these states consistently corre­
late with specific EEG patterns across different tasks and input methods (keyboard,
mouse, touchpad).
26
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:35==
Testing Hypothesis 1.3: Feasibility of Passive Authentication
1. Procedure: Record resting­state EEG data of participants as they perform passive
tasks (like watching a neutral video or sitting quietly). The data will be used to test
the system’s ability to authenticate users passively.
2. Data Analysis: Assess the variability of resting­state EEG patterns among different
individuals. Use machine learning algorithms to develop a model that can authen­
ticate individuals based on their resting­state EEG data. Evaluate the accuracy of
the model in correctly identifying individuals and its reliability over repeated trials.
4.3
Methodological Approach for Research Question 2:
Stability and Effectiveness of EEG Features
4.3.1
Objective
The focus of this research segment is to examine the stability and effectiveness of EEG
features for authentication purposes. It involves investigating the impact of emotional
states on EEG signal stability, identifying effective features for individual differentiation,
and evaluating the consistency of these features over time. For the second research
question ”Are EEG features effective and stable?”, let’s formulate specific hypotheses
and outline the corresponding data analysis approaches for each sub­question.
4.3.2
Hypotheses
Hypothesis 2.1: Stability of EEG with Emotional Variability The stability of EEG sig­
nals varies significantly with the user’s emotional state, impacting the reliability of EEG­
based authentication systems.
This hypothesis is based on the understanding that emotional states can influence brain
activity, potentially altering EEG patterns.
Hypothesis 2.2: Effective and Stable Features for Individual Differentiation Certain
EEG features (e.g., specific frequency bands, connectivity patterns) are both effective in
distinguishing between individuals and stable over time.
The hypothesis is grounded in the premise that despite the inherent variability of EEG
signals, there are consistent patterns unique to individuals.
Hypothesis 2.3: Feature Relevance in EEG Authentication In EEG­based authenti­
cation systems, static features related to consistent individual neural patterns are more
crucial and stable than dynamic features.
4.3.3
Experimental Design
EEG data were acquired using Muse S Bluetooth­based wireless headband with 4 chan­
nels and keystroke/mouse/touchpad data were acquired using a laptop keyboard/mouse.
Participants:
Recruit a diverse group of individuals with varying levels of experience in
controlling brain activity (e.g., meditation practitioners and novices). Involve participants
with varying levels of proficiency in using keyboards, mice, or touchpads.
This is our Participant Recruitment of experiment settings
• number: 15–30
• gender: male and female
• tasks: 6
Revolutionizing Authentication:
27
==PAGE:36==
• ages: 20–40
• records: 10 for each task, 60 for each participant
Tasks:
In order to investigate neural signatures of different emotions and stable patterns
over time, we design a new emotion experiment to collect EEG data, which is different
from other existing publicly available datasets. In our experiments, we guide the partic­
ipants through language to imagine some sad or happy scenes, and then ask them to
maintain the sad or happy state while entering the password. In each session, the user
was typing a user predefined password 10 times and EEG and keystroke data were ac­
quired simultaneously. Thus, a total of 60 trials were collected per user, summing up to
600 trials for all ten users.
This is our tasks of experiment settings:
• Enrollment with keyboard with happy mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with keyboard with sad mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with mouse with happy mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with mouse with sad mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with happy mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with sad mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with keyboard with happy mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with keyboard with sad mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with mouse with happy mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with mouse with sad mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with happy mood for 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with sad mood for 5 times
4.3.4
Data Analysis
Feature extraction
According to [52] and [53], the authors have found several different features and combi­
nations are efficient for EEG­based emotion recognition: power spectral density (PSD),
differential entropy (DE), differential asymmetry (DASM), and Event­Related Desynchro­
nization (ERD) features from EEG. According to five frequency bands: delta (1­3Hz); theta
(4­7Hz); alpha (8­13Hz); beta (14­30Hz); and gamma (31­50Hz), we compute the tradi­
tional PSD features using Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and Welch’s Method of
Averaged Periodograms.
The differential entropy feature is defined as follows [54]:
h(X) = −
Z ∞
−∞
1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

log

1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

dx = −1
2 log(2πeσ2)
, where X submits the Gauss distribution N(µ, σ2), σ is the standard deviation of the EEG
signal segmentation, x is a variable, and π and e are constants.
28
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:37==
We compute differential asymmetry (DASM) features as the differences and ratios be­
tween the DE features of asymmetry channels (AF7­AF8, TP9­TP10, TP9­AF7, TP10­
AF8). DASM can be expressed as
DASM = DE(Xleft) −DE(Xright)
and
DCAU = DE(Xfrontal) −DE(Xposterior)
Event­Related Desynchronization (ERD) refers to a decrease in the power of a specific
frequency band of brain waves compared to a baseline. For example, when a person
is engaged in a motor task, there is typically a decrease in the power of alpha (8­13 Hz)
and beta (13­30 Hz) frequencies over the motor cortex. This decrease, or desynchroniza­
tion, signifies increased neural activity in that region. The percentage power decrease or
increase in a particular frequency band from the reference interval (R) to the activation
interval (A) was determined as:
ERD = ([R −A]/R) × 100%
.
In addition to the features mentioned above, [55] also examined other features.
Signal Magnitude Area Total (SMAT) was calculated for 5 channels from the first button
is pressed to the final button is released.
SMATchannel =
X
i
|channel_segmenti|
This feature can review the time used by users to input password and also amplitude of
EEG in time domain.
Time domain Coefficient of Variation CVchannel: The mean is calculated as:
mean = 1
n
n
X
i=1
channel_segmenti
The standard deviation is:
std =
v
u
u
t
1
n −1
n
X
i=1
(channel_segmenti −mean)2
The coefficient of variation (CV ) for tp9 is:
CVchannel =
 std
mean

× 100
Feature Selection
To avoid overfitting and to get rid of irrelevant and superfluous features, feature selection
is necessary. The features were ranked according to the importance score obtained from
the feature ranking model. Random Forest is an ensemble of decision trees, which was
used for the feature ranking. It calculates feature ranking using “Gini impurity” or “mean
decrease impurity” [56]. The importance scores of a feature at all the nodes of a decision
tree are calculated and then averaged over all trees.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
29
==PAGE:38==
In a decision tree with child nodes, while partitioning at node m, the decrease in impurity
at node m can be calculated by the following equation,
∆im = im −
a
X
j=1
wjij
∆im is the decrease of impurity at node m. im is the impurity value at node m before
splitting, which can be calculated by Gini impurity, or mean decrease impurity. wj is the
weighted number of samples at node j after split, ij is the impurity value at node j after
split, and The index j ranges from 1 to a, where a is the total number of child nodes
produced from the split of parent node m.
Impurity at node m is calculated by “Gini Impurity Index” which is defined by the following
formula,
im =
C
X
q=1
P(q) ∗(1 −P(q))
C is the total number of classes. P(q) = nq
n , where nq is the number of samples in the
node that belongs to class q, and n is the total number of samples in the node. P(q)
means the proportion of samples in the node that are of class q. For example, if you have
a node with 100 samples, and 30 of those samples are of class q, then P(q) = 30
100 = 30%.
Then the importance of a feature xk is calculated by averaging the decrease of impurity
at all nodes over all trees as shown in the following formula,
Imp(xk) = 1
T
T
X
t=1
N
X
m=1
wm∆im
∆im is the decrease of impurity at node m, wm is the proportion of the training samples
that reach the mth node, and this is used to give more importance to the nodes that are
reached by more samples when calculating the feature importance. N is the total number
of nodes where the feature xk appears, and T is the total number of trees.
We hope that the random forest algorithm can select features that are both important and
consistent. Feature consistency generally refers to whether the importance of a feature
is consistent across different datasets or models. For example, if a feature is considered
important in one random forest model and also deemed important in another, then we
can say that the feature is consistent. This consistency can be achieved in various ways,
including using different training and testing sets for cross­validation, or by increasing
the number of trees while ensuring high accuracy, and reducing the depth of the trees.
In Random Forest, using more trees helps the model generalize because it reduces the
variance in the model’s results due to the variation of individual trees. Each tree is trained
on a different subset of the dataset, so by increasing the number of trees, the results of
different trees can balance each other, thereby improving the robustness of the entire
model. As for the depth of the trees, shallower trees can reduce the risk of model overfit­
ting. The depth of the tree determines the level of detail and complexity of the data that
the model can capture. If the trees are too deep, they might learn noise in the training set,
which does not represent the true distribution of the data, leading to good performance on
the training set but poor performance on unseen data. On the other hand, if the trees are
too shallow, the model might not capture important patterns in the data, leading to under­
fitting. Therefore, finding the appropriate tree depth is key to preventing both overfitting
and underfitting.
30
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:39==
Testing Hypothesis 2.1: Stability of EEG with Emotional Variability
1. Procedure: Participants perform tasks that evoke happy and sad emotional states
while their EEG signals are recorded. Each participant enters a predefined pass­
word using different input methods (keyboard, mouse, touchpad) in both emotional
states.
2. Data Analysis: Analyze the EEG data to identify changes in signal patterns corre­
sponding to the different emotional states. Use statistical methods to determine the
variability and stability of these patterns. Compare EEG patterns during emotional
states with baseline patterns to assess the impact of emotional variability on EEG
signal stability.
Testing Hypothesis 2.2: Effective and Stable Features for Individual Differentiation
1. Procedure: Collect EEG data from participants across different tasks and emotional
states. Ensure that each participant completes the task multiple times to capture
EEG patterns over time.
2. Data Analysis: Identify specific EEG features (like frequency bands or connectivity
patterns) that are consistent across different sessions for the same individual but
distinct between different individuals. Use machine learning algorithms for feature
extraction and classification to evaluate the effectiveness of these features in indi­
vidual differentiation and their stability over time.
Testing Hypothesis 2.3: Feature Relevance in EEG Authentication
1. Procedure: Alongside the standard task performance, analyze the EEG data for
both static (consistent neural patterns) and dynamic (changing with tasks or emo­
tional states) features.
2. Data Analysis: Compare the effectiveness of static and dynamic EEG features in the
context of authentication. Assess which type of features (static or dynamic) provides
more consistent and reliable authentication performance. This can involve machine
learning models trained separately on static and dynamic features and evaluating
their authentication accuracy.
4.4
Methodological Approach for Research Question 3:
Balancing Usability and Security in EEG­Based
Authentication Systems
4.4.1
Objective
The goal of this research segment is to investigate how to achieve an optimal balance
between usability and security in EEG­based authentication systems. This includes ex­
amining the impact of password complexity, comparing different authentication methods
for resilience against security threats, and evaluating time efficiency in system phases.
For the third research question ”How to balance usability and security for EEG­based
authentication systems?”, we can develop specific hypotheses for each sub­question and
outline the corresponding data analysis methods.
4.4.2
Hypotheses
Hypothesis 3.1: Password Length Impact: The success rate of shoulder surfing at­
tacks in compromising EEG­based authentication systems should be very low with any
Revolutionizing Authentication:
31
==PAGE:40==
password length.
Hypothesis 3.2: Authentication Method Efficiency Against Security Threats Differ­
ent EEG­based authentication methods (keyboard, mouse, touchpad) are effective and
necessary against security threats, with some offering better protection against attacks
like shoulder surfing.
The hypothesis assumes that the interaction mode with EEG­based systems influences
both their security efficacy and their usability.
Hypothesis 3.3: Usability of EEG­Based Systems The usability of current EEG­based
authentication systems meets user satisfaction benchmarks, and users accept for regular
use.
Evaluating the time efficiency of EEG­based systems in both enrollment and authentica­
tion phases.
4.4.3
Experimental Design
EEG data were acquired using Muse S Bluetooth­based wireless headband with 4 chan­
nels and keystroke/Mouse/touchpad data were acquired using a laptop keyboard/mouse.
Participants:
Recruit a diverse group of individuals with varying levels of experience in
controlling brain activity (e.g., meditation practitioners and novices). Involve participants
with varying levels of proficiency in using keyboards, mice, or touchpads.
This is our Participant Recruitment of experiment settings
• number: 15–30
• gender: male and female
• tasks: 6
• ages: 20–40
• records: 10 for each task, 60 for each participant
Tasks:
In order to investigate neural signatures of different emotions and stable patterns
over time, we design a new emotion experiment to collect EEG data, which is different
from other existing publicly available datasets. In our experiments, we guide the partic­
ipants through language to imagine some sad or happy scenes, and then ask them to
maintain the sad or happy state while entering the password. In each session, the user
was typing a user predefined password 10 times and EEG and keystroke data were ac­
quired simultaneously. Thus, a total of 60 trials were collected per user, summing up to
600 trials for all ten users.
This is our tasks of experiment settings:
• Enrollment with keyboard with short password (1 character) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with keyboard with medium password (3 characters) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with keyboard with medium password (6 characters) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with keyboard with medium password (12 characters) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with mouse with short password (1 character) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with mouse with medium password (3 characters) for at 5 times
32
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:41==
• Enrollment with mouse with medium password (6 characters) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with mouse with medium password (12 characters) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with short password (1 character) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with medium password (3 characters) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with medium password (6 characters) for at 5 times
• Enrollment with touchpad with medium password (12 characters) for at 5 times
4.4.4
Data Analysis
Testing Hypothesis 3.1: Password Length Impact
This hypothesis evaluates the im­
pact of password length on the success rate of shoulder surfing attacks in EEG­based
authentication systems.
1. Analyze the EEG data for patterns that might be indicative of the password length.
2. Simulate shoulder surfing attacks to determine if the attackers can successfully infer
the passwords based on EEG data.
3. Compare the success rate of these attacks across different password lengths to
assess the impact of password complexity on system security.
Testing Hypothesis 3.2: Authentication Method Efficiency Against Security Threats
This hypothesis examines the effectiveness of different EEG­based authentication meth­
ods against security threats.
1. Evaluate the resilience of each authentication method to the introduced security
threats.
2. Determine which input method offers better protection against these threats based
on the success rate of attacks.
Experiment Setup:
Testing Hypothesis 3.3: Usability of EEG­Based Systems
This hypothesis focuses
on the usability of current EEG­based authentication systems.
1. Analyze the collected feedback to assess user satisfaction and acceptance for reg­
ular use.
2. Evaluate time efficiency by measuring how long it takes participants to complete
each task. Compare these times across different password lengths and input meth­
ods.
3. Consider error rates and ease of use as part of the usability assessment.
4.5
Methodological Approach for Research Question 4:
Unique Advantages of EEG­Based Authentication
4.5.1
Objective
The objective of this part of the research is to identify and evaluate the unique advantages
of EEG­based authentication systems. This includes exploring the feasibility of password­
less and continuous authentication methods, as well as assessing whether these systems
can replace or supplement current mainstream identity authentication methods.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
33
==PAGE:42==
For the fourth research question ”What are the unique advantages of EEG­based au­
thentication?”, let’s formulate specific hypotheses for each sub­question and outline their
corresponding data analysis approaches.
4.5.2
Hypotheses
Hypothesis 4.1: Body Voltage Influence on EEG: Voltage fluctuations in other parts of
the body cause changes in EEG potential.
Hypothesis 4.2: High­Fidelity EEG Synchrony: Voltage changes in parts of the body
other than the brain result in high­fidelity synchronous alterations in EEG recordings, sug­
gesting a strong systemic electrical connectivity within the body.
Hypothesis 4.3: Comparative Advantage Over Traditional Methods EEG­based au­
thentication systems offer significant advantages in specific scenarios (like high­security
environments) over traditional authentication methods in terms of security, user expe­
rience, and adaptability. In addition, TEP based authentication can reach continuous
authentication using EEG is more effective in maintaining security throughout a session
compared to traditional one­time authentication methods.
This hypothesis assumes that the unique characteristics of EEG signals can provide en­
hanced security measures that are hard to replicate with traditional methods.
4.5.3
Experimental Design
EEG data were acquired using Muse S Bluetooth­based wireless headband with 4 chan­
nels and keystroke/Mouse/touchpad data were acquired using a laptop keyboard/mouse.
Participants:
Recruit a diverse group of individuals with varying levels of experience in
controlling brain activity (e.g., meditation practitioners and novices). Involve participants
with varying levels of proficiency in using keyboards, mice, or touchpads.
This is our Participant Recruitment of experiment settings
• number: 15–30
• gender: male and female
• tasks: 6
• ages: 20–40
• records: 10 for each task, 60 for each participant
Tasks:
In order to investigate neural signatures of different emotions and stable patterns
over time, we design a new emotion experiment to collect EEG data, which is different
from other existing publicly available datasets. In our experiments, we guide the partic­
ipants through language to imagine some sad or happy scenes, and then ask them to
maintain the sad or happy state while entering the password. In each session, the user
was typing a user predefined password 10 times and EEG and keystroke data were ac­
quired simultaneously. Thus, a total of 60 trials were collected per user, summing up to
600 trials for all ten users.
This is our tasks of experiment settings:
• Enrollment while remaining still for at 10 times
• Enrollment with electrified button interaction for at 10 times
34
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:43==
4.5.4
Data Analysis
Testing Hypothesis 4.1: Body Voltage Influence on EEG
1. Analyze the EEG data for stable, baseline brainwave patterns. This data will serve
as a control for comparing with the EEG data acquired during the electrified button
interaction.
2. Compare the EEG data from this task with the baseline data from Task 1. Look for
changes in EEG potential that synchronize with the timing of the electrical stimulus.
Testing Hypothesis 4.2: High­Fidelity EEG Synchrony
Determine if there is a con­
sistent, systemic electrical connectivity within the body as reflected by synchronous EEG
alterations.
Testing Hypothesis 4.3: Comparative Advantage Over Traditional Methods
Com­
pare the security effectiveness, user experience, and adaptability of EEG­based systems
against traditional methods. Evaluate if continuous EEG authentication maintains better
security throughout a session.
4.6
Ethical Considerations
1. Informed Consent: Clearly communicate the nature of the experiments and obtain
informed consent from all participants.
2. Data Privacy and Security: Adhere to stringent data protection standards to safe­
guard sensitive EEG and personal data.
3. Comfort and Safety: Ensure that the use of EEG equipment and participation in
various tasks do not cause discomfort or pose risks to participants.
4.7
Data Collection and Analysis Tools
4.7.1
Data collection equipment
The EEG collection tool we use is called Muse S, developed by by Interaxon Inc 1. Muse
is a next­generation, state of the art EEG system that uses advanced algorithms to train
beginner and intermediate meditators at controlling their focus and offers non­invasive
sleep interventions that work.
Figure 4.1: Appearance of Muse S
1https://choosemuse.com/products/muse-s-gen-2
Revolutionizing Authentication:
35
==PAGE:44==
As shown in the figure 4.1, unlike traditional headsets or head caps, Muse S is a elastic
headband with EEG sensors. Although Muse S can only collection 4­channel EEG data,
it is super portable and comfortable for users to use, thus we want to explore its potential
as a user authentication device.
Muse S uses 10­10 system to describe its channels. The 10­10 system is an interna­
tionally recognized method for placing EEG (Electroencephalography) electrodes on the
scalp. Figure 4.2 shows the electrode placement in 10­10 system and the 4 channels
we used to collect EEG data: AF7, AF8, TP9, TP10. The default sampling rate of the
MuseS headband is 256 Hz. TP stands for temporal lobe, which is involved in auditory
processing and is also important for the formation of long­term memory. AF stands for
Anterior Frontal, which means the electrode is placed in the frontal region of the scalp,
but more anterior than the traditional Frontal (F) locations. This area of the brain is mainly
associated with higher cognitive functions, such as decision making, problem­solving,
consciousness, and emotions.
Figure 4.2: EEG channels for data collection
4.7.2
Data Collection Software
Overview of the System
The data collection software we use is Muse LSL, which is based on this GitHub reposi­
tory 2. Muse LSL is a Python package for streaming, visualizing, and recording EEG data
from the Muse devices developed by InteraXon. Lab Streaming Layer or LSL is a system
designed to unify the collection of time series data for research experiments. It has be­
come standard in the field of EEG­based brain­computer interfaces for its ability to make
seperate streams of data available on a network with time synchronization and near real­
time access. The value of LSL comes in the fact that you can synchronize multiple data
2https://github.com/alexandrebarachant/muse-lsl
36
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:45==
streams from different sampling at different frequencies. Thus I can integrate stream data
from keyboard or mouse recorder alongside EEG for our experiment, and LSL ensures
that both data streams will be synchronized.
Figure 4.3: LSL network overview
As shown in figure 4.3, the Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) serves as a central hub, integrating
data from a diverse array of biometric sensors—including EEG headbands, physiological
monitors and user inputs from devices like keyboards. LSL timestamps and aligns data
from all these sources, enabling precise correlations and analyses of complex interactions
among physiological signals. Additionally, it supports real­time data viewing and record­
ing, which is essential for monitoring experiment progress and ensuring data quality. The
framework is particularly advantageous in fields such as neuroscience, psychology, and
human­computer interaction, where simultaneous data acquisition from various sensors
is crucial for comprehensive analysis and development of applications like user authenti­
cation systems.
4.7.3
Implementation of Keyboard Recorder
In order to do multimodal experiments, we have to implement a keyboard recorder, which
is not implemented in the original repository. Here we use PsychoPy library writen in
Python. PsychoPy provides graphical user interface (GUI) to present a wide range of
stimuli, including visual (text, images, videos, shapes) and auditory (tones, words, mu­
sic), and it can handle complex timing and presentation sequences. In addition, Psy­
choPy contains modules that can accurately collect a variety of response types, including
keyboard and mouse responses, vocal responses (via microphone), and responses from
specialized hardware like button boxes or eye trackers.
4.7.4
Implementation of Real­time Viewer
For better observe the real­time EEG data, we want to show the real­time Power Spectral
Density (PSD) of EEG, which is not implemented in the original repository. PSD is a mea­
sure of the power present in an EEG signal as a function of frequency, and it’s particularly
useful for identifying dominant rhythms and assessing changes in brain activity across
different mental states or tasks.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.4: Default viewer of EEG in time domain
Figure 4.5: Our implemented viewer of PSD of EEG
4.7.5
Implementation of Recording Program
The biggest challenge in implementing the recording program is that all events and time
series must be timestamped and recorded together, with the same timing reference, to be
analyzable.
Figure 4.6 shows the overview of our extended Muse LSL for data recording.
38
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.6: Our extended Muse LSL for data recording
Steam CLI is used to start streaming EEG data if any Muse S device is connected. Record
CLI is used to launch data recorder to streaming Keyboard/Mouse data. User can choose
whether to record Mouse data or keyboard data. Then the Keyboard/Mouse streaming
data will be added as marker of EEG data. Since the sample rate of EEG and Keyboard­
/Mouse are different, there is always the case that certain timestamp of keyboard/mouse
data cannot find an EEG data with the exactly same timestamp. In order to handle this
case, we first buffer the EEG data for about 100ms, so that we can search the nearest
timestamp in the buffered EEG data, and add the keyboard/mouse data as marker to the
EEG data with the nearest timestamp.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
39
==PAGE:48==
These are the GUIs we designed to enter the passwords with keyboard or mouse.
Figure 4.7: GUI of keyboard input
Figure 4.8: GUI of mouse input
The GUI with mouse requires users to drag button with certain letter and drop it in to green
area to realize password input.
These are the sample data set we collect we our extended data recorder.
40
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.9: recorded data with keyboard input
Revolutionizing Authentication:
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.10: recorded data with mouse input
The G column of keyboard data shows which button the user is pressing. The G, H, I
column of mouse data shows the mouse x location, y location, and which letter is choosing
respectively.
42
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:51==
5
System Design
5.1
Adversary Model
• Man In The Middle Attack (MITM): A Man­in­the­Middle (MITM) attack is a type
of cyber attack where an unauthorized actor intercepts, relays, and may alter com­
munications between two parties who believe they are directly communicating with
each other. The attacker can capture and store any transmitted data, such as login
credentials, personal information, or sensitive business data.
• Mimic Attack: In a mimic attack, adversaries observe the entire process of user
enrollment and then attempt to imitate the user’s actions. Their goal is to regenerate
a key that closely resembles the original, thereby gaining unauthorized access.
• Replay Attack: In a replay attack, an unauthorized attacker intercepts and records
a legitimate message exchanged between two devices that are in the process of
pairing. The attacker then replays this captured message at a later time, either
to gain unauthorized access to the system or to initiate actions that the original
message was intended to trigger.
• Brute Force Attack: In a brute­force attack targeting an encrypted message inter­
cepted during a Man­in­the­Middle (MITM) attack, the attacker systematically tries
all possible decryption keys or passwords until the correct one is found. Rather than
exploiting any specific vulnerabilities in the encryption algorithm, the attacker relies
on sheer trial and error, testing every conceivable key until the original message is
successfully decrypted.
5.2
Design Goals
To address the threats and challenges we have identified, we have set the following goals
that our proposed EEG­based authentication system aims to achieve:
• Security: All transmitted data should be encrypted and designed in such a way
that attackers cannot easily decrypt it. Additionally, the scheme should have the
capability to detect any tampering with the transmitted data.
• Usability: The time required for both the enrollment and authentication stages
should be minimal, and the process should demand low effort from the user.
• Lightweight: The scheme should be resource­efficient, requiring minimal compu­
tational resources, as part of the system will be integrated into BCI devices.
5.3
System Design of BEP­based Authentication
In this section, we provide a detailed overview of the key technological modules of BEP,
ranging from identical sequence generation to identity verification.
5.3.1
Data Collection
After receiving an authentication request, the user enter his password through keyboard,
, which serves as the source of a shared secret to establish the initial secure session. The
workstation records the timestamps of button presses and releases, while the BCI device
captures variations in voltage potential over time.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
43
==PAGE:52==
Temporal Alignment
Given that the devices independently sample EEG and keyboard
data, temporal alignment becomes necessary.
We employ an event­based approach
where both devices detect the onset of the first pressing event and use this as a basis to
segment the data. This approach eliminates the need for explicit time synchronization be­
tween the devices, under the assumption that they are equipped with sufficiently accurate
real­time clocks to ensure alignment within the detected active segments.
Entropy of Sensor Data
During the enrollment phase, the workstation continuously
calculates the resulting entropy of the collected keyboard data. If the entropy is found
to be insufficiently high at the end of the enrollment process, users will be prompted to
undergo the enrollment process again.
5.3.2
Data Processing
• Scaling: The EEG data is scaled within a specific range (e.g., 0 to 1) to reduce
computational resource consumption during model training.
• Segmentation: The continuous EEG data is divided into segments, each with a
specific window size (W). Each segment or window is then decoded into a number
belonging to the set {0, 1, 2} by our transformer auto­encoder.
Unlike traditional EEG­based authentication methods, we do not require filtering of arti­
facts caused by eye blinks or facial muscle movements, nor do we require noise filtering
of irrelevant brainwave bands. According to our experimental results, the changes in
brainwaves induced by KEP are sufficiently distinct to allow for accurate decoding.
5.3.3
Auto­encoder Training
We employ the standard transformer model, as described by Vaswani et al. [57], to serve
as our auto­encoder. The structure of the model is depicted in Fig 5.1.
Figure 5.1: The flowchart of the Transformer Auto­encoder.
In our configuration, we set d_model to 4, as the BCI device is limited to detecting data
from four channels: AF7, AF8, TP9, and TP10. The architecture comprises four main
layers: the Encoder Layer, the Decoder Layer, the Fully Connected Layer, and the Sig­
moid Layer. The Encoder Layer processes the input sequence to create a ’memory’ that
encapsulates the contextual information of the input. This memory is subsequently uti­
lized by the Decoder Layer. The Encoder Layer is composed of multi­head self­attention
mechanisms and feed­forward neural networks. We set the number of attention heads to
2, as it must be a factor of d_model, which in this case is 4.
The Decoder Layer receives the ’memory’ from the Encoder Layer and generates the
output sequence. During training, it can also accept an additional ’target’ sequence as
44
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:53==
input. The Fully Connected (FC) Layer serves to map the output of the Decoder Layer to
the desired output shape. In this case, it maps each position in the sequence to a single
value (scalar). The Sigmoid Layer then maps any real­valued number to the range of
0,1,2. Finally, the hash module takes the tensor output from the transformer model and
generates the session key.
5.3.4
Encrypted Key Exchange
If both devices require the key for secure communication, they can utilize a key agree­
ment protocol to ensure that both possess the same key without having to transmit it
directly. Specifically, we employ the Diffie­Hellman Encrypted Key Exchange [58], which
is an example of a Balanced Password­Authenticated Key Exchange (PAKE) protocol (as
illustrated in Fig 5.2). Following parameters are used in this method of key generation:
Figure 5.2: Diffie Hellman EKE
• p: a big prime, called the ”modulus”
• q: a divisor of p −1, called the ”subgroup order”
• g: ”generator” an integer modulo p of order q (this means that the smallest integer
k > 0 such that gk = 1 mod p is k = q)
• X and Y: random numbers chosen separately by the two parties
The basic idea is to use the shared secret key ssk to protect the public key swap of
Revolutionizing Authentication:
45
==PAGE:54==
Diffie­Hellman Key Exchange. Only the one who possesses the key ssk can encrypt
and decrypt the ciphertexts. If A and B pass key verification successfully, then a secure
channel has been established between A and B. Otherwise, the device pairing process
restarts, looping through the pipeline until a shared secret key is successfully generated.
5.4
Usecase 1: Key Renewal
In the event that a key is compromised, it is imperative to initiate a key renewal process
to maintain the security of the system. The process is as follows:
1. Compromised Key Detection: The system or user finds or is notified that the current
authentication key may have been compromised.
2. Initiate EEG­based Authentication: The user undergoes EEG­based authentication
to confirm their identity before a key renewal process can commence.
3. Start New Enrollment Stage: Upon successful authentication, the system begins a
new enrollment phase to capture the user’s unique EEG patterns.
4. Run Key Renewal Protocol: A secure protocol is executed to generate a new cryp­
tographic key based on the newly enrolled EEG patterns.
5. New Key Generation: The system finalizes the new key generation, ensuring that the
user’s EEG patterns are correctly mapped to the new cryptographic key.
The newly generated key replaces the compromised key, restoring the security of the
system and ensuring that the user’s access remains protected by their unique neurological
patterns.
5.5
Usecase 2: Key Recovery
The loss of an EEG authentication headband entails the loss of the associated crypto­
graphic key. To recover the original key and ensure continued secure access, the follow­
ing recovery procedure is implemented:
1. Report Loss: The user reports the loss of the headband to the system administrators
or through the system’s user interface.
2. Authentication with EEG­based biometrics: The user is authenticated based on
EEG­based biometrics. This step confirms the user’s identity and authorizes them to
proceed with key recovery.
3. New Enrollment Stage: Upon successful authentication, the system initiates a new
enrollment phase. The user is required to undergo the EEG data capture process
again with a replacement headband.
4. Signal Generation: The system generates the same signals that were used in the
original enrollment, ensuring that the EEG patterns captured produce the same cryp­
tographic key.
5. Key Regeneration: With the consistent EEG signals, the device regenerates the orig­
inal key, thereby granting the user access with the new headband as if it were the
original.
This process ensures that the user’s access is seamlessly maintained even in the event
of physical loss of the authentication device, leveraging the uniqueness of EEG signals
to securely recover the original key.
46
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:55==
6
Evaluation
6.1
Goals
In this section, we show our results to test the hypothesises we raised in Chapter 4 and
then assess the performance of our proposed BEP protocol for EEG­based authentication.
The objectives of the BEP assesment are threefold: 1) to assess the scheme’s security
against various types of adversarial attacks and to evaluate the length of the generated
keys; 2) to determine the optimal key parameters, including the length of the input data
and the window size (W); 3) to identify the optimal hyperparameters, including the number
of attention heads, encoder layers, and decoder layers.
6.2
Methodology
6.2.1
Data Collection
The dataset used for evaluating the performance of the proposed system comprises 10
subjects (5 males and 5 females). As illustrated in Figure 6.1, we collect EEG data from
the following channels according to the EEG 10­10 system: AF7, AF8, TP9, TP10. The
default sampling rate of the MuseS headband is 256 Hz. During the data collection phase,
Figure 6.1: EEG channels for data collection
participants were instructed to wear the BCI device and type randomly on the keyboard
for approximately 30 seconds at a normal speed (fewer than 10 keystrokes per second).
Data collection was conducted under both reasonable and slightly unreasonable wearing
conditions to capture different scenarios in practical use. Each subject was asked to
repeat the random typing process five times.
6.2.2
Feature extraction
According to [52] and [53], the authors have found several different features and combi­
nations are efficient for EEG­based emotion recognition: power spectral density (PSD),
differential entropy (DE), differential asymmetry (DASM), and Event­Related Desynchro­
nization (ERD) features from EEG. According to five frequency bands: delta (1­3Hz); theta
Revolutionizing Authentication:
47
==PAGE:56==
(4­7Hz); alpha (8­13Hz); beta (14­30Hz); and gamma (31­50Hz), we compute the tradi­
tional PSD features using Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and Welch’s Method of
Averaged Periodograms.
The differential entropy feature is defined as follows [13 Differential entropy feature for
EEG­based emotion classification]:
h(X) = −
Z ∞
−∞
1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

log

1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

dx = −1
2 log(2πeσ2)
, where X submits the Gauss distribution N(µ, σ2), σ is the standard deviation of the EEG
signal segmentation, x is a variable, and π and e are constants.
We compute differential asymmetry (DASM) features as the differences and ratios be­
tween the DE features of asymmetry channels (AF7­AF8, TP9­TP10, TP9­AF7, TP10­
AF8). DASM can be expressed as
DASM = DE(Xleft) −DE(Xright)
and
DCAU = DE(Xfrontal) −DE(Xposterior)
Event­Related Desynchronization (ERD) refers to a decrease in the power of a specific
frequency band of brain waves compared to a baseline. For example, when a person
is engaged in a motor task, there is typically a decrease in the power of alpha (8­13 Hz)
and beta (13­30 Hz) frequencies over the motor cortex. This decrease, or desynchroniza­
tion, signifies increased neural activity in that region. The percentage power decrease or
increase in a particular frequency band from the reference interval (R) to the activation
interval (A) was determined as:
ERD = ([R −A]/R) × 100%
.
In addition to the features mentioned above, [55] also examined other features.
Signal Magnitude Area Total (SMAT) was calculated for 5 channels from the first button
is pressed to the final button is released.
SMATchannel =
X
i
|channel_segmenti|
This feature can review the time used by users to input password and also amplitude of
EEG in time domain.
Time domain Coefficient of Variation CVchannel: The mean is calculated as:
mean = 1
n
n
X
i=1
channel_segmenti
The standard deviation is:
std =
v
u
u
t
1
n −1
n
X
i=1
(channel_segmenti −mean)2
The coefficient of variation (CV ) for certain channel is:
CVchannel =
 std
mean

× 100
48
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:57==
6.2.3
Feature Selection
To avoid overfitting and to get rid of irrelevant and superfluous features, feature selection
is necessary. The features were ranked according to the importance score obtained from
the feature ranking model. Random Forest is an ensemble of decision trees, which was
used for the feature ranking. It calculates feature ranking using “Gini impurity” or “mean
decrease impurity” [56]. The importance scores of a feature at all the nodes of a decision
tree are calculated and then averaged over all trees.
In a decision tree with child nodes, while partitioning at node m, the decrease in impurity
at node m can be calculated by the following equation,
∆im = im −
a
X
j=1
wjij
∆im is the decrease of impurity at node m. im is the impurity value at node m before
splitting, which can be calculated by Gini impurity, or mean decrease impurity. wj is the
weighted number of samples at node j after split, ij is the impurity value at node j after
split, and The index j ranges from 1 to a, where a is the total number of child nodes
produced from the split of parent node m.
Impurity at node m is calculated by “Gini Impurity Index” which is defined by the following
formula,
im =
C
X
q=1
P(q) ∗(1 −P(q))
C is the total number of classes. P(q) = nq
n , where nq is the number of samples in the
node that belongs to class q, and n is the total number of samples in the node. P(q)
means the proportion of samples in the node that are of class q. For example, if you have
a node with 100 samples, and 30 of those samples are of class q, then P(q) = 30
100 = 30%.
Then the importance of a feature xk is calculated by averaging the decrease of impurity
at all nodes over all trees as shown in the following formula,
Imp(xk) = 1
T
T
X
t=1
N
X
m=1
wm∆im
∆im is the decrease of impurity at node m, wm is the proportion of the training samples
that reach the mth node, and this is used to give more importance to the nodes that are
reached by more samples when calculating the feature importance. N is the total number
of nodes where the feature xk appears, and T is the total number of trees.
We hope that the random forest algorithm can select features that are both important and
consistent. Feature consistency generally refers to whether the importance of a feature
is consistent across different datasets or models. For example, if a feature is considered
important in one random forest model and also deemed important in another, then we
can say that the feature is consistent. This consistency can be achieved in various ways,
including using different training and testing sets for cross­validation, or by increasing
the number of trees while ensuring high accuracy, and reducing the depth of the trees.
In Random Forest, using more trees helps the model generalize because it reduces the
variance in the model’s results due to the variation of individual trees. Each tree is trained
on a different subset of the dataset, so by increasing the number of trees, the results of
different trees can balance each other, thereby improving the robustness of the entire
Revolutionizing Authentication:
49
==PAGE:58==
model. As for the depth of the trees, shallower trees can reduce the risk of model overfit­
ting. The depth of the tree determines the level of detail and complexity of the data that
the model can capture. If the trees are too deep, they might learn noise in the training set,
which does not represent the true distribution of the data, leading to good performance on
the training set but poor performance on unseen data. On the other hand, if the trees are
too shallow, the model might not capture important patterns in the data, leading to under­
fitting. Therefore, finding the appropriate tree depth is key to preventing both overfitting
and underfitting.
6.3
Validation of Hypotheses
6.3.1
Hypothesis 1.1 Testing
Hypothesis 1.1: Individuals can learn and demonstrate control over specific EEG pat­
terns through concentration or relaxation exercises, and the change can be obvious enough
to mimic others’ EEG patterns.
Channels
Sad
Happy
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
AF7_theta
32.1
4.6
37.1
8.3
AF7_alpha
19.6
5.1
24.1
9.5
AF7_beta
49.5
5.6
73.2
23.3
AF7_gamma
115.3
9.8
114.0
34.6
TP9_theta
124.5
22.1
160.3
41.1
TP9_alpha
35.5
6.1
52.0
5.6
TP9_beta
155.6
16.4
174.1
44.5
TP9_gamma
109.3
11.3
104.1
12.6
Table 6.1: Average PSD values across channels in different channels, frequency bands,
and emotion states.
This table displays the average Power Spectral Density (PSD) of EEG across different
channels and frequency bands when the user is in a state of happiness and sadness
respectively. Happy and sad are two extreme emotional states, which are used to help
estimate PSD change boundaries. An increase in mean PSD values from ’Sad’ to ’Happy’
could suggest a higher level of brain activity in the corresponding frequency band when
the subject is happy. While the standard deviation values show the variability of the PSD
measurements around the mean. Larger Std values indicate more variability in the EEG
signal’s power within that frequency band. As a conclusion, users can control EEG pat­
terns themselves, but the change in PSD (Power Spectral Density) of EEG is limited and
difficult for attackers to mimic others’ EEG, unless the EEG distributions of two people are
very similar to begin with.
6.3.2
Hypothesis 1.2 Testing
Hypothesis 1.2: EEG signals can reliably indicate emotional states (happy or sad) during
a mental task (like imagining a password), and these emotional states are reflected in
distinguishable EEG patterns.
50
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:59==
Emotion
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
support
Happy
0.88
0.92
0.88
0.90
44
Sad
0.88
0.84
0.89
0.86
44
Table 6.2: Emotion Recognition Results.
Considering the high values of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1­score for both emotions,
the hypothesis that EEG signals can reliably indicate emotional states (happy or sad)
during a mental task like imagining a password seems to be supported by the table 6.2.
The results indicate that these emotional states are indeed reflected in distinguishable
EEG patterns with a high degree of reliability.
6.3.3
Hypothesis 1.3 Testing
Hypothesis 1.3: Feasibility of passive authentication: Passive authentication using EEG
is feasible and can achieve high accuracy.
subject id
Precision
Recall
F1­score
support
subject_0
0.94
1.00
0.97
44
subject_1
1.00
1.00
1.00
44
subject_2
1.00
0.78
0.88
44
subject_3
0.77
1.00
0.86
44
subject_4
1.00
1.00
1.00
44
subject_5
0.86
1.00
0.92
44
subject_6
1.00
0.75
0.86
44
subject_7
1.00
1.00
1.00
44
subject_8
1.00
0.77
0.73
44
subject_9
1.00
1.00
1.00
44
Table 6.3: Classification result without typing password
According to the table 6.3, most subjects have precision and recall values of 1.00, indicat­
ing perfect performance in correctly identifying true positive cases and not misclassifying
negative cases. The F1­score, which is a harmonic mean of precision and recall, is also
1.00 for the majority of subjects, suggesting a highly accurate balance between precision
and recall. Given these results, the data suggests that passive authentication using EEG
is highly feasible and can achieve high accuracy for the majority of subjects. However,
there are a few subjects (subject_2, subject_3, subject_5, subject_6, and subject_8) with
lower scores in at least one metric, indicating some variability in the system’s performance.
Overall, the system appears to be highly effective but may require further refinement to
ensure consistent accuracy across all individuals.
6.3.4
Hypothesis 2.1 Testing
Hypothesis 2.1: The stability of EEG signals varies significantly with the user’s emotional
state, impacting the reliability of EEG­based authentication systems.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
51
==PAGE:60==
Channels
Sad
Happy
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
AF7_theta
32.1
4.6
37.1
8.3
AF7_alpha
19.6
5.1
24.1
9.5
AF7_beta
49.5
5.6
73.2
23.3
AF7_gamma
115.3
9.8
114.0
34.6
TP9_theta
124.5
22.1
160.3
41.1
TP9_alpha
35.5
6.1
52.0
5.6
TP9_beta
155.6
16.4
174.1
44.5
TP9_gamma
109.3
11.3
104.1
12.6
Table 6.4: Average PSD values across channels in different channels, frequency bands,
and emotion states.
This table displays the average Power Spectral Density (PSD) of EEG across different
channels and frequency bands when the user is in a state of happiness and sadness
respectively. Happy and sad are two extreme emotional states, which are used to help
estimate PSD change boundaries. An increase in mean PSD values from ’Sad’ to ’Happy’
could suggest a higher level of brain activity in the corresponding frequency band when
the subject is happy. Larger Std values indicate more variability in the EEG signal’s power
within that frequency band. Based on the provided data, the hypothesis 2.1 seems to be
supported. The differences in the mean PSD values between Sad and Happy states,
along with the variability (standard deviation), suggest that EEG patterns do indeed vary
with emotional states. This variability could impact the reliability of EEG­based systems
used for authentication, as the system would need to account for these changes to ac­
curately verify users’ identities. Thus, if we want to EEG as biometric information, we
suggest that users should keep in a sad or calm mood during the authentication.
6.3.5
Hypothesis 2.2 and 2.3 Testing
Hypothesis 2.2: Effective and Stable Features for Individual Differentiation Certain
EEG features (e.g., specific frequency bands, connectivity patterns) are both effective and
stable in distinguishing between individuals.
Hypothesis 2.3: Feature Relevance in EEG Authentication In EEG­based authenti­
cation systems, static features related to consistent individual neural patterns are more
crucial and stable than dynamic features.
52
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:61==
rank
feature
importance
0
gamma_power_tp9
0.048882
1
gamma_power_af7
0.042603
2
gamma_power_af8
0.038632
3
beta_power_af7
0.036869
4
avg_DASM_ft
0.035716
5
CV_af7
0.034075
6
gamma_power_tp10
0.030817
7
beta_power_tp9
0.028931
8
SMAT_af7
0.027263
9
theta_power_tp9
0.026247
10
CV_tp9
0.025947
11
CV_gamma_power_tp9
0.025285
12
beta_power_af8
0.024846
13
theta_power_tp10
0.024716
14
SMAT_tp9
0.023279
15
CV_gamma_power_af7
0.022192
16
alpha_power_tp9
0.021923
17
alpha_power_tp10
0.021138
18
avg_DE_frontal
0.019459
19
CV_af8
0.018675
20
CV_gamma_power_tp10
0.018656
Table 6.5: Top 30 features of Keyboard input
rank
feature
importance
0
gamma_power_tp9
0.047177
1
avg_DASM_lr
0.045358
2
gamma_power_af7
0.042663
3
CV_af7
0.040288
4
gamma_power_tp10
0.039477
5
beta_power_af7
0.039018
6
gamma_power_af8
0.033353
7
CV_tp10
0.031214
8
theta_power_af7
0.031021
9
SMAT_tp9
0.030548
10
CV_tp9
0.029615
11
SMAT_tp10
0.028188
12
avg_DASM_ft
0.027971
13
beta_power_tp10
0.027295
14
CV_gamma_power_tp10
0.025916
15
alpha_power_af7
0.024658
16
delta_power_af7
0.024644
17
beta_power_af8
0.023098
18
CV_gamma_power_af7
0.022461
19
delta_power_tp9
0.021819
Table 6.6: Top 20 features of Mouse input
Revolutionizing Authentication:
53
==PAGE:62==
rank
feature
importance
0
beta_power_af8
0.044379
1
gamma_power_tp9
0.041852
2
gamma_power_af8
0.035126
3
gamma_power_tp10
0.034604
4
gamma_power_af7
0.033169
5
CV_tp9
0.033097
6
CV_tp10
0.030707
7
SMAT_tp10
0.030216
8
CV_af7
0.029895
9
SMAT_af7
0.029723
10
beta_power_af7
0.028506
11
beta_power_tp9
0.024928
12
theta_power_tp10
0.024026
13
beta_power_tp10
0.023890
14
CV_af8
0.023431
15
CV_theta_power_tp10
0.022236
16
theta_power_af7
0.021245
17
SMAT_tp9
0.020316
18
CV_gamma_power_tp10
0.019174
19
alpha_power_af7
0.017998
Table 6.7: Top 20 features of Touchpad input
We can get some insights based on the Table 6.5, 6.6. and 6.7:
1. Gamma Power Features: Feature gamma_power_tp9 is ranked highly in all three
tables (rank 0, 0, and 1 respectively). Feature gamma_power_af7 also appears in
all tables within the top three features.
2. Beta Power Features: Feature beta_power_af7 is prominent in the keyboard and
mouse tables. Feature beta_power_af8 is present in both keyboard and touchpad
tables, though with a lower rank in the touchpad table.
3. Coefficients of Variation (CV): CV_af7 is another feature appearing across all
three tables, indicating variability in the af7 channel is consistently important. CV_tp9
also appears in all tables, though with varying ranks.
4. Dynamic Features: avg_DASM_ft and SMAT features (indicative of asymmetry
and mean absolute values, respectively) show up multiple times across tables but
not as consistently as gamma power features.
5. Most Important and Stable Features: Based on the repeated appearance and
high ranks, gamma_power_tp9 and gamma_power_af7 can be considered the most
important and stable features across different input methods. The consistency of
these features at the top suggests that gamma power is a significant indicator for
EEG­based authentication systems, regardless of the input method used.
Conclusion
The repeated prominence of gamma power features in the EEG data across
various input methods (keyboard, mouse, touchpad) suggests that these features are both
important for the model’s predictive capabilities and stable across different types of user
54
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:63==
interaction. The consistent ranking of these features implies that they hold a key role in
distinguishing EEG patterns and can be crucial for the development of robust EEG­based
authentication systems.
The variability in the ranking of avg_DASM_ft and SMAT across different input methods
suggests that while dynamic features do play a role in EEG­based authentication, they
may not be as stable or crucial as static features such as gamma_power and beta_power,
which consistently rank at the top. This observation could be seen as partial support
for Hypothesis 2.3, suggesting that static features related to consistent individual neural
patterns are indeed more crucial and stable for EEG­based authentication than dynamic
features, which may vary with context or over time.
6.3.6
Hypothesis 3.1 and 3.2 Testing
Hypothesis 3.1: Password Length Impact: The success rate of shoulder surfing at­
tacks in compromising EEG­based authentication systems should be very low with any
password length.
Hypothesis 3.2: Authentication Method Efficiency Against Security Threats Differ­
ent EEG­based authentication methods (keyboard, mouse, touchpad) are effective and
necessary against security threats, with some offering better protection against attacks
like shoulder surfing.
password length (char)
Precision
Recall
F1­score
support
12
1.00
1.00
1.00
44
6
1.00
1.00
1.00
44
3
1.00
1.00
0.96
44
1
0.96
1.00
0.97
44
Table 6.8: Authentication Performance across different Password Length
The table 6.8 shows that for password lengths of 12, 6, and 3 characters, both precision
and recall are perfect (1.00), resulting in an F1­score of 1.00 as well. For a password
length of 1 character, precision decreases slightly to 0.96, but recall remains perfect at
1.00, leading to an F1­score of 0.97. Based on these results, the hypothesis 3.1 appears
to be largely validated. The high precision and recall across all password lengths indicate
that the authentication system can reliably distinguish between genuine and fraudulent
attempts.
The slight drop in precision for a 1­character password suggests a marginal increase in
false positives but not to a degree that significantly compromises the system’s overall
effectiveness. The recall of 1.00 across all password lengths indicates that genuine at­
tempts are consistently recognized regardless of password length.
Therefore, the hypothesis stands validated, as the success of shoulder surfing attacks
remains low across all tested password lengths, with only a minor decrease in precision
for the shortest length.
In addition, since password length has little impact on performance, multi­modal authen­
tication methods (keyboard, mouse, touchpad) may not be necessary, as they offer mini­
mal accuracy improvement while significantly increasing user effort. Conversely, using a
keyboard, mouse, or touchpad can indeed increase the success rate of shoulder surfing
attacks. Therefore, Hypothesis 3.2 is proven to be false.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
55
==PAGE:64==
6.3.7
Hypothesis 3.3 Testing
Hypothesis 3.3: Usability of EEG­Based Systems The usability of current EEG­based
authentication systems meets user satisfaction benchmarks, and users accept for regular
use.
Upon concluding the experiment, I solicited feedback from the participants regarding their
experience with the multi­modal and passive EEG­based authentication system. The ma­
jority of participants acknowledged the novelty of EEG authentication; however, they iden­
tified no discernible benefits when contrasted with conventional authentication modalities
such as biometric or password­based systems. They observed that the enrollment pro­
cess was somewhat protracted, akin to that of biometric systems. Additionally, it was
noted that while users are necessitated to replicate a consistent input pattern, akin to a
signature, there is also a requisite to remain motionless during the password entry phase.
In summation, the user experience was deemed suboptimal, and a predominant share of
participants expressed reluctance to incur additional expenditures for the adoption of an
alternative biometric system.
6.3.8
Hypothesis 4.1 Testing
Hypothesis 4.1: Body Voltage Influence on EEG: The potential changes in a finger
touching an electrified button will be reflected synchronously in EEG recordings, with mea­
surable changes in EEG signal amplitude and frequency components
As illustrated in Figure 6.2, the hypothesis 4.1 has been validated through observation;
noticeable changes in EEG were evident when the electrified button with a voltage around
12V was touched. This could potentially be due to the direct electrical influence on the
body, which affects the voltage potentials measured by the EEG.
Figure 6.2: Observed Potential Change in EEG
As shown in Figure 6.3, the appearance of harmonics around 110 Hz in the EEG could
be analyzed in terms of resonance phenomena or electrical interference. Human bioelec­
trical activity typically ranges below 100 Hz, so harmonics at 110 Hz might suggest an
external electrical influence, such as from the electrified button. These harmonics could
be considered for encoding features as they represent a distinct and consistent pattern
that correlates with a specific external event (touching the electrified button). The pres­
ence of such harmonics in the EEG data could serve as a novel biomarker for interactions
56
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:65==
with electrical devices and could be utilized in more sophisticated EEG analysis and in
developing new interfaces that respond to bioelectrical signals.
Figure 6.3: Observed harmonics in EEG
6.3.9
Hypothesis 4.2 Testing
Hypothesis 4.2: High­Fidelity EEG Synchrony: Voltage changes in parts of the body
other than the brain result in high­fidelity synchronous alterations in EEG recordings, sug­
gesting a strong systemic electrical connectivity within the body.
The bit agreement rate represents the percentage of bits that match in the secret keys
generated by both parties. This metric is used to evaluate the likelihood of Alice and Bob
agreeing on the same key. In our experiments, we set the key length to 256 bits and
aim to train the transformer auto­encoder to identify the simplest model that can achieve
a validation loss lower than 0.001. The results depicted in the figure 6.4 relate to the
training of a transformer auto­encoder model, showing total loss values during training
time with different depths of layers.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.4: Total loss values during training time with different depth
Results show that even with just one layer of encoder and one layer of decoder, the loss
can converge to zero. However, the model’s performance converges most quickly when
there are two layers of encoder and two layers of decoder.
Since the model’s aim is to encode and decode EEG signals to match a secret key be­
tween two parties (trusted laptop and EEG device), and the system achieves a low valida­
tion loss, it indicates that the model is capable of capturing the high­fidelity synchronous
alterations hypothesized to occur. A low validation loss implies that the model is effec­
tively learning the underlying patterns in the EEG signals that are indicative of systemic
electrical connectivity, which is consistent with the hypothesis 4.2.
6.3.10
Hypothesis 4.3 Testing
Hypothesis 4.3: Comparative Advantage Over Traditional Methods EEG­based au­
thentication systems offer significant advantages in specific scenarios (like high­security
environments) over traditional authentication methods in terms of security, user expe­
rience, and adaptability. In addition, TEP based authentication can reach continuous
authentication using EEG is more effective in maintaining security throughout a session
compared to traditional one­time authentication methods.
As illustrated in the system design section, we are now equipped to conduct a compre­
hensive comparison between our proposed novel EEG­based authentication system and
traditional authentication methods.
58
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:67==
Table 6.9: Comparison of Authentication Method Characteristics
Scheme
Usability
Deployability
Security
Memorywise Effortless
Physically Effortless
Efficient­to­use
Easy­to­Recover
Easy­to­change
Low Identification Cost
Low Device Cost
Resilient­to­SSA
Resilient­to­Phishing
Resilient­to­Theft
Password
×
✓
✓
×
✓
✓
✓
×
×
×
2FA
✓
×
✓
×
✓
×
✓
✓
×
✓
Biometrics
✓
✓
✓
×
×
×
×
✓
✓
✓
Token
✓
✓
✓
×
×
✓
×
✓
✓
×
Traditional
EEG
✓
×
×
×
×
×
×
✓
✓
✓
BEP­based
EEG
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
✓
✓
✓
✓= offers benefit; ×= does not offer benefit
6.4
Security Evaluation
Man­In­The­Middle Attack (MITM)
: The primary security concern in wireless commu­
nication over a public channel is the risk of a MITM attack during the session key exchange
protocol. In our system, a MITM attacker cannot intercept the data from the communica­
tion channel because the secret travels through the user’s body, from their fingertip to
their brain. Attackers are unlikely to guess the ’secret,’ as its length can be set to be suf­
ficiently long (e.g., 256 bits) to ensure high entropy. Therefore, a MITM attack is highly
improbable, given that the attacker would need access to the recorded data to derive the
temporary key ssk, which the device uses to authenticate the BCI device.
Mimicry Attack
: Our basic assumption is that the adversary would need to observe
the entire process of user enrollment. However, most people have two hands. If users
suspect that their environment is unsafe, they can register using one hand while using the
other hand to completely cover the actions of the registering hand. As a result, an attacker
attempting to derive the key solely from recorded videos would find it nearly impossible.
Replay Attack
: In this type of attack, an intruder replays messages from a previous
session key establishment procedure between two devices, A and B. By doing so, the
intruder could potentially impersonate Device B to communicate with Device A, or vice
versa. However, in our system, all transmitted messages are encrypted based on a shared
secret, and timestamps are included in every message for data alignment. As a result,
intruders are unable to execute a meaningful replay attack.
Entropy and Brute Force Attack
: The success of a dictionary attack depends on the
entropy of the shared secret, which measures the level of uncertainty or randomness
associated with the generated bit strings. To validate the randomness of these bit strings,
Revolutionizing Authentication:
59
==PAGE:68==
we can employ the NIST suite of statistical test algorithms [59]. If the entropy is found to
be insufficient, users can be prompted to re­register.
Diffie­Hellman key exchange protocol has two key sizes, the discrete log group size, and
the discrete log key size. More specifically, the discrete log group size is the length of the
modulo p, while the discrete log key size is the length of the exponents, X or Y, chosen
by Alice or Bob. The recommended value of the two sizes is 256­bit for key size and
2048­bit for group size. This ensures a 128­bit security level[60]. Note that to ensure this
bit security level it is required that the order of g is a prime q of at least 256 bits; which
can be ensured by using a modulus p which is a ”safe prime” (prime integers p such that
(p­1)/2 is also a prime).
6.5
Bit Rate
Bit rate refers to the average number of bits generated from the acceleration samples per
unit time, typically measured in bits per second (bps). This metric assesses the speed at
which Alice and Bob can generate shared secret bits.
The Window Size (W) directly influences the bit rate. We investigate the impact of W on
the generated key through a systematic exhaustive search. The objective of this search is
to identify the optimal W that both maximizes the agreement rate and converges quickly.
After selecting the appropriate hyper­parameters, we vary the window size within a spe­
cific range, i.e., W = 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36. This range is based on the sampling frequencies
of EEG data (256Hz) and keyboard data (21Hz). The ratio is 256/21 ≈12.19. Therefore,
when the window size is larger than 12, the model will learn the features of changes in
keystrokes between two adjacent periods (i.e., from press to release or vice versa).
Figure 6.5: Total loss values during training time with different window size
60
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:69==
Results show that when W=18, the performance of the model converges most quickly.
With W=18, it takes approximately
18
256 ≈0.07 seconds to generate 1 bit. Therefore, to
generate a 256­bit key, it would take around 18 seconds, which falls within an acceptable
range for the data collection phase.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:71==
7
Discussion
Our creation of a proof­of­concept dataset using Muse S users marks a significant step
in the field of EEG­based authentication. While limited in size and diversity, this dataset
serves as a foundational resource for future research, offering a preliminary glimpse into
the potential of EEG data in user authentication. The importance of such a dataset cannot
be overstated, as it provides a crucial baseline for future explorations and validations in
this burgeoning field. It represents a starting point for more extensive studies, potentially
leading to more robust and comprehensive EEG­based authentication systems.
The findings from our experiment underscore the significant potential of EEG as an au­
thentication factor. The effectiveness and stability of EEG features observed in our study
are particularly noteworthy, suggesting that EEG­based systems could provide a reliable
alternative to traditional authentication methods. This stability is critical in ensuring the
consistency and security of such systems, laying the groundwork for their broader accep­
tance and implementation.
Our study reveals the distinct advantages of the BEP­based authentication system over
traditional methods. Notably, the system’s ability to consistently produce features across
different subjects and to effectively train transformer­based deep learning models is a
remarkable achievement. This capability highlights the system’s sophistication, especially
given its success in decoding the dynamics of keystrokes without the need for frequency
domain transformation. Such advancements could revolutionize the way authentication
systems are developed and implemented.
The process of generating a 256­bit secure session key in our system, which takes ap­
proximately 18 seconds for new user registration, is both efficient and highly successful,
with a success rate exceeding 99.99%. This efficiency is crucial in real­world applications,
where time and accuracy are of the essence. The high success rate further emphasizes
the system’s reliability, making it a viable option for secure environments where quick and
accurate user authentication is paramount.
Despite these promising results, our study is not without limitations. The small sample
size and potential demographic biases raise questions about the generalizability of our
findings. Future research should focus on expanding the dataset to include a broader
range of participants. This expansion is necessary to ensure the system’s applicability and
effectiveness across diverse user groups. Investigating potential demographic variations
and their implications on EEG­based user authentication will be critical in developing more
inclusive and universally applicable systems.
The findings from our study pave the way for more practical and user­friendly EEG­based
authentication solutions. These systems hold promise for a variety of sectors, offering a
balance of security and user experience that traditional methods may not provide. The
potential for these systems to be adapted for different applications is vast, and as EEG
technology and deep learning algorithms continue to advance, we can expect even more
sophisticated and accessible authentication solutions in the future.
In conclusion, our study offers valuable insights into the feasibility and advantages of EEG­
based authentication systems, setting a course for future research and development in
this exciting field. The potential for these systems to transform the landscape of user
Revolutionizing Authentication:
63
==PAGE:72==
authentication is considerable, and we look forward to seeing how they evolve and are
adopted in various applications.
64
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:73==
8
Conclusion
Firstly, we create a proof­of­concept (PoC) dataset. Despite limitations in size and di­
versity, the creation of a dataset from Muse S users serves as a proof of concept. This
dataset can be a valuable resource for future research and development in the field, set­
ting a foundation for more extensive studies.
Based on our experiment, we validated that EEG as an authentication factor has signif­
icant potential, the effectiveness and stability of EEG features are satisfactory, and our
proposed BEP­based authentication system has its unique advantages over traditional
authentication methods. The features of BEP are consistent across different subjects and
are sufficiently distinct to be utilized in training transformer­based deep learning models.
Despite not performing a frequency domain transformation on the brainwave data, the
transformer model was able to accurately decode the dynamics of keystrokes, namely
the moments when a button was pressed and released. In terms of generating a 256­bit
secure session key, it takes approximately 18 seconds to register a new user, with a re­
markably high success rate exceeding 99.99%. Since these results are based on a limited
dataset consisting of 10 subjects, future research will investigate potential demographic
biases and the generalizability of our approach for EEG­based User Authentication.
Considering the unique advantages provided by BEP­based EEG authentication, our
study pave the way for practical EEG­based authentication solutions that can be adopted
by a broader user base.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Jonathan R. Wolpaw, José del R. Millán, and Nick F. Ramsey. “Chapter 2 ­ Brain­
computer interfaces: Definitions and principles”. In: Brain­Computer Interfaces. Ed.
by Nick F. Ramsey and José del R. Millán. Vol. 168. Handbook of Clinical Neurology.
Elsevier, 2020, pp. 15–23. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63934-9.00002-
0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444639349000020.
[2]
S Bhalerao, IA Ansari, and A Kumar. “Protection of BCI system via reversible wa­
termarking of EEG signal”. In: Electronics Letters 56.25 (2020), pp. 1389–1392.
[3]
Brandon J King, Gemma JM Read, and Paul M Salmon. “The risks associated with
the use of brain­computer interfaces: a systematic review”. In: International Journal
of Human–Computer Interaction (2022), pp. 1–18.
[4]
Shuai Zhang et al. “Review on EEG­based authentication technology”. In: Compu­
tational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2021 (2021).
[5]
Vijay Kumar Yadav et al. “MITM attack on modification of diffie­hellman key ex­
change algorithm”. In: Communication, Networks and Computing: Second Inter­
national Conference, CNC 2020, Gwalior, India, December 29–31, 2020, Revised
Selected Papers 2. Springer. 2021, pp. 144–155.
[6]
Gernot R Muller­Putz et al. “Steady­state somatosensory evoked potentials: suit­
able brain signals for brain­computer interfaces?” In: IEEE transactions on neural
systems and rehabilitation engineering 14.1 (2006), pp. 30–37.
[7]
Ioan Buciu and Alexandru Gacsadi. “Biometrics systems and technologies: A sur­
vey”. In: International Journal of Computers Communications & Control 11.3 (2016),
pp. 315–330.
[8]
Siaw­Hong Liew et al. “Identifying visual evoked potential (VEP) electrodes setting
for person authentication”. In: Int. J. Adv. Soft Comput. Appl 7.3 (2015), pp. 85–99.
[9]
Heba El­Fiqi et al. “Convolution neural networks for person identification and verifi­
cation using steady state visual evoked potential”. In: 2018 IEEE International Con­
ference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). IEEE. 2018, pp. 1062–1069.
[10]
Claes Wohlin. “Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a
replication in software engineering”. In: Proceedings of the 18th international con­
ference on evaluation and assessment in software engineering. 2014, pp. 1–10.
[11]
Amir Jalaly Bidgoly, Hamed Jalaly Bidgoly, and Zeynab Arezoumand. “A survey on
methods and challenges in EEG based authentication”. In: Computers & Security
93 (2020), p. 101788.
[12]
Christos A Fidas and Dimitrios Lyras. “A Review of EEG­Based User Authentication:
Trends and Future Research Directions”. In: IEEE Access (2023).
[13]
Yang Di et al. “Robustness Analysis of Identification Using Resting­State EEG Sig­
nals”. In: IEEE Access 7 (2019), pp. 42113–42122. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.
2907644.
[14]
Donghyeon Kim and Kiseon Kim. “Resting state EEG­based biometric system us­
ing concatenation of quadrantal functional networks”. In: Ieee Access 7 (2019),
pp. 65745–65756.
[15]
Daria La Rocca, Patrizio Campisi, and Gaetano Scarano. “Stable EEG features
for biometric recognition in resting state conditions”. In: Biomedical Engineering
Systems and Technologies: 6th International Joint Conference, BIOSTEC 2013,
Barcelona, Spain, February 11­14, 2013, Revised Selected Papers 6. Springer.
2014, pp. 313–330.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
67
==PAGE:76==
[16]
Yunqi Wang and Laleh Najafizadeh. “On the invariance of EEG­based signatures
of individuality with application in biometric identification”. In: 2016 38th Annual In­
ternational Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC). 2016, pp. 4559–4562. DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591742.
[17]
Maria Ruiz­Blondet et al. “Brainprint: Identifying unique features of neural activity
with machine learning”. In: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Sci­
ence Society. Vol. 36. 36. 2014.
[18]
Mohammed Abo­Zahhad, Sabah M Ahmed, and Sherif N Abbas. “A new multi­
level approach to EEG based human authentication using eye blinking”. In: Pattern
Recognition Letters 82 (2016), pp. 216–225.
[19]
Yiyu Chen et al. “A high­security EEG­based login system with RSVP stimuli and
dry electrodes”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 11.12
(2016), pp. 2635–2647.
[20]
Emanuela Piciucco et al. “Steady­state visual evoked potentials for EEG­based bio­
metric identification”. In: 2017 International Conference of the Biometrics Special
Interest Group (BIOSIG). IEEE. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[21]
Carl M Gaspar, Guillaume A Rousselet, and Cyril R Pernet. “Reliability of ERP and
single­trial analyses”. In: NeuroImage 58.2 (2011), pp. 620–629.
[22]
Barjinder Kaur, Dinesh Singh, and Partha Pratim Roy. “A novel framework of EEG­
based user identification by analyzing music­listening behavior”. In: Multimedia tools
and applications 76.24 (2017), pp. 25581–25602.
[23]
Dennis Frank, Jasmine Mabrey, and Kenji Yoshigoe. “Personalizable neurological
user authentication framework”. In: 2017 International Conference on Computing,
Networking and Communications (ICNC). IEEE. 2017, pp. 932–936.
[24]
Rig Das, Emanuele Maiorana, and Patrizio Campisi. “Motor imagery for EEG bio­
metrics using convolutional neural network”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE. 2018, pp. 2062–
2066.
[25]
John Chuang et al. “I think, therefore I am: Usability and security of authentication
using brainwaves”. In: Financial Cryptography and Data Security: FC 2013 Work­
shops, USEC and WAHC 2013, Okinawa, Japan, April 1, 2013, Revised Selected
Papers 17. Springer. 2013, pp. 1–16.
[26]
Pinki Kumari and Abhishek Vaish. “Feature­level fusion of mental task’s brain sig­
nal for an efficient identification system”. In: Neural Computing and Applications 27
(2016), pp. 659–669.
[27]
Sebastien Marcel and José del R Millán. “Person authentication using brainwaves
(EEG) and maximum a posteriori model adaptation”. In: IEEE transactions on pat­
tern analysis and machine intelligence 29.4 (2007), pp. 743–752.
[28]
JX Chen et al. “EEG­based biometric identification with convolutional neural net­
work”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 79 (2020), pp. 10655–10675.
[29]
Vikrant Bhateja et al. “Artificial neural networks based fusion and classification of
EEG/EOG signals”. In: Information Systems Design and Intelligent Applications:
Proceedings of Fifth International Conference INDIA 2018 Volume 2. Springer. 2019,
pp. 141–148.
[30]
Tien Pham et al. “A study on the stability of EEG signals for user authentication”.
In: 2015 7th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER).
IEEE. 2015, pp. 122–125.
[31]
Syed Zulkarnain Syed Idrus et al. “A Review on Authentication Methods”. In: Aus­
tralian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences 7.5 (Mar. 2013), pp. 95–107. URL:
https://hal.science/hal-00912435.
68
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:77==
[32]
T Riley. “Cybersecurity 202: Global Losses from Cybercrime Skyrocketed to nearly
1Trillionin2020”. In: The Washington Post ().
[33]
Aashi Singh Bhadouria. “Study of: Impact of Malicious Attacks and Data Breach on
the Growth and Performance of the Company and Few of the World’s Biggest Data
Breaches”. In: International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications (2022).
[34]
Chen Wang et al. “User authentication on mobile devices: Approaches, threats and
trends”. In: Computer Networks 170 (2020), p. 107118.
[35]
Xugang Cai, Jiahui Pan, et al. “Toward a brain­computer interface­and internet of
things­based smart ward collaborative system using hybrid signals”. In: Journal of
Healthcare Engineering 2022 (2022).
[36]
Mehar Ullah et al. “Providing facilities in health care via brain­computer interface and
Internet of Things”. In: 2020 43rd International Convention on Information, Commu­
nication and Electronic Technology (MIPRO). IEEE. 2020, pp. 971–976.
[37]
Mehar Ullah and Kari Smolander. “Highlighting the key factors of an IoT platform”.
In: 2019 42nd International Convention on Information and Communication Tech­
nology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO). IEEE. 2019, pp. 901–906.
[38]
Hadeel Alharbi et al. “Identifying Thematics in a Brain­Computer Interface Research”.
In: Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2023 (2023).
[39]
Xiao Zhang et al. “Tiny noise, big mistakes: adversarial perturbations induce er­
rors in brain–computer interface spellers”. In: National Science Review 8.4 (2021),
nwaa233.
[40]
Sergio Lopez Bernal et al. “Cyberattacks on miniature brain implants to disrupt spon­
taneous neural signaling”. In: Ieee Access 8 (2020), pp. 152204–152222.
[41]
Marcello Ienca and Pim Haselager. “Hacking the brain: brain–computer interfacing
technology and the ethics of neurosecurity”. In: Ethics and Information Technology
18 (2016), pp. 117–129.
[42]
Joseph Lange et al. “Side­channel attacks against the human brain: the PIN code
case study (extended version)”. In: Brain informatics 5.2 (2018), pp. 1–16.
[43]
Reza Abiri et al. “A comprehensive review of EEG­based brain–computer interface
paradigms”. In: Journal of neural engineering 16.1 (2019), p. 011001.
[44]
Katsuhiko Hamada et al. “Airborne ultrasonic tactile display brain­computer inter­
face paradigm”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.4184 (2014).
[45]
Yuezhong Wu et al. “Auto­Key: Using autoencoder to speed up gait­based key gen­
eration in body area networks”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile,
Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4.1 (2020), pp. 1–23.
[46]
Cory T Cornelius and David F Kotz. “Recognizing whether sensors are on the same
body”. In: Pervasive and Mobile Computing 8.6 (2012), pp. 822–836.
[47]
Darko Kirovski, Mike Sinclair, and David Wilson. “The martini synch”. In: Microsoft
Research, Cambridge, UK, Tech. Rep. MSR­TR­2007­123 (2007).
[48]
Qi Lin et al. “H2B: Heartbeat­based secret key generation using piezo vibration
sensors”. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Information Pro­
cessing in Sensor Networks. 2019, pp. 265–276.
[49]
Masoud Rostami, Ari Juels, and Farinaz Koushanfar. “Heart­to­heart (H2H) authen­
tication for implanted medical devices”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC
conference on Computer & communications security. 2013, pp. 1099–1112.
[50]
Dominik Schürmann et al. “BANDANA—Body area network device­to­device au­
thentication using natural gAit”. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Perva­
sive Computing and Communications (PerCom). IEEE. 2017, pp. 190–196.
Revolutionizing Authentication:
69
==PAGE:78==
[51]
Weitao Xu et al. “Walkie­talkie: Motion­assisted automatic key generation for secure
on­body device communication”. In: 2016 15th ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN). IEEE. 2016, pp. 1–12.
[52]
Wei­Long Zheng, Jia­Yi Zhu, and Bao­Liang Lu. “Identifying stable patterns over
time for emotion recognition from EEG”. In: IEEE Transactions on Affective Com­
puting 10.3 (2017), pp. 417–429.
[53]
Christa Neuper et al. “Long­term stability and consistency of EEG event­related
(de­) synchronization across different cognitive tasks”. In: Clinical Neurophysiology
116.7 (2005), pp. 1681–1694.
[54]
Ruo­Nan Duan, Jia­Yi Zhu, and Bao­Liang Lu. “Differential entropy feature for EEG­
based emotion classification”. In: 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on
Neural Engineering (NER). IEEE. 2013, pp. 81–84.
[55]
Arafat Rahman et al. “Multimodal EEG and keystroke dynamics based biometric
system using machine learning algorithms”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 94625–
94643.
[56]
Leo Breiman. Classification and regression trees. Routledge, 2017.
[57]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 30 (2017).
[58]
Steven Michael Bellovin and Michael Merritt. “Encrypted key exchange: Password­
based protocols secure against dictionary attacks”. In: (1992).
[59]
Andrew Rukhin et al. A statistical test suite for random and pseudorandom number
generators for cryptographic applications. Vol. 22. US Department of Commerce,
Technology Administration, National Institute of …, 2001.
[60]
Elaine Barker. NIST Special Publication 800­57 Part 1 Revision 5: Recommendation
for Key Management. URL: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-57pt1r5.
70
Revolutionizing Authentication:
==PAGE:79==
Revolutionizing Authentication:
71
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
