==PAGE:1==
Sound Systems Live
Characterisation
Daniel Saiz Seti´en
Supervised by:
Vicente Cutanda
Jonas Brunskog
A thesis presented for the
Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Department of Acoustic Technology
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
November 2023
==PAGE:2==
i
Abstract
In amplified music concerts, the sound system performance
is affected by many parameters, including the acoustic field of
the room, the audience absorption, and the ambient temperature.
These parameters tend to change with time. In this project,
electroacoustic signals from the loudspeaker will be used to extract
information about the room acoustics and how it is changed.
This information can be used by the sound engineer to modify
the mixing of the concert. In the project, different strategies will be
evaluated, and the main challenges will be identified. If time allows,
closed-loop or human-in-the-loop solutions will be considered.
Motivation
Over the past century, the availability of a virtually infinite power supply
(electricity) has allowed incredibly powerful sound sources to be built: mod-
ern sound reinforcement and sound reproduction systems were born.
And with them, an additional problem: massive amounts of sonic power can
be easily delivered, up to the point of becoming a potential hearing health
issue. Voluntary Noise Exposure has never been such a huge concern [15],
[62].
It has become necessary to control the amount of power they can deliver
by evaluating their performance [50], [41],[26],[45].
A measurement and control method is proposed and tested in this the-
sis, which is meant to overcome one major challenge in Sound Systems
Live Characterisation: the measurement position, by extracting information
about the Radiating Environment (Room) from the Electrical Impedance.
==PAGE:3==
ii
Summary
“It is not how a speaker radiates sound, rather how it speaks
with the room.”
— Siegfried Linkwitz
This thesis project aims to research new techniques for extracting infor-
mation and measuring the sound field created from electroacoustic sources,
focused on Sound Reinforcement Systems under live music performance.
Live non-invasive measurement techniques are evaluated.
A Control System is presented as a potential implementation.
A Boxed Speaker set up with an Amplifier, a Noise Source, and a
Voltage-Current measurement system is placed in different rooms, and the
Electrical Impedance is estimated from the Voltage (input) to Current (out-
put) variables. The data iss interpreted with the aid of ElectroAcoustical
models to isolate the Radiation Impedance and the Room Modes.
The main findings of the research show that from the Radiation Impedance,
room modes, and absorption can be measured, but the many complications
that the method implies make it difficult for practical implementation.
Live Sound sets some limitations to measurement methods, ease of mea-
surement and repeatability are preferred over accuracy, and the artistic
component gives more importance to keeping track of the changes rather
than extracting exact values. Many of the Sound System parameters are
hard to spot by ear, and this justifies the research into measurement tech-
niques.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
What is a Sound System?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Communication Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
The Receiver Mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
The Sound System Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
The State of Art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methods
7
2.1
ElectroAcoustical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Radiation Impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Room Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Air properties (ambient conditions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Model Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Full model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Numerical setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8
Measurement setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.9
System Impulse Response Estimator
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Results
18
3.1
Numerical simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Thiele-Small parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Room comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Additional research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Discussion
24
5
Conclusions
26
Bibliography
28
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
iv
A Research questions
34
A.1 Targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.2 Initial questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.3 Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.4 Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.5 Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.6 Empirical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.7 Impact - InNovation and applications . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.8 Intended learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.9 Redundancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
A.10 Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
B Measurement system
40
B.1 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
B.2 Magnitudes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B.3 Signal Conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B.4 Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
C Planning
54
C.1 Activities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
C.2 Milestones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
C.3 Deliverables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C.4 Risk analysis: risk - mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:6==
Introduction
Throughout human history, acoustic communication has played a relevant
role in society’s development. Recreational use of it traces back to ancient
times when narrations, speeches, and performances took place in as primi-
tive places as caves [37].
In all cases, a problem to overcome was to ensure sufficient loudness
and intelligibility of the voice and instruments at the receiver position,
achieved through the architecture of the sonic space. More portable devices
were merely horns, which evolved into the Megaphone [42]. This has gone
through a major change during the past century, when the availability of a
virtually infinite power supply (electricity) allowed powerful sound sources
to be built: Sound Reinforcement Systems were born [7]. And with them,
an additional problem: massive amounts of sonic power can now be
easily delivered, up to the point of becoming a potential health
issue [15],[62],[50].
1.1
What is a Sound System?
Philosophically speaking, a Sound System is any set of physical components
in which Sound plays a role. Wide a blurry definition enough to cover al-
most any object with mass in the universe [49].
Sound System n. :
• equipment for the reproduction and amplification of sound [47].
• a piece or several pieces of electronic equipment that can be used to
play music from recordings, radio broadcasts, etc [11].
• a sound system consists of a connected collection of components whose
purpose is to receive, process and transmit audio signals.
1
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
The basic components consist of microphones, signal processing, am-
plifiers, speakers, interconnection cabling and digital networking [39].
* LoudSpeaker n. : an apparatus that converts electrical impulses
into sound, typically as part of a public address system [47].
Some definitions, especially the ones arising from Jamaica, Reggae and
Dub music, not only embrace the technical equipment, but also the social
and cultural aspects, and extend to the sound source in terms of the human
power behind the decks and the instruments [35], [25], [30], [9].
Other definitions have completely different definition approaches, as they
describe a phonetic system [40], [17].
So, what is a Sound System?
In a more practical yet philosophical enough definition, a Sound System can
then be described as a Communication System between two Parts
using Sound as the Message.
Figure 1.1: Communication model
This definition is already known in Communication Theory [54] and
enhances the fact that Sound conveys information [46], [21], [24].
What is Sound
“...the sensation of sound is a thing sui generis, not comparable with any
other of our senses.” Lord Rayleigh [52]
Sound is defined as a physical vibration that can be received by the hearing
system of a living being. Sound limits are set by the human hearing limits,
otherwise referred to as infra and ultra Sound (Sound still).
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
Purpose
The purpose of a Sound System is broad:
• Communicating over distance
• Communicating over noise
• Communicating over time
• Extending the coverage of a Sound Source
The last item can be included in the former ones. It is listed separately for
practical considerations.
1.2
The Communication Model
Let us trace back to the earliest communication system, or instead to the
first device purposefully used by humans for communication, and that goes
back to Beacon Fires, Drum Beats, or primitive Tin Can telephones. They
constitute the earliest signaling techniques, which evolved into the tele-
graph, which set the base for most modern communication systems, includ-
ing the Telephone and the Internet.
Figure 1.2: Tin Can Telephone communication model
The Sender Channel and Receiver elements in Figure 1.2 can be de-
scribed by their Transfer Functions.
A reflection is that Speech is the most predominant communication in
human society, and communication is incomplete without feedback [33],[16],[2].
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
1.3
The Receiver Mechanisms
An example of the utility of this model is Hearing Loss, where the transfer
function of the Receiver has been modified. The Sender can adapt his signal
to overcome the Receiver transfer function (screaming works, but is not the
best solution), or the Receiver can modify his transfer function (using a
Hearing Aid, getting closer, etc).
Degradators
Three main factors have been identified as potential degradators of both
the Transmission and the Feedback paths.
• Auditory fatigue: is defined as a temporary loss of hearing after ex-
posure to sound. It results in a Temporary Threshold Shift (TTS). It
leads to decreased preceived Loudness.
• Equal Loudness Contours (IsoPhonic contours): is a measure of sound
pressure level over frequency for which a listener perceives two tones
as equally loud. It is valid to a certain extent for complex signals.
The “Loudness” button of commercial amplifiers applies a similar
compensation.
• Pure Tone Masking: is the change of perception of one sound in the
presence of another. When a tone is present in the Auditory Filters, it
will raise the higher frequency components level required to be heard.
It can lead to differences of more than 20dB at regular listening levels.
From these, Masking is picked as the ground for the addressing Room
Modes. It is known that room resonances are to be avoided, here I am
selecting one that directly impact the Sound Pressure Level and as so the
Noise exposure.
1.4
The Sound System Model
We can adapt the previous model to the definitions of Section 1.1. For
making the distinction sharper, what we are modeling now is a Sound Re-
inforcement System, or a Sound Reproduction System [3],[1],[39].
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
These Systems usually aim for a transparent transduction, as opposed to
Section 1.3.
Yet sometimes these targets are modified for creative and
artistic purposes[23],[22],[14],[6]. Nevertheless, the elements present in any
of these Systems can be simplified into a general model.
Figure 1.3: Sound System model
Figure 1.3 shows a human in the loop case. The control box can be as
simple as a volume, and the Sender can be the same as the Receiver. The
feedback path relies on different senses: listening, visual observation of the
meters, receiver response, etc, and it is clear that the Source Adapts to the
Radiation Environment [38],[61].
This is the foundation of the control system of the Sound System, and
the main concern is evaluating the feedback path characteristics: the met-
rics.
1.5
The State of Art
Sound system metrics can be as simple as Sound Pressure Level. We can also
estimate the Impulse Response of the System, the Room, and the spatial
characteristics of the field [19]. One of the most compromising challenges
of any acoustical measurement is the placement of the probe. For practical
reasons, the Sound Field can not be fully sampled, and the measurements
are usually biased and compromised [18].
The method researched here overcomes this restriction by measuring the
properties of the Sound Field from the Source.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
6
Electroacoustic transducers are reciprocal by nature [20], [13], This princi-
ple is used for estimating loads that are external to the system [43], [31]
or for estimating environment parameters: Sonar, Radar, Parking Sensor,
Ground Penetrating Radar, or Echography [48], [63], [60].
The same principle will be applied here, considering the Air and the
Room Modes as the external load.
Loudspeakers are inefficient radiators [10], [57]. However, provided a good
estimator of the Impulse Response, all the system parameters can be de-
rived. Moreover, the electrical variables (voltage and current) are easy to
measure, as opposed to the Acoustical variables (pressure and velocity) [28],
[27], [34].
==PAGE:12==
Methods
The System Under Study is a Loudspeaker with the required elements to
operate it (Amplifier, Signal Source).
The electrical variables (Voltage-
Current) are measured (approximating the Current by the Voltage drop
across a Small Resistor).
Figure 2.1: System draft
The electro-acoustical model is lumped into a Two Port network and
the Radiation Impedance is modeled as a Piston in a Baffle superimposed
with the Input Mobility of the Sound Field.
The technique itself is non-invasive in the sense that there is no need to
put a microphone in the Sound Field, yet the measurement signal used for
the estimation has to be considered, as it is impractical to use measurement
signals during a Live Show.
Simple numerical simulations have been performed to verify the model.
7
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
8
2.1
ElectroAcoustical model
The ElectroAcoustical Model is derived [8],[59],[55]. The elements of the
System are lumped and described using an electrical analogy [7].
B·l is the force factor, Ze,m are the electrical and mechanical complex
analogy impedances, Sd is the effective diaphragm area, and the circuit vari-
ables are voltage uc, current ic, Lorentz force fd, force over the diaphragm
fa, volume velocity Ud, and acoustical pressure pd. ZAB and ZAF are the
complex acoustical impedances and eg, Rg are the Thevenin equivalent of
the excitation.
Figure 2.2: Electroacoustic model
This model is grouped into Electrical, Mechanical, and Acoustical impedances,
and compacted in a Two Port network for convenience [36].
Figure 2.3: Quadripole model
The two-port network model allows us to think in terms of power, trans-
fer function, and sources/loads.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
9
The equations of the system are:
Ud = B·l·Sd
Ze
·
1
Zm + Sd2·ZAB + (B·l)2
Ze
· eg
(2.1)
and ignoring the Diaphragm Scattering for the microphone:
i =
R2
l
Re + Rl
·
−B·l·Sd
Zm + Sd2·ZAB + (B·l)2
Ze
· pf
(2.2)
The relation between input to output variables is calculated through:
Zeq
e = uc
ic
= Ze +
(B·l)2
Zm + S2
d·(ZAB + ZAF)
(2.3)
From 2.3, the relation between the Radiation Impedance (ZAF which stands
for Acoustical Impedance Front) and the measured Electrical Impedance
(Zeq
e ) is downscaled by a factor of
 Sd
B·l
2
. For commercial Loudspeaker
drivers, this factor ranges between 10−4 and 10−2. This is already a 40-
60 dB attenuation of the magnitudes from the output to the input of the
system. Larger differences are found for microphones [5].
Baffling
Most Loudspeakers are baffled. This is just a technique to overcome the low-
frequency limitations of Piston radiation. When the Wavelength becomes
large enough, the Front and Back of the diaphragm become Acoustically
Shortcutted.
There are Dipole LoudSpeakers commercially available. It will change the
model of the back Radiation Impedance, while the whole model will still be
valid.
Thiele-Small lumped parameters
Previous parameters can be estimated by rearranging the System equations
[55]. From there, 5 equations with 6 unknowns are obtained. To constrain
the equations, one more equation is added, at the cost of introducing an
additional known parameter: either a compliance (box) or a mass [56],[12].
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
10
2.2
Radiation Impedance
Two models for the Radiation Impedance (ZA) are considered. Pressure will
be the Across variable while Volume Velocity will be the Through variable.
r is the distance from the source (diaphragm) and a is the piston radius.
• Spherical Wave radiated from a Point Source: Solving the wave equa-
tion for an infinitely small sphere yields an Impedance in the form:
ZA(r) =
p(r)
4·π·r2·u(r) =
j·ω·ρ
4·π·r·(1 + j·k·r) ≡

1
j·ω·MA
+ 1
RA
−1
(2.4)
Where MA =
j·ρ
4·π·r
r≫0
−−→ρ·r
S and RA =
ρ·c
4·π·r2
r≫0
−−→0.
From Eq.2.4, ZA can be represented as a parallel Inductive and Resis-
tive elements which represent the Air Mass and the Dissipation. For
a Far Field condition r ≫0 the Reactive component approximates to
a local plane wave impedance and the losses tend to 0.
• Circular Piston in a Baffle: the impedance of a massless rigid cir-
cular piston placed in an infinitely large rigid planar baffle can be
approximated through the Rayleigh integral as:
ZA = ρ·c
π·a2·

1 −J1(2·k·a)
k·a
+ j·H1(2·k·a)
k·a

(2.5)
Where J1 is the 1st order Bessel function and H1 is the 1st order
Struve function. The approximation used is about the radius (carte-
sian coordinates). A further approximation allows us to model Eq.2.5
as a lumped element.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
11
The Radiation Impedance can be understood as Radiated Power (that
is the Real part, the power being delivered to the Sound Field) and Stored
Energy (the Imaginary part, that is Power travelling back and forth be-
tween Reactive components) [4],[44].
These models only account for the radiation of the Source in Free Field
conditions.
2.3
Room Acoustics
All Sound Sources behavior is influenced by the surroundings. These sur-
roundings have two extreme conditions: closed space, completely bounded
by reflective surfaces, and Free Field, where no reflections at all occur.
The boundaries are defined by the shape and geometry, and the Surface
Impedance, which relates to the Absorption of that surface (under certain
assumptions of the definition of Absorption/Reflection coefficients).
A Room Sound Field can be modeled in different ways: the cosine room
(Greens function), statistical acoustics, the Wave Fronts can be depicted as
Waves or Rays, etc [29].
Here we only focus on the low-frequency model, where the Wave Equa-
tion is solved for the rigid boundary conditions, yielding an expression for
the Room Modes (the Cosine Room). Note here that this is a property of
the Room, being the Homogeneous Solution to the Wave Equation.
 ∇2 + k2
·ψm = 0
(2.6)
ψn(x, y, z) = √εnx·εny·εnz· cos
nx·π·x
lx

· cos
ny·π·y
ly

· cos
nz·π·z
lz

(2.7)
This equation expresses the frequencies at which a Sound Wave can
exist, under the boundary conditions imposed to solve the wave equation.
kn(x, y, z) = 1/2·
snx
lx
2
+
ny
ly
2
+
nz
lz
2
(2.8)
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
12
We can express the pressure as a modal sum:
p =
X
N
AN·ψN(x, y, z)·ej·ω·t
(2.9)
Assuming a point source and integrating across the Room Volume yields
the Transmission between two positions.
G(r, r0) = −1
V ·
X
N
ψN(r)·ψN(r0)
k2 −k2
N −j· ki
τ ∗
N
(2.10)
The variables ki and τ ∗
N in Equation 2.10 account for the losses.1
T60 = 6·ln(10)·τ ∗
N·c
τ ∗
N = τN·c
(2.11)
2.4
Air properties (ambient conditions)
Both temperature and humidity affect the Speed of Sound and the Air
Density. Following psychrometric curves, an increase in temperature causes
a decrease in Humidity. Absolute Humidity increases with human presence
(metabolic rate[32]). For the situation we are concerned with, the Speed of
Sound will increase as the system reaches its operating point.
Detailed equations can be found in [51].
Is it always air?
One of the assumptions up to here is that the medium will be air, that is the
basic of Room Acoustics. Music Venues are filled with the audience, which
takes a significant amount of space. The behaviour of Low Frequency Sound
through an audience can be modelled as if there was a porous absorber
instead [53].
Not only the Ambient Conditions change, but also the medium material.
1ki is not a conventional notation, it can be kN or k, depending on wether we account
for the losses in the boundaries or the medium. τ ∗
N is not the time constant of the mode,
but rather the normalized by the Speed of Sound time constant. This has been made on
purpose to leave the Greens function independent of ambient conditions.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
13
2.5
Model Assumptions
There are many assumptions behind this model.
• Linear model: the Loudspeaker driver must remain in its linear range.
• the lumped element assumes that the elements are smaller than the
wavelength (k·r ≪1). Relevant for the diaphragm.
• the diaphragm behaves as a rigid piston (k·r ≪1).
• the radiation impedance model assumes an infinite baffle, which is
not only not achievable in practice but also restricted by the room
boundaries in our scenario.
• Time invariance: the properties of the system remain constant and
stable over time. To guarantee this condition, the observation window
must be faster than the time constant of the changing parameters.
The k·r = 1 limit is 215Hz for the large driver and 1kHz for the small one.
Note that this does not set a sharp boundary for the validity of the model.
2.6
Full model
From Sections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, the variables required for this model are:
• Thiele-Small parameters
• Room dimensions
• Ambient conditions: ρ (air density) and c (speed of Sound)
• Room modes time constant (Reverberation Time)
Given that room dimensions remain constant and assuming that Thiele-
Small parameters also are, the only remaining parameters are the Air prop-
erties and the Room Modes time constant.
|Za| ∝ρc
2·π·f = k/c
τ ∗
N = τ·c
The Ambient Conditions will determine the scale (both in magnitude
and frequency), and the Reverberation Time will determine the Shape of
the Modes.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
14
2.7
Numerical setup
A prismatic Room has been modeled with a circular piston placed in one
wall. The piston size is d ∈[2, 10, 21] inch and the center is located at the
middle and a quarter of the wall.
The study frequency range is limited to 120Hz because of computation
time. The higher the frequency range, the finer the mesh.
Figure 2.4: Numerical simulation, walls removed for visibility
The room dimensions are the ones of the Reverberant Room used. It is
small compared to regular listening rooms but the Room Modes are very
strong.
Room Dimensions (m)
Air conditions (20° C)
Length
Width
Height
Density
Speed of Sound
[ρ] kg/m3
[c] m/s
4,39
3,14
3,30
1,2
343
The boundaries (walls) are constrained with an Impedance condition
(Zwall ∈[1, 4, 12, 27]·ρc), so they range from air impedance to a value of
a common absorption coefficient for treated Rooms.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
15
2.8
Measurement setup
The speaker drivers used are:
• two 2-inch, 4 ohm, cloth surround with paper cone, mounted on a
dipole box.
They have shielded magnets.
They have been in my
workshop for more than a decade. They have a relatively high res-
onance frequency because of their building, and the two units have
repeatable parameters.
• PeerLess 850146/CSX257H 10inch woofer in a 20l volume box. This
driver was chosen because of the lower resonant frequency and the
larger diaphragm.
The amplifier used is a Toshiba TDA8217P (class AB).
The current sensing is done by measuring the voltage drop across a
resistor. A large resistor power rating implies lower thermal drift due to
heating, and using a parallel assembly reduces the resistor value tolerance
(uncertainty). The resistors used are 4x33mOhm 5W and 3,3ohm 10W as
validation.
The voltages are measured with two configurable gain, ground-referenced
preamplifiers, and captured with a regular audio interface, using non-balanced
inputs. The common ground topology of the measurement system implies
using a correction for one of the voltages.
v = i·(Z1 + Z2)
vs = v −i·Z1 = i·Z2
i =
v
Z1 + Z2
= v −vs
Z1
= vs
Z2
(2.12)
The resulting equation can be solved for any of the impedances, being the
other a known one.
Z2/Z1 =
vs
v −vs
(2.13)
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
16
From Figure 2.12, Z1 and Z2 form a voltage divider.
The Speaker can
replace any of them, and the other will be the sense resistor. If different
gains are applied, a small correction must be made:
Z1 = k·v −ks·vs
ks·vs
·Z2 =
 k
ks
· v
vs
−1

·Z2
(2.14)
Measurement environments
The Electrical Impedance was measured with the two speaker units in differ-
ent Rooms. Temperature and Humidity were logged for each measurement.
Location
Length (m)
Width (m)
Height (m)
Anechoic
12,1
9,7
8,5
Reverberant
4,385
3,14
3,30
Outdoor
2·π
2.9
System Impulse Response Estimator
The signal analysis is done based on a dual channel FFT analysis [58],[56].
The auto-correlation function Rf(τ) of a time-process is a more detailed
temporal description: it is equivalent to averaging in the time domain [58].
Applying it to Linear Systems theory, the Impulse Response of a System
can be estimated from:
ˆH1(ω) = Sxy(ω)
Sxx(ω) =
Sab(ω)
Saa(ω) + Smm(ω) = H(ω)·
Saa(ω)
Saa(ω) + Smm(ω)
(2.15)
ˆH2(ω) = Syy(ω)
S∗
xy(ω) = Sbb(ω) + Snn(ω)
S∗
ab(ω)
= H(ω)·Sbb(ω) + Snn(ω)
Sbb(ω)
(2.16)
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
17
Which leads to the following:
|Sxy(ω)|2 ̸= Sxx(ω)·Syy(ω)
(2.17)
And also allows to calculate the Coherence of the measurement:
C ≡γ2
xy(ω) =
|Sxy(ω)|2
Sxx(ω)·Syy(ω)
0 ≤γ2
xy(ω) ≤1
(2.18)
And from there the Signal to Noise spectral Ratio.
SNR =
C
1 −C
(2.19)
Signals
The excitation signals considered are:
• Random Gaussian noise, null mean. Also known as White Noise.
• Internal amplifier circuit noise (pure random).
• Chirps: linear and exponential sweeps.
• Pseudo-Random noise: multi-sinus implementation
• Random: Music
Music is arguably considered a random excitation. Music properties vary
in many aspects. It will bias the estimator in many ways but is guaranteed
to be present in the system. Back to the live scenario, we can partially
control the input signal through the feedback path.
Signal choice
After testing the Measurement System, a random signal of 2s (which leads to
a maximum frequency resolution of 0.05Hz) over 30 averages was concluded
to give good coherence. Given the simplicity of the setup, the assembly in
each room was instant and allowed to measure many different scenarios.
The short measurement time also guarantees the time invariance.
Having this clear, it’s time to move on to analyze the results.
==PAGE:23==
Results
3.1
Numerical simulation
The Radiation Impedance is calculated with the aid of the numerical model
for three conditions: rigid baffle, air-coupled baffle, and rigid baffle in a
double-sized room.
It is compared against the Analytical and Lumped
approximated expressions.
A larger piston size was used to reduce computational time.
The same
changes show for a smaller piston, however only the tail of the radiation
impedance can be seen within the selected frequency range.
Figure 3.1: Radiation impedance for a 5x21” baffled piston in a Room
Whenever the impedance is Air Coupled or Air Baffle, I am referring to
setting Zwall = ρc, which represents the air impedance for a normal incident
plane wave at a locally reacting surface. This condition is meant to be the
closest representative of Free Field, even though it is not an accurate way
of modeling it.
18
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
19
The size diameter of the piston influences the pure radiation impedance,
as well as the mode coupling.
Figure 3.2: Piston size comparison
With increased absorption, the modal overlap grows larger. Decreasing
the absorption (towards a more rigid wall) shows the stronger coupling of
the Room Modes to the Radiation Impedance. If we place the source in a
nodal line, that mode is not excited, and the free field radiation impedance
dominates. The Real Source is placed at a corner to minimize this effect,
even though the placement of the piston changes the radiation impedance.
Figure 3.3: Mode overlap
From all the above, the Room Modes are modeled through the Green´s
Function, and superimposed to the analytical radiation impedance.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
20
Figure 3.4: Radiation Impedance of a Baffled Piston in a Room, along with
the Room Greens function for the center of the piston
3.2
Thiele-Small parameter
The Electrical Impedance is calculated using the lumped parameters.
Figure 3.5: Electrical Impedance validation
A downscale is applied to the Lumped Model to fit the data, this is
believed to arise from a miscalibration in the measurement system. The
Thiele-Small parameters agree with the values in the datasheet.
The different models of Radiation Impedance are used as the Front
Impedance in the Lumped model.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
21
3.3
Room comparison
Both Speaker driver units are placed in different Rooms. Temperature and
Humidity are logged.
Figure 3.6: Electrical impedance across Rooms, Small Speaker
Figure 3.7: Electrical impedance across Rooms, Woofer
The response of the Woofer is normalized with the anechoic Impedance.
The magnitude of the Green’s function is plotted along with the mode
central frequency.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
22
Figure 3.8: Reverberant chamber measurement normalized by the anechoic
Figure 3.9: Reverberant chamber measurement Normalized
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
23
3.4
Additional research
I asked professional Sound Engineers how the problems are addressed in
Real Life. The identity of the Venues and the Engineers are kept anony-
mous.
The Questions asked:
• Do you touch the Mix during the show?
• Does the audience influence the Sound?
• Do you have a specific method for compensating it?
They all touch the mix during the performance, both because the Sound
has Changed and they are fine-tuning the mix. Sound Check time limita-
tions allow only for a rough mix. They all have some opinions about the
impact of the audience and ambient conditions.
The Answers:
• Audience takes some SPL (up to 3-6 dB).
• Audience takes High Frequency (because of absorption).
• Audience, or ”Blood backs” are 60% made of water, and have sub-
stance, hence absorption.
* No one mentioned Room Modes.
==PAGE:29==
Discussion
The experiment conditions are not valid for most rooms, as they break some
approximations of the model straight from the beginning but are used as a
proof of concept. Figure 3.1 shows deviations from the analytical expres-
sions when subjected to extreme conditions. While these conditions are
not realistic, the shape of the Radiation Impedance does not significantly
deviate. The source of the 5-scale factor has not been identified.
The Pure Radiation Impedance model of a circular piston in a baffle
(Equation 2.5) uses an approximation of the radius in the Rayleigh inte-
gral. The integral assumes a sum of monopoles evenly distributed over the
piston surface. This monopoles radiate in Free Field. Both approximations
are no longer valid when the Piston Size is of comparable dimensions with
the room. In a Room, each monopole will have a Modal Expansion, so the
radiation of all the monopoles will be the sum of many modal shapes.
The differences in the piston position and the baffle absorption are more
noticeable in the low-frequency range, where the models used are valid. But
again, this is the case for the extreme conditions that have been established
on purpose to showcase these differences. This effect becomes negligible for
real scenarios.
In Figures 3.2 and 3.3, the dimensions of the model are more realistic,
and the result agrees with the analytical models. In Figure 3.4, the ana-
lytical expressions are coupled. The weight of each mode’s contribution is
causing the differences.
The Lumped electro-acoustical parameters can be considered stable
from Figure 3.5 and the literature.
It is worth mentioning that Figure
3.5 shows a miscalibration whose origin is unknown. Given that we were
interested in the changes, it is not a problem, as the miscalibration is a
constant parameter.
24
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
25
Figure 3.6 shows three different rooms and conditions. The resonant
frequency shift agrees with a decreased Speed of Sound. The trace for the
outside measurement is just attenuated and has not been explained.
Figure 3.7 shows the difference for the large woofer. The frequency shift
is masked by the room modes, but the stronger mode coupling is visible.
Isolating the Radiation Impedance is challenging. In Figures 3.8 and 3.9
he Impulse Response is extracted by normalizing with the anechoic electri-
cal impedance. The estimation is noisy, especially around the resonance
of the electro-acoustical system.
Normalizing by the anechoic electrical
impedance relies on the Ambient Conditions to be the same. Normalizing
by the lumped model did not make a difference, the noise is attributed to
the changes in the radiation impedance according to the numerical simula-
tion.
The time invariancy is an assumption known to break since the state-
ment of the project scope. The approach to overcome this limitation has
been an estimation window faster than the time-varying parameters time
constant. There is no evidence to refute this assumption.
The results from the interviews show that even though current measure-
ment tools can solve the problem, most of the engineers do not use these
tools. The main problem statement explains this, where the measurement
setup and result interpretation were the hypothesized main restrictions.
==PAGE:31==
Conclusions
The Sound System has been tracked from one end to the other, analyzing
each of the elements that form it and verifying the validity of the models.
The Speaker coupling with the Sound Field is modeled by coupling ana-
lytical expressions and their limitations are compared against a numerical
model and real measurements.
The approximations and assumptions of the various models have proved
to be robust up to very extreme conditions, and the reciprocity of the model
is supported by measuring acoustical parameters from the electrical side of
the system. Most of the variable parameters that affect the performance
of the Sound System live in the Acoustical domain.
They can be esti-
mated from the electrical domain, but simpler and cheaper solutions like
thermometers and hygrometers can replace this method now that the ana-
lytical models are defined.
Already existing measurement techniques can be used for characterizing
the Sound System, yet they have complications that keep them from being
a reliable correction tool except in controlled listening rooms, studios, cin-
emas, etc.
The proposed alternative here overcomes many of the limitations of the ex-
isting methods, at the cost of a poor estimator of the Room Response. Even
though it has not been tested, the estimator obtained with this method rep-
resents the actual Power injected into the system.
The main feedback paths are identified from the Sound System Model
analysis in the frame of a communication system. The user control capabili-
ties of a Sound System are limited. This emphasizes the importance of good
acoustical treatment and system calibration. The availability of correction
tools is directly related to the sophistication of the System. This means
that low-budget Sound Systems are double cursed unless built-in solutions
start to be developed.
26
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS
27
The main conclusion from this thesis is that the Power radiation is
affected by room modes, which are present in most listening rooms. This
affects the low-frequency range, where the models used are of validity. This
influence grows larger for larger diaphragm sizes, which are desired in this
frequency range for improving the radiation. This seems to indicate that
the room is a relevant part of the coupling of the low-frequency extension
of a loudspeaker system. Furthermore, these room modes have detrimental
effects on hearing perception.
==PAGE:33==
Bibliography
[1]
Wolfgang Ahnert and Frank Steffen. Sound Reinforcement Engineer-
ing. CRC Press, 1993. isbn: 9781138569744.
[2]
Fady Alajaji and Po-Ning Chen. An Introduction to Single-User In-
formation Theory. Springer, 2018. isbn: 978-981-10-8000-5.
[3]
“An anthology of articles on Sound Reinforcement”. In: the Journal
of the Audio Engineering Society 15-44 (1967 -1996).
[4]
Brian E. Anderson. “Understanding radiation impedance through ani-
mations”. In: POMA: Proceedings of meetings on Acoustics 33.1 (May
2018).
[5]
Salvador Barrera-Figureoa. “Free-field reciprocity calibration of mea-
surement microphones at frequencies up to 150 kHz”. In: Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 144 (2018), pp. 2575–2583.
[6]
Enda Bates. “The Composition and Performance of Spatial Music”.
PhD thesis. Trinity College Dublin, 2009.
[7]
Leo L. Beranek and Tim J. Mellow. Acoustics: Sound Fields and
Transducers. Elsevier, 2012. isbn: 978-0-12-391421-7.
[8]
Egbert de Boer. “Acoustic Interaction in Vented Loudspeaker En-
closures”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 31
(1959), pp. 246–247.
[9]
Red Bull. How Jamaican soundsystem culture conquered music. 2017.
url: %22www . redbull . com / int - en / a - brief - history - of -
jamaican-soundsystem-culture,www.redbull.com/us-en/how-
jamaican - soundsystem - culture - conquered - music. (accessed:
28.09.2023).
[10]
Douglas J. Button. “Heat Dissipation and Power Compression in
Loudspeakers”. In: Journal of Audio Engineering Society 40.1,2 (1992),
pp. 32–41.
28
==PAGE:34==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
29
[11]
University Press Cambridge. Cambridge Dictionary. 2023. url: https:
//dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/. (accessed:
28.09.2023).
[12]
Jeff Candy and Clauss Futtrup. “An Added-Mass Measurement Tech-
nique for Transducer Parameter Estimation”. In: Journal of the Acous-
tical Engineering Society 65.12 (2017).
[13]
Edwin L. Carstensen. “Self-Reciprocity Calibration of Electroacoustic
Transducers”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 19.6
(1947), pp. 961–965.
[14]
Maurizio Corbella. “Multimedia Counterpoints On Henry Brant’s Vi-
sual Experiments with Spatial Music”. In: Mitteilungen der Paul Sacher
Stiftung 32 (2019).
[15]
Eileen Daniel DEd. “Noise and Hearing Loss: A Review”. In: Journal
of school health 5.5 (Apr. 2007), pp. 225–231. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1746-1561.2007.00197.x.
[16]
Archit Dixit. “Communication is Incomplete without Feedback”. In:
Pen Acclaims 2 (2018).
[17]
Daniel L. Everett. The navajo sound system. Linguistic Society of
America, 2007. isbn: 15350665 and 00978507.
[18]
Katzberg F et al. “Sound-field measurement with moving microphones”.
In:
Acoustical Society of America (2017), pp. 3220–3235. doi: 10.
1121/1.4983093.
[19]
Efren Fernandez-Grande et al. “Reconstruction of room impulse re-
sponses over extended domains for navigable sound field reproduc-
tion”. In: 2021 Immersive and 3D Audio: from Architecture to Au-
tomotive (I3DA). 2021, pp. 1–8. doi: 10.1109/I3DA48870.2021.
9610846.
[20]
Henry Primakoff; Leslie L. Foldy. “A General Theory of Passive Lin-
ear Electroacoustic Transducers and the Electroacoustic Reciprocity
Theorem. I”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 17.2
(1945), pp. 109–120.
[21]
Nyquist H. Certain Topics in Telegraph Transmission Theory. Paper.
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, Agosto 1920.
==PAGE:35==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
30
[22]
Maria Harley. “From Point to Sphere: Spatial Organization of Sound
in Contemporary Music (after 1950)”. In: Canadian University Music
Review / Revue de musique des universit´es canadiennes 13 (1993).
[23]
Maria Anna Harley. “An American in Space: Henry Brant’s “Spatial
Music””. In: American Music 15.1 (1997), pp. 70–92.
[24]
Ralf V. L. Hartley. “Transmission of Information”. In: Bell System
Technical Journal 27 (July 1928).
[25]
Julian Henriques. The Jamaican Dancehall Sound System as a Com-
mercial and Social Apparatus. Routledge, 2008. isbn: 9781315087825.
[26]
Franz Maria Heuchel. “Sound field reconstruction for outdoor sound
field control applications”. PhD thesis. Danmarks Tekniske Univer-
sitet, 2020.
[27]
Finn Jacobsen. “Sound Intensity and its Measurement”. In: Fifth In-
ternational Congress on Sound and Vibration (1997).
[28]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Møller Juhl. “A note on measurement of
sound pressure with intensity probes”. In: Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (2004). doi: 10.1121/1.1777851.
[29]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Møller Juhl. Fundamentals of General Lin-
ear Acoustics. John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2013. isbn: 978-1-118-34641-
9.
[30]
Graham Peter St John. “Sound System Nation: Jamaica”. In: Dancecult:
Journal of Electronic Dance Music Culture (May 2010), pp. 94–104.
doi: DOI10.12801/1947-5403.2010.01.02.07.
[31]
Lenart Jung. System Identification. Prentice Hall PTR, 1999. isbn:
0-13-656695-2.
[32]
M. Kavgic et al. “Analysis of thermal comfort and indoor air qual-
ity in a mechanically ventilated theatre”. In: Energy and Buildings
40.7 (2008), pp. 1334–1343. issn: 0378-7788. doi: https://doi.
org / 10 . 1016 / j . enbuild . 2007 . 12 . 002. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778807002940.
[33]
Su Iong Kio. “Feedback theory through the lens of social networking”.
In: Issues in Educational Research 25(2) (2015).
[34]
Bruel og Kjaer. Sound Intensity Probe. 2010.
==PAGE:36==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
31
[35]
Jean-Paul Lapp-Szymanski. “Thechnology Inna Rub-A-Dub Style :
Technology and Dub in the Jamaican Sound System and Recording
Studio”. MA thesis. McGill University, Aug. 2005.
[36]
Arno Lenk et al. Electromechanical Systems in Microtechnology and
Mechatronics. Springer, 2010. isbn: 978-3-642-10805-1.
[37]
David Lubman. “Archaeoacoustics”. In: McDonald Institute for Ar-
chaeological Research and Oxbow Books (2006).
[38]
Fred C. Lunenburg. “Louder Than Words: The Hidden Power of Non-
verbal Communication in the Workplace”. In: International Journal
of Scholarly Academic Intellecutal Diversity 12.1 (2010).
[39]
Bob McCarthy. Sound Systems: Design and Optimization (3rd Edi-
tion). Routledge, 2016. isbn: 9781315849843. doi: https://doi.
org/10.4324/9781315849843.
[40]
Joyce McDonough. The navajo sound system. Springer Netherlands,
2003. isbn: 978-94-010-0207-3. doi: 10.1007/978-94-010-0207-3.
[41]
MONICA project, Management Of Networked IoT Wearables – Very
Large Scale Demonstration of Cultural Societal Applications. url:
www.monica-project.eu.
[42]
Henry C. Montgomery. “Amplification and high fidelity in the Greek
theater”. In: The Classical Journal 54.6 (Mar. 1959), pp. 242–245.
[43]
Norman S. Nise. Control System Engineering. John Wiley & Sons,
2011. isbn: 978-0470-91769-5.
[44]
M´elanie Nolan and John L. Davy. “Two definitions of the inner prod-
uct of modes and their use in calculating non-diffuse reverberant
sound fields”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 145
(2019), pp. 3330–3340.
[45]
Diego Caviedes Nozal. “Sound field reconstruction for outdoor sound
field control applications”. PhD thesis. Danmarks Tekniske Univer-
sitet, 2020.
[46]
Harry Nyquist. “Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed”. In: Bell
System Technical Journal 27 (Apr. 1924), p. 324.
[47]
University Press Oxford. Oxford Learner’s Dictionary. 2023. url:
https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com. (accessed: 28.09.2023).
==PAGE:37==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
32
[48]
Robert M. Page. “1977 Pioneer Adward Monostatic Radar”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems AES-13.5 (1977),
pp. 557–571.
[49]
Robert Pasnau. “What is Sound?” In: The Philosophical Quarterly
49.196 (July 1999), pp. 309–324. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/
1467-9213.00144.
[50]
Libianchi Pierangelo, Agerkvist Finn T., and Shabalina Elena. “A
review of techniques and challenges in outdoor sound field control”.
In: Internoise. 2022.
[51]
Knud Rasmussen. Calculation methods for the physical properties of
air used in the calibration of microphones. Tech. rep. Department of
Acoustic Technology, Technical University of Denmark, 1997.
[52]
J.W.S Rayleigh. The Theory of Sound. Cambridge: University Press,
1877. isbn: 978-1-108-03220-9.
[53]
Elena Shabalina. “The Propagation of Low Frequency Sound through
an Audience”. PhD thesis. Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik
der Rheinischen-Westf¨alischen Technischen Hochschule Aachen, 2013.
[54]
Claude E. Shannon. “A mathematical model of communication”. In:
The Bell System Technical Journal 27 (July 1948), pp. 379–423, 623–
656.
[55]
Richard H. Small. “Direct-Radiatior Loudspeaker System Analysis”.
In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, reprinted from IEEE
Transactions on Audio and Electroacoustics 20.5 (1972), pp. 383–395.
[56]
Cristopher J. Struck. “Determination of the Thiele-Small Parameters
using two-channel FFT Analysis”. In: Bruel and Kjaer Instruments
Inc (1987).
[57]
St´ephan Tassart, Simon Valcin, and Michel Menu. “Active Loud-
speaker Heat Protection”. In: Journal of Audio Engineering Society
62.11 (2014), pp. 767–775.
[58]
1983. Technical Review Nos.1 & 2. Dual channel FFT analysis (Part
I & II). Tech. rep. 2. Bruel og Kjaer, 1984.
[59]
Arthur Neville Thiele. “Loudspeakers in Vented Boxes”. In: Journal
of the Audio Engineering Society 19.5 (1971), pp. 382–392.
==PAGE:38==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
33
[60]
T. Uebo, T. Kitagawa, and T. Iritani. “Short Range Radar Utilizing
Standing Wave of Microwave or Millimeter Wave”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (2001).
[61]
Majorie Fink Vargas. Louder than words : an introduction to non-
verbal communication. The Aiowa State University Press, 1986. isbn:
0-8138-1113-9.
[62]
World Health Organisation WHO. Environmental noise guidelines for
the European Region. Regional Office for Europe, 2019.
[63]
Oscar B. Wilson. “An Introduction to the Theoryand Design of Sonar
Transducers”. In: IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering OE-12.4 (1987),
p. 576.
==PAGE:39==
Research questions
“O Deep Thought computer,” he said, “the task we have de-
signed you to perform is this. We want you to tell us....” he
paused, “The Answer.”
“The Answer?” said Deep Thought. “The Answer to what?”
— Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
The purpose of this thesis is to compile and connect all the knowledge I have
been gathering over the years and tie the loose ends. At the same time, as
this is a research project, some important questions have been founded and
answered.
Another important objective was compile all that information into a
usable format as a reference for myself while being structured enough to be
presented, shared and used by others.
An extensive literature research reveal that most of the components of
the Sound System previously described are well defined from long ago. In
my opinion this knowledge is very scattered (ask me how much time did I
spend on finding the literature and putting it all together in my head...)
A.1
Targets
They were defined as a starting point, however, a extensive thinking when
defining them made them consistent along the whole thesis.
- Measure Sound System Response and its changes.
- Measure audience absorption and room parameters.
- Compensate for this parameters and changes.
34
==PAGE:40==
APPENDIX A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
35
A.2
Initial questions
- How much information can be extracted from a LoudSpeaker?
- Can it replace current measurement systems?
A.3
Research question
- How can we measure acoustical parameters?
- Can we characterise the System offline?
- Can we identify Room contribution?
- Can we do anything of the above live?
- Can we use that information for helping the mix?
Additional question
- How much information about a sound field can be extracted from the
emitter (source) position?
A.4
Hypothesis
- Live Characterization can be done with input-output comparison.
- Signals are very small on the electrical circuit to accurately measure
the radiation impedance, however, the variations of those parameters
can easily be measured.
- All the information about the actual state of the sound field can be
extracted from the emitter position, however, a priori knowledge of
the field is needed.
- Most of the relevant controllable parameters of a sound field can be
monitored from the emitter position.
==PAGE:41==
APPENDIX A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
36
A.5
Research goals and methods
- The radiation impedance of simple conditions will be tried to measure:
anechoic chamber, simple rooms, variable absorption.
- Room modes will be measured from the electrical side of the speaker.
- Temperature and absorption will be estimated from the resonances of
closed rooms. Outdoor sound will require a different technique.
- Dual channel FFT identification will be used, MLS superimposed to
the live signal will be considered. Signal levels, annoyance threshold
of the measurement signals and, if time allows and other signals will
be also analyzed.
- An estimation of the parameters magnitude will be done through
modelling.
- Switching amplifiers will be briefly analyzed.
A.6
Empirical considerations
The problem will be approached in three main sections:
1. Modelling.
2. Laboratory measurements.
3. Live tests.
The measurement system will rely on already existing measurement
technology, current sensing will be approximated by a resistor voltage and
everything will be measured with a AD interface. The acoustical measure-
ments will be taken with a regular measurement microphone.
All the signals will be captured and processed digitally.
Required facilities are different acoustic environments (rooms).
==PAGE:42==
APPENDIX A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
37
A.7
Impact - InNovation and applications
There is plenty of literature and patents related to the problem under study.
Even though the approach proposed here is novel.
Most of the current Sound Systems use internal Signal Processing com-
pensation for accounts its deficiencies in the target specifications, usage
specifications degradation, and non linearities compensations. Most if not
all of those compensators use only a priory knowledge, under the hypothe-
sis that those parameters will remain stable within the compensation range.
The most spread Room Compensation System is the Human in the Loop
(Sound Engineer) that adjust the system parameters, from the simple vol-
ume control present in any system, through more advanced equalisers or
frequency and time domain signal processing tools.
The novel approach of this study analyses a Human In the Loop control
element in the Sound System closed loop control. (Ricard Vill`a, Din`amica
de Sistemes, 1997). It also research which aditional inputs can this element
have and how to estimate those.
The same transducer will be used for both generating and capturing the
measurement signal, inspired by technologies like sonar, parking sensors or
Ground penetrating radar. This InNovation is intended to overcome the
measurement challenges associated with the Sound System control.
A.8
Intended learning
- Problem definition: a huge effort has been allocated in the precise
definition of the problem and the solution to this problem. For this,
the Double Diamond approach is applied.
- Global thinking applied to technology development: technology has
a significant impact on society development, so special attention has
being paid to the potential benefits and consequences of the solutions
proposed in this project.
- Understanding of the basic concepts: the principles and main ideas
behind this project are extremely simple and date back to the very be-
==PAGE:43==
APPENDIX A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
38
ginning of loudspeaker invention or earlier. A deeper understanding of
the working principles of acoustics and loudspeakers, room acoustics
and hearing is seeked.
- Project planning: given that it has being prioritized simplicity, this
allows (and obliges) for experiments to be run. This involves human
and material resources and exhaustive and detailed planning. Identi-
fying the tasks, critical timing, stakeholders, resources, requirements
and long etc will be primal.
- Transferable knowledge: another motivation for this project is to ap-
ply solutions that address similar problems from different research
areas to the field of acoustics.
A.9
Redundancy
The thesis is divided in two parts:
• System modelling, and system metrics, which aims to model the whole
system from an outside perspective.
• Electro acoustic characterisation: which aims to test the viability of
estimating the Room Acoustics from the Radiation Impedance.
They constitute the TopDown and the BottomUp approaches to the prob-
lem.
A safeguard was chosen before moving on with the project: it must not
rely on a single technology or method that might or not work. An imple-
mentation of the current measurement systems is used.
From a risk perspective, this heavily increases the workload and the risk, as
the are two potential parallel bottlenecks in the project. On the scientific
perspective, this just aligns the validation method and the proposed alter-
native.
This way, the outcome produces ready to use tools, while developing to-
wards more powerful alternatives.
==PAGE:44==
APPENDIX A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
39
A.10
Opportunities
Sound Reinforcement Systems, or Public Address systems, are the most
widely known Sound Systems, yet probably the least technically challeng-
ing systems compared with critical applications like Hearing Aids, Sonar,
Ground Penetrating Radar and many other Sound Systems where technical
requirements are very strict.
Any System that helps to improve the ”Audio Quality” and as so re-
duce Sound Pressure Level, that can be easily implemented in this Systems,
can have a major repercussion in the usage of Speakers. Of the aforemen-
tioned problems, many relate to the Room Acoustics, which is linked to the
Room Modes, and the other major problem is the measurement position.
If this information can be extracted from the Source transducer, without
significant modifications of the system, will set a huge step towards this
solution.
==PAGE:45==
Measurement system
Having clear what we want to measure, and how we can potentially measure
it, it is time to get it working.
Acoustical measurements: we can measure Sound Pressure and Particle
Velocity. The second is out of discussion for the complexity of it. According
to Juhls it should not even be necessary.
The Sound Pressure can be measured with any microphone. Mechanical
Measurements: we can measure Force and Velocity. For the ease of it lets
measure Displacement (laser). This wont be done.
Electrical Measurements: we can measure Voltage and Current. Voltage
measurement is a standard, any Analog to Digital converter will do. The
current needs to be estimated, either from Magnetical fields (Faradays) or
our approach: Ohms law and a series resistor.
From here it can be seen that all the measured variables will be trans-
lated into an electrical signal. The analysis of this signals (according to the
Two Port Network) will be done indeferently, the important aspect will be
the units and magnitudes.
B.1
Requirements
- Easy interface: a live sound analyser is useful if it can be ”plugged” or
used with a regular Audio Interface
TOO much information on screen for just a single number to be extracted,
HOW to automate this?
- Live metrics
- Repeatability: for live sound, repeatability and ease of measurement is
prioritary over precision. The sound engineer learns how to interpret the
”not that precise” data.
40
==PAGE:46==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
41
interface
• Capture signal: constant
• Representation: user (window size, zoom, etc)
Figure B.1: Measurement loop
Figure B.2: Measurement system schematic
System seeting: input selection, and sampling frequency. With this we
define the adquisition loop. Most Analog to Digital converters (which inter-
facing with the Operative System is hidden under many abstraction layers)
work with frames, which are extracted to the hardware to Physical Com-
puter Registry Addres. This capture loop is the most tricky, and already
available tools are used for it. What the Measurement System will do then
is just grab the supplied frames on a regular basics and perform the differ-
ent analysis.
==PAGE:47==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
42
The representation will be selected according to the measurement, and
for most of the measurements a Bode plot will be the appropriate one. The
phase will be plotted and the coherence also. For a live setup, the later will
be used as a threshold BK.
B.2
Magnitudes
First setup
Figure B.3: First setup
Here the Electrical Impedance was measured, and the low frequency
was analysed. Really noisy Low Frequency Estimator was spot, which later
showed to be the ROOM MODES making the estimator very poor due to
short averaging.
Three resistors were used: 1, 33 and 100 ohms.
Two Sound Cards were used: Focusrite Saffire 2i2 and Motu Ultralite MKI.
The microphone BALANCED inputs were used in an asymetrical topology
and a gain of about 10 dB was used for the voltage sense and a gain of 50
dB (maximum available) for the voltage sense.
==PAGE:48==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
43
This led to further research the signal magnitudes under analysis, and the
relation between the resistor size and the voltages across.
Second Setup
The following setup was run to measure the parameter range for the De-
vice Under Test. The Voltage and Current were measured with Standard
Measurement Devices. Magnitudes have been ESTIMATED from the Elec-
troAcoustic model.
Figure B.4: Calibration setup
Different signals were used. As the Transfer Function Estimator System
was not ready yet, simple signals were used (they allow to also varufy the
linearity analysis, a sine wave will show harmonics, among others).
The optimal value for the Operating Point was set to produce Sound
Pressure Levels from 40 to 70 dB, depending on the input signal (high Spec-
tral Density Signals will produce less output with the same input energy).
The Sound Pressure Level was measured with NIOSH SLM, which has an
accuracy of 0.5 dB CITE PAPERS!!. They have been calibrated in Re-
verberant Room and Anechoich chamber for this particular devices within
+-0.5dB against a calibrated BK Sound level Meter.
The metric used was Slow A and C weighting, and both agree (due to the
radiation efficiency of the driver used they are valid).
The input frequencies were 440 Hz and 1kHz, chosen arbitrarily for the
STANDARD measurements, and they are in a frequency range where the
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
44
validity of the LUMPED MODEL breaks. They could not be repeated due
to the lack of time, but verified through FULL RANGE measurements af-
terwards.
Another Setup was set to measure the approximated ”microphonic” ef-
fect. It does not fully represent how the Transducer ”couples back” the
Radiation Load, but the values measured match the expected values from
the ElectroAcoustical model. And it allows for a separate system to be
build.
Figure B.5: Calibration setup microphonic
From this calibration, it can already be observed that an AVERAGE
estimation of the current does not directly relate to the Acoustical Output.
==PAGE:50==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
45
Figure B.6: Calibration values
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
46
Figure B.7: Calibration values
==PAGE:52==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
47
B.3
Signal Conditioning
The acoustical and mechanical measurements will rely on existing equip-
ment. For the electrical ones the system will be fitted to requirements.
Figure B.8: General system scheme
The operation amplifiers are used as a Buffer, meant to have a really
High Input Impedance and as so avoiding biased voltage measurements.
Given the small Parameter Magnitudes (from EXPERIMENT II), some
gain was desired.
Sensing resistor
The resistor choice has a compromise: large resistors develop higer volt-
ages for small currents, this mean higher Signal to Noise Ratios. This also
ensures that the Speaker Driver sees the amplifier as a Constant Current
Source because the Source Impedance is much larger than the Device Un-
der Test (cite IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS). The cost is higher power
drawn from the amplifier. With modern amplifiers this is not a problem,
however...
The resistor should be small to not affect the circuit under measurement.
This is a common rule of thumb, and for most daily Current Sensing it is
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
48
Figure B.9: Practical Implementation
Originally borrowed from PCP Audio
a fair rule (commercial products use resistors in the order of mili and mi-
croohms, though more advanced current sensing devices are now available).
In an experimental setup, this is actually not a problem: we don’t care
about power efficiency. This fact was not considered when designing the
system, unfortunatley...
There is one important factor with the choice of the resistor: it must be
as close as possible to a pure resistive element. Small size resistors tend to
have higher inductance (due to physical coiling manufacturing) and even
capacitance at very high frequencies (not relevant here). Also, small size
resistors have larger thermal drift.
This factors can be mitigated by parallel assembly of resistors CITE TOL-
ERANCE ADDITION, and by using high power handling resistors.
In the end, the choice was made:4x parallel 5W 0.22ohm resistors.
The resulting equivalent resistor is a 33 mOhm 25W resistor. Consequence:
==PAGE:54==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
49
low Signal to Noise Ratio. Which will require averaging, which goes against
the ideal setup...
From the calibration, this gains are Vgain ∈−1 −15 dB and Igain ∈
40to80 dB
The Current gain is extremely problematic, as justified by the really small
resistor choice.
Current sensing correction
The measurement system (usually) have a common ground, this makes an-
other compromise in the Measurement Setup design: either make a complex
differential Instrumentation Amplifier, which can measure voltage differ-
ences across two points, indifferent from the real ground, or measure the
voltages with respect to the common ground and apply a correction.
v = i·(Zsp + Rs)
(B.1)
vs = v −i·Zsp = i·RS
(B.2)
i =
v
Zsp + Rs
=
v −vs
Zsp = vs
Rs
(B.3)
Zsp = Rs·v −vs
vs
(B.4)
Mind that this equation is valid when the resistor is placed after the Speaker
Driver. If placed before this equation will be the Inverse.
Also, for Signal to Noise Ratio optimization, different gains can be ap-
plied to each voltage sensing. They need to be compensated later:
Zsp = k1·v −k2·vs
k2·vs
=
k1
k2
· v
vs
−1

·Rs
(B.5)
Speaker power
The power a speaker can handle is related to Input Voltage and Current
through Ohms law.
v = i·r
(B.6)
P = v·i = i2·r = v2
r
(B.7)
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
50
Power (W)
Impedance (ω)
Voltage (v)
Current (A)
10
8
9
1
10
6
7,7
1,3
10
4
6,3
1,6
This give us an idea about real magnitudes to be measured and potential
challenges that come with them. As a reference, the commercial Analog
to Digital converters have a peak maximum input of 2V for audio, 5V
for microcontrollers and 10V for scientific acquisition devices. The main
challenge is still measuring the large currents in the system. Inductive and
Hall sensors will probably be the way to go for it.
The gain stages
Another factor to account: the voltages to be measured are centered around
0V. For the operation amplifiers to capture this voltage, they need a two
rail power supply. So either the power Supply is designed to be symmetric,
or the Operational Amplifier is biased to handle this signals. The system
will be powered from a single supply, so for simplicity the second topology
was chosen.
Figure B.10: Amplifier operation point
The gain stages are designed using Texas Instruments Single Rail Op-
eration Amplifier Design Guide.
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
51
Figure B.11: Voltage sensing
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
52
Figure B.12: Current sensing
==PAGE:58==
APPENDIX B. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
53
Final Setup
B.4
Signal processing
==PAGE:59==
Planning
“No plan survive the first battle”
— VCH
“Plans are useless, planning is essential”
— JBR, quoted from Unknown (Eisenhower)
In this chapter, the project timeline, goals and structure will be defined.
This process started a while before the project was actually running, re-
garding the problem definition, scope definition, execution approach and
many other practical issues that are relevant for project management.
Figure C.1: Double Diamond by the Design Council
The initial state was very undefined and immensely broad, and it did not
pose any solution to a problem nor research topic. The Double Diamond
approach was used then for clearly defining a starting point, problem or
opportunity.
54
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX C. PLANNING
55
C.1
Activities
- Project scope definition
- Problem and target definition
- Literature research
- Planning
- Experiment setup definition
- Interviews preparation
- Documentation
- Experimentation
- Data collection and plotting
- Documentation
- Project tracking and revision
C.2
Milestones
- Project plan
- Interviews appointments
- Involved companies
- Measurement procedure
- Experiment setup
- Impulse Response measurement kit
- Report drafts
- Room measurements
- Festival live tests
- Electro-mechanical measurement kit
- Experiment setup revision 1
- Thesis draft
- Thesis report
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX C. PLANNING
56
C.3
Deliverables
- Experiment setup drawings
- Acoustical identification tool
- Electrical identification tool
- Two channel FFT identification setup
- Relevant parameter choice (interviews)
- Preliminary experiment data
- Experiment validation data
- Individual activities report
- Project tracking chart
- Thesis draft
- Annex draft
- Thesis
C.4
Risk analysis: risk - mitigation
- Electrical magnitudes not measurable - Acoustical measurement al-
ternative.
- Unstable parameters ? Find proper time constants.
- No contact with sound engineers ? Parallel literature research.
- No contact with festivals ? Alternative laboratory validation.
- Missing documentation ? Report and document while advancing the
thesis.
- Model complexity ? Go back to problem definition and redefine ap-
proach.
- Overloading ? Time buffers included in the planning
