==PAGE:1==
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Test­
ing for Startup Companies
Effektive og rentable testløsninger for iværksæt­
tervirksomheder med mobilapps
Matic Jovan
Supervisor: Ekkart Kindler, Associate Professor
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
Effektive og rentable testløsninger for iværksættervirksomheder med mobilapps
Master Thesis
30th of November, 2023
By
Matic Jovan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, As­
mussens Alle, building 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preamble
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Computer Science and
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with Fauna
Aps and in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of software development
and testing.
Matic Jovan ­ s210225
Signature
Date
ii
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents a comprehensive investigation into the development of efficient and
cost­effective software testing strategies for mobile applications within the context of tech­
nology startups where the company Fauna serves as a case study. With a focus on
resource­constrained environments, the study introduces a step­by­step approach, inte­
grating fast critical software component identification, artificial intelligence (AI) tools, low­
code testing tools and continuous integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD) methodolo­
gies to enhance testing efficiency and effectiveness.
The research identifies the unique challenges faced by startups in software testing, em­
phasizing the need for strategies that are not only resource­efficient and cost­effective
but also adaptable to fast development cycles. The step­by­step approach, central to this
thesis, serves as a guide for startups on how and what to implement using AI­enhanced
testing methods, including the use of AI chatbots for automated test generation and low­
code UI testing tools, such as Testim. This approach is complemented by the integration of
CI/CD practices, facilitating a more streamlined and consistent software delivery process.
Additionally, it also presents how the defect­solving scenario could pose an improvement
over the methods without having testing frameworks and practices in place.
Empirical evaluations and comparative analyses underscore the advantages of the pro­
posed methods over traditional testing approaches. These include potential time savings
and reduced cost, reduction in manual testing efforts, and most importantly, the potential
way for improved software quality. The study also delves into the practical implementa­
tion of these strategies in a startup environment, demonstrating their feasibility and impact
through various case studies and real­world scenarios.
To conclude, this thesis provides valuable insights and actionable strategies for tech star­
tups aiming to enhance their software testing practices. It contributes to the field of soft­
ware development by offering a scalable, efficient, and cost­effective framework for mo­
bile app testing, addressing the specific needs and constraints of startups in the rapidly
evolving technological landscape.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Fauna: An Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Software testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Background
11
2.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Analysis: Existing and new technology
13
3.1
Analysis of existing application architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Feasibility study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Environment setup
35
4.1
Source code repository
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
CI/CD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3
Testing frameworks and Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Test development and implementation
39
5.1
Test plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Test steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Test case development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.4
Integration with the CI pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Leveraging advanced testing tools
49
6.1
AI­powered test case development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Results
53
7.1
Critical component analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.2
Manual test development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.3
Test development using AI test generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.4
Test development using an AI chatbot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.5
Low­code test development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.6
CI/CD integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
7.7
Bug identification and resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
8
Evaluation
75
9
Conclusion
85
Bibliography
87
A Appendix ­ AI chatbot’s software components criticality analysis output
93
iv
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:7==
B Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests developed manually
96
C Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests generated automatically with Machinet
AI test generation
99
D Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests developed using the AI chatbot
102
E
Appendix ­ UI test developed using the AI chatbot
107
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In the fast­paced world of tech startups, the concept of launching a Minimal Viable Product
(MVP) has become a foundational strategy [1]. MVPs, often manifested as a basic version
of a functioning product, can allow startups to gather practical evidence regarding the
product’s compatibility with the market’s needs [2]. The impact of a launched MVP on the
market significantly affects the viability of a startup in a strongly competitive landscape.
Thus, early validation and reaction to the MVP’s effectiveness on the market is crucial for
a startup in order to mitigate future risks and pivot (if necessary) towards a successful
path.
However, the rush to market with an MVP can have its own risks. There have been
notable cases where the premature launch of an MVP negatively impacted a startup’s
market reputation due to unresolved flaws or user experience issues [3]. It might be that
the early launch of an MVP allows for early validation of the practical market fit of the
product, yet it would be preferred that the MVP causes as little damage as possible to the
reputation of a startup [4]. Nevertheless, even after a successful MVP launch which fits the
market’s needs, startups may have to raise necessary funding based on the prototype’s
reception to the early customers for further development [5]. Furthermore, even with the
necessary funding, startups face the troublesome task of translating their validated idea
into a full­fledged mobile application which has been noticed from personal experience.
This is where lies a significant challenge: ensuring the software not only meets functional
requirements but also meets the quality standards. The need for comprehensive software
testing thus could become paramount [6].
It is widely known that startups face themselves with unique constraints.
Limited re­
sources, both in terms of personnel and finances, often mean that thorough software
testing is neglected [6]. Many startups rely heavily on manual ’smoke’ tests—simple eval­
uations aiming to catch the most prominent issues. While this approach might identify
and resolve up to 50% of major bugs, it’s not without its risks [7]. In several instances,
oversights in the manual testing process have led to significant data losses or even severe
damage to end­users [8].
Moreover, the argument that writing tests could potentially double the development time
becomes a frequent reason among startup circles to refrain from doing it due to budget
constraints. This sentiment, combined with the perception that tests might soon become
obsolete due to rapidly changing requirements, leads many to question the value of early
testing [2]. However, this mindset overlooks a critical aspect of budgeting: the cost of
post­production fixes. Issues detected and rectified during the development phase are in
most cases cheaper than those identified after deployment [9]. However, the reluctance
to adopt automated testing early on is increasing the probability of startups ending up in
the situation of fixing post­production issues [9]. Relying solely on manual methods often
leads to building up technical debt — a scenario where shortcuts taken during the develop­
ment process require costly substantial revisions later. Furthermore, the consequences
of deploying a faulty application extend beyond financial consequences; they can weaken
trust, damage a startup’s reputation, and in extreme cases, result in its downfall.
On the other hand, the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in testing is becoming more preva­
lent and offers promising opportunities. AI­based testing tools can enhance the quality
and efficiency of testing, making it faster, more flexible, and better aligned with a startup’s
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
1
==PAGE:10==
dynamic requirements. Software testing with AI involves using tools like chatbots for test
automation, AI systems for test case generation, and other AI­driven techniques. The
main advantage of AI in testing is not only accelerating the testing process, simplifying
and automating tasks, but also learning and adjusting to changes in the software [10] [11].
In conclusion, while the MVP model offers startups a valuable tool for market validation,
the subsequent steps, especially software testing, present a great set of challenges. It’s
a careful balance: startups must balance the urgency to release with the need for quality.
The approach and methods chosen for testing, given the constraints and high stakes,
could very well be the key component of a startup’s success or failure. This thesis aims
to delve deeper into these challenges, exploring cost­effective testing methodologies, AI­
powered testing tools and methodologies, and assessing their impact in a quantifiable
manner.
1.1
Fauna: An Overview
Fauna is a start­up dedicated to offering pet owners a unique digital health book experi­
ence for their pets. This application serves as a bridge between pet owners and veterinary
clinics. At its core, the Fauna application’s functionality is similar to the well­recognized
Min Sundhed application, a digital health book for Denmark residents [12]. The distinction
between the two applications lies in Fauna’s focus: pets. Previously, Fauna extended its
services to the veterinary side; however, a shift in strategy led to the discontinuation of
that. Despite this, if a pet owner’s veterinary clinic is affiliated with Fauna, they can effort­
lessly access digital records of their pets and receive timely reminders about vaccinations
through the app.
Fauna’s main functionalities include:
• Manual upload/take photo: the user can upload a picture of a receipt received at
a veterinary clinic or scan the QR (quick response) code to obtain its digital version
in the Fauna mobile application as seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Upload photo screen
Figure 1.2: Household screen
• Household: the application screen where the user can add and manage the house­
2
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:11==
hold members as seen in Figure 1.2. All household members can then manage the
user’s pet that is registered in the user’s application.
Figure 1.3: Vaccinations screen
Figure 1.4:
Scan vaccination QR code
screen
• Vaccinations: the screen where the user can see all their pet’s digital vaccination
receipts as seen in Figure 1.3.
• Add vaccination via QR code: the screen where the user can scan the QR code
of a vaccination receipt adding it to the digital vaccination receipts screen as seen
in Figure 1.4.
• Timeline: the screen where the user can add and see all the events (vaccinations,
health check etc.) that already happened chronologically on a timeline as seen in
Figure 1.5.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.5: Timeline screen
In its product journey, Fauna successfully launched the first iteration of the mobile appli­
cation for both Android and iOS platforms and is now gearing up to release the second
iteration. The application’s architecture and the complete code repository are located on
GitHub, which also serves as Fauna’s primary version control system. A notable concern,
however, is the lack of any comprehensive software testing on the mobile application.
While there are some testing efforts on the back­end side, the mobile front­end remains
clearly untested, setting the stage for potential challenges.
The development responsibility lies on the capable shoulders of a main developer, pro­
ficient in testing strategies, and a student developer. Technologically, Fauna’s Android
application is developed in Kotlin native, combined with Jetpack Compose for user inter­
face (UI), Hilt for dependency injection, and Apollo GraphQL for data transactions [13,
14, 15, 16, 17]. However, the startup’s challenges are undeniable. With only Firebase
Crashlytics for crash monitoring and without a proper CI/CD pipeline, there emerges a
clear need for a more holistic debugging and testing mechanisms [18]. This emphasizes
the crucial importance of this research in addressing these shortcomings in lack of testing.
Within the contemporary digital landscape, startups like Fauna stand as representatives
of rapid innovation and adaptability. Offering both native iOS and Android applications,
Fauna shows the common approach many startups attempt to reach as many users as
possible. However, for the relevance and precision of this thesis, the focus will be specifi­
cally on their Android application, and within that, an even narrower focus on its Onboard­
ing feature.
Taking Fauna as a case study, this research intends to extract insights and practices that
can be generalized for other startups facing similar technological and operational chal­
lenges. Such a focused examination aids in identifying strategies that could be applicable
to startups operating with similar tech stacks or situations.
The following sections are meant to dive deeper into the subject of this thesis. The Intro­
duction chapter focuses on setting the stage, introducing the company part of the project,
stating the problem, methodology and software testing. Chapter Background will describe
4
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:13==
the obtained knowledge and experience in the field, and present related work on the topic
of this thesis. Chapter Analysis: Existing and new technology will analyze the existing
Fauna’s Android application’s architecture, Fauna’s development and testing processes
in place, carry an identification of the most critical components and carry out a feasibility
study of components to be tested, CI/CD tools and testing tools. Chapter Environment
setup will present how the set­up was done; the source code repository, CI/CD and test­
ing frameworks and tools. Chapter Test development and implementation will present the
test plan, test steps, test case development and integration with the CI pipeline. Chap­
ter Leveraging advanced testing tools will present the test development with AI­powered
tools (test generation and AI chatbot), and low­code testing. Chapter Results will present
the results obtained: critical component analysis, manual test development, AI test gener­
ation test development, AI chatbot test development, low­code test development, CI/CD
integration and bug identification and resolution. Chapter Evaluation will present the eval­
uation of the results obtained and discussing them. Chapter Conclusion will present the
conclusion to this work.
1.1.1
Feature in focus: Onboarding
The Onboarding features nine screens which can be seen in Figure 1.6.
Figure 1.6: Onboarding screens
The user reaches this flow with these screens when the Fauna application when first
opened. First, a login/register new user screen is displayed and when ”Opret bruger”
(register new user) is clicked the user is navigated through the next three description
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
5
==PAGE:14==
screens. Alternatively if ”Log ind” is clicked the user will be navigated to the login screen
which is a separate flow. After navigating through the description screens, the user has
to input their information. Then an access code is received through and text message
on the phone number provided and has to be input to the next screen. Afterwards, the
pet type is selected and pet info has to be inputted. Once that is completed, the user us
greeted with a welcome screen in the end.
1.2
Problem statement
Emerging tech startups grapple with the dual objectives of ensuring software quality and
optimizing resource allocation. In the absence of dedicated testing teams, developers
often have to take on this responsibility. This arrangement can lead to potential oversights,
given that developers might not always be fully versed in comprehensive testing. Such
oversights could result in post­release bug­fixing episodes, which are not only resource­
intensive but can also harm the product’s reputation.
Key challenges confronting startups include:
1. Post­release bug resolution becoming a costly and inefficient process due to inad­
equate testing beforehand.
2. Developers, without a test team, potentially overlooking critical issues due to a lack
of specialized testing expertise which ultimately become too expensive for startups.
3. Many startups with limited resources in a similar situation argue software testing
could double the development time (especially using traditional testing methods)
and, thus, skip or shorten the testing of their software.
Given these challenges, this research aims to outline strategies enabling startups to main­
tain product quality without having developers spend too much of their time devising, writ­
ing tests and excessively delaying the startup’s time­to­market.
1.3
Methodology
The goal of this research project is to assess the need for software testing within tech
startups, focusing on the type and extent of testing required to balance product quality,
resource and time constraints. To achieve this, Fauna’s Android application will serve as
our primary case study, providing insights applicable to other startups in similar stages of
development.
The initial phase involves an in­depth analysis of Fauna’s system architecture, including
its code structure and data flow. This will aid in identifying critical sections of the applica­
tion’s source code and determining which application layers necessitate testing. Such an
analysis is crucial for understanding the current state of the application, the architecture
and tools it currently uses, and for the selection of libraries for software testing.
It will then as part of Chapters Test development and implementation and Leveraging
advanced testing tools implement four distinct testing methods:
1. Traditional manual test case implementation.
2. Test case creation using AI­powered chatbots.
3. Automated test case generation through AI­driven tools.
4. Low­code software testing utilizing AI­enhanced tools.
6
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:15==
Each testing method will be incorporated into a Continuous Integration/Continuous De­
livery (CI/CD) pipeline. The project begins with setting up a new code repository and
environment, subsequently migrating the Onboarding feature. A variety of CI/CD frame­
works will be assessed and only one implemented, and being connected with the primary
GitHub code repository.
The testing spectrum encompasses unit, integration, UI, and user tests — with user tests
already being integral to Fauna’s pre­release checks. It will delve into advanced testing
tools and frameworks utilizing AI, such as:
• ChatGPT for AI­based chatbots [19]
• Machinet AI for AI­assisted automatic test case code generation [20]
• And platform Testim that employ low­code testing techniques for accessible software
testing [21]
Upon completion of the test frameworks, this work will focus on the main part of the project:
presenting the results and evaluating the outcomes. Metrics include standard parameters
like cost, cost/benefit ratio, time metrics, learning curve, and speed. More advanced
metrics will evaluate the testing methods’ effectiveness in software defect detection and
its resolution, maintainability, and the intercompatibility of tools and methods.
Feedback, especially from startup stakeholders such as developers and product owners,
will also play an important role in the qualitative assessment. This feedback, compared
against the quantitative data, will offer a well­rounded evaluation.
Conclusions will be drawn based on the collected data, resulting in meaningful observa­
tions and informed recommendations for startups. This will entail reasons to adopt spe­
cific methods, potential benefits, mistakes to avoid, alternatives, and the reasoning behind
choosing one solution over another, especially concerning time­ and resource­efficiency,
and long­term cost­effectiveness.
1.4
Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery
Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Delivery (CD) have emerged as critical prac­
tices that enable teams to deliver code changes more frequently and reliably. CI refers to
the practice of automating the integration of code changes from multiple contributors into
a single software project. It is a development practice where developers integrate code
into a shared repository frequently, preferably several times a day. Each integration can
then be verified by an automated build and automated tests. CI is used to catch issues
early in the development cycle, which tends to reduce the cost of fixing them. The auto­
mated tests play a significant role in CI, as they validate the new code’s compatibility with
the existing codebase and ensure that the new integration does not break the product.
[22]
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.7: Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery processes in a system [22].
Figure 1.7 depicts both CI and CD and showcases where the difference lies visually.
CD can provide a competitive edge by enabling faster go­to­market for features and ensur­
ing that the product evolves in close alignment with user feedback. For resource­limited
startups, CD ensures that deployment processes are not a bottleneck and that releases
are routine and low­risk. [22]
CI and CD, when used together, enable startups to develop, test, and deploy features
swiftly. By automating the release process, startups can focus more on developing new
features rather than managing releases. The automation inherent in CI/CD tools replaces
many manual steps that developers would traditionally perform after pushing their code.
This automation ensures consistency and reliability throughout the entire release process.
The benefits of CI/CD for startups include faster feedback on code changes, which aids
in identifying and fixing issues early. [23]
For startups, CI/CD can play a vital role when resources are directed towards crucial
tests that offer the most significant feedback for the product at hand. Automated testing
within CI/CD pipelines ensures that the startup maintains a high­quality codebase without
excessive resource expenditure. [24]
Software testing might not always be part of CI/CD especially when there are time and
resource limitation and when startups are in early stages.
1.5
Software testing
Software testing is the process of evaluating the functionality, performance, and security of
a software application by identifying gaps, errors, or missing requirements. In the context
of mobile apps, testing may become more intricate due to the variety of mobile devices,
operating systems, and user interfaces. [25]
For startups, effective software testing is a business­important topic. It leads to a reli­
able product, building user trust and market reputation. In the competitive landscape,
the ability to quickly release bug­free, user­friendly applications can make a significant
differentiation. [26]
8
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:17==
1.5.1
Types of testing
Mobile app development in startups is important, understanding and implementing various
types of testing is crucial for ensuring a high­quality product. Each type of testing serves
a specific purpose and addresses different aspects of the application. Functional testing
type is one of the important types.
Unit testing focuses on individual components or units of the application. It’s essential for
early bug identification and simplifies debugging in later stages. [26]
Integration Testing: This testing phase involves combining units and testing them as a
group to ensure seamless interaction, particularly vital in mobile apps where various mod­
ules interact. [27]
UI testing focuses on the user interface of the app to ensure it is user­friendly and functions
as expected. This type of testing is vital for ensuring the app’s interface meets design
standards and is intuitive for users. [28]
End­to­end testing examines the flow of an application from start to finish, ensuring all
integrated components function together correctly across various scenarios. For example,
it is critical in verifying the complete functionality of the application. [29]
Automated and Manual testing
Software testing presents two main approaches: automated and manual testing. Both
have their unique benefits, particularly in startups where the balance between time, qual­
ity, and resources is crucial. Automated testing, especially in Android development, con­
sists of scripts written to check other code for proper functionality. This method offers
software stability and allows developers to scale their applications efficiently [30].
However, automation is not always the answer to every testing challenge. Certain com­
plex scenarios, like verifying access codes, often need the human element that manual
testing provides. Fauna’s approach embodies this. Before rolling out new app versions,
the team conducts manual tests internally. Moreover, they also release the app to a set
of test users for adding feedback. This combination of team testing and real­world user
feedback helps Fauna detect and fix potential issues before a wider release. In this chap­
ter, we’ll compare the strengths and weaknesses of both methods, shedding light on their
roles in a startup context like Fauna’s.
1.5.2
Artificial intelligence in testing
Artificial intelligence has emerged as a fundamental part of modern computational tech­
nology.
It is designed to simulate human cognitive capabilities and functions to cre­
ate systems that can autonomously perform tasks, which normally require human intel­
lect [31] [32].
Artificial intelligence, a transformative technology in many areas, holds tremendous po­
tential not only for software testing but software development in general. It has made a
great shift in the field ,especially regarding startups and mobile app development [33].
The section on AI in testing explores the foundational principles that enable its applicabil­
ity, exploring AI­powered tools and the potential of AI chatbots in the testing area. These
AI­driven techniques might not only revolutionize testing efficiency but also accelerate the
process of creating test scenarios.
AI technologies, such as machine learning and natural language processing, are increas­
ingly being used to automate test case generation. This automation leads to more efficient
and effective testing processes, crucial for startups with limited resources. [34]
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
9
==PAGE:18==
Principles of AI in testing
This chapter will discuss potential principles and potential benefits that can be achieve
with AI.
Adaptability: One of the key principles of AI in testing is its adaptability. AI algorithms
can quickly adjust to changes in the app environment or requirements, making them highly
effective for the dynamic nature of mobile app development. [35]
Efficiency and cost­Effectiveness: AI­driven testing is known for its efficiency and cost­
effectiveness. By automating repetitive and time­consuming tasks, AI allows startups to
focus their resources on more critical aspects of development. [36]
Scalability: Scalability is another vital principle of AI in testing. AI tools can handle an in­
creasing amount of work and more complex test scenarios without a proportional increase
in effort or cost, a crucial factor for growing startups. [29]
These principles of AI in testing stress the potential of AI to revolutionize the testing pro­
cess, making it more efficient, effective, and adaptable to the needs of low­resource star­
tups in the competitive mobile app market.
10
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:19==
2
Background
This chapter will outline the experience obtained prior to this project and the related work,
applicable to this work.
Prior to this project software development and testing experience has been obtained
through several student jobs. Some focused on mobile development and some on general
software development. One student job has been focusing specifically on test automa­
tion for camera software, thus, a decent knowledge and applied experience in testing
principles were received. There have also been numerous university courses attended
regarding software development and testing. Software development experience has been
gathered since the year 2018 and software testing experience since the year 2021.
2.1
Related work
The interaction between software testing methodologies in the startup environment and
the evolving technological landscape, notably the integration of AI, has attracted the at­
tention of researchers. A few significant studies have explored various aspects of this
theme:
Gruner et al.[37] undertake a comprehensive review of current methods and guidelines
related to software testing. They propose numerous potential solutions, with a perspec­
tive that some measures, such as enhancing the software testing curriculum at universi­
ties, might not be feasible by startups. They also mention to potential complications of
automated testing tools, suggesting they might unintentionally introduce their own bugs.
Despite the study’s age, its insights into manual and automated testing remain relevant,
especially in the agile environment of startups. However, their study leans more towards
a general approach, lacking in specific details.
M. T. Hasan et al.[38] turn their focus on Small to Medium Enterprises (SMEs), presenting
a framework tailored to their software testing needs. This work recognizes the unique
challenges SMEs face, such as budget limitations and resource constraints. While their
framework provides strategic direction, it misses out on detailed, applicable techniques.
S. Basri et al.[39] emphasize the use of exploratory testing during the early development
phases. Their methodology prioritizes the early identification of defects but does not ex­
plore the necessary steps required for their correction.
N. Mulla et al.[40] delve into the topic of AI in software testing, outlining the numerous
ways AI can revolutionize the testing process. However, their work does not specifically
focus on startups, particularly those providing mobile applications, which is a primary
focus of this research.
In conclusion, while existing studies highlight the importance of software testing in the
startup domain and explore advancements like AI, a notable gap persists in uniting these
areas. This work attempts to fill this gap, aiming to provide both insights and concrete
solutions suited for the specific challenges faced by tech startups.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:21==
3
Analysis: Existing and new technology
The realm of software startups is characterized by dynamic challenges and decisions
that play a pivotal role in determining their journey toward success. This chapter aims
to analyze the different aspects of software development and testing processes within
the context of startups, particularly by using Fauna as a study case. The main goal is
to present and explain the system’s architecture, technology choices, the mobile appli­
cation’s development process and key factors which are needed for effective software
testing and development. This chapter will firstly shed light on the existing application
and processes within Fauna, and then on the feasibility method itself.
The Analysis of existing application architecture section will provide insights into the struc­
ture and details of the Android application. Namely, an in­depth look is provided into the
application’s data flow, dependency providing and API (Application Programming Inter­
face). The section continues with the presentation of the existing processes in Fauna and
a comprehensive mobile application risk analysis aiming to efficiently identify the most
critical components to be prioritized in testing. The risk analysis is aimed at Fauna’s func­
tionalities, as it provides a description of their most important software components and
parameters, and subsequently ranks them based on how critical it is for them to be tested.
The subsequent Feasibility study dives into the practicality of various testing decisions. It
assesses which areas of the application are possible to test and investigates the feasibility
of different testing tools for the startup. Critical factors such as cost implications, tool
compatibility, learning curves, and specific support for the Android app and the Kotlin
language underpin these considerations. The section will cover:
• CI/CD Tools: Analyzing the potential advantages that Continuous Integration and
Continuous Deployment tools might offer to Fauna.
• Testing Tools: Exploring the realm of available testing tools, focusing on potential
automation capabilities, and notably the emerging domain of AI­enhanced capabil­
ities.
Throughout the Feasibility study section, the conducted experiments, successes, and
challenges faced with various tools will be described, providing real­world insight into
their applicability.
The evaluations and insights from this chapter will form an important foundation, shap­
ing the evaluative criteria applied in subsequent chapters, particularly in Chapter 5 and
Chapter 6.
Concluding this chapter, readers will gain a clear understanding of Fauna’s development
environment, its technology choices, the decisions shaping its path and the new technolo­
gies that could potentially help evolve Fauna’s processes to become more efficient and
cost­effective, particularly in terms of software testing.
3.1
Analysis of existing application architecture
In software development, the foundational structure — often compared to the blueprint of
a building — is referred to as the application architecture.
The essence of application architecture lies in its design and framework. It orchestrates
the interactions of various components and dictates the flow of data within a software
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
13
==PAGE:22==
system. It is imperative to devise a well/structured architecture as it can improve the
performance, scalability, and maintainability of the software [41].
The principle is essentially the same in the mobile application architectures. Moreover,
it is also important in this type of architecture to keep it clearly defined and enable it to
support flexibility and Agile development practices, more efficient testing, easier future
maintenance and the overall considerations to make the application less prone to bugs
[42].
3.1.1
Android architecture
The world of Android development is rich with choices when it comes to architectural
design patterns. These choices, which are critical to the lifecycle and performance of
an Android application, have evolved to address the unique challenges posed by mobile
development.
Android architecture represents the design patterns and principles used in developing
Android applications. There are several popular patterns such as Model­View­Controller
(MVC), Model­View­Presenter (MVP), and Model­View­ViewModel (MVVM) that incor­
porate the separation of the user interface and business logic of the application. This
separation promotes the testability and ease of testing each component in isolation [43].
Another crucial aspect of having a well­structured app architecture is when the application
expands in size. As that occurs, it is important to adopt an architecture that allows the app
to scale, increases the app’s robustness, and enables the app to be tested with ease [44].
Fauna’s Android application follows the MVVM architecture pattern effectively separating
the data layer from the UI layer. That can be seen in Figure 3.1, where the UI layer
consists of a View (Composable) and ViewModel (Hilt ViewModel) components, while
the Data Layer consists of Repository, Data Source and Apollo GraphQL components.
The Apollo GraphQL also serves as a bridge between the mobile application and the
Remote Server in the back­end, which hosts the database.
14
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Fauna Android application architecture
The View (Composable) (top­most component in the Figure 3.1) serves as a top layer
of the UI which ultimately represents what the users see when they interact with the ap­
plication on their mobile devices. Fauna Android application’s UI layer leverages Jetpack
Compose, a modern declarative UI toolkit for developing Android applications [14]. Using
this, the application’s UI can be defined using a set of Composable functions, which are
the crucial components of the Compose toolkit. The functions take in data as parameters
and emit UI elements. This is depicted in the example code snippet below, showing a sim­
ple Composable UI component function accepting a string type parameter and outputting
a Text UI component displaying the string input parameter: [14]
1
[caption=Composable example]
2
@Composable
3
fun Greeting(name: String) {
4
Text("Hello $name")
5
}
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
15
==PAGE:24==
The View component (shown top­most in Figure 3.1) is connected to the ViewModel
(shown in Figure 3.2) which acts as a medium between the UI Layer and Data Layer.
The ViewModel manages the UI state; it contains and preserves the data, exposes it to
the UI (Composable) and handles the application logic [45]. Its main advantage is that
it caches the state of the UI and persists it through application configuration changes
(e.g. the UI does not have to fetch the data again when navigating between screens or
activities) [46].
Figure 3.2: ViewModel’s role in the UI Layer [45]
The ViewModel is also responsible for communicating with the Model. Model consists of
the Data and Domain Layers. The Data Layer handles the storage and retrieval of the
application data from various sources, such as databases, web services or files (these
operations, specifically, are carried out in the Data Source component) [47]. The archi­
tecture may optionally also include the Domain Layer containing the Business Logic,
which determines how application data must be created, stored, and changed [48]. The
Domain layer lies in­between the UI and Data layers as can be seen in Figure 3.3. How­
ever, it is not part of the Fauna application as seen in Figure 3.1.
16
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Optional Domain layer lies in­between the UI and Data layers [47]
On top of the Data layer is the Repository; a class that is connected to none or multiple of
the data sources and which abstracts the sources of data from the rest of the application
(concretely to the ViewModel in the UI layer to which is connected to, as can be seen in
Figures 3.1 and 3.2). The Repository also exposes the data from data sources to the
rest of the application. This can be seen in both Figures 3.1 and 3.3. [49]
The Data source component is the bridge between the application and the system for
data operations e.g. a remote server which can be seen in Figure 3.1. Each component
should be responsible for interacting with only one source of data which can also be a
file or a network source. Data source classes should never be accessed by other layers
directly; the entry point to the data layer should always be the repository component.
Furthermore, the data exposed by the data source should be immutable in order for it to
be impossible to be modified by other classes. [47]
Dependency injection
Dependency Injection (DI) is a technique used in Android development. If its principles
are followed, can establish the foundation for a good application architecture. It provides
advantages such as code reusability, ease of refactoring and ease of testing. [50]
In Fauna Android mobile application dependencies are incorporated into the application
components using Dagger Hilt dependency injection. This is shown in Figure 3.1 where
a dependency is injected into a Viewmodel using Hilt. Hilt is a is a dependency injection
library used to reduce the boilerplate of doing manual dependency injection. It provides
a standard way of using DI in an Android application by providing containers for every
Android class in the project and managing their lifecycles automatically. [15, 51]
API call functions
The application utilizes Apollo Kotlin for GraphQL. Apollo Kotlin is a GraphQL client that
generates Kotlin models from GraphQL queries. GraphQL is a query language used for
API calling and a server­side runtime for executing queries. It is not tied to any specific
database or storage engine and is incorporated into existing code and data. Apollo Kotlin
executes queries and mutations against a GraphQL server and returns results as query­
specific Kotlin types, meaning e.g. dealing with parsing JSON becomes obsolete. While
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
17
==PAGE:26==
queries are used to fetch data (equivalent to GET calls in representational state transfer
(REST)), mutations, on the other hand, are used to modify the server­side data (equivalent
to e.g. PUT in REST). [16, 17, 52, 53]
The implementation of the Apollo client along with queries and mutation calls is done in
the data sources. Listing 3.1 depicts how the mutation call for creating a new user in
Fauna’s application is actually implemented.
1
@Singleton
2
class AccountDataSource @Inject constructor(
3
private val apolloClient: ApolloClient ,
4
private val user: User
5
) {
6
...
7
8
fun userCreate(name: String, phone: String, username: String): Flow<Result
<Boolean >> {
9
return apolloClient.mutate(RegisterMutation(name = name, username =
username , phone = phone)).toFlow()
10
.map {
11
it.toResult { data ->
12
setToken(data.register.token)
13
true
14
}
15
}
16
.catch {
17
Result.Error(this.toString())
18
Log.e("userCreate", it.toString())
19
}
20
}
21
22
...
23
}
Listing 3.1: Creating a user using Apollo’s mutation call
For the purpose of testing and not actually requiring the API calls, a function was created
to substitute the Apollo mutation call by simply returning a ”successful” result upon calling
it. This is sufficient for demonstrating the successful connection between the Viewmodels,
Repositories and Data sources in form of an integration test. This change can be seen in
Listing 3.2.
1
@Singleton
2
open class AccountDataSource @Inject constructor(
3
private val user: User
4
) {
5
...
6
7
private val userCreatedSuccessful = mutableStateOf(true)
8
9
...
10
11
fun userCreate(name: String, phone: String, username: String): Flow<Result
<Boolean >> {
12
return flow { emit(Result.success(userCreatedSuccessful.value)) }
13
}
14
}
Listing 3.2: Mocking creating a user call
18
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:27==
3.1.2
Development and testing processes in place
In exploring software testing practices in startup environments, a closer examination of
Fauna’s current development and testing processes reveals insightful information. Op­
erating with the typical limitations of a startup ­ limited resources, time pressures, and
having only two developers (one full­time and one part­time student) ­ Fauna’s approach
is a blend of ”partial” agile development practices and a version of ad­hoc testing [54][55].
By writing ”partial” agile development practices, a reference is made to the fact that these
practices are loosely followed as part of the existing development practices within the
startup. Particularly when it comes to sprints ­ as mentioned in Chapter 1.1, there is a
Kanban board established containing the tasks. However, the tasks are not part of any
sprints. There are also no strict deadlines for the individual tasks in the Kanban board and
no daily stand­up meetings. The tasks are aimed to be completed as soon as possible with
sometimes an aim to be completed before a certain date. Stand­up meetings are aimed to
be carried out regularly, however, that is not strict (e.g. it is not mandatory that a meeting
has to take place at least once weekly). Furthermore, as part of the existing development
practices in Fauna, there are also no automated processes when it comes to integrating
software code changes, namely, there are no CI/CD practices established. Once the
code changes are ready to be integrated, they are simply reviewed by the developer
(and adapted if necessary) and integrated into the existing code base. Regarding the
Integrated Development Environment (IDE), Android Studio is used as it is the official
IDE for Android development [56]. Lastly, in Fauna’s development, there is a practice of
creating a new branch in the code repository when larger changes are to be done (e.g.
developing a new feature, modifying a feature etc.). Agile practices are thus followed to
a certain extent to review and integrate the new code changes early and often [54].
To expand on testing practices, as already mentioned in Chapter 1.1, there are already
some testing practices in place in Fauna, namely manual testing and user testing. As a
development practice and part of the Jetpack Compose UI framework used, there is also
a version of UI testing implemented in the application’s software code. This is done by
utilizing the Preview function provided by the Jetpack Compose framework, which allows
the developer to quickly see the preview of a certain application screen’s UI defined in a
Composable. It allows for quick visualization of how a certain screen’s UI would look on a
device screen of choice and interaction with it without actually running the application. This
can be seen in Figure 3.4. The left button in the top right corner of the figure represents
the Interaction mode, allowing to quickly test the screen’s responses to user interactions.
Moreover, there is another manual testing practice in place that can be referred to as a
version of testing. However, it is only used in specific scenarios such as a version of ad­
hoc testing mentioned above. This is due to the fact that this testing is only carried out
when manually resolving a software bug. For example, when a new bug is reported (either
through a Firebase error or crash trace, manual test user report or beta user feedback)
and the report is reviewed by the developer, the code affected is inspected and this testing
is performed. This testing is in the form of a combination of debugging and manual testing
by the developer. After the testing is done and the bug is found and resolved, the code
affected and application are reviewed and an application update is deployed. This whole
process can be seen in Figure 3.5.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.4: A screen UI preview in the IDE along with the Interaction mode button in the
top right corner (left button). Figure depicts the Login/Sign Up screen that users see when
opening the Fauna application
Figure 3.5: A flowchart of the existing manual bug­solving process in Fauna
3.1.3
Mobile application risk analysis: identification of the most critical
components to be prioritized in testing
Normally risk analysis is carried out before the actual mobile application development
kick­off. Besides, before the actual software testing, the factors playing an important role
in the development such as the size and capability of the development team, the amount
of legacy code and the architecture used have to be considered in order to identify what to
test first [57]. Considering the small development team in Fauna and the negligible amount
of code, the analysis will focus on the swift and effective identification of the components
that are part of the critical functionality in the application, The identified components will
thus be included in the essential software tests.
This subchapter focuses on analyzing the current Fauna’s Android application architec­
20
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:29==
ture, its components and data flows. Each functionality that is part of the Onboarding
feature will be listed, identifying which components of the application’s architecture are
handling it and describing the functionality’s expected behaviour. Moreover, each appli­
cation software component is ranked in terms of its importance or how crucial it is to be
tested according to the Android development guides and general industry best practices.
The importance ranking for each component will be derived from parameters such as de­
pendency count, whether it deals with sensitive data and whether it contains user input
validation (determining whether the user input is valid). It has to be noted here that user
impact would normally play a crucial role in identifying the importance of testing the com­
ponent. However, it was excluded from this list of parameters due to the fact that all the
screens in Onboarding are essentially more or less equally important. Lastly, an AI chat­
bot will be used to aid in quickly identifying these critical components and ranking them
with a score; the higher the score the more critical is it for the component to be tested.
Due to this project’s focus being on the functional aspect of the app, only functional tests
will be integrated and evaluated as mentioned in chapter 1.3.
The table 3.1 below describes the software components identified to be at risk:
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.1: Risk Analysis for Application Components
Application
component
Functionality
Description
Phone
Number
ViewModel
Login code request
Performs a callback request to the backend
through Login Repository and Account Data
Source with an asynchronous function
Phone
Number
ViewModel
Subscribe to login code flow
Subscribes to the backend through
Login
Repository and Account Data Source, specifi­
cally to the value in the latter and when it is up­
dated, it updates the local request code value
Phone
Number
ViewModel
Validate the user input
Validates the user input based on the request
code value
Phone
Number
ViewModel
Reset the UI state
Resets the screen’s UI state when the user pro­
ceeds to the next screen
Animal
Create
ViewModel
Set and store user input val­
ues (animal name, chip num­
ber, repeated chip number)
Sets and stores the user input values in local
class variables
Animal
Create
ViewModel
Animal creation
The flow of creating a new animal; it takes the
current values of the New animal input fields
and performs an asynchronous callback to the
backend through Animal Repository and Animal
Data Source
Animal
Create
ViewModel
Animal input validation
Validates the animal data input (name, type and
chip number)
Welcome
View­
Model
Onboarding
information
screens display
Manages the Onboarding info screens’ state;
whether the user has already navigated through
them and, thus, whether they should not be dis­
played anymore when next time the Onboarding
feature is initiated
User
Create
ViewModel
Set and store user input val­
ues (user name, phone num­
ber, email and privacy policy
check)
Sets and stores the user input values in local
class variables
User
Create
ViewModel
User creation
The flow of creating a new user; it takes the cur­
rent values of the New user input fields and per­
forms an asynchronous callback to the backend
through User Create Repository and Account
Data Source
User
Create
ViewModel
User input validation
Validates the user data input (name, email,
phone number and privacy policy check)
Login ViewModel
Set and store access code in­
put values
Sets and stores the access code value in a local
class variable
Login ViewModel
Authentication
The flow of creating authenticating; it takes the
current values of the access code and phone
number input fields and performs an asyn­
chronous callback to the backend through Login
Repository and Account Data Source
Login ViewModel
Access code input validation
Validates the access code input
Animal class
AnimalType object to draw­
able conversion
It takes AnimalType object as parameter and
converts it to a drawable string using the Kotlin
extension function
22
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:31==
According to the developer guide for testing Android applications, best practice is that
essential unit tests should cover [57]:
• ViewModels
• Data layer, especially repositories, where test doubles can be used to replace the
database modules and remote data sources.
• Utility classes
Thus, all the ViewModels have been listed accordingly in Table 3.1. Repositories on the
other hand, have not been listed but mentioned for each ViewModel that interacts with
them, as that is the only way the Repositories are used in the application. There is also a
utility class in scope, namely the Animal class.
Phone Number ViewModel
To begin with, PhoneNumber ViewModel interacts with the PhoneNumber Composable
regarding the GUI and Login Repository regarding the communication with the backend.
Login Respository acts as an extra layer between the PhoneNumber ViewModel (UI) and
Account Data Source which is the component directly responsible for the API calls to the
backend. The ViewModel contains:
• 2 dependencies: Login Repository and User
• 1 value setting function: setPhoneNumber()
• 4 input validation functions
• 2 asynchronous callback functions: subscribeToRequestCodeFlow() and
requestLoginCode()
• 1 helper function: resetUIstate()
• sensitive data: yes
Animal Create ViewModel
As mentioned in Table 3.1, AnimalCreate ViewModel interacts with the AnimalCreate
Composable regarding the GUI and Animal Repository regarding the communication with
the backend. Animal Respository acts as an extra layer between the AnimalCreate View­
Model (UI) and Animal Data Source which is the component directly responsible for the
API calls to the backend. The ViewModel contains:
• 1 dependency: Animal Repository
• 4 value setting functions: setAnimalType(), setAnimalName(),
setIdentificationNumber() and setIdentificationNumberConfirm()
• 4 input validation functions
• 1 asynchronous callback function: createAnimal()
• sensitive data: no
Figures 3.6 and 3.7 below represent the screens whose state and data handling is done
by the AnimalCreate ViewModel:
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6:
Fauna application’s animal
type choosing screen
Figure 3.7: Fauna application’s animal de­
tails input screen
Welcome ViewModel
Welcome ViewModel interacts with the Onboarding Composable regarding the GUI and
Welcome Repository regarding the storing of variables in the smartphone permanently
(meaning their values persist if the application is terminated and restarted unless the ap­
plication and its data are deleted from the smartphone). The ViewModel contains:
• 1 dependency: Welcome Repository
• 1 value setting function: setSeenOnBoard()
• 1 function subscribing to a value update: subscribeSeenOnBoarding()
• input validation: no
• sensitive data: no
Figures 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10 below represent the screens whose state and data handling is
done by the Welcome ViewModel:
24
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.8: Fauna applica­
tion’s first onboarding info
screen
Figure 3.9:
Fauna appli­
cation’s second onboarding
info screen
Figure 3.10:
Fauna ap­
plication’s third onboarding
info screen
User Create ViewModel
UserCreate ViewModel interacts with the UserCreate Composable regarding the GUI
and UserCreate Repository regarding the communication with the backend. UserCreate
Repository acts as an extra layer between the UserCreate ViewModel (UI) and Account
Data Source which is the component directly responsible for the API calls to the backend.
The ViewModel contains:
• 1 dependency: UserCreate Repository
• 4 value setting functions: setName(), setEmail(), setPhoneNumber() and
setCheckboxCheckedStatus()
• 3 input validation functions (validating the values for user name, email and phone
number)
• 1 asynchronous callback function: createUser()
• sensitive data: yes
Figure 3.11 below represents the screens whose state and data handling is done by the
UserCreate ViewModel:
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.11: Fauna application’s user details input screen
Login ViewModel
Login ViewModel interacts with the AccessCode Composable regarding the GUI and Lo­
gin Repository regarding the communication with the backend. Login Repository acts as
an extra layer between the Login ViewModel (UI) and Account Data Source which is the
component directly responsible for the API calls to the backend. The ViewModel contains:
• 1 dependency: Login Repository
• 1 value setting functions: setAccessCode()
• 1 input validation function1 (validating the value for the access code)
• 1 asynchronous callback function: authenticate()
• sensitive data: yes
Figure 3.12 below represents the screen whose state and data handling is done by the
Login ViewModel:
26
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.12: Fauna application’s phone number verification screen
Animal utility class
Animal class only has one utility extension function of the object AnimalType which is an
enumerator class. The extension function drawable() returns the drawable resource item
that has the same string name as the AnimalType. The function does not contain anything
else.
Machinet’s AI chatbot with its context­awareness was used to exemplify a quicker iden­
tification of each component’s risks and ranking them by which one is suggested to be
prioritized to be tested first (in descending order) [20]. In order to obtain the result the
Machinet chatbot’s context awareness feature was used by adding the relevant files (all
the viewmodels as identified earlier in this chapter) to the chatbot’s chat history. This can
be achieved by selecting the desired files in the project, and by clicking the right mouse
button, they can be added to the chat history as seen in Figure 3.13.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.13: The pop­up window in the IDE to add a file to Machinet’s chat history in order
for it to gain context awareness
Then a prompt was written and submitted to the chatbot visible in Listing 3.3 (note that the
previously discussed and evaluated user impact parameter was excluded due to being
too broad for the chatbot evaluation).
1
I have developed a mobile app for the platform Android , using the MVVM
architecture. As part of functional testing in this architecture , I need
to evaluate the following components: AnimalType , WelcomeViewmodel ,
PhoneNumberViewmodel , UserCreateViewmodel , LoginViewmodel and
AnimalCreateViewmodel.
2
3
Evaluate each component based on the provided criteria and provide an output
for each in the format shown below:
4
5
Component Name:
6
Complexity: [Points] (Reasoning for complexity)
7
External Dependencies: [Points] (Reasoning for external dependencies)
8
Input Validation: [Points] (Reasoning for input validation)
9
Error Handling: [Points] (Reasoning for error handling)
10
Sensitive Data Handling: [Points] (Reasoning for sensitive data handling)
Points: [Total Points] Error-Prone Ranking: [Error-Prone Ranking]
11
12
For each component , assign points to each criterion based on the provided
reasoning. Calculate the total points and assign an error-prone ranking
based on the total points. To provide a more accurate evaluation , the code
for each component is provided in the chat's history.
13
}
Listing 3.3: Prompt submitted to an AI chatbot to identify each component’s risks and rank
them by which should be prioritized in testing in descending order
Only the part containing the software component was identified as the highest­ranking
28
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:37==
and, thus, one that should be prioritized to be tested first: UserCreateViewmodel with 18
points as seen in Listing 3.4, which depicts only this part of the whole chatbot’s output.
The remaining can be found in Appendix A.
1
...
2
3
Component Name: UserCreateViewModel
4
5
Complexity: 4 points Reasoning for complexity: The UserCreateViewModel
component is responsible for handling the logic related to user creation.
It may involve input validation , data retrieval , and interaction with
external services.
6
7
External Dependencies: 3 points Reasoning for external dependencies: The
UserCreateViewModel component may have external dependencies such as data
sources , APIs, or libraries for retrieving data, validating user input, or
performing user creation.
8
9
Input Validation: 4 points Reasoning for input validation: The
UserCreateViewModel component may require input validation to ensure that
the user input for name,email, phone number , and other fields are valid.
It may need to check for correct formats , lengths , and uniqueness of
certain fields.
10
11
Error Handling: 4 points Reasoning for error handling: The UserCreateViewModel
component may need error handling to handle cases where there are errors
in input validation , data retrieval , network connectivity issues , or other
unexpected errors during the user creation process.
12
13
Sensitive Data Handling: 3 points Reasoning for sensitive data handling: The
UserCreateViewModel component may handle sensitive data such as user
credentials , personal information , or payment details. It should ensure
proper handling and protection of this sensitive data.
14
15
Points: 18 Error-Prone Ranking: High
16
17
...
Listing 3.4: The part of the chatbot’s output containting the highest­ranking identified
software component in terms of needing to be tested first
Thus, the UserCreateViemodel was taken as an example to develop the software tests
for and to obtain results.
3.2
Feasibility study
In the landscape of software development, the alignment and integrability of technological
tools and methodologies with the project’s software and project goals is of great impor­
tance. Ensuring that the correct tools are used and that critical application components
are identified correctly and effectively is not merely due to convenience, but also making
the project a successful one. A feasibility study is a crucial step in this alignment process,
before investing any time and resources in the project software testing [58].
This chapter aims to analyze the practicality of various technological options available
and to identify the challenges and opportunities they pose. Concretely, it will estimate
the feasibility of testing the most critical application software components identified in
Chapter 3.1.3. This will be explored in the subchapter 3.2.1. Additionally, the study will
delve into the evaluation of different CI/CD tools, testing frameworks, AI code completion
tools, and other techniques, seeking to pinpoint their potential fit with the project’s existing
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
29
==PAGE:38==
framework. The feasibility result will be based on parameters such as cost, complexity
and specifically for testing tools; compatibility and ease of integration, and evidenced in
the subchapters 3.2.2 and 3.2.3.
3.2.1
Application components subject to test
Mobile application development is filled with complexities, particularly when it comes to
ensuring the reliability and quality of software components. This is why identifying not
only what software components should be tested in an application, and for which software
components is it more important to be tested first, but also how feasible is it for the startup
to actually test it, especially if the startup has limited resources.
Previous Chapter 3.1.3 laid the groundwork by identifying the components most critical
to the application’s successful functionality and stability in the Onboarding feature. This
subchapter will expand on this, by doing a feasibility study dedicated to app component
testing is crucial to determine the practicality of testing these components within the limi­
tations of a tech startup’s resources and timelines.
For example, the main software component to be tested (userCreateViewModel), as iden­
tified in Chapter ??, has one dependency, four value setter functions, three input valida­
tion functions and one asynchronous callback function. At first glance, according to the
developer guide, there should not be any issues in implementing functional test cases for
these functions [59]. Upon further examination, there has been an observation made that
there are private variables defined for the setter functions. These will likely need to be
modified or have utility functions implemented in order to be more testable. The private
variables can be seen in Listing 3.5.
1
@HiltViewModel
2
class UserCreateViewModel @Inject constructor(
3
private val userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
4
) : ViewModel() {
5
6
private val _userName = MutableStateFlow("")
7
private val _userEmail = MutableStateFlow("")
8
private val _userPhoneNumber = MutableStateFlow("")
9
private val _userCheckboxChecked = MutableStateFlow(false)
10
11
...
12
}
Listing 3.5: The private variables in UserCreateViewmodel
Furthermore, all the basic functions identified in the UserCreateViewmodel except for the
createUser function seem to be compatible with the developer guide techniques on how
unit tests should be created [59, 60]. The createUser's functionality can also be tested
with an integration test [61]. Regarding the UI testing ­ carrying out UI testing seems to
be feasible as there is also a testing tool covering specifically the Jetpack Compose UI
library that is part of Fauna’s application [62].
Initial experiments have also proven that testing these functions are indeed feasible.
3.2.2
CI/CD tools
After basic research, numerous CI/CD frameworks and tools can be found with ease. A
comparison of 10 mobile CI/CD providers by Runway that are popular will be taken to
compare some of the platforms mentioned and analyze the feasibility of implementing
them into the existing system [24]. As the primary goal of this project is to set up a test­
30
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:39==
ing framework efficiently, the main criteria considered when identifying a suitable CI/CD
provider will be cost and hosting requirements.
For example Jenkins and TeamCity are both suitable options with Jenkins being free, and
TeamCity being free for the first 14 days [63, 64]. However, they both offer only self­hosted
solutions [65, 64]. This means that the developers would have to have their only locally
hosted servers to run these CI/CD pipelines.
Bitrise.io, GitHub Actions, GitLab and Azure Pipelines aim to simplify and ensure the
efficient delivery of high­quality applications [66, 67, 68, 69]. They all offer a wide variety
of features such as:
• a user­friendly and easy­to­use interface
• a simple setup and integration with the application project
• support for multiple mobile platforms
Although Azure Pipelines is not on the CI/CD platform comparison list, it was also taken
into consideration due to Fauna already having a subscription plan for Azure DevOps
service [70].
It has to also be noted that while GitLab does offer free 400 minutes of usage, the project
repository has to be made public (in terms of availability and visibility) in order for the CI
to be used for free [71]. However, when performing initial technology experiments, GitLab
proved to be too complex to set up as three hours have been invested in trying to have it
run successfully.
The other three that are apparent to satisfy the criteria (Azure pipelines, GitHub Actions
and Bitrise) have all proven successful in the initial experiments. GitHub Actions also has
a similar policy to GitLab, requiring a project repository to be public in order to use it for
free [72]. They were all, however, easy to set up, integrate and run successfully.
There has also been a remark made on Bitrise CI ­ Fauna’s developer stated ”If there
was the need to choose a CI tool, we would highly likely opt for Bitrise, especially when
considering it for the long run”. Furthermore, during the experiments with it, it has indeed
proven to be much more intuitive and easy to use, with lots of pipeline step templates
and graphical step representation (as opposed to code representation). This can be seen
in Figure 3.14, where the workflow file for running the tests is shown which was created
automatically. It also depicts the pipeline steps as visualized in the left part of Figure 3.14.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.14: Example of a workflow file and the CI pipeline steps visualized in Bitrise
Overall, all these platforms seem to offer a fairly complex functionality and are relatively
simple to use. However, Bitrise is free only for the first 30 days. GitHub Actions, GitLab
and Azure Pipelines, on the other hand, all offer some amount of free use time. GitLab
additionally offers an option to apply for a special program for startups with more feature­
rich options [73].
Considering the implications, only the GitHub Actions CI tool will be actually set up in
Chapter 4.2, implemented in Chapter 5.4, results presented in Chapter 7.6 and evaluated
in Chapter 8. As can be seen in this chapter, there are many CI/CD platforms that tech
startups can choose from depending on their needs.
It also has to be taken into account that in the scenario when the startup will grow and
expand it will have to ascertain that the CI/CD tool chosen meets the startup’s needs once
that happens. There are plenty of articles written on identifying different CI/CD tools, and
their advantages and disadvantages such as the one mentioned in this chapter.
3.2.3
Testing tools
Delving into software testing tools, specifically for mobile applications, choosing them usu­
ally depends on the programming language and technology stacks that were chosen for
the development of the application (compatibility). To expand on the feasibility perspec­
tive, it also depends on the tool’s cost and if that satisfies the startup’s limited budget
constraints.
There are several widely standardized testing frameworks for this type of application sys­
tem based on Java/Kotlin. JUnit and Mockito are both examples of that. The former is a
unit testing framework and the latter is a framework for creating the test double objects.
They are both free and straightforward to use.
Compose UI Testing is a framework meant for testing the Jetpack Compose UI. It allows
to simulate and run any part of the application on a device emulator or an actual mobile
32
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:41==
phone, where it is able to test several aspects of the UI. It is free and rather simple to use.
When it comes to more sophisticated testing tools such as AI­enhanced ones, many may
come with several dependencies such as having Appium and their large software package
installed on your local computer, even if the tool is cloud­based.
Machinet is an AI­powered plugin for certain types of an Integrated Development Envi­
ronment (IDE). It aims to simplify not only the writing of unit tests but also accelerate the
writing of code in general. It offers a context­aware chat window where one can ask any
sort of questions, including specifics regarding the project’s files and code. By describ­
ing the desired outcome with a prompt in the chat window, it can generate code and unit
tests. It can also utilize previously­mentioned JUnit and Mockito libraries. Unit tests can
be automatically generated with its AI Unit Test Agent by selecting the desired method.
[20]
It offers a free version, with a daily limit of 300 character­limited AI chat prompt requests
and 20 AI Unit Test Agent runs or unit test generations. Besides the free plan, it also offers
two more paid plans. Additionally, it is simple to set up and use; it can be searched for in
the IDEs plugin marketplace JetBrains­based IDEs only and installed through it [74].
Figure 3.15: Example of Machinet plugin with its AI context­aware chat window plugin
within an IDE
In practical experiments with Machinet, the AI test generation has proved to be functional,
however, it sometimes generated a whole folder and file including the test code, and
sometimes only the test case code in the chatbot. It has also proven useful in being
context­aware which was demonstrated with the critical component analysis in Chapter
3.1.3.
TestSigma is a web application tool that provides codeless techniques using NLP (natural
language processing) to accelerate UI test development. After conducting experiments
with it in its trial period, it has proven to be a perfect fit for anyone aiming to utilize codeless
techniques for UI test creation. However, it is expensive, starting at 249$ per month. [75,
76]
Applitools Eyes is similarly a web application aiming to provide a solution where less
code­writing is necessary in order to do testing and, thus, accelerate it. However, it relies
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
33
==PAGE:42==
on having the Appium UI testing framework previously installed and test cases developed
using Appium. [77, 78]
TestGrid is also a web application aiming to accelerate UI testing using a test recorder.
This is done by uploading the application to the web application which is then run on
a virtual mobile device. The test is then created by recording the user’s actions which
are translated into test steps. In the experiments this was functional however, it was
difficult to navigate through the web application and the virtual device did not have a
decent responsiveness. Thus, it was difficult to work with.
Testim is another web­based application providing a low­code solution to accelerate UI
testing similar to TestGrid using a test recorder. It is easy to set up, intuitive, provides
solid documentation and offers a free program for startups [79]. During the initial ex­
periments with it, an Android application was uploaded to the Testim tool. Proceeding
from there, navigating to the test creation screen and creating test steps was simple on
the Testim­provided virtual mobile device that is interactable. The Testim’s test creation
screen including the virtual mobile device (on the right side) can be seen in Figure 3.16.
This virtual device is intended to be used through a test recorder; the action and inter­
actions with the application on the virtual device are recorded and translated into UI test
steps.
Figure 3.16: Testim tool’s test creation screen including the virtual mobile device to run
the tests on
It has to also be noted that TestSigma, TestGrid and Testim all provide a black­box sort of
testing while Applitools Eyes provides a white­box sort of testing [80].
Considering the implications, only the JUnit, Mockito, Compose UI testing, Machinet and
Testim will be actually set up in Chapter 4, implemented in Chapters 5.4 and 6, results
presented in Chapter 7 and evaluated in Chapter 8. As can be seen in this chapter, there
are several testing tools and platforms that tech startups can choose from depending on
their needs.
All the tools considered to be used should also be applicable and relevant when the star­
tups scale up.
34
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:43==
4
Environment setup
Establishing a solid and efficient development environment is a foundational step in any
software project’s journey. The choices made in this phase not only influence the work­
flow but also play a crucial role in determining the project’s long­term sustainability and
efficiency. As we delve into environment setup, this chapter will explore how to create
and maintain an environment tailored for optimal development and testing.
Beginning with an examination of the source code repository, its significance and role in
safeguarding the project’s codebase, promoting collaboration, and tracking progress will
be discussed. Moving on, the focus will be on Continuous Integration and Continuous
Deployment (CI/CD) processes, underlining their implementation and integration with the
existing environment. Lastly, the exploration will delve into the domain of testing tools,
how their setup took place and how were they integrated.
By the end of this chapter, the aim is to brief readers with a solid understanding of the
components that the development environment consists of and concretely how were they
set up.
4.1
Source code repository
In order to have a standalone Android project and a completely isolated environment, a
remote repository with its own version control was created on GitHub. The project repos­
itory was named fauna­onboarding. Additionally, this has been done in order to maintain
full control over the project, environment, and permissions, to avoid any potential depen­
dencies on other users, and, thus, avoid any unwanted holdback. This repository and
project contain the entirety of the Onboarding feature from the actual Fauna production
repository. The sole difference is that the test folders have been added automatically to
the project upon its creation and not later as it was done in the actual project.
The project was selected to have its remote repository hosted on GitHub. Firstly, this was
due to the original Fauna project already having been hosted on GitHub and, secondly,
due to GitHub’s simplicity and integrability with the integrated development environment
(IDE) and compatibility with the CI frameworks that were analyzed (GitHub Actions, Azure
Pipelines and GitLab).
4.2
CI/CD
Setting up each of the selected CI/CD frameworks is made to be done simply in a few steps
[81]. GitHub Actions is already set up since it is part of the GitHub platform. Furthermore,
the GitHub Actons framework needs to be linked to the project with a YAML­type workflow
file containing information about the pipeline, its steps and jobs. This file is created in a
specific (depending on the CI/CD framework) location in the project.
This was done by navigating to Actions section of the GitHub repository [82]. In the Actions
section of GitHub the workflow file was created using the ”Android CI” template as seen
in Figure 4.1.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.1: Android CI GitHub Actions workflow template
The initial workflow file from the template required to change the java (JDK in the listing)
version from 11 to 17. Then the workflow file looked like as shown in Listing 4.1.
1
name: Android CI
2
3
on:
4
push:
5
branches: [ "master" ]
6
pull_request:
7
branches: [ "master" ]
8
9
jobs:
10
build:
11
12
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
13
14
steps:
15
- uses: actions/checkout@v3
16
- name: set up JDK 17
17
uses: actions/setup-java@v3
18
with:
19
java-version: '17'
20
distribution: 'temurin '
21
cache: gradle
22
23
- name: Grant execute permission for gradlew
24
run: chmod +x gradlew
25
- name: Build with Gradle
26
run: ./gradlew build
Listing 4.1: Integration of the step in the workflow file to run all the non­instrumented tests
in the CI pipeline
4.3
Testing frameworks and Tools
This chapter will outline how all testing tools and frameworks used in testing were set up.
4.3.1
JUnit, Mockito, Mockk and Compose UI testing
To set up JUnit, Mockito, Mockk and Compose UI testing tools and frameworks it was
required to include their dependencies in the application module level build.gradle file as
seen in Listing 4.2 [60].
36
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:45==
1
...
2
3
dependencies {
4
// JUnit 4 framework for local tests
5
testImplementation "junit:junit:4.13.2"
6
// for instrumented tests
7
androidTestImplementation 'androidx.test.ext:junit:1.1.5'
8
9
// Mockito framework
10
testImplementation "org.mockito:mockito -core:$mockitoVersion"
11
// mockito -kotlin
12
testImplementation "org.mockito.kotlin:mockito -kotlin:$mockitoKotlinVersion"
13
14
// Mockk framework
15
testImplementation "io.mockk:mockk:$mockkVersion"
16
17
// Compose UI testing
18
androidTestImplementation platform('androidx.compose:compose -bom
:2022.10.00')
19
debugImplementation 'androidx.compose.ui:ui-tooling '
20
// Test rules and transitive dependencies:
21
androidTestImplementation "androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-junit4:
$compose_version"
22
// Needed for createAndroidComposeRule
23
debugImplementation "androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-manifest:$compose_version"
24
25
// For MainCoroutineScopeRule
26
testImplementation "org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx -coroutines -test:1.6.4"
27
testImplementation "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin -gradle -plugin"
28
testImplementation "com.android.tools.build:gradle:7.4.0"
29
30
...
31
}
32
33
...
Listing 4.2: Addition of the dependency for the testing tools and frameworks used
4.3.2
Machinet AI
As Android Studio IDE was used to carry out all the development, Machinet AI could simply
be set up and included as a plugin for it. Navigating to Settings/Plugins which opens the
JetBrains/based IDEs plugin marketplace and typing ’Machinet AI’ into the search bar
outputs the tool’s plugin [74]. Pressing install button installs Machinet into the IDE. Then
once the tool window opens, the user is required to register or sign in to their OpenAI
account [83]. Machinet AI is then ready to be used.
4.3.3
Testim
Testim UI testing tool can be set up by navigating to the website, clicking ’Get Testim free’
and filling in the required information. Then an activation email is received and once the
activation is done through the link in the email, Testim is available to be used. [21]
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:47==
5
Test development and implementation
Testing is fundamental to solid software development. It ensures that the software meets
the requirements, performs as expected, and is free of defects. Being defect­free is also
directly linked to customer satisfaction. This chapter examines the methods and tech­
niques that guarantee a software’s quality and reliability.
To begin with, this paper will explore the test plan section. This segment explains the
the principles and aims at understanding specific outcomes. It will describe how unit,
integration and UI tests should be carried out according to guides and best practices. It
also testing Metrics. Here, the essential metrics that measure the effectiveness of testing
will be presented. These metrics not only provide quantitative feedback but also guide
necessary adjustments and refinements in the testing process.
The chapter continues with the testing success criteria. This segment establishes bench­
marks that act as the standard for effective and meaningful testing.
The Test case development subchapter will also implement one simple test case and one
more advanced test case using the traditional way of writing them manually, and capturing
the results which will later be analyzed and compared to results using advanced tools in
Chapter Results.
The chapter concludes with an exploration of the Integration with the CI Pipeline. Empha­
sizing real­world applicability to other startups, this section highlights how the developed
test cases integrate with the broader development landscape, especially within the CI
pipeline.
By the end of this chapter, one will be able to understand how to build and effective testing
framework using concrete examples.
5.1
Test plan
Given the limited resources and time constraints (conditions), devising a well­thought­out
test plan can be highly beneficial. This will consider the Onboarding feature’s description
of software components (in chapter 3.1.3), their functionality (in chapter 3.1.1) and define
the test steps, pass/fail criteria for each test, test deliverables (e.g. test report) and CI
integration. However, as mentioned in chapter Mobile application risk analysis: identifi­
cation of the most critical components to be prioritized in testing, the test cases will only be
implemented for the User Create ViewModel software component. Specifically, the test
cases will include unit tests covering all of the Viewmodel’s functions and an integration
test focusing on the function interacting with other software components and performing
an API call.
As part of the test plan, the topics below should normally be included [84]:
• Defining the release scope
• Scheduling the timeline
• Defining the test objectives
• Defining test metrics
• Defining the test deliverables
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
39
==PAGE:48==
• Devising the test strategy; test types in scope and test success criteria
• Planning the test environment and test data
However, due to the focus being on startups with limited resources and the aim of this
work to present a lightweight solution, some points will be excluded from the test plan.
The scope of testing would normally be defined e.g. specifying which are the main fea­
tures of the product and would thus be required to be tested first.
The timeline can be defined, however, it depends. If a startup is e.g. adopting agile
methodologies effectively and unlike Fauna has proper sprints according to agile, then it
may be required for them to define the timeline as well.
A test objective is the purpose of a test [84]. In Fauna’s scenario the purposes would be:
• Not only reporting, identifying and resolving defects but also resolving them faster
than the manual method (described in Chapter Development and testing processes
in place)
• Ensuring the correct functionality of the critical components identified in Chapter
Mobile application risk analysis: identification of the most critical components to be
prioritized in testing
However, there are many potential objectives that can be identified depending on the
specific needs of the startup.
Metrics evaluate the overall quality of a release, the progress and effectiveness of the
testing. As the project focuses on efficient testing, yet still aiming to carry it out compre­
hensively the metrics that will be used for testing are test success (pass/fail), development
time, learning time, maintainability, pipeline execution time and the total cost involved. On
the other hand, the metrics can include e.g. defect density. [84]
In terms of defining test deliverables; they are the products of testing that help keep track
of testing progress. The only testing deliverable that will be used in this project is the test
summary report which will be produced after each test run. There are numerous other
deliverables that can be defined, however, depending on the needs. [84]
The success criteria is the standard that regulates all activities within a testing project
[84]. It depends on the testing types chosen to be carried out. As part of this project only
automated functional tests will be carried out; unit, integration and UI tests.
The main criteria (as the project focuses on justifying the implementation of tests them­
selves) for the success of testing will be whether the time to fix the bug is shorter than
before and whether the whole process of implementing tests and testing is more cost­
effective than not having it as before. It will also determine which business goals would
be applicable ­ their alignment with testing and using them to determine the testing effi­
ciency. For example, it would also be reasonable to state the criteria as a goal: a certain
percentage of critical tests must pass before a feature can be deemed suitable for release
(in this case, as the focus is on critical components in feature, 100% of the tests should
pass successfully).
It is also meaningful to define the plan for the test environment (what needs to be set up
and how) and test data (what kind of data and for what purpose). If the software testing
was carried out for the whole Fauna application, it would be reasonable to set up a test
environment for it (especially when it comes to the connection with the backend database).
[84]
40
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:49==
Thus, the test plan for startups in a similar situation to Fauna’s; having limited resources
will include only test objectives, test metrics, test deliverables, test strategy and test
environment.
5.2
Test steps
Smartphones and the mobile applications that come with them have become an essential
part of our lives. In this end­user environment, mobile applications are trialled with high
expectations regarding what they have to offer, in what way, and most importantly, is their
functionality acceptable or do they have too many bugs.
This subchapter focuses on the importance of the test steps in test cases not only in mobile
application testing but software testing in general. Test cases are a set of conditions and
checks designed to verify that an application is functioning as intended, while test steps
are steps; actions and checks that test cases consist of [85].
Identifying the test steps first requires the person writing them to have a solid understand­
ing not only of the software testing principles but also of the already developed software.
The test steps follow test case development best practices regarding [86][87]:
• avoiding infrastructure dependencies in unit tests
• how to name the tests
• leveraging Arrange, Act, Assert pattern
• using simple input
• using variables
• avoiding logic
• avoiding multiple Act statements in one test case
• testing edge cases
5.2.1
Unit tests
To begin with writing test steps for the unit tests, the functionality of each function un­
der test needs to be understood. Starting with User Create ViewModel’s value updating
functions for user’s name, email, phone number and privacy policy checkbox they each
simply update the local variable as it can be seen in the code snippet from the ViewModel
in Listing 5.1.
1
@HiltViewModel
2
class UserCreateViewModel @Inject constructor(
3
private val userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
4
) : ViewModel() {
5
private val _userName = MutableStateFlow("")
6
private val _userEmail = MutableStateFlow("")
7
private val _userPhoneNumber = MutableStateFlow("")
8
private val _userCheckboxChecked = MutableStateFlow(true)
9
10
fun setName(it: String) {
11
_userName.value = _userName.value
12
}
13
14
fun setEmail(it: String) {
15
_userEmail.value = it
16
}
17
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
41
==PAGE:50==
18
fun setPhoneNumber(it: String) {
19
if (it.length <= PhoneNumberViewModel.phoneNumberLength) {
20
_userPhoneNumber.value = it
21
}
22
}
23
24
fun setCheckboxCheckedStatus(it: Boolean) {
25
_userCheckboxChecked.value = it
26
}
27
28
...
29
}
Listing 5.1: User Create ViewModel setter functions
Thus, the steps for for expected behaviour for each setter can be defined as:
1. Initialize the ViewModel and mock the User Create Repository dependency
2. Arrange: create a variable and assign it a valid value
3. Act: use the ViewModel’s setter function and use the valid value as its parameter
4. Assert: verify that the value was set and stored correctly in the ViewModel
Another unit test was created to test the UI state in the viewmodel which is essentially
a class updating and capturing all the user variables (name, email, phone number and
checkbox checked) as can be seen in Listing 5.2.
1
@HiltViewModel
2
class UserCreateViewModel @Inject constructor(
3
private val userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
4
) : ViewModel() {
5
...
6
7
private val _userCreateUiStateFlow: StateFlow <UIState > =
8
userCreateRepository.getCreateUserFlow
9
.map { result ->
10
when (result) {
11
Result.success(true) -> UIState.Success
12
Result.success(false) -> UIState.Error
13
else -> UIState.Loading
14
}
15
}
16
.stateIn(
17
scope = viewModelScope ,
18
started = SharingStarted.WhileSubscribed(5_000),
19
initialValue = UIState.Initial
20
)
21
22
...
23
}
24
25
data class UserCreateUIState(
26
val result: UIState = UIState.Initial ,
27
val inputUIState: UserCreateInputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState()
28
)
29
30
data class UserCreateInputUIState(
31
val name: String = "",
32
val email: String = "",
33
val phoneNumber: String = "",
42
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:51==
34
val checkboxChecked: Boolean = false
35
)
36
37
...
Listing 5.2: User Create ViewModel UI state
Thus, the steps for for expected behaviour for the UI state can be defined as:
1. Initialize the ViewModel and mock the User Create Repository dependency
2. Arrange: create user input variable and assign them a valid value, and initialize a
UserCreateInputUIState with these variables
3. Act: use the ViewModel’s setter functions, set the user parameter variables and
perform first() on the UI state class value to emit the class values
4. Assert: verify that the emitted UI state value was set and stored correctly in the
ViewModel by checking if it is the same as the one set in Arrange step
The last set of unit tests created was to test the input validation extension functions in
the viewmodel which are essentially validating the input of each input field in the UI state
class as can be seen in Listing 5.3.
1
...
2
3
fun UserCreateInputUIState.isNameError(): Boolean {
4
return this.name.isBlank()
5
}
6
7
fun UserCreateInputUIState.isEmailError(): Boolean {
8
return !Patterns.EMAIL_ADDRESS.matcher(this.email).matches()
9
}
10
11
fun UserCreateInputUIState.isPhoneNumberError(): Boolean {
12
return !Patterns.PHONE.matcher(this.phoneNumber).matches()
13
|| this.phoneNumber.length != phoneNumberLength
14
}
15
16
fun UserCreateInputUIState.continueEnabled(): Boolean {
17
return !this.isNameError()
18
&& !this.isEmailError()
19
&& !this.isPhoneNumberError()
20
&& this.checkboxChecked
21
}
Listing 5.3: The input validation extension functions in UserCreateViewmodel
The steps for expected behaviour for the validator functions can be defined as:
1. Initialize the ViewModel and mock the User Create Repository dependency
2. Arrange: initialize the input UserCreateInputUIState class with a valid input value
3. Act: call the input validation extension function on the UserCreateInputUIState class
4. Assert: verify that the validation function’s output value is correct as expected
5.2.2
Integration tests
The createUser() function takes the user parameters in the viewmodel as arguments
and performs a callback to the UserCreateRepository. Once the data source is called
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
43
==PAGE:52==
(and reached from the repository) it returns a successful result. To test and verify the
successful functioning of the callback function and its communication with the data source
through a repository an integration test will be implemented [61]. The function can as can
be seen in Listing 5.4.
1
@HiltViewModel
2
class UserCreateViewModel @Inject constructor(
3
private val userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
4
) : ViewModel() {
5
...
6
7
fun createUser() = viewModelScope.launch {
8
userCreateRepository.userCreate(_userName.value, _userPhoneNumber.
value, _userEmail.value)
9
}
10
11
...
12
}
Listing 5.4: User Create ViewModel creating the user callback function
The steps for expected behaviour for the createUser() function can be defined as:
1. Initialize the Repository and the Account Data source and coroutine dispatcher de­
pendency [88]
2. Initialize the AccountDataSource mock
3. Arrange: create the user parameter variables (name, email and phone number)
with valid values and initialize the ViewModel with the User Create Repository de­
pendency
4. Act: use the ViewModel’s setter functions, set the user parameter variables and
launch the createUser() function [88]
5. Assert: verify that the result value obtained in the repository is not null, that the
process completed successfully and that the result’s value is as expected
What needs to be noted here is that writing tests for functions using coroutines in Kotlin.
5.2.3
UI tests
Writing test steps for the UI tests is mainly based on the approach of testing with unit
tests seen in Chapter Unit tests, namely the functions in Listing 5.1 and Listing 5.2 from
the UserCreateViewmodel. However, these functions are here tested and verified through
the UI. Thus, the UI components that are to be used and called in the tests require the
test tags to be added to them [89]. An example for this can be seen in line 18 in Listing
5.5 where a test tag is added to the input field UI component for the user’s name.
1
@OptIn(ExperimentalMaterial3Api::class, ExperimentalComposeUiApi::class)
2
@Composable
3
fun UserInfoCard(
4
modifier: Modifier = Modifier ,
5
userCreateInputUIState: UserCreateInputUIState ,
6
onNameChanged: (String) -> Unit,
7
onEmailChanged: (String) -> Unit,
8
onPhoneNumberChanged: (String) -> Unit,
9
onCheckboxCheckedChanged: (Boolean) -> Unit,
10
onContinueClick: () -> Unit,
11
) {
12
...
44
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:53==
13
14
OutlinedTextField(
15
modifier = Modifier
16
.fillMaxWidth()
17
.weight(0.3F)
18
.semantics { testTag = "userName" },
19
value = userCreateInputUIState.name,
20
label = { Text(stringResource(R.string.user_create_name)) },
21
keyboardOptions = KeyboardOptions(
22
keyboardType = KeyboardType.Text,
23
imeAction = ImeAction.Next
24
),
25
keyboardActions = KeyboardActions(onAny = {
26
focusRequester.requestFocus()
27
}),
28
onValueChange = onNameChanged ,
29
isError = userCreateInputUIState.isNameError(),
30
singleLine = true
31
)
32
33
...
34
}
Listing 5.5: An example of how a test tag is set for a UI Composable component
The input validation extension functions seen in Listing 5.3 will also be used in the test to
validate each input.
Therefore, the steps for expected behaviour for the UI test of the whole UserCreateView­
model class can be defined as:
1. Initialize the UserCreate Repository and the Account Data source
2. Initialize the AccountDataSource
3. Initialize the compose rule [89]
4. Arrange: create the user parameter variables (name, email and phone number)
with valid values and initialize the ViewModel with the User Create Repository de­
pendency and set the UI content with the compose rule
5. Act: use the test tag to set the input value for each UI input component, perform
first() on the UI state class value to emit the class input values and validate each
input
6. Assert: verify that each input value is valid as expected using the validation function
extensions
5.3
Test case development
This chapter focuses on the actual test case development (using traditional manual meth­
ods) and recording the results.
5.3.1
Unit and integration test development
To simplify the test, there is an option to generate a test template for any of the classes
or functions in Android Studio.
As an example, when performing a right­click on the
UserCreateViewModel class, a window panel with options is shown containing the option
’Generate...’. By selecting this option another window is opened which looks something
like the one in figure 5.1.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.1: Generate a test template window
After creating the template for the viewmodel test seen in Listing 5.6, each test’s name
was changed first to follow previously mentioned in Chapter Test steps as best practice
approach. Then, the test steps defined in Chapter Unit tests were implemented.
1
class UserCreateViewModelTest {
2
3
@Before
4
fun setUp() {
5
}
6
7
@Test
8
fun setName() {
9
}
10
11
@Test
12
fun setEmail() {
13
}
14
15
@Test
16
fun setPhoneNumber() {
17
}
18
19
@Test
20
fun setCheckboxCheckedStatus() {
21
}
22
23
@Test
24
fun createUser() {
25
}
26
}
Listing 5.6: IDE­generated unit test template
The implemented tests for the setter functions can be seen in Listing ??. The final unit
and integration test cases can be seen in Appendix Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests
developed manually.
46
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:55==
5.4
Integration with the CI pipeline
To integrate the developed test cases only a few steps need to be added to the already
set up CI pipeline as shown in Chapter 4.2.
The steps in Listing 5.7 first check out the code and set up the correct version of Java in
the environment [90]. Then the permissions are granted, the project build is initiated and
then the tests can be run [91].
1
...
2
3
- name: Run tests
4
run: ./gradlew test
5
6
...
Listing 5.7: Integration of the step in the workflow file to run all the non­instrumented tests
in the CI pipeline
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:57==
6
Leveraging advanced testing tools
The rapid evolution of technology has brought about an increase in innovative tools and
techniques aimed at enhancing the software testing process. One of the game­changing
elements of this progression is the integration of advanced tools like artificial intelligence
(AI) and low­code testing. This chapter delves into these modern methodologies, focus­
ing on their capabilities, relevance, and potential impact on the efficiency, coverage and
accuracy of software testing [92].
Furthermore, AI­driven tools such as Machinet AI unit test generation and AI chatbot such
as ChatGPT (as part of the Machinet AI tool) will be used to create and develop test
cases. This is with the aim of improving the current testing techniques, mainly in terms of
efficiency and potentially also effectiveness.
Complementing the AI­powered methods, the concept of low­code testing emerges as
another major advancement. This segment introduces the principles of low­code testing,
providing insights into tools and platforms that allow not only developers and testers to
design and execute tests without diving deep into code, but potentially also other team
members in the startup. Such tools not only make testing more accessible but can also
reduce the workload of the developers in these startups.
The chapter also dives into other cutting­edge techniques that are reshaping the testing
landscape, ensuring readers are aware of the latest methodologies. Following this, a
focus on test case development underscores how these advanced tools can be practically
incorporated into the test design process. This will extend the previous chapter Test case
development, attempting to achieve the same or better results with higher efficiency in
reducing the process of fixing a bug and potentially even off­loading some the developer’s
work. The results will be be presented in Chapter Results.
By navigating through this chapter, readers will gain a general perspective on the latest
trends in software testing, understanding their significance and their potential to super­
charge testing efficiency and effectiveness.
6.1
AI­powered test case development
This chapter will explore the application of the AI test tools write the test cases with the
help of AI and record the results.
6.1.1
Test case generation
This chapter focuses on the test case development with the test case generation method
(using Machinet AI testing tool) and recording the results.
To generate and create the test cases, the Machinet’s button has been pressed as de­
picted in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: The ’generate unit tests for class’ Machinet AI’s blue button to generate tests
automatically for the UserCreateViewModel class
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
49
==PAGE:58==
Once pressed, it opens the tool’s side chat window where the entire test is generated.
The provided generated test code has then been copied into a new manually created file
’UserCreateViewModelTest.kt’ in folder
’test/kotlin/com.example.faunaonboarding/onboarding.userCreate’. The entire generated
test cases are depicted in Appendix Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests generated au­
tomatically with Machinet AI test generation.
6.1.2
Chatbots and testing
This chapter demonstrates the test case development with the AI chatbot method (using
ChatGPT in Machinet AI) and recording the results.
To have the chatbot create the unit and integration test cases as shown in Chapters Unit
tests and Integration tests, the software component to have test cases generated for was
first added to the chatbot’s chat history as demonstrated in Chapter Mobile application risk
analysis: identification of the most critical components to be prioritized in testing. Then
the chatbot was prompted to create the test cases as shown in Listing 6.1.
1
Create test cases for UserCreateViewModel class
Listing 6.1: AI chatbot prompt to create the test cases
The entire created test cases with the AI chatbot are depicted in Appendix Appendix ­ Unit
and integration tests developed using the AI chatbot.
To have the chatbot create the UI test case as described in Chapter UI tests, the software
component to have test cases generated for first needed to be added to the chatbot’s chat
history as demonstrated in Chapter Mobile application risk analysis: identification of the
most critical components to be prioritized in testing. Then the chatbot was prompted to
create the UI test cases as shown in Listing 6.2.
1
Create UI test case for UserCreateViewModel class
Listing 6.2: AI chatbot prompt to create the UI test case
The entire created test cases with the AI chatbot are depicted in Appendix Appendix ­ UI
test developed using the AI chatbot.
6.1.3
Low­code testing
This chapter demonstrates the test case development with the low­code method (using
Testim UI test tool) and recording the results.
To create the UI test case and its steps, the virtual device in the test steå creation was
booted and by navigating through the whole Onboarding process, the test steps were
automatically recorded with the test recorder (shown in Figure 3.16) in Chapter Testing
tools. The whole and final test case with the test steps is shown in Figure 5.2.
This UI test has 33 steps and tests the whole flow of the UI screens in the Onboarding.
50
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.2: A UI test steps in Testim tool used to test the whole screen flow of the On­
boarding feature
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:61==
7
Results
This chapter outlines the comparative results obtained by carrying out critical compo­
nent identification and analysis in Chapter Mobile application risk analysis: identification
of the most critical components to be prioritized in testing, traditional (manual) testing
approaches in Chapter Test development and implementation and AI­augmented testing
methods in Chapter 6 within a CI framework. Furthermore, through the proposed method­
ology and tools, this work tackles the problem of efficient and effective software defect
identification and resolution of found defects. These methodologies were applied to an
Android mobile application developed by Fauna, serving as an example to analyze the
tangible benefits and challenges of each software testing approach. Software testing was
carried out by introducing an artificial bug in the Fauna’s application software. The bug
identification and resolution have been carried out with both the current Fauna’s method
(removing them manually without having any tests in place) and with the proposed meth­
ods in this project (having previously developed critical tests in place together with a CI
framework).
Note that if there is a process’ time duration indicated with the same value in more than
one of the time figures, that means that is one process and, thus, has the same time value
in all its occurrences.
Figures 7.2, 7.7, 7.13, 7.14 and 7.17 depict the duration of each process as part of the test
implementation in terms of Test Implementation time (marked with a blue colour), Ad­
ditional implementation time (marked with a green colour) and Learning time (marked
with a purple colour). While test implementation time represents the actual time spent on
the implementation of the setup and test steps, additional implementation time refers to
the time spent on modifying the existing code in order for it to be more testable. Learning
time, on the other hand, stands for the time spent on learning how to test certain compo­
nents, how to use certain testing tools and how to repair the failing tests.
7.1
Critical component analysis
The critical component analysis that took place in Chapter Mobile application risk anal­
ysis: identification of the most critical components to be prioritized in testing consisted
of three steps and in total required 45 minutes. The following are the steps and their
corresponding total times:
1. Research and identification of the components and their types to be tested: 10
minutes. The testing guide for developers for Android Kotlin is clear and specifies
which components in the application’s architecture are essential to be tested and
which should not be tested [57].
2. Addition of the component files to the Machinet AI chat history: 5 minutes. It had to
be searched in Machinet AI’s documentation on how to use this feature. However,
as the Machinet AI is a plugin in the IDE, it was straightforward to add the selected
files to the chatbot’s chat history with a mouse click.
3. Identification of relevant criteria: the complexity, external dependency count, in­
put validation and sensitive data parameters were identified simply by observing
the viewmodel class (UserCreateViewmodel), researching how unit test should be
carried out and what they should test in the viewmodel [93]. The error handling pa­
rameter, however, has been suggested and added by the chatbot itself: 20 minutes
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
53
==PAGE:62==
4. Writing a prompt for the chatbot to analyze the components and output its results: 15
minutes. Knowing the application’s architecture, components to be tested, criteria
for the analysis and the goal of this analysis a prompt was constructed. What was
unknown was the output format. Thus, the chatbot was first prompted to specify
the prompt format where the mentioned parameters and the goal would be inputted.
It provided the idea of the ranking system, the format of the analysis result and
included the ’error handling’ parameter.
The prompt result to be input to the chatbot if one aims to similarly identify the most
critical components is shown in Listing . The template used with actual values and not
placeholders is depcited in Chapter Mobile application risk analysis: identification of the
most critical components to be prioritized in testing in Listing 3.3.
1
I have developed a mobile app for the platform [platform name], using the [
application architecture type] architecture. As part of functional testing
in this architecture , I need to evaluate the following components: [
specific component names]. Best practices for testing this type of
architecture is to test [components to be tested] first.
2
3
Evaluate each component based on the provided criteria and provide an output
for each in the format shown below:
4
5
Component Name:
6
[criteria parameter 1]: [Points] (Reasoning for [criteria parameter 1]) [
criteria parameter 2]: [Points] (Reasoning for [criteria parameter 2]) [
criteria parameter 3]: [Points] (Reasoning for [criteria parameter 3]) [
criteria parameter 4]: [Points] (Reasoning for [criteria parameter 4]) [
criteria parameter 5]: [Points] (Reasoning for [criteria parameter 5])
Points: [Total Points] Error-Prone Ranking: [Error-Prone Ranking]
7
8
For each component , assign points to each criterion based on the provided
reasoning. Calculate the total points and assign an error-prone ranking
based on the total points. To provide a more accurate evaluation , each
component is provided in the chat history.
Listing 7.1: The critical component analysis template for an AI chatbot
7.2
Manual test development
There have been 12 (11 unit and 1 integration) test cases developed using the traditional
method ­ implementing them manually. The test cases are presented in Chapter 5.3 and
their implementation can be seen in Appendix B. Out of those, 8 passed successfully and
the remaining 4 failed when running them which is depicted in figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Proportion of passed and failed tests that were developed manually
It has to be noted that the test names in Figure 7.5 were simplified due to their length
(e.g. the test name in the figure is isPhoneNumberValid() whereas the actual test name
is setPhoneNumber_ValidPhoneNumber_ValidationCorrect()).
54
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:63==
Figure 7.2: The test suite with the test cases developed manually including its setup
The setup for the tests has been done in 15 minutes. It includes:
• Implementation: type declaration of the UserCreateViewModel variable and a mocked
UserCreateRepository variable, and initialization of the mocking and the UserCreateViewModel
variable in the setUp() function has been done in
• Additional implementation: the mocked class Repository had to be changed to open
class in order to be testable
• Learning: how to mock components and dependencies
The setup was also the process with the longest time spent on implementation.
Moreover, for each of the set() function test cases depicted in figure 7.2 the implementa­
tion time was 8 minutes, while the additional implementation was 3 minutes per function
which included creating a get() function for each of these values from the UserCreateViewModel.
The 2 tests to verify the correct functionality of the name validator (isNameValid() and
isNameInvalid()) only required 7 minutes each to be developed. However, although the
other 4 test cases that test the input (valid and invalid phone number and email) required
the same amount of time for their implementation (7 minutes), they failed nonetheless.
This can be seen in the test results in figures 7.3 and 7.4 upon triggering the CI pipeline
run and running the tests by pushing new code to the remote code repository.
Figure 7.3: Test results for validating a valid and invalid phone number in the log after the
CI pipeline run has been triggered
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 7.4: Test results for validating a valid and invalid email in the log after the CI pipeline
run has been triggered
To expand on these last 4 tests; there has also been 7 minutes per test invested as
learning time. Specifically, this was for uncovering the root cause of the error caused in
these test cases and investigating whether there exists another feasible solution. Another
potential solution has indeed been identified ­ in the form of a UI test. This would essen­
tially test the input validation, however through inputting it as the user would ­ through
interacting with the UI.
The testCheckUIStateCorrect and createUserSuccessfully are considered more com­
plex tests, as the former requires the UI state class to emit its value and the latter requires
to verify the correct communication between different software components (viewmodel,
repository and data source). The testCheckUIStateCorrect required 10 minutes of
learning time to understand how to correctly set and retrieve the values from the UI state
component. The test case createUserSuccessfully is the integration test and required
in total of learning time to understand the basics of how Kotlin coroutines work and how
to test it correctly as part of the integration test [88, 94].
7.2.1
Execution time
The CI pipeline has been run and test results received with a failure (due to the 4 afore­
mentioned failed tests) which required 3 minutes and 15 seconds as can be seen in
figure 7.5
Figure 7.5: The CI pipeline run failure from failing manually developed tests after the initial
run
7.2.2
Maintainability
As manual test development is the approach where the test steps are written and test
cases developed by hand, it can become cumbersome rather quickly to update and main­
tain the tests, especially in the startup environment where the application and its features
have the tendency to change on a regular basis. Thus, in case the feature’s code that is
under test changes, then at least the test cases would need to be updated or refactored.
However, if the case is that the feature itself has undergone an iteration and changed, it
is likely that the test steps would require a modification as well. In both cases, the time
spent on writing and developing the test cases would increase if not double itself.
7.3
Test development using AI test generation
To set up the Machinet AI tool for AI test generation as described in Testing frameworks
and Tools, it required a total of 17 minutes.
56
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:65==
There have been 6 test cases generated using the AI test generation method ­ imple­
menting them automatically. The test cases are presented in Chapter 6.1.1 and their
implementation can be seen in Appendix C. Out of those, 3 passed successfully and the
remaining 3 failed when running them which is depicted in figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6: Proportion of passed and failed tests that were automatically developed with
the AI test generation
Figure 7.7: The test suite with AI­generated test cases and the setup
What can also be observed from the figure 7.7 is that there is no implementation time
noted in the graph. This is due to the fact that the whole process of AI test generation and
their implementation required less than 1 minute, and was thus not included. The setup
required in 5 minutes. It includes:
• Additional implementation: the mocked class Repository had to be changed to open
class in order to be testable
• Learning: how to mock components and dependencies
Moreover, for each of the set() function test cases depicted in figure 7.7 the additional im­
plementation required 3 minutes per function which included creating a get() function for
each of these values from the UserCreateViewModel. However, the test testSetPhoneNumber()
failed, upon triggering the CI pipeline run and running it by pushing new code to the re­
mote code repository. The test case failed due to the phone number variable being set
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
57
==PAGE:66==
to a too­long set of numbers (10 instead of exactly 8) shown in Listing 7.2. This can be
seen in the test results in Figure7.8.
1
...
2
3
@Test
4
fun `testSetPhoneNumber `() = runBlockingTest {
5
// Arrange
6
val testPhoneNumber = "1234567890"
7
8
// Act
9
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(testPhoneNumber)
10
11
// Assert
12
assertEquals(testPhoneNumber , userCreateViewModel.getPhoneNumber())
13
}
14
15
...
Listing 7.2: Failed test case testing the phone number setter function
Figure 7.8: Test results for setting the phone number in the log after the CI pipeline run
has been triggered
The 2 tests that verify the correct functionality of the create user function and user create
UI state flow failed as well upon being run as part of the CI pipeline. This is due to incor­
rect testing of Kotlin coroutines and UI state’s value emission not calling first(). Both
generated tests can be seen in Appendix Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests generated
automatically with Machinet AI test generation. The test run failures in the CI pipeline can
be seen in the test results in Figure 7.9 where the first part of the log is for testUserCreate
and the second part is for testUserCreateUIState.
Figure 7.9: Test results for tests the create user and user create UI state in the log after
the CI pipeline run has been triggered
After repairing the failing test cases, there were zero failing ones left and all 6 completed
successfully.
7.3.1
Execution time
The CI pipeline has been run and test results received with a failure (due to the 4 afore­
mentioned failed tests) which required 3 minutes and 50 seconds as can be seen in
figure 7.10
58
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.10: The CI pipeline run failure from failing AI­generated tests after the initial run
7.3.2
Maintainability
AI­generated test development is the approach where the test cases are developed au­
tomatically by being generated by AI in less than 1 minute. Updating and maintaining
the tests can also be very swift and simple. In case the feature’s code that is under test
changes, then new test cases can simply be generated again in the same way as before
with a press of a button. If the case is that the feature itself has undergone an iteration
and changed, it is likely that the test steps would require a modification as well. This step,
on the other hand, has to be done manually as in manual test development ­ changing
the test steps manually.
7.3.3
Code redundancies
There are a few things that are part of the generated code (as part of the test suite) that
are redundant .
Imports that are redundant can be seen as the grey imports in figure 7.11.
Figure 7.11: Redundant imports (colored grey) that were generated for UserCreateView­
Model test cases
Variable initialization has been done for a variable instantTaskExecutorRule that is
never used. This can be seen in listing . The variable is meant specifically for testing
components that use LiveData [95], however, that is not part of these test cases nor the
application software in scope.
1
class UserCreateViewModelTestGen {
2
3
@get:Rule
4
val instantTaskExecutorRule = InstantTaskExecutorRule()
5
6
...
Listing 7.3: A redundantly initialized variable
Calls such as runBlockingTest (or the non­deprecated and suggested version runTest for
testing Kotlin Coroutines [94]) as part of the test definition is redundant as it would only be
necessary for the test cases dealing with testing Kotlin Coroutines. Example of this code
redundancy can be seen in listing
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
59
==PAGE:68==
1
class UserCreateViewModelTestGen {
2
3
...
4
5
fun `testSetName `() = runBlockingTest {
6
...
7
}
Listing 7.4: An example of a redundantly added call for the test function
7.3.4
Test tool issues
The Machinet AI’s test generation tool sometimes encountered some issues. For exam­
ple, there was once an unknown error when clicking the ’generate tests’ button. Another
time when experimenting it generated a test with Java language annotations which did
not work. The test can be seen in Listing 7.5.
1
@Test
2
fun testSetNameWhenCalledThenUserNameValueIsSet() = runBlockingTest {
3
// Arrange
4
val testString = "Test User"
5
6
// Act
7
userCreateViewModel.setName(testString)
8
9
// Assert
10
val userNameField = UserCreateViewModel::class.java.getDeclaredField("
_userName")
11
userNameField.isAccessible = true
12
val userNameValue = userNameField.get(userCreateViewModel)
13
assertEquals(testString , userNameValue)
14
}
Listing 7.5: Wrongfully generated test case
7.4
Test development using an AI chatbot
This section presents the results obtained from implementing test cases using an AI chat­
bot. Firstly the results of developing unit tests are presented and then also for develop­
ment of a UI test.
There have been 16 local unit test cases, 1 local integration test case and 1 instrumented
UI test case developed using the AI chatbot test development method ­ writing and de­
veloping them automatically [60]. Instrumented in this scenario means that it requires a
testing device or an emulator. The test cases are presented in Chapter 6.1.2. Out of
those, 7 passed successfully and the remaining 11 failed when running them which is
depicted in Figure 7.6. Note that the UI test has been executed locally outside of the CI
pipeline. This is due to the fact that the device emulator for running the UI test required
too much time to be set up in the pipeline and was thus excluded from the scope of this
work.
60
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:69==
Figure 7.12: Proportion of passed and failed tests that were written and developed by the
chatbot
Figure 7.13: The test suite with AI chatbot developed unit test cases and the setup
Figure 7.14: The test suite with AI chatbot developed UI test cases and the setup
Similarly to the test time graph in Chapter Test development using AI test generation, what
can also be observed here from Figures 7.13 and 7.14 is that there is no implementation
time noted in either of the graphs. This is due to the fact that the whole process of the
chatbot test development and their implementation required less than 1 minute, and was
thus not included. The setup for the unit test suite required 5 minutes and includes:
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
61
==PAGE:70==
• Additional implementation: the mocked class Repository had to be changed to open
class in order to be testable
• Learning: how to mock components and dependencies
while the setup for the UI test case required 4 minutes:
• Learning: 6 minutes for how to initialize the Viewmodel variables correctly and how
to implement test tags [89]
• Additional implementation: 11 minutes for the test tags
Moreover, for each of the set() function test cases depicted in Figure 7.13 the addi­
tional implementation required 3 minutes per function which included creating a get()
function for each of these values from the UserCreateViewModel.
However, the test
testSetPhoneNumber() failed, upon triggering the CI pipeline run and running it by push­
ing new code to the remote code repository. This can be seen in the test results in Listing
7.6. It failed due to setting the wrong number of digits for the phone number parameter
as can be seen in the test case itself in Listing 7.7.
1
...
2
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > setPhoneNumber should update
userPhoneNumber when input is valid FAILED
3
org.junit.ComparisonFailure at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:71
4
5
...
Listing 7.6: Chatbot developed test results for setting the phone number in the log after
the CI pipeline run has been triggered
1
...
2
@Test
3
fun `setPhoneNumber should update userPhoneNumber when input is valid `() {
4
// Arrange
5
val phoneNumber = "1234567890"
6
7
// Act
8
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(phoneNumber)
9
10
// Assert
11
assertEquals(phoneNumber , userCreateViewModel.getPhoneNumber())
12
}
13
14
...
Listing 7.7: Chatbot developed phone number test case
The 8 unit tests isEmailErrorValid, isEmailErrorInvalid, isPhoneNumberErrorValid,
isPhoneNumberErrorInvalid, isContinueEnabledAllValid, isContinueEnabledEmailInvalid,
isContinueEnabledPhoneNumberInvalid and isContinueEnabledCheckboxInvalid test­
ing the correct functionality of the extension function input validators failed upon being run
as part of the CI pipeline. This is due to the fact that the input validaton libraries used for
these validator functions cannot be used in the testing environment as seen in Listing 5.3
in Chapter Unit tests depicting the libraries used for the validator functions. The created
tests can be seen in Appendix Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests developed using the
AI chatbot. The test run failure in the CI pipeline can be seen in the test results in Listing
7.8.
62
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:71==
1
...
2
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > isPhoneNumberError should return true
when phone number is invalid FAILED
3
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:169
4
5
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > continueEnabled should return false
when phone number is invalid FAILED
6
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:249
7
8
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > continueEnabled should return false
when checkbox is not checked FAILED
9
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:266
10
11
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > isPhoneNumberError should return
false when phone number is valid FAILED
12
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:181
13
14
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > continueEnabled should return true
when all input is valid and checkbox is checked FAILED
15
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:198
16
17
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > continueEnabled should return false
when email is invalid FAILED
18
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:232
19
20
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > isEmailError should return true when
email is invalid FAILED
21
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:145
22
23
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > isEmailError should return false when
email is valid FAILED
24
java.lang.NullPointerException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:157
25
26
...
Listing 7.8: Chatbot developed test results for validating the input values in the log after
the CI pipeline run has been triggered
The integration test that verifies the correct functionality of the create user function failed
upon being run as part of the CI pipeline. This is due to incorrect testing of Kotlin corou­
tines. The created test can be seen in Appendix Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests
developed using the AI chatbot. The test run failure in the CI pipeline can be seen in the
test results in Listing 7.9.
1
...
2
com.example.faunaonboarding.onboarding.userCreate.
UserCreateViewModelTestChatbot > createUser should call
userCreateRepository with correct parameters FAILED
3
java.lang.IllegalStateException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt:99
4
Caused by: java.lang.RuntimeException at UserCreateViewModelChatbot.kt
:35
5
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
63
==PAGE:72==
6
...
Listing 7.9: Chatbot developed test results for creating the user in the log after the CI
pipeline run has been triggered
The UI test case created by the AI chatbot failed as well. It was not able to be executed
due to having the UserCreateComposable’s parameter set wrong as seen in Figure 7.15.
The pop­up information window seen in the same figure shows how the parameter should
be set correctly. The UI test, however, mainly required learning time to understand why
certain test steps are failing and how to fix them.
Figure 7.15: The wrongfully set parameter for the UserCreateComposable in the AI
chatbot­created UI test step
Furthermore, the test also required to do a ”start call” step before accessing the user­
CreateUIState and its validator function extensions. This had to be done as shown in
Listing
1
...
2
3
viewModel.userCreateUiState.first()
4
5
...
Listing 7.10: The first CI pipeline run’s failure after including the Testim UI test to the
pipeline’s configuration file
Calling the createUser function and verifying if it was called correctly was also removed
due to it being too difficult to implement it as part of the UI test (it required too much time
to fix it and have it function correctly).
64
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:73==
The whole test case implementation can be seen in Appendix Appendix ­ UI test devel­
oped using the AI chatbot.
7.4.1
Execution time
The CI pipeline has been run and test results received with a failure (due to the 4 afore­
mentioned failed tests) which required 2 minutes and 34 seconds as can be seen in
figure 7.16
Figure 7.16: The CI pipeline run failure from failing the AI chatbot developed tests after
the initial run
7.4.2
Maintainability
AI chatbot written test development is the approach where the test cases are developed
automatically by AI in less than 1 minute. Updating and maintaining these tests can also
be very swift and simple. For example, in case the feature’s code under test changes,
then new test cases can simply be developed again for the new code in the same way
as before ­ by requesting a test by writing a prompt to the chatbot. If the case is that
the feature itself has undergone an iteration and changed, it is likely that the test steps
would require a modification as well. Thus, the AI chatbot can similarly solve the problem
by not just quickly developing the test case itself, but also writing its new test steps. To
demonstrate this, the test testSetName will be taken as an example.
In order for the AI chatbot to write the steps for a new test, the new test has to be developed
first and the file it is located in added to the AI chatbot’s chat history in order for it to easily
see the test case and the context it is in. Then one can simply write a prompt in the chat
asking to write the test steps for a certain test (in this case the newly developed test.
For example, for a simple test testSetName) the prompt can be written as something
similar to the one in listing 7.11.
1
write the test steps in natural language for test 'setName should update
userName '
Listing 7.11: An example of a prompt to input to the AI chatbot in order for it to generate
the test steps for a simple test case such as ’testSetName’
The chatbot’s response to the prompt is documented in Listing 7.12.
1
Sure! Here are the test steps for the 'setName should update userName ' test:
2
1. Set up the test environment.
3
2. Define a name variable with the value "John Doe".
4
3. Call the setName() method of the userCreateViewModel object with the
name variable as the parameter.
5
4. Retrieve the value of the userName property using the getName() method
of the userCreateViewModel object.
6
5. Assert that the value of the userName property is equal to the name
variable.
Listing 7.12: The AI chatbot’s response to the input prompt for it to generate the test steps
for the simple test case ’testSetName’
To demonstrate the chatbot’s capability of writing the test steps for a test case a prompt
was made to request the test steps for the more complex create user test as seen in
Listing 7.13
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
65
==PAGE:74==
1
write the test steps in natural language for test 'createUser should call
userCreateRepository with correct parameters '
Listing 7.13: An example of a prompt to input to the AI chatbot in order for it to generate
the test steps for a more complex test case such as ’createUser’ test
The chatbot’s response to the prompt is documented in Listing 7.14.
1
Sure! Here are the test steps for the test case createUser should call
userCreateRepository with correct parameters:
2
1. Set up the test environment by initializing the necessary objects and
dependencies.
3
2. Create a new instance of the UserCreateViewModel class.
4
3. Set the values for the userName , userEmail , userPhoneNumber , and
checkboxChecked parameters.
5
4. Call the createUser() method of the UserCreateViewModel instance.
6
5. Verify that the userCreateRepository is called with the correct
parameters.
7
6. Retrieve the result from the userCreateRepository and assert that it is
not null.
8
7. Assert that the result is a success.
9
8. Assert that the result is equal to Result.success(true).
10
11
These steps ensure that the createUser() method of the UserCreateViewModel
class correctly calls the userCreateRepository with the expected
parameters.
Listing 7.14: The AI chatbot’s response to the input prompt for it to generate the test steps
for the complex test case ’createUser’
7.5
Low­code test development
To demonstrate the test case development using the low­code technique, one test has
been developed using this technique which can be seen in Figure A UI test steps in Testim
tool used to test the whole screen flow of the Onboarding feature in Chapter Low­code
testing.
Testim tool was used to create the test steps and have a test­running environment in its
web application. The development of this test followed the principle Arrange, Act, Assert.
As the Testim tool does the black­box type of UI testing and the principle was followed
mainly by [80, 96]:
• arranging the data by using the provided functions (in the form of test steps in Testim)
generating random values and email addresses to be input in the input fields.
• asserting that some UI element (e.g. text or image) is visible on the phone screen
• acting by interacting with the UI elements (e.g. clicking a button)
66
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:75==
Figure 7.17: The total times of the UI test developed using Testim codeless tool
Here can be observed from Figure 7.17 that there is no additional implementation time
noted. This is simply due to the fact that it was not necessary. The total time spent on
setting up the test tool environment and developing the test steps as seen in Figure 7.17
is 103 minutes.
The setup process of the test tool and the test case as seen in Figure 7.17 required 16
minutes in total and includes:
• Test implementation: 11 minutes for the setup of the test tool, the test case and
arranging the data to be generated
• and 5 minutes for learning how to set it up
The process of actually developing the test required a total of 87 minutes and includes:
• Test implementation: 65 minutes for the actual implementation of the test steps
including the interaction with the UI elements as part of the test
• Learning: 22 minutes to learn how to do the assertions effectively and how to repair
the test when it is failing
Moreover, the initial run of the test after including it in the CI pipeline’s configuration file
failed as evidenced in Listing 7.15.
1
...
2
3
Test list:
4
1 : Onboarding UI flow test (cK5d1C4rFlP7m5i6)
5
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6
Test "Onboarding UI flow test" started (cK5d1C4rFlP7m5i6) url: https://app.
testim.io/#/project/YiFgVRXyMdhDGE8Egcar/branch/master/test/
cK5d1C4rFlP7m5i6?result-id=u3YoNNpnADLvs8ZN
7
Get device slot from virtual -mobile -grid
8
Get device to run Onboarding UI flow test
9
Wait for test complete
10
(node:1782) ExperimentalWarning: buffer.File is an experimental feature and
might change at any time
11
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
12
Test "Onboarding UI flow test" finished status: FAILED (cK5d1C4rFlP7m5i6)
duration: 00:01:27.240
13
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
14
Test plan anonymous () completed PASSED: 0 FAILED: 1 FAILED -EVALUATING: 0
ABORTED: 0 SKIPPED: 0 Duration: 00:01:58.207 (JfZrvmFdQPdEwnqg)
15
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
16
Failed runs are:
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
67
==PAGE:76==
17
Onboarding UI flow test : https://app.testim.io/#/project/YiFgVRXyMdhDGE8Egcar
/branch/master/test/cK5d1C4rFlP7m5i6?result-id=u3YoNNpnADLvs8ZN
18
JUnit XML file saved to testim-tests-report.xml
19
Error: Process completed with exit code 1.
20
21
...
Listing 7.15: The first CI pipeline run’s failure after including the Testim UI test to the
pipeline’s configuration file
When navigating to the Testim web application, the failed test notification including the
error message was displayed in the main dashboard which is depicted in Figure 7.18
Figure 7.18: The test failure notification including the error message displayed in the
Testim web application’s dashboard
Then, once clicking on the fail error, the tool navigates to the web application’s test steps
screen, displaying in which test step the fail has occurred as seen in Figure 7.19.
68
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:77==
Figure 7.19: The exact location of the problem in the UI test developed in Testim
After investigating the issue in Testim and learning about the correct way to perform as­
sertions, and generating and using values, it has been discovered that the generated
animalName variable’s value was not set properly in the input field for the pet’s name
[97]. Namely, the field where the parameter to be set in the input field for the pet’s name
was accidentally left empty and the value was never set as seen in the phone screenshot
on the right side of Figure 7.20. Thus, the flow could not proceed to the next screen seen
in the phone screenshot on the left side of Figure 7.20 as intended.
Figure 7.20: The phone screens affected and their screenshots captured by the tool when
clicking See error in the red panel seen in Figure 7.19
Out of the 22 minutes spent on learning, 8 were dedicated to learning how to fix this
issue (by setting the variable correctly in the set step). After the issue was solved and the
changes were saved, the CI pipeline was re­run manually and with success.
7.5.1
Execution time
The CI pipeline has been run and test results received with a failure at (due to the afore­
mentioned failed test’s variable setting) which required 1 minutes and 58 seconds as
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
69
==PAGE:78==
can be seen above in Listing 7.16.
After implementing the solution, the CI pipeline run with the Testim test succeeded in 2
minutes and 33 seconds as seen in Listing
1
...
2
3
BUILD SUCCEEDED in 2m 33s
4
5
...
Listing 7.16: The second CI pipeline run’s success after including the fixed Testim UI test
to the pipeline’s configuration file
7.5.2
Maintainability
To maintain and update the tests in Testim, it is simple: the red plus icon can be clicked
seen in Figure 7.21 which starts the test recorder and new steps can be added. They can
substitute the old steps.
Figure 7.21: Maintaining the test steps in a test
7.6
CI/CD integration
GitHub Actions CI/CD framework was used to exemplify the setup and integration of a CI
pipeline into the workflow, providing automated builds triggered by certain desired actions.
The setup has already been carried out and can be seen in Chapter CI/CD and in total
required 1 hour and 17 minutes. The difficulty in setting it up was mainly due to the
fact that there is not a specific CI pipeline workflow template for Android Kotlin, only for
Android [98]. Thus, on implementation, it required some debugging and correction in
order to make it function as intended.
Including the step in the CI pipeline’s workflow file to execute all the non­instrumented
tests (tests not requiring a test device for executing the tests) in the code repository was
simple and required 10 minutes. It is displayed in Chapter Integration with the CI pipeline
in Listing 5.7.
Including the step in the CI pipeline’s workflow file to execute all the Testim UI tests in the
Testim project was also simple and required 10 minutes. The CI pipeline step is prede­
fined in the Testim instructions on how to integrate the test into the existing CI workflow
and can, thus, simply be copied into the CI workflow file [99]. It is displayed in Listing
7.17.
1
...
2
3
- name: Set up Node.js
4
uses: actions/setup-node@v1
5
with:
6
node-version: '18.x'
7
8
- name: Install and run tests using testim -cli
70
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:79==
9
run: |
10
npm install -g @testim/testim -cli
11
testim \
12
--token "GHRzlTtakE6CNR7bIbS7nbCLlC2h51AeQY7yq3VRAmYwQ1OsTi" \
13
--project "YiFgVRXyMdhDGE8Egcar" \
14
--grid "virtual -mobile -grid" \
15
--mode "appium" \
16
--report-file testim-tests-report.xml
17
18
- name: Publish Test Results
19
uses: actions/upload-artifact@v2
20
with:
21
name: testim-tests-report
22
path: testim-tests-report.xml
23
24
...
Listing 7.17: Integration of the step in the workflow file to run all the Testim tests in the CI
pipeline
7.7
Bug identification and resolution
For the purpose of demonstrating defect identification and resolution methods, a bug has
been manually implanted into the code base of the Fauna application. This bug has been
tackled together with the developer in Fauna in order to resolve how they are usually re­
solved in Fauna (also described in Chapter Development and testing processes in place).
The times presented were recorded together with the developer while resolving the issue.
Only the latency times (bug report, deployment and test execution) have been estimated
with the help of the developer and were not actually measured and captured. Namely in
the UserCreate Viewmodel’s set function updating the user name (setName()) where the
variable for the name to be updated is both initialized wrong and being updated wrong as
seen in Listing 7.18:
1
@HiltViewModel
2
class UserCreateViewModel @Inject constructor(
3
private val userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
4
) : ViewModel() {
5
6
private val _userName = MutableStateFlow("i")
7
private val _userEmail = MutableStateFlow("")
8
private val _userPhoneNumber = MutableStateFlow("")
9
private val _userCheckboxChecked = MutableStateFlow(false)
10
private val _uiState = MutableStateFlow <UIState >(UIState.Success)
11
12
13
fun setName(it: String) {
14
_userName.value = _userName.value
15
}
16
17
...
Listing 7.18: A wrongly initialized and updated user name variable
The correct way of initializing the _userName in Listing 7.18 would be without the obsolete
letter ”i” in the string ­ with an empty string ””. And the setName() function should update
the name variable with the passed parameter it and not itself.
To demonstrate this bug’s identification, both the Fauna’s existing approach and the pro­
posed approach will be used in the following two subsections.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
71
==PAGE:80==
7.7.1
Using the existing (manual) method
To demonstrate this method, Figure 3.5 in Chapter Development and testing processes
in place will be referred to as it describes the current (manual) bug­solving process. The
time­frames presented in this chapter were obtained from a discussion with Fauna’s de­
veloper who is practising this particular method of bug­solving.
Table 7.1: Times taken for each step in the current bug identification and resolution pro­
cess
Process stage
Time taken
Bug report
24 hours
Bug review and prioritization
1.5 hours
Code inspection and debugging
2 hours
Bug fixing
5 minutes
Code and application review
15 minutes
Deployment
4 hours
Total
31.83 hours
To describe the process, the time frames were captured for each step in the existing bug
discovery and resolution process, and stored in Table 7.1. To expand on it, a description
of each stage in the process is described:
• Bug report: The bug comes from reports of the manual testers, however, as the
bug’s nature is not to be spotted easily, at least not in the Onboarding process, it
lasts longer for it to be reported. Thus, it takes 24 hours for it to be discovered and
reported. This is considered latency time.
• Bug review and prioritization: Once the bug report is received, the developer
needs to review and prioritize it based on its severity and impact on the application.
This step takes 1 hour and 30 minutes.
• Code inspection and debugging: The developer needs to inspect the code to
identify the cause of the bug and debug it to understand the issue. The debugging
is done using the IDE’s debugger and writing print statements. As the mobile ap­
plication’s code is not overly complex and the developer knows that the bug could
not arise from the backend part (as it contains rather well­covered testing), the is­
sue can be more easily pinpointed to have arisen from the front end ­ the mobile
application. Thus, this step takes 2 hours.
• Bug fixing: After identifying the cause of the bug, the developer fixes the problem,
which takes 5 minutes.
• Code and application review: Once the bug fix is implemented, the code and
application need to be reviewed to ensure the fix is correct and does not introduce
new issues. This step takes 15 minutes.
• Deployment: Lastly, the bug fix is deployed to the production environment. This
took 4 hours as approval from the mobile application store is required for each new
application version. This period of waiting for approval is considered latency time.
There are two occurrences with latency time; essentially meaning that those times are
not actual developer work time. In total they evaluate to 28 hours. Thus, the total sum
72
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:81==
of the work time taken for the manual bug identification and resolution is approximately 4
hours.
7.7.2
Using the proposed method
To demonstrate and present bug identification and resolution with the proposed method,
the process steps will be presented along with their time frames. The time frames also
include the time required to set up and implement the test cases and the CI pipeline (which
are only done one time in the beginning). Moreover, the times for each step recorded for
the setup process in Chapter Environment setup and times recorded from testing that
were presented in Chapter Results will be taken into account.
Table 7.2: Times taken for each step in the proposed bug identification and resolution
process, including the initial one­off set­up of the testing environment and CI pipeline
Process stage
Time taken
Automated testing and testing tool
setup
2 hour
CI setup
1.5 hours
Test execution
3 minutes
Test result analysis
5 minutes
Bug identification and fixing
15 minutes
Pushing the changes and CI trigger
5 minutes
Test result validation
10 minutes
Deployment
4 hours
Total
8.13 hours
To describe the process, the time frames were captured for each step in the proposed bug
discovery and resolution process, and stored in Table 7.2. To expand on it, a description
of each stage in the process is described:
• Automated testing and testing tool setup: The setup step entails importing the
test tool dependencies in the development environment, and setting up the AI chat­
bot tool and the AI test generation tool, requiring 2 hours in total for this step.
• CI setup: The second part of the setup sets up and integrates the CI pipeline (as
described in Chapters 4 and 5) in order for it to be triggered and run on each new
code change pushed. This step took 1 hour and 30 minutes.
• Test execution: Once the setup is in place and new code changes are pushed via
the version control system, the CI pipeline is triggered, executing the tests described
in its configuration file. For this particular scenario, this step takes 3 minutes.
• Test result analysis: As the CI detects and pinpoints the problems and errors in
the pipeline run, the analysis is quick. Thus, this step takes 5 minutes.
• Bug identification and fixing: Once the analysis is done and the error is pinpointed
by the CI, the bug identification and fixing is a rather straightforward process. This
step takes 15 minutes.
• Pushing the changes and CI trigger: Similar to step Test execution this step
re­executes the tests in the CI pipeline on pushing the fixed code changes to the
version control system. Thus, this step takes 5 minutes.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
73
==PAGE:82==
• Test result validation: The test result validation is performed by the CI pipeline
after the bug fix code is pushed to the version control system. This took 10 minutes.
• Deployment: Lastly, the bug fix is deployed to the production environment. This
took 4 hours as approval from the mobile application store is required for each new
application version.
The steps automated testing and testing tool setup and CI setup were set­up steps
required to be carried out only once. The in total evaluate to 3 hours and 30 minutes.
Additionally, similarly as mentioned in Chapter Using the existing (manual) method, de­
ployment step is considered latency time and not actual developer work time which eval­
uates to 4 hours. Thus, the total sum of the actual developer time taken for the proposed
bug identification and resolution is approximately 40 minutes.
74
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:83==
8
Evaluation
This chapter presents an evaluation of the findings detailed in Chapter Results and builds
upon the analysis in Chapter Analysis: Existing and new technology. The evaluation
unfolds in a structured manner, beginning with a thorough assessment of the Fauna case
study. Here, both the traditional methods in use and the newly proposed methodologies
are compared.
Following this, the focus shifts to an in­depth examination of the tools used in the pro­
posed methods. Consistent with the methodology’s objectives in Chapter Methodology,
this evaluation is based on key metrics that are crucial to understanding the tools’ practi­
cality and the methods’ long­term effectiveness in a startup environment.
These metrics, essential for evaluating the testing tools in scope, include:
• Task efficiency: Assessing which time­consuming tasks the tool can tackle and
how
• Skill requirements: Identifying the technical skills required to effectively use the
tool, thereby mapping its accessibility to startup team members with varying exper­
tise levels
• Cost effectiveness: Evaluating what the tool provides when investing in it and its
possibilities
• Support level: Analyzing the extent and quality of support and guidance offered by
the tool, crucial for startups with limited in­house expertise and resources
In addition to these tool­specific metrics, the chapter will also consider broader factors
such as cost­efficiency, learning curves, speed, and more nuanced measures like the ef­
fectiveness of detecting defects in the application and maintainability, as it was described
in Chapter Methodology.
A key feature of this chapter is the presentation and evaluation of a method recommenda­
tion flowchart. Each recommendation derived from this flowchart is examined and eval­
uated, providing startups with actionable insights. This part of the evaluation particularly
addresses how these recommended methods compare to the existing practices in the
field, offering a perspective on their applicability and effectiveness.
Significant in this assessment is also the incorporation of qualitative feedback from startup
stakeholders, paired with quantitative data, to provide a comprehensive understanding of
the methods’ and tools’ impacts.
Furthermore, the chapter outlines meaningful and generalized observations and recom­
mendations tailored for startups based on research carried out in Fauna. These conclu­
sions are based on the previously obtained software development and testing knowledge
evident in Chapter Background, reflecting on the data collected, the feedback gathered,
and the comparative analysis conducted. The objective is to provide startups with a clear
potential path forward, one that balances the potential need for effective software testing
with the long­term vision of effective and resource­efficient development practices.
The chapter conludes with various alternative approaches and potential long­term so­
lutions that could benefit startups in their quest for efficient software development and
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
75
==PAGE:84==
testing. These discussions aim to broaden the scope of the evaluation, considering not
only the immediate implications but also the long­term strategic impact of these method­
ologies.
To begin with, a critical analysis of the software components has been carried out in Chap­
ter Mobile application risk analysis: identification of the most critical components to be
prioritized in testing and its results presented in Chapter Critical component analysis. It
presents a fast and efficient method of identifying the most critical software components
to be prioritized in testing. As a template prompt is constructed in in Listing 7.1 in Chapter
Critical component analysis any user is potentially able to identify these components the
same way regardless of the application’s platform and architecture.
Looking at all of the test development method results presented in Chapter Results, the
manual method required the most time (180 minutes) for its test development, as it is
displayed in Figure 8.1, namely in the table on the right side. The AI test generation
method, on the other hand, had the lowest total development time (47 minutes). The
graph on the left side of Figure 8.1 represents the total time and number of passed tests
after fixing for each method. It has to be also noted here that there is no additional cost
for the AI chatbot as the ChatGPT free chatbot version was taken into account, which in
essence be used the same way as Machinet’s chatbot. Similarly, there is 5 minutes of
total setup time for the AI chatbot method which is referred to setting­up the ChatGPT.
Figure 8.1: Comparison of the total values in terms of time and cost and the number of
passed tests after fixing for each test development method
The initial test success results from the two AI­powered methods (AI test generation and
AI chatbot) shown in Figure 8.1 indicate that the AI chatbot method had the most failing
tests proportional to the successful ones, having 57 % more failing tests than the passing
ones. The method also contains the most test cases, having a total of 18.
To display the total development time and the number of passed tests (after fixing the
issues) of each method in a more meaningful format, the time­efficiency ratio value is
calculated. The number of passed tests after fixing is represented with nr and total de­
velopment time with tp. Thus, the equation for time­efficiency ratio is written as:
nr
tp × 100
(8.1)
The calculations are captured in Table 8.1.
76
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:85==
Table 8.1: Time­efficiency values for each method
Test development method
Time­efficiency value
Manual
4.4
AI test generation
12.8
AI chatbot
13.8
As it can be observed from the calculation in Table 8.1, the manual method has the lowest
value while the AI chatbot method has the highest value. A higher value indicates a more
time­efficient testing method and, thus, the manual method is the least efficient while
the AI chatbot method is the most efficient, and the AI test generation method being not
too far behind it. It can also be observed that both AI­powered methods are more than 3
times more efficient than the manual method.
Furthermore, having both the values total setup time and additional cost in Table 8.1, the
cost­effectiveness can be calculated as shown in Equation 8.3. This calculation uses the
average between an Android software developer’s monthly salary [100] and an average
test automation engineer’s monthly salary in Copenhagen in 2023, as shown in Equation
8.2 bellow:
a + t
2
= 78000 + 56500
2
= 67250
(8.2)
The result of Equation 8.2 is 67250 where a stands for average Android developer’s salary,
t stands for average test automation engineer’s salary and where the currency is Danish
krone (DKK). Thus, the hourly wage can be derived by dividing this value first by 37.5
(total working hours in a week in Denmark) and then by 4 (number of weeks in a month)
where 448.3 DKK/h is the result.
The cost­effectiveness for each of the methods is then calculated by:
tc
tp = (td + ts) × h + ac
tp
(8.3)
where tc represents the total cost, tp represents the number of passed tests after fixing, td
represents the total development time, ts represents the total setup time, h represents the
average hourly wage and ac represents the additional cost. The calculation results based
on equation 8.3 for each test development method are captured in Table 8.2 bellow:
Table 8.2: Cost­effectiveness values for each method
Test development method
Cost­effectiveness value
Manual
168.1
AI test generation
65.9
AI chatbot
58.9
As it can be seen from Table 8.2, the manual method has the highest cost­effectiveness
result, meaning it is the least preferred method in terms of cost and effectiveness, while
the AI chatbot method has the highest value, meaning it is the most preferred test de­
velopment method. Generally speaking, a lower value indicates a more cost­effective
testing method and, thus, the manual method is the least cost­effective while the AI
chatbot method is the most cost­effective, and the AI test generation method being not
too far behind it. It can also be observed that both AI­powered methods are almost 3
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
77
==PAGE:86==
times more cost­effective than the manual method by AI test generation method being
61% more cost­effective and the AI chatbot method being 65% more cost­effective.
What has to be noted in terms of maintenance presented in Chapter Maintainability for
the tests developed by the AI chatbot is that the response still requires to be verified.
Furthermore, a comparison of the two methods (existing and proposed as presented in
Chapter Bug identification and resolution) of identifying and resolving a bug scenario was
carried out and evaluated.
Table 8.3: Cost values for each bug identification and resolution method
Bug identification and
resolution method
Total time of the
method(h)
Total setup time
(h)
Additional
cost
(DKK)
Existing
31.83
0
0
Proposed
8.13
3.25
0
Table 8.3 depicts the total times necessary for the process, setup of the tools and frame­
works required and any additional cost. What can be noticed is that the total time taken
for the existing (manual) process was approximately 32 hours, which is quadruple the
amount of time required for the proposed (automated) method, that takes approximately
8 hours. As the proposed method is based on the test development with the AI chatbot,
the total development time was taken from Figure 8.1. In order to evaluate the existing
and proposed methods from the cost perspective, the total expense was calculated for
each method as it is shown in Table 8.4. The average salary was taken from Equation
8.2, where the value for an hourly wage is derived to be 448.3 DKK/h. Thus, the total cost
was calculated using these predefined values and the values from Table 8.3 in Equation
8.4 bellow:
(tp + ts) × h + ac
(8.4)
where tp represents the total time of the method, ts represents the total setup time, h rep­
resents the average hourly wage and ac represents the additional cost. The calculations
are captured in Table 8.4.
Table 8.4: Total cost values for each method identifying and resolving a bug
Bug identification and
resolution method
Total cost (DKK)
Existing
14269.4
Existing (excluding the
initial latency time)
3510.2
Existing (excluding the
total latency time)
1681.1
Proposed
5101.7
Proposed
(excluding
the setup and latency
times)
298.9
Table 8.4 depicts that the proposed method is more expensive than the existing method
(excluding the initial latency time of 24 hours), however, it has to be noted that the cost
value of the proposed method includes the testing tools and CI setup time. This time is
78
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:87==
essentially developer work time, however, it is carried out only once in the beginning. The
tests still need to be developed over time, however. Having the AI­empowered methods
presented, on the other hand, may create this process may be much more time­efficient.
Thus, the total existing method’s cost is 1681.1 DKK, whereas the proposed method’s
cost is 298.9 DKK.
Looking from the perspective of UI testing there are two different software testing meth­
ods that were carried out which will be evaluated. One through the traditional test script
written testing created by an AI chatbot and one through a codeless test technique using
Testim [21].
In terms of testing scope, the traditional UI test has been done to test only the Create
user screen while the test in Testim has been done to test the entire Onboarding feature’s
UI screens. Although the traditional way of testing provides more flexibility in terms of
what and how to test, testing using Testim provides an intuitive interface for developing
the test steps and, thus, intuitive testing without requiring the knowledge to develop test
steps using coding. The traditional way of using an AI chatbot is a suitable option for more
in­depth testing.
For example when inputting a value into an input field; in the traditional UI test the input
value can be verified by checking its corresponding validator function’s return value (either
true or false), as it can be seen in Listing 8.1. Anything else could also be verified if
necessary.
1
@Test
2
fun testUserInput() = runTest {
3
...
4
5
// Enter valid input
6
val validName = "John Doe"
7
8
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userName")
9
.performTextInput(validName)
10
11
// Verify name error
12
assertFalse(viewModel.userCreateUiState.value.inputUIState.isNameError
())
13
14
...
15
}
Listing 8.1: The test steps inputting a valid name value and a verifying if it is valid using
the correspoding validator function
Listing 8.1 depicts how input field value setting is done for a UI component with the test
tag ”userName” and how its corresponding validator function is used to verify whether the
value is valid.
The traditional test created with the AI chatbot (before fixing it) also includes a createUser()
function call. However, this was removed when fixing the chatbot­created test case as it
was less straightforward to implement it in an instrumented UI test and due to the fact that
it was already part of the unit/integration tests presented before (e.g. the remaining tests
developed with the AI chatbot presented in Chapter 7.4). Besides, including the create
user function test step would also test the application’s logic in the data layer and, through
that, this test would become a UI integration test instead [101, 102].
As opposed to the other UI testing method presented, the UI test using Testim the input
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
79
==PAGE:88==
value can be verified implicitly by e.g. pressing a button and asserting that a certain UI
element is visible as expected. Moreover, using this method gave a more straightforward
and intuitive way to create the test to cover all the screens in the whole Onboarding.
Comparing both test methods from a time perspective, the traditional UI test was slightly
shorter ­ concretely by 24 minutes. The individual times spent are noted in Table 8.5.
Table 8.5: Total times for each of the UI tests
Test
implemen­
tation
Additional
im­
plementation
Learning
AI chatbot­created UI
test
0
11
68
Estimated AI chatbot­
created UI test to cover
the all the Onboarding
screens
0
99
180
UI test created using
Testim
76
0
27
Considering that the standard UI test using the AI chatbot is testing only the screen han­
dling the user’s input data, the time required to cover the whole Onboarding screen flow
can be estimated, including:
• Test implementation time: this time value would likely remain at 0 minutes as the
whole test can be written by the chatbot
• Additional implementation time: it would require at maximum 11 minutes per screen
the same as the current test to add the test tags to the UI components in scope
• Learning time: knowledge was already acquired beforehand regarding how to use
the test tags, how to correctly verify the input validators, and how to repair certain
test steps or test setup (note that there might still be some time required to be spent
on debugging and repairing the test). There may also be a slight learning curve in
determining how to correctly transition between the UI screens. However, this would
likely be required only once. Thus, it can be estimated the time would be at least
halved for the three screens handling the text input; leading to approximately 30
minutes of learning required per screen. The remaining screens, mainly requiring
only a click to be performed are estimated to require a lower time frame; takes
approximately 15 minutes.
Note that here the test was developed as one single test. However, the procedure can be
split into individual tests for each screen, depending on the testing needs and scenario.
The total time spent on developing a UI test to cover all the screens in Onboarding was
estimated using Equation 8.5. It is taken into account that there are nine screens; three
handling the user text input and the other six only requiring a click. Thus the total time is:
i × (ta + tli) + n × (ta + tln) = 279
(8.5)
where i represents the number of text input screens, ta represents the additional im­
plementation time per screen, tli represents the learning time per text input screen, n
represents the number of normal screens (non­text input, only a click) and tln represents
the learning time per normal screen.
80
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:89==
As it can be seen in Equation 8.5 the total estimated test development to cover all the
screens in Onboarding is 279 minutes, which is almost three times more than the UI
test using Testim which can be seen in Table 8.5.
As already mentioned, Testim is fairly intuitive and simple to use, which is also visible from
the learning time of the Testim test in Table 8.5, showcasing a total of 27 minutes of it.
This is much shorter than the total of 68 minutes of learning time that took place in the
traditional UI test. Moreover, as using Testim does not require any software programming
skills, only basic testing skills (knowing what to test, what action to perform, what should be
asserted etc.), it has the potential to be leveraged in the startup, not only by the developers
but also other team members (e.g. product owner). It has the potential to efficiently free
up the manual testers’ (e.g. startup team members) time for them to do more meaningful
work [103].
Furthermore, the difficulty of integrating each of the UI tests has been different for the two
testing methods; it was significantly easier to integrate the Testim test into the CI pipeline
than the standard method. The standard instrumented UI test, on the other hand, requires
an emulator to be set up, including debugging it and making sure it functions correctly in
the CI environment. This may be a bit cumbersome. However, if there is a need for a more
in­depth UI testing (on multiple application layers), which would essentially be also more
similar to an integration or even end­to­end test, then using the standard instrumented UI
test could prove to be beneficial. As these types of tests can also be more time­intensive,
it might be reasonable to simply execute them on a local machine with either an emulator
or a real device.
To conclude the evaluation part, all the results and their evaluations provided in this chap­
ter were gathered and utilized to derive a recommended step­by­step method for a startup
in a similar situation as Fauna. However, it has to be noted that some recommendations
do not have steps in the presented recommendation format. A flowchart as presented
in Figure 8.2 could be used, where through different parameters in the forms of yes/no
questions, a recommendation (coloured with a purple colour) was derived. It is assumed
in the flowchart that the startup in question does not have any automated testing in place.
Viewing the flowchart in Figure 8.2, in order to obtain the step­by­step recommendation
that applies to Fauna, all the questions have to be answered with ”yes” which leads to the
leftmost recommendation. The recommendation includes:
1. Using an AI chatbot for identifying the most critical software components: the auto­
matic analysis done through the AI chatbot is fast and efficient as shown in Chapter
Critical component analysis and evaluated in this chapter. Most importantly, it is
sufficient for this scenario ­ having relatively similar components, dependencies and
data flows in the software components without an overly complex architecture. The
detailed steps are described in Chapter 3.1.3.
2. Using an AI test generation tool: as shown in this chapter, it can be 291% more effi­
cient than the manual implementation of tests and 61% more cost­efficient in terms
of generating unit and integration tests compared to the manual test method. It of­
fers low latency when generating test cases, practically no learning curve and low
maintenance overhead as the test can simply be regenerated. It is first required to
find a suitable AI test generation tool; this project describes this in detailed steps
in Chapter Testing tools. The AI tools should be set up and run on the desired test
cases. This project examines specifically Machinet AI test generation tool where
its setup was documented in Chapter Testing frameworks and Tools, its usage de­
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
81
==PAGE:90==
scribed in Chapter Test case generation and its results in Chapter Test development
using AI test generation.
3. Using an AI chatbot for test adaptation, creation and maintenance: as shown in this
chapter, it can be 314% more efficient than the manual implementation of tests and
65% more cost­efficient than the manual test method in terms of generating unit and
integration tests. Similarly to the AI test generation tool, it offers low latency when
creating test cases, practically no learning curve and low maintenance overhead
as the test can simply be recreated. Furthermore, the AI chatbot is also able to
easily explain code and e.g. convert the test steps into natural language using NLP
(natural language processing) which can be seen in Chapter 7.4.2 in Listing 7.12
[104, 105]. This method can also be utilized for creating UI tests with a relatively
low learning curve. For example, creating a functional UI test for the user creation
screen (as depicted in Figure 3.11) requires a total of 79 minutes of developer time,
out of which 62 minutes were spent on learning and repairing the tests. It was
estimated in this chapter that to create a UI test for the whole Onboarding feature
it would require approximately 279 minutes of developer time (this was also based
on the fact the application screens in the feature are relatively similar in terms of
software architecture).
4. Opting for Testim low­code UI testing tool: being intuitive, easy to use and having
a low learning curve, it required a total of 103 minutes to create a UI test using
the tool. The breakdown of the total time can be seen in Table 8.5. As shown in
this chapter, this is 63% faster than if the same test was developed traditionally by
coding and with the help of an AI chatbot. Since it does not require the user to
have any coding skills, it can practically be used by anyone in the startup’s team.
Moreover, it has the potential to reduce manual testing, particularly in the areas that
are more cumbersome to test manually such as user input fields. Another beneficial
feature of Testim is that it already provides a virtual mobile device for the UI test
execution. It also provides the option for integrating it into a CI pipeline, however,
that is only possible as part of the Testim’s paid subscription plan [106]. Although
the paid subscription plan is usually paid, Testim also offers this plan for free for
startups with up to 20 employees [79].
5. Integrating a CI/CD pipeline: automated builds using a CI pipeline can be set up
relatively quickly in order to run the automated tests on each predefined trigger (this
project sets up triggers for the CI pipeline to be run on each code change push
or pull request which is documented in Chapter 4.2). For this project, it required
a total of 1 hour and 37 minutes to set up the pipeline entirely including all the
test steps (non­instrumented unit and integration tests, and Testim UI tests) as seen
in Chapter CI/CD integration. Furthermore, setting up automatic builds and test
execution using a CI pipeline can reduce the latency and developer bug­fixing times
as evidenced in this chapter. It also brings the possibility of preventing certain bugs
from being part of a new mobile application production release (preventing errors
from becoming failures [107]) by catching and identifying them with failing tests on
automatic CI pipeline triggers beforehand.
6. Utilizing other team members in the startup in testing processes: if other team mem­
bers in the startup are willing to aid in testing, they can especially be helpful in using
the Testim tool. In case they are already participating in manual testing then set­
ting up automated UI tests in Testim using its low­code methods may help eliminate
some of the manual testing and thus, enable the other team members to tackle more
82
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:91==
meaningful tasks. It may also help in reducing some of the developers’ work in test­
ing. Furthermore, the other team members may also assist in using the AI chatbot
e.g. obtaining the test steps in natural language from certain tests or the opposite
­ utilizing the NLP of the chatbot to create a test case. Thus, there can be some
test cases already created for the developer to review. By utilizing the AI chatbot,
the other startup team members can also participate in identifying the most critical
software components to be prioritized in a certain feature as exemplified in Chapter
3.1.3.
Furthermore, to compare the method to the related works in the field of software testing
for mobile applications in startups.
M. T. Hasan et al. as mentioned in Chapter Background propose a strategic direction on
how to improve the practices in startups. The approach is similar to what has been carried
out in this project in Chapter Test development and implementation, however, it is much
more in detail. It is recommended how the testing processes in different phases should
be prioritized. This represents a small part of this work and as it delves more into detail
in terms of techniques and testing methods it is more valuable. However, the process
and method recommendation done in the other work can serve as an empowerment to
this work. This work could include those processes that Hasan et al. presents and utilize
them to potentially create the solution proposed here more powerful to the startups.
Furthermore, GPTs by OpenAI could also potentially be utilized by creating a special GPT
that specializes in software testing specifically for the application architecture, environ­
ment and tools that a certain startups has [108]. Then the GPT would become better by
learning through every interaction and correction by the user. This startups could utilize
the GPTs to practically create their own AI assistant in testing, improving the processes
greatly.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure 8.2: A flowchart containing the recommended methods
84
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:93==
9
Conclusion
This thesis explored mobile app testing within the context of tech startups, focusing on
efficiency and cost­effectiveness. The research’s cornerstone was the development and
evaluation of a comprehensive step­by­step approach, tailored to guide startups through
the intricacies of implementing effective testing strategies. The project, enriched with a
fast approach of identifying the critical software components, AI­powered tools, notably
AI chatbots and AI test generation, has demonstrated substantial improvements in testing
efficiency and cost­effectiveness. Moreover, the usage of low­code UI testing tools has
proven to be potentially beneficial for startups constrained by resources, reducing the
manual effort typically associated with thorough UI testing. Both AI chatbots and low­
code UI testing tools are potentially providing the option to other members of the startup
team to be part of the testing process, effortlessly.
The implementation of CI/CD methodologies surfaced as a critical factor in enhancing the
software delivery process. For startups operating in dynamic market environments, the
agility afforded by CI/CD pipelines was not only a facilitator of rapid market adaptation but
also the tools to enable the maintenance and consistent delivery of high­quality software
products. The carried­out experiment showcased that the CI/CD framework is essential
in software testing by showing it is simple to include and use and, therefore, deeming it
beneficial and a worthy investment for the low­resource tech startups.
There are several implications of this research offering potential benefits to the startup
ecosystem. Startups, often operating under strict resource limitations, can leverage the
insights from this study to opt for efficient and cost­effective software testing. The step­by­
step recommended approach, methodically outlined in this thesis, serves as a practical
guide, enabling startups to use their resources towards the most impactful testing strate­
gies.
While the findings of this study are robust, the dynamic nature of technology and startup
environments, there are always unexplored possibilities and potential enhancements. Fu­
ture research could broaden the scope, taking a more diverse set of startups across vari­
ous industries and developmental stages, to validate and possibly expand upon the find­
ings of this study. Additionally, as AI continues to evolve at an exponential pace, delving
into more advanced AI and machine learning applications in software testing presents a
promising goal for further research.
This thesis marks a significant contribution to enabling and enhancing software testing
practices in tech startups. By providing well­founded, actionable strategies and insights, it
empowers startups to not only begin and navigate but also perform in their software testing
practices efficiently and swiftly. As the technology continues to advance, the approaches
and methodologies in software testing will undoubtedly evolve, offering fresh challenges
and opportunities for innovation. This research, thus, stands as a proof to the ongoing
mission for efficiency and excellence in the domain of software development.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
85
==PAGE:94==
86
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
How to Build an MVP in 2023: Step­By­Step Guide + Examples. 2023. URL: https:
//www.failory.com/blog/how-to-build-an-mvp.
[2]
Anh Nguyen­Duc, Kai­Kristian Kemell, and Pekka Abrahamsson. “The entrepreneurial
logic of startup software development: A study of 40 software startups”. In: Empir­
ical Software Engineering 26 (2021), pp. 1–55.
[3]
Alexey Shalimov. MVP DEVELOPMENT FOR STARTUPS: 12 MISTAKES TO
AVOID. 2022. URL: https://easternpeak.com/blog/mvp- software- development-
mistakes/.
[4]
Andrew Osipov. MVP and the first traction: How to balance the funds for a startup.
URL: https://www.visual- craft.com/blog/mvp- and- the- first- traction- how- to-
balance-the-funds-for-a-startup/.
[5]
Ella Napata. From MVP to Seed Funding: A Roadmap for Startup Success. 2023.
URL: https://aleph1.io/blog/defining-vision-building-mvp-startup-hiring-roadmap-
funding-growth-scale/#:~:text=Releasing%20an%20MVP%20allows%20you,to%
20fuel%20further%20growth.
[6]
Albert Purnama. Testing for startups: How unit test is the enemy of startup’s agility
and how you can fix it. 2022. URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/
2022/10/05/testing-for-startups-how-unit-test-is-the-enemy-of-startups-agility-and-
how-you-can-fix-it/?sh=65b098556e48.
[7]
Carmine Giardino et al. “Software development in startup companies: the green­
field startup model”. In: IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 42.6 (2015),
pp. 585–604.
[8]
Anna Smith. The Biggest Software Failures in Recent Years. 2020. URL: https:
//dzone.com/articles/the-biggest-software-failures-in-recent-years.
[9]
Yana Slemzina. Software testing in startups> basics, principles, common mis­
takes. 2019. URL: https://bekey.io/blog/software- testing- in- startups- basics-
principles-misconceptions.
[10]
How AI is Transforming Software Testing. 2021. URL: https://www.rishabhsoft.
com/blog/ai-in-software-testing.
[11]
AI in Software Testing: The Future of Quality Assurance. 2019. URL: https://www.
testingxperts.com/blog/AI-in-Software-Testing.
[12]
Få adgang til dine sundhedsdata. URL: https://www.sundhed.dk/borger/min-side/.
[13]
F. URL: https://kotlinlang.org/docs/native-overview.html.
[14]
Thinking in Compose. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/
mental-model.
[15]
Hilt. 2023. URL: https://dagger.dev/hilt/.
[16]
Introduction to Apollo Kotlin. URL: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/kotlin/.
[17]
Introduction to GraphQL. 2023. URL: https://graphql.org/learn/.
[18]
URL: https://firebase.google.com/docs/crashlytics/.
[19]
URL: https://chat.openai.com/.
[20]
AI assistant for developers. 2023. URL: https://www.machinet.net/.
[21]
Automate web and mobile testing with AI. URL: https://www.testim.io/.
[22]
Sten Pittet. Continuous integration vs. delivery vs. deployment. URL: https://www.
atlassian.com/continuous-delivery/principles/continuous-integration-vs-delivery-vs-
deployment.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
87
==PAGE:96==
[23]
Chris Raroque. Applying Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD)
For Startups In 2023. URL: https://aloa.co/blog/how-startups-can-ensure-code-
quality - when - with - offshore - software - development - teams - use - ci - cd - tools# : ~ :
text=URL%3A%20https%3A%2F%2Faloa.co%2Fblog%2Fhow.
[24]
Siddhant Varma. Comparing the top 10 mobile CI/CD providers. 2023. URL: https:
//www.runway.team/blog/comparing-the-top-10-mobile-ci-cd-providers.
[25]
International Software Testing Qualifications Board (ISTQB). ISTQB Foundation
Level Syllabus. https://www.istqb.org/downloads/category/2-foundation-level-
documents.html. Accessed: [1.12.2023]. 2023.
[26]
Paul C. Jorgensen. Software Testing: A Craftsman’s Approach. CRC Press, 2013.
[27]
Mark Fewster and Dorothy Graham. Software Test Automation. Addison­Wesley,
1999.
[28]
Kenneth S. Rubin. Essential Scrum: A Practical Guide to the Most Popular Agile
Process. Addison­Wesley, 2012.
[29]
Kirk Richardson. Java Application Architecture: Modularity Patterns with Examples
Using OSGi. Pearson Education, 2012.
[30]
Write automated tests. 2023. URL: https : / / developer . android . com / codelabs /
basic- android- kotlin- compose- write- automated- tests?continue=https%3A%2F%
2Fdeveloper.android.com%2Fcourses%2Fpathways%2Fandroid-basics-compose-unit-
2-pathway-3%23codelab-https%3A%2F%2Fdeveloper.android.com%2Fcodelabs%
2Fbasic-android-kotlin-compose-write-automated-tests#2.
[31]
Nils J. Nilsson. Artificial Intelligence: A New Synthesis. Morgan Kaufmann, 1998.
[32]
Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach.
Pearson Education Limited, 2009.
[33]
ZhiQuan Zhang et al. “Machine Learning Testing: Survey, Landscapes and Hori­
zons”. In: IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2020).
[34]
Mark Harman et al. “Achievements, Open Problems and Challenges for Search
Based Software Testing”. In: IEEE. 2015.
[35]
Antonia Bertolino. “Software Testing Research: Achievements, Challenges, Dreams”.
In: IEEE (2007).
[36]
Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. “Evolutionary Generation of Whole Test Suites”.
In: International Conference on Quality Software. 2011.
[37]
Stefan Gruner and Johan Van Zyl. “Software testing in small IT companies: a (not
only) South African problem”. In: South African Computer Journal 47.1 (2011),
pp. 7–32.
[38]
Md Tarek Hasan et al. “An Unified Testing Process Framework for Small and
Medium Size Tech Enterprise with Incorporation of CMMI­SVC to Improve Ma­
turity of Software Testing Process.” In: ENASE. 2022, pp. 327–334.
[39]
Shuib Basri et al. “A proposed framework using exploratory testing to improve
software quality in sme’s”. In: Recent Trends in Data Science and Soft Comput­
ing: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference of Reliable Information and
Communication Technology (IRICT 2018). Springer. 2019, pp. 1113–1122.
[40]
Nilofar Mulla and Naveenkumar Jayakumar. “Role of Machine Learning & Arti­
ficial Intelligence Techniques in Software Testing”. In: 2021. URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:236675484.
[41]
The comprehensive guide to application architecture in mobile development. 2020.
URL: https://nix-united.com/blog/the-comprehensive-guide-to-mobile-application-
architecture/.
[42]
Ritech Ranjan. The Mobile App Architecture Guide for 2023. 2022. URL: https:
//www.netsolutions.com/insights/mobile-app-architecture-guide/.
88
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:97==
[43]
Android Architecture Patterns — MVC, MVP, MVVM, MVI, Clean Architecture.
2023. URL: https://medium.com/droidblogs/android-architecture-patterns-mvc-
mvp-mvvm-mvi-clean-architecture-cde8029b8f37.
[44]
Guide to app architecture. 2023. URL: https : / / developer . android . com / topic /
architecture.
[45]
ViewModel and State in Compose. URL: https://developer.android.com/codelabs/
basic-android-kotlin-compose-viewmodel-and-state#3.
[46]
ViewModel overview. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/
architecture/viewmodel.
[47]
Data Layer. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/topic/architecture/data-
layer.
[48]
Domain layer. 2023. URL: https : / / developer . android . com / topic / architecture /
domain-layer.
[49]
Add repository and Manual DI. URL: https://developer.android.com/codelabs/basic-
android-kotlin-compose-add-repository#1.
[50]
Dependency injection. 2022. URL: https://developer.android.com/training/dependency-
injection.
[51]
Dependency injection with Hilt. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/training/
dependency-injection/hilt-android.
[52]
Queries and Mutations. 2023. URL: https://graphql.org/learn/queries/.
[53]
Khalil Stemmler. GraphQL Mutation vs Query – When to use a GraphQL Mutation.
2021. URL: https://graphql.org/learn/queries/.
[54]
What is Agile development? 2022. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/devops/
plan/what-is-agile-development.
[55]
Thomas Hamilton. What is Adhoc Testing? Types with Example. 2023. URL: https:
//www.guru99.com/adhoc-testing.html.
[56]
Meet Android Studio. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/studio/intro.
[57]
What to test in Android. 2021. URL: https://developer.android.com/training/testing/
fundamentals/what-to-test.
[58]
A3logics. What is Feasibility Analysis and How it is Important for Mobile App De­
velopment. 2023. URL: https://www.a3logics.com/blog/what-is-feasibility-analysis-
and-how-it-is-important-for-mobile-app-development.
[59]
URL: https://developer.android.com/codelabs/advanced-android-kotlin-training-
testing-basics#5.
[60]
Build local unit tests. 2022. URL: https://developer.android.com/training/testing/
local-tests.
[61]
Adalberto Plaza. Android Testing (Kotlin)— Integration tests. 2019. URL: https:
//medium.com/@adalberto.plaza/android-testing-integration-tests-c16d380679a8.
[62]
Automate UI tests. 2022. URL: https://developer.android.com/training/testing/
instrumented-tests/ui-tests.
[63]
Jenkins. URL: https://www.jenkins.io/.
[64]
Powerful continuous integration for DevOps­centric teams. URL: https://www.
jetbrains.com/teamcity/.
[65]
Avi. 6 Best Jenkins Hosting Platform for Small to Enterprise. URL: https://geekflare.
com/jenkins-hosting-platform/.
[66]
URL: https://bitrise.io/.
[67]
URL: https://docs.github.com/en/actions.
[68]
URL: https://about.gitlab.com/.
[69]
URL: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/devops/pipelines/.
[70]
Azure DevOps. URL: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/devops/.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
89
==PAGE:98==
[71]
Get the AI­powered DevSecOps Platform. URL: https://about.gitlab.com/pricing/
#why-do-i-need-to-enter-credit-debit-card-details-for-free-compute-minutes.
[72]
Usage limits, billing, and administration. URL: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/
learn-github-actions/usage-limits-billing-and-administration.
[73]
Accelerate your growth. URL: https://about.gitlab.com/solutions/startups/.
[74]
URL: https://www.jetbrains.com/.
[75]
Automate tests 5X faster and ship with confidence. URL: https://testsigma.com/.
[76]
URL: https://www.trustradius.com/products/testsigma/pricing#:~:text=Testsigma%
20has%20Freemium%20and%20Paid%20plans.%20Paid%20plans, that%20can%
20be%20tailored%20to%20fit%20the%20rquirements..
[77]
Find More Bugs. Write Less Code. Update Tests Faster. URL: https://applitools.
com/platform/eyes/.
[78]
URL: https://appium.io/docs/en/2.1/.
[79]
Startups: Get the Professional plan Free! 2021. URL: https://www.testim.io/blog/
startups-get-professional-plan-free/.
[80]
Mohammad Adil. Black Box vs White Box Testing: What are the Key Differences?
2023. URL: https://testsigma.com/blog/key-differences-between-black-box-and-
white-box-testing/.
[81]
Continuous Integration basics. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/training/
testing/continuous-integration.
[82]
Quickstart for GitHub Actions. URL: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart.
[83]
URL: https://openai.com/.
[84]
How To Create A Test Plan (Steps, Examples, Template). 2023. URL: https://
www.testrail.com/blog/create-a-test-plan/.
[85]
How to Write Test Cases: A Step­by­Step QA Guide. 2023. URL: https://www.
coursera.org/articles/how-to-write-test-cases.
[86]
Unit testing best practices with .NET Core and .NET Standard). 2022. URL: https:
//learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/testing/unit-testing-best-practices.
[87]
Unit Testing in Kotlin: Best Practices ). 2023. URL: https://dopebase.com/unit-
testing-kotlin-best-practices.
[88]
Coroutine context and dispatchers. URL: https://kotlinlang.org/docs/coroutine-
context-and-dispatchers.html.
[89]
Testing your Compose layout. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/jetpack/
compose/testing.
[90]
Enrique López­Mañas. GitHub Actions for Android developers. 2021. URL: https:
//medium.com/google-developer-experts/github-actions-for-android-developers-
6b54c8a32f55.
[91]
Test from the command line. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/studio/
test/command-line.
[92]
George Lawton. How to gradually incorporate AI in software testing. 2023. URL:
https://www.techtarget.com/searchsoftwarequality/tip/How-to-gradually-incorporate-
AI-in-software-testing.
[93]
Saurabh Pant. Writing ViewModel tests in Android ­Testing Fundamentals. 2022.
URL: https : / / blog . devgenius . io / writing - viewmodel - tests - in - android - testing -
fundamentals-ii-5bc44efa4a39.
[94]
Testing Kotlin coroutines on Android. 2023. URL: https://developer.android.com/
kotlin/coroutines/test.
[95]
Jose Alcérreca. Unit­testing LiveData and other common observability problems.
2019. URL: https://medium.com/androiddevelopers/unit-testing-livedata-and-other-
common-observability-problems-bb477262eb04.
90
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:99==
[96]
What Is Black Box Testing? A Complete Introductory Guide. 2020. URL: https:
//www.testim.io/blog/what-is-black-box-testing/.
[97]
Wait for. 2023. URL: https://help.testim.io/docs/wait-for.
[98]
Using starter workflows. 2023. URL: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-
github-actions/using-starter-workflows.
[99]
CLI settings. URL: https://help.testim.io/docs/cli-settings#:~:text=You%20can%
20integrate%20your%20tests%20with%20your%20CI,your%20CI%E2%80%99s%
20platform%20from%20the%20dropdown%20options%20available..
[100]
How much does a Software Developer make in Copenhagen, Denmark? 2023.
URL: https://www.glassdoor.com/Salaries/copenhagen-software-developer-salary-
SRCH_IL.0,10_IM958_KO11,29.htm.
[101]
Stefano Magni. Component vs (UI) Integration vs E2E tests. 2019. URL: https:
//www.linkedin.com/pulse/component-vs-ui-integration-e2e-tests-stefano-magni/.
[102]
Unit vs Integration vs System vs E2E Testing. 2022. URL: https : / / microsoft .
github.io/code-with-engineering-playbook/automated-testing/e2e-testing/testing-
comparison/.
[103]
Pic­Time leverages Testim’s fast and flexible authoring to rapidly scale test au­
tomation. URL: https://www.tricentis.com/case-studies/pic-time-leverages-testim-
to-scale-test-automation.
[104]
Mastering Test Automation with ChatGPT. 2023. URL: https://www.browserstack.
com/guide/mastering-test-automation-with-chatgpt.
[105]
Natural Language Processing in ChatGPT: An In­depth Exploration. 2023. URL:
https://jenni.ai/chat-gpt/nlp.
[106]
Pricing. URL: https://www.testim.io/pricing/.
[107]
Software Engineering | Differences between defect, bug and failure. 2023. URL:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/software-engineering-differences-between-defect-
bug-and-failure/.
[108]
URL: https://openai.com/blog/introducing-gpts.
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
91
==PAGE:100==
92
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:101==
A
Appendix ­ AI chatbot’s software
components criticality analysis output
1
Component Name: AnimalType
2
Complexity: 3 points Reasoning for complexity: The AnimalType component
appears to be a simple component that represents different types of
animals. It does not have complex logic or dependencies.
3
External Dependencies: 1 point Reasoning for external dependencies: The
AnimalType component does not seem to have any external dependencies. It
is self-contained and does not rely on external services or libraries.
4
Input Validation: 2 points Reasoning for input validation: The AnimalType
component may require input validation to ensure that the selected animal
type is valid. This validation can be done by checking if the selected
animal type exists in a predefined list.
5
Error Handling: 2 points Reasoning for error handling: The AnimalType
component may need error handling to handle cases where the selected
animal type is not valid or when there are errors in retrieving the list
of animal types.
6
Sensitive Data Handling: 1 point Reasoning for sensitive data handling: The
AnimalType component does not seem to handle sensitive data. It is
unlikely to deal with any sensitive user information.
7
Points: 9 Error-Prone Ranking: Low
8
9
Component Name: WelcomeViewModel
10
Complexity: 4 points Reasoning for complexity: The WelcomeViewModel component
is responsible for handling the logic related to the welcome screen. It
may involve handling user interactions , navigation , and data retrieval.
11
External Dependencies: 2 points Reasoning for external dependencies: The
WelcomeViewModel component may have external dependencies such as data
sources , APIs, or libraries for retrieving data or performing navigation.
12
Input Validation: 3 points Reasoning for input validation: The
WelcomeViewModel component may require input validation to ensure that the
user input is valid, such as validating user credentials or input
parameters for data retrieval.
13
Error Handling: 3 points Reasoning for error handling: The WelcomeViewModel
component may need error handling to handle cases where there are errors
in data retrieval , network connectivity issues , or other unexpected errors
.
14
Sensitive Data Handling: 2 points Reasoning for sensitive data handling: The
WelcomeViewModel component may handle sensitive data such as user
credentials or personal information. It should ensure proper handling and
protection of this sensitive data.
15
Points: 14 Error-Prone Ranking: Medium
16
17
Component Name: PhoneNumberViewModel
18
Complexity: 3 points Reasoning for complexity: The PhoneNumberViewModel
component is responsible for handling the logic related to phone number
input. It may involve input validation and formatting.
19
External Dependencies: 1 point Reasoning for external dependencies: The
PhoneNumberViewModel component does not seem to have any external
dependencies. It is self-contained and does not rely on external services
or libraries.
20
Input Validation: 3 points Reasoning for input validation: The
PhoneNumberViewModel component may require input validation to ensure that
the entered phone number is valid. It may need to check for the correct
format and length of the phone number.
21
Error Handling: 2 points Reasoning for error handling: The
PhoneNumberViewModel component may need error handling to handle cases
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
93
==PAGE:102==
where there are errors in input validation or formatting.
22
Sensitive Data Handling: 1 point Reasoning for sensitive data handling: The
PhoneNumberViewModel component does not seem to handle sensitive data. It
is unlikely to deal with any sensitive user information.
23
Points: 10 Error-Prone Ranking: Low
24
25
Component Name: UserCreateViewModel
26
Complexity: 4 points Reasoning for complexity: The UserCreateViewModel
component is responsible for handling the logic related to user creation.
It may involve input validation , data retrieval , and interaction with
external services.
27
External Dependencies: 3 points Reasoning for external dependencies: The
UserCreateViewModel component may have external dependencies such as data
sources , APIs, or libraries for retrieving data, validating user input, or
performing user creation.
28
Input Validation: 4 points Reasoning for input validation: The
UserCreateViewModel component may require input validation to ensure that
the user input for name,email, phone number, and other fields are valid.
It may need to check for correct formats , lengths , and uniqueness of
certain fields.
29
Error Handling: 4 points Reasoning for error handling: The UserCreateViewModel
component may need error handling to handle cases where there are errors
in input validation , data retrieval , network connectivity issues , or other
unexpected errors during the user creation process.
30
Sensitive Data Handling: 3 points Reasoning for sensitive data handling: The
UserCreateViewModel component may handle sensitive data such as user
credentials , personal information , or payment details. It should ensure
proper handling and protection of this sensitive data.
31
Points: 18 Error-Prone Ranking: High
32
33
Component Name: LoginViewModel
34
Complexity: 4 points Reasoning for complexity: The LoginViewModel component is
responsible for handling the logic related to user login. It may involve
input validation , authentication , and interaction with external services.
35
External Dependencies: 3 points Reasoning for external dependencies: The
LoginViewModel component may have external dependencies such as data
sources , APIs, or libraries for retrieving data, validating user input, or
performing authentication.
36
Input Validation: 4 points Reasoning for input validation: The LoginViewModel
component may require input validation to ensure that the user input for
username and password are valid. It may need to check for correct formats ,
lengths , and uniqueness of certain fields.
37
Error Handling: 4 points Reasoning for error handling: The LoginViewModel
component may need error handling to handle cases where there are errors
in input validation , authentication , data retrieval , network connectivity
issues , or other unexpected errors during the login process.
38
Sensitive Data Handling: 3 points Reasoning for sensitive data handling: The
LoginViewModel component may handle sensitive data such as user
credentials. It should ensure proper handling and protection of this
sensitive data.
39
Points: 18 Error-Prone Ranking: High
40
41
Component Name: AnimalCreateViewModel
42
Complexity: 3 points Reasoning for complexity: The AnimalCreateViewModel
component is responsible for handling the logic related to creating a new
animal. It may involve input validation , data retrieval , and interaction
with external services.
43
External Dependencies: 2 points Reasoning for external dependencies: The
AnimalCreateViewModel component may have external dependencies such as
data sources , APIs, or libraries for retrieving data, validating user
input, or performing animal creation.
94
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:103==
44
Input Validation: 3 points Reasoning for input validation: The
AnimalCreateViewModel component may require input validation to ensure
that the user input for animal details are valid. It may need to check for
correct formats , lengths , and uniqueness of certain fields.
45
Error Handling: 3 points Reasoning for error handling: The
AnimalCreateViewModel component may need error handling to handle cases
where there are errors in input validation , data retrieval , network
connectivity issues, or other unexpected errors during the animal creation
process.
46
Sensitive Data Handling: 2 points Reasoning for sensitive data handling: The
AnimalCreateViewModel component does not seem to handle sensitive data. It
is unlikely to deal with any sensitive user information.
47
Points: 13 Error-Prone Ranking: Medium
Listing A.1: User Create ViewModel code snippet
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
95
==PAGE:104==
B
Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests
developed manually
1
@RunWith(JUnit4::class)
2
class UserCreateViewModelTestMan {
3
4
private lateinit var userCreateViewModel: UserCreateViewModel
5
private lateinit var userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
6
7
private val testDispatcher = TestCoroutineDispatcher()
8
9
10
@Mock
11
private lateinit var userCreateRepositoryMock: UserCreateRepository
12
13
@Mock
14
private lateinit var accountDataSource: AccountDataSource
15
16
@Before
17
fun setUp() {
18
Dispatchers.setMain(testDispatcher)
19
MockitoAnnotations.initMocks(this)
20
userCreateViewModel = UserCreateViewModel(userCreateRepositoryMock)
21
accountDataSource = AccountDataSource(User())
22
userCreateRepository = UserCreateRepository(accountDataSource ,
testDispatcher)
23
}
24
25
@Test
26
fun setName_ValidName_InputNameIsSetCorrectly() {
27
val testName = "testName"
28
29
userCreateViewModel.setName(testName)
30
31
assertTrue(userCreateViewModel.getName() == testName)
32
}
33
34
@Test
35
fun setEmail_ValidEmail_InputEmailIsSetCorrectly() {
36
val testEmail = "email@gmail.com"
37
38
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(testEmail)
39
40
assertTrue(userCreateViewModel.getEmail() == testEmail)
41
}
42
43
@Test
44
fun setPhoneNumber_ValidPhoneNumber_InputPhoneNumberIsSetCorrectly() {
45
val testPhoneNumber = "12345678"
46
47
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(testPhoneNumber)
48
49
assertTrue(userCreateViewModel.getPhoneNumber() == testPhoneNumber)
50
}
51
52
@Test
53
fun setCheckboxStatus_CheckedStatus_InputCheckboxIsSetCorrectly() {
54
val testCheckboxChecked = true
96
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:105==
55
56
userCreateViewModel.setCheckboxCheckedStatus(testCheckboxChecked)
57
58
assertTrue(userCreateViewModel.getCheckboxCheckedStatus() ==
testCheckboxChecked)
59
}
60
61
@Test
62
fun testCheckUiState_isSetCorrectly() = runTest {
63
val testName = "testName"
64
val testEmail = "email@gmail.com"
65
val testPhoneNumber = "12345678"
66
var testCheckboxChecked = true
67
68
userCreateViewModel.setName(testName)
69
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(testEmail)
70
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(testPhoneNumber)
71
userCreateViewModel.setCheckboxCheckedStatus(testCheckboxChecked)
72
73
var userCreateInputUiState =
74
UserCreateInputUIState(testName , testEmail , testPhoneNumber ,
testCheckboxChecked)
75
76
userCreateViewModel.userCreateUiState.first().inputUIState
77
assertTrue(userCreateViewModel.userCreateUiState.value.inputUIState ==
userCreateInputUiState)
78
}
79
80
@Test
81
fun setName_ValidName_ValidationCorrect() {
82
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(name = "John Doe")
83
84
val isNameError = inputUIState.isNameError()
85
86
assert(!isNameError)
87
}
88
89
@Test
90
fun setName_InvalidName_ValidationIncorrect() {
91
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(name = "")
92
93
val isNameError = inputUIState.isNameError()
94
95
assert(isNameError)
96
}
97
98
@Test
99
fun setEmail_ValidEmail_ValidationCorrect() {
100
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(email = "email@example.com")
101
102
val isEmailError = inputUIState.isEmailError()
103
104
assert(!isEmailError)
105
}
106
107
@Test
108
fun setEmail_InvalidEmail_ValidationIncorrect() {
109
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(email = "invalid_email")
110
111
val isEmailError = inputUIState.isEmailError()
112
113
assert(isEmailError)
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
97
==PAGE:106==
114
}
115
116
@Test
117
fun setPhoneNumber_ValidPhoneNumber_ValidationCorrect() {
118
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(phoneNumber = "12345678")
119
120
val isPhoneNumberError = inputUIState.isPhoneNumberError()
121
122
assert(isPhoneNumberError)
123
}
124
125
@Test
126
fun setPhoneNumber_InvalidPhoneNumber_ValidationIncorrect() {
127
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(phoneNumber = "")
128
129
val isPhoneNumberError = inputUIState.isPhoneNumberError()
130
131
assert(isPhoneNumberError)
132
}
133
134
@OptIn(ExperimentalCoroutinesApi::class)
135
@Test
136
fun createUser_ValidData_UserCreatedSuccessfully() = runTest {
137
// Arrange
138
val testName = "John Doe"
139
val testPhoneNumber = "1234567890"
140
val testEmail = "test@example.com"
141
val userCreateViewModel = UserCreateViewModel(userCreateRepository)
142
143
// Act
144
userCreateViewModel.setName(testName)
145
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(testPhoneNumber)
146
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(testEmail)
147
launch { userCreateViewModel.createUser() }
148
149
val result = userCreateRepository.getCreateUserFlow.firstOrNull()
150
assertNotNull(result)
151
assertTrue(result!!.isSuccess)
152
assertEquals(result, Result.success(true))
153
}
154
}
Listing B.1: The manually developed unit and integration tests
98
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:107==
C
Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests
generated automatically with Machinet
AI test generation
1
@ExperimentalCoroutinesApi
2
class UserCreateViewModelTestGen {
3
4
@get:Rule
5
val instantTaskExecutorRule = InstantTaskExecutorRule()
6
7
@Mock
8
private lateinit var userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
9
10
private lateinit var userCreateViewModel: UserCreateViewModel
11
12
@Before
13
fun setup() {
14
MockitoAnnotations.initMocks(this)
15
userCreateViewModel = UserCreateViewModel(userCreateRepository)
16
}
17
18
@Test
19
fun `testSetName `() = runBlockingTest {
20
// Arrange
21
val testName = "John Doe"
22
23
// Act
24
userCreateViewModel.setName(testName)
25
26
// Assert
27
assertEquals(testName , userCreateViewModel.getName())
28
}
29
30
@Test
31
fun `testSetEmail `() = runBlockingTest {
32
// Arrange
33
val testEmail = "test@example.com"
34
35
// Act
36
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(testEmail)
37
38
// Assert
39
assertEquals(testEmail , userCreateViewModel.getEmail())
40
}
41
42
@Test
43
fun `testSetPhoneNumber `() = runBlockingTest {
44
// Arrange
45
val testPhoneNumber = "1234567890"
46
47
// Act
48
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(testPhoneNumber)
49
50
// Assert
51
assertEquals(testPhoneNumber , userCreateViewModel.getPhoneNumber())
52
}
53
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
99
==PAGE:108==
54
@Test
55
fun `testSetCheckboxCheckedStatus `() = runBlockingTest {
56
// Arrange
57
val testCheckboxCheckedStatus = true
58
59
// Act
60
userCreateViewModel.setCheckboxCheckedStatus(testCheckboxCheckedStatus
)
61
62
// Assert
63
assertEquals(testCheckboxCheckedStatus , userCreateViewModel.
getCheckboxCheckedStatus())
64
}
65
66
@Test
67
fun `testCreateUser `() = runBlockingTest {
68
// Arrange
69
val testName = "John Doe"
70
val testPhoneNumber = "1234567890"
71
val testEmail = "test@example.com"
72
73
// Act
74
userCreateViewModel.setName(testName)
75
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(testPhoneNumber)
76
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(testEmail)
77
userCreateViewModel.createUser()
78
79
// Assert
80
Mockito.verify(userCreateRepository).userCreate(testName ,
testPhoneNumber , testEmail)
81
}
82
83
@Test
84
fun `testUserCreateUiState `() = runBlockingTest {
85
// Arrange
86
val testName = "John Doe"
87
val testEmail = "test@example.com"
88
val testPhoneNumber = "1234567890"
89
val testCheckboxChecked = true
90
val testUiState = UIState.Success
91
92
// Act
93
userCreateViewModel.setName(testName)
94
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(testEmail)
95
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(testPhoneNumber)
96
userCreateViewModel.setCheckboxCheckedStatus(testCheckboxChecked)
97
98
val userCreateUiState = userCreateViewModel.userCreateUiState.first()
99
100
// Assert
101
val expectedUserCreateUiState = UserCreateUIState(
102
result = testUiState ,
103
inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(
104
name = testName ,
105
email = testEmail ,
106
phoneNumber = testPhoneNumber ,
107
checkboxChecked = testCheckboxChecked
108
)
109
)
110
assertEquals(expectedUserCreateUiState , userCreateUiState)
111
}
112
}
100
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:109==
Listing C.1: Machinet AI­generated test cases
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
101
==PAGE:110==
D
Appendix ­ Unit and integration tests
developed using the AI chatbot
1
@ExperimentalCoroutinesApi
2
class UserCreateViewModelTestChatbotInit {
3
4
@get:Rule
5
val instantTaskExecutorRule = InstantTaskExecutorRule()
6
7
@Mock
8
private lateinit var userCreateRepository: UserCreateRepository
9
10
private lateinit var userCreateViewModel: UserCreateViewModel
11
12
@Before
13
fun setUp() {
14
MockitoAnnotations.initMocks(this)
15
userCreateViewModel = UserCreateViewModel(userCreateRepository)
16
}
17
18
@Test
19
fun `setName should update userName `() {
20
// Arrange
21
val name = "John Doe"
22
23
// Act
24
userCreateViewModel.setName(name)
25
26
// Assert
27
assertEquals(name, userCreateViewModel.getName())
28
}
29
30
@Test
31
fun `setEmail should update userEmail `() {
32
// Arrange
33
val email = "test@example.com"
34
35
// Act
36
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(email)
37
38
// Assert
39
assertEquals(email, userCreateViewModel.getEmail())
40
}
41
42
@Test
43
fun `setPhoneNumber should update userPhoneNumber when input is valid `() {
44
// Arrange
45
val phoneNumber = "1234567890"
46
47
// Act
48
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(phoneNumber)
49
50
// Assert
51
assertEquals(phoneNumber , userCreateViewModel.getPhoneNumber())
52
}
53
54
@Test
102
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:111==
55
fun `setPhoneNumber should not update userPhoneNumber when input is too
long `() {
56
// Arrange
57
val phoneNumber = "12345678901234567890"
58
59
// Act
60
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(phoneNumber)
61
62
// Assert
63
assertNotEquals(phoneNumber , userCreateViewModel.getPhoneNumber())
64
}
65
66
@Test
67
fun `setCheckboxCheckedStatus should update userCheckboxChecked `() {
68
// Arrange
69
val isChecked = true
70
71
// Act
72
userCreateViewModel.setCheckboxCheckedStatus(isChecked)
73
74
// Assert
75
assertEquals(isChecked , userCreateViewModel.getCheckboxCheckedStatus()
)
76
}
77
78
@Test
79
fun `createUser should call userCreateRepository with correct parameters
`() = runBlockingTest {
80
// Arrange
81
val userName = "John Doe"
82
val userEmail = "test@example.com"
83
val userPhoneNumber = "1234567890"
84
85
// Act
86
userCreateViewModel.setName(userName)
87
userCreateViewModel.setEmail(userEmail)
88
userCreateViewModel.setPhoneNumber(userPhoneNumber)
89
userCreateViewModel.createUser()
90
91
// Assert
92
Mockito.verify(userCreateRepository).userCreate(userName ,
userPhoneNumber , userEmail)
93
}
94
95
@Test
96
fun `isNameError should return true when name is blank `() {
97
// Arrange
98
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(name = "")
99
100
// Act
101
val result = inputUIState.isNameError()
102
103
// Assert
104
assertTrue(result)
105
}
106
107
@Test
108
fun `isNameError should return false when name is not blank `() {
109
// Arrange
110
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(name = "John Doe")
111
112
// Act
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
103
==PAGE:112==
113
val result = inputUIState.isNameError()
114
115
// Assert
116
assertFalse(result)
117
}
118
119
@Test
120
fun `isEmailError should return true when email is invalid `() {
121
// Arrange
122
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(email = "invalid_email")
123
124
// Act
125
val result = inputUIState.isEmailError()
126
127
// Assert
128
assertTrue(result)
129
}
130
131
@Test
132
fun `isEmailError should return false when email is valid `() {
133
// Arrange
134
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(email = "test@example.com")
135
136
// Act
137
val result = inputUIState.isEmailError()
138
139
// Assert
140
assertFalse(result)
141
}
142
143
@Test
144
fun `isPhoneNumberError should return true when phone number is invalid `()
{
145
// Arrange
146
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(phoneNumber = "123")
147
148
// Act
149
val result = inputUIState.isPhoneNumberError()
150
151
// Assert
152
assertTrue(result)
153
}
154
155
@Test
156
fun `isPhoneNumberError should return false when phone number is valid `()
{
157
// Arrange
158
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(phoneNumber = "1234567890")
159
160
// Act
161
val result = inputUIState.isPhoneNumberError()
162
163
// Assert
164
assertFalse(result)
165
}
166
167
@Test
168
fun `continueEnabled should return true when all input is valid and
checkbox is checked `() {
169
// Arrange
170
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(
171
name = "John Doe",
104
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:113==
172
email = "test@example.com",
173
phoneNumber = "1234567890",
174
checkboxChecked = true
175
)
176
177
// Act
178
val result = inputUIState.continueEnabled()
179
180
// Assert
181
assertTrue(result)
182
}
183
184
@Test
185
fun `continueEnabled should return false when name is blank `() {
186
// Arrange
187
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(
188
name = "",
189
email = "test@example.com",
190
phoneNumber = "1234567890",
191
checkboxChecked = true
192
)
193
194
// Act
195
val result = inputUIState.continueEnabled()
196
197
// Assert
198
assertFalse(result)
199
}
200
201
@Test
202
fun `continueEnabled should return false when email is invalid `() {
203
// Arrange
204
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(
205
name = "John Doe",
206
email = "invalid_email",
207
phoneNumber = "1234567890",
208
checkboxChecked = true
209
)
210
211
// Act
212
val result = inputUIState.continueEnabled()
213
214
// Assert
215
assertFalse(result)
216
}
217
218
@Test
219
fun `continueEnabled should return false when phone number is invalid `() {
220
// Arrange
221
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(
222
name = "John Doe",
223
email = "test@example.com",
224
phoneNumber = "123",
225
checkboxChecked = true
226
)
227
228
// Act
229
val result = inputUIState.continueEnabled()
230
231
// Assert
232
assertFalse(result)
233
}
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
105
==PAGE:114==
234
235
@Test
236
fun `continueEnabled should return false when checkbox is not checked `() {
237
// Arrange
238
val inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(
239
name = "John Doe",
240
email = "test@example.com",
241
phoneNumber = "1234567890",
242
checkboxChecked = false
243
)
244
245
// Act
246
val result = inputUIState.continueEnabled()
247
248
// Assert
249
assertFalse(result)
250
}
251
}
Listing D.1: AI chatbot­created test cases
106
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:115==
E
Appendix ­ UI test developed using the
AI chatbot
1
@RunWith(AndroidJUnit4::class)
2
class UserCreateInputUITestChatbotInitial {
3
4
@get:Rule
5
val composeTestRule = createComposeRule()
6
7
@Test
8
fun testUserCreateFlow() {
9
// Arrange
10
val viewModel = UserCreateViewModel(MockUserCreateRepository())
11
val initialUiState = UserCreateUIState(
12
result = UIState.Initial ,
13
inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState()
14
)
15
16
// Act
17
composeTestRule.setContent {
18
UserCreateComposable(userCreateViewModel = viewModel)
19
}
20
21
// Assert initial state
22
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userName")
23
.assert(hasText(initialUiState.inputUIState.name))
24
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userEmail")
25
.assert(hasText(initialUiState.inputUIState.email))
26
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userPhone")
27
.assert(hasText(initialUiState.inputUIState.phoneNumber))
28
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("checkbox")
29
.assert(isNotSelected())
30
31
// Enter valid input
32
val validName = "John Doe"
33
val validEmail = "test@example.com"
34
val validPhoneNumber = "1234567890"
35
36
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userName")
37
.performTextInput(validName)
38
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userEmail")
39
.performTextInput(validEmail)
40
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userPhone")
41
.performTextInput(validPhoneNumber)
42
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("checkbox")
43
.performClick()
44
45
// Assert updated state
46
val updatedUiState = UserCreateUIState(
47
result = UIState.Initial ,
48
inputUIState = UserCreateInputUIState(
49
name = validName ,
50
email = validEmail ,
51
phoneNumber = validPhoneNumber ,
52
checkboxChecked = true
53
)
54
)
55
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
107
==PAGE:116==
56
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userName")
57
.assert(hasText(updatedUiState.inputUIState.name))
58
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userEmail")
59
.assert(hasText(updatedUiState.inputUIState.email))
60
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userPhone")
61
.assert(hasText(updatedUiState.inputUIState.phoneNumber))
62
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("checkbox")
63
.assert(isSelected())
64
65
// Perform continue click
66
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("continueButton")
67
.performClick()
68
69
// Assert UI state after continue click
70
val continueClickedUiState = UserCreateUIState(
71
result = UIState.Success ,
72
inputUIState = updatedUiState.inputUIState
73
)
74
75
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userName")
76
.assert(hasText(continueClickedUiState.inputUIState.name))
77
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userEmail")
78
.assert(hasText(continueClickedUiState.inputUIState.email))
79
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("userPhone")
80
.assert(hasText(continueClickedUiState.inputUIState.phoneNumber))
81
composeTestRule.onNodeWithTag("checkbox")
82
.assert(isSelected())
83
84
// Assert that the userCreate function is called in the view model
85
assertTrue(viewModel.createUserCalled)
86
}
87
}
88
89
class MockUserCreateRepository : UserCreateRepository {
90
override suspend fun userCreate(name: String , phoneNumber: String , email:
String) {
91
// Mock implementation
92
}
93
}
94
95
class UserCreateViewModel(private val userCreateRepository:
UserCreateRepository) {
96
var createUserCalled = false
97
98
fun createUser() {
99
createUserCalled = true
100
}
101
}
Listing E.1: Machinet AI­generated test cases
108
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
==PAGE:117==
Efficient and Cost­Effective Mobile App Testing for Startup Companies
109
==PAGE:118==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
