==PAGE:1==
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline
for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocu­
lar Systems
Master Thesis
DTU Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in
Monocular Systems
Master Thesis
November, 2023
By
Patrick Dominique Vibild
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over four months in the School of Computing, at the Korean
Advance Institute of Technology, KAIST, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
degree Dual degree in a Master Computer Science in collaboration with the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU.
Patrick Dominique Vibild ­ s213801
Signature
Date
ii
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
3 December, 2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis proposal focuses on developing a comprehensive data acquisition pipeline
for collecting ship images and their corresponding Automated Identification System (AIS)
positions. The central objective is the creation of a dataset that is instrumental in train­
ing and evaluating machine learning models for distance estimation in monocular camera
systems. Accurate distance estimation is critical for collision avoidance, object tracking,
and enhancing situational awareness in marine environments. The proposed automated
approach involves integrating AIS data with monocular camera imagery through various
steps, including AIS data integration, using a pre­trained ship detection model, image col­
lection with precise synchronization, and dataset generation. The pipeline encompasses
multiple sensors to generate an annotated dataset that includes ship positions, distances,
and speeds. This newly developed dataset is utilized to train an inference model, and
evaluation metrics such as average precision and intersection over union are applied to
assess its performance against manually annotated images. The system proposed is
anticipated to contribute significantly to future machine­learning models that aim to esti­
mate the position and speed of ships using monocular camera systems, offering practical
applications for enhancing safety and efficiency in marine environments.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Patrick Dominique Vibild,
MSc Computer Science, KAIST
MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Dimitrios Papadopoulos, Associate Professor of Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, DTU
Daeyoung Kim, Professor of School of Computing, KAIST
iv
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Airtrack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Monocular Depth Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Infrared imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Survey on Deep­learning Marine Object Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Ship Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methodology
14
3.1
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
3D to 2D projection: pinhole camera model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
MMSI data retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Pretrained ship detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Matching projection and detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Development
22
4.1
Data acquisition: AISail, Embedded ship recording solution . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Postprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Experimental Results
44
5.1
High Dynamic Range
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.2
NIR images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3
Object detection: Faster R­CNN and HRNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4
AIS projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.5
Matching AIS data and object detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6
Future work
56
7
Conclusion
58
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
61
A.1 Faster R­CNN 101 configuration file
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.2 HRNet with RCNN backbone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.3 Dataset structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The governance of maritime navigation falls under the stringent oversight of entities such
as the International Maritime Organization (IMO), established in 1948 under the United
Nations. Its mandate encompasses a comprehensive regulatory framework for shipping,
addressing safety, environmental impacts, legal matters, cooperation on technical as­
pects, security, and overall shipping efficiency. To uphold safety standards, the IMO man­
dates, through the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification, and
Watchkeeping for Seafarers, the continuous presence of a designated watchkeeper on
vessels.
Technological advancements like Radar, Sonar, and Automatic Identification System (AIS)
have significantly enhanced maritime safety. The IMO mandates the installation and use
of AIS and Radar for certain vessels, whereas Sonar is obligatory primarily for ships en­
gaged in underwater exploration. Each technology offers distinct advantages and limita­
tions.
Due to its cost­effectiveness and precision, sonar is indispensable for underwater map­
ping, detecting obstacles, and marine life. However, its range is limited to 2400 meters,
and its signals may be disrupted by severe weather.
Radar excels in precision and range, detecting objects up to 130 kilometers away. These
benefits, though, come at higher installation costs and greater power consumption.
AIS operates by broadcasting a ship’s position via radio frequency and is an active detec­
tion method reliant on the broadcasting vessel. Regulated by the IMO for large vessels,
AIS is an economical and accurate technology that can transmit signals up to 35 kilome­
ters, depending on the equipment used.
Despite the navigation standards set by the IMO and the implementation of sonar, radars,
and AIS, collisions remain a leading cause of incidents in commercial navigation[1]. Cur­
rent ship detection methods are insufficient for safe navigation. Radars, while accurate,
are often not installed on smaller, less expensive vessels such as those used for pas­
senger transport, leisure, or fishing due to cost. Sonar systems have limited range, and
weather conditions can compromise their effectiveness. Furthermore, AIS, which is af­
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Example of a deep learning model detecting, classifying, and estimating the
distance to ships using an RGB camera. The solution can fill the weakness of current
maritime ship detection mechanisms such as: sonar, radar, and AIS.
fordable and precise, is not compulsory on smaller boats. Additionally, there is the issue
of ”dark fishing” where fishing vessels in quota­regulated areas may switch off their AIS
to evade detection by authorities and exceed quota limits.
We suggest developing a new vessel identification technique utilizing deep learning to
address these shortcomings. As seen in Fig 1.1, this innovative approach would fill the
existing gaps by providing passive sensing capabilities, enabling vessels to detect others,
classify their type, and estimate their relative distance without relying on the other vessels’
active cooperation.
The primary obstacle in developing a model that can detect vessels and estimate their
distance is the absence of a suitable dataset. No dataset exists that combines object
detection with the distance measurement to a ship, which is a prerequisite for training a
model with these capabilities.
The process of data acquisition and dataset generation is notably time­intensive. This
thesis introduces an innovative method that employs computer vision and deep learning
to streamline the creation of a new dataset where ships, along with their classifications
and relative distances, are systematically annotated.
The thesis proposes a cutting­edge system that integrates a pre­trained object detection
AI model for identifying and detecting ships within image frames. It employs the math­
ematical framework of a pinhole camera model to project real­world coordinates of ves­
2
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:11==
sels into the image frame. This approach facilitates the generation of a new dataset and
enriches the annotated ships with critical data, such as their relative distance from the
camera.
Research is conducted to evaluate the proposed system, and the embedded solution,
AISail, is designed and developed. AISail, a self­crafted embedded system, captures
visible and near­infrared light and determines its absolute orientation, position, and the
positions of surrounding ships.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature Review
This section presents an overview of the papers underpinning the project. Initially, the
”AirTrack” project is explored, which employs the Airborne Object Tracking Dataset (AOT)
[2] for developing an embedded system. This system can identify and predict airborne
objects using a 5MP monochrome camera, and it estimates their distance and time to
collision. Subsequently, a summary of various research papers on monocular depth es­
timation is provided, offering insights into depth evaluation using a single camera.
Subsequently, an examination is conducted of research works that utilize the infrared
spectrum to improve ship detection in maritime environments. This is followed by a review
of papers centered on ship object detection. Finally, an overview of existing ship datasets
is presented.
2.1
Airtrack
The paper AirTrack[3] presents a real­time vision­only detection and tracking framework
designed to enhance the safety of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) by enabling detect­
and­avoid capabilities.
To tackle the challenge of low signal­to­noise ratios from distant aircraft, the framework
employs full­resolution images within a deep learning architecture that aligns successive
images with eliminating ego­motion. The aligned images are then processed through cas­
caded primary and secondary classifiers, enhancing the system’s detection and tracking
performance on various metrics. Unlike previous models that struggled to detect multi­
scale objects in an image, HRNET[4] can detect large and smaller objects within each
frame effectively.
The effectiveness of AirTrack is demonstrated by outperforming state­of­the­art baselines
when evaluated on the AOT data set. Real­world flight tests involving an aircraft inter­
acting with general aviation traffic and near­collision flight tests with a helicopter flying
towards a UAS in a controlled setting show that AirTrack complies with the standards for
aviation detect­and­avoid.
Empirical evaluations further prove that the AirTrack system achieves a probability of track
of over 95% up to a range of 700m, highlighting its capability to ensure safer operations
4
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Showcase of AirTrack: Plane detection, tracking, distance estimation, and
time to the closest point of approach. AirTrack can detect and estimate airplane distance
even when a few pixels are in the image.
for unmanned aircraft systems.
AirTrack uses a high­definition camera to demonstrate the real­time inference capabilities
of current deep­learning models. The Airborne Object Tracking (AOT) dataset contains
close to 6 million frames, each annotated with airborne objects, and, when available,
the corresponding distance from the camera to the annotated object. The embedded
solution in AirTrack employs a Sony IMX264 monochrome camera with a 2448 x 2048
pixels resolution. The system utilizes a Jetson Xavier AGX to achieve real­time inference,
achieving a prediction rate of 30 frames per second for live video feeds.
2.1.1
Conclusion
The success of AirTrack’s approach to airborne object detection and distance estimation
inspires the possibility of applying a similar concept to ship detection and distance esti­
mation. However, a significant hurdle arises due to insufficient datasets containing ship
positions and their respective distances to the camera. Therefore, before embarking on
creating an embedded solution capable of detecting ships and extracting their distance,
orientation, and speed, it becomes imperative to generate a dataset akin to AOT tailored
explicitly to ships.
2.2
Monocular Depth Estimation
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) is a computer vision task that aims to predict the
relative distance of objects within a scene from a single input image. It involves extract­
ing depth information from a 2D image without additional sensor inputs, such as stereo
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
5
==PAGE:14==
cameras or LiDAR. Monocular depth estimation has significant applications in robotics,
autonomous vehicles, augmented reality, and various other fields, as it enables machines
to perceive the 3D structure of their surroundings using only a single camera.
The ”Monocular Depth Estimation Challenge”[5] demonstrated the capabilities and high­
lighted the areas for future advancement in the field of MDE. It marked the inaugural
event of such a challenge, where all participating teams surpassed the performance of 16
state­of­the­art MDE algorithms by leveraging deep learning techniques.
There are two types of depth estimation: dense and sparse. In dense depth estimation, a
depth value is assigned to every pixel in an image, providing a complete depth map. On
the other hand, sparse depth estimation only calculates the depth or distance for specific
points of interest in the image, resulting in a limited set of depth values.
The ”CNN­based Monocular Depth Estimation”[6] utilized an encoder­decoder architec­
ture to predict the dense depth map from a given RGB image. The encoder processed
the input to create a higher­dimensional feature map, which the decoder then used to
reconstruct the ground­truth depth estimation.
On the other hand, ”Long­Range Object­Level Monocular Depth Estimation for UAVs”[7]
demonstrated the ability to estimate sparse depth in the AOT dataset. The authors achieved
this by implementing the YoloX model with an additional prediction head for distance es­
timation. This enabled the model to detect objects and predict their distance. What sets
this model apart from others is its real­time inference capability. The regression time for
the model was measured at 25ms (equivalent to 40 frames per second) using FP16 and
an RTX 3090 graphics card.
2.2.1
Conclusion
Current background research has demonstrated the potential of creating a neural network
capable of predicting the position and distance of a ship, given the availability of a suit­
able dataset. The limitations of stereo cameras, where error increases quadratically with
distance, and the performance challenges of LiDAR in long distances suggest that the
generated dataset can be sparse, focusing only on annotating the distance of points of
interest, specifically ships in this context. This approach holds promise for developing an
efficient and effective neural network for ship position and distance estimation, facilitating
safer and more accurate operations in maritime environments.
6
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Infrared imaging
Object detection is a crucial computer vision task with wide­ranging real­world applica­
tions. In the maritime setting, this task becomes particularly challenging due to fluctu­
ating light conditions, varying view distances, diverse weather conditions, and the pres­
ence of sea waves. Moreover, issues like light reflection, camera motion, and illumination
changes can lead to false detections. To tackle these challenges, researchers have ex­
plored infrared (IR) imaging, introducing an additional dimensionality to the input of neural
networks. This approach aims to enhance object detection accuracy in the maritime en­
vironment and improve the robustness of the models against adverse conditions.
In the paper ”Deep Learning­Based Multi­Modal Fusion Architectures for Maritime Vessel
Detection”[8], the authors utilize Near Infrared (NIR) imaging to enhance ship detection
along the Finnish coasts. They curate a custom dataset comprising pairs of RGB/NIR
images captured during daytime and nighttime. The daytime dataset shall consist of 7,250
training and 1,750 validation images, while the nighttime dataset shall consist of 2,250
training images and 1,000 RGB/NIR pairs.
The authors train an RCNN model with various sensor fusion techniques using RGB/NIR
images. They conduct comparisons between models trained solely with RGB data, solely
with NIR data, early fusion (combining RGB and NIR into a single 4­channel image), mid­
fusion (employing a separate neural network to fuse RGB and NIR), and late fusion (per­
forming independent inferences on RGB and NIR images and then comparing and vali­
dating the results).
As seen in Fig. 2.2, the results demonstrate that using a mid­fusion architecture with RGB
and NIR achieves an average precision of 79%, outperforming the 63% average preci­
sion achieved when using only RGB data. This indicates that integrating NIR information
significantly improves the accuracy of ship detection compared to using RGB alone.
In the study ”Maritime Situational Awareness Using Adaptive Multi­Sensor Management
Under Hazy Conditions”[9], the researchers implemented a sensor fusion manager that
integrates data from various sensors, including RGB, NIR, Automatic Identification Sys­
tem (AIS), radars, and sonars. This fusion manager aims to enable the identification and
mapping of ships and obstacles in the vicinity of an autonomous maritime vessel.
As seen in Fig. 2.3, their investigation revealed that the NIR sensor, particularly, proved
to be highly advantageous in hazy weather conditions. By incorporating the NIR data
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Results from fusing RGB and NIR in the early, mid, and late stages have
been analyzed. The study demonstrated that combining RGB and NIR light can yield an
improvement of 15 points during daytime and 10 points at night in a YOLO model.
Figure 2.3: NIR vision improvement on a hazy weather condition. Top image using NIR
light shows with red arrows ships that are not visible in the same circumstances using
only visible light.
8
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:17==
into the sensor fusion process, the system improved its ability to effectively perceive and
navigate the maritime environment during challenging weather scenarios characterized
by haziness. This finding underscores the importance of sensor fusion in enhancing situ­
ational awareness and safety for autonomous vessels operating under adverse weather
conditions.
”Comparison of Medium and Long­Wave Infrared Imaging for Ocean­Based Sensing”[10]
investigated the effectiveness and capabilities of long­wave infrared (LWIR) and mid­wave
infrared (MWIR) sensors for ship detection in the ocean. Both LWIR and MWIR sensors
can detect the radio frequency emitted by the heat generated by objects. This property
makes them suitable for ship detection, as the ocean exhibits relatively uniform temper­
atures. However, a tradeoff is observed, as sensors operating in the LWIR and MWIR
spectra are substantially more expensive, potentially costing over ten times more than a
NIR sensor. Additionally, to attain optimal performance, LWIR and MWIR sensors neces­
sitate calibration to reduce interference from environmental heat.
The research presented several MWIR and LWIR images, highlighting that LWIR images
are less susceptible to the adverse effects of light reflection from ocean waves. The study
provides valuable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of MWIR and LWIR sensors,
helping to inform sensor selection for ocean­based sensing applications, particularly for
ship detection.
2.3.1
Conclusion
Incorporating Near Infrared (NIR) imaging with RGB significantly improves object detec­
tion in maritime settings. Sensor fusion, combining NIR with various marine sensors, is
essential for autonomous navigation in adverse weather. Medium and Long Wave In­
frared sensors also detect ships via heat emission but come with increased costs and
complexity.
2.4
Survey on Deep­learning Marine Object Detection
Ruolan Zhang[11] presents an in­depth study of various deep learning techniques and
state­of­the­art models applied in ship navigation, maritime surveillance, ship manage­
ment, and other intelligent applications. The survey explores the advancements in these
areas and provides a comprehensive overview of the latest approaches and methodolo­
gies in maritime technology. By reviewing and analyzing the current literature and models,
the paper contributes to the understanding and development of advanced technologies
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
9
==PAGE:18==
for the marine industry.
Marine object detection includes applications like maritime and shore­based surveillance,
high­resolution satellite imagery, and airborne surveillance using drones and UAVs. Datasets
from aerial and sea­level views are generally incompatible due to differing angles and per­
spectives. This requires specialized techniques and models for accurate detection in each
scenario.
Object detection models can be broadly classified into two categories: single­stage meth­
ods and multistage methods.
Multistage methods such as Faster R­CNN prioritize high localization and object recogni­
tion accuracy. In R­CNN, selective search generates candidate regions, which are then
passed to a second CNN model for classification.
On the other hand, single­stage methods like YOLO[12] prioritize fast inference speed.
YOLO, for instance, divides the input image into a 7x7 grid and predicts two bounding
boxes per grid, along with their corresponding classifications and locations. While YOLO
is efficient, it may miss tiny objects. YOLO has evolved through multiple versions, with
the latest being YOLOv8.
Researchers have employed both single­stage and multistage object detection models for
ship detection. YOLO is often favored for real­time applications due to its fast inference
speed. The ShipYOLO[13] implementation, for example, achieves an inference time of
38 FPS on a 512x512px image with a mAP50 of 95% on an NVIDIA 100 Ti graphics card
using the SeaShip[14] dataset.
However, the authors of SeaShip[14] conducted tests on their dataset with different ver­
sions of faster R­CNN, SSD, and YOLO models. They found that, except for inference
time, faster R­CNN consistently outperformed single­stage models in various metrics, in­
dicating better precision with multistage models.
2.5
Ship Datasets
Datasets used in deep learning can be generic, covering multiple unrelated objects, or
specialized, focusing on specific objects like ships and distinguishing their categories.
Examples of generic datasets include ImageNet[15], PASCAL VOC[16], and COCO[17].
However, these datasets often contain few ship images. For instance, PASCAL VOC2007
has only 363 ship images, CIFAR­10[18] offers 6000 ship images but at a low resolution
10
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:19==
of 32x32 pixels, and Caltech­256[19] includes 418 ship images in random sizes. Generic
datasets are insufficient to train models effectively for ship identification beyond their train­
ing data. Hence, specialized datasets like SeaShip or Singapore Maritime Dataset[20]
become necessary for accurate ship detection and categorization.
Figure 2.4: The distribution of ship categories in the SeaShip dataset is examined. The
categories are distributed equally. It is noted that SeaShip lacks representation of some
ship categories, including tankers and sailing boats.
The SeaShip dataset was created to address the deficiency of specialized datasets. This
dataset comprises 31,455 images with a resolution of 1920 x 1080 pixels. To ensure di­
verse backgrounds, the images were collected from 45 different locations. The dataset is
designed to encompass multiple ship classifications, variations in visible proportion, scale,
viewpoint, illumination, background, and occlusion, as seen in Fig. 2.5. The authors claim
that SeaShip provides a comprehensive and varied set of images, enabling robust training
and evaluation of ship detection models under various real­world scenarios.
SMD [20] created their ship dataset across the Singaporean coast. This dataset contains
Figure 2.5: A snippet from the SeaShip dataset is presented, showcasing various ship
categories against their respective backgrounds. The SeaShip dataset originates from
the industrialized river in Wuhan, China. Owing to its riverine origin, most of the ship
images in the dataset are captured from the port and starboard sides of the ships.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.6: Singapore Maritime Dataset: Annotated ships in RGB and NIR images. NIR
has shown a bigger image reach under hazy conditions. Combining NIR and RGB images
can also increase object detection models’ accuracy.
both separated RGB and NIR images of ships with their annotations. The dataset includes
a total of 81 videos, where 51 record visible light and 30 of them record in the NIR spectrum
as shown in Fig. 2.6 NIR has a higher reach under hazy weather conditions.
Figure 2.7: AIHub Maritime object dataset frame example of ships, lighthouse, and fishing
nets annotation in the Korean coastline
Finally, a dataset curated by AIHub [21] is available, an entity associated with South Ko­
rea’s National AI Industrial Convergence Complex. This complex is a significant initiative
by the South Korean government to establish the country as a leader in AI innovation.
AIHub has assembled a comprehensive dataset comprising 5.4 million images. This in­
cludes a substantial subset of maritime images, with one million meticulously annotated
to detail elements such as buoys, lighthouses, and fishing nets. This dataset is particu­
larly valuable for the project, as it was generated along the Korean coastline, illustrated in
12
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:21==
Fig 2.7. While the dataset does not classify the annotated ships, a visual inspection sug­
gests that they were recorded in fishing areas, and most of the ships featured are fishing
vessels.
2.5.1
Conclusion
The three datasets previously featured in this section are specifically designed for ship
detection applications. A notable similarity among them is the absence of distance es­
timations of the ships, a crucial element for the scope of this work. Nevertheless, the
methodology section will outline the approach through which these existing datasets can
be utilized in the automated creation of a new dataset, encompassing the distance mea­
surements between the camera and the ships.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
13
==PAGE:22==
3
Methodology
The project encompasses two principal phases. The first phase involves designing and
creating an embedded solution for data acquisition, which gathers all the necessary data.
The second phase is a post­processing data pipeline that generates the targeted dataset
from the collected data. An overview of the system design and the processes involved in
the post­processing section is depicted in Fig. 3.1.
Subsequently, the data undergoes offline post­processing, divided into two simultaneous
tasks: projecting ship data and detecting objects. Task A employs a pinhole camera model
to pinpoint the positions of ships detected by AIS within our RGB/NIR image frames. This
requires knowledge of the ship’s location, the camera’s position and orientation, and the
specific camera matrix. The accuracy of this task allows for the precise localization of
the ships in the image frames, and it also integrates AIS­obtained details such as the dis­
tance to the ship, the vessel’s speed, direction, and the Maritime Mobile Service Identities
(MMSI), which uniquely identifies each vessel. The MMSI further facilitates the retrieval
of additional data about the ship, including type, size, and year of construction, if avail­
able. Task B focuses on identifying vessels within the images and generating bounding
boxes around them, which will contribute to the creation of our dataset. In the final phase,
the outcomes of both tasks are merged, with the projected and detected ship data being
aligned based on their proximity within the image frames.
The Appendix provides a detailed description of the targeted dataset’s fields and structure,
as referenced in A.3.
3.1
Data acquisition
The system necessitates RGB/NIR images, camera orientation and position, and the posi­
tions of surrounding ships. An embedded solution equipped with all the requisite sensors
is essential to acquire this data. A primary consideration for this embedded solution is its
power consumption, ensuring it can be conveniently powered in remote locations using a
power bank or a portable battery.
Data collection is conducted both onshore and offshore along the Korean coastline to
generate a new dataset. Offshore dataset gathering was done in collaboration with Ulsan
14
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: The methodology diagram illustrates the process by which the method ex­
tracts both the distance and the classification of a ship from its AIS data. Utilizing the
same frame, a pre­trained object detection model identifies the ships. Finally, we align
the information obtained from the AIS with the bounding box corresponding to the ship
within the frame.
Taehwa ship.
3.2
3D to 2D projection: pinhole camera model
The pinhole camera model is a foundational construct in computer vision that simplifies
the complex image capture process into an understandable geometric form. It facilitates
understanding how a three­dimensional scene is projected onto a two­dimensional image
plane without the distortion that lenses introduce. At its core, the model conceptualizes
a camera as a closed box with a point as aperture, through which light from the scene
enters and forms an inverted image on the surface opposite the pinhole.
In computer vision, the pinhole model is instrumental in deducing the spatial relationships
between the camera and the scene. It is employed to calculate intrinsic camera parame­
ters, which dictate how the camera’s physical characteristics affect image formation, and
extrinsic parameters, which describe the camera’s position and orientation in space.
This is the pinhole mathematical model.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
15
==PAGE:24==


u
v
1

=


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1




r11
r12
r13
t1
r21
r22
r23
t2
r31
r32
r33
t3




X
Y
Z
1


Simplified:
x = A[R|t]X
Where:
• (X, Y, Z) are the coordinates of a 3D point in the world coordinate space.
• (u, v) are the coordinates of the projection point in pixels.
• (cx, cy) is a principal point usually at the image center.
• fx, fy are the focal lengths expressed in pixel units.
• rij where i ∈{1, 2, 3} and r ∈{1, 2, 3} are the rotation matrix of the camera.
• ti where i ∈{1, 2, 3} are the translation vector of the camera.
Figure 3.2 provides a geometric depiction of the pinhole camera model, illustrating the
projection of an image onto the image frame from in front of the camera. The intrinsic
parameters of this model include the principal point and the focal length, while the extrinsic
parameters are defined by a matrix generated by the rotation matrix and the translation
vector. Utilizing the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the camera, the projection of any
three­dimensional world coordinates onto the image plane can be computed.
Our system uses sensors to determine the camera’s orientation and position, while the
intrinsic parameters, including the focal length and principal point, are calculated through
camera calibration. Camera calibration is a critical step in computer vision; it determines
the intrinsic parameters of a camera.
Furthermore, the calibration of the camera results in the determination of the distortion
coefficient of the camera lens. Given that the pinhole camera model does not consider
lens distortion, it becomes necessary to either rectify the original images to eliminate
this distortion or to include the distortion coefficient in the calculations for achieving an
accurate 3D to 2D projection.
16
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: Geometrical representation of pinhole camera model and its 3D to 2D projec­
tion in the image frame. The point P is projected into the image plane point (u, v)
.
3.3
MMSI data retrieval
The Maritime Mobile Service Identity (MMSI) serves as a distinctive radio signal identi­
fier for each ship, facilitating the retrieval of registered vessel information. This identifier
can access details such as the ship’s class, year of build, and size on public websites
like VesselFinder or MarineTraffic. However, due to the requirement of a paid subscrip­
tion to access these sites or other public databases, our system relies on a custom­built
scraper. This scraper is designed to collect the necessary ship data and save it into a
local database for later reference.
3.4
Pretrained ship detection
Due to the excellent performance shown in SeaShips (Fig. 3.3), our post­processing
pipeline employs Faster R­CNN with a ResNet­101 architecture as its backbone.
In our system, High­Resolution Network (HRNet) is employed alongside Faster R­CNN
with a ResNet­101 backbone for comparative analysis. HRNet has demonstrated pro­
ficiency in detecting smaller­scale objects, as evidenced by the results in the AirTrack
paper, where it outperformed other models in this aspect.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Medium Average Precision benchmark on SeaSails dataset [14]. Highest
scored model is Faster R­CNN with a ResNet101 backbone.
3.4.1
Faster R­CNN
Faster R­CNN[22] is an object detection framework that improves upon earlier versions
of R­CNN by incorporating a Region Proposal Network (RPN). This network is designed
to predict object boundaries and their ’objectness’ directly from the features extracted
by a convolutional neural network (CNN), thereby speeding up the proposal generation
process that was a bottleneck in previous models.
As seen in Fig. 3.4, the Faster R­CNN architecture can be divided into two main parts:
the RPN for generating object proposals and the Fast R­CNN detector that uses these
proposals to detect objects. The RPN slides over the convolutional feature map produced
by the CNN and outputs a set of rectangular object proposals, each with an objectness
score. It employs anchors, boxes of different scales and aspect ratios, to cover various
spatial locations across the image. The Fast R­CNN detector then takes these proposals
to pool features and predict both the class of the object and refine the bounding box
coordinates.
Figure 3.4: Faster R­CNN proposed a ground­breaking RPN to extract ROI end­to­end.
18
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:27==
The model is trained using an alternating method where first the RPN or backbone is
trained, followed by the Fast R­CNN detector. The shared convolutional layers result in
a streamlined process, as they do not need to be computed separately for each module.
This integration of proposal generation and detection into a single network allows Faster
R­CNN to achieve real­time performance with high accuracy.
3.4.2
High­Resolution Network
HRNet is a novel architecture designed to maintain high­resolution representations through­
out the entire processing pipeline, unlike traditional networks, which compress the image
into a low­resolution representation and then recover the high­resolution details. HRNet
begins with a high­resolution stream and progressively adds parallel streams of lower res­
olutions. These multi­resolution streams are connected in parallel, not in series, allowing
for the preservation of high­resolution information. The network performs repeated multi­
resolution fusions, enhancing the high­resolution features with data from the lower resolu­
tions and vice versa, leading to semantically strong and spatially precise representations.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of HRNet downsampling and upsampling. Aggregate high and low­
level semantics on each of the levels. Keeping high and low dimensionality in the model
is the key to detecting objects of different dimensions.
As shown in the previous Fig. 3.5, downsampling creates lower­resolution streams from a
high­resolution stream. This is achieved by adding convolutional layers that apply down­
sampling operations, such as strided convolutions, which reduce the spatial dimensions
of the feature maps. These lower­resolution streams are processed in parallel to the
high­resolution stream.
Upsampling in HRNet is performed to fuse the multi­resolution features. It involves op­
erations such as transpose convolutions or bilinear upsampling to increase the spatial
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
19
==PAGE:28==
dimensions of the lower­resolution feature maps. These upsampled features are then
combined with the high­resolution features to enhance the final representation with fine­
grained details. The process of fusing features is repeated across the network to ensure
rich semantic information at multiple scales.
3.4.3
Models evaluation
Average Precision (AP) and Average Recall (AR) are essential metrics in the domain
of object detection, with Mean Average Precision (mAP) serving as a comprehensive
evaluation measure. AP for a specific class is calculated by averaging precision values
at various recall levels, where precision P and recall R are determined from the following
equations:
P =
TP
TP + FP ,
R =
TP
TP + FN
In these formulas, TP represents true positives, FP false positives, and FN false nega­
tives. AP is the area under the precision­recall curve. AR similarly averages recall over
different precision levels or object sizes. The mAP, a key metric in challenges like PAS­
CAL VOC and MS COCO, is the mean of the AP scores across all classes or over different
IoU thresholds. It is computed as:
mAP = 1
N
N
'
i=1
APi
where N is the number of classes and APi is the average precision for the i­th class. This
metric effectively balances precision and recall, providing a singular measure of quality
across multiple object detection categories.
High recall is essential in situations where missing any detections could have serious im­
plications. On the other hand, high precision is prioritized in contexts where the accuracy
of each detection is paramount, and false positives can lead to significant consequences.
3.5
Matching projection and detection
In the system, matchmaking is executed as a straightforward process where the shortest
distance between AIS projections and the centers of bounding boxes is identified. This
matching process continues until all AIS projections or bounding boxes available for pair­
ing are exhausted. This step is essential, given that not every ship emits an AIS signal,
20
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:29==
and the object detection algorithm might sometimes produce false positives or negatives
in ship identification.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Development
The section is composed of two main sections: firstly, it outlines the design and construc­
tion of our embedded system, AISail, and secondly, it examines the post­processing of
the data that AISail collects.
Figure 4.1: AISail embedded system: integrates orientation and localization sensor with
RGB/NIR frames and surrounding AIS information under a consumption of 25 watts. It
integrates RGB and NIR camera, global orientation sensor, GPS and AIS antenna to
capture surrounding ship position.
The exploration will begin with examining the rationale behind selecting the components of
AISail and the system’s design. A concise explanation of the implementation of each com­
ponent will succeed this. Finally, attention will be directed towards the post­processing
methodology of the system.
4.1
Data acquisition: AISail, Embedded ship recording
solution
The AISail system is designed to capture RGB/NIR images, the camera’s orientation and
position, and the surrounding AIS data. The embedded system is affixed to a custom­
22
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:31==
designed aluminum plate to ensure robust alignment with the camera’s orientation. The
design of AISail can be seen in Fig. 4.2. The aluminum board was crafted using CNC
machining, providing precision and durability, while the mounting components and the
protective casing for the system were 3D printed using ABS plastic, chosen for its re­
silience to outdoor conditions.
Figure 4.2: Early prototype of AISail using Fusion 360 industrial design program. Further
development we changed the casing to integrate more components.
The device is powered by a camping battery with a capacity of 600 watts. A significant
advantage of the proposed solution is its low power consumption. The embedded system
has a power usage of 22 watts per hour, allowing for approximately 27 hours of operation
on a single battery charge.
4.1.1
Hardware selection
The component selection for AISail was conducted with budget considerations at the fore­
front. The current setup balances cost and functionality, acknowledging that future itera­
tions could improve component tolerances by allocating a higher budget.
RGB camera
The RGB camera integrated into AISail is the AR0821 CMOS from Onsemi, selected for
its low signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) and high dynamic range capabilities. A low SNR is
advantageous as it reduces the amount of noise and artifacts in the images, which is
particularly crucial for accurately detecting smaller objects where fidelity to actual pixel
values is necessary, see image Fig. 4.3.
Additionally, the camera’s high dynamic range is beneficial in environments with multi­
ple light sources and reflections, similar to its applications in the automotive industry, as
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3: Signal to noise ratio comparison in a camera. Higher noise impacts smaller
objects in the image frame and can make them unnoticeable.
seen in Fig. 4.4. This feature ensures that the camera can capture clear images in mar­
itime settings, where the sun and its reflections on the water’s surface could otherwise
compromise image clarity.
Figure 4.4: Comparison of a camera with HDR on and HDR off. Light sources can over­
expose the image and remove details from the scene.
NIR camera
The system’s NIR (Near­Infrared) camera is fashioned from a low­light capable camera
coupled with a long­pass IR filter to economize. NIR light spans wavelengths from 800 to
2,500 nanometers. The Sony IMX462 sensor is known for its excellent response to light
in wavelengths beyond 800nm, a characteristic highlighted in Fig. 4.5. By integrating an
800nm long­pass IR filter, we effectively block all visible light from reaching the sensor,
thus ensuring that only NIR light is captured, resulting in a pure NIR image.
Orientation sensor
The system integrates the Bosch BNO055 inertial measurement unit, providing nine de­
grees of freedom. This sensor combines a gyroscope, an accelerometer, and a magne­
tometer to ascertain its orientation. In compass mode, after calibration, the sensor can
determine absolute orientation using the north as the reference point.
24
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.5: Spectral light response to the Sony IMX 462 sensor. 800nm to 2500nm are
near­infrared light wavelengths. By blocking all light under 800nm we create our own
near­infrared camera
Camera position
The camera’s location is pinpointed using a GPS­RTK solution. Specifically, the system
employs the EM­TL30KLR RTK module from EMWave, which provides real­time GPS
positioning. The RTK system determines its location by locking onto GPS satellites and
identifying nearby LGU+ LTE network cells. Under optimal conditions, this RTK solution
can achieve positional accuracy within an error margin of less than 5 centimeters.
AIS receiver
To gather the surrounding Automatic Identification System (AIS) data, an AIS dongle from
ShipXplorer has been implemented in the system. AIS signals are typically broadcasted
over 156 MHz and 163 MHz. To ensure clarity of the received signals, an antenna specifi­
cally designed to filter these frequencies is connected to the dongle, which helps minimize
noise in the radio signal. The selection of this particular dongle is strategic; it is widely
used within the hobbyist community, which has led to numerous public libraries that sup­
port its functionality and ease the integration process.
Board
The system’s components are interfaced with two Raspberry Pi 4 units. Initially, attempts
to connect all components to a single Raspberry Pi resulted in power limitations that in­
terfered with sensor operation. To address this, the system has been configured with a
primary Raspberry Pi 4 board with 8GB of RAM that connects to all components except
the GPS. The secondary board, equipped with 4GB of RAM, handles the GPS module.
Both Raspberry Pi boards are connected to the same internal network within AISail for
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
25
==PAGE:34==
data sharing between the sensors.
4.1.2
Components implementation
The system’s initial setup was implemented using ROS2, a robust framework designed
for robot software development. ROS2 operates similarly to a package manager in Linux,
allowing for the separation of the implementation for each sensor. This modular approach
dramatically simplifies the development and integration of complex robotic systems across
diverse hardware and software environments. ROS2 employs a publisher­subscriber pat­
tern, facilitating component communication without requiring direct integration or aware­
ness of each other. While individual components managed to maintain a satisfactory data
refresh rate, the collective operation of all sensors proved to be too resource­intensive for
the Raspberry Pi 4 to handle effectively.
The primary challenge in implementing the system is ensuring that all components con­
currently read data from their respective sensors while the device captures images and
sensor data from the IMU, GPS, and AIS at 10 Hz. Since some sensors operate at dif­
ferent frequencies and exhibit timeout characteristics, implementing each sensor as an
individual thread within a main loop was the solution. This approach allows asynchronous
sensor readings, effectively eliminating timeouts and enabling consistent recording at the
targeted 10 Hz rate.
AISail box
The AiSail box was custom­designed and built from the ground up as part of the project.
This prototype includes a protective casing for all components and features a sturdy alu­
minum base to which all parts are securely and precisely attached. To minimize alignment
errors between the cameras and the IMU, we meticulously planned the placement of our
hardware. Custom cuts in the aluminum plate were made using a Tinyrobo P6012 ATC
CNC machine, as illustrated in Fig. 4.6.
The aluminum plate and the 3D­printed cover case for the AISail were both designed
using the Fusion 360 industrial design program. The casing for AISail was printed using
a Creality K1 Max 3D machine. ABS plastic was chosen as the material for the casing
due to its robust characteristics. Despite being a challenging material to print with, ABS
offers a stronger and more durable print. It is well­suited for outdoor conditions, offering
resistance to UV light exposure, and is lighter yet capable of handling higher impact forces
compared to materials like PLA.
26
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.6: AISail box has a custom cut CNC plate that aligns all the sensor. The rigitidy of
the aluminium and the precision of the CNC reduces the alignment erros of the cameras
and the Inertial Motion Unit.
Figure 4.7: All internal components of the AISail are affixed to the aluminum plate. For the
IMU, we specifically fabricated a 3D­printed plastic stand. This was necessary because
the aluminum base was found to interfere with the IMU sensor’s internal magnetometer.
Camera implementation
Both cameras in the AISail system are managed using the Python programming language
with the OpenCV library for image processing tasks. OpenCV interfaces with cameras
through Video4Linux2 (V4L2) drivers, which require the unique device ID of the camera,
typically determined by the USB port to which the camera is connected. To prevent incor­
rect camera references, the system initially queries the Linux OS for the camera name to
locate the correct ID before initiating the camera with OpenCV.
We encountered two significant challenges during camera implementation. The first issue
was that the V4L2 drivers, by default, opened the cameras using the UYVY format, where
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
27
==PAGE:36==
each pixel occupies 16 bits. This format caused the drivers to experience timeouts when
reading frames continuously from both cameras concurrently. The solution was to adjust
the OpenCV video capture settings to utilize the MJPEG codec. MJPEG compresses the
video stream instead of transmitting raw data, which reduces the bandwidth and process­
ing load, thereby preventing the timeout issue associated with the UYVY format.
1
DEFAULT_CAMERA_NAME = '/dev/v4l/by-id/CU81_econsytems '
2
3
if os.path.exists(DEFAULT_CAMERA_NAME):
4
device_path = os.path.realpath(DEFAULT_CAMERA_NAME)
5
device_re = re.compile("\/dev\/video(\d+)")
6
info = device_re.match(device_path)
7
if info:
8
device_num = int(info.group(1))
9
else:
10
raise Exception('Camera not found ')
11
cap = cv2.VideoCapture(device_num)
Listing 4.1: Finding camera ID in Linux system by name code snippet
The corruption of images at regular intervals, as depicted in Fig. 4.8, is attributable to
a race condition arising within the concurrent programming setup of the system.
As
outlined earlier, each component operates on a separate thread within a main loop to
asynchronously access sensor data. The shared variable last_frame is accessed by the
__capture_frames thread and the main loop responsible for recording frames.
Figure 4.8: Corrupted image obtained by AISail due to race/concurrency issue. Data is
stored in disk while the existing reference to the data is been modified.
This race condition occurs when last_frame is updated with new frame data while the
previous values are still in memory and not entirely written to storage, creating corrupted
frames. To mitigate this issue, synchronization techniques such as mutexes ensure that
28
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:37==
last_frame is not simultaneously accessed for reading and writing.
1
...
2
class CameraCU81():
3
def __init__(self, W=1920, H=1080, hz=60):
4
self.cap = cv.VideoCapture(find_id('/dev/v4l/by-id/CU81_econsytems
'))
5
self.cap.set(cv.CAP_PROP_FOURCC , cv.VideoWriter_fourcc('M', 'J', '
P', 'G'))
6
self.cap.set(cv.CAP_PROP_FRAME_WIDTH , W)
7
self.cap.set(cv.CAP_PROP_FRAME_HEIGHT , H)
8
self.cap.set(cv.CAP_PROP_FPS , hz)
9
self.last_frame = None
10
11
def __capture_frames(self):
12
while True:
13
ret, frame = self.cap.read()
14
if not ret:
15
error_f = True
16
else:
17
self.last_frame = frame
18
19
...
Listing 4.2: Snipped of camera code. self.last_frame contains the last image read by
the camera. Multithread programming accesses this variable simultaneously, creating
corrupted images.
IMU
When initializing the BNO055 sensor, selecting the appropriate working mode is cru­
cial, depending on the requirements for sensor data fusion and the needed orienta­
tion accuracy.
The BNO055 offers a variety of modes, with COMPASS, NDOF, and
NDOF_FMC_OFF being particularly relevant for precise absolute orientation.
COMPASS mode, utilizing the magnetometer and accelerometer, is used to determine the
north reference, which is ideal for 2­dimensional orientation. The NDOF mode, standing
for Nine Degrees of Freedom, integrates data from the accelerometer, gyroscope, and
magnetometer. This mode requires calibration of all three sensors to provide reliable
orientation data. The NDOF_FMC_OFF mode is similar to NDOF but excludes the fast
magnetometer calibration, resulting in slightly less accuracy.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
29
==PAGE:38==
For AISail, the NDOF mode has been selected to achieve the highest precision. The
calibration process is critical, with the sensor displaying a calibration status in the termi­
nal ranging from 0 (not calibrated) to 3 (fully calibrated). Achieving a status of 3, which
signifies strong calibration, involves the following steps:
• Accelerometer: Position the device in six different stable orientations for a few sec­
onds each to calibrate.
• Gyroscope: Keep the device stationary for a short period.
• Magnetometer: Perform random, continuous movements, such as drawing a figure­
eight in the air with the device.
Initially, the sensor’s accuracy was compromised during field tests due to its placement
atop the aluminum case, only 2 millimeters away. Magnetometers can be sensitive to
nearby metallic objects as they operate by applying a small AC magnetic field to sense
the Earth’s magnetic field through changes in electron energy levels. To address the
reduced accuracy caused by the proximity to the aluminum, a 3D­printed plastic stand
was created to isolate the sensor from any metal or electrical interference. This isolation
ensures that the magnetometer readings are as precise as possible.
GPS
USB cable connects The GPS sensor to the auxiliary Raspberry Pi. The GPS can afford
a slight delay or minor synchronization discrepancies among all sensors, so it’s been
delegated to the secondary board. The main loop on the primary board communicates
with the auxiliary board through UDP signals, instructing it to log the GPS data. This data
is then timestamped and saved in a JSON format for seamless integration with the primary
Raspberry Pi data.
We must install the vendor’s drivers to access the raw GPS data, enabling us to read
UART data transmitted over USB. The data collection is handled by the Pyserial library,
which interprets the incoming data into human­readable text in the National Marine Elec­
tronics Association (NMEA) format. NMEA sentences start with a dollar sign and are
followed by a string that specifies the message type. The GPS provides the geographic
coordinates and data on the location of satellites, operational mode, course, and speed
over the ground, among other details.
Our system focuses primarily on the $GNGGA message, representing the Global Posi­
tioning System fix data. NMEA messages are comma­separated, and each position within
the message corresponds to a specific data point. Below is an interpretation of the key
components of a sample message:
30
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:39==
• 185833.80: This represents the UTC of the GPS fix.
• 4808.7402397 N: This is the latitude of the GPS fix.
• 01133.9325039 E: This indicates the longitude of the GPS fix.
• 5: This number signifies the fixed quality, with higher numbers indicating greater
precision.
• 15: This is the number of satellites used to calculate the position fix.
• 470.50 M: This represents the altitude above mean sea level.
Other data provided by the GPS is not pertinent to our system and is thus disregarded.
1
$GNGGA ,185833.80,4808.7402397,N,01133.9325039,E,5,15,1.1,470.50,M,45.65,M,,*75
Listing 4.3: Example of a $GNGGA NMEA message
AIS receiver dongle
The AIS is connected via USB to the main board and, like the GPS, transmits data in the
NMEA format to the system.
An open­source project named AIS­catcher[23] is utilized to process the NMEA data from
AIS. AIS­catcher, a library written in C++, can be compiled and installed on various operat­
ing systems, including Windows, Linux, and macOS. Before the installation of AIS­catcher,
the installation of drivers for the specific type of USB dongle is necessary. For the system
employing an RTL­SDR dongle, the required dependencies are installed using the appro­
priate command for the operating system. This setup enables the effective decoding of
AIS messages and the integration of this information into the dataset collected by AISail.
1
apt-get install librtlsdr -dev
AIS­catcher serves as more than just a driver for reading NMEA data from the AIS dongle;
it also features a web server that is integrated with the AIS­catcher software, providing
the capability to retrieve, visualize, and troubleshoot data from the AIS dongle. To access
AIS data programmatically, AIS­catcher offers a daemon that can be launched from the
command line. This daemon reads the AIS data and then broadcasts it locally over UDP
port 10111.
With the NMEA data being broadcast on the UDP port, our code can now interpret the raw
data to extract information about nearby vessels from the AIS signals. The processing of
AIS NMEA data is similar to that of GPS.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
31
==PAGE:40==
1
!AIVDM ,2,1,3,B,55P5TL01VIaAL@7WKO@mBplU@ <PDhh000000001S;AJ::4A80?4i@E53 ,0*3E
2
!AIVDM ,2,2,3,B,1@0000000000000 ,2*55.
Listing 4.4: AIS MNEA message example. In this case, the payload is split into two AIVM
messages.
Below, the structure of a typical raw NMEA data string received from the AIS is dissected:
• The first two elements indicate the total number of messages required for a complete
payload and the current payload’s sequence number.
• The third element is the sequential message identifier for all received AIS messages.
• The following element identifies whether the message is from an AIS A or AIS B
type transmitter. Maritime regulations mandate AIS A transmitters to broadcast their
position, while AIS B transmitters are vessels that have voluntarily installed AIS
systems and optionally broadcast their position.
• After this is the payload, which must be decoded to interpret the data. If the AIVDM
message indicates that it consists of two parts, as suggested by the first field, then
both payloads must be concatenated to form a complete message.
• The final element represents the fill bits required to pad the payloads to complete
the AIVDM message.
Detailed information about vessels, including identity, position, course, speed, and other
maritime navigational data, is obtained by decoding the payload. This information can
then be integrated into AISail’s dataset.
The decoding of AIS data payloads is accomplished using the PyAIS package in Python.
This package effectively translates the raw NMEA payload into a structured dictionary
format. It provides vessel information such as MMSI, vessel status, speed, longitude,
latitude, course, and the type of AIS message received. The type of message is crucial
as it distinguishes the source of the AIS signal, which can originate not only from vessels
but also from buoys, lighthouses, and base stations.
The system focuses explicitly on ships’ messages, which fall under AIS class A and class
B. Consequently, a filter is applied to the message types, selecting only types 1, 2, and
3, corresponding to AIS class A (mandatory for larger vessels), and types 18 and 19,
related to AIS class B (commonly used by smaller vessel not mandated to carry AIS class
A equipment).
32
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:41==
4.2
Postprocessing
The AISail embedded system is designed to collect RGB/NIR images along with the as­
sociated camera orientation, position, and surrounding AIS data. This collected data is
organized into folders, with the system capturing information at a rate of 10Hz for both
the images and the corresponding sensor data. The images are saved with a resolution
of 1920 x 1080 pixels in JPG format, and the sensor data, including camera orientation
and AIS data, is stored in a JSON file within the same folder for easy correlation.
As noted earlier, the sensors are distributed across two separate boards due to the power
consumption limitations of the Raspberry Pi 4. The GPS data is handled explicitly by the
secondary board. While integrating the GPS data into the main data set is not detailed
here, it is merged into the existing JSON format that includes the camera orientation and
AIS data.
4.2.1
AIS Continuous Data
Our system captures two types of AIS data: type A and type B. Type A data comes from
ships mandated by maritime regulations to broadcast their positions. These ships transmit
their location every 3 minutes at anchor and more frequently—every 2 to 10 seconds—
when in transit. On the other hand, type B data originates from vessels not required by
law to have an AIS transmitter but choose to do so for safety reasons. These vessels
broadcast their position less frequently, typically every 30 to 90 seconds when moving
and every 6 minutes while at anchor.
The intermittent nature of AIS data transmission results in gaps in the information, posing
challenges in tracking ship movements over time. To mitigate these gaps and construct
a continuous trajectory of ship movements, the positions of ships are estimated during
intervals between received AIS data points. Since ships typically follow predictable and
linear paths with no abrupt changes in direction, interpolating their positions between two
known points based on elapsed time is feasible. This approach ensures consistent and
reliable tracking of each vessel’s journey.
Three scenarios are involved in this process. The first occurs when image frames and
sensor data are collected before receiving the first AIS message. The second scenario
transpires between consecutive AIS messages, while the third scenario occurs after the
last AIS message is received, as image frames and sensor data continue to be captured.
For the second scenario, with two consecutive AIS data points P1 = (lat1, long1, t1) and
P2 = (lat2, long2, t2), and the need to estimate the position P = (lat, long, t) at some time
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
33
==PAGE:42==
t where t1 < t < t2, we use linear interpolation:
lat = lat1 +
(lat2 −lat1
t2 −t1
)
(t −t1)
long = long1 +
(long2 −long1
t2 −t1
)
(t −t1)
In the first and third scenarios, we extrapolate using the first two data points for initial
estimations and the last two for the final estimations. For positions before t1:
lat = lat1 −
(lat2 −lat1
t2 −t1
)
(t1 −t)
long = long1 −
(long2 −long1
t2 −t1
)
(t1 −t)
And for estimating positions after tn using the last two points:
lat = latn +
(latn −latn−1
tn −tn−1
)
(t −tn)
long = longn +
(longn −longn−1
tn −tn−1
)
(t −tn)
These calculations allow us to fill in the gaps in data, providing a continuous track of the
ship’s position to match our image frames.
4.2.2
3D to 2D projection
The pinhole camera model describes the conversion from 3D world coordinates to a 2D
image plane mathematically, detailed in Section 3.2. To accurately perform this projec­
tion, it’s essential to understand the camera’s intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. Among
these is the principal point, which is the pixel at the center of the image frame. However,
this point isn’t always the exact pixel center because camera sensors are mounted onto
a motherboard and encased within a housing that includes the lens. Manufacturing tol­
erances mean that the principal point usually lies near, but not precisely at, the center.
Another critical intrinsic parameter is the focal length along the x and y axes, which varies
based on the lens used.
34
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:43==
Intrinsic Parameter
Camera calibration in computer vision aims to estimate the intrinsic parameters of a cam­
era using a series of mathematical equations. A commonly used model is the pinhole
camera model, where the relationship between a 3D point X = (X, Y, Z) in the world and
its 2D projection x = (x, y) on the image plane is given by:
x = A[R|t]X
Here, A is the camera matrix that includes the focal lengths fx and fy along with the
principal point coordinates (cx, cy), which is often represented as:
A =


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1


The calibration process involves using a set of known correspondences between the 3D
world points and their 2D image projections to solve for the entries in the matrix A. This
is typically done using a calibration target like a checkerboard, where the geometric reg­
ularity provides easily detectable corner points whose 3D positions are known. The dis­
tortions introduced by the camera lens, such as radial and tangential distortions, are also
estimated and corrected during calibration using distortion coefficients.
To determine the intrinsic parameters of a camera, multiple photographs of a chessboard,
as shown in Fig. 4.9, are taken from various angles. These images are then used with a
calibration technique, such as Zhang’s method, to estimate these parameters.
Zhang’s method does not require explicit homography calculation but instead utilizes the
geometric constraints of the planar calibration pattern visible in the multiple images. The
camera’s intrinsic parameter matrix A is derived by minimizing the re­projection error. This
error is the difference between the actual observed positions of the chessboard pattern
points and their projected locations as per the camera model.
The intrinsic parameters are fine­tuned iteratively during optimization, adjusting the cam­
era’s model until the projected points on the image plane match the observed points as
closely as possible.
This process can be done using the OpenCV library. It will calculate both the camera
matrix A and the distortion coefficient of the lens. Once this process is done, the camera
matrix is stored since it is a constant value.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.9: Chessboard images calibrate the camera and find its intrinsic parameters.
Multiple images of the board are taken by defining the grid and cell size of the chessboard.
For each frame, the program detects the corners of the chessboard and estimates the
camera’s internal parameters. Repeating this process several times we can obtain a
precise intrinsic parameter.
Translation vector
Data from the IMU and GPS are utilized for the extrinsic parameters about location. These
parameters necessitate the determination of the rotation matrix and the translation vector.
Before this step, the definition of our coordinate systems is required.
Considering the AIS receiver’s approximate range of 5 km, we can assume the world can
be a plane with negligible curvature. Camera position is established as the origin of our
coordinate system. In mathematical terms, if we denote the camera’s position as (0, 0)
and a point P on the plane as (x, y), then x is defined such that x < 0 for points west of
the camera and x > 0 for points east of the camera. Similarly, y is defined such that y > 0
for points north of the camera and y < 0 for points south of the camera.
Since the camera now takes the origin of our coordinate system, we can define the trans­
lation matrix as:
36
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.10: The coordinate system is defined with the camera serving as the reference
point. The X and Y axes extend west to east and south to north, respectively. The orien­
tation of the camera is considered to be (0,0,0) when it is parallel to the earth and directed
towards the east.
t =


0
0
l


Where l is the altitude over the sea of our camera.
Rotation Matrix
The construction of the rotation matrix involves aligning the Euler angles, as provided by
the IMU, with the coordinate system that has been defined. The yaw component indi­
cates the orientation of the camera parallel to the Earth’s surface. According to the IMU
readings, a yaw of 0 degrees corresponds to the camera facing south, 90 degrees to the
west, 180 degrees to the north, and 270 degrees to the east. The data is adjusted to align
our coordinate system with 0 degrees to the east, 90 degrees to the north, 180 degrees
to the west, and 270 degrees to the south. The roll and pitch values from the IMU are
integrated into the coordinate system without modification. A pitch of 0 degrees means
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
37
==PAGE:46==
the camera is aligned parallel to the plane. At 90 degrees, the camera is perpendicular to
the plane, facing upwards towards the sky, and at ­90 degrees, it is perpendicular, looking
down towards the Earth.
Figure 4.11: Euler angles describing the rotation of an object in 3 dimensions.
Converting Euler angles to a rotation matrix involves a sequence of rotations about the
principal axes. Given Euler angles θ (roll), φ (pitch), and ψ (yaw), the corresponding
rotation matrix R can be computed as:
R = Rz(ψ)Ry(φ)Rx(θ)
where
Rx(θ) =


1
0
0
0
cos θ
−sin θ
0
sin θ
cos θ

,
Ry(φ) =


cos φ
0
sin φ
0
1
0
−sin φ
0
cos φ

,
Rz(ψ) =


cos ψ
−sin ψ
0
sin ψ
cos ψ
0
0
0
1


The matrix R is a 3x3 rotation matrix resulting from the product of individual rotation ma­
trices for roll, pitch, and yaw.
Ship X and Y coordinates
After the rotation matrix and translation vector for each frame have been determined,
the ship’s position relative to the camera can be defined. Given the known positional
coordinates of both the camera and the ship, the ship’s relative position to the camera
is calculable. This calculation is achieved using the haversine formula, a trigonometric
function that computes the shortest distance between two points on a sphere based on
their latitudes and longitudes. Employing the haversine formula enables the calculation
of distances on the x and y axes of the coordinate system in two separate steps.
Given Coordinate_camera(latcam, loncam) and Coordinate_ship(latship, lonship), haver­
sine formula is used to determine the distances in the x direction (dx) and the y direction
38
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:47==
(dy) as follows:
dx = Haversine((latcam, loncam), (latship, loncam)),
dy = Haversine((latcam, loncam), (latcam, lonship)),
Projection
With the essential variables of the pinhole camera model available, the projection target
in pixel coordinates (u, v) for a specified ship can be computed. This computation is
facilitated using the Euler angles for orientation, alongside the GPS coordinates, to define
the camera’s and ship’s positions.


u
v
1

= A
*
R|t
+


dX
dy
0
1


The ‘projectPoints‘ function in OpenCV performs the projection operation. A notable limi­
tation of OpenCV’s ‘projectPoints‘ is that it indiscriminately projects points in front of and
behind the camera onto the image plane. To rectify this, the camera’s field of view (FOV) is
computed at any particular instance.Subsequently, any ship coordinates that fall beyond
the bounds of the computed Field of View (FOV) are filtered out and discarded.
4.2.3
MMSI data retrieval: Web Scrapper
Web scraping is a method for extracting data from websites, which involves automating
the navigation of web pages to gather information that can range from text to multimedia
content. This is typically executed by a scraper, a software tool that imitates the browsing
behavior of a human to collect data from online sources.
Sites like VesselFinder and MarineTraffic allow users to look up information about vessels
using their MMSI numbers, providing details such as the vessel’s last known AIS position,
including its course, speed, and location. Additionally, these sites offer vessel­specific
information like the type of ship, its dimensions, gross tonnage, the year it was built, and
its radio call signal.
While this information is accessible via an API or a paid remote database service, the sys­
tem employs a scraping mechanism to retrieve the information needed from VesselFinder
and MarineTraffic without incurring costs. It then stores this data in a local database, which
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
39
==PAGE:48==
is more efficient than scraping the same MMSI information repeatedly, as querying a local
database is faster than retrieving data from a remote website, enhancing the speed of the
pipeline.
The scraping process begins with an HTTP request to the websites, incorporating the
MMSI number into the URL. The payload is processed if the HTTP response is successful,
indicated by a 200 status code. The HTML content is parsed using a Python library called
BeautifulSoup, which generates an easily searchable data structure tree of the HTML.
The desired data, such as ship category, country flag, vessel size, and construction year,
is extracted for each site.
This extracted data is stored in a MongoDB database run inside a Docker container to
avoid needing direct database installation. This use of Docker ensures that the application
can be operated on systems where Docker is already installed, eliminating the need for
additional software installations.
1
URL = 'https://www.vesselfinder.com/vessels/details/' + mmsi
2
header = {'User-Agent ': 'Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_15_7)
AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/114.0.0.0 Safari/537.36'}
3
page = requests.get(URL, headers=header)
4
if page.status_code == 200:
5
soup = BeautifulSoup(page.content , "html.parser")
6
year = s.find_all('section ', class_='ship-section ')[3]
7
.find('div')
8
.find('div')
9
.find('table ')
10
.find('tbody ')
11
.find_all('tr')[10]
12
.find('td', class_='v3').text
Listing 4.5: Code snippet how to scrap build year of a given MMSI. The code requests
the page to VesselFinder. Under the correct request, we process the payload and query
the obtained HTML page to find the required information.
4.2.4
Pretrained ship detection
The objective of the object detection task is to create bounding boxes for the ships, which
will be utilized in the new dataset. A Faster RCNN­101 and HRNet model is trained using
the MMDetection framework to achieve this.
MMDetection[24] is an open­source object detection toolbox that is a part of the Open­
40
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:49==
MMLab project. It is designed for deep learning researchers and engineers to facilitate
implementing, training, and evaluating object detection models. MMDetection is built on
the PyTorch framework and provides a modular design, allowing for rapid experimentation
and extension with new algorithms. It offers extensive support for various state­of­the­art
models like Faster R­CNN, Mask R­CNN, RetinaNet, and YOLO, as well as efficient util­
ities for model training, finetuning, and performance benchmarking, making it a versatile
tool in the field of computer vision research.
MMDetection’s foremost advantage lies in its ability to train various models using the
same dataset, facilitated by the configuration files for each model. As utilized in this
project, these config files are modular and enable the integration of cutting­edge models
like Faster R­CNN and HRNet. MMDetection’s source code also includes brief explana­
tions and summaries for each model based on the corresponding published papers. They
also provide benchmarks for various model configurations, detailing model size, inference
time, and average precision when trained on the MS­COCO dataset.
Figure 4.12: The benchmark conducted by MMLab[24] provides a comprehensive anal­
ysis of the Faster R­CNN model. Detailed data is available for each configuration, along
with corresponding results. These benchmarks are invaluable for identifying the optimal
model or prioritizing configurations during the training of a custom model..
In Fig. 4.12, a comparison conducted by MMLab on the Faster R­CNN model is illus­
trated. The tables in this figure comprehensively detail the configuration of Faster R­CNN,
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
41
==PAGE:50==
including expected memory size, learning rate, inference time, and the precision achieved
during training. Moreover, the table includes links to access training logs, model weights,
and the specific configuration files used, enabling replication of the results.
In our model training, three distinct datasets were combined and outlined in our state­
of­the­art review: SeaShips, SMD, and AIHub. This integration was motivated by the
recognition of significant limitations in each standalone dataset, with the expectation that
their merger would mitigate these shortcomings.
The SeaShips dataset, originating from the industrialized river of Wuhan, China, primarily
features types of ships standard in such environments. However, this leads to a skewed
representation, with a notable absence of vessel types like sailing boats, passenger ships,
large container ships, and towboats. Furthermore, as the dataset is river­based, the ships
predominantly navigate along the horizontal axis in the image frames, resulting in images
captured only from the port or starboard sides.
The SMD dataset, collected around Singapore’s coast, both onshore and offshore, en­
compasses various ship types and angles. Its major drawback lies in the limited duration
and composition of its 81 videos, each spanning about 2 minutes. Of these, 30 are in
NIR, yielding only black­and­white images, leaving us 51 usable videos. This volume of
data alone is insufficient for training our model effectively.
Finally, the AIHub ship dataset was incorporated, its primary strength being the extensive
collection of 5.4 million images captured along the Korean coastline. Although this dataset
does not classify ship types, a detailed inspection indicates a predominance of smaller
fishing vessels attributed to the data’s primary capture in fishing regions.
In the initial training stages, it was observed that models trained exclusively on the Sea­
Ships or SMD dataset were not effective in reliably detecting ships. However, a substantial
improvement in detection quality was achieved when multiple datasets were combined for
training.
For the dataset integration, the annotation formats were standardized. The MS­COCO for­
mat was chosen due to its compatibility with the MMDetection framework. The SeaShips
dataset, initially in PASCAL format, the SMD dataset with its Matlab­specific annotations,
and the AIHub dataset, with its unique JSON format, were all transformed to align with this
standard. The AIHub dataset, sourced from South Korea, contained various fields, such
as categories and locations annotated in Korean. These were translated into English to
ensure consistency with the other datasets. AIHub, provided by a South Korean entity,
had not undergone academic publication. Several issues in its JSON annotations were
42
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:51==
(a) Detection training only on SeaShips. Miss­
ing detection of three ships on the top area of
the images and two on the left.
(b) Detection training in SeaShips and SMD
dataset. It only misses to detect the ship far
in the background.
Figure 4.13: The model demonstrates superior performance on unseen data when trained
on a combination of multiple datasets. This improvement is attributed to the fact that each
dataset, as detailed in our state­of­the­art review, possesses significant shortcomings
within its data.
identified during its conversion, including inconsistent naming conventions for the same
class, missing annotations in some frames, and corrupted images.
The newly standardized dataset was then used in MMDetection for training the object
detection models. For the Faster R­CNN, the ’faster­rcnn_r101_fpn_2x_coco.py’ con­
figuration was employed, selected for its advantageous precision­to­memory­size ratio.
It should be noted that larger models necessitate a reduced batch size during training,
thereby decelerating the process. Alterations to the configuration, including adjustments
in batch size, category definitions, and dataset specifications, are comprehensively de­
tailed in Appendix A.1.
We also conducted training using HRNet with Faster R­CNN, which employs a ResNet­50
backbone. The configuration file for this model is accessible in Appendix A.2.
For both HRNet and Faster R­CNN, MMDetection provides pre­trained weight points. We
utilized these in our model to expedite the training process.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
43
==PAGE:52==
5
Experimental Results
”In this section, a range of results that have been obtained throughout the project are pre­
sented. Predominantly, these results are qualitative due to the absence of quantitative
evaluation methods in the project. An exploration of the HDR capabilities of the installed
RGB camera is conducted. Additionally, the NIR capabilities of the custom­built NIR cam­
era are discussed, with an emphasis on its strengths and potential limitations. The object
detection model, trained using Faster R­CNN and HRNet, is examined. Finally, a demon­
stration is provided where the integration of AIS projected data with the bounding boxes
from the object detection is showcased, highlighting the effectiveness of the developed
pipeline.
(a) Image taken on AISail RGB camera against
the sun with the sun reflection.
(b) Image taken on Samsung S20 against the
sun with the sun reflection.
Figure 5.1: Both cameras obtain the details of the bridge under a high light source. How­
ever, the AISail camera obtains better exposure on the ship seen at the left of the image
compared to the Samsung S20.
5.1
High Dynamic Range
The capture of ship images presents challenges due to the harsh lighting and reflections
generated by the sea. HDR cameras are capable of exposing a wide range of colors in
scenarios where varied light sources, both high and low, are present.
The two images in Fig. 5.1 provide a comparative analysis. The camera installed in
AISail captured the first image, and the second image was taken with a Samsung S22.
Both images were captured at the exact location and at a similar time of day, illustrating
the differences in image quality and color range between the two devices.
44
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:53==
(a) AISail RGB camera.
(b) Samsung S20 camera.
Figure 5.2: Comparing both cameras, the AISail camera has better exposure. More de­
tails of the bridge and the ship are visible in the AISail camera compared to the Samsung
s20.
Furthermore, the camera’s capabilities are evidenced by its ability to retain detail in im­
ages, as we can see in Fig. 5.2, as demonstrated when a detailed image of a ship passing
directly beneath the sun and its reflection is successfully captured without loss of detail.
5.2
NIR images
A low­light camera was modified to capture only Near­Infrared (NIR) images to reduce
costs and align with budget constraints. As indicated by the spectral efficiency graph in
Fig. 4.5, the camera can record light with high efficiency at wavelengths above 800 nm.
However, the range of the sensor’s sensitivity to NIR light, which spans from 800 nm to
2500 nm, is not delineated, leaving the upper limit of its detection capabilities unspecified.
NIR images were captured with the intent to enhance the accuracy of future models.
Although no quantitative results are available from training a new detection model using
the combined RGB and NIR images, several observations can be made upon inspecting
the images.
Fig. 5.3 presents two RGB/NIR images captured under optimal conditions. The sunlight is
positioned behind the camera, ensuring that infrared light is reflected from the objects into
the camera’s frame. In the first pair, a distant ship is depicted on the horizon. Unlike the
corresponding NIR image, this ship does not exhibit a strong contrast with the background
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) I) RGB image.
(b) I) NIR image.
(c) II) RGB image.
(d) II) NIR image.
Figure 5.3: In both pairs of images, it is discernible that the NIR images could contribute
value to a new model aimed at ship detection. Even in distant images, as observed in
image I, ships are clearly defined and contrast against the background, indicating the
potential effectiveness of NIR imagery in enhancing detection capabilities.
46
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:55==
(a) I) RGB image.
(b) I) NIR image.
(c) II) RGB image.
(d) II) NIR image.
Figure 5.4: Conditions where NIR imaging does not yield high­contrast ship images, are
also documented. In the image I, ships are almost invisible in the NIR frame. In image
II, the sunlight overexposes the NIR image, significantly reducing the visibility of the ship
located in the middle of the frame..
in the RGB image, which appears to add relevant data potentially valuable for training and
detecting new objects. The second pair of images distinctly illustrates that water does
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
47
==PAGE:56==
not reflect NIR light, suggesting that NIR data could provide an additional dimension to
enhance object detection models using RGB imagery.
The SMD dataset and the paper titled ’Deep Learning Based Multi­Modal Fusion Architec­
tures for Maritime Vessel Detection’ do not address any drawbacks or adverse conditions
for NIR imaging. However, during this project, a noticeable improvement in identifying
high­contrast ship images was observed when the sun was not positioned behind the
camera, allowing sunlight to reflect off the ships and back into the camera. Conversely, it
was noted that when the camera faces the sun, NIR light tends to overexpose the image,
obliterating details of any ships in the field. Instances of this phenomenon are illustrated
in Fig. 5.4.
The issues identified may be attributed to constructing a custom NIR camera rather than
using an end­to­end NIR camera solution.
5.3
Object detection: Faster R­CNN and HRNet
In this project, both Faster R­CNN and HRNet models were tested for object detection.
Following the acquisition of training results, weight points from epochs that converged
without overfitting were selected for qualitative comparison and testing.
Although both models were trained on the same dataset, they exhibited slightly different
capabilities in their detection performances, as observed during the comparison phase.
Several comparisons are shown now on unseen data for the model.
As anticipated, HRNet demonstrated superior detection capabilities for smaller objects.
This is evidenced in Fig. 5.5, where HRNet successfully detected two more vessels com­
pared to its Faster R­CNN counterpart. Such results were consistent across other inputs
tested with both the Faster R­CNN and HRNet models.”
Another observation regarding Faster R­CNN is its tendency to generate multiple detec­
tions for the same object, as depicted in Fig. 5.6. In this frame, it appears that both models
exhibit similar precision in terms of correctly identifying ships. However, the recall of HR­
Net is inferred to be superior, given its fewer false positives and avoidance of multiple
predictions for the same object.
Two major issues were identified in both models during the review of results. It was ob­
served that the models, particularly Faster R­CNN, tend to misidentify geometrical struc­
tures as ships. Objects such as bridges, fences, floating platforms, and cranes were
frequently mistaken for ships in both models’ detections, as illustrated in Fig. 5.7. Addi­
tionally, both models failed to detect ships at great distances, which occupied only a few
48
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:57==
(a) Faster R­CNN inference.
(b) HRNet inference.
Figure 5.5: In the comparison between the Faster R­CNN and HRNet models, it is ob­
served that HRNet possesses enhanced capabilities for detecting smaller objects within
a frame. Conversely, Faster R­CNN often fails to label several ships, particularly on the
smaller side of the frame size.
(a) Faster R­CNN inference.
(b) HRNet inference.
Figure 5.6: HRNet shows better results in avoiding false positives. Faster R­CNN also
tends to create multiple detections for the same object, increasing the false positive count.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
49
==PAGE:58==
pixels in the image frame. This limitation could be attributed to the training dataset, which
lacked annotations for distant ships. The misidentification of geometrical structures, such
as cranes and fences, may stem from the influence of the SeaShips dataset, generated
in an industrial area where many ships are ore carriers or have cranes attached. A more
in­depth investigation is warranted in this area, possibly requiring enhancements or mod­
ifications to the training dataset to address these issues.
(a) Geometrical structures detected as ships.
(b) Vessel at a big distance is never detected by our model. This type of data is not representative
of our training dataset. Missing detection are marked in read.
Figure 5.7: Both models share the same issues.
Evaluation
For the evaluation, 60 images captured by the AISail device were manually annotated.
These images were randomly selected from different days, areas, and surroundings to
measure which model, HRNet or Faster R­CNN, performs better.
Both models underwent evaluation by comparing their Average Precision (AP), Average
50
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:59==
Metric
HRNet
Faster R­CNN
Average Precision ­ IoU=0.50:0.95
0.180
0.161
Average Precision ­ Small
0.124
0.085
Average Precision ­ Medium
0.378
0.358
Average Precision ­ Large
0.352
0.556
Average Recall ­ IoU=0.50:0.95
0.252
0.199
Average Recall ­ Small
0.155
0.093
Average Recall ­ Medium
0.459
0.419
Average Recall ­ Large
0.640
0.667
mAP ­ IoU=0.50:0.95
0.1800
0.1610
mAP ­ Small
0.1240
0.0850
mAP ­ Medium
0.3780
0.3580
mAP ­ Large
0.3520
0.5560
Table 5.1: Average Precision, Average Recall and mean Average Precision comparison
between HRNet and Faster R­CNN.
Recall (AR), and mean Average Precision (mAP) to support the qualitative results previ­
ously presented. In the forthcoming Table. A.2, all metrics obtained for both models are
displayed. In this evaluation, the AP, AR, and mAP for small, medium, and large objects
were also measured. Small objects are defined as those with bounding boxes smaller
than 1024 pixels, medium objects as those between 1024 and 9216 pixels, and large
objects as those with bounding boxes larger than 9216 pixels.
Precission measures the proportion of instances correctly identified as positive out of all
predicted positive instances, while recall assesses how many actual positive instances the
model correctly identifies as positive. A higher precision reduces false positives, whereas
a higher recall ensures that all ships in the image are identified, even if many non­ship
objects are mistakenly detected as ships.
Overall, HRNet demonstrates superior performance in identifying vessels in an image
frame and exhibits fewer false positives. Additionally, it is observed that Faster R­CNN
achieves a higher precision score with large objects. However, as shown in the table, both
models perform suboptimally with small objects, which could be attributed to the absence
of such small objects in the training dataset, as evident in the subsequent Fig. 5.8
5.4
AIS projection
Projection plays a crucial role in the project, relying on the accuracy of the sensors as well
as the alignment and tolerances between the cameras and the IMU/GPS. During projec­
tion testing, an offset of 8­12 degrees in the yaw readings from the IMU was observed.
Once this offset was accounted for in the 3D to 2D projection calculations, the projection
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) Offshore manually annotated image.
(b) Offshore manually annotated image.
Figure 5.8: Discrepancies between the testing and training data have been identified.
Notably, the training data lacks the presence of small vessels in any of the three datasets
utilized.
points closely matched the locations of ships emitting the AIS radio signals. This align­
ment is evident in Fig. 5.9, where all ships are correctly identified with their MMSI and are
centrally positioned within the projected GPS location overlay from AIS.
The required offset in the IMU readings could be attributed to the discrepancy between
the geographic North Pole, which serves as the reference point in our coordinate system,
and the magnetic North Pole.
During data capture, the AISail device was intentionally tilted to test and validate the
response time of the IMU data in relation to the image frames. In the forthcoming Fig. 5.10,
three images are showcased, each with a 500ms time difference, along with the resulting
projection. It can be asserted that the IMU achieves accurate orientation and adapts well
to movements, such as those generated by a ship navigating at sea. However, a delay
and mis­synchronization were observed during this movement, indicating that further work
is necessary to align the timing between the IMU and the image frames.
5.5
Matching AIS data and object detection
The system matches the AIS projections with the generated ship­bounding boxes. This
is accomplished by iterating over the predictions and then over the bounding boxes, con­
sidering that some ships may not have AIS signals and some might not be detected.
Connections are established between each projection and the nearest bounding box.
As demonstrated in Fig. 5.11, AIS data can be matched by proximity to the nearest bound­
52
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.9: In the frame, AIS coordinates projected over the image obtained with AISail
are displayed. All ships are centrally located within the projection. Each circle is labeled
with the MMSI, a unique identifier for each ship.
ing box. Pairing this information not only facilitates the creation of a new dataset but also
integrates additional details such as distance, ship category, and ship dimensions into the
object detection process.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Projection while the camera is still.
(b) Projection while the camera orientation is been changed.
(c) Projection after the camera orientation has been changed.
Figure 5.10: A small delay was noted between the first and second frames regarding the
alignment of IMU orientation data with the image frame projection. By the last frame, the
IMU had aligned with the frame position, resulting in the projections being again aligned.
An interval of 500ms separates each of the displayed frames.
54
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:63==
(a) All projection have a clear bounding box match.
(b) Tanker and three towing boats make it almost impossible to match the projection to the bound­
ing box.
Figure 5.11: Matching AIS projections to bounding boxes presents challenges, particularly
when projections and bounding boxes occlude each other. In the second image, it is
observed that no pairings can be successfully matched.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
55
==PAGE:64==
6
Future work
Both the AISail and the post­processing system have the potential to generate a new
dataset effectively. However, certain aspects require refinement and enhancement to
produce a high­quality dataset for future use.
In the final weeks of development, a transition was made from a GPS with a passive
ceramic antenna to an RTK/GPS. This modification significantly improved the precision
of the 3D to 2D projection, addressing the large tolerances of the original GPS. The
IMU sensor, however, did not achieve the necessary precision when capturing data on
a moving object, such as a ship. Data acquired from the Ulsan Taehwa ship revealed
substantial offsets in various angles during ship data projection, likely due to the BNO055
sensor’s limited accuracy in constant motion. AISail should consider adopting a more re­
liable absolute orientation sensor for future enhancements to ensure precise data capture.
HRNet has shown promise in accurately detecting ships. Nonetheless, as discussed in
Section. 5.3, the models require a fine­tuned dataset that more accurately reflects the cur­
rently recorded data. This entails reducing the size of the existing AIHub dataset, which
contains 5.4 million images primarily composed of repetitive or near­identical data, and
augmenting it with manually annotated data of distant vessels and industrial areas featur­
ing objects like fences and cranes. By streamlining the AIHub dataset and supplementing
it with more representative data, an improvement in model performance is anticipated.
Issues encountered in aligning AIS projections with object detection bounding boxes
were showcased, particularly when ships obstruct each other’s visibility during navigation.
Object tracking and feature extraction methods such as ORB, SIFT, or SURF could be
implemented to address this. Although this would increase post­processing time, the
trade­off is considered worthwhile, given the offline nature of this process.
The success of the object detection phase is crucial in the post­processing pipeline,
influencing the extent of manual correction required in the automated dataset genera­
tion. Enhancing accuracy involves several strategies, including the elimination of false
positives. One approach could involve training a secondary model to validate detections.
Fusing AIS data with the detection model may also provide precise positional information
56
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:65==
of ships in the image frame, aiding identification. If unsuccessful, AIS data could be used
post­processing to validate detected models. Knowledge of a ship’s projected position,
distance, and dimensions from AIS data could help estimate its size and area in the
image frame, thereby assisting in removing false positives or identifying false negatives
by analyzing cropped images around the estimated projection.
As a significant step in evaluating our process, creating metrics to measure the effec­
tiveness of our data acquisition and post­processing methods is necessary. Since the
project is still in its early stages, modifications and experiments with new solutions are
being undertaken to enhance the system.
Adopting new techniques and assessing
results should be based on objective criteria.
Through applying these techniques, a significant enhancement in the detection and align­
ment of ship projections is expected, thereby facilitating the creation of a data­rich, high­
fidelity ship dataset, complete with corresponding distance measurements.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
57
==PAGE:66==
7
Conclusion
An embedded solution, AISail, coupled with state­of­the­art post­processing techniques,
has been presented, demonstrating promising potential in automating the creation of a
new dataset from scratch. The project involved the design and creation of AISail, which
is equipped with the necessary sensors to determine the relative distance and position of
nearby ships. Utilizing the mathematical principles of the pin­hole camera model and the
sensor data from AISail, it has been shown that the position and distance of a vessel within
an image frame can be accurately calculated. Concurrently, a deep learning model for
object detection has been developed, capable of generating precise bounding boxes for
ships in the images. The integration of these two techniques enables the automated gen­
eration of a dataset comprising vessels and their corresponding distances without human
intervention. The future­generated dataset is expected to enhance the accuracy of future
deep­learning models in ship detection and distance estimation, thereby contributing to
increased coastal safety.
58
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
P. Antão et al. “Quantitative assessment of ship collision risk influencing factors
from worldwide accident and fleet data”. In: Reliability Engineering System Safety
234 (2023), p. 109166. ISSN: 0951­8320. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.
109166. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0951832023000819.
[2]
Amazon. Amaozn Airborne Object Tracking. https://registry.opendata.aws/airborne-
object-tracking. [Online; accessed 2­August­2023]. 2023.
[3]
Sourish Ghosh et al. AirTrack: Onboard Deep Learning Framework for Long­Range
Aircraft Detection and Tracking. 2023. arXiv: 2209.12849 [cs.CV].
[4]
Jingdong Wang et al. “Deep High­Resolution Representation Learning for Visual
Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1908.07919 (2019). arXiv: 1908.07919. URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1908.07919.
[5]
Jaime Spencer et al. The Monocular Depth Estimation Challenge. 2022. arXiv: 2211.
12174 [cs.CV].
[6]
Swaraja, K. et al. “CNN Based Monocular Depth Estimation”. In: E3S Web Conf.
309 (2021), p. 01070. DOI: 10.1051/e3sconf/202130901070. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1051/e3sconf/202130901070.
[7]
David Silva, Nicolas Jourdan, and Nils Gählert. Long Range Object­Level Monocu­
lar Depth Estimation for UAVs. 2023. arXiv: 2302.08943 [cs.CV].
[8]
Fahimeh Farahnakian and Jukka Heikkonen. “Deep Learning Based Multi­Modal
Fusion Architectures for Maritime Vessel Detection”. In: Remote Sensing 12.16
(2020). ISSN: 2072­4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12162509. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
2072-4292/12/16/2509.
[9]
Dilip K. Prasad et al. “Maritime situational awareness using adaptive multi­sensor
management under hazy conditions”. In: CoRR abs/1702.00754 (2017). arXiv: 1702.
00754. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.00754.
[10]
Jordan Peckham, Siu O’Young, and John Jacobs. “Comparison of medium and long
wave infrared imaging for ocean based sensing”. In: Journal of Ocean Technology
10 (Sept. 2015), p. 112.
[11]
Ruolan Zhang et al. “Survey on Deep Learning­Based Marine Object Detection”.
In: Journal of Advanced Transportation 2021 (Nov. 2021), pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1155/
2021/5808206.
[12]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real­Time Object Detection”.
In: CoRR abs/1506.02640 (2015). arXiv: 1506.02640. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1506.02640.
[13]
Xu Han et al. “ShipYOLO: An Enhanced Model for Ship Detection”. In: Journal of
Advanced Transportation 2021 (June 2021), pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1155/2021/1060182.
[14]
Zhenfeng Shao et al. “SeaShips: A Large­Scale Precisely Annotated Dataset for
Ship Detection”. In: IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 20.10 (2018), pp. 2593–2604.
DOI: 10.1109/TMM.2018.2865686.
[15]
Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large­scale hierarchical image database”. In: Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2009. 2009.
[16]
M. Everingham et al. “The Pascal Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge”. In: IJCV
88.2 (June 2010), pp. 303–338. ISSN: 0920­5691. DOI: 10.1007/s11263-009-0275-4.
[17]
Tsung­Yi Lin et al. “Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context”. In: CoRR abs/1405.0312
(2014). arXiv: 1405.0312. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
59
==PAGE:68==
[18]
Felipe O. Giuste and Juan Carlos Vizcarra. “CIFAR­10 Image Classification Using
Feature Ensembles”. In: CoRR abs/2002.03846 (2020). arXiv: 2002.03846. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.03846.
[19]
Greg Griffin, A Holub, and Pietro Perona. “Caltech­256 object category dataset”. In:
CalTech (2007).
[20]
Dilip K. Prasad et al. “Video Processing From Electro­Optical Sensors for Object
Detection and Tracking in a Maritime Environment: A Survey”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems 18.8 (2017), pp. 1993–2016. DOI: 10.1109/
TITS.2016.2634580.
[21]
AIHub: Maritime object detection and segmentation dataset, howpublished = https:
//www.aihub.or.kr/aihubdata/data/view.do?currMenu=115&topMenu=100&
aihubDataSe=realm&dataSetSn=175, note = Accessed: 22 of November, 2023.
[22]
Shaoqing Ren et al. Faster R­CNN: Towards Real­Time Object Detection with Re­
gion Proposal Networks. 2016. arXiv: 1506.01497 [cs.CV].
[23]
AIS­catcher open source project, howpublished = https://github.com/jvde-github/
AIS-catcher, note = Accessed: 27 of November, 2023.
[24]
Kai Chen et al. MMDetection: Open MMLab Detection Toolbox and Benchmark.
2019. arXiv: 1906.07155 [cs.CV].
[25]
AIS Ship Types, howpublished = https://api.vtexplorer.com/docs/ref-aistypes.html,
note = Accessed: 22 of November, 2023.
60
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Faster R­CNN 101 configuration file
1
# The new config inherits a base config to highlight the necessary
modification
2
_base_ = '../faster_rcnn/faster -rcnn_r101_fpn_1x_coco.py'
3
4
# We also need to change the num_classes in head to match the dataset's
annotation
5
model = dict(
6
roi_head=dict(
7
type='StandardRoIHead',
8
bbox_roi_extractor=dict(
9
type='SingleRoIExtractor',
10
roi_layer=dict(type='RoIAlign', output_size=7, sampling_ratio=0),
11
out_channels=256,
12
featmap_strides=[4, 8, 16, 32]),
13
bbox_head=dict(
14
type='Shared2FCBBoxHead',
15
in_channels=256,
16
fc_out_channels=1024,
17
# dont confuse this with number of classes.
18
roi_feat_size=7,
19
num_classes=2,
20
bbox_coder=dict(
21
type='DeltaXYWHBBoxCoder',
22
target_means=[0., 0., 0., 0.],
23
target_stds=[0.1, 0.1, 0.2, 0.2]),
24
reg_class_agnostic=False,
25
loss_cls=dict(
26
type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=False, loss_weight=1.0),
27
loss_bbox=dict(type='L1Loss', loss_weight=1.0))),
28
test_cfg=dict(
29
rpn=dict(
30
nms_pre=1000,
31
max_per_img=1000,
32
nms=dict(type='nms', iou_threshold=0.7),
33
min_bbox_size=0),
34
rcnn=dict(
35
score_thr=0.6,
36
nms=dict(type='nms', iou_threshold=0.5),
37
max_per_img=100)
38
# soft-nms is also supported for rcnn testing
39
# e.g., nms=dict(type='soft_nms', iou_threshold=0.5, min_score=0.05)
40
)
41
)
42
43
# Modify dataset related settings
44
data_root = '/mnt/hdd_5A/ships_detection/combined/'
45
metainfo = {
46
'classes': ('NoShip', 'Ship',)
47
}
48
49
train_dataloader = dict(
50
batch_size=8,
51
num_workers=18,
52
dataset=dict(
53
data_root=data_root ,
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
61
==PAGE:70==
54
metainfo=metainfo ,
55
ann_file='train/_annotations.train.coco.json',
56
data_prefix=dict(img='train/')))
57
58
val_dataloader = dict(
59
dataset=dict(
60
data_root=data_root ,
61
metainfo=metainfo ,
62
ann_file='valid/_annotations.valid.coco.json',
63
data_prefix=dict(img='valid/')))
64
65
test_dataloader = dict(
66
dataset=dict(
67
data_root=data_root ,
68
metainfo=metainfo ,
69
ann_file='valid/_annotations.test.coco.json',
70
data_prefix=dict(img='test/')))
71
72
# Modify metric related settings
73
val_evaluator = dict(ann_file=data_root + 'valid/_annotations.valid.coco.json'
)
74
test_evaluator = dict(ann_file=data_root + 'valid/_annotations.test.coco.json'
)
75
76
# We can use the pre-trained Mask RCNN model to obtain higher performance
77
load_from = 'https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/faster_rcnn/
faster_rcnn_r101_fpn_mstrain_3x_coco/
faster_rcnn_r101_fpn_mstrain_3x_coco_20210524_110822 -4d4d2ca8.pth'
78
79
log_level = 'INFO'
80
81
evaluation = dict(interval=1)
# This evaluate the model per 12 epoch.
82
83
log_config = dict(
84
interval=1,
85
hooks=[
86
dict(type='TextLoggerHook'),
87
dict(type='TensorboardLoggerHook'),
88
dict(type='LocalVisBackend'),
89
dict(type='TensorboardVisBackend'),
90
# TODO search local backend visualization LocalVisBackend check line
96
91
])
92
93
_base_.visualizer.vis_backends = [
94
dict(type='LocalVisBackend'),
95
dict(type='TensorboardVisBackend'),
96
]
97
98
auto_scale_lr = dict(enable=True, base_batch_size=60)
99
100
train_cfg = dict(
101
type='EpochBasedTrainLoop',
# The training loop type. Refer to https://
github.com/open-mmlab/mmengine/blob/main/mmengine/runner/loops.py
102
max_epochs=50,
# Maximum training epochs
103
val_interval=1)
Listing A.1:
MMDetection configuration file to train Faster R­CNN with resnet 101
backbone
A.2
HRNet with RCNN backbone
62
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:71==
1
# The new config inherits a base config to highlight the necessary
modification
2
_base_ = '../hrnet/faster -rcnn_hrnetv2p -w32_2x_coco.py'
3
4
# We also need to change the num_classes in head to match the dataset's
annotation
5
n_classes = 2
6
model = dict(
7
roi_head=dict(
8
bbox_head =
9
dict(
10
type='Shared2FCBBoxHead',
11
num_classes=n_classes),
12
)
13
)
14
# Modify dataset related settings
15
data_root = '/mnt/hdd_5A/ships_detection/combined/'
16
metainfo = {
17
'classes': ('NoShip', 'Ship',)
18
}
19
20
train_dataloader = dict(
21
batch_size=4,
22
num_workers=18,
23
dataset=dict(
24
data_root=data_root ,
25
metainfo=metainfo ,
26
ann_file='train/_annotations.train.coco.json',
27
data_prefix=dict(img='train/')))
28
29
val_dataloader = dict(
30
dataset=dict(
31
data_root=data_root ,
32
metainfo=metainfo ,
33
ann_file='valid/_annotations.valid.coco.json',
34
data_prefix=dict(img='valid/')))
35
36
test_dataloader = dict(
37
dataset=dict(
38
data_root=data_root ,
39
metainfo=metainfo ,
40
ann_file='valid/_annotations.test.coco.json',
41
data_prefix=dict(img='test/')))
42
43
# Modify metric related settings
44
val_evaluator = dict(ann_file=data_root + 'valid/_annotations.valid.coco.json'
)
45
test_evaluator = dict(ann_file=data_root + 'valid/_annotations.test.coco.json'
)
46
47
# We can use the pre-trained Mask RCNN model to obtain higher performance
48
load_from = 'https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/hrnet/
cascade_rcnn_hrnetv2p_w32_20e_coco/
cascade_rcnn_hrnetv2p_w32_20e_coco_20200208 -928455a4.pth'
49
50
log_level = 'INFO'
51
52
evaluation = dict(interval=1)
# This evaluate the model per 12 epoch.
53
54
log_config = dict(
55
interval=1,
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
63
==PAGE:72==
56
hooks=[
57
dict(type='TextLoggerHook'),
58
dict(type='TensorboardLoggerHook'),
59
dict(type='LocalVisBackend'),
60
dict(type='TensorboardVisBackend'),
61
# TODO search local backend visualization LocalVisBackend check line
96
62
])
63
64
_base_.visualizer.vis_backends = [
65
dict(type='LocalVisBackend'),
66
dict(type='TensorboardVisBackend'),
67
]
68
69
auto_scale_lr = dict(enable=True, base_batch_size=20)
70
71
train_cfg = dict(
72
type='EpochBasedTrainLoop',
# The training loop type. Refer to https://
github.com/open-mmlab/mmengine/blob/main/mmengine/runner/loops.py
73
max_epochs=50,
# Maximum training epochs
74
val_interval=1)
Listing A.2: MMDetection configuration file to train HRNet with Faster R­CNN backbone
A.3
Dataset structure
In the previous chapter, an exploration of ongoing research into ship datasets, ship de­
tection, and distance estimation was conducted. This thesis aims to develop a pipeline
capable of automating the creation of a new dataset, which will be employed by deep
learning models for ship identification and distance estimation from the camera.
Before detailing the methodology, the structure of the automated dataset will be estab­
lished, and the necessary data will be specified. For consistency and compatibility with
future deep learning models, the dataset will be organized in the COCO format.
In the COCO dataset format, annotations are encapsulated within a JSON file. This file
allocates a unique identifier to each image, detailing the filename, object detection cate­
gories, and annotations about the detected ships.
1
{
2
"info": {
3
"year": "2023",
4
"version": "1.0",
5
"description": "Sailing through data",
6
"contributor": "Patrick Vibild",
7
"date_created": "2023-12-02T09:48:27"
8
},
9
"licenses": [
10
{
11
"url": "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/",
12
"id": 1,
13
"name": "Attribution -NonCommercial -ShareAlike License"
14
},
15
...
16
],
17
"categories": [
18
...
19
],
20
"images": [
21
...
22
],
64
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:73==
23
"annotations": [
24
...
25
]
26
}
Listing A.3: General structure of COCO format dataset
Once the general structure has been defined, a description of the categories for object
detection, the images associated with these annotations, and the annotations of the de­
tected ships within the listed images will be provided.
The ship categories outlined in the AIS signal [25] are followed for categorizing. An ex­
ample of this categorization code is provided below.
1
"categories": [
2
{"supercategory": "ship","id": 30,"name": "fishing"},
3
{"supercategory": "ship","id": 31,"name": "towing"},
4
{"supercategory": "ship","id": 32,"name": "large towing"},
5
{"supercategory": "ship","id": 33,"name": "dredging or underwater ops"},
6
{"supercategory": "ship","id": 34,"name": "diving ops"},
7
...
8
{"supercategory": "ship","id": 80,"name": "Tanker"},
9
{"supercategory": "ship","id": 81,"name": "Tanker , Hazardous category A"}
10
]
The compilation of images, detailed in Table ??, enumerates all the photographs to be
analyzed by the deep learning model, delineating their pixel dimensions, filenames, and
data capture details in line with the COCO format. We have also incorporated information
on the camera’s orientation and position. Including such data on orientation may prove
valuable for future applications, such as eliminating the camera’s movement from the
analysis.
Identifier
Explanation
Type
Neccesary
license
License id of the image
int
Y
file_name
name of the image
string
Y
height
height of the image in pixels
int
Y
width
width of the image in pixels
int
Y
data_captured
date the frame was capture in
ISO 8601 format
string
Y
id
unique id of the frame
int
Y
orientation
Orientation of the camera in Euler angles
[float, float, float]
Y
position
Position of the camera in Latitude,
Longitude and Altitude
[float, float, float]
Y
Table A.1: Data structure of the images added into our COCO annotation.
The final section of the JSON file consists of the annotations (Table A.2). This section is
a collection of annotations linked to its corresponding image. For every annotation, we
specify the category of the ship, the dimensions of the bounding box (bbox), the relative
distance from the camera to the ship, and the ship’s MMSI. The MMSI, which stands for
Maritime Mobile Service Identity, is a unique identifier provided by the AIS system and can
be utilized to retrieve data about the vessel, including dimensions or year of construction,
from public databases.
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
65
==PAGE:74==
Identifier
Explanation
Type
Neccesary
id
annotation id
int
Y
image_id
id of the annotated image
int
Y
category_id
category of the detected object
int
Y
bbox
tuple of upper­left pixel and
width and height of the bbox
[int, int, int, int]
Y
area
area of the bbox
int
Y
distance
distance in meters to the object
int
N
mmsi
unique AIS identifier
int
N
Table A.2: Data structure of the annotations added into our COCO annotation.
Considering the requirements for the dataset, the methodology section will concentrate
on the automated process for compiling this dataset.
66
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
==PAGE:75==
Development of a Data Acquisition Pipeline for Distance Estimation of Ships in Monocular Systems
67
==PAGE:76==
Korean Advance Institute of Technology
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Phone. 042­350­7810
www.compute.dtu.dk
