==PAGE:1==
Providing reliable quality-of-service through
network resource allocation for the monitor-
ing of mobile business processes
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the
monitoring of mobile business processes
Master Thesis
November, 2023
By
Björn Wilting
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ii
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Business Process Monitoring enables companies to monitor their operational workflow.
For mobile business processes (MBP), monitoring is particularly challenging, because
the work is being performed at changing locations or while moving between locations.
By equipping business artifacts with IoT-based sensors and using the mobile network to
transmit the data has enabled the autonomous monitoring of MBPs. However, this makes
the quality of the monitoring dependent on the quality-of-service (QoS) provided by the
mobile network. In this thesis it has been investigated, how QoS can be optimized for
the MBP monitoring use case. Reservation-based scheduling has been identified as a
promising approach to ensure the availability of network resources for the scheduled ex-
ecution of process activities. However, due to the mobile network lacking key capabilities
to support it, a custom simulator was developed to assess is effectiveness. The results
show that the approach is capable to satisfy QoS in the experiment scenario.
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
iii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors Prof. In-Young Ko at KAIST
and Prof. Giovanni Meroni at DTU for their guidance and support during this thesis project.
Their advice and experience has been instrumental help towards reaching my goals.
I am also deeply grateful for the support and encouragement offered by my family through-
out my studies and especially during my stay at KAIST, during which I also conducted this
thesis.
iv
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:8==
Declaration of Work
This master’s thesis was conducted as part of the Computer Science Dual Degree pro-
gram between DTU (Technical University of Denmark) and KAIST (Korea Advanced In-
stitute of Science and Technology). This program, is a joint program between the two
universities enabling the achievement of the Computer Science Master degrees of both
KAIST and DTU through one singular study program.
The thesis project has been recognized and assessed by both DTU and KAIST, and pro-
fessors from both universities have also been involved in the supervision of the project.
The conducting of this thesis has also necessitated the creation and submission of sep-
arate thesis reports, that cover the similar contents, provided to KAIST and DTU respec-
tively, because each university individually assesses, whether the student has fulfilled the
requirements for their degree.
However, due to the special circumstance of this dual-degree program, the originality of
this work has been preserved, even though separate thesis report have been submitted
to the respective universities.
The DTU report has been released under the english title ”Providing reliable quality-of-
service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile business pro-
cesses” (Danish title: ”Levering af driftsikker servicekvalitet gennem allokering af netværk-
sressourcer til monitorering af mobile business processer”).
The KAIST report has been released under the english title ”Reliable quality-of-service
through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile business processes”
(Korean title: 모바일비즈니스프로세스를모니터링하기위한네트워크자원할당을통한
신뢰할수있는서비스품질관리방법).
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
v
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Business Process Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Mobile Business Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Mobile Business Process Monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
5G Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.5
Network Slicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Related Work
6
3.1
Monitoring of Mobile Business Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Improving QoS Through Network Slicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Research Goals
8
5
Enabling QoS Provision for MBP Monitoring
9
5.1
Slice Resource Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.2
Enabling Reservation-based Scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3
Considering User Mobility During Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6
Optimizing QoS Provision
12
6.1
Simulator Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
7
Simulation Design
14
7.1
Simulation Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.2
Model Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.3
Map Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.4
Network Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7.5
Business Environment Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
Results
19
8.1
Setting a Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
8.2
Delay-Tolerant Scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
8.3
The Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
8.4
Further Experimentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
9
Conclusion
24
10 Future Works
25
Bibliography
26
vi
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Business process (BP) monitoring is an approach to improve the reliability of a business
process. By monitoring how a business processes executes, faults and incidents can
be detected, which might prevent a successful completion of the process. The detection
of these events enables businesses to take correcting actions and bring the business
process execution back on track. Business process monitoring is also one of the enabling
factors for the automation of business processes, as the collected information is used to
asses the state of execution and to determine which business activities will be executed
next [1].
Mobile business processes (MBPs) are business processes, where the location of exe-
cution may differ between different executions of the same process or even during the
execution of a process [2]. The fact that locations are dynamic makes MBP monitoring
much more challenging, since monitoring systems must possess sufficient flexibility to
support monitoring in different or even continuously changing locations.
Artifact-driven process monitoring (ADPM) is one approach solving the challenge of vary-
ing locations in MBP. The idea behind this approach is to monitor the execution of BP
activities by monitoring the business artifacts involved in their execution [3]. For example
by utilizing Internet-of-things (IoT)-based sensors, it is possible to turn a physical business
artifact into a smart object capable of monitoring itself, and reporting its state to monitoring
application. Since the sensor is attached to the object being monitored, the object can be
monitored in different locations or even while moving.
However, this approach also introduces a dependency on the mobile network, since the
monitoring data has to be transferred to the monitoring application running in the cloud,
for example. Since objects change locations or move, it is also not feasible to setup a
wired network connection, making it necessary to rely on wireless communication. As a
consequence, network connections that are unable to provide sufficient quality-of-service
(QoS) can impact the monitoring quality.
With the introduction of the 5G network architecture and network slicing, a concept en-
abling a the virtual partitioning of network resources, the mobile network gained new ca-
pabilities to improve its ability to satisfy QoS requirements. An approach utilizing network
slicing and reservation-based scheduling of network resources was proposed to improve
QoS for APDM-based MBP monitoring [4]. However, the approach could not be validated,
since some network capabilities were required, that were not supported by existing net-
work specifications.
1.1
Scope
The goal of this project is to investigate how network QoS can optimized for the monitoring
of mobile business processes. Through simulation it will also be attempted to assess
effectiveness of the identified optimizations.
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
1
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
In section 1 the project topic and the project goals has been introduced. This section
will explain key concepts related to this project and highlight challenges that need to be
considered.
2.1
Business Process Models
Business processes form the workflows that an organization is running. They consists
of various business activities, tasks that need to be executed, and may require making
business decisions based on the outcome of previous activities. The processes can be
described using business process models, using e.g. a modeling language like Business
Process Modeling and Notation” (BPMN). A business process model, expressed using
BPMN, consists of several business activities, events and sequence flows, and may con-
tain gateways to model more complex flows between activities [5].
Receive
Order
Drive to Company
Truck Arrived
at Company
Loading
Complete
Drive to Customer
Truck Arrived
at Customer
Customer Received
Goods
Delivery
Completed
Deliverer
Order Goods
Truck Arrived
at Customer
Deliver Goods
Customer Received
Goods
Order Received
Customer
Receive
Order
Prepare Goods for
Transportation
Order Delivery Truck
Truck Arrived
at Company
Load Goods onto
Truck
Loading
Complete
Delivery
Completed
Order
Completed
Company
Figure 2.1: Example of a product delivery process
2.2
Mobile Business Processes
The example business process given in Figure 2.1 shows a special type of business pro-
cess known as a mobile business process (MBP), because it involves a degree of flexibility
regarding its location of execution [2]. In the case of the product delivery process, given
in the example, this is due to multiple reasons. Firstly, the process involves tasks such
as Drive to Company or Drive to Customer, where the delivery truck, used to execute the
task, is changing location as part of the task execution. Secondly, different orders typi-
cally need to be delivered to different customers that have different addresses. Finally, a
company could also utilize different delivery companies to deliver their goods, depending
on which delivery company is being used, the dispatch location of the delivery truck might
therefore also change.
2
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:12==
In mobile business processes, the location of execution may be defined differently for
different business activities, which has led to proposal of the following classification for
location-dependent business activities [4]:
Area-based Activities
are business activities, whose execution is constrained to a
predefined static area, such as a company compound. The
execution of the activity will being in the defined area and
stay within that area during the entirety of its execution.
Path-based Activities
are a class of activities, where movement from a starting
location A to destination B occurs during their execution.
The path being followed to reach the destination is flexible
and may even be adjusted as needed.
Trajectory-based Activities can be considered a subclass of Path-based activities that
have to strictly have to follow a set static path, when moving
from starting location A to destination B.
2.3
Mobile Business Process Monitoring
When executing business processes, they are being monitored by a business process
management system (BPMS) to verify the correctness of execution. Generally, business
process monitoring techniques can be divided into two categories [5]:
• Offline Process Monitoring focuses on analysing historical process executions,
that have been recorded an stored in e.g. event logs. The analysis of this historical
data can provide insight into the performance of the process, its conformance to
certain rules and regulations that may apply and possibly reveal why a process is
performing poorly.
• Online Process Monitoring is a technique used to monitor active process execu-
tions, providing real-time information about its current state and performance based
on data generated by the executing processes. In this scenario, the BPMS can be
used to raise alerts, in case the process in performed as intended or even trigger
corrective actions.
In the context of mobile business processes, the ability of the BPMS to monitor the process
is restricted, since some activities may need to be performed by a human operator, such
as driving a delivery truck. Without additional measures enabling the BPMS to monitor the
delivery truck, during operation, no information about the current task execution would be
available. To address this issue artifact-driven process monitoring (ADPM) [3] has been
introduced, an approach enabling the monitoring of business artifacts, such as a delivery
truck or company goods, by equipping smart-devices, e.g. sensors or cameras. By utiliz-
ing the wireless mobile network to transmit the monitoring data this approach can also be
used to monitor MBPs. [4]. A consequence of this is that the quality of the MBP monitor-
ing can be impacted by the quality-of-service (QoS) provided by the mobile network. This
applies to online process monitoring in particular, where timely and accurate monitoring
information is required to enable corrective actions in case of process violations.
2.4
5G Network
The introduction of the 5G network, also known as the fifth-generation mobile network,
comes in response to trends and developments in the usage of mobile networks. Some
of these trends include the rapid rise of mobile data traffic due to e.g. video streaming,
the rising number of networked devices each user possesses and the network provider’s
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
3
==PAGE:13==
need to reduced operational expenses. The 5G network also aims to support new use
cases, such as supporting industry applications, the Internet-of-Things and the opening
of new revenue streams for network operators [6] [7] [8].
In order to support these new demands the 5G network is focusing on three main usage
scenarios, Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Ultra Reliable and Low Latency Com-
munication (URLLC), Massive Machine Type Communications (mMTC) [8] [6]:
eMBB
mainly targets human-centric use cases that involve high performance and seam-
less connectivity. It is also intended to cover usage scenarios that require wide-
area coverage or need to support high levels of mobility.
URLLC focuses on applications with stringent network service requirements, such as
safety-critical applications.
mMTC
targets use cases with massive amounts of connected devices, typically trans-
mitting with low power, transmitting low volumes of data.
2.4.1
Physical Network Infrastructure
The introduction of the 5G network architecture also bring changes to the wireless radio
network, also known as the radio access network (RAN). In the radio network, different
classes of base stations (cells) are utilized to provide network connection for different
coverage areas and over different frequency ranges [9] [10] [11].
Macrocells provide wide are coverage and supporting a few thousand users.
Microcells are a type of medium range base station providing coverage in a radius of
up to 2 km and support 100-2000 users.
Picocells
provide local area coverage in a radius of below 1 km and support up to 100
users.
Femtocells are the smallest type of base station, mainly intended for indoor usage. They
support up to 30 users in a range of up to 100 m.
Microcells, Picocells and Femtocells are considered small cells [12] that function as sup-
porting cells for the services provided by the macrocell, as well as its coverage. Small
cells also provide high network capacity within their coverage area. However, they are
expensive to deploy at mass scale [13]. While an increase in network capacity could also
be achieved through technological improvements, efficient utilization of existing capacity
to reduce infrastructure costs.
2.5
Network Slicing
To support these use cases, the 5G mobile network uses a service-based architecture
that provides networks as a service. This is enabled by introducing concepts such as
network function virtualisation (NFV) and software defined networking (SDN) enabling
the deployment and operation of virtual networks on generic hardware, This contrasts to
previous mobile network generations, that relied on specialized hardware [14] [15].
These virtual networks, also known as network slices, are being run on a shared phys-
ical infrastructure [16] and provide a virtually isolated network with its own set virtual
resources. A network slice is typically owned and operated by a network operator, who
provides set of virtual networking functions (VNFs) through the network slice. To manage
the network slices (NS), the VNFs and the network slice resources the NFV Management
and Orchestration (NFV MANO) framework is introduced in the 5G architecture [17] and
provides three types of network managers:
4
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:14==
• The Vitualized Infrastructure Manager’s responsibility is to manage the physical
and virtual resources belonging to a single slice.
• The VNF Manager is responsible for managing the lifecycle of VNFs. A single VNF
Manager can be responsible for one or multiple VNFs.
• The NFV Orchestrator (NFVO) is responsible for the orchestration of resource be-
tween the different VIMs, and the lifecycle management of network services, e.g
which network slices are being provided.
When considering the relations between the different managers in the NFV MANO, it also
becomes apparent that network resource allocation is managed on two levels. The NFV
Orchestrator manages the resource distribution between slices, the inter-slice allocation,
whereas the different VIMs manage the internal resource allocation of the network slice,
e.g the resource allocated to different user sessions [18].
allocated to
NFVI Resources
manages
NFV Orchestrator
Network Slice #1
VIM #1
Internal NFVI
Resources
manages
Network Slice #2
VIM #2
Internal NFVI
Resources
manages
Network Slice #3
VIM #3
Internal NFVI
Resources
manages
allocated to
allocated to
provides
Network
Connection
provides
provides
Network
Connection
provides
provides
Network
Connection
provides
provides
provides
provides
Figure 2.2: Two-Tier Resource Management Relation between NFVO and VIMs
Beyond enabling network operators to collectively operate on a shared physical infrastruc-
ture, network slicing can also be performed by network operators to create new network
slices that are being provided as custom networks to customers. This concept is also
known as Network Slicing as a Service (NSaaS) [19].
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
5
==PAGE:15==
3
Related Work
In this section previous research relevant to this project is going to be discussed. The
relevant works will be grouped by their primary topic of contribution.
3.1
Monitoring of Mobile Business Processes
In [3] Meroni et al. presented a service to autonomously monitor the physical business ar-
tifacts involved in the execution of a business process capable of continuing the monitoring
of the process after the intended process flow has been violated. The proposed solution
utilizes the Extended Guard-Stage Milestone language (E-GSM), an artifact-centric lan-
guage to represent the process, its tasks and the conditions that must be met to ensure a
proper task execution. If a condition is violated during process execution the task marked
as violated, however the service maintains the ability to track the process flow. To fully
automate the monitoring, they assume that the business artifacts have been equipped
with smart-devices, such a sensors, capable of providing data to infer the processes ex-
ecution state. Furthermore, they also show how a standard BPMN model can be used to
generate the E-GSM model required by the service.
The idea of autonomously monitoring the execution of business processes through sensor-
equipped business artifacts, is also addressed in a later work involving Meroni [4], where
the use of network slices, a networking concept introduced in the 5G network architecture,
is proposed to ensure reliable monitoring quality for the monitoring of MBPs. While the re-
searchers are able to show, how QoS requirements for network slices can be derived from
BPMN models that have been enhanced with time, locations, network quality-of-service
based requirements. They are unable to validate the proposed approach, as the net-
work slicing standard does not accept time-based or location-based requirements. While
conceptually network slices are capable of satisfying QoS, since they provide a virtually
isolated set of network resources and can manage the resource allocation between the
users connected to the network slice. However, QoS can still be impacted by resource
competition between different network slices as they all operate on a shared physical in-
frastructure. This means, they could still be affected by localized overloads of the existing
physical infrastructure, due to spikes in network activity.
3.2
Improving QoS Through Network Slicing
Using the concept of network slicing to improve QoS has already been performed in other
fields of research. In [20] a framework to support the dynamic management of many het-
erogeneous network slices for IoT is being presented, focusing on the massive Machine
Type Communication use case. The authors show that their framework even satisfy QoS
requirements in high stress scenarios for applications such as smart factories, smart farm-
ing and smart cities. However, even though mobility support is mentioned test scenarios
involving a high-degree of mobility have not been covered, due to focusing on IoT ap-
plications for mMTC. This raises the question, whether the proposed framework can be
used for MBP monitoring scenarios that involve a high degree of mobility, such as logistics
processes.
Marinova et al.
present a proof-of-concept network slicing framework providing end-
to-end capable of dynamically reallocating network resources, dynamically creating and
configuring network slices and wireless system reconfiguration to swiftly adapt the slices
service provision to changing demands. While the researchers show that the proposed
6
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:16==
framework is capable of maintaining QoS for services, when the network demand changes.
It is still unclear how the framework performs during congestion scenarios, where the de-
mand is particularly high [21].
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
7
==PAGE:17==
4
Research Goals
The goal of this project is to investigate how network QoS can optimized for the monitor-
ing of mobile business processes. Therefore the following main research question and
subgoals have been formulated:
1. How can network service provision be optimized to provide QoS more reliably?
(a) What are the technological limitations that impact the mobile networks ability
to provide QoS?
(b) What are possible optimization options to overcome current technological lim-
itations?
(c) How do the optimization options affect network service provision?
8
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:18==
5
Enabling QoS Provision for MBP
Monitoring
In order to answer how QoS can be satisfied for MBP monitoring it is important to con-
sider how the technologies utilized to support MBP monitoring and the properties of MBPs
impact QoS provision.
5.1
Slice Resource Allocation
In section 2.5 the concept of network slicing was introduced. An approach enabling the
creation of virtual isolated networks that run on a shared physical infrastructure. Network
operators can provide these slices to companies as a service, providing them with a pri-
vate network with its own set of resources. In previous work it has already been suggested
to support mobile business process monitoring by providing a custom network slice to the
company running the process [4]. Since the company can control who uses this private
network slice, it should therefore be possible to guarantee the satisfaction of QoS require-
ments. However, that might not always be the case. Firstly, it has to be considered that
the resource capacity of the physical network is finite and strictly dependent on the den-
sity of radio cells in the area. Secondly, if many different network slices are active in an
area, a large amount of the physical network resource may already have been allocated
to other network slices, creating resource conflicts between the different slices.
5.1.1
Reservation-based Resource Scheduling
To ensure that the necessary resources required by MBP monitoring actually are avail-
able, it has therefore been suggested in [4] to reserve the required network resources in
advance such that they are available when needed. However, it was also pointed out, that
the NFV MANO [17] does not consider time-based or location-based constraints, which
would both need to be specified in order to guarantee their availability.
5.1.2
Mobility
Assuming the mobile network was capable of considering such time- and location-based
requirements, the location requirements need to specify more than just a specific location.
As previously presented in section 2.2, a classification of mobile business activities based
on their mobility constraints has been proposed by [4].
Area-based activities define a specific area in which the activity will be performed, which
will not be left during its execution. For such business activities scheduling could still be
performed quite easily, since only the resource availability of cells covering that area would
need to be considered.
However, when considering activities such as Trajectory-based or Path-based activi-
ties, where the mobile unit executing the activity, moves between two locations, either
on a specified path (trajectory-based) or any path (path-based) connecting these two lo-
cations, resources would need to be reserved in a chain of cells providing service along
the entire route. Reserving resources at such a level of detail, also poses the problem of
having the check a huge amount of cells for their availability in order to reserve resources
along the entire path. To circumvent this problem, a more feasible scheduling approach
might therefore consider the general resource availability for localized areas, when mak-
ing scheduling resource reservations but leave it up to the NFV Orchestrator to allocate
the network resources as needed, once the slice becomes active.
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
9
==PAGE:19==
This would in turn require, that a general definition for those areas is shared between the
NFV MANO and the network customers.
5.2
Enabling Reservation-based Scheduling
Through the discussion of the network technologies and the MBP properties, the follow-
ing required capabilities have been defined to enable the reservation-based scheduling
approach:
• The capability to accept location- and time-based network service requirements from
network customers, such as companies.
• The capability to evaluate, if sufficient network resources are available to fulfill the
resource reservation requests of users, considering both time and locality require-
ments.
• The capability to manage scheduling and allocation of network slices based on
reservation requests.
• The capability to consider spatial and temporal relations between neighbouring ser-
vice areas, when scheduling network resources for mobile units.
5.3
Considering User Mobility During Scheduling
Scheduling network slices in the context of MBP monitoring already goes beyond ”classi-
cal” scheduling, as both time and location requirements need to be considered, instead of
just the time. However, these two-dimensional requirements make it possible to consider
a more advanced strategy in order to maximize the amount of successfully scheduled
service requests. For example, when considering the types of mobile business activities,
a scheduling failure of network resources for the monitoring of path-based activities could
potentially be avoided by falling back to a path negotiation to route the mobile unit, exe-
cuting said activity, along a different path. However, this type of fallback would only work
for path-based activities, due to its loosely defined mobility constraints.
Also, when considering the desired execution period of a MBP, it may sometimes still be
acceptable to delay the execution until the required network resources are available.
This means, that four major scheduling approaches can be considered to improve the
QoS of network services for MBP monitoring:
Strict Scheduling
considers the requested time period and service loca-
tion and attempts to schedule a network slice and the re-
quested network resources in the specified service area.
If the required resources are unavailable at the time of
the request, the scheduling fails.
Mobility-aware Scheduling
attempts to reroute the mobile unit along a different path,
in case of a scheduling failure, given this is permitted by
the unit’s mobility constraints.
Delay-tolerant Scheduling
accepts a delayed execution of a business activity, if it is
impossible to schedule the required network resources
at the required time period.
Hybrid Scheduling
considers both mobility constraints and delay, when schedul-
ing network resources for the execution of an mobile busi-
ness process or activity. However, this would also re-
10
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:20==
quire additional decision-making capability to decide, which
fallback strategy to use, when resources cannot be pro-
vided as requested.
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
11
==PAGE:21==
6
Optimizing QoS Provision
In the previous chapter several factors that can impact QoS for MBP monitoring have
been discussed, as well as the concept of reservation-based scheduling as a potential
approach to optimize QoS. Several variations of this concept were proposed as potential
solutions to optimize QoS. In this chapter it will be discussed how the effect on QoS
provision could be evaluated.
6.0.1
Evaluating the QoS Optimizations
In order to evaluate, how the proposed network resource provision optimizations affect the
quality-of-service provided by the mobile network, an environment reflecting the proposed
changes and the resulting behaviour is required. A suitable environment should therefore
reflect the following aspects:
Mobility:
Moible units participating in the execution of a MBP may be vehi-
cles, such as a cargo truck and may move at relatively high speeds
allowing the to travel great distances in relatively short time.
Spatial Dimension: An environment, where units can travel great distances in short time,
must be able to reflect the space being traversed. Sufficient network
infrastructure must exist in the geographical space to support MBP
monitoring.
User Distribution:
When considering larger geographical areas, the distribution of other
network users and their dynamics must also be considered. Net-
work demand and capabilities may differ between densely popu-
lated urban areas and sparsely populated rural areas. In fact, differ-
ent performance targets have been defined for eMBB, taking differ-
ent levels of urbanization into consideration [22] (see Table 7.1.1).
User Dynamics:
The activity of other network users may also impact the availability
of network resources at a given time in a localized area,
When considering the aspects listed above, a practical approach utilizing networking hard-
ware to setup the environment no longer seems feasible. On one side, reflecting the en-
vironment at scale might become too resource expensive. On the other side however,
when working with a miniaturized environment it might no longer be possible to reflect
the localized network capabilities, the user distribution and the user dynamics accurately.
Reflecting the mobility of participants, involved in the execution of MBPs, accurately is
also a challenge, when working with minitureized setups. Therefore, a simulation setup
seems more suitable for to evaluate the proposed QoS optimizations.
6.1
Simulator Selection
In order to create a simulation environment that supports the possesses the previously
discussed capabilities, a simulator is needed, that can provide a sufficient level of ab-
straction to the simulated networking hardware. This is necessary, because the simulator
needs to support a macro-scale spatial environment, due to the high mobility levels of
mobile units involved in MBP execution. Also, the planning of a radio network [23], such
that the chosen network node placement satisfies network requirements seems to be a
challenging research problem of its own, likely extending beyond the scope of this project.
12
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:22==
While System-level network simulators, like WiSE [24], the Vienna 5G Simulator [25],
enable simulation of the mobile network at a larger scale, they are focused on simulat-
ing the telecommunication infrastructure and analysing its performance rather than e.g.
considering network slice deployment and QoS requirements posed by users.
Due to these challenges and limitations it was chosen to develop a custom simulator utiliz-
ing a custom environment model to simulate and analyze the MBP monitoring scenario.
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
13
==PAGE:23==
7
Simulation Design
In the previous section the need to develop a custom simulator was explained. In this
section, the approach and the design of the simulation model will be presented.
7.1
Simulation Approach
The goal of creating this simulation provide a virtual means of testing and experimenting
with different network resource allocation strategies, considering the requirements of MBP
monitoring during MBP execution. This means, for example considering the locations of
mobile units executing the MBPs, the network service requirements to locally support MBP
monitoring, the local network resource availability and network resource demand of other
network users. Because these examples describe interactions between the MBPs, the
mobile network and the physical environment (the physical world), a modeling approach
is needed that is capable simulating these interactions.
This can be achieved by representing the simulation model a system of systems, where
the MBPs, the mobile network and the physical environment each are modeled as sys-
tem of their own. Then, by defining how these system interaction with each other, it can
be analysed how their behaviour affects the overall system behaviour e.g. its ability to
satisfy QoS for MBP monitoring. As a next step, it could be analyzed, how changing the
behaviour of one system would change the QoS provision, e.g. by changing how the
mobile network allocates network resources.
7.2
Model Overview
As mentioned previously, the overall simulation model represents a system of systems
consisting of three separate submodels, each representing an independently operating
system of their own. A map model is used to represent the physical environment and
its features, a network model describes the mobile network and a business environment
model models companies and their MBPs. By simulating the interactions between these
systems in both the digital and physical environment and analyzing the emergent be-
haviour resulting from these system interactions, it is attempted to assess how different
network resource distribution approaches affect QoS provisioning for MBP monitoring.
In order to make different network resource allocation approaches comparable, a default
behaviour will be defined for both the map model and the business environment model,
which will be used to model the network activity of both companies and the general pop-
ulation situated in the area being modeled. Combined, these models can therefore be
considered the test environment.
The network model will be considered the test system utilizing different network resource
allocation strategies, attempting to optimize QoS for the required network services, by
controlling the distribution of network resources.
7.3
Map Model
To represent geographical environment with a heterogeneous user density distribution,
the geographical space must be subdivided into several locally homogeneous areas.
These areas will from now on be referred to as service areas, and are defined by the
following properties:
14
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:24==
Border:
The border consist of a enclosing set of edges and defines the shape
of the service area. Crossing a border represents a transition from one
service area to a neighbouring service area.
Area size:
Defines the size of the area.
Population:
Defines the amount of network users situated in the area.
Activity Rate: The activity rate describe the percentage of network users actively using
the mobile network in the service area. This value is dynamic and used
to model the natural flux in network activity for non-MBP users.
The area size and population properties can be used to determine the population density,
which in turn enables the association of the service area to one of the network perfor-
mance scenarios specified in [22] (see Table 7.1.1. urban macro, rural macro, dense
urban). The identified network performance profile can then be used to define a local net-
work model representing the local network in a given service area. It should be noted,
that only the performance targets defined for eMBB consider the level of urbanization.
Making it impossible to define a performance profile for service areas, that considers all
three (eMBB, URLLC and mMTC) technologies. Secondly, since MBP monitoring mainly
requires to transmit data from the mobile unit to the monitoring application, the initial sim-
ulation model only simulates network uplink.
Scaled Map
A scale is selected for the map,
defining the area sizes of the
different zones.
E.g. 100 km x 100 km
Area Types
Area types define the type of area
in a particular location.
E.g. green = rural, yellow=urban,
red = dense urban
Companies
- Represent the owners of
business processes. 
- Form the starting point for MBP
execution
- Represent locations where MBP
activities are executed
Customers
Represent entities served by MBP
Represent locations where MBP
activities are executed
Figure 7.1: An overview of the physical environment model
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
15
==PAGE:25==
7.4
Network Model
The network model is represented by several local network models, where each local
network is associated to one service area in the map model. Each local network repre-
sents the segment of the mobile network that provides network service in a given service
area. It provides a mechanism to distribute network resources, based on the chosen net-
work resource allocation strategy, manages network slices active in the service area, and
represents the localized features of the mobile network, such as resource capacity and
network quality.
The segmentation of the overall network into several localized models serves enables the
representation of localized differences, such as network resource capacity and network
slice activity. However, they are all part of the same mobile network.
A downside of considering network slice management on the abstract level of service
areas is that it no longer reflects the real deployment on the physical network infrastruc-
ture. On the upside, it still is capable of providing generalized insights about the service
provision, which, as discussed in section 6.1, otherwise may not have accessible. For
example, it would still be able to assess, whether the required resources are available in
the service area to provide the requested network service. However,
7.4.1
Network Service Provisioning
Network access is provided by deploying network slices in the local network. Each local
network operates one public slice, providing access to the population of a service area
(the non-MBP users). Additionally, several private company-owned network slices can be
deployed to facilitate the monitoring of a MBP execution in the area.
In this model a company only operates one network slice. However, a single network slice
can be deployed in several disjoint service areas at once.
Each network slice is defined by a set of service requirements, specifying the QoS con-
straints of a network service for in a given service area. A service requirement consists
of the following parameters:
Capacity:
Specifies the required amount of network resources (the data rate) required
by the network service.
Latency:
Specifies the maximum latency allowed by the network service.
Reliability: Specifies the minimum level of QoS compliance required during service pro-
vision. This parameter can be considered the budget of tolerated QoS provi-
sion failure (a failure budget), e.g. a reliability requirement of 99% specifies
that the capacity and latency requirements must be satisfied during at least
99% of the service lifetime.
Depending on what level of reliability is required, violating the capacity or latency require-
ments of a service requirement does not immediately lead to a QoS provision failure. If
the accumulated amount of temporary QoS violations remains within the tolerated failure
boundaries, QoS provision will still be considered a success.
Representing Network Resources
Within the scope of this simulation, a local networks resources are defined as its total data
rate capacity. The total data rate capacity (Ctotal) can be derived using the formula
CTotal = AreaServiceArea × AreaTrafficCapacity
(7.1)
16
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:26==
where Area Traffic Capacity represents the data rate density ((bit/s)/km2) and the Area
is the size of service area, where the local network provides service. The Area Traffic Ca-
pacity is one of the network performance parameters defined in the network performance
targets [22] (Table 7.1.1.).
The network resource capacity of a local network is considered to be a single resource
pool, that can provide these resources anywhere within the associated service area. Mod-
eling a the local networks data rate capacity as a single resource pool, avoids the issue
of having to define a concrete network topology for the service area. By assuming that
the local network meets the specified network performance target it is possible to assess,
whether the local network can provide sufficient network resources to deploy, e.g a re-
quested network service in the service area without having to consider aspects, such as
network node selection and network node resource availability, that are network topology
dependent.
Simulating network resource allocation on such an conceptual level also serves the pur-
pose of enabling the behavioral analysis of resource allocation approaches, that are not
yet supported by current 5G capabilities, such as the scheduling approaches proposed in
chapter 6.
7.4.2
Simulating Network Resource Demand
The network resource demand in a service area is simulated by deploying and remov-
ing company operated network slices requesting network resources for the monitoring of
the MBPs. Additionally, a base network resource demand is simulated by dynamically
adjusting the activity rate of the population of a service area. Since [22] only specifies
network performance targets, and not strict performance requirements, the Average user
busy hour usage rate metric from the Uplink performance table [26] (page 19) chosen as
a minimum demand per user. (The NGMN document [26] was also used as a supporting
document by [22] to specify the network performance targets.)
7.4.3
Simulating Network Latency
In addition to simulating network resource demand, latency is also being simulated in order
to enable deviations in network quality, e.g. due to naturally occurring interference. This
mainly serves the purpose of supporting the simulation of imperfect network conditions
and to test the robustness of the approaches against unpreventable QoS violations.
7.5
Business Environment Model
The business environment model consists of multiple companies, that are located in dif-
ferent service areas. Each company is defined by the following properties:
MBP:
Each company owns a mobile business process that they execute and
monitor.
Network Slice: The network slice owned by the company is used provide the required
network service to enable MBP monitoring.
Each company is responsible for the execution of their business process and the schedul-
ing of business activity executions. For the currently supported set of mobile business
process representations, they also define the initial location for process execution.
7.5.1
Mobile Business Process
For the representation of mobile business processes a simplified model was utilized, con-
sisting of a single chain of business activity executions. This choice was made, because
the information needed by the mobile network to provide its network services is defined by
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
17
==PAGE:27==
the individual business activities. In fact, the mobile network only requires the information,
where, when, and how many resources need to be provided and to which network slice,
the structure of the business process itself is not relevant in this regard.
7.5.2
Business Activities
Business activities represent the individual tasks, that are being executed while running
a mobile business process. Activities are defined by an activity type and a set of service
requirements. The activity type (see Chapter 2.1) defines the mobility constraints that
apply during task execution, and the service requirements define the network constraints
the must be satisfied in order to successfully monitor the task execution.
Depending on the activity type the following mobility constraints apply
Area-based activities
constrain mobility to a single service area.
Path-based activities
move between a starting location A and a destination B
along an unspecified path. This means that multiple ser-
vice areas will be traversed and will require network service
in each area.
Trajectory-based activities constrain mobility to a fixed path between the starting loca-
tion A and the destination B. Like the path-based activities
this will traverse multiple service areas and requires net-
work service in each area.
To support the scheduling of network resources for MBP execution, each activity also
defines an expected execution time and the network service requirements (see section
7.4.1) to support MBP monitoring. For scheduling-based resource allocation approaches,
the expected execution time is used to determine the time period for allocating the network
resources.
18
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:28==
8
Results
In this chapter the experiments conducted to evaluate the proposed approaches will be
discussed.
The source code for the simulator is accessible on Github (https://github.com/Unfunc-
tioned/QOSsimulation).
8.1
Setting a Baseline
In section 6 several resource allocation approaches have been proposed to optimize QoS
for MBP monitoring. However, assessing the effectiveness of the proposed approaches,
required developing a new simulator to act as a test environment. Because of this, no
baseline exists to put the proposed approaches into perspective.
In order to provide a good reference point for comparison, the network resource alloca-
tion approach should show, how QoS provision would perform without considering the
properties of MBP. Therefore, it was decided to use a simple first come - first served ap-
proach, that prioritizes network slices based on their activation time. While this approach
still will considers user location, and only provides the network slice in the required ser-
vice area(s), when providing network resources, it only provides them when needed and
thus does not reserve resources as in the scheduling approaches. Additionally, it should
also only consider static slice requirements, meaning that QoS requirements for a network
slice cannot change during its lifetime.
8.2
Delay-Tolerant Scheduling
As a comparison approach the delay-tolerant scheduling approach, introduced in section
5.3 was tested, as all business activity types could potentially benefit from a rescheduling,
in case the requested time slot was unavailable.
8.3
The Experiment
As an initial experiment single network operator environment was considered, where the
network operator is responsible for both the provision of network slices to the companies
execution their MBPs, as well as serving the its regular network users through a public
network slice. A standard QoS requirement was set for all MBPs shown in the table 8.1,
as well as a dynamic QoS requirements for the public slice shown in table 8.2. The service
requirements for the public slice were defined in order to enable resource conflicts to occur
in the various service areas.
Min. Data Rate
10 mbps
Maximum Latency
5 ms
Reliability
99%
Table 8.1: Standard QoS requirements of MBPs
Min. Data Rate
5 mbps
Maximum Latency
N/A
Reliability
N/A
Table 8.2: Standard QoS requirement for the public slice
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
19
==PAGE:29==
Min (s)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Max (s)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
14
16
20
25
30
Table 8.3: Overview of Latency Spike Duration Ranges
As an additional setting the duration range of the randomly occurring spikes in latency
were set as shown in table 8.3. During the simulation latency spikes will occur at random
points in time at random locations and last for a random duration within the configured du-
ration range. Inducing latency spikes serves the purpose of causing QoS violations that
naturally consume the failure budgets of the business activities. Since no mechanisms
to prevent latency violations are included this increases the pressure on the network al-
location approach to avoid capacity based QoS violations, in order to preserve the failure
budget.
Running the experiment 1600 times (10 Worlds, 10 Randomizations, 16 Latency Spike
Ranges) for 5000 MBP Users on a 100x100 km2 map produced the following results:
Figure 8.1: QoS Satisfaction Baseline
20
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:30==
Figure 8.2: QoS Satisfaction Delay-Tolerant Scheduling
The results show the delay-tolerant scheduling approach shows stable performance, across
all latency noise settings. Whereas the baseline clearly degrades with worsening latency
conditions.
Figure 8.3: Simulated Time Range Baseline
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
21
==PAGE:31==
Figure 8.4: Simulation Time Range Delay-Tolerant Scheduling
Comparing the simulated time range indicates that both approaches on average per-
formed similarly, showing that the cost of using delay-tolerant scheduling for this con-
figuration is acceptable.
8.4
Further Experimentation
A similar experiment was conduction considering varying densities of MBP processes ac-
tive in the environment. For this scenario the latency spike delay range was fixed between
(1s,2s).
Due to a slight misconfiguration in the experiment setup the default latency target had
been set to 9.5ms. However, the QoS requirements of the MBPs had been adjusted to
expect worse latency conditions.
Min. Data Rate
10 mbps
Maximum Latency
10 ms
Reliability
99%
Table 8.4: QoS Requirements for MBP
From the results shown in figures 8.5 and 8.6 it is visible that the Delay-Tolerant Schedul-
ing still is able to maintain a high rate of successful QoS provisions. However, the variance
noticeably increases for higher MBP Counts.
8.4.1
Next Steps
To complete the evaluation of the reservation-based scheduling approaches, the same
experiments would need to be conducted for the other scheduling variants.
22
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:32==
Figure 8.5: QoS Satisfaction Baseline
Figure 8.6: QoS Satisfaction Delay-Tolerant Scheduling
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
23
==PAGE:33==
9
Conclusion
In this thesis it was investigated, how QoS provision can be optimized for the monitoring
of mobile business processes. During the investigation, the concept of reservation-based
scheduling was identified as an approach to improve QoS. An approach was proposed,
how reservation-based scheduling could be applied. Additionally, different variations of
the base reservation-based scheduling strategy were proposed, that were considering the
properties of MBPs. To evaluate these approaches a custom simulator was developed
and the simulation results showed that delay-tolerant scheduling provided a stable QoS
results under the simulation conditions.
Regarding the main research question, how network service provision can be optimized
to provide QoS more reliably, it was learned that reservation-based scheduling could be
used as a QoS optimization strategy.
However, due to the mobile networks inability to consider time- and location-based re-
quirements, such an approach is not yet supported. Another factor limiting the ability to
use reservation-based scheduling is the potentially costly planning of path-based reser-
vations.
To address these limitations as set of network capabilities was defined that would need
to be supported in order to enable the use of reservation-based scheduling. Secondly, it
was proposed to consider resource reservation for localized areas instead of individual
cells to overcome the potential cost of having to check the resource availability of each
individual cell. For the localized area this would mean, that the NFV Orchestrator would
need to consider how the reserved resources are allocated, once the reservation becomes
active.
Through experimentation with the custom simulator developed to evaluate the perfor-
mance of reservation-based scheduling, it was shown that it performed consistently pro-
vided QoS at a high rate.
24
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:34==
10
Future Works
While the initial results were promising with respect to the effectiveness of reservation-
based network resource scheduling. Different resource allocation strategies will required
to be analyzed to provide perspective on the obtain results.
Another task is to show that the simulator provide comparable results to other simulators
in order to formally provide proof of its correctness.
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
25
==PAGE:35==
Bibliography
[1]
Amin Jalali and Paul Johannesson. “Multi-perspective business process monitoring”.
In: International Workshop on Business Process Modeling, Development and Sup-
port. Springer. 2013, pp. 199–213.
[2]
Volker Gruhn, André Köhler, and Robert Klawes. “Modeling and analysis of mo-
bile business processes”. In: Journal of Enterprise Information Management 20.6
(2007), pp. 657–676.
[3]
Giovanni Meroni, Claudio Di Ciccio, and Jan Mendling. “An artifact-driven approach
to monitor business processes through real-world objects”. In: Service-Oriented
Computing: 15th International Conference, ICSOC 2017, Malaga, Spain, November
13–16, 2017, Proceedings. Springer. 2017, pp. 297–313.
[4]
Giovanni Meroni et al. “Improving Mobile Business Process Monitoring with En-
hanced NFV MANO”. In: Association for Computing Machinery: Brno, Czech Re-
public (2020).
[5]
Marlon Dumas et al. Fundamentals of business process management. Vol. 2. Springer,
2018.
[6]
Sabine Dahmen-Lhuissier. 5G. 2023. URL: https://www.etsi.org/technologies/5g.
[7]
5G System Overview. Oct. 2022. URL: https://www.3gpp.org/technologies/5g-
system-overview.
[8]
ITU-R. IMT Vision – Framework and overall objectives of the future development
of IMT for 2020 and beyond. Oct. 2015. URL: https://www.itu.int/dms_pubrec/itu-
r/rec/m/R-REC-M.2083-0-201509-I!!PDF-E.pdf.
[9]
ETSI. ETSI TS 125 104 V17.0.0 (2022-04) Universal Mobile Telecommunications
System (UMTS); Base Station (BS) radio transmission and reception (FDD) (3GPP
TS 25.104 version 17.0.0 Release 17). Apr. 2022. URL: https://www.etsi.org/
deliver/etsi_ts/125100_125199/.
[10]
Abdul Ahad et al. “A Comprehensive review on 5G-based Smart Healthcare Net-
work Security: Taxonomy, Issues, Solutions and Future research directions”. In:
Array 18 (2023), p. 100290. ISSN: 2590-0056. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j .array . 2023 . 100290. URL: https : //www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2590005623000152.
[11]
A Çil and S Kahveci. “Evaluation of 5G Cell Types through Channel Models”. In:
Journal of Communications Technology and Electronics 67.8 (2022), pp. 984–1009.
[12]
E. Ezhilarasan and M. Dinakaran. “A Review on Mobile Technologies: 3G, 4G and
5G”. In: 2017 Second International Conference on Recent Trends and Challenges
in Computational Models (ICRTCCM). 2017, pp. 369–373. DOI: 10.1109/ICRTCCM.
2017.90.
[13]
Edward J Oughton et al. “Assessing the capacity, coverage and cost of 5G infras-
tructure strategies: Analysis of the Netherlands”. In: Telematics and Informatics 37
(2019), pp. 50–69.
[14]
Margaret Chiosi et al. Network functions virtualisation - ETSI. Oct. 2012. URL: https:
//portal.etsi.org/NFV/NFV_White_Paper.pdf.
[15]
Diego Kreutz et al. “Software-defined networking: A comprehensive survey”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 103.1 (2014), pp. 14–76.
[16]
Xin Li et al. “Network slicing for 5G: Challenges and opportunities”. In: IEEE Inter-
net Computing 21.5 (2017), pp. 20–27.
26
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
==PAGE:36==
[17]
ETSI. ETSI GR NFV-MAN 001 V1.2.1 (2021-12). Dec. 2021. URL: https://www.
etsi . org / deliver / etsi _ gr / NFV - MAN / 001 _ 099 / 001 / 01 . 02 . 01 _ 60 / gr _ NFV -
MAN001v010201p.pdf.
[18]
Haijun Zhang et al. “Network slicing based 5G and future mobile networks: Mobility,
resource management, and challenges”. In: IEEE communications magazine 55.8
(2017), pp. 138–145.
[19]
Xuan Zhou et al. “Network slicing as a service: enabling enterprises’ own software-
defined cellular networks”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 54.7 (2016), pp. 146–
153.
[20]
Antonio Matencio Escolar et al. “Adaptive network slicing in multi-tenant 5G IoT
networks”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 14048–14069.
[21]
Simona Marinova et al. “End-to-end network slicing for future wireless in multi-
region cloud platforms”. In: Computer Networks 177 (2020), p. 107298.
[22]
ETSI. ETSI TS 122 261 - V17.11.0 - 5G; Service requirements for the 5G system
(3GPP TS 22.261 version 17.11.0 Release 17). Oct. 2022. URL: https://www.etsi.
org/deliver/etsi_ts/122200_122299/122261/17.11.00_60/ts_122261v171100p.pdf.
[23]
Panagiotis K Gkonis, Panagiotis T Trakadas, and Dimitra I Kaklamani. “A compre-
hensive study on simulation techniques for 5g networks: State of the art results,
analysis, and future challenges”. In: Electronics 9.3 (2020), p. 468.
[24]
Chin-Kuo Jao et al. “WiSE: A System-Level Simulator for 5G Mobile Networks”. In:
IEEE Wireless Communications 25.2 (2018), pp. 4–7. DOI: 10.1109/MWC.2018.
8352614.
[25]
Agnes Fastenbauer et al. 2022, pp. 1–68.
[26]
NGMN Alliance. Recommendations for NGMN Kpis and requirements for 5G. May
2016. URL: https://www.ngmn.org/wp-content/uploads/Publications/2016/160603_
Annex_NGMN_Liaison_to_3GPP_RAN_72_v1_0.pdf.
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
27
==PAGE:37==
==PAGE:38==
Providing reliable quality-of-service through network resource allocation for the monitoring of mobile
business processes
29
==PAGE:39==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
