==PAGE:1==
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For
License Plate Detection
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
Master Thesis
November, 2023
By
Thomas Bork Aspinall
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build-
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Visual Computing, De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng. MSc in Computer Science and Engineering
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning.
Thomas Bork Aspinall - s202775
Signature
12/11/2023
Date
ii
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Object detectors have seen large improvements in recent research, however there are
still room to the upside for performance. Many of the object detectors are able to detect
more complex scenarios than before. Object detectors are benchmarked over the Generic
object detection problem. This thesis examines whether the performance for a reduced
problem translates in terms of accuracy and inference speed for the object detectors.
This is done by implementing, testing and evaluating object detectors from one-stage and
two-stage detectors categories in order to find the model with highest performance on the
license plate detection problem. The underlined technology leveraged is convolutional
based object detectors, and not transformer based object detectors, given the fact that
transformer based object detectors need more data. Furthermore, this thesis will look into
how the performance changes when the input image size is changed. The networks are
trained on two datasets: UFPR and RODOSOL, and the performance is then compared
in order to figure out if a more complex architecture or model is needed or vice versa. This
inquiry found out that the object detector Yolov5 performs slightly better than the object
detector Faster R-CNN in terms of accuracy while being orders of magnitude faster. Even
the smaller and less complex variant of Yolov5 called Yolov5s is close to the same in terms
of accuracy than the bigger version called Yolov5x. The image size was found to not have
a huge impact on the inference speed, however in terms of storage and practical use, it
was reliable with little to no cost at the accuracy.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Thomas Bork Aspinall, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
This thesis was carried out under the supervision of Vedrana Andersen Dahl and Anders
Bjorholm Dahl. A special thanks for providing clear direction and support, making the
process much smoother. Thanks for all the meetings that added value to my work process.
The entire experience was purposeful and a great learning process for me.
iv
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Licenses Plate Detection Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Traditional Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
State Of The Art Object Detection Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
License Plate Detecting Using Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Background
7
3.1
Application Of Deep Learning In Licenses Plate Detection . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Metrics For Evaluation For Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Implementation
33
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Training Hyperparams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.3
Training With Faster R-CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Training With Yolov5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5
Results
43
5.1
Faster R-CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Yolov5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.3
Comparison Between Faster R-CNN And Yolov5 Variances . . . . . . . . . 55
5.4
Input Image Size Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6
Discussion
59
6.1
Comparison Of Yolov5 and Faster R-CNN Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.2
Input Image Size Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7
Conclusion
61
7.1
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Bibliography
63
A Appendix
67
A.1 Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.2 Best Model Image Size Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Due to political decision-making, the Danish Ministry of Transport published an article on
February 25th 2022 revealing a new test-based project involving road pricing vehicles
on Danish roads [1]. The argument was that it was deemed necessary to get a more
thorough insight into what effect such road pricing could have on the Co2 emissions and
traffic congestion in Denmark. The project aimed to examine these effects by collecting
data on behavioral changes in motorists prompted by the road pricing.
1.1
Problem Statement
When developing such a system it is an important factor to consider speed and accuracy
of the system, as these two factors are crucial to how well the road pricing will succeed
in real world application. Therefore I want to examine how these factors play out in two
different AI categories, and build a system that will solve the license plate detection prob-
lem through a comparison of multiple models through two different datasets consisting of
license plates. As license plate detection problem is a reduced problem of generic object
detection, it is interesting to examine how the complexity effects the performance.Doing
so, I aim to inquire into the question of whether an AI can help develop the road pricing
project, and if it is possible to have a system that is close to non-intrusive on the motorists
experience of the road pricing and data collection of their behavior having a fast inference
speed and high accuracy? Therefore the research objectives in this thesis are therefore
as follows:
1. I will implement, train, evaluate and compare two variances of deep learning object
detection algorithms: one- and two-stage detectors on two datasets. To examine
the effect of complexity the two variances will be a smaller less complex version of
the models and a bigger more complex version of the models.
2. I will then compare the configurations of the models with each other to find the best
overall model.
3. Finally, I will examine how the change the input image size effects the overall per-
formance.
1.2
The Licenses Plate Detection Problem
Generic object detection is a method of finding instances of objects in an image and give
a coarse location [2] (see Figure 1.1). These objects stem from predetermined classes.
License plate detection is a variant of generic object detection, where the problem is to
find all instances of one primary class in a given image. This means that license plate
detection is reduced from generic object detection as seen on (b) 1.1. The most frequent
way these methods locate objects in a given image is by a Bounding Box (bb). A bounding
box is usually defined by four points which fully encapsulate the given object. The object
classification problem is a reduced instance of the object detection problem, where you
only recognizing whether an instance of the object appears on an image level fashion or
not.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
1
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.1: Related problems [2]
Object detection using deep learning has improved in recent research, but as this survey
paper points to [3] ” [..] the best detectors are still far from saturation in performance”.
Furthermore, research has shown that two-stage object detection algorithms usually have
better performance. However in the latest research one-stage detectors have taken the
rain and become just as accurate while being faster.
There are multiple challenges for object detection, such as variance in the object, oc-
clusion, illumination and viewpoint. Licences plates appear different ex. color, size and
design. Furthermore, the given environment and surroundings can affect the licences
plates in different ways. The location at which the picture has been captured can result in
license plates with different appearances, like scale and position. All of these and more,
are challenges that make object detection difficult. Additionally, there are always other
biases from the dataset which could have an impact.
2
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:10==
2
Related Work
In this chapter I will go through state of the art of object detection, in order to get a more
complete and holistic overview of the current methods. Doing so helps me achieve a better
understanding of which approaches are beneficial in solving the license plate detection
problem. In three sections I will go through traditional methods, general deep learning
methods and investigate how others have used deep learning for solving this problem.
2.1
Traditional Methods
As mentioned deep learning has made a lot of progress in their performance in recent
time (section 1.2). However, in order to establish a fundamental theoretical foundation I
will give an overview of traditional method for license plate detection. Traditional methods
can be condensed into the following process, that consists off two stages (see Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: Diagram of how traditional methods works in general
The first stage is to extract features, which utilizes some prior knowledge of the prob-
lem to find candidates. There are different methods for extracting these features. The
prior knowledge is a design choice ex. edge detection using the sobel operator [4], high
contrast changes between the license plate’s letters and background [5] and Mean-shift
segmentation to segment the image into regions with uniform intensity given the prior
knowledge that the license plate will then be contained inside one of these regions [6].
The second stage is candidate selection, where the candidates are discarded based on
criteria. These criteria are usually a quality measure of how likely the candidate is a
license plate. Candidate selection can happen based on different criteria of geometrical
properties such as shape, aspect ratio, size and overall rectangularity [7][8]. Another
method of candidate selection can be a classifier learned on a dataset[9].
However these methods have some inherited disadvantages, as they fail and fall short
when the prior knowledge changes. Therefore, the methods are only as good as the prior
knowledge.
2.2
State Of The Art Object Detection Methods
Object detection methods utilizing deep learning, stands on two schools of thought. These
schools are fundamentally different considering how to solve a problem. The first method
splits the problem into smaller bits in order to solve and then combine. The second method
tries to handle the problem all at once. These methods are respectively called one- and
two-stage detectors.
A comparison between these two categories of methods, shows that two stage detectors
generally are more accurate than one stage detector yet much slower in terms of inference
speed. Therefore, picking a model is a trade off between speed and accuracy. This means
that it can be difficult to pick an optimal model in terms of both speed and accuracy.
However in the newer models one stage detectors have shown to catch up in terms of
accuracy and even surpassing in some cases.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
3
==PAGE:11==
2.2.1
Vision Transformer (ViT)
Vision transformers (ViT) have been shown to have great performance in object detection
and other areas [10]. A ViT is a method that utilizes deep learning and can replace a
convolutional layer or be applied in a mixed fashion [11]. The overview of the ViT can
be seen on Figure 2.2. The model works by splitting the image into patches of fixed
sizes, then feeding these patches into the Transformer Encoder along with a position
embedding. The Transformer Encoder also takes in an extra learnable feature which is
the class in the case of classification. The ViT has some disadvantage for use compared
to convolutional layers, as it lacks inductive biases such as the translation equivariance
as well as not having the spacial information out of the box. This results in the ViT not
generalizing to a satisfactory degree on small datasets.
Figure 2.2: Model overview of vision transformer called ViT [11]
One of biggest drawback of the ViT is the demand for a large amount of data and conse-
quently a high amount of computation, meaning the training time is longer. As mentioned
in the paper [10] [”..The question of learning a Transformer in a dataefficient manner is an
open research problem”]. Since this is the case, I will not be utilizing ViT based networks
given the fact that license plate dataset are not very big. Another reason why not to go
further with this technology when comparing two models, is that comparing models with
different building blocks like ViT and convolutional is not directly comparable.
2.2.2
Two Stage Detectors
A two stage object detector is a method that, as the name suggest, consists of two stages.
The first stage is usually responsible for the region proposals where the network believes
that an object is present. The second stage is classifying and localizing each of the region
proposals and normally returns the class and the bounding box. A two stage detector lacks
global context, because the model is not detecting on the whole image but a part of it[3].
One of the foundations of two stage detectors are the Faster R-CNN. Faster R-CNN con-
sists of a region proposal network and a network that detects on these proposals. There
have been many improvements to the original network [12]. Such as replacing the back-
bone to a ResNet that makes the network perform better [13] and applying a Feature
Pyramid Network called FPN, that aims at making the network better at predicting object
at different scale, by taking an image and combining feature maps at different levels [14].
Another model called Region-based Fully Convolutional Networks (R-FCN)[15], shows
results competitive with Faster R-CNN in terms of accuracy, yet not in terms of training
time and inference speed. Therefore it is not considered further for this thesis. The model
4
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:12==
Mask R-CNN [16], adds a parallel branch which is responsible for pixel level segmen-
tation. This addition is not very cost heavy and outperforms Faster R-CNN. However,
improvements to MASK R-CNN have been made. The improvements are also applicable
to Faster R-CNN that works without the added complexity of a segmentation head [17].
2.2.3
One Stage Detectors
In the task of object detecting the one stage detector both localizes and classifies on the
given image of an object. It treats the problem as a simple regression problem, where the
detector takes in the raw image and then predicts the probability for a class if it is present
in the image and along with the position of the bounding box. In the category of one stage
detectors, there are models such as You only look once (Yolo), Yolov2, Yolov3 and Yolov4
[18][19][20][21]. All the Yolo versions add ideas and make the detector better while trying
to maintain the reason for using single stage; fast inference time. Yolo introduced this
way of framing object detecting as a regression problem. Single Shot Detector (SSD)
extended the method of prediction on cells from Yolo. SSD take features from different
scales (8x8, 6x6, 4x4, 3x3, 2x2) with the idea of having anchor boxes from Faster R-CNN
called priors [3]. These bounding boxes are defined by a set of dimensions and aspect
ratios. RetinaNet introduced a new loss function called Focal loss. The main idea behind
the new loss function was in object detection to solve that there is an “extreme foreground-
background class imbalance” [3]. EfficientDet introduces model scaling where the model
size can be chosen dynamically by multiplying with a coefficient. EfficientDet has a layer
called BiFPN, which is a feature pyramid network that aggregates feature maps at different
scales, with learnable weights for the connections. EfficientDet achieves better efficiency
and accuracy than Yolov3, SSD, and RetinaNet while being smaller and computationally
cheaper [3].
Yolo had some short comings such as high localization error and a limitation on number of
object it could detect resulting in low recall. Yolov2 increased the recall of the model and
reduced the amount of parameters. Yolov3 added a bigger backbone while being faster
than the previous model. The Yolov3 model also addressed the bottleneck of the previous
models that had a difficult time predicting smaller objects by modifying the network to
detect on three scales instead of one. Yolov4 added a ”bag of freebies” and a ”bag of
specials”. Bag of freebies is, as the name suggest, a no cost way to increase accuracy.
The bag of specials add time to the inference time, however it was worth the trade-off in
accuracy. The final model ended up being twice as fast as EfficientDet yet with similar
accuracy. Yolov5 was released one month later than Yolov4. The models perform similar
[22] though some indicate that Yolov5 has faster training time [23].
One stage detectors also have the added benefit of being closer to end-to-end training,
because the optimization happens directly on detection performance. Training on a two
stage detection pipeline is slower and harder to optimize compared to one stage detectors
[2]. In the field of deep learning there are fast and constant development, therefore I only
deal with the before mentioned models.
2.3
License Plate Detecting Using Deep Learning
After looking into deep learning models I have outlined a holistic overview of which types
of models that exist, how they work and their performances. I will now dive how deep
learning have been applied to the specific task of detecting license plates.
There are many examples of how to apply deep learning to the license plate detection
problem. In this article [24] researchers use traditional computer vision methods along
with prior knowledge to modify the image before it is fed through a CNN. Another relevant
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
5
==PAGE:13==
paper[25], flips the method from previous example; instead of modifying the input image
and then applying deep learning, they use deep learning classifiers and their correspond-
ing saliency map, that indicates a region of pixels that is important for the classifier. They
use the information from the saliency map to find the bounding box of the license plates
in the image.
In this paper [26] researchers apply prior knowledge by modifying Yolo into MD-YOLO
that has two stages. The first stage is called a prepositive CNN and it finds a attention
region which give a rectangular region to where the model should pay special attention.
This region is found by employing the prior knowledge that license plates are fixed on
cars and that there is a set distance between any two plates. This attention region is
then refined by MD-YOLO, which introduces angle information in the regression problem,
to find a more precise rectangular region with correct rotation. The same use of prior
knowledge is present in Laroca et al. [27] and [28] by adding a car detection stage before
finally detecting the license plate.
Ravirathinam et. al. [29] and Rafique et. al. [30] utilizes Faster R-CNN for license plate
detection with different backbones respectively (VGG16 and ResNet-50) and (VGG16 and
ZF). In Ravirathinam et. al. the system is extended to find the characters in the license
plate after the detection.
The go to object detector model seems to be a variant of Yolo. Since the release of the pa-
per[17] there was some suggestions to improve the Faster R-CNN which has not applied
yet to this problem. The survey paper indicates that one stage detectors are equally as
accurate while being much faster [3]. However, a lot of progress has been made to both
models. Therefore this thesis examines whether it is possible to solve the license plate
detection problem through a pure fully deep learning approach without any prior knowl-
edge yet getting state of the art results. Both YOLO and Faster R-CNN are developed
and benchmarked on the general object detection problem. However since license plate
detection is a reduced problem, it is relevant to examine if a fully deep learning approach
can be applied to get state of the art results. Due to this I apply two pure deep learning
models one from a one stage detector and one from a two stage detector, without the
use of prior knowledge methods. I do this to see whether the performance is high on the
reduced problem license plate detecting or not.
The chosen two-stage model is the Faster R-CNN. The reasoning behind this choice
stems from the fact that Mask R-CNN has additional complexity that is not used. Due to
this, I want to examine if there is difference in performance between the Original model
and the Version 2 model that includes the improvements from this paper [17]. The chosen
one-stage model is Yolov5. Firstly Yolov4 and Yolov5 are comparable in terms of speed
and accuracy with some indication that Yolov4 is a little better. Yolov5 however seems to
have faster training time and it consists of five sizes of models. Therefore, I would like to
see the performance contrast between Yolov5’s smallest and largest model. In order to
examine whether the trade off between a bigger and more complex model or a smaller
model is advantageous in solving the license plate detection problem, these two variances
have been chosen. Both models are easy to implement because they are compatible with
Pytorch, which is an added benefit in terms of development time.
6
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:14==
3
Background
In this section I will explore and explain some important background knowledge needed
in order to fully understanding object detection models and metrics commonly used to
measure the performance of the detectors. At the end of this section I will describe the
inner workings of the two models in depth.
3.1
Application Of Deep Learning In Licenses Plate Detection
Deep learning is a technology used to solve the object detection problem described in
section 1.2. In recent years, the field of deep learning has ”[..] seen exponential growth
with rapid development of new tools and techniques.”[3]. The object detection problem
generally falls under the category of supervised learning [3] (section 3.1.1). Neural net-
works (NN) stem from biology. The idea that a neuron needs to be stimulated above a
certain threshold in order for it to fire, is what the activation function mimics [31]. Each
layer of a NN consist of multiple neurons and each of these neurons are fully connected
to each of the neurons in the next layer. This mimics the way the brain finds different
pathways when learning. A fully connected neural network is called a multilayer percep-
tron (MLP). One feature of a deep learning algorithm that makes them very attractive for
real life applications is the fact that after a model is trained it can predict on unseen im-
ages and preform well, meaning it generalizes the information learned from the dataset.
Deep learning trains by minimizing a loss function. In deep learning the dataset is split
into batches that the loss is averaged across. This loss is used to notch the weights of
the network so that the loss becomes smaller. When working with images a convolutional
neural network is usually applied instead of a multilayer perceptron.
3.1.1
Supervised Learning
Supervised learning is a method of having label or a target given by an instructor for each
data point in the dataset (p. 103 [32]). In the case of Object detection, for each image
x, there is a corresponding label y, consisting of five values; one value to identifies the
correct class, and four values to predict the bounding box. This target shows the machine
what to do and what to change in order to preform better at the given task.
3.1.2
Backbone Architectures
An important element in an object detector is the backbone architecture[3]. A backbone
architecture is the CNN that extracts the features from the given image, that the detector
uses to classify and localize within the image. These features are the results of applying
a CNN to an image. A lot of different types of backbone architectures exist. Two of the
most commonly used backbones are VGG and ResNet.
3.1.3
Convolutional Neural Networks
A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a layer where each input are convolved with
each kernel, this is called multi-input multi-output convolution [33]. Thereby the channel
of feature maps becomes greater and greater. A CNN intuitively works by the first layers
capturing low level features, such as edges etc. Then a layer that is deeper in the network
will combine and capture more complex high level features. This stems from the fact that
the network is feeding input forward and using the output of one layer as input in the next.
The the lower level features are combined into a higher level in the layer in front [31].
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
7
==PAGE:15==
Convolutional Neural Networks And Fully Connected Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) come with three features: sparse interactions, pa-
rameter sharing and equivariant representations (p. 329 [32]). Sparse interactions means
that each input pixel is only connected to a few of the outputs, this means that each input
is always some part responsible for each output. In a CNN each pixel is only responsible
for a smaller set of outputs depending on the size of the kernel. A 3x3 kernel’s weights
are then connected to 9 pixels in the output. Looking backwards from the output per-
spective, a single output pixel have a region of pixels responsible for its value called the
receptive field. In a CNN the parameters in the kernel are independent for each input
channel, where in a neural network the parameters are only used one time when calcu-
lating the output of the layer. This results in less computations because CNN uses the
same parameters on the entire input, meaning it will have less parameters. Equivariant
representations means that convolution outputs a feature map with high intensity where
the given characteristics appear in the input image. If the characteristics are moved in
the input so will the representation by the same amount. This is a favorable feature to
have because instances of objects or features can be present at different locations in the
image.
Convolutional Layer
In a convolutional layer the input image is convolved by sliding a kernel across the image
pixel intensity values. A representation of an image is a matrix containing values between
0-255 [31]. A RGB image consists of three channels where each channel is the intensity
of the given color. The kernel is applied for each position and the output is the weighted
average of the input and the kernel values. Figure 3.1 is an example of applying the kernel
in one position of the image. The next position would be moving the kernel one pixel to
the right. When the kernel has reached the end of a row in the input, it will wrap around
to the next row. The length between the current and previous kernel is called the stride,
this parameter of a convolution is usually one.
Figure 3.1: This figure shows a convolution, where the kernel is applied to the first position
in the input. This convolution is also using the technique of zero padding, therefore the
size of the output is the same as the input [31].
Therefore, when applying a kernel of 3X3 on the input image, the resulting output becomes
2 pixel shorter in the width and height. When convolution is used in a CNN, it is a more
complex version that the one shown in Figure 3.1. The convolutions used in a CNN are
called multi-input multi-output convolution [33] (see Figure 3.2). As seen in the first input
layer we have three channels, then there are six kernels of size 5x5x3 which results in an
output with six channels, one for each of the kernels.
8
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.2: This figure shows a multi-input multi-output Convolution [33]
Activation Function
A convolution is a linear operation that extracts features from an image [31]. These fea-
tures are then passed through an activation function that gives the output non-linearity
therefore making the decision boundary of the model become fluid and not just a line.
The most used activation function in a CNN is called rectified linear unit (ReLU) [31], that
is unbounded to the positive values, and all negative numbers are set to zero as seen on
Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Activation function: rectified linear unit (ReLU) [31]
Max Pooling
Another component of a CNN is a pooling layer, and is responsible for downsampling
the output feature in the spacial dimensions while leaving the depth also called channels
conserved. The max pooling layer is one of the most commonly used methods, which
combines a small patch into a number which is the maximum number in the patch (See
Figure 3.4). Normally Max pooling has a size of 2x2 and a stride of 2, thereby reducing
the feature map by half in the spacial dimensions. This reduction means that the size
of the feature maps are reduced faster compared to using convolutions and results in
less computations. The receptive field of the model is increased by using a pooling layer.
Removing the unimportant information and making the output smaller makes a bigger
area from the input image responsible for each output pixel.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.4: Showcasing the two most commonly used pooling methods [33]
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
Most commonly after a feature extractor, also called a backbone, the output is flatten into
a one dimensional vector. A multilayer perceptron (MLP) consists of an input layer and
an output layer with hidden layers in between. All the layers are dense layers, sometimes
called a fully connected layer, which means that each node is connected to all the other
nodes in the next layer. This MLP does prediction based on the flatten features extracted
by the convolutions. The output layer is used for the prediction of the network. Usually
the activation function of the output layer is different than the normal nodes. One common
activation function of the output layer is called softmax. Softmax scales the output into
probabilities, meaning they sum to one. This means the output vector of the network with
size X is normalized to a probability distribution with X possible classes.
3.1.4
Backpropagation
Backpropagation is one method used when training a deep learning network. Backprop-
agation is a way of making the model to become better at the given task, by notching the
weights and biases in the network to minimize the loss function. Backpropagation is a
way for the model to evaluate its own performance based on the given data, and how to
optimize its performance based on this data. The main idea is to have the network gener-
alize features of the data in order to increase the performances. Therefore, the goal with
an AI is to create a model that can look at a subset of data, sampled and annotated by a
human (supervised learning see sec 3.1.1), then learn features and be able to generalize
this information on unseen data. A model can run into pitfalls when training ex. over- and
underfitting (see section 3.1.4).
Loss Function
A loss function is a function that converges towards zero based on how well the network
performs at the given task. A loss function estimates the error between the predictions
created by the model to the annotation given by a human, meaning how well does the
network fit to the dataset. The two main types of problems are a regression problem and
a classification problem. A regression is a problem where the prediction is a real value.
In terms of object detection that would be predicting the bounding box position by pixel
values. This is also called bounding box regression. A classification problem is where
the output is one or zero, based on whether an instance of the object is corresponding
to the given class or not. This can exist both as a binary classification or a multi-class
classification. For a binary classification the output is a zero or a one that corresponds
to the two classes respectively. However, for a multi-class classification the output is a
vector with one at the given position of the correct class.
Gradient Descent
Gradient descent is the optimization algorithm utilized for optimizing the learnable param-
eters of weights and biases in a model to get a minimal loss function [31]. As seen on fig
3.5, the result that is optimal is a global minima, however the algorithm could get stock in
10
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:18==
a local minima. The algorithm works by taking the gradients of the loss function, which
gives the direction to where the parameter has the biggest increase in value. Then the
algorithm takes a step in the opposite direction for each parameter, resulting in a loss
value that converges towards a minima. This is completed in iterations until the model
has reached a minima or is stopped manually. The step size is called a learning rate and
is a hyperparameter chosen by the designer. Calculating this for one image is an easy
task for a computer. However calculating it for a whole dataset is time consuming and is
too heavy to compute. Therefore, in practice one uses stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
which means taking a subset of the given dataset at uniformly at random to estimate the
correct way to walk.
Figure 3.5: Gradient descent [31]
In deep learning the whole dataset is usually split into three different sets each with their
own purpose. The three sets are called; a training set, a validation set and a testset. All
the data has annotations and consists of the same elements. Normally, the data is split
so that the training set contains the most data followed by the validation set and testset.
The purpose of the training set is to train the model using SGD utilizing the annotation.
The validation set is utilized during the training process but without letting the model learn
from the data. The validation data is used by the human, to train the model and fine tune
and measure the model’s performance. Finally the testset is used to get a final evaluation
of the model, used to see if the model has learned to generalize on unseen data. See
Figure (3.6) [31]
Figure 3.6: Cross validation data split [31]
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
11
==PAGE:19==
Overfitting And Underfitting
A model overfits during training when the loss over the training data continues to fall,
meaning that the model’s performance increases. However, during that time the validation
loss is becoming larger. This means that the model cannot generalize the information
learned from the training dataset and will therefore start to perform worse on unseen data
[31]. One way to intuitively understand why this happens, is when you have to solve a
problem and try to learn a method that works on all instances of the problem. However, if
the problem space is not very large it is more beneficial to just remember all the answers to
the given input. That is essentially what overfitting is. The model is just remembering the
answers to the training dataset, therefore becoming worse at unseen data. Underfitting
means that the model has a bad performance on both the training and validation datasets.
Underfitting usually happens when a model hasn’t been trained for long enough or if the
model is too simple for the given dataset and thereby cannot reach convergence towards
zero. This means that the model fails to find any generalizable features and can happen
when the data is bad. An example of underfitting and overfitting can be seen on Figure
3.7.
Figure 3.7: An example of overfitting and underfitting
There exist many methods to combat these situations and stopping or minimizing them
[31]. The best way is to acquire more data. A model trained on a larger amount of data is
in most cases better at generalizing. However, in some cases procuring more data can be
difficult or cost a lot of money or time. Therefore, other methods can be utilized instead.
Data augmentation is a great way to make the models more robust. Regularization meth-
ods are also good alternatives. Utilization of batch normalization eliminates the need for
other forms of regularization [34]. Other forms of popular regularization methods, include
dropout and weight decay. In the end it is also possible to reduce the complexity and size
of the architecture in order to limit overfitting.
Transfer Learning
As established earlier in sec 3.1.2, the backbone is very important for the overall per-
formance of the networks. One technique that is helpful to minimize the training time,
is called transfer learning [35]. This methods is often used in object detection on the
backbone. The backbone can be a pre-trained network on a large dataset from a similar
domain. A backbone can then transfer information from the learned domain to the new
domain, this is beneficial if the domain is difficult to obtain data in. During training we gen-
erally need less training time to get good results. Training an object detector from scratch
consists of two tasks. Firstly training a backbone to get features that are important and
secondly concurrently training the prediction heads of the network. Therefore using a pre-
trained backbone with already learned features from an other domain makes the problem
of predicting easier to solve. Applying these learned features to a similar problem is less
demanding on the training time, compared to a random starting point.
12
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Metrics For Evaluation For Object Detection
In order to understand and compare object detection models’s performances, we need a
metric of measurement independent of the models, so we can evaluate them [36]. These
metrics will help to compare models and give a sense of how well they perform on the
given task. Firstly we need to find a way to get an accuracy of an object detector. In a
classification problem the accuracy is simple to find by calculating the correctly classified
images divided by the total amount of images. Thereby getting a percentage of how
well the classification model performed. In object detection the problem is a bit different,
because the accuracy is not at the image level. However, we need to look into how good
the predicted bounding box compares with the annotation. One way to measure this is
called intersection over union explained in the next section.
3.2.1
Intersection Over Union (IoU)
Intersection over union (IoU) is a ratio of the area of the overlap between two bounding
boxes (bb). This means that IoU gives a value between zero and one, where zero means
that the bbs are not overlapping at all [36]. A value of one means that the two bbs are sitting
perfectly on top of each other. IoU has the feature of rewarding boxes that are similar in
size. IoU thereby eliminates bounding boxes that are encapsulating or contained inside,
by rewarding boxes depending on proportionality of the sizes. An example of IoU that will
give a low score, happens when a predicted bb is contained inside a much larger bb and
vise versa. This happens because the intersection is small. An example of IoU can be
seen on the Figure (3.8)
Figure 3.8: intersection over union [36]
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
13
==PAGE:21==
3.2.2
Non-maximum Suppression (NMS)
A method called Non-maximum suppression (NMS) [37] is used to eliminate redundant
bbs, in such a manner that it maintains the boxes the model is most confidence about.
The NMS algorithm is explained in 1. The criterion used is IoU commonly with a threshold
of 0.5, however this can be change. NMS can be used during training and inference.
Algorithm 1 Non-maximum suppression [37]
Input: B = b1, . . . , bN
▷B is the list of initial detection boxes
Input: S = s1, . . . , sN
▷S contains corresponding detection scores
Input: Nt
▷Nt is the NMS threshold
1: D ←{}
2: while B ̸= empty do
3:
m ←argmax S
▷Get highest detection score
4:
M ←bm
▷Get corresponding box
5:
D ←D ∪M
▷add box to D
6:
B ←B−M
▷Remove box from list of boxes B
7:
for bi in B do
▷Loop through all boxes and compare condition with M
8:
if IoU(M, bi) ≥Nt then
▷Compare criterion (IoU) with threshold
9:
B ←B−bi
▷Remove the box if they overlap
10:
S ←S−si
▷Remove corresponding score
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end while
14: return D, S
3.2.3
Anchor Boxes
Anchor boxes are very similar to a bb, it is a region in an image. An anchor box is defined
from a center, while bbs does not have to. An anchor box is then specified usually by a
width and a height. Anchor boxes are used by object detection models for localizing the
objects. The way anchor boxes help the models is by reducing the problem of prediction,
from predicting the location directly with respect to the coordinates to only predicting the
offset for an already defined anchor box. This makes the regression problem of predicting
the box a lot easier. By finding the best fitting anchor box, compared to the annotation from
a set of predefined anchors boxes, the prediction of the offset is a lot easier. There are
different ways to predefined the anchor boxes. In Faster R-CNN (see sec 3.3.3) the boxes
are defined from multiple scales and ratios, creating an anchor box from each possible
combination of these parameters. In Yolov2 the best possible anchor boxes are found
from the dataset (see sec 3.3.5), by using k-means clustering. The use of anchor boxes
makes an object detector more robust for detecting occluding objects, because it allows
for multiple anchor boxes for each localisation.
3.2.4
Mean Average Precision (mAP)
Another metric commonly used in object detection is called Mean Average Precision
(mAP) [36]. This metric measures how well the object detector does across multiple
classes and then takes the average, which results in a great view of the general per-
formance. This measurement is a percentage and utilizes IoU of each predicted bb with
respect to the corresponding ground truth bb. Therefore, mAP is calculated at a given
IoU threshold, and the resulting measurement will differ at different thresholds. The way
this metric is calculated is by finding the average precision of each class and then taking
the mean over all of these values. The average precision is calculated using two mea-
14
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:22==
surements on the test dataset, called precision and recall. In order to understand mAP
we first need to understand the building blocks and concepts of it.
True positive (TP) A correct detection
False positive (FP) An incorrect detection
False negative (FN) No detection of a ground truth
True negative (TN) No detection of a possible bb in an given image. This measure does
not make sense given the fact there exists an infinite amount of possible bbs.
The way to determine whether or not a detected bb is a TP or a FP is if the IoU ratio,
with respect to the corresponding ground truth, is greater than the threshold. Below both
precision and recall is defined.
Precision
This is a measurement that only cares about predicting correctly.[36]
p =
TP
TP + FP =
TP
all detections
(3.1)
Recall
This is a measurement that only cares about if all the elements are recalled at some
point.[36]
R =
TP
TP + FN =
TP
all ground truths
(3.2)
Precision And Recall Graph (pr-graph)
The way to find the average precision of a class is by creating a graph where you have
recall on the x-axis and precision of the y-axis. The first step is to get all predictions of the
model sorted in a descending order based on the confidence score. Next step is iterating
through the sorted predictions and calculating the IoU, and then classifying the prediction
as a TP or FP and accumulate these values. Lastly these precision and recall pairs can
be plotted, resulting in the pr-graph. Obtaining the average precision using these values,
is done by taking the area under the curve. On the figure below there is showcased two
pr-graphs(3.9). The area under the curve values are bounded between zero and one,
where one corresponds to 100% vice versa for zero.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.9: An example of two PR-graphs
A low score will result in a graph dropping fast and a good score results in a graph that
stays high. To exclude the human element of choosing the optimal IoU threshold to eval-
uate the performance, one approach is to take a set of IoU thresholds most commonly
mAP0.5:0.05:0.95. This means starting at threshold 0.5 with a step size of 0.05 go up
until and including 0.95. Then it is possible to calculate the average precision for each of
these thresholds and take the mean. This results in a quality measurement independent
of IoU threshold.
3.2.5
Frames Per Second (FPS)
Another metric that object detection is commonly compare over is Frames per second
(FPS). For an object detector to be applicable in a real life use-case, the detection phase
needs to happen fast. Therefore, this measurement is a method that calculates how many
fps the model can obtain. Another way to measure how fast a model performs is called the
inference time. Inference time is the time between where the model is given the image to
where the model gives a prediction. This measurement does not care about the accuracy
at all just the speed. Real time performance is defined as FPS above 30 [3]. Calculating
the FPS from the inference speed is simply taking
1
inference time.
3.3
Models
In this section I will explain the history of the two models, Yolo and Faster-RCNN by going
through the previous models in addition to the new contributions, how they work and the
main intuition behind the idea. Finally I will go into dept with the two final models.
3.3.1
Region Based Convolutional Neural Network (R-CNN)
Region based convolutional neural network is a method that takes in a region of an image
and predicts the class contained within the region [38]. The region proposals come from
a method called selective search (SS), but can be replaced by other methods. SS is a
deterministic method and can be run on all the training data offline, which means one
can calculate all the regions in an image and save that. The location of the object comes
from the SS, by cropping and resizing the image from the bb from SS. Then each of the
images are evaluated by the network (seen on fig 3.10). At the end, to sort through all the
detections, NMS (see sec 3.2.2) is used independently for each class to remove unwanted
results.
16
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.10: The architecture of Region based convolutional neural network (R-CNN) [38]
The idea behind using selective search is to find blob-like regions in the image which are
more likely to contain the object from the given task. This is because SS returns a region
where pixels are similar and therefore more likely to contain an object. SS gives a lot of
regions thereby working with the principle: high recall will capture all the objects in the
image and then discard regions without the correct object.
I experimented with SS and made a script on some of the images, using opencv2 imple-
mentation of SS. I got approximately two thousand proposals per image. Running one
epoch of training on a dataset of 20 thousand images would take 20 thousand multiplied
with two thousand amount of forward passes through the network. Furthermore, when
training, the proposals will be added to a class if a threshold of the IoU is ≥usually 0.5.
The model handles a skew in the classified proposals, by sampling 128 proposals with 32
positive and 96 background on run-time.
3.3.2
Fast Region Based Convolutional Neural Network (Fast R-CNN)
Fast Region based convolutional neural network (Fast R-CNN) is a method that, unlike
R-CNN that takes in small region of the image, takes in the entire image with proposals
[39]. This results in only running the forward pass once per image instead of running once
per region proposals. This saves a lot of computation.
Figure 3.11: The architecture of Fast Region based convolutional neural network (Fast
R-CNN) [39]
The network extracts the features using a deep CNN in addition to max pooling, in order
to reduce the size. The region of interest (RoI) pooling layer is responsible for taking the
features inside the bb and getting out a fixed length vector. This makes it possible to
pass the features into a fully connected layer and use them for prediction. This extraction
happens for each object proposal. The corresponding region of interest (ROI) is then
used to detect and classify. These proposals still comes from selective search or other
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
17
==PAGE:25==
proposal algorithms. The network has sibling heads: one with softmax which gives a
probability for each class and a catch all class called ’background’. The second head is
a regression head, responsible for bb prediction. The regression head predicts four real
values which corresponds to the offset for the bbs. The model labels the classes based
on the IoU scores ≥0.5 as the given class and the rest as background. The data is re-
balanced with 25% positive classes and 75% of background. At the end the network shifts
through all these predictions by NMS (see sec 3.2.2) to remove unwanted results. When
using a region proposal algorithm such as SS, there is no learning happening, therefore
bad proposals will continue to occur. Region proposals are bottlenecks when it comes
to the family of R-CNN’s performance. The two things Faster R-CNN is trying to solve
better are proposals with higher precision while maintaining high recall by learning from
the generation of region proposals to have less bad proposals.
3.3.3
Faster Region Based Convolutional Neural Network (Faster R-CNN)
The Faster R-CNN introduces the concept of having a region proposal network (RPN) [12],
which replaces the proposal algorithm in the previous models. This makes the network
fully deep learning based and adds two more losses; two for each network. Faster R-
CNN consists of two parts. The first part is a RPN and the second part is the Fast R-CNN.
The progression from R-CNN and to Faster R-CNN makes the training progress closer
and closer to end-to-end training. This is because in R-CNN only focuses on having high
recall, however the later models take into account the precision of the proposals.
Figure 3.12: The architecture of Faster region based convolutional neural network (Faster
R-CNN) [39]
Backbone
In the original network the backbone is a VGG-16 deep CNN. The backbone’s job is to
extract features from an image. The backbone used in this thesis is called a ResNet-50-
FPN on the models which is implemented in PyTorch [40]. As mentioned earlier there are
performance improvement when VGG-16 is replaced with ResNet [13]. Furthermore, the
backbone is pre-trained on MS COCO dataset, to utilize the benefits of transfer learning
(see sec3.1.4). A deeper network generally performs better, however a problem occurs
where the model’s performance degrades rapidly after a certain depth. When saturation
18
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:26==
has been reached further increasing of the depth of a network results in worse perfor-
mance . One solution to this problem is a residual network, as ” [..] deep residual nets
can easily enjoy accuracy gains from greatly increased depth, producing results substan-
tially better than previous networks.”[13]. See Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: A block in a residual network (ResNet) [13]
A residual network is build on blocks of convolutional layers in sequences. The output
of a block is added to the input called the identity. If the identity is at the optimal the
network has the ability to turn off a block by making the block output zero. When increasing
the amount of layers in the network results in a worse performance, it is because the
identity is closer to the optimal. Therefore being able to turn off a block makes it possible
to add more layers without degradation in accuracy. The intuition of how this is better
for object detection, is that a single block could have a responsibility for some features
characterising different objects. This method of building deep residual neural networks
does not add parameters and complexity compared to normal deep neural networks. For
the very deep network a building block called a ’bottleneck’, responsible for reducing sizes,
can be used. See Figure 3.13 and 3.14. This building block still have the identity added
at the output. However, it consists of three layers instead of two, where the first layer
reduces the dimensions and the last layer enlarges the dimensions. Therefore the middle
layer is a convolution with less complexity, compared to no reduction in dimensions.
Figure 3.14: Bottleneck building block for large ResNets [13]
In ResNet-50-FPN, FPN stands for Feature Pyramid network [14]. The idea behind a
feature pyramid network stems from how the layers in a deep CNN have certain aspects
desired at different depths. The layer at the deepest level contains high level abstract
semantic information about the task, while also having the biggest receptive field. Thus
a layer at a deeper level is better at detecting objects at large scale. On the contrary
the layers at the start have a smaller receptive field, and are therefore better at detect-
ing smaller objects. The features extracted early in the network also have more spacial
information, in contrast to the later, but has weaker semantic information. The main idea
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
19
==PAGE:27==
behind a feature pyramid network is to take high level abstract semantic information later
in the network and enrich the earlier layers. This results in a backbone network that has
features at different scales enriched with higher level abstract semantic information. The
model is therefore better at detecting objects at different scales as ” [..] A topdown ar-
chitecture with lateral connections is developed for building high-level semantic feature
maps at all scales.”[14].
The network consists of a bottom-up pathway, a top-down pathway and connections from
different layers called lateral connections (see Figure 3.15). Firstly the bottom-up path-
way is a feed forward convolution that computes features with a stronger and stronger
semantic information. The pyramid is divided into different stages with a scale of two
for ResNets. A stage on the pyramid is from the last output from a residual block (see
Figure 3.14) skipping the first scale given the large memory imprint, called {C2, C3, C4,
C5}. Now there is a pyramid build with different stages. Each stage then have a lateral
connection which we should enrich. The feature maps, of the different levels, do not have
matching dimensions and therefore cannot be merged directly. The top-down pathway
is responsible for this by upsampling the smaller dimensional output with a factor of two.
After this the corresponding stage is then convolved by a 1x1 to reduce the dimensions
first, and then element-wise merged together. This is passed further down to the next
stage and iteratively applied until the first stage. These maps are refined to reduce the
aliasing effect of upsampling by a 3×3 convolution that generates the final feature maps
called {P2, P3, P4, P5} corresponding to {C2, C3, C4, C5} the last output of each residual
block.
Figure 3.15: feature pyramid network showcasing the two pathways
Region Proposal Networks (RPN)
RPN is what replaces the SS algorithm in the earlier models [12]. One benefit of RPN
is that it can learn concurrently with the rest of the network. The purpose of RPN is to
generate a proposal consisting of (c,x,y,w,h) where c corresponds to the class, called
objectness. The x,y is the bb’s corners and w,h is the width and height. Objectness
essentially means asking if is there an object in the region or not. The RPN takes in the
feature map of the last layer of the backbone, this case vgg-16, in order to share as many
of the parameters with the Fast R-CNN as possible. The way the network generates these
proposals, is by sliding a small window over the feature map mentioned before.
The input to the network is a (n=3 x n=3) box sliding cross the feature map. For each
position of the window there is predicted k possible proposals. An anchor is a box that is
centered at the window (n x n) (see Figure 3.16) (see sec 3.2.3). The three scales are
20
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:28==
(1282, 2562, 5122) and the three aspect ratios are (1:1, 1:2, 2:1), resulting in k = 9 anchor
boxes for each position of the (n x n) window. In total there is W*H*k giving ∼2400
anchor boxes. This is then passed onto the sibling layers; one for box-regression and
one for classification of the region.
Figure 3.16: Region Proposal Networks (RPN) [12]
In order to train the RPN there is assigned a binary class: object or not object to each of
the anchors.
1. The anchor with the highest IoU with a ground truth or
2.
{
Object
if IoU > 0.7
Not object
if IuO < 0.3 for all ground-truth boxes
During training the proposals are skewed to the negative side. This bias is diminished by
taken a fixed number of positives and negatives. A mini-batch of 256 anchors is sampled
randomly, with a 50 % 50% split if possible. If there is less positive instances to reach a
ratio of 1:1 then more negatives are used. Each ground truth can fulfill the conditions for
multiple anchors. Therefore each anchor is assigned a label; positive or negative, which
corresponds to positive impact or negative impact when training. If an anchor has not
been assign any label it is not apart of the training.
L({pi}, {ti}) =
1
Ncls
∑
i
Lcls(pi, p∗
i ) + λ
1
Nreg
∑
i
p∗
i Lreg(ti, t∗
i ).
(3.3)
The loss for the RPN consists of two parts; an objectness and a regression. Looking
at the equation 3.3, the first part is the objectness score, based on the binary class for
each anchor box.
1
Ncls and
1
Nreg is the normalisation over the mini-batch. The λ is a term
introduced to keep the losses at balance by equally weighing the two parts. Lcls(pi, p∗
i ) is
the log loss over the binary class, where pi is the network prediction if a given anchor box
is an object or not. p∗
i is the label of positive or negative. Log loss gives an indication of
how close the prediction is to the true value: the further away the value is from the true the
larger is the resulting log loss. Thereby, taking the sum of these gives a way to assess the
quality of the network’s prediction capabilities. The second term Lreg(ti, t∗
i ) is the smooth
L1 regression loss, where ti and t∗
i is the predicted bb and the associated ground truth.
The whole part is multiplied by p∗
i to get the result of zeroing this part out for negative bbs
to make the network only learn from the good boxes.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
21
==PAGE:29==
Smooth L1 loss function is a combination of L1 and L2 loss functions, taking the advantage
from both. L1 is the absolute difference between the predicted value and the true value,
thereby being larger proportionally to how big the error is. L2 is the same difference just
squared. At large differences the loss acts as L1 having steady gradients, and at smaller
differences it acts as L2 having a smooth curve towards zero, giving less change to the
gradients. When calculating the regression loss it does so over a parameterized value
such as: a predicted box {tx, ty, tw, th} and a target {t∗
x, t∗
y, t∗
w, t∗
h}. x, xa, x∗terms are the
predicted box, the anchor box and its corresponding ground truth bb. These updates are
only applied to the corresponding regressor K=9. This can be thought of as regression
going from an anchor box to a nearby ground truth box.
tx = (x −xa)
wa
, ty = (y −ya)
ha
, tw = log( w
wa
), th = log( h
ha
),
t∗
x = (x∗−xa)
wa
, t∗
y = (y∗−ya)
ha
, t∗
w = log(w∗
wa
), t∗
h = log(h∗
ha
),
Now the RPN gives a lot of proposals pr image and there are roughly 6k anchors per im-
age. Many of these proposals overlap, and therefore, in order to reduce this redundancy
of information, NMS is applied (see sec 3.2.2). With a threshold fixed to 0.7 using the clas-
sification score, the remaining proposals after NMS is around 2k per image. NMS is not
harmfull for the performance in terms of accuracy, because they only remove redundant
information.
RoI Pooling Layer
The RoI pooling layer takes a well formed RoI of arbitrary size, fitting them into a fixed
length, by utilizing max pooling [12]. A RoI is defined by four values (x, y, w, h) that
corresponds to the corner x and y and to the width and height. This RoI is an area in the
feature map of the backbone, that the RPN believes contains an object. The way the RoI
pooling layer achieves this is by dividing a RoI into smaller parts, w
W and h
H , where W and
H is a hyper-parameter to this layer. After the RoI is separated into smaller parts, max
pooling is carried out to achieve the down-sampling on each of these smaller parts. This
is done for all channels in the feature map independently. This results in the predicted
region proposals being reshaped using a RoI pooling layer which then can be passed
along into a fully connected layer and the heads of the Faster R-CNN.
Prediction Heads
This model has four losses, two for each network, both having a classification and a
regression loss. The classification on the final head uses softmax to output a discrete
probability distribution one per RoI over a total of K + 1 categories. There is added an
additional class which is a catch all background similar to the RPN. The classification loss
used is cross-entropy over the predicted and corresponding ground-truth label. Compared
to log loss, cross-entropy loss is not a binary classification. Cross entropy is a generalized
log loss instead of taking the difference between 0 or 1. It only looks at the difference
between a true value 1 and the predicted value disregarding indexes in the vector where
the target is zero. Taking the negation of the sum over all log of the predicted where target
is one. This is the same as taking log loss over all the indexes where the target is correct.
The regression loss it is calculated the same way as in the RPN using smooth L1 see RPN
section for explanation. This loss is calculated by taking the offset between the predicted
bb to the corresponding ground-truth bb.
22
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:30==
This results in the original model, which has 41,755,286 parameters [40]. The next part
goes through a method to improve this model, called version 2. Version 2 ends up with a
total of 43,712,278 parameters[41].
Model Version 2
A way to improve the Faster R-CNN with the same backbone of ResNet-50-FPN, is to
change components in the backbone. Another way is make changes to the modules of
Faster R-CNN [17]. Firstly a backbone’s performance is jointly linked to the pre-training.
The idea is to split the task, first training a backbone with a large dataset, thereby learning
generalizable features. These features can then be fine tuned to a new task, which should
be an easier problem to optimize rather than taking on learning the features and then
the given task. Therefore a new pre-training backbone gives better results. The pre-
training includes optimizations with learning rate, weight decay and something as simple
as longer training time. Besides fine tuning data augmentation is also applied. Secondly
some upgrades are applied to the different modules of the network. The RPN gets one
more layer on top of the one it already had along with batch normalization. The two
sibling heads also get heavier. The classification and box regression heads now have
four convolutional layers with the addition of batch normalization compared to two layers
without batch normalization.
Comparing these two model’s performances of license plate detection, is a reduced prob-
lem from the benchmark of object detecting on MS COCO with 80 classes and a many
images. Therefore, It it is interesting to examine if the Faster R-CNN with a backbone of
ResNet-50-FPN is enough for this task. Furthermore, in terms of accuracy, will they be
similar, and given the added complexity to the model version 2, is the loss in inference
speed noticeable enough to become the preferred model?
3.3.4
You Only Look Once (YOLO)
You only look once (YOLO) model, is a model developed in 2016 [18]. YOLO was devel-
oped concurrently with Faster-RCNN and at the time most of research focused on making
the existing models faster and more accurate. However, YOLO took a new approach by
trying to solve object detection as a regression problem in a single stage. This stems from
the fact that all previous models did not look at the whole image. In Fast R-CNN the model
only looks at small window of the image with a high probability of containing an object.
YOLO can be optimized from end-to-end because the whole detection and classification
happens in the same network. Compared to the Fast R-CNN YOLO has better gener-
alizability, because YOLO has access to global features of the image when predicting.
The network works by splitting the input image into S x S grid (S = 7). Then it creates a
class probability map which assigns each cell a class. Each cell upholds P(class|Object)
meaning that it is the probability of a given class if there is an object in the cell. If an object
is larger than one cell the center of the object determines which cell is responsible for that
object. The network also predicts the bb and an associated class. The network combines
this class probability map and the predicted bb + confidence into the final detections (see
on Figure 3.17). Because YOLO classifies and localises in one stage, the inference speed
of YOLO outperforms Faster R-CNN. The Architecture of YOLO consists of 24 convolu-
tional layers with two fully connected layers at the end. YOLO has some limitations; there
is a limited amount of objects in total that it can detect, based on the number of cells. Two
boxes are predicted in each cell and the one with highest confidence score is chosen. In
this case YOLO can predict (7 X 7) = 48 objects and have 48*2 = 98 boxes. This means
that YOLO is bad at detecting groups of small objects if they all are contained within one
cell. The result is that only one with be detected the rest disregarded.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.17: The class probability map and predicted Bounding boxes + confidence
3.3.5
YOLOv2
The second model in the yolo family is called YOLO9000 (YOLOv2) which extends YOLO
to 9000 classes [19]. YOLO is worse than region proposal-based methods when it comes
to localization error and recall. Therefore, YOLOv2 tries to improve on these two factors
while preserving the beneficial aspects such as inference speed.
The approach that YOLOv2 takes is not to scale up the network in order to maintain the
speed. Instead the model simplifies the network and makes the representation easier to
learn. YOLO uses fully connected layers on the feature maps to predict the bb coordi-
nates. YOLOv2 introduces anchor boxes (see section 3.2.3), which increases the recall
of the model but does not change the mAP, and goes to a fully convolutional architecture.
Furthermore YOLOv2 uses a new network, called darknet-19. It consists of 19 convo-
lutional layers, five less that the network from YOLO. In addition to this the model has
five max pooling layers one more than the previous model, and it adds a softmax layer
for class prediction. These changes results in a reduction in operations from 8.52 billion
to 5.58 billion. Batch normalization is used on all convolutional layers which makes the
training more stable and eliminates the need for other regularisation methods such as
dropout. YOLO is pre-trained on imageNet and then applied on double the scale, which
means that the network is trying to adjust to the new scale while also learning the de-
tection. YOLOv2 mitigates this by fine turning the up-scaled classification network for 10
epoch on imageNet and then it fine tunes the detection separately. YOLOv2 has higher
resolution feature maps which means that the model’s grid size is (13 X 13) instead of
(7 X 7) to increase performance on detecting smaller objects. This increases the amount
of predictions to 169 and boxes to 338. However this is still no where near other models
which are all above 5000. Hence why YOLOv2 adopts anchor boxes (see section 3.2.3),
which means that YOLOv2 generates 5 anchor boxes per cell which gives 835 boxes.
Additionally using anchor boxes means that the objectness and class are predicted for
each anchor, instead of for each cell in the grid. Just like in Faster R-CNN YOLOv2 adds
anchor boxes to predict the boxes. Then it simplifies the problem of predicting the coor-
dinates and becomes easier to learn by only predicting the offsets. Faster R-CNN uses
hand-picked priors for generating the anchor boxes, where YOLOv2 uses k-means clus-
tering on the dataset to find better priors: the average shape and locations. YOLOv2
uses the location prediction parametrization to be relative of the given grid cell. This
24
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:32==
makes it easier for the network to learn and thereby more stable. To localizes smaller
object, Faster R-CNN uses different ranges of resolutions in the FPN. YOLOv2 uses a
passthrough layer, by concatenating high resolution features with the low resolution fea-
tures, to increase prediction on smaller objects. During training the model uses multi-scale
training, meaning that it changes the network to work on a new dimension of images ran-
domly after 10 batches. This results in a more robust network when it comes to detecting
on different resolutions.
3.3.6
YOLOv3
The third version in the yolo sequence, is called YOLOv3 [20].
The paper is called
”YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement”, which indicates that there is only small differ-
ences. The biggest difference is the backbone architecture, as YOLOv3 uses a new
feature extractor called darknet-53 that has 53 convolutional layers. This new backbone
does not have any pooling layers, instead opted to use convolutional layers with a stride
of 2. results in a similar down-scaling of the features. The added benefits of using con-
volutional layers with stride of 2, is that there is no loss of information compared to max-
pooling which picks the highest value out of kernel. When utilizing this method all the
pixel are apart of the mapping from the input to the output. Furthermore, this method
has learnable weights which gives the network the ability to learn the down-scaling, with
the most important information being the most prevalent. Darknet-53 also incorporates
shortcut connections. This means that the extractor is much more powerful and bigger
than darknet-19 from the previous model, yet still more efficient than ResNet-101, which
is the closest in terms of operations. The network has shortcut connections that works
in a similar manner to the FPN, by extracting features at different scales, which gives
the added benefits mentioned in 3.3.3 of enriching the feature maps making the network
better at detecting objects at different scales. The backbone darknet-53 performs equally
with the other state-of-the-art classifiers with higher accuracy than ResNet-101 yet less
than ResNet-152. The backbone has fewer floating point operations and more speed,
than ResNet-101 and ResNet-152.
YOLOv3 uses leaky Relu for the activation function along with batch normalisation. YOLOv2
uses five anchor boxes and YOLOv3 lowers this number to three. The reason YOLOv3
does this is because YOLOv3 predicts on 3 different scales (See Figure 3.18). With a
down-scaling of 32, 16 and 8, that are responsible for predicting small, medium and large
objects. This means that for an input image of size (416x416) the prediction scales are
(13x13), (26x26) and (52x52) this gives 3549 cells in total. For each cell there is predicted
3 anchors which gives a total of 10,647 boxes. This is a large improvement compared
to YOLOv1 of 98 boxes and YOLOv2 845 boxes, which is more than 10 times larger.
YOLOv3 ditches the assumption that each box only has one class and does not use Soft-
max but a multi-label approach instead. A multi-label approach adds support for overlap-
ping objects, as the output does not sum to one. Each label is bounded between [0, 1]
using sigmoid. This is an independent logistics classifier, which means one classifier per
class.
Direct image prediction is utilized for box regression with a prediction of (tx, ty, tw, th, to).
This means that the predicted boxes are relative to the image’s x and y coordinates of the
top left corner. The with and height of the boxes are calculated with respect to the given
anchor box. The x and y values are bounded between [0−1] using sigmoid from [−∞, ∞],
Bx = sigmoid(tx) + cx where cx is the image’s x coordinate and tx is the target’s x offset.
Likewise for y. bh is found by bh = expth ∗anchorboxh where expth bounds [−∞, ∞] to
[0, ∞]. Likewise for w. to is the objectness for a given anchor box, where 0.9 means
that the network is 90% certain that an object exists in the box. Even with all of these
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
25
==PAGE:33==
changes the performance of the YOLOv3, in terms of AP 50 and the new metric of AP with
IoU between .5 and .95, the author states that at high IoU thresholds the YOLOv3 lacks
behind. This means that the model is fast but struggles with getting the boxes to perfectly
align with the objects. The YOLOv3’s AP on small objects now performs relatively well,
however now it cannot compare predictions on medium and larger size objects to other
state-of-the-art models.
Figure 3.18: Yolov3 architecture [42]
3.3.7
YOLOv4
The fourth installment of yolo is called YOLOv4 [21]. The development of the model is
split into two types: bag of Freebies (BoF) and bag of Specials (BoS). This installment
adds a neck in the model as the previous models just directly passes the features from
the feature extractor to the prediction head. The neck of the model is placed between
the feature extractor and the detector. BoF does, as the name suggests, not increase the
inference time only changes the training. Most of the changes that satisfies this definition
is data augmentation, which aims at making the model more robust at detecting objects in
different environments. BoS are defined by techniques that only increases the inference
time a little yet gives a substantial accuracy improvement to be worthwhile.
Bag of Freebies
Applied to both
Mosaic data augmentation is an augmentation technique that stacks four images
into a grid, while keeping the bbs relative to the images. This makes objects
detectable outside the their normal context, which makes the model more ro-
bust.
DropBlock regularization using dropout in convolutional layers does not work well,
because there is a spacial correlation between the features near each other.
Dropblock is more successful by dropping a region of a feature map together
at the same time.
26
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:34==
Backbone
CutMix is a data augmentation technique that removes a region of an image and
replaces it with a region from another image, where the labels are mixed pro-
portionally to the size of the mixed area.
Class label smoothing is a method where taking hard labels and turning them into
smooth labels makes the model more robust.
Detector
Complete IoU-loss Yolov4 opted for using CIoU-loss, for the box regression prob-
lem solver. CIoU is faster at moving the boxes to fit the ground truths and has
higher accuracy on the BB regression problem.
Cross mini batch normalization (CmBN) is used to get information from all the
mini batches instead of only one singular mini-batch
Self-Adversarial Training is a data augmentation method that goes through two
forward passes. In the first pass the gradients are calculated with respect to
the input image and not the weights. Then the image is modified to change
it in a way so that the network believes it does not contain an object. During
the second forward pass the network trains on the image normally. This is a
technique normally used to attack a network making the network predict false
negatives.
Eliminate grid sensitivity is a modification of the box regression targets, that makes
the network better at predicting objects on the boundary of a cell. This sensitiv-
ity comes from the use of sigmoid. To land on the max values the input should
be extremely high.
Using multiple anchors for a single ground truth instead of only comparing to
one anchor for each ground truth multiple are used.
Cosine annealing scheduler changes the learning rate on the fly during training.
Cosine annealing also follows a smooth wave with rapid decrease, which means
that the learning rate goes from large to very small. At the end of every wave
there is a ’warm reset’ where the learning rate is increased again, continuously
moving in repeating waves.
Optimal hyperparameters genetic algorithms are used to select the optimal hy-
perparameters.
Random training shapes During training multiple image scales are used at ran-
dom, like in the earlier versions, while also dynamically changing the mini-batch
sizes in addition.
Bag of Specials
Applied to both
Mish activation is an activation function (see sec 3.1.3) that is smooth, unbounded
from above, and bounded from below (see on Figure 3.19) [43]. Being un-
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
27
==PAGE:35==
bounded from above means that Mish avoids saturation like Relu. Unlike Relu,
Mish is continuously differentiable, which removes undesired side effects in op-
timization. Mish preserves a small amount of negative information which stops
the phenomenon called dying ReLU. This is when Relu activations are always
outputting zero. As Mish is smooth it gives way for better generalization and
easier optimization, because of less sharp transitions.
Figure 3.19: Mish activation function [43]
Backbone
Cross-stage partial connections (CSP) The darknet-53 from yolov3 is changed
to a CSPdenseNet, which reduces redundant gradients when backpropagat-
ing. This keeps the benefits of alleviating the vanishing-gradient problem, by
allowing feature reuse with a significant reduction in the number of parameters
[44]. The computation complexity of the network is smaller, because only half
the input is passed through the backbone [45].
Multiinput weighted residual connections (MiWRC) Is applying weights to the
residual connections that are learnable.
Detector
SPP-block has the added benefit of increasing the receptive field significantly, while
having little to no effect on the inference cost. SPP-block also gets the most
relevant context features at different resolutions [46].
SAM-block is a modified version of Spatial Attention Module (SAM). SAM works
by taking a feature map as input, then creating a feature map with values from
[0, 1] using sigmoid. This means that the redundant information is close to 0 and
the information to pay attention to is close to 1. This output is multiplied onto
the identity, which is the same as applying weights for all the pixel values. The
modified version is where, instead of creating two channels with maxpooling
and average pooling, there is a convolution. This gives the possibility for the
network to learn which features to pay more attention to.
28
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:36==
path-aggregation block (PAN) is an extension to Feature Pyramid Network (see
section 3.3.3). The PAN Block’s job is to mix and combine the different image
features taken at different scales to pass them forward to prediction.
DIoU-NMS is used instead of the normal NMS (see section 3.2.2). This changes
the criterion from IoU to DIoU, which takes the distance between the centers
into accounts as well. This makes the suppression of redundant boxes more
robust for cases with occlusions.
3.3.8
YOLOv5
YOLOv5 and YOLOv4 are very similar models in many aspects, as YOLOv5 also uses
SPP, PANet and CSPdarknet. YOLOv5 uses the same prediction head as YOLOv4 and
YOLOv3. There are some debate whether or not YOLOv5 is better in comparison with
YOLOv4. Most say that YOLOv4 has better accuracy yet lacks behind in inference time.
Others say that YOLOv4 has same or better inference time [23] [22]. YOLOv5 is faster
to train compared to YOLOv4. The biggest difference between the two networks is the
languages that they are written in, as YOLOv4 opted for C and YOLOv5 is written in
PyTorch. YOLOv5 is on the pytorch hub that makes it possible to run different tests on
the model in direct comparison with the Faster R-CNN. YOLOv5’s architecture has five
sizes to choose from. The sizes goes from smallest to biggest and is named n, s, m, l and
x.
As mentioned above the backbone of YOLOv5 is a CSPDarknet. CSPDarknet is a mod-
ified version of Darknet-53 introduced in YOLOv3. There are two significant changes;
the addition of Cross Stage Partial network and the use of DenseNet blocks [45]. In a
DenseNet Block, as seen on Figure 3.20, each layer has a connection to all the previous
layers. The idea behind the use of DenseNet is that networks are becoming increasingly
deeper, and it is shown to be more accurate and efficient to train when there are short
cut connections close to the input and close to the output [44]. DenseNet takes this to
the extreme, by having all the connections possible in a block called a fully connected
block; a dense block, that is similar to a fully connected dense layer. These short cuts
and residual connections also make the vanishing gradient problem less likely to occur,
because gradients are send through these short cuts as well. However, all these con-
nections create another problem, which is a redundancy in the gradients. This problem is
then addressed in the Cross Stage Partial network.
(a) DenseNet Block [45]
(b) Dense Block, where all layers are
connected and get input from all pre-
ceding feature-maps [44]
Figure 3.20: Dense Block
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
29
==PAGE:37==
Cross Stage Partial (CSP) network is a very simple idea. If the short cut connections have
too much duplicated and redundant information and thus make the inference time longer,
the network only send half the channels through the block [45]. CSP network is applied to
the darknet-53 from yolov3, meaning that there is a split in the input. x0 the input is split
into [x
′
0, x
′′
0] over the channels. Where x
′
0 is passed through the network and then into a
transition layer. The output of this transition layer is then concatenated with the x
′′
0 which
is then send through another transition layer as seen on Figure 3.21.
Figure 3.21: CSPDenseNet [45]
An Spatial Pyramid Pooling (SPP) block works similar to RoI pooling where a region,
sometimes called a window, is of dynamic size converted into a fixed size vector (See
spp on Figure 3.22). The way that this occurs is by taking the region and splitting it into
a smaller grid and then taking the max value in each cell. The SPP-block extends this by
taking a grid in multiple resolutions over the whole image, which still gives a fixed length
vector [46]. The SPP-block increases the receptive field significantly, while it gets the
most significant context features with almost no cost to the speed of the network.
Figure 3.22: The Spatial Pyramid Pooling Layer [46]
Like YOLOv4, YOLOv5 also utilizes a neck in the architecture. A Path Aggregation Net-
work (PANet) is an extension to FPN (see section 3.3.3). PANet adds one more bottom-up
30
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:38==
path with lateral connections [47]. At the end all of these scales are applied to Adaptive
feature pooling. This means that now predictions are a mix of the different scales where in
FPN, the predictions happens independently for each scale. The second bottom-up path
is to create a highway for the low-level feature maps to go to the outputs, with a lot less
convolutional layers between. Additionally the second bottom-up path’s job, is to recover
information. As seen on Figure 3.23 the red path has a lot of convolutional layers in be-
tween, where the green path has a lot less. It therefore contains more of the unmodified
information, which is then send through to N2 to N5 corresponding to P2 and P5 resulting
in a path between each proposal and all feature levels. PANet has been modified by in-
corporating the BottleNeckCSP in its architecture. This module is a CSP network, with a
1×1 convolution in order to reduce the number of input feature-maps, followed by a 3x3
layer, which is then concatenated together.
Figure 3.23: Path Aggregation Network [47]
The entire architecture can be seen on Figure 3.24. YOLOv5 also changes the backbone
by replacing the first three layers by a single one: A convolutional layer with a kernel of
size 6, stride 2 and padding 2. The main reason for implementing this layer, is to reduce
the complexity of the model by down-sampling the input.
Figure 3.24: Yolov5 architecture [37]
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
31
==PAGE:39==
Yolov5 does not use a SAM module in the detector, as yolov4 does. Similarly to yolov4,
yolov5 has grid sensitivity eliminated by new equations compared to the ones used in
yolov3 (see sec 3.3.6). The grid sensitivity problem occurs because of the sigmoid bound,
meaning that only extremely large values are placed on the grid boundary. The new equa-
tions extent the interval of possible values from [0, 1] to [−0.5, 1.5]. This means that the
offset is now more easily one or zero. The width and height equations were unbounded,
but to limit training instabilities, the new equations are now bounded.
bx = (2 ∗sigmoid(tx) −0.5) + cx, by = (2 ∗sigmoid(ty) −0.5) + cy,
bw = anchorboxw ∗(2 ∗sigmoid(tw))2, bh = anchorboxh ∗(2 ∗sigmoid(th))2,
The activation function applied by the network is the swish activation function for the hid-
den layers (see on Figure 3.19). Swish has many of the same properties as Mish, and is
very similar which is apparent when looking at the Figure. Yolov5 uses the Sigmoid acti-
vation function for the output layers. Yolov5, like the previous models, has a loss function
consisting of three terms; an objectness loss, a classification loss and a location loss.
The objectness and classification are using Binary Cross Entropy, which is explained in
section 3.3.3, to determine the loss. The final term location loss is determined by using
CIoU to compute this loss. CIoU takes into account the overlapping area like IoU-loss,
the aspect ratio and orientation like GIoU and the distance between the two center points
like DIoU [21]. This extends IoU-loss that cannot work with non-overlapping bb. The λ
terms are just a hyperparameter for weightage of each loss.
losstotal = λ1Lcls + λ2Lloc + λ3Lobj
32
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:40==
4
Implementation
Firstly, I will go through the two datasets. In deep learning understanding the data is
paramount in order to understand the output of the model. Without good understanding
of the data, it is hard to understand the behaviour of the model. This is due to the fact
that, by using supervised learning (sec 3.1.1), the model is learning from labeled data,
and because the model is only as good as the data allows the model to be. Additionally,
inspecting the data can reveal inherent biasses, which could explain some behavior. Such
biasses can be that the labels are annotated by two experts, and the experts does not
100% agree on the annotations. However, in the case of these datasets, the position of
the labels are fairly precise. Most of the biasses should come from how, where and when
the data is capture and the human choices of how to split the data.
4.1
Datasets
The two datasets are used to measure the performance of the models. Firstly, as men-
tioned in the section 3.1, the problem that I am trying to solve is the license plate detection
problem. Furthermore, the annotation used to detect a license plate will be a bb (sec 1.2).
For each image there is a bb. In the two dataset the bb is using the format [ymin, xmin,
ymax, xmax], meaning that the pixel position values for the four corners. Another element
is the size of the image. As yolov5 uses 640 as default image size (See train.py line 438
[48]), this size is used to train both models, so that the comparison is more fair. The sizes
of the bbs are then scales to fit the new image size in the dataloader section A.1.1.
4.1.1
UFPR-ALPR
The dataset, introduced in the paper by Laroca et al. [27], is designed for Automatic
License Plate Recognition (ALPR). The dataset consists of 150 tracks, which means that
there are 30 images taken in sequence of a car driving making a total of 4500 images
[49]. The images contained in the dataset are captured in a real-world scenario, which
means that the vehicle in the image is moving and that the cameras position is inside
another vehicle, and therefore also moving. There were three cameras used to capture
the images, and each camera captured 1500 images. The dataset has two types of license
plates, a gray and a red. Furthermore, the dataset has both cars and motorcycles. As
mentioned in sec 3.1.4 the dataset is split into three subsets called, training, validating
and testing dataset, all used for different purposes. This dataset has a given split of 40%
for training, 40% for testing and 20% for validation. This split is based on tracks, which
means that there are no images from a track distributed into more than one of the splits.
The actual amount of images in each dataset can be seen in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: UFPR Dataset split
Dataset
Amount
Tracks
Training
1800
60
Validation
500
30
Test
1800
60
Total
4500
150
This is positive, as the images are very similar inside each track, because the images are
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
33
==PAGE:41==
capturing the same vehicle just at a different temporal point. Splitting the dataset loses
its meaning if the tracks are mixed. The dataset also contains more information such as
the vehicle position and the characters of the license plate. However I am only using the
position of the license plate. As mentioned in the section above, the format of this bb is
[ymin, xmin, ymax, xmax].
Showcase Of Images:
Figure 4.1: Show case of data
(a) Six pictures sampled at evenly spaced interval
(b) Six pictures sampled at evenly spaced interval
Figure 4.2: Showcase of two tracks
Quality Measurement Of UFPR Split
Looking at the split datasets, in terms of the whole set compared to the trainset and val-
idationset, it seems that the testset contained a different variance of qualities such as
brightness. This means that the data is skewed compared with the whole dataset. I
therefore calculated the average brightness for each image in the dataset to see if this
was the case.
34
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.3: Mean brightness pr image measurement
As seen on Figure 4.3, the whole dataset has more variance, and the distribution of the
splits are skewed to some degree in the different average brightness. One factor that
results in this, stems from the fact that the dataset has a lot of information overlap. This
information overlap is inherent when capturing images in a track, because the same light-
ing conditions and spacial elements will appear in the same region. This corresponds to
having high peaks in the histogram.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
35
==PAGE:43==
(a) The brightest
(b) Mean brightness
(c) The darkest
Figure 4.4: Mosaic over the difference of brightness
Figure 4.5: In spacial heatmap over bb’s positions, it is apparent that the spread of loca-
tion is not very uniform, stemming from the fact that these splits contains 30 images in
sequence. It is almost possible to see the start and ending position of the license plate.
4.1.2
RODOSOL-ALPR
This dataset, introduced by the same authors as above [50], has, unlike the other dataset,
images taken from a stationary camera at pay tolls [51]. There are some similarities
between the datasets, such as both containing motorcycles, having the same format for bb
and containing more information ex. the vehicle position and the characters of the license
plate. One difference between the datasets is that RODOSOL differentiates between
more types of vehicles, omitting buses and trucks, where busses are a part of the UFPR,
yet still classified as a car. RODOSOL also contains a lot more images; a total of 20
thousand images. These images are separate instances of vehicles, where UFPR had
30 images of each instance. Taking this into account, this dataset has images of 20
thousand vehicles where UFPR only had 150 vehicles. This means that RODOSOL has
a lot more information when training, and should therefore be able to generalize better
than UFPR, based on the fact that there is more variance in the data. However, I am only
utilizing the position of the license plate.
36
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.2: RodoSol Dataset split
Dataset
Amount
Training
8000
Validation
4000
Test
8000
Total
20000
Showcase Of Images:
Figure 4.6: Show case of data
Quality Measurement Of RODOSOL Split
When I looked into the quality of the UFPR dataset, I found some worries. Yet, I still
expect RODOSOL to have better quality in the brightness aspect, because the dataset
contains more information and has less information overlap, because the images are
single instances and do not appear multiple times in the dataset.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.7: Mean brightness pr image measurement
(a) The brightest
(b) Mean brightness
(c) The darkest
Figure 4.8: Mosaic over the difference of brightness
38
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.9: Spacial heatmap over bbs measurement
The heatmap is a more dense and connected blob, which makes sense because the
vehicles are stationary. Therefore the heatmap has, as expected, a very compact shape.
It is clear, when viewing the different in brightness, that the RODOSOL has more extreme
cases compared to the UFPR. However, it is more similar when it comes to the data split.
4.2
Training Hyperparams
The hyperparameters that are used when training for all models are listed below:
Hyperparameters
Value
Img Size
640
Batch Size
16
Optimizer
SGD
Epoch
40
Furthermore, the Yolov5 has a fitness function that is used to choose which configuration
of weights is the best during training. The equation is as following 4.1: [48].
fitness = mAP@0.5 ∗0.1 + mAP@0.5 : 0.05 : 0.95 ∗0.9
(4.1)
The entire development process was carried out on the high performance computing avail-
able for DTU students at computing center. The process is explained in the appendix A.1.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
39
==PAGE:47==
4.3
Training With Faster R-CNN
The two variances of Faster R-CNN, the original and version 2, are both implemented in
Pytorch. When using the Pytorch documentation [40], it is shown how to get the losses
of the model for training. Firstly, a target is created that is a collection of everything the
model needs to improve. In the case of license plate detection it is the class label and the
annotated bb. This list of targets is then given to the model, resulting in a dictionary of four
lossses, two for each network in the model, returned from the model (section 3.3.3). These
four losses are then using backpropagation 3.1.4 to minimize the losses, and thereby
improving the models’s performance.
The steps in the training are as follows:
1. Zero the optimizer from last pass
2. Create the targets
3. Getting the losses from the model
4. Sum the four losses
5. Calculate the gradients by calling .backward() on the losses
6. Update the weights by calling .step on the optimizer using the parameters
7. Archive the loss values and save the model
8. Repeat the process on the validation dataset split
This training process is executed over the dataset’s batches, and the losses are averaged
over the current batch. This means that the model is updated once per batch, in order to
walk in a direction that is better in general. After the training there is an inspection of the
losses and metrics, such as mAP and the fitness score. Based on the losses it is possible
to see if the models have reached convergence. This means that a model will not improve
by additional training. Furthermore, inspecting the loss will make it apparent if the model
has overfitted or underfitted 3.1.4. The best model is chosen based on the best fitness
score which is an indicator based on a weighted mAP that gives a great gauge on the
current models’s performances see sec 3.2.
40
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:48==
4.4
Training With Yolov5
Before it is possible to train Yolov5 the dataset needs to be transformed in order for it to
be compatible with Yolov5 [52]. First of all the format of the bb for Yolov5 needs to be
[xcenter, ycenter, width, height] normalized between 0-1. Furthermore, when using the
Yolov5 train.py script from the github, the images should be placed into specific folders.
The folder structure is as follows:
Root-folder
1. images
(a) test
(b) train
(c) val
2. labels
(a) test
(b) train
(c) val
Folder structure from their github [52]
In the labels folder there is a .txt file with the same name as the corresponding image
from the images folder. This .txt file contains a row for each object in the image. In this
case there only exists one object per image, therefore the .txt file will only have one row for
each image containing the class and then the box in the format mentioned above: [classnr
xcenter ycenter width height]. In order to get the data into the this format I created a script
that went through all the images in the dataloader, transformed them, moved them to the
correct folder and created a .txt file in the matching label folder (see A.1.2).
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
41
==PAGE:49==
42
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:50==
5
Results
In this chapter the results of the trained models with be compared and presented. The
examination will show which model’s performance is best in terms of speed and accuracy.
The models will be compared over each dataset. The two variances of Faster R-CNN and
Yolov5, will be compared to find the most suitable model for the task. The most suitable
variances will then be compared, to see if there is a clear indication of one model pulling
ahead in terms of speed and accuracy. Finally an experiment, over the size of the input
image and how the performance changes based on this aspect, is carried out.
5.1
Faster R-CNN
In this section the two variances of the Faster R-CNN’s performance will be presented
for each dataset. First for RODOSOL and then for UFPR. When training, the training
time varied a great deal, however the clear trend was that the version 2 model trained for
approximately twice as long compared to the original model.
5.1.1
RODOSOL Training And Validation
The first elements I am inspecting are losses, in order to for me to look for signs of over-
and under-fitting. I am inspecting the mean loss to see if there is a downwards trend which
indicates that the model has started converging and successfully getting better and better
at the task at hand. The mean training loss and the mean validation loss is set side by
side, in order to see how the model performs on images it wasn’t trained on. The loss
graph can be seen on Figure A.1.3. After the training the mAP and fitness score on the
validation dataset are calculated for each epoch (See Figure 5.1). The fitness score is
utilized to pick the best configuration of the model with the weights of epoch 33 for the
original and 30 for the version 2 with a 91.26% and 91.48% accuracy respectively.
Figure 5.1: The mAP and fitness score (see equation 4.1) over epoch. On the left the
original model and on the right the model version 2. These mAPs are calculated on the
validation dataset and used to pick the best configuration indicated by the blue dot
Inquiring into the predictions for the best epoch model, a clear picture emerges. The
model has a high confidence for most of the predictions (See Figure 5.2). When looking
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
43
==PAGE:51==
at the IoU for each prediction it indicates that the IoU is similar, except for an outliers for
version 2 with zero IoU. However, the version 2 is not very confident about the prediction
that got such a low score. The prediction can be seen on Figure 5.3. All of these elements
are consistent with how the pr-graphs depict the performances (see Figure 5.4)
Figure 5.2: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. To the
left the models predictions are plotted over the confidence score. Likewise on the right
the models predictions are plotted over the IoU score. All of these are computed on the
validation dataset.
Figure 5.3: A prediction from model version 2, that has IoU score of zero. The prediction
is in red and the ground truth is in blue.
44
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.4: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. The
figure shows three precision-recall graphs each over a different IoU criterion. On the left
@0.5, in the middle @ 0.75 and finally on the right the average over @0.5:0.05:0.95. All
these are computed on the validation dataset.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
45
==PAGE:53==
5.1.2
RODOSOL Test And Evaluation
Here we see that the model clearly can perform the task on unseen data. The predictions
with a low confidence score has a corresponding low IoU score. The original model has
two predictions with zero IoU score as outliers, these can be seen on Figure 5.6. When
looking at these predictions it is clear to see, that the characteristics are similar to the
information that a license plate contains. The pr-graph indicates that the performances
are good, and that they are very similar to the training pr-graph which represents good
generalizability.
Figure 5.5: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. To the
left the models predictions are plotted over the confidence score. Likewise on the right
the models’s predictions are plotted over the IoU score. All of these are computed on the
test dataset.
46
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.6: Two predictions from original model with zero IoU score. The prediction is in
red and the ground truth is in blue.
Figure 5.7: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. The
figure shows three precision-recall graphs each over a different IoU criterion. On the left
@0.5, in the middle @ 0.75 and finally on the right the average over @0.5:0.05:0.95. All
these are computed on the test dataset.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
47
==PAGE:55==
5.1.3
UFPR Training And Validation
The loss for UFPR is inspected in order to check if the models have converged and are not
overfitting. When looking at the graph it is clear that the models converge and stagnate,
which means that the models are saturated in the terms of learning (See on Figure A.1.4).
This means that more training would not increase the models’s performance and that they
are more likely to start overfitting. The fitness score indicates that epoch 40 and 37, for the
original and version 2 respectively, are the best configurations (see Figure 5.8). Looking at
the models’s predictions a low IoU score corresponds to a low confidence which is a good
thing. Both models have two predictions that have no overlap with the ground truths (See
Figure 5.10 and 5.11). When scrutinizing the bad predictions, it seems that the original is
clearly non-sensible. However, the version 2 captures more similar characteristics. This
falls in line with the fact that distances between the models’s corresponding pr graphs that
are larger compared to the previous dataset (See Figure 5.12).
Figure 5.8: The mAP over epoch and fitness score (see equation 4.1). On the left the
original model and on the right the model version 2. These mAP’s are calculated on the
validation dataset and used to pick the best configuration indicated by the blue dot.
Figure 5.9: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. To
the left the models predictions are plotted over the confidence score. On the right the
models predictions are plotted over the IoU score. All of these are computed on the
validation dataset.
48
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.10: Two predictions from the original model with zero IoU score. The prediction
is in red and the ground truth is in blue.
Figure 5.11: Two predictions from the version 2 model with zero IoU score. The prediction
is in red and the ground truth is in blue.
Figure 5.12: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. The
figure shows three precision-recall graphs each over a different IoU criterion. On the left
@ 0.5, in the middle @ 0.75 and finally on the right the average over @0.5:0.05:0.95.
All these are computed on the validation dataset.
5.1.4
UFPR Test And Evaluation
For the models’s performances on the test dataset, both models have a lot of complete
misses with no overlap at all (See Figure 5.15). The original model has 65 and the version
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
49
==PAGE:57==
2 model has 33 predictions with zero IoU. This indicates that both models do not generalize
well for this dataset, which corresponds with the quality inspection of the dataset, where
some aspects were highlighted as bad characteristics in terms of a good quality dataset.
Figure 5.13: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. To
the left the models predictions are plotted over the confidence score. On the right the
models predictions are plotted over the IoU score. All of these are computed on the test
dataset.
When plotting all of the zero IoU predictions over the confidence score it is clear to see
that both models have some predictions with high confidence. However, it seems as if
the original model has some predictions with low confidence while version 2 keeps a very
high confidence on all the predictions, with the lowest at 0.993.
Figure 5.14: All predictions with zero IoU score.
When examining the pr-graph the version 2 has better accuracy on all the the criteria.
This indicates that the version 2 model is better on all parameters in terms of accuracy.
50
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.15: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. The
figure shows three precision-recall graphs each over a different IoU criterion. On the left
@ 0.5, in the middle @ 0.75 and finally on the right the average over @0.5:0.05:0.95.
All these are computed on the test dataset.
Comparison Of Faster R-CNN Variances
Model
mAP@0.5
mAP@0.75
mAP@0.5:0.05:0.95
Inference speed
RODOSOL
Original
99,96%
99,81%
90,64%
3.24s
Version 2
100%
99,83%
91,39%
4.98s
UFPR
Original
94,44%
88,35%
63,46%
3.19s
Version 2
98,05%
97,06%
72,88%
5.20s
In terms of accuracy, the version 2 model is better for RODOSOL by a very small margin.
However, in terms of inference speed the added complexity results in close to 2 seconds
longer time. This, I would argue, is not a worthwhile trade off, meaning that the original
model is better for RODOSOL. The generalization is not good for UFPR, yet the version
2 model performs slightly better than the original model. While it seems that both models
preform similar on the RODOSOL dataset, it is not the case for UFPR. On the UFPR the
accuracy benefit for the version 2 model is a lot bigger: roughly 10 mAP points difference
on the @0.75 and @0.5:0.05:0.95. This indicates that the model is better at localizing
the objects and making the bbs fit more perfectly than the original. The original model is
only less than 4 points behind the version 2 model in terms of mAP@0.5. All this taken
into account the version 2 model is the better model for the UFPR dataset, and for the
RODOSOL the original is the better model in terms of the trade off between speed and
accuracy.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
51
==PAGE:59==
5.2
Yolov5
In this section the performances of the two variances of the Yolov5, Yolov5s and Yolov5x,
will be presented for each dataset. First for RODOSOL and then for UFPR. The training
time was a lot quicker compared to both Faster R-CNNs, however the two variances of
Yolov5 both trained with a small margin of time difference.
5.2.1
RODOSOL Training And Validation
When training yolov5, the three losses are box regression loss, objectness loss and clas-
sification loss and is shown on each row in the first three spots (See Figure A.1.5 ). The
last four graphs are the mAP, precision and recall graphs over the validation dataset. All
the loss graphs show a clear converges and no over-fitting. The other graphs show the
model getting closer and closer to one, which means a perfect score. This shows good
promise. The graphs are similar for both models as they follow the same pattern.
5.2.2
RODOSOL Test And Evaluation
Firstly, when looking at the predictions for both models, they have similar results, With an
exception of an outlier for yolov5s that has a prediction with 0.3 IoU score. It is a good
sign that the model has one of the lowest confidence scores for this prediction.
Figure 5.16: The first row is the small model s and the second row is the largest model x.
To the left the models predictions are plotted over the confidence score. On the right the
models predictions are plotted over the IoU score. All of these are computed on the test
dataset.
When inspecting the pr-grahs it seems that the models’s performances are very similar,
with the biggest difference on mAP@0.5:0.05:0.95. This means that Yolov5x is a bit better
at localizing the object with a tight fitting bb.
52
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.17: The first row is the small model s and the second row is the largest model x.
The figure shows three precision-recall graphs each over a different IoU criterion. On the
left @ 0.5, in the middle @ 0.75 and finally on the right the average over @0.5:0.05:0.95.
All these are computed on the test dataset.
5.2.3
UFPR Training And Validation
When looking at the losses it is clear to see that the smaller model s is struggling on the
mAP graphs and recall precision graphs (See Figure A.1.6). Model yolov5x increases
more steeply. However both models end at a similar point.
5.2.4
UFPR Test And Evaluation
Figure 5.18: The first row is the small model s and the second row is the largest model x.
To the left the models predictions are plotted over the confidence score. On the right the
models predictions are plotted over the IoU score. All of these are computed on the test
dataset.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
53
==PAGE:61==
When looking at the predictions they are clearly different from the RODOSOL datasets
predictions. The Yolov5s model has 14 zero IoU predictions, while Yolov5x only has 7.
The clear difference between these can be seen on Figure 5.19, where Yolov5s maintains
a high confidence score for all the predictions with zero IoU, while Yolov5x has some with
high confidence score. However, the confidence drops which indicates a better general-
ization and understanding of the problem.
Figure 5.19: All prediction with zero in IoU score
The pr-graphs are not surprising, considering the earlier findings. The model Yolov5x
outperforms, by a significant amount for mAp@0.5:0.05:0.95 metric.
Figure 5.20: The first row is the small model s and the second row is the largest model x.
The figure shows three precision-recall graphs each over a different IoU criterion. On the
left @ 0.5, in the middle @ 0.75 and finally on the right the average over @0.5:0.05:0.95.
All these are computed on the test dataset.
54
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:62==
Comparison Of Yolov5 Variances
Model
mAP@0.5
mAP@0.75
mAP@0.5:0.05:0.95
Inference speed
RODOSOL
yolo5s
99,86%
99,61 %
91,01%
0.14s
yolo5x
99,91%
99,78%
93,46%
0.76s
UFPR
yolo5s
99,08%
97,29%
75,32%
0.15s
yolo5x
99,83%
99,72%
79,11%
0.77s
Yolov5x outperforms on UFPR and RODOSOL, while UFPR has a bigger difference on all
metrics mAP@0.5, mAP@0.75 and mAp@0.5:0.05:0.95 compared to the Yolov5s, with
exception for the FPS, where Yolov5s is better on both the datasets. Yolov5x is still faster
than both the Faster-R-CNN variances. However, in the overall performance of Yolov5s,
it is surprising that it can maintain such a high accuracy while having such a fast inference
speed.
5.3
Comparison Between Faster R-CNN And Yolov5
Variances
Model
mAP@0.5
mAP@0.75
mAP@0.5:0.05:0.95
Inference speed
RODOSOL
yolo5s
99,86%
99,61 %
91,01%
0.14s
Orginal
99,96%
99,81%
90,64%
3.24s
UFPR
yolo5s
99,08%
97,29%
75,32%
0.15s
Version 2
98,05%
97,06%
72,88%
5.20s
When comparing these models over the datasets it is clear, that Yolov5s is better at gener-
alizing on the UFPR dataset than both the Faster R-CNN models. Yolov5s’s performance
is also better on RODOSOL, however only on the mAP@0.5:0.05:0.95 metric, which in-
dicates a higher localization ability than the original Faster R-CNN. The Version 2 model
got 91,39% on RODOSOL which is very close to Yolov5s’s accuracy of 91,01%, Which
means that Yolov5s is comparable to the version 2 Faster R-CNN model in terms of ac-
curacy while being ∼30 times faster. Yolov5s outperforms the original model being over
∼20 times faster.
It becomes apparent that the yolov5 is better at generalizing and generating proposals
due to the fact that it has a prediction on the RODOSOL data with greater than zero IoU
score for all images in the testset. On the UFPR dataset yolov5 has some predictions
with zero IoU score, however it is still a lot less than Faster R-CNN.
Yolov5 has better generalization on unseen data. It is apparent that Yolov5’s training loss
is closer to the validation loss, which indicates better performance and understanding of
the problem in comparison with the Faster R-CNN variances. This is probably the results
of the way the models generate the proposals. Yolov5 has access to global features which
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
55
==PAGE:63==
helps. The RPN does not have access to global features. This results in predictions that
make no sense, while all of Yolov5s’s proposals make sense in a global setting. See
on the figure 5.21 below an example of non-sensible proposal and see Figure 5.22 for
a proposal with an indication that Faster R-CNN does not utilize global features when
predicting.
Figure 5.21: Two predictions from the original model with zero IoU score. The prediction
is in red and the ground truth is in blue.
Figure 5.22: A prediction from model version 2, that has IoU score of zero. The prediction
is in red and the ground truth is in blue.
Therefore, the Faster R-CNNs both have a lot more predictions with zero IoU score with a
very high corresponding confidence score. Yolov5 has less complete misses. In terms of
implementation Yolov5 is a lot more user friendly and works out of the box, and does not
necessarily need a prior understanding of the model. Placing the images in the correct
folders and ruining the training command will train the model with a lot of default settings.
One of the most time-consuming tasks in developing a deep learning model is the train-
ing time. During the training of the models the time varied a little, however it was clear
that Yolov5 was roughly twice as fast as the Faster R-CNNs. This likely stems from the
fact that Yolov5 uses its own optimized training script while Faster R-CNN uses my own
implemented dataloader and training loop.
56
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:64==
5.4
Input Image Size Experiment
The goal with this experiment is to find an input size for the images while maintaining high
accuracy. It is interesting to see when the model’s performance drop in terms of mAP
@0.5 and mAP @0.75, to see if the model just gets bad at localizing the objects tightly or
losses the ability to find the bbs. see A.2
Figure 5.23: On the Left Yolo5s mAP@0.5:0.05:0.95 scores and On the Right amount of
no prediction, both over sizes of input image. These are executed on test dataset.
Figure 5.24: On the Left Inference speed in seconds (s), and on the Right the FPS, both
over the images input sizes.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
57
==PAGE:65==
58
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:66==
6
Discussion
In the following chapter the results of the two experiments will be discussed. A brief
discussion of other aspects relevant to the process will also be included.
6.1
Comparison Of Yolov5 and Faster R-CNN Experiment
In the first experiment I compared four models, two from each of the categories of one-
stage and two-stage object detectors. First the results showcased a clear convergence
towards zero for all the trained models, with an indication of stagnation meaning more
training will not be beneficial to the performance. The classification losses tends to de-
crease before the regression losses. This might be due to the fact that it is the first step
in object detection, and because regression is dependent on the classification in order to
function. The regression loss has a continuous downtrend for longer time than classifica-
tion. The distances between the training losses and validation losses are bigger for the
UFPR dataset, which is in line with the speculation when looking at the dataset quality.
The models’s predictions have a clear trend; on the UFPR dataset all the models’s have
total misses with zero IoU with a high confidence score. Especially on the smaller less
complex variances, meaning that the models’s performances on UFPR is worse compared
to RODOSOL. The performance over the datasets is as expected. The UFPR dataset is
a lot more difficult for a deep learning model to get good generalisation on. One of the
datasets has significantly worse performances than the other. This could be improved
by utilizing dataaugmentation, such as mosaic augmentation for object detection, which
could be an interesting addition to experiment on. This could make the performance
better and the model more robust. When inspecting the images that the models’s have
predicted with zero IoU score (see Figures 5.11, 5.3 and 5.6 for examples), the models
have predicted a box around some letters. A way to make the models more robust for
predicting bbs, on top of the actual license plate instead of other text in the image, is to
make dataaugmentation that injects believable text on top of an element in the image.
Another way to make the models’s predictions more robust utilizing prior knowledge, is
to make, a model that is trained on predicting an attention area. In this case predicting a
bb around the car, and then perform license plate detection within this area. This would
eliminate predictions such as the ones seen on Figure 5.3 and 5.10. However, given the
performance, this extra step is very likely to require a lot more inference time and FPS
with very little possible space to the upside.
It was interesting to see how the original model had comparable results on the RODOSOL
dataset in the results, with the version 2 model being a more complex model. This was
surprising and showed how the original model’s performance was good enough for a
reduced problem. However, both Faster R-CNN variances are outclassed by the Yolov5s
and Yolov5x models in terms of speed and they are near each-other in terms of accuracy.
Likewise, it was interesting to see how yolov5s outperformed the version 2 model on the
UFPR dataset, which was of lower quality and therefore not expected.
This indicates that object detection models, that are developed to solve generic object
detection or at the very least a collection of objects, can perform better at a reduced
problem. Object detectors that have a lower mAP on the benchmark of COCO with 80
classes, do not translate to being better at single class object detection, such as license
plate detection. Even without taking inference speed and FPS into account, the less
complex models are still comparable to the more complex models.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
59
==PAGE:67==
6.2
Input Image Size Experiment
Input Image Size Experiment showcases what happens when the image input changes
in size, and to what size is it beneficial to down scale the image to, while still preserving
the accuracy. Overall it shows that no matter how complex the model is, it all boils down
to the data and the quality of the dataset.
There is a very small improvement for the FPS over the input sizes. In fact so small, that
one might argue that it is not worth the extra effort to resize the input images. However,
in a real life application setting, the smaller size images have the added benefit of saving
hard disk space. Depending on the size of the application, the disk space that is saved
grows exponentially proportional to the amount of images taken and saved.
60
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:68==
7
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to construct a license plate detector, using deep neural net-
works with high accuracy while maintaining a fast inference speed. The license plate
detection problem is a reduction of the general object detection problem, that models
such as Yolov5 and Faster R-CNN are developed and benchmarked against. Therefore,
inquiring into whether a one-stage or a two-stage detector, Yolov5 and Faster R-CNN
respectively, have the best performance looking over the mAP@0.5:0.05:0.95 metric.
The performance was trained and inspected over two different datasets; UFPR and RO-
DOSOL, consisting of 4,500 and 20,000 images respectively. The datasets’s quality were
assessed, based on many factors. One such factor was how the datasets were split into
training-, validation- and test-sets. Other factors were how the pictures and annotations
were gathered. Finally, the uniformity of the images, meaning the brightness and local-
ization of the bounding boxes, was accessed. The end result was that Yolov5s, Yolov5’s
smallest model, had very good accuracy, and therefore the fastest as well. Yolov5x’s ac-
curacy increase was minuscule compared to Yolov5s because it got very close to perfect
accuracy on RODOSOL, and fairly good on UFPR compared to the other models.
Yolov5s was also tested based on the input size of the images. Here is was apparent
that a clear drop in accuracy happened at 360-400 size dependent on the dataset. While
maintaining a good accuracy on a bit smaller size than the default size of 640. In terms of
the inference speed there was also a small increase when having smaller input images.
7.1
Future works
In the following section I will go through some exploration that could be an interesting addi-
tion to the model-comparison and full-end the licence plate detection model. As mentioned
in the discussion the classification loss converged and stagnated first. Then it seemed
like only the regression loss continued to have a downwards trend. Therefore a future
examination of applying weights on the losses, allowing box regression to play a bigger
role in the training, could be interesting, as it might make it possible to improve the model.
In addition to assessing the models’s performances on each dataset, similar to grouping
performance over small, medium and large objects, it would be interesting to group the
performance on clusters classified as easy and hard images.
It would also be interesting to test the performance of the trained models on data gathered
of vehicles in Denmark, to see whether the models generalize to new domains or not. Fur-
thermore, Looking into saliency-maps, by taking the last feature layer in the classification
layer off the models, could give some inside understanding of which pixels the models
means are the most relevant to change to get the correct classification. This could help
with getting a deeper understanding of the datasets and models.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
61
==PAGE:69==
62
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1]
Transportministeriet. Forsøg med vejafgifter for personbiler kan sættes i gang. 2022.
URL: https://www.trm.dk/nyheder/2022/forsoeg-med-vejafgifter-for-personbiler-kan-
saettes-i-gang (visited on 11/03/2022).
[2]
Li Liu et al. “Deep learning for generic object detection: A survey”. In: International
journal of computer vision 128.2 (2020), pp. 261–318.
[3]
Syed Sahil Abbas Zaidi et al. “A survey of modern deep learning based object de-
tection models”. In: Digital Signal Processing (2022), p. 103514.
[4]
Yule Yuan et al. “A robust and efficient approach to license plate detection”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 26.3 (2016), pp. 1102–1114.
[5]
Jun-Wei Hsieh, Shih-Hao Yu, and Yung-Sheng Chen. “Morphology-based license
plate detection from complex scenes”. In: 2002 International Conference on Pattern
Recognition. Vol. 3. IEEE. 2002, pp. 176–179.
[6]
Wenjing Jia, Huaifeng Zhang, and Xiangjian He. “Region-based license plate de-
tection”. In: Journal of Network and computer Applications 30.4 (2007), pp. 1324–
1333.
[7]
Ching-Tang Hsieh, Yu-Shan Juan, and Kuo-Ming Hung. “Multiple license plate de-
tection for complex background”. In: 19th International Conference on Advanced
Information Networking and Applications (AINA’05) Volume 1 (AINA papers). Vol. 2.
IEEE. 2005, pp. 389–392.
[8]
Vahid Abolghasemi and Alireza Ahmadyfard. “An edge-based color-aided method
for license plate detection”. In: Image and Vision Computing 27.8 (2009), pp. 1134–
1142.
[9]
Huaifeng Zhang et al. “Learning-based license plate detection using global and lo-
cal features”. In: 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR’06).
Vol. 2. IEEE. 2006, pp. 1102–1105.
[10]
Salman Khan et al. “Transformers in vision: A survey”. In: ACM computing surveys
(CSUR) 54.10s (2022), pp. 1–41.
[11]
Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
recognition at scale”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020).
[12]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region
proposal networks”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015).
[13]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[14]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Feature pyramid networks for object detection”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pp. 2117–
2125.
[15]
Jifeng Dai et al. “R-fcn: Object detection via region-based fully convolutional net-
works”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 29 (2016).
[16]
Kaiming He et al. “Mask r-cnn”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision. 2017, pp. 2961–2969.
[17]
Yanghao Li et al. “Benchmarking Detection Transfer Learning with Vision Trans-
formers”. In: CoRR abs/2111.11429 (2021). arXiv: 2111.11429. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2111.11429.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
63
==PAGE:71==
[18]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You only look once: Unified, real-time object detection”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2016, pp. 779–788.
[19]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “YOLO9000: better, faster, stronger”. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017,
pp. 7263–7271.
[20]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “Yolov3: An incremental improvement”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.02767 (2018).
[21]
Alexey Bochkovskiy, Chien-Yao Wang, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. “Yolov4: Optimal
speed and accuracy of object detection”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10934 (2020).
[22]
Ildar Idrisov. YOLOv4 vs YOLOv5. 2020. URL: https : / / medium . com / deelvin -
machine-learning/yolov4-vs-yolov5-db1e0ac7962b (visited on 10/01/2022).
[23]
Cherifi Imane. YOLO v5 model architecture [Explained]. 2020. URL: https://iq.
opengenus.org/yolov5/ (visited on 01/01/2023).
[24]
Zied Selmi, Mohamed Ben Halima, and Adel M Alimi. “Deep learning system for
automatic license plate detection and recognition”. In: 2017 14th IAPR international
conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR). Vol. 1. IEEE. 2017,
pp. 1132–1138.
[25]
Hui Li and Chunhua Shen. “Reading car license plates using deep convolutional
neural networks and LSTMs”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.05610 (2016).
[26]
Lele Xie et al. “A new CNN-based method for multi-directional car license plate
detection”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 19.2 (2018),
pp. 507–517.
[27]
R. Laroca et al. “A Robust Real-Time Automatic License Plate Recognition Based
on the YOLO Detector”. In: International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN). July 2018, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1109/IJCNN.2018.8489629.
[28]
Rayson Laroca et al. “An efficient and layout-independent automatic license plate
recognition system based on the YOLO detector”. In: IET Intelligent Transport Sys-
tems 15.4 (2021), pp. 483–503.
[29]
Praveen Ravirathinam and Arihant Patawari. “Automatic license plate recognition
for indian roads using faster-RCNN”. In: 2019 11th international conference on ad-
vanced computing (ICoAC). IEEE. 2019, pp. 275–281.
[30]
Muhammad Aasim Rafique, Witold Pedrycz, and Moongu Jeon. “Vehicle license
plate detection using region-based convolutional neural networks”. In: Soft Com-
puting 22 (2018), pp. 6429–6440.
[31]
Rikiya Yamashita et al. “Convolutional neural networks: an overview and application
in radiology”. In: Insights into imaging 9.4 (2018), pp. 611–629.
[32]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[33]
Jong Chul Ye. “Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Geometry of Deep Learning:
A Signal Processing Perspective. Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2022,
pp. 113–134. ISBN: 978-981-16-6046-7. DOI: 10.1007/978- 981- 16- 6046- 7_7.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-6046-7_7.
[34]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep net-
work training by reducing internal covariate shift”. In: International conference on
machine learning. pmlr. 2015, pp. 448–456.
[35]
Karl Weiss, Taghi M Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing Wang. “A survey of transfer learn-
ing”. In: Journal of Big data 3.1 (2016), pp. 1–40.
64
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:72==
[36]
Rafael Padilla, Sergio L Netto, and Eduardo AB Da Silva. “A survey on performance
metrics for object-detection algorithms”. In: 2020 international conference on sys-
tems, signals and image processing (IWSSIP). IEEE. 2020, pp. 237–242.
[37]
Renjie Xu et al. “A forest fire detection system based on ensemble learning”. In:
Forests 12.2 (2021), p. 217.
[38]
Ross Girshick et al. “Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and se-
mantic segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. 2014, pp. 580–587.
[39]
Ross Girshick. “Fast r-cnn”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision. 2015, pp. 1440–1448.
[40]
Pytorch. FASTERRCNN_RESNET50_FPN. URL: https://pytorch.org/vision/main/
models / generated / torchvision . models . detection . fasterrcnn _ resnet50 _ fpn . html #
torchvision.models.detection.fasterrcnn_resnet50_fpn (visited on 11/03/2022).
[41]
Pytorch. FASTERRCNN_RESNET50_FPN_V2. URL: https://pytorch.org/vision/
main/models/generated/torchvision.models.detection.fasterrcnn_resnet50_fpn_v2.
html (visited on 11/03/2022).
[42]
Danqing Xu and Yiquan Wu. “Improved YOLO-V3 with DenseNet for multi-scale
remote sensing target detection”. In: Sensors 20.15 (2020), p. 4276.
[43]
Diganta Misra. “Mish: A self regularized non-monotonic activation function”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.08681 (2019).
[44]
Gao Huang et al. “Densely connected convolutional networks”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pp. 4700–
4708.
[45]
Chien-Yao Wang et al. “CSPNet: A new backbone that can enhance learning ca-
pability of CNN”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition workshops. 2020, pp. 390–391.
[46]
Kaiming He et al. “Spatial pyramid pooling in deep convolutional networks for visual
recognition”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
37.9 (2015), pp. 1904–1916.
[47]
Shu Liu et al. “Path aggregation network for instance segmentation”. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2018,
pp. 8759–8768.
[48]
Glenn Jocher. ultralytics/yolov5. 2020. URL: https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5
(visited on 11/03/2022).
[49]
https://paperswithcode.com/. UFPR-ALPR. 2018. URL: https : / / paperswithcode .
com/dataset/ufpr-alpr (visited on 11/03/2022).
[50]
R. Laroca et al. “On the Cross-dataset Generalization in License Plate Recognition”.
In: International Conference on Computer Vision Theory and Applications (VIS-
APP). Feb. 2022, pp. 166–178. ISBN: 978-989-758-555-5. DOI: 10.5220/0010846800003124.
[51]
https://paperswithcode.com/. RodoSol-ALPR. 2022. URL: https://paperswithcode.
com/dataset/rodosol-alpr (visited on 11/03/2022).
[52]
Glenn Jocher. ultralytics/yolov5. 2020. URL: https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5/
wiki/Train-Custom-Data (visited on 11/03/2022).
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
65
==PAGE:73==
66
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:74==
A
Appendix
A.1
Environment
During the development I used python and the interactive notebook called Jupyter Note-
book. The process of using the HPC, was to access through ssh, and then login into
a node with an available graphics card. Then a Jupyter Notebook was started with this
command: ′jupyternotebook −−no −browser −−port = 7475 −−ip = $HOSTNAME′.
Then port forwarding was using to connect to the Jupyter Notebook to have access to the
interactive shell for testing and development. The dataset was transferred to the HPC
into a Scratch folder given to me by the support team. I made a symbolic link between
the Scratch folder and a local folder in my home directory by the following command:
′ln −s/work3/s202775 /work′.
I had some issues with the HPC, because the support team changed the way one had
to access the HPC because a breach the occurred, where they tightened the security
afterwards.
A.1.1
Dataloaders
A dataloader is a class that takes a dataset and splits it into batches and makes it pos-
sible to iterate over these batches. Furthermore, a dataloader is responsible for loading
the images into memory along with the labels and other information needed by the ob-
ject detectors, to perform the operations they need to train and test. The information that
is needed for object detection, is a target consisting of a classification label, the bb and
then the corresponding image. When loading an image the dataloader resizes and trans-
forms the image into a tensor, which normalizes the image’s values between 0-1. The
resized size for the images is 640x640, which is mentioned in sec 4.1. Additionally, the
dataloader scales the bbs to fit the new image with size 640x640. This means that the bb
still encapsulates the license plate on the new image.
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
67
==PAGE:75==
A.1.2
Data Pre-Process For Yolo
Figure A.1
A.1.3
Faster R-CNN: RODOSOL Training And Validation Loss
Figure A.2: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. on
the left is the mean loss over for each epoch. On the middle and right the training and
validation loss
68
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.3: The first row is the training loss and the second row is the validation loss. On
each plot there are individual Losses for both models. On the left and middle left the
prediction heads classification and box regression losses. On the right and middle right
the region proposals networks objectiveness and box regression losses
A.1.4
Faster R-CNN: UFPR Training And Validation Loss
Figure A.4: The first row is the original model and the second row is the version 2. on
the left is the mean loss over for each epoch. On the middle and right the training and
validation loss
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
69
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.5: The first row is the training loss and the second row is the validation loss. On
each plot there are individual Losses for both models. On the left and middle left the
prediction heads classification and box regression losses. On the right and middle right
the region proposals networks objectiveness and box regression losses
A.1.5
Yolov5: RODOSOL Training Loss
Yolov5s Training and Validation
Figure A.6: This figure showcases the three training and validation losses; box regression
loss, objectiveness loss and classification loss. The figure also shows the progression on
mAP@0.5 and mAp@0.5:0.05:0.95, the recall and precision over epochs
Yolov5x Training and Validation
70
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.7: This figure showcases the three training and validation losses; box regression
loss, objectiveness loss and classification loss. The figure also shows the progression on
mAP@0.5 and mAp@0.5:0.05:0.95, the recall and precision over epochs
A.1.6
Yolov5: UFPR Training Loss
Yolov5s Training and Validation
Figure A.8: This figure showcases the three training and validation losses; box regression
loss, objectiveness loss and classification loss. The figure also shows the progression on
mAP@0.5 and mAp@0.5:0.05:0.95, the recall and precision over epochs
Yolov5x Training And Validation
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.9: This figure showcases the three training and validation losses; box regression
loss, objectiveness loss and classification loss. The figure also shows the progression on
mAP@0.5 and mAp@0.5:0.05:0.95, the recall and precision over epochs
A.2
Best Model Image Size Experiment
Figure A.10: On the Left mAP with threshold of 0.5, and on the Right mAP taken with a
threshold of 0.75.
72
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
==PAGE:80==
Comparison Of Deep Learning Methods For License Plate Detection
73
==PAGE:81==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
