==PAGE:1==
Classifying content type and subreddit from
thread structure on Reddit
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
Master Thesis
December, 2023
By
Richárd Benjámin Jakab
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800, Kongens Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Richárd Benjámin Jakab - s212903
Signature
Date
ii
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Social media platforms, like Reddit, provide rich data for exploring how different types of
content affect user interaction and involvement.
In the field of social media analysis, studying comment structures helps us gain more
knowledge about user engagement. By analysing the statistical properties of comment
trees, researchers can understand patterns in how different post types affect user discus-
sions. This approach, which combines data science and machine learning, allows for a
complex understanding of online community dynamics and content distribution.
This study addresses the challenge of differentiating Reddit post types and their origi-
nating subreddits based solely on the structural characteristics of their comment trees.
Here, we show that while distinguishing the subreddits based on comment tree structures
proves to be difficult due to online cultural similarities, the machine learning model can
modestly differentiate post types, with recognition rates surpassing baseline accuracies.
Previously, it was unclear the connection between the structural attributes of comment
trees on social media platforms like Reddit and the type of the original post or its originat-
ing subreddit. Our findings add new information by showing that, despite online cultural
similarities across subreddits, distinct post types can be differentiated based on their com-
ment structures.
The ability to categorise social media content based on user interaction patterns, as
demonstrated in this study, has broader implications for improving content recommen-
dation algorithms and understanding online community behaviours. These insights are
important in shaping how digital platforms can make user involvement better and cus-
tomise content for different user preferences.
This research adds to the field of digital communication and artificial intelligence by show-
ing how machine learning can reveal patterns in social media interactions. It highlights the
potential of data-driven approaches in decoding complex online behaviours, which is cru-
cial in an era where digital platforms play a significant role in shaping public discussions
and social dynamics. Such insights are valuable across various scientific disciplines, of-
fering a window into the evolving landscape of digital communication and its impact on
society.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Thank you to Sune and Jonas for their help throughout my work, and for their ideas and
insights.
Sune Lehmann Jørgensen, Associate Professor, Department of Mathematics and Com-
puter Science
Jonas Lybker Juul, Postdoctoral researcher, Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science
iv
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Dataset
5
3.1
Data Gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Reddit Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Obtaining Reddit Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Processing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Statistics of Comments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.6
Building Comment Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.7
Creating Graphs from JSON Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.8
Insights from Graph Generation and Adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Methods
15
4.1
Preparation of the Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Classification with Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Data Analysis and Initial Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Hyperparameter Optimization of the Logistic Regression Model . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Analytical Approach: Implementing and Assessing Logistic Regression
. . 22
5
Results
25
5.1
High-Level Data Analysis and Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Individual Graph Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
Similarities Between Subreddits and Types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6
Discussion
45
6.1
Post Type Identification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Subreddit Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.3
Individual Cascade Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4
Similarities Between Subreddits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7
Conclusion
49
8
Future Work
51
Bibliography
52
A Appendix
57
A.1 Type determining script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Select Size Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.3 JSON Submission object
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.4 JSON Comment object
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
v
==PAGE:8==
A.5 Javascript Script to Get Total Size of Comments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.6 Statistics regarding the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.7 Parameter optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.8 Heatmap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
vi
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Social media has transformed the way we communicate, share, and access information.
A prime example of this transformation is Reddit, the largest internet forum. It offers a
wide array of topics in its ’subreddits’, or subforums, allowing users to create and engage
in discussions. Subreddits contain posts, similarly to other social media platforms, where
users can comment on the post or reply to other users’ comments. These posts are
categorized into types: text, image, link, video, gallery, and poll.
This study investigates the feasibility of predicting or recognizing a post’s type based solely
on the structure of its comment tree. ’Structure’ here refers to statistical metrics such as
the tree’s width, depth, virality, and so on. I selected posts from five Nordic subreddits:
”r/Denmark”, ”r/sweden”, ”r/Norway”, ”r/Finland”, and ”r/Iceland”. These subreddits were
chosen under the assumption that their users share a comparable online culture, thus
presenting a unified social behavior. This should allow us to focus on the properties of
the comment trees without the influence of the subreddits’ cultural patterns. This thesis
will also examine whether these subreddits are indeed as similar as presumed.
Understanding the relationship between a post’s type and the structure of its comment
tree offers several advantages:
• It can help platforms optimize user experience by understanding how different types
of posts influence user engagement and discussion patterns. For example, they
might develop algorithms to recommend content that users are more likely to engage
with, based on their interaction with similar post types.
• Businesses and advertisers can use insights on the most engaging post types to
guide their marketing strategies, tailoring content to formats that resonate with their
target audience.
• This analysis can provide valuable insights into online social dynamics and user
behavior, helping researchers understand how information spreads, how communi-
ties form around certain topics, and the impact of different content types on public
discourse.
• Understanding these relationships can also aid algorithms in predicting the potential
popularity or controversy of certain post types, crucial for early detection of viral
trends, emerging topics, or misinformation campaigns.
For this thesis, I collected millions of comments and hundreds of thousands of posts from
these five subreddits. I focused solely on the structure of the posts, ignoring the content
of the comments and the authors’ online presence; this data was deleted after converting
the comment tree into a graph. Due to technical difficulties, I could not use Reddit’s
official API and had to resort to alternative methods for data collection. I used Python
libraries, predominantly NetworkX, Pandas, scikit-learn, and NumPy. These libraries are
effective and well-built, offering comprehensive data science functions, which I utilized for
data extraction, preprocessing, logistic regression model development, training, testing,
analysis, and visualization of results. This process involved creating numerous scripts
and producing dozens of figures and tables. After this, I also analyzed the results and
the cascades manually, by comparing the most and the least recognized trees from each
type and subreddit.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
1
==PAGE:10==
Preliminary findings indicate a modest but detectable correlation between post types and
their comment trees. The degree of correlation varies by type. However, for the Nordic
subreddits, there appears to be no significant correlation, aligning with our initial assump-
tion.
The thesis is organized as follows:
1. In the Literature Review chapter, I collect and summarize related papers and articles.
2. In the Dataset chapter, I describe the data collection process and the conversion of
data into graphs and then turning them into statistical metrics.
3. In the Methods chapter, I detail the tools used for data analysis, the functions of the
machine learning model, and its training and testing processes.
4. In the Results chapter, I list my findings and provide a brief reflection on them.
5. In the Discussion chapter, I offer a detailed response to the observations.
6. In the Conclusion chapter, I summarize the results and conclude the final findings.
2
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
Social media is a term for platforms where people connect, message each other, and
share memories and moments of their lives through posts, images, or videos. Social me-
dia have become one of the most important aspect of our lives. It plays a significant role
in elections, influencing public opinion, campaign strategies, and voter engagement [1] [2]
[3] [4]. Beyond elections, social media has a great impact in several other areas, including
but not limited to business [5], marketing [6] [7] [8], education [9] [10] and mental health
[11] [12]. Given its importance on so many areas of our lives, social media platforms were
subject of many network analyzing researches, for example using Bayesian nonparamet-
ric models for user behaviour analysis on Twitter [13], Facebook’s social networks [14]
[15], or generally the social network concept [16] [17] [18].
Reddit, as a social media platform, is the largest online forum on the internet and has
become one of the most visited websites in our world. In 2020, Reddit had 52 million
daily active users, and, in that year alone, more than 303 million new posts and 2 billion
comments were created [19]. It consists of subreddits [20], which can be considered
subforums. Each subreddit specializes in one topic, with its own moderation rules and
customs, including abbreviations. Larger subreddits even develop their own cultures and
vocabulary [21] [22] [23]. Users can submit posts in these subreddits, and others can
comment on them. Reddit is a rich source for data: many researchers from scientific
or from marketing backgrounds have been using it as it is relatively easy to obtain large
amount of data, from people all over the world [24] [25] [26] [27] [28]. Given its importance,
many studies have been conducted, about its impact or its possibilities [29]. For example:
Identifying the social signals that drive online discussions [30], studies of depression and
anxiety using it [31] as well as detecting anxiety through Reddit [32], using it to understand
patterns and perceptions of JUUL use [33], predicting depression and anxiety [34] and its
role in the GameStop short squeeze [35].
To analyze social media behavioral patterns, graph theory is widely used: the way we
connect and communicate publicly on social media platforms can be directly represented
in graphs [28] [36]. In these models, people can be nodes with their connections as
edges. Alternatively, comments can form a graph as well: a post acts as the main node,
the comments replying to it are neighboring nodes, and replies to other comments form a
tree structure, representing a connected acyclic directed graph.
A graph is an ordered pair of disjoint sets (V, E) such that E is a subset of the V (2) of
unordered pairs of V [37]. Meaning, a graph is made of nodes and edges connect them.
The origins of graph theory dates back to the 18th centry, when Leonhard Euler solved the
famous ”Seven Bridges of Königsberg” problem, laying the foundations of graph theory
[38] [39]. However, the first book on graph theory only came out less than one hundred
years ago, in 1936, from the Hungarian mathematician Dénes Kőnig: Theory of finite
and infinite graphs [40]. Since then, graph theory has been used in many aspects of life:
scheduling aircrafts or jobs, classification of finger prints or in biology, where a vertex
can represent regions where certain species exist (or habitats) and the edges represent
migration paths, or movement between the regions [41].
So far I have been focused on how people connect on social media platforms, how do
they form a network, and I showed how can those networks be analyzed what are their
metrics and properties. In the following part of the chapter, since my thesis focuses on
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
3
==PAGE:12==
the structure of Reddit comments, I will focus on the comment trees on these previously
mentioned social platforms, will write about machine learning because my project uses it
for classification, and in the end I will write about the combination of these two.
In an article by Medvedev et al. [42], the authors introduce models that can generate
comment trees. They also include time as a significant factor contributing to the creation
of such networks. It is well-measured how the growth of cascades changes over time. This
contrasts with findings from articles like [43] and [44], where the models focus exclusively
on the structure of the trees and not on the timing of events. In another case, they try
to predict the cascades’ growth [45], providing information that can help us predict and
explain events in social systems [46] or compare information diffusion mechanisms [47].
Cascade analysis is widely used on many social media platforms, especially on Twitter,
Facebook, and Reddit [46] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52].
Machine learning [53] is a very popular topic nowadays [54] [55] [56] [57]. It is the tech-
nique of using algorithms to parse data, learn from it, and then make a determination or
prediction about something in the world. Widely used in social media, machine learn-
ing involves the study of social structures through the use of networks and graph theory
[58]. Examples include detecting and classifying toxic comments [59] [60], quantifying
predictability on social media [61], and identifying behavioral influence patterns [62]. The
authors also discuss the visualization of information diffusion, anomaly discovery in social
media, anomaly detection among unauthorized users [63], and recognizing illegitimate
users and their behaviors [64] [65].
One of the popular way for machine learning classification is using logistic regression.
Logistic regression is a statistical method used for binary classification, which predicts
the probability of an outcome that can only be one of two values. It is remarkably effective
for classification because it not only provides a clear decision boundary between the two
classes, but also gives the probability of belonging to a particular class, which can be
valuable in decision-making. Logistic regression is simple to implement and interpret,
and works well with linearly separable data, making it a popular choice for many binary
classification problems [66] [67] [68] [69].
In the context of social media, logistic regression can be employed to analyze and predict
user behaviors, sentiments, or trends. For instance, it can be used to classify whether
a social media post is positive or negative in sentiment, identify potential spam or fake
accounts, or even predict user engagement with specific content. To apply logistic regres-
sion effectively in social media analytics, it is crucial to first select and preprocess relevant
features from the data. These features might include text from posts, user engagement
metrics (like likes, shares, and comments), or user profile information. Examples of using
logistic regression in regard to social media and their platforms include sentiment analy-
sis on Twitter data, providing insights into public opinions and trends [70], detecting spam
content on social networks [71], predicting user engagement on social media platforms
[72], and classifying tweets into selected topics [73].
4
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:13==
3
Dataset
In the constantly changing field of data science, it is crucial to use and make sense of
the large amounts of data found online. Reddit stands out as a valuable source of user-
created data because of its design and large number of users. Known as ’the front page of
the internet,’ Reddit lets its users post content, make comments, and participate in various
topic discussions. These activities create complex connections, often seen as comment
trees, making Reddit a prime site for studying user behaviors, conversation trends, and
online exchanges.
This study focuses on exploring the rich dataset of Reddit. It examines how the type of
a Reddit post influences the structure of its related comment tree. The method involves
collecting Reddit data, especially posts and comments, preparing it, and then performing
an in-depth analysis.
The first step is data collection, which involves gathering a significant number of posts
and comments. The next phase is data processing, where I transform raw data into a
format better suited for analysis. This includes organizing data into structured frames and
turning comments into comment trees. After processing, the data is analyzed to identify
patterns and offer insights into Reddit user interactions.
Various tools and techniques are used throughout this process, including Reddit’s API, the
Python programming language, and data processing libraries like Pandas and Networkx1.
Using these tools allows for a thorough study, greatly enhancing our understanding of user
interactions on Reddit.
3.1
Data Gathering
Before my thesis started, it was an important decision to choose which social media plat-
form’s data I will use for analyzing. Not every platform has an API that allows easy access
to their data. Facebook is the most enormous social media platform, with the most users.
However, Facebook is known for being closed and not free, very restricted. Twitter could
have been a popular choice, but the free package only contains 1500 tweets per month
[74] which is not enough for my study. Ultimately, I settled on the most obvious website,
which also boasted the most user-friendly API: Reddit. I also had previous experience
with working Reddit, that proved to be useful.
After I started my thesis, Reddit introduced radical changes to its API 2. These changes
did not affect my work but altered any future Reddit-related work involving fresh data.
Due to the fact that these changes made data collection very expensive, it became highly
challenging to collect data effectively and legally.
3.2
Reddit Data
Reddit is a popular social media website where people can post links, make their own
content, and talk with others. It started in 2005 and is now one of the top websites globally
and the 9th most used social media app in the US.
The site is divided into sections called ”subreddits,” which are communities built around
certain topics. For example, in r/science, people share and talk about scientific discover-
1https://networkx.org/
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2023_Reddit_API_controversy
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
5
==PAGE:14==
ies, and in r/AskReddit, they ask and answer questions. Each subreddit has its own set
of rules made and upheld by volunteer moderators.
A key feature of Reddit is its voting system. People can ”upvote” or ”downvote” posts and
comments, affecting how visible they are. Posts with lots of upvotes get more attention,
helping popular content get seen by more people.
Reddit is known for its open conversations and content created by its users. It is a cen-
tral place for various discussions, debates, and sharing information. It is also famous
for its impact on online culture, often starting viral content, trends, and memes. These
characteristics make Reddit an ideal subject for my thesis.
3.3
Obtaining Reddit Data
In this section, I present and detail the various methods I explored to gather data efficiently
and comprehensively.
3.3.1
Reddit API
One option to access Reddit data is to use its API. Reddit’s API allows us to query posts,
subreddits, user data, and to upvote, downvote, among other operations [75].
The Reddit API follows a specific set of rules [76]. Users must use OAuth2 to connect
to Reddit, and they are allowed to make up to 60 requests per minute. The challenge
with this limitation is the time required to collect a sufficient amount of posts and comment
structures; I would have needed significantly more time. Here are my estimates:
In my tests, I found that it took approximately 1.7 seconds to fetch a single comment. My
goal was to collect data from around 300,000 posts. Based on the official Reddit statistics
from 2020 [77], there were approximately 303.4 million posts and roughly 2 billion com-
ments that year. This amounts to an average of approximately 6.59 comments per post.
Therefore, to fetch 300,000 posts along with their complete comment trees, I would have
needed 40 days. This method would have taken too much time, because in the beginning,
I did not know how much data I needed. If it had turned out that I needed twice or three
times more data, then I could not have started working on my project for months, which I
really sought to avoid. I wanted to start the project quickly and avoid problems that could
arise from a long process. So, I chose a different way to collect the needed data for the
project.
3.3.2
Scraping Reddit
Web scraping, particularly when applied to Reddit or similar websites, is a technique
for data extraction. It requires crafting a script, typically in programming languages like
Python or JavaScript, that interacts with a website. This script simulates the actions of a
user to traverse the site, though it operates more broadly and swiftly.
The script accesses a webpage and analyzes its HTML code to identify the required in-
formation. It then stores this data in an organized format, like a CSV file or a database,
for subsequent analysis. For example, in scraping Reddit, data like post titles, comment
counts, and post types can be gathered. I had prior experience with similar scraping
tasks on smaller projects, which I was able to utilize effectively in this situation. A popular
choice for this is Puppeteer 3, a ”Node.js library which provides a high-level API to control
Chrome/Chromium over the DevTools Protocol”.
After determining that using the API was impractical, I initiated a web scraping project
on my computer and evaluated its speed. Although the speed met my expectations, the
3Puppeteer: https://pptr.dev/
6
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:15==
scale of this project required thorough research into the complexities of web scraping. It
is important to remember that speed isn’t the sole concern; there’s also the risk of the
scraper being blocked by Reddit, which I aimed to avoid as well. Also, legally it is a
complicated area, so Reddit blocks larger attempts for web scraping.
In my exploration of scraping Reddit, I came across two key insights. Firstly, scraping
at this scale is challenging, and setting up a project to mitigate risks would demand con-
siderable time. Secondly, and crucially, I found a comprehensive torrent file containing
Reddit data from June 2005 to December 2022 [78]. This archive was split into separate
files for comments and posts and included an extraction algorithm with filtering options,
enabling the retrieval of specifically relevant data. This discovery ultimately led me to drop
the scraping approach.
I chose to utilize this available data, effectively eliminating the need to scrape Reddit.
3.3.3
Torrent File
The previously mentioned Reddit torrent file [78] is exceptionally large, close to 2TB highly
compressed data, containing almost 17 years’ worth of Reddit posts and comments, which
is far more than I needed. Initially, I downloaded the posts and comments from January
2010 to examine the content of these files. I selected this month because the size of
the files increases every month since Reddit started, meaning the earlier the month, the
smaller the file, and this specific one was small enough to be easily and quickly handled,
but large enough so it had enough data for testing purposes.
After downloading, I obtained two files: a compressed submission file (53.6 MB) and a
comment file (268.7 MB). Both are in the compressed ndjson format, which consists of
JSON objects on separate lines. Initially, I tried to manually decompress the submission
file using the following code4:
zstd -d RS_2010-01.zst
However, I received the following error message:
RS_2010-01.zst : Decoding error (36) : Frame requires too much memory
for decoding
RS_2010-01.zst : Window size larger than maximum : 2147483648 >
134217728
RS_2010-01.zst : Use --long=31 or --memory=2048MB
Using the --memory=2048MB option, I was able to decompress the file successfully. The
original file, which was 53.6 MB, expanded to 801 MB. This file includes 549,007 JSON
objects, each on a separate line. You can see an example of one of these JSON objects at
(section A.3). From these objects, I can extract various useful metadata like the number
of comments, the submission ID, its score, and even its type.
Identifying the type of a post initially appears challenging because there isn’t a direct
property for it. However, I have indicators like is_gallery and post_hint that hint at
various subtypes. To address this, I developed a function that accepts a JSON object as
input and determines its type, see section A.1. The code creates a function named get_-
post_type, which processes a submission and identifies its type, returning it as a string.
It uses various conditional checks on the submission object’s attributes. The process is
as follows:
4For my thesis a MacOS device was used, so Zstandard was utilized to decompress data, which is a
lossless data compression algorithm developed by Yann Collet.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
7
==PAGE:16==
1. Checks if post_hint is ’image’. If yes, returns ’image’.
2. Checks for is_gallery. If present, returns ’gallery’.
3. If is_video is True, returns ’video’.
4. Checks for poll_data. If found, returns ’poll’.
5. Checks for crosspost_parent. If present, returns ’crosspost’.
6. If is_self is True, returns ’text’.
7. If none of these conditions are met, returns ’link’.
This method allows for the classification of a post’s type based on its specific attributes.
Moving to the comments file, it consists of 2,884,096 JSON objects. We can find an ex-
ample at (section A.4). These objects contain various attributes, including the text of the
comment, its creation time, the author’s username, the comment’s ID, and the parent ID.
The parent ID is especially crucial because I had to construct the comment trees from
scratch, and this attribute was necessary for that process, which I will discuss in more
detail later.
Moving to the comments file, it consists of 2,884,096 JSON objects. We can find an ex-
ample at (section A.4). These objects contain various attributes, including the text of the
comment, its creation time, the author’s username, the comment’s ID, and the parent ID.
The parent ID is especially crucial because I had to construct the comment trees from
scratch, and this attribute was necessary for that process, which I will discuss in more
detail later.
3.4
Processing Data
Initially, my task was to select specific subreddits and timeframes for my research. To-
gether with my supervisor, we decided to focus on country-specific subreddits. We se-
lected five subreddits for our study: r/Denmark, r/sweden, r/Norway, r/Finland, and r/Ice-
land. Each of these represents a Nordic country. Our assumption was that regular con-
tributors to these subreddits would show similar cultural behaviors. This similarity can
help minimize the number of external factors that could affect the variation in commenting
behaviors, allowing us to focus more on the commenting patterns themselves. This se-
lection was aimed at ensuring a more controlled and focused analysis. Whether this was
achieved in the end, and indeed neighboring countries show similar patterns or not, will
be shown later.
To manage my data storage constraints, I developed a JavaScript script (referenced as
section A.5) to calculate the total size of the comment data. Since my laptop had limited
storage capacity, it was crucial to determine the amount of data I could feasibly download
and store. The entire dataset spanning from 2019 to 2022 was too large, requiring nearly
1 TB of space, which exceeded my available storage.
Therefore, I adopted a sequential approach, downloading the data year by year. I used the
combine_folder_multiprocess.py script, sourced from [79], for extracting the necessary
data. This process resulted in receiving a separate file for each month.
To streamline the decompression of this monthly data, I wrote a Python script that au-
tomated the process. This methodical approach ensured that I could manage the large
volume of data within the storage limitations of my laptop, while still being able to access
and analyze the relevant information for my study.
8
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:17==
The result of this procedure was a collection of .zst files, each representing different
subreddits and years. These compressed files needed more processing. I wrote a script
that unpacked these .zst files, grouped them by year, and stored them as .ndjson files.
Following this, I developed another script to transform these .ndjson files into a Pan-
das dataframe, which I then saved in the .feather file format, known for its efficiency5.
Ultimately, I had a dataframe where each comment contains properties such like the au-
thor of the comment, the content of the comment, different Reddit IDs of the comment,
score, subreddit and the year when it was created (see Table 3.1). The dataframe con-
tains 8,582,274 comments. Additionally, in Table 3.2, I show four examples from the posts
dataframe. The total number of posts I gathered is 306,251.
1992803
3767670
1270149
6258905
author
Snygg...
Koriz...
Parti...
[deleted]
name
t1_i1tzn89
t1_he74rqx
t1_ijbmlsu
t1_g54vym4
body
Jag ha...
varför...
It’s v...
[deleted]
created_utc
1648062405
1632557489
1659887176
1600018384
id
i1tzn89
he74rqx
ijbmlsu
g54vym4
link_id
t3_tkp9y6
t3_pug25t
t3_wgn1kh
t3_irurwe
parent_id
t1_i1s9xl9
t1_he5p6kb
t1_ij7qw2f
t1_g54teu6
score
3
2
0
1
subreddit
sweden
sweden
Finland
Denmark
year
2022
2021
2022
2020
Table 3.1: A few samples from the dataset containing all of the comments, the headers
are the indexes of the comments in the dataframe. The comments are from the Danish,
Swedish, Finnish, Icelandic and Norwegian subreddits. This small sample accurately
reflects the nature of the dataframe, where occasionally the author’s name and the content
of the comments are missing, and the scores of the comments differ.
128163
256868
284320
133640
subreddit
Denmark
sweden
Denmark
sweden
num_comments
3
12
8
18
score
0
13
4
10
id
wyhua2
cjpgsr
asf6ih
w0r81y
create_utc
1661541776
1564480023
1550609165
1658007837
post_type
text
image
link
text
link
https://www.redd...
https://i.red...
http://ull...
Table 3.2: The Danish, Swedish, Finnish, Icelandic, and Norwegian subreddits were cho-
sen to build the post dataframe, which includes various types of posts such as text,
images, or links, among others. The headers are the indexes of the comments in the
dataframe
3.5
Statistics of Comments
Out of the comments, this is the distribution of the comments by subreddits:
5Apache Arrow: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/feather.html, November 2023
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
9
==PAGE:18==
Comments
Size of Subreddit
Ratio
sweden
3,961,752
556,000
7.13
Denmark
3,509,510
383,000
9.16
Norway
470,965
300,000
1.57
Finland
406,010
178,000
2.28
Iceland
234,037
77,000
3.04
Table 3.3: Distribution of comments by subreddits. The ratio is calculated by dividing the
size of the subreddit by the number of comments. The differences between the subreddits
is visible.
As shown in Table 3.3, r/sweden and r/Denmark have the largest number of comments by
a significant margin. The last column, labeled Ratio, displays the proportion of comments
made relative to the size of each subreddit. It is evident that the Danish community is the
most active, followed closely by the Swedish one. The smaller subreddits exhibit less
activity, which may necessitate further investigation.
2019
2020
2021
2022
1
2
3
4
·106
Year
Number of Comments (M)
Figure 3.1: Number of all comments made per year on the five chosen subreddits.
In Figure 3.1, it is clear that the number of comments in these subreddits grew each year.
The most significant increase happened in 2022, where the volume of new comments
more than doubled compared to 2021. I had expected this surge to occur in 2020, the
year of lockdowns and COVID-19, when people were at home more and had more time
to surf the internet. The reason for this surge in 2022 remains unclear and needs more
further investigation.
3.6
Building Comment Trees
To analyze the structure of comment trees, I first needed to construct these trees using
the available comments and posts data. I developed a script that went through each post
ID, and for every post ID, the script looked for comments where the parent_id matched
the format t3_{post_id}. On Reddit, post IDs begin with ”t3”, and comment IDs start
with t1. This approach helped me find comments that are directly responding to the post,
forming the root level of the comment trees.
Next, I applied a recursive method to process all comments. This involved searching for
10
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:19==
comments whose parent_ids matched the ID of a current comment, effectively build-
ing out the branches of the tree. This process enabled me to trace the entire comment
thread stemming from a single post. This methodology was crucial for understanding
and comparing the complexities of conversation flows within different Reddit threads. An
illustrative example of the resulting structure is provided in the following code snippet:
1
{
2
post: // post data, such as subreddit , num_comments , ...
3
comment_tree: [
4
{
5
// comment data, such as author , body, score, ...
6
children: []
7
},
8
{
9
// comment data, such as author , body, score, ...
10
children: [
11
{
12
// comment data, such as author , body, score, ...
13
children: []
14
}
15
]
16
},
17
// ...
18
]
19
}
After implementing and executing these scripts, I ended up with more than 300,000 com-
ment tree JSON objects. Then, I needed to convert these JSON objects into graphs to
handle them in a manner consistent with their nature.
3.7
Creating Graphs from JSON Objects
To create, manage, and analyze graphs, I utilized Networkx, a widely-used Python library
for working with complex networks. NetworkX is ideal for creating, modifying, and examin-
ing the structure, dynamics, and functions of complex networks. It offers data structures
for representing various types of networks, or graphs, such as both undirected and di-
rected graphs. Additionally, it includes algorithms for shortest paths, network centrality,
and community detection. As the authors in [80] present, usually the graphs are rep-
resented in adjacency matrices, which is an easy way to store and read them. I used
Networkx’s built-in method, which stores it as an adjacency list, by default.
NetworkX’s versatility allows it to handle networks of different types and sizes. This makes
it a powerful tool for network analysis across various fields, including computational social
science, biology, physics, and more. Furthermore, its integration with standard Python
packages like NumPy, Pandas, and Matplotlib also enables comprehensive data analysis
and visualization.
I created a script that processed every JSON object into a graph using NetworkX. The
post’s metadata was assigned to the root node as attributes. Other pieces of information
were not stored in the graph, so to access them, I had to match the post’s ID against the
DataFrame and look up individual pieces of information. This was not necessary until I
started to manually investigate the trees. For general, statistics-based comparisons, the
structure of the graph was sufficient. For example, one of the graphs appears as follows.
The root node (which is the post itself) has the following attributes:
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: An example of a post graph. The root node is the post, the following layer
represents the comments that directly responded to the post. The rest of the nodes are
other comments responsing to other comments.
{'subreddit': 'Denmark', 'post_type': 'link', 'post_id': 'bqgjie'}
In Figure 3.2, we can see a graph created from a Reddit post. The post itself is the root
node, located at the top center. It is connected to the root level comments, which can be
seen on the next level down. Some of these comments have child comments, responses
to them, and a few of these child comments have their own children as well.
3.8
Insights from Graph Generation and Adjustments
After generating graphs from the Reddit data, an interesting observation became appar-
ent. A discrepancy was noticed between the sizes of the generated graphs and the actual
number of comments in posts. More often than not, the graphs were larger, even after ac-
counting for the root node representing the post itself. This led to an investigation into the
cause of this discrepancy, revealing that deleted comments, not displayed on the Reddit
page, were included in my downloaded dataset.
This was a surprising discovery, given that Reddit generally shows deleted comments
marked with a [deleted] author name and text. A deeper examination revealed that
Reddit does not display comments that have been deleted and do not have any child
comments. There is a certain logic to this policy; however, it required a regeneration of
all the graphs to maintain consistency with the Reddit representation.
The inclusion or exclusion of these nodes is indeed a crucial factor affecting the results.
The timing of the deletion, whether immediate or weeks/months later, can significantly
impact engagement levels on these comments. If a comment is deleted immediately
12
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:21==
after posting, other users wouldn’t have the opportunity to engage or respond. However,
if the comment was deleted much later, it implies users had the chance to engage but
chose not to. Unfortunately, without information on when the comments were deleted,
it is impossible to differentiate between these two scenarios. Therefore, to ensure the
integrity of the results and align with Reddit’s display policy, it was decided to exclude
these nodes from the graphs.
As I was generating new graphs and corresponding statistical metrics, I carried out a
series of comparisons to understand the impacts of changes in graph representation. Of
the total 306,251 submissions, there were differences in graph size for 140,194 instances
when comparing the new graph with the old one.
In total, I deleted 424,544 comments from the initial count of 8,582,274 comments in my
dataset. Furthermore, an additional 3694 submissions were removed from the newly gen-
erated dataset, primarily due to their minimal size of only a single node. These were
unnecessary for analysis, as all their statistical metrics were zero, offering no valuable
information for the later machine learning process.
In conclusion, after the removal and adjustments made to enhance the data relevance,
the final dataset comprised 302,557 entries. This optimized and refined dataset forms the
basis for the subsequent parts of this thesis.
3.8.1
Handling Deleted Comments in the Dataset
Another observation worth noting is that if a comment was deleted after the creation of
the dataset, those comments would still appear as valid nodes in the graphs I generate,
despite their lack of children. However, if someone visited the Reddit pages of those
posts, they would find fewer comments and would not see these deleted comments. This
is because, as previously mentioned, Reddit does not display deleted comments that lack
child comments. Since I have no information whether a comment was deleted after the
generation of the dataset, I will ignore this detail. Instead, I will treat these comments as
valid nodes within the graphs.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:23==
4
Methods
After turning the comments into graphs, I needed to make them accessible for the machine
learning model. For this purpose, I used several statistical metrics to describe the graphs.
After selecting the appropriate machine learning model from many and fine-tuning it on
the dataset, I ran tens of thousands of tests to have enough data to draw conclusions in
later chapters.
4.1
Preparation of the Data
In the previous section, I explained the process of transforming Reddit comments and
submissions into Networkx graphs. To use machine learning algorithms’ ability to classify
these graphs based on structural patterns, I needed to numerically quantify these pat-
terns. This numerical representation makes the data compatible with machine learning
algorithms.
The study by [47] provided valuable insights for this part of the project. It used four sta-
tistical metrics to compare different social media cascades: cascade size (number of
retweets), cascade depth (the greatest distance of a node from the root), cascade max-
imal breadth (the maximum number of nodes at the same distance from the root), and
cascade ”virality” (a normalized version of what is also known as the Wiener index [81],
representing the average pairwise distance of nodes in the cascade when all directed
edges are converted into undirected edges). This study also measured the geometric
mean of the time it takes for a cascade to be retweeted by a unique set of users.
4.1.1
Statistical Metrics
Inspired by this, I introduced the following statistical measures in my study:
1. Size: Number of nodes in the graph, the post root node is counted as well.
2. Average Branch: This gives the average number of neighbour nodes each node in
the tree has, so in other words, this is the average degree.
3. Diameter: This represents the length of the shortest path between the most distant
nodes in the graph.
4. Number of Peripheries: This represents the number of nodes that are as far away
from the root as possible (their eccentricity is equal to the diameter of the graph).
5. Maximum Degree: This represents the highest number of edges connected to a
single node in the graph.
6. Degree of Root: This represents the number of edges connected to the root node
of the graph.
7. Virality: Similar to the aforementioned study, this is a normalized version of the
Wiener index.
8. Number of Leaves: This represents the number of nodes in the graph that do not
have any children.
9. Average Periphery Distance: This represents the average distance of all nodes in
the periphery from the root.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
15
==PAGE:24==
10. Average Shortest Distance: This represents the average of the shortest paths from
each node to every other node.
These metrics should provide a detailed characterization of the graph’s structure, paving
the way for effective classification by machine learning algorithms.
4.1.2
Calculation of Metrics
I would like to provide an insight into the calculations of these metrics. By showing these
calculations, the reader can better grasp the idea of the metrics I use in my project and
what they stand for. Also, my work will be reproducible. For the calculations, I heavily
used the NetworkX library’s built-in functions, since they are well-made, fast, reliable, and
tested by many users and programmers over the years.
1. Size: Use Networkx’s built-in size function
2. Average Branch: Extract the degrees of the graph and calculate the mean of that
list.
3. Diameter: Use Networkx’s built-in diameter function.
4. Number of Peripheries: Calculate the length of the result from Networkx’s built-in
periphery function.
5. Maximum Degree: Iterate through the degrees and find the maximum degree.
6. Degree of Root: Determine the degree of the root node.
7. Virality: Use Networkx’s wiener_index function and normalize it, which involves di-
viding it by (n * (n - 1)), where n is the number of nodes.
8. Number of Leaves: Iterate through the nodes’ degrees, identify nodes where the
degree is 1 (indicating they are leaves in a tree), and count them.
9. Average Periphery Distance: Iterate through the periphery of the graph (to get it use
Networkx’s periphery function), and for each periphery node, calculate the shortest
path between it and the root using Networkx’s built-in shortest_path_length function.
Then calculate the mean of these path lengths.
10. Average Shortest Distance: Use Networkx’s built-in average_shortest_path_length
function.
In Figure 4.1, the distributions of the different statistical metrics are presented. Please
note the logarithmic scale used for these distributions.
4.2
Classification with Machine Learning
Classification is a type of supervised learning approach in machine learning, where the
algorithm learns from the input data to predict or determine the output class or category.
In other words, it is a process of categorizing a given set of data into classes. The task of
the classifier is to predict or determine the class label for an unseen instance based on the
learning it has done on the training data. There are several types of classification algo-
rithms, including decision trees, k-nearest neighbors, logistic regression, support vector
machines, and neural networks, among others. Each of these techniques has a different
method for learning and making predictions.
In the training phase, the classification algorithm builds a model based on the input fea-
tures and their corresponding class labels. This model is then used in the prediction
16
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.1: Distributions of the metrics I used for machine learning. The X-axis represents
the metric values, while the Y-axis represents their quantities.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: Comparing different classification algorithms to determine which one I will use
for the analysis later. Logistic Regression was chosen for the project because it gives the
highest accuracy rate for the dataset used in the project.
phase to determine the class label of unseen instances. The quality of the classifier can
be evaluated by metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score.
I evaluated three distinct classification algorithms for my project: Logistic Regression,
Decision Tree, and K-Nearest Neighbors. I wanted determine the most effective model to
proceed with for my analysis. Early on, I chose to exclude Support Vector Machines from
my evaluation due to its relative inefficiency and subpar performance.
In Figure 4.2, I can see the comparison results of the three selected algorithms. It is clear
that Logistic Regression performs better than the others. This evaluation involved running
each classification algorithm a hundred times on a dataset with 181,440 examples. This
dataset, which I will explain more about later, was equally divided between link and text
type posts.
The mean accuracy of Logistic Regression, rounded to four decimal places, was 0.5866,
with a standard deviation of 0.0025. This implies that, on average, Logistic Regression
was capable of correctly classifying post types based on the previously listed features
with a success rate of approximately 58.66%. Considering this outcome, it was clear that
Logistic Regression was the best model out of these three ones for this task due to its
higher prediction accuracy and consistency.
4.3
Data Analysis and Initial Observations
Before proceeding with applying the Logistic Regression model to our data, it is essential
to first analyze and understand the dataset’s characteristics. The dataset under review
comprises a total of 306,251 posts, as stated earlier. Figure 4.4 illustrates the distribution
of these posts across various subreddits. The graphic reveals a significant imbalance with
the Swedish and Danish subreddits containing significantly more posts than the others.
One can consider the distribution of post types, illustrated in Figure 4.3. In using the Lo-
gistic Regression classification machine learning algorithm, it was critical to ensure that
the graphs’ statistical metrics were being classified based solely on their graph features,
rather than external factors such as the originating subreddit. There is a risk because of
the uneven distribution of post types: for instance, the sheer volume of text posts is two
orders of magnitude greater than that of poll posts. Lastly, there was one additional fea-
ture where imbalance could lead to misleading results: the distribution of graph sizes. A
breakdown of the size distribution can be seen in Figure 4.5. The data reveals that more
than half of the graphs have a size of 12 or smaller. The largest graph in my dataset has
18
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:27==
Text
Link
Image
Crosspost
Video
Gallery
Poll
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Number of posts (log)
Figure 4.3: Number of post with different post types.
Sweden
Denmark
Norway
Finland
Iceland
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
·105
Number of posts (100K)
Figure 4.4: Number of posts from different subreddits.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
19
==PAGE:28==
Graph size
Quantity
Percentage
2
43,630
14.42%
3
21,199
7.01%
4
17,277
5.71%
5
15,142
5.0%
6
13,222
4.37%
7
12,084
3.99%
8
10,952
3.62%
9
10,126
3.35%
10
9,029
2.98%
11
8,267
2.73%
12
7,419
2.45%
Rest
139,873
45.67%
Figure 4.5: This table highlights the prevalence of smaller-sized graphs as the most com-
mon category. Beyond them, the distribution of dataframe sizes becomes more uniform
across different sizes. The figure shows the distribution via a boxplot chart. The box ex-
tends from the first quartile (Q1) to the third quartile (Q3) of the data, with a line at the
median. The whiskers extend from the box to the farthest data point lying within 1.5x
the inter-quartile range (IQR) from the box. Flier points (outliers) are those past the end
of the whiskers. Nevertheless, the obtained dataset contains outliers; the top 10 largest
discussion trees have an average size of 3386. However, outliers were excluded due to
the sheer amount of them: more than 31,000 posts have a size larger than the 1.5 · IQR
(or the upper whisker).
a size of 5678, and this corresponds to a submission regarding the 2022 election from a
Swedish subreddit1. Readers will notice a mismatch between the number of comments
displayed on the Reddit page and the size I have provided; this is due to the factor ex-
plained in subsection 3.8.1. The observation, based on the figures and statistics, is that
the larger the discussion, the less likely it is to occur.
Therefore, to maintain the integrity and reliability of the results, I took measures to control
these potential biases and ensure that the classification was based purely on the structural
characteristics of the Reddit discussion threads. In the following subsections, I will further
elaborate on how I managed these imbalances during the classification process.
4.3.1
Balancing Data on Size, Post Type, and Subreddit
In applications of machine learning, especially those that use social media data such as
Reddit posts, it is essential to maintain a balanced dataset to avoid biases in algorithmic
results. This section presents a comprehensive approach for filtering and pairing data,
with a focus on Reddit posts. The goal is to achieve balance in three main areas: post
type, subreddit, and size. Size was included in this measurement as well because we
assumed the highly different distribution of the sizes would affect the training process.
The first step in balancing the dataset is to ensure equal representation of different post
types. This is done by identifying the post type with the least representation and then
randomly choosing a similar number of posts from other types. This method guarantees
a uniform distribution of post types, which is crucial in reducing biases.
Balancing post types is relatively straightforward, but the task becomes more complex
1https://www.reddit.com/r/sweden/comments/xbokn1/sweddits_valvaka_2022/
20
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:29==
when considering graph sizes and subreddit distributions. To tackle this, I have created a
script that processes a dataframe, a list of post types, and subreddits, to produce a bal-
anced dataframe. The key steps of this script, which are essential in achieving a thorough
balance across all three aspects, are as follows:
1. Filtering the Input DataFrame: The process starts by filtering the input dataframe
(referred to as input_df) based on the desired post types and subreddits. This
step narrows down the dataset to only pertinent entries, making further steps more
manageable.
2. Grouping and Analyzing Data: The script then organizes the filtered data by size,
post type, and subreddit. Grouping the data in this way helps in spotting distribution
patterns and identifying any imbalances.
3. Calculating Minimums and Selecting Viable Pairs: A critical step is to calculate the
minimum counts for each combination of size, post type, and subreddit. The script
eliminates combinations with zero counts, focusing on feasible pairs for further anal-
ysis.
4. Determining Unique Post Type Counts: This step involves counting the variety of
post types within different sizes, which gives insight into the dataset’s diversity after
the filtering process.
5. Final Filtering Based on Size and Practicality: The script concludes the filtering pro-
cess by concentrating on size combinations where pairing is practical, ensuring even
representation across all dimensions.
A function, called select_sizes(row, filtered_df) (see section A.2), is crucial in this
process. It selects samples based on size, post type, and subreddit, guaranteeing bal-
anced representation from each category. The function iterates over each subreddit and
post type, randomly choosing samples of a specific size. These samples are then com-
bined, creating a balanced subset of the original dataset.
By following these steps, the script successfully balances the dataset across size, post
type, and subreddit. This balanced dataset is vital for training machine learning models
without bias, particularly for projects analyzing social media content. The methodology
described is not only effective but also versatile, suitable for various datasets and machine
learning project requirements.
4.4
Hyperparameter Optimization of the Logistic Regression
Model
Now that the data is ready, the next task is to fine-tune the logistic regression model’s pa-
rameters. While using default settings is an option, a more detailed approach can ensure
the model’s optimal performance within practical limits. For this, I chose to use Scikit-
learn (commonly known as sklearn)2, a comprehensive and free machine learning library
for Python. Sklearn offers various classification, regression, and clustering algorithms
and is designed to work smoothly with Python’s numerical and scientific libraries, NumPy
and SciPy. It also provides numerous tools for model fitting, data preprocessing, model
selection, and evaluation, among others, making it a perfect choice for this project. I have
made use of the logistic regression model provided by sklearn3.
2https://scikit-learn.org
3https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
21
==PAGE:30==
The logistic regression model from sklearn’s documentation allows for extensive cus-
tomization. Users can manipulate various parameters such as the penalty applied, the
tolerance for stopping criteria, or the used solver. Given the numerous quantity of param-
eters and the multitude of their potential combinations, I wrote a program to determine
the ideal combination of these parameters. For this task, I examined a certain set of pa-
rameters (see section A.7). I created a program that tries out every possible mix of these
settings. It trains the model, tests it, records how well it works and the settings used in a
table. This is done so I can later study this information to find out which setup works the
best. However, the number of combinations was remarkably large, estimated at 120,960.
For the balanced dataframe, I used text post type and two subreddits: sweden and Den-
mark. The magnitude of the task became evident when considering that, on average,
training and testing a model with a set of parameters took approximately 3.881 seconds,
implying that my script would need to run for several days to yield results.
It was clear that a faster method was necessary. This led me to use RandomizedSearchCV4,
a built-in class from sklearn. This is a strong and reliable tool for hyperparameter opti-
mization. By defining a parameter grid and the number of iterations, RandomizedSearchCV
smartly navigates through different combinations of hyperparameters to find the best con-
figuration. This method not only saves time compared to exhaustive search methods, but
also improves the model performance by determining the ideal hyperparameters for the
given task. I tested this method using the same balanced dataframe, containing only the
Swedish posts, with an equal number of text and link post type instances. The machine
learning algorithm’s task was to classify and predict the post type based on these graphs.
The optimal set of parameters for this setting, which resulted with an accuracy of 0.5281,
turned out to be as follows:
• warm_start: False,
• tol: 0.001,
• solver: ’lbfgs’,
• random_state: 42,
• penalty: ’l2’,
• max_iter: 5000,
• l1_ratio: None,
• fit_intercept: True,
• class_weight: ’balanced’,
• C: 1
From now on, I used the Logistic Regression with this set of parameters.
4.5
Analytical Approach: Implementing and Assessing
Logistic Regression
To perform our analysis, I must examine the various combinations of submission types
and subreddits, apply the Logistic Regression model to them, and evaluate the outcomes.
For this, I have created a program that accepts two boolean arguments: size and type.
The operation of this program is as follows:
4https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.RandomizedSearchCV.html
22
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:31==
Initially, I require all the combinations of the target feature. This could be either Post Type
or Subreddit, depending on the type argument value. Then, I must generate a balanced
dataframe based on the target feature. This too is based on the type argument. When the
target is, for instance, Subreddit (which means the type argument is false), I preprocess
the dataframe to only keep rows associated with the most common post type: text. This
way, the varying submission types will not impact the outcome. The process is similar
when the target is Post Type, except in this case, I only keep rows associated with the
largest subreddit value, which is sweden.
Following this, I decide whether to keep or discard the size column from the feature
dataset. Specifically, this is to analyse the relationship between the model and the size of
the graph. The size argument flag determines this: if it is true, then size is preserved in
the training data, otherwise it is discarded.
At this stage, I have everything required to run the program on the combinations. The
program is executed for every Subreddit or Post Type combination, and for every argu-
ment combination, repeating 1000 times. This allows me to gain a deeper understanding
of the underlying mechanisms, to identify and exclude outliers, and to draw meaningful
conclusions.
At the conclusion of each combination’s execution, I record two different types of results.
The first is the coefficient matrix of the features in the decision function, along with cor-
responding data such as Class 0 and Class 1 columns. The coefficient (or ”coef”) for
a specific feature represents the change in log odds resulting from a one-unit increase
in that feature. Log odds, in simple terms, relate to the probability of an event occurring
versus it not occurring.
For instance, if a feature in this model has a coefficient of 0.1874, it implies that for every
one unit increase in that feature, the log odds of the event (here, the subreddit being
classified as ’Finland’, which is Class 1) versus the event not taking place (Denmark, i.e.,
Class 0) increase by 0.1874.
{
'Average Branch': 0.1874,
'Class 0': 'Denmark',
'Class 1': 'Finland'
}
In simpler terms, as the value of this feature increases, the model leans towards classify-
ing the subreddit as ’Finland’ rather than Denmark. This interpretation, however, assumes
that all other feature values remain constant.
The second type of data that I collect is intended for the analysis of individual predic-
tions and graphs. For every combination of arguments, the outcomes of the 1000 runs
are stored. Moreover, for each run, the cascades (or comment graphs) used for testing
(specifically, their IDs), the model’s predictions for those graphs, and their actual values
are preserved.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:33==
5
Results
This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive examination and interpretation of the re-
sults obtained from the research. The objective is to derive insights by analyzing data at
both high and low levels. The high-level analysis focuses on identifying broad trends and
patterns within the results, while the low-level analysis concentrates on the examination
of individual features, their coefficients, and their impact on classification performance.
5.1
High-Level Data Analysis and Observations
First I look at the data on a higher level. After compiling all the results, I have a large
dataframe consisting of 62,000 entries. This figure is derived from the number of subreddit
combinations (10), plus the number of type combinations (21), multiplied by whether the
size was included or not (2), and further multiplied by the number of model runs (1000).
The dataframe also contains the Class 0 and Class 1 parameters, which represent either
post types or subreddits.
When grouping by classes and calculating their mean values, the results are presented
in Table 5.1. The majority of accuracies hover around 0.5. However, there are some
notable exceptions. For instance, the model runs related to polls produced extremely low
accuracies, which can be attributed to the very small datasets they were trained on. These
limited training datasets are inadequate for achieving a satisfactory recognition rate.
As I expected, the machine learning model performed better when classifying post types
compared to subreddits. The model could more readily distinguish differences between
post types than differences between various subreddits. This may be due to the similar-
ities of the subreddits, which was our assumption when I chose these subreddits, or it
could be due to other factors, what I discuss in the next chapter. Upon excluding polls
from the analysis, the average accuracy for post type classification was 0.5473, while the
average accuracy for subreddit classification was 0.5158.
As indicated by the linear regression line in the Figure 5.1, a larger dataset generally
yields higher accuracy. This result aligns with the widely accepted understanding that the
more data a model has to train on, the better it can perform. Yet, when polls were once
again excluded and the average Size of DF was calculated for both type and subreddit
targeting models, an unexpected pattern was discovered. Subreddit targeting models had
double the average size compared to the type targeting models, with 32,073 and 15,093
instances respectively. On the surface, these results seem contradictory. More data
usually improves model performance, but in this case, the model predicting post types
outperformed the one classifying subreddits, despite having less data to learn from. This
could be attributed to the fact that post types may possess more distinctive features that
make them easier for the model to classify, even with a smaller dataset: distinct patterns
can simplify the classification task for the model, thereby enhancing its performance. In
contrast, subreddits, despite having more data for the model to learn from, may pose a
more complex classification problem. Subreddits can discuss similar topics but differen-
tiate in subtle ways such as user demographics, tones, or perspectives. These nuances
might be harder for the model to capture and learn from, leading to a lower accuracy.
These findings underscore the complexity of the relationship between data size and model
accuracy, demonstrating that more data does not always lead to better performance. It
highlights the importance of not only the quantity but also the quality and distinctness of
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
25
==PAGE:34==
Class 0
Class 1
Accuracy
Size of DF
gallery
link
0.6382
2,738
link
video
0.6079
4,856
image
link
0.5902
47,630
link
text
0.5630
75,010
image
text
0.5539
53,146
crosspost
gallery
0.5493
2,248
gallery
image
0.5451
2,734
Iceland
sweden
0.5324
17,168
text
video
0.5294
4,872
image
video
0.5280
4,858
crosspost
link
0.5274
6,346
Denmark
sweden
0.5261
92,442
gallery
text
0.5230
2,754
crosspost
video
0.5226
3,962
Finland
sweden
0.5215
26,448
Norway
sweden
0.5186
42,432
crosspost
text
0.5155
6,360
Finland
Norway
0.5149
25,948
Iceland
Norway
0.5106
17,126
Denmark
Norway
0.5105
38,446
Denmark
Iceland
0.5096
17,168
crosspost
image
0.5084
6,352
gallery
video
0.5082
2,540
Finland
Iceland
0.5078
17,132
Denmark
Finland
0.5065
26,428
gallery
poll
0.3875
22
crosspost
poll
0.3858
20
image
poll
0.3555
22
poll
video
0.3511
22
link
poll
0.3469
22
poll
text
0.3380
22
Table 5.1:
The corresponding accuracies, target parameters, and the sizes of the
dataframes associated with these data.
26
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.1: This scatter plot with a linear regression line shows a positive correlation
between the size of the Data Frame (DF) and model Accuracy, indicating that larger data
frames generally result in higher predictive accuracy.
the data. Therefore, further research would be necessary, possibly investigating ways
to make subreddit classifications more distinguishable or identifying specific features that
aid in easier post type classification. The vast majority of the results barely exceed a 50%
prediction rate, implying that the model struggles to accurately determine the class of the
graph. This performance indicates the inherent complexity and ambiguity in classifying
these trees.
5.1.1
Analyzing Feature Importance and Model Performance
The resulted dataframe from the learnings contains information about the coefficients
(coef) for each feature as well. The coefficient for Size is provided only 50% of the time,
due to the conditions mentioned earlier. It also contains the accuracy of each model ex-
ecution and notes whether the size was factored into the learning process.
To understand the significance of a feature in the model’s decision-making process, I cal-
culate its importance. Generally, the higher the absolute value of a feature’s coefficient,
the stronger its influence on the model’s predictions. For each class combination, I de-
termined the three most significant features and tallied their counts. These results are
presented in Table 5.3. Since the Size feature’s impact on the results are negligible, I
only looked at those results where Size was not included, and there were 31 such cases.
According to my analysis, Average Shortest Distance and Average Branch appeared
as the two most impactful features. However, as Table 5.2 showed, the model performed
effectively only for the class combinations: (gallery, link), (link, video), and (image,
link). Thus, I filter the coefficients matrices for these specific classes. Figure 5.2 pro-
vides a visual boxplot summary of the feature coefficients. This is an average obtained
from cases where Size was either included or excluded in the model training. As the dif-
ference between the two scenarios was found to be insignificant, the average value was
considered sufficient for further analysis.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that certain types, such as link, are present in both
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
27
==PAGE:36==
799
411
519
132
969
Max Depth
0.0359
0.0567
-0.0114
-0.0033
0.0359
Max Width
-0.0311
0.0383
0.0421
0.0195
-0.027
Virality
0.0418
-0.0215
-0.1271
-0.0689
-0.0723
Average Branch
-0.1379
0.2223
-0.2551
-0.1373
-0.175
Diameter
-0.0311
0.0383
0.0421
0.0195
-0.027
No. Peripheries
-0.0329
-0.0165
0.0239
0.0199
0.0152
Maximum degree
0.0451
0.0214
0.0037
-0.1407
0.058
Degree of root
-0.0089
-0.0771
0.1336
0.213
0.1439
No. Leaves
-0.0207
0.0814
-0.0581
-0.0502
-0.161
Average Periphery Distance
0.0351
-0.1323
-0.0068
0.0244
0.0138
Average Shortest Distance
0.0836
-0.0431
-0.2541
-0.1379
-0.1447
Accuracy
0.5027
0.4941
0.5609
0.5381
0.5667
Size Flag
False
True
False
True
True
Type Flag
False
True
True
False
True
Class 0
Denmark
gallery
link
Iceland
link
Class 1
Norway
video
text
sweden
text
Size
NaN
-0.028
NaN
0.0041
0.0403
Table 5.2: The table presents five samples of coefficients derived from the logistic regres-
sion analyses. Column titles indicate the indexes of the samples in the dataframe. When
Size is NaN, that means Size was not included in the training process, also Size Flag
indicates this. Class 0 and Class 1 are the categories compared to against each other
(either two types or two subreddits). The feature Type Flag indicates if two types were
compared (True) or two subreddits (then it is False).
Feature
Count
Average Shortest Distance
20
Average Branch
17
Degree of root
12
Average Periphery Distance
10
No. Leaves
9
Virality
8
Maximum degree
7
Max Depth
6
No. Peripheries
4
Table 5.3: The number of times a coefficient feature was determined to be important
across 31 cases. The coefficient feature was determined to be important if its absolute
value ranked among the top three highest values in each case.
28
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.2: Boxplot charts with the coefficient features. Some features do not have a real
impact on the results, like Max Width, Diameter or No. Leaves, on the other hand, others
have a significant impact, like Average Branch, Average Shortest Distance and Virality.
Class 0 and Class 1. As a result, I need to differentiate between the coefficient matrices
for each row from Table 5.1. Analyzing the coefficient matrices for these three cases with
the highest accuracies led to the following insights:
For the model to classify between link, video or image, the Average Branch value should
be lower to favor link, and the Average Shortest Distance should be higher. Similarly,
a higher Virality value also increases the likelihood of a link classification, while Degree
of Root displays an inverse relationship: a higher value decreases the chance for link.
Summarizing these findings (the coefficient dataframes with all the data can be seen in
Table A.1, Table A.2, Table A.3), I observe the following:
• Link: A lower Average Branch, higher Average Shortest Distance, lower Degree of
Root, and higher Virality are indicative.
• Video: Characterized by a higher Average Branch, lower Average Shortest Dis-
tance, higher Degree of Root, lower Virality, and lower Maximum Degree.
• Image: Exhibits a higher Average Branch, lower Average Shortest Distance, higher
Degree of Root, and lower Virality.
• Gallery: Similar to the Image type, it has a higher Average Branch, lower Average
Shortest Distance, higher Degree of Root, and lower Virality.
In conclusion, at a higher statistical level, my research and data analysis have led to
the following insights: The four most important features are Average Branch, Average
Shortest Distance, Degree of Root, and Virality. For video classification, Maximum
Degree can also prove useful. However, these findings apply specifically when I are clas-
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
29
==PAGE:38==
sifying posts with image, link, video, or gallery types. As observed in Table 5.3, these
features were consistently important in all cases, but for other types and subreddit clas-
sification scenarios, they were not sufficiently reliable to be solely relied upon.
5.2
Baseline
To better understand the effectiveness of our models, it is important to establish a baseline
for comparison. Therefore, I calculated a baseline for each type, addressing our model’s
struggle to differentiate between types. The baseline was determined by having the model
identify Swedish posts from both Type 1 and Type 2, with labels shuffled each time to pre-
vent any learning, ensuring a truly random result. The results are displayed in Table 5.4.
In addition to the mean, I have also listed the standard deviation, highlighting that the
mean typically hovers around 0.5 with a very low deviation. With these results, I can un-
derstand better the results what our model achieved. In addition to this, the baseline was
calculated for subreddits as well in Table 5.5.
5.3
Individual Graph Analyses
Another way to analyze the results is by looking at the graphs manually to determine
which ones were easily recognized by the algorithm and which were not. For this data,
during each run, I saved the test dataset, the predictions, and the indexes of the cascades.
Subsequently, I could count how many times each used cascade was recognized correctly
and incorrectly. An example of this dataset can be seen in Table 5.6.
I am looking for answers for the following questions:
1. Which cascades were very recognizable? What are the similarities among them?
2. Which cascades were very unrecognizable? What are the similarities among them?
3. Which cascades showed mixed results regarding recognition? What are the simi-
larities among them?
5.3.1
Cascades Predominantly Recognized Correctly or Incorrectly
Let’s examine the cascades that were the most recognizable. I have listed the top 10 in
Table 5.7. Interestingly, all of these are from the Swedish subreddit. The first non-Swedish
post, a Finnish one, ranks at position 765th (out of 77,601). It was recognized correctly
1725 times without any misrecognition. Similarly, if I look at the worst 10 in Table 5.8,
I observe a similar pattern. Given that the Swedish subreddit is the most dominant in
my dataset, and similarly for the text type, it is unsurprising that the extreme values are
from this category. To find the first exclusively misrecognized non-Swedish post, we again
come to the 765th position, which is an Icelandic tree misrecognized 1704 times.
Let’s average them by subreddit and type. The results are shown in Table 5.9. For the
Swedish subreddit, examples from every post type are present. However, for the other
subreddits, only text is used. This is due to the reason mentioned earlier: in my previ-
ous work, when comparing subreddits, I matched them based on the most popular type,
which is text. The same approach was used for types, but with the most popular sub-
reddit, which is sweden. As the table indicates, generally, Swedish posts have the highest
recognition rate. However, because the Swedish subreddit was used to compare ’poll’
type posts, which seem extremely hard to distinguish, the bottom of the table also shows
a Swedish result.
In Table 5.10, we can see the number of each <subreddit, post type> pair recognized
correctly or incorrectly in individual cascade testing. The numbers are so large because
30
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:39==
Type 1
Type 2
Mean
Std
link
text
0.4988
0.004
link
image
0.4985
0.0052
link
video
0.5044
0.0138
link
gallery
0.4907
0.0223
link
crosspost
0.5016
0.0139
link
poll
0.5
0.1844
text
image
0.5013
0.0022
text
video
0.508
0.0094
text
gallery
0.4993
0.0194
text
crosspost
0.5025
0.0134
text
poll
0.56
0.1744
image
video
0.5
0.0144
image
gallery
0.506
0.0203
image
crosspost
0.4991
0.0128
image
poll
0.52
0.24
video
gallery
0.5049
0.0206
video
crosspost
0.5035
0.0155
video
poll
0.54
0.18
gallery
crosspost
0.4951
0.0158
gallery
poll
0.48
0.2993
crosspost
poll
0.475
0.3052
link
text
0.4998
0.0041
link
image
0.5017
0.0067
link
video
0.4985
0.0189
link
gallery
0.5029
0.0224
link
crosspost
0.5009
0.01
link
poll
0.4
0.1789
text
image
0.4974
0.0045
text
video
0.492
0.0129
text
gallery
0.4884
0.015
text
crosspost
0.5
0.0122
text
poll
0.46
0.1562
image
video
0.5043
0.0106
image
gallery
0.4923
0.0193
image
crosspost
0.5005
0.0098
image
poll
0.36
0.196
video
gallery
0.4984
0.0192
video
crosspost
0.4933
0.0126
video
poll
0.48
0.16
gallery
crosspost
0.4951
0.0109
gallery
poll
0.6
0.2
crosspost
poll
0.425
0.1601
Table 5.4: This table presents the mean and standard deviation of our model’s ability to
identify cascades from Type 1 and Type 2. The baseline was obtained by shuffling labels
to achieve random results, resulting an average performance near 0.5 with low deviation.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
31
==PAGE:40==
Subreddit 1
Subreddit 2
Mean
Std
Denmark
sweden
0.5018
0.0044
Denmark
Iceland
0.4969
0.0082
Denmark
Finland
0.4989
0.0064
Denmark
Norway
0.5011
0.0062
sweden
Iceland
0.4988
0.0104
sweden
Finland
0.5015
0.0056
sweden
Norway
0.5001
0.0047
Iceland
Finland
0.5013
0.0101
Iceland
Norway
0.4982
0.0071
Finland
Norway
0.5026
0.009
Denmark
sweden
0.4995
0.0027
Denmark
Iceland
0.502
0.0088
Denmark
Finland
0.5012
0.0064
Denmark
Norway
0.4983
0.0044
sweden
Iceland
0.5015
0.0109
sweden
Finland
0.5026
0.0084
sweden
Norway
0.501
0.0038
Iceland
Finland
0.501
0.0098
Iceland
Norway
0.4982
0.0058
Finland
Norway
0.505
0.0061
Table 5.5: This table presents the mean and standard deviation of our model’s ability to
identify text posts from Subreddit 1 and Subreddit 2. The baseline was obtained by
shuffling labels to achieve random results, resulting an average performance near 0.5 with
low deviation.
ID
Correct
Incorrect
94197
426
355
299120
406
393
16052
398
0
20932
1178
416
268830
0
793
Table 5.6: Example. Cascades (their IDs) and how many times were they recognised
correctly and incorrectly. The cascades were chosen randomly from the post dataframe
which contains 302,557 trees.
32
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:41==
ID
Correct
Incorrect
Subreddit
Post Type
52504
3721
2
sweden
text
2834
3684
0
sweden
text
154599
3641
4
sweden
text
83950
3637
0
sweden
text
282239
3622
0
sweden
text
8487
3607
10
sweden
text
168124
3606
3
sweden
text
265420
3603
1
sweden
text
239353
3578
18
sweden
text
255275
3567
34
sweden
text
Table 5.7: The top 10 correctly recognized post.
ID
Correct
Incorrect
Subreddit
Post Type
140611
3
3694
sweden
text
290900
5
3662
sweden
text
38592
0
3659
sweden
text
256137
15
3636
sweden
text
61981
28
3612
sweden
text
40527
2
3610
sweden
text
38315
468
3590
sweden
text
231923
68
3556
sweden
text
54889
120
3552
sweden
text
91990
96
3552
sweden
text
Table 5.8: The worst 10 incorrectly recognized post.
Subreddit
Post Type
Correct
Incorrect
Correct
Incorrect
Ratio
Avg.
Avg.
Std.
Std.
sweden
video
1056
678
576
558
1.56
image
501
339
311
314
1.48
link
450
317
430
382
1.42
gallery
1088
791
622
620
1.38
text
681
498
648
596
1.37
Finland
text
814
634
498
497
1.28
sweden
crosspost
841
808
455
450
1.04
Norway
text
597
618
450
437
0.97
Denmark
text
322
375
325
330
0.86
Iceland
text
726
873
601
602
0.83
sweden
poll
1158
1681
699
684
0.69
Table 5.9: For each <subreddit, type> pair, I calculated the averages and standard devia-
tions of the corresponding results. The ratio was also determined by dividing the number
of correctly guessed posts by the number of incorrect guesses. If a specific <subreddit,
type> pair is missing, this is because in my initial work, I only used posts from the sweden
subreddit when comparing by type (as it is the largest subreddit), and similarly, only text
posts when comparing subreddits.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
33
==PAGE:42==
Subreddit
Post Type
Correct
Incorrect
sweden
text
31,240,002
22,819,671
link
13,734,370
9,655,610
Denmark
text
13,654,703
15,892,763
sweden
image
12,763,318
8,623,324
Norway
text
9,156,426
9,486,635
Finland
text
8,002,172
6,234,285
Iceland
text
4,628,301
5,566,011
sweden
video
2,139,064
1,372,841
crosspost
1,921,490
1,844,877
gallery
1,356,946
986,481
poll
9,265
13,445
Table 5.10: The table displays the number of each <subreddit, post type> pair was recog-
nised correctly or incorrectly in individual cascade testing. These numbers strongly cor-
relate with the size distribution of the subreddits, meaning the Swedish subreddit is the
largest and the Icelandic subreddit is the smallest Nordic subreddit on Reddit.
181,277 cascades were tested, with each one tested on average 1000 times (this average
can also be observed in Table 5.9).
In Figure 5.3, the first row visualizes cascades representing the three most recognizable
trees from my dataset. These were guessed correctly multiple thousands of times and not
once incorrectly. Conversely, in the bottom row, we see graphs that were wrongly iden-
tified thousands of times, all of which are of the text type. A distinguishable difference
between the two rows is that a highly identifiable graph contains many more first-level
comments and leaves in general. The recognizable text posts have many subbranches,
meaning people tend to comment on other comments. Since less engaging trees domi-
nate the least recognizable text cascades, it suggests that other types have a less en-
gaging comment structure.
Drawing conclusions from these charts (Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5) is challenging due to
the mostly inconsistent results. However, a tentative summary suggests that Swedish,
Norwegian, and Danish posts are more recognizable when they have, relatively speak-
ing, a dense comment structure: dozens of first-level comments, and several have sub-
branches where many users engage in conversations. Conversely, Finnish and Icelandic
posts tend to be less recognizable under these conditions. Looking at the types, since that
is the main question of my thesis: how well identifiable are the post types across different
subreddits? For this purpose, we generated charts that show the best recognizable post
type cascades and the worst ones.
5.3.2
Cascades with Mixed Recognition
To answer the question regarding the most mixed posts, I introduced two new columns:
the Geometric Mean and the Geometric Ratio, see Table 5.11. I calculated the Geomet-
ric Mean by multiplying the numbers of correct and incorrect cases and then taking the
square root. To obtain the ratio, I divided the mean by the sum of these two numbers.
Essentially, the Geometric Ratio shows us how close the numbers of correct guesses
are to the incorrect guesses, and the mean gives it an emphasis. For example, if a cas-
cade was tested 20 times, and it was guessed 10 times correctly and 10 times incorrectly,
then the ratio will indicate a strong 0.5 , however, the mean will be only 10, whereas if
those two numbers were 100 each, the ratio would still be 0.5, however, the mean is 100
34
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.3: Visualized graphs are presented, all originating from the Swedish subreddit
and featuring the text post type. The first row displays the most easily identifiable cas-
cades from my dataset, while the second row showcases the least identifiable ones. The
post ID is shown between the apostrophes. Trees which were recognized a few times
incorrectly were excluded.
which is ten times higher: meaning the model was really on the edge regarding this cas-
cade. Together, these two formulas provide insights into the difficulty of identifying certain
cascades. I found that sorting the posts by the Geometric Mean and considering the Ge-
ometric Ratio when analyzing the data is an effective way to measure them in this regard.
However, since the two formula depends on each other, we will see correlation between
them too.
After reviewing the results in which each subreddit was represented in Table 5.11 (where
Swedish texts dominated), I visualized the three most mixed cascades from each sub-
reddit, as seen in Figure 5.8, and also the three most mixed cascades from each type is
visualized in the Figure 5.9.
5.4
Similarities Between Subreddits and Types
In this section, I present figures and tables demonstrating that subreddits are more similar
to each other than post types. A method to measure these similarities is by training the
model on one subreddit or post type and testing it on another. Before conducting this test,
it was necessary to first establish the correct parameters for the model. I tested my model
with various parameters and ultimately selected the most effective setting, which is also
illustrated in the following code snippet.
param_grid = {
'C': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100],
'solver': ['newton-cg', 'lbfgs', 'liblinear', 'sag', 'saga'],
'max_iter': [100, 200, 300]
}
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.4: The figure shows the most identifiable cascades from each subreddit, along
with their IDs and post types. It also includes trees that were incorrectly recognized a few
times.
36
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.5: The figure shows the least identifiable cascades from each subreddit, along
with their IDs and post types. It also includes trees that were correctly recognized a few
times.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.6: The figure shows the most identifiable cascades from each post type, along
with their IDs and subreddit. It also includes trees that were incorrectly recognized a few
times.
38
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.7: The figure shows the least identifiable cascades from each subreddit, along
with their IDs and subreddit. It also includes trees that were correctly recognized a few
times.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.8: The three most mixed cascades from each subreddit are presented, in the
title with their IDs as well. In this context, ’mixed’ means that the model struggled to
differentiate these posts, being correct in half of the cases and incorrect in the other half.
This indicates that the model was on the edge regarding these trees.
40
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.9: The three most mixed cascades from each type are presented, in the title with
their IDs as well. In this context, ’mixed’ means that the model struggled to differentiate
these posts, being correct in half of the cases and incorrect in the other half. This indicates
that the model was on the edge regarding these trees.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
41
==PAGE:50==
ID
Correct
Incorrect
Subreddit
Post
Geometric
Geometric
Type
Mean
Ratio
271308
1868
2248
sweden
text
2049
0.4979
31465
2345
1749
sweden
text
2025
0.4947
136987
2320
1702
sweden
text
1987
0.4941
176330
2674
1457
sweden
text
1973
0.4778
24548
1843
1910
sweden
text
1876
0.4999
141637
2029
1696
sweden
text
1855
0.498
290975
1851
1861
sweden
text
1855
0.5
32434
1862
1842
sweden
text
1851
0.5
191957
1820
1879
sweden
text
1849
0.4999
302322
1772
1923
sweden
text
1845
0.4996
Table 5.11: The posts with the most balanced mix of correct and incorrect guesses are
determined by calculating the Geometric Mean. The higher this number, the harder it
was for the model to recognize the target class of the post. The Geometric Ratio is also
calculated by dividing the Mean by the sum of the correct and incorrect guesses. Together,
these two formulas help analyze the results. A higher Ratio indicates a closer balance
between the two numbers, while a higher Mean suggests a greater magnitude of attempts
by the model to identify the post, meaning difficulties in classification.
# chosen parameters
params = {'C': 0.01, 'solver': 'liblinear', 'max_iter': 200}
After obtaining the parameters, I ran the test, first, for subreddits: for each subreddit
pair, I trained the model on one and then tested it on the other. This included tests on
the same subreddit pair to potentially yield interesting results. Initially, I analyzed the
heatmap shown in Figure A.1. This heatmap suggested that Norway, as well as Finland
and Iceland, were highly recognizable by other subreddits. However, after thorough de-
bugging, I discovered an error: most of the cascades were of the text type, leading the
algorithm to learn this pattern and falsely inflate prediction rates. Recognizing this issue, I
balanced the dataframes and obtained a more accurate heatmap, depicted in Figure 5.11.
In this revised heatmap, Norway remains highly recognizable, particularly by the Danish
training data. The Danish subreddit also shows a high degree of recognizability. The
Icelandic training dataset indicates a higher identification rate, which might be attributed
to its smaller size, as the subreddit is relatively small. As it can be seen, the model easily
picked up the differences between the subreddits, meaning the subreddits are quite sim-
ilar to each other. However, on the other hand, when the test was conducted on the post
types, quite different results were received, as can be observed in Figure 5.10.
42
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.10: This heatmap describes the correlation between post types. The models
were trained on the post type represented on the Y-axis and tested on the post type rep-
resented on the X-axis, with each cell showing the resulting prediction accuracy. The
results are more consistent with each other, generally revolving around 0.5. In some
cases, the recognition rate was remarkably low, especially when ’poll’ or ’crosspost’ was
involved. This can be explained by their significantly small number in the dataset, which
meant the model was not able to learn their contingent patterns effectively.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.11: This heatmap accurately describes the correlation between subreddits. The
models were trained on the subreddit represented on the Y axis and tested on the sub-
reddit represented on the X axis, with each cell showing the resulting prediction. In this
case, the training datasets were balanced. The results are more consistent with each
other, generally revolving around 0.5. A notable exception is the Norway subreddit, which
is distinctly identifiable when using Danish training data.
44
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:53==
6
Discussion
In this discussion chapter, I investigate the interpretation and implications of my findings
from the analysis of Reddit data, particularly focusing on the predefined post types from
the Nordic subreddits. The chapter primarily centers on the evaluation and conclusion of
two aspects: the identification of post types and the distinction between different subred-
dits based on the user interactions.
6.1
Post Type Identification
In this section, I will discuss the results obtained in recognizing post types across different
subreddits. As shown in Table 5.1, my model generally performed better in recognizing
post types. With the baseline at around 0.5 (see Table 5.4), my model at the top improved
by as much as 13%, a modest improvement. In 6 cases out of 21, it was better by 5%,
which, while not significant, is noticeably better than the baseline, because in average the
baseline has a low (0.0729) standard deviation. This suggests the model detected certain
patterns, allowing it to identify different post types in Nordic subreddits, albeit slightly.
To ensure the accuracy of my results, I took several measures: each test case was run
1000 times using a different random seed. Importantly, I balanced the training dataset
by including equal amounts of both post types. This balance was crucial because the
distribution of post types varies significantly (see Figure 4.3). Without balancing, one
post type could dominate the training dataset, leading to a high prediction rate without
the model recognizing any structural pattern, merely reflecting the popularity of one type
over the other. Regarding the heatmap in Figure 5.10, the model had difficulty reusing
the knowledge obtained from one post type and applying it to another. This leads us
to think, especially compared to the subreddit heatmap, that the post types are more
distinguishable than the subreddits are from each other.
6.2
Subreddit Identification
The model encountered more difficulties in recognizing different subreddits. Which means
my model indeed was able to focus solely on the type of the posts, and was not interfered
by the subreddit’s own patterns. Essentially, when it came to subreddits, it performed only
marginally better than the baseline (from Table 5.5), suggesting that Nordic subreddits are
quite similar, or that other statistical metrics of the cascades might be needed for effective
identification. Additionally, when the model was trained on one subreddit and tested on
another to determine if it recognizes any similarities (as shown in Figure 5.11), the pre-
dictions were slightly higher in some cases, notably with Iceland and Norway. However,
these results might be skewed by the small size of the Icelandic subreddit, which pro-
vided insufficient data for a thorough analysis. As for Norway, there appears to be certain
underlying correlations that warrants further investigation.
6.3
Individual Cascade Identification
I also examined the cascades: some trees were remarkably identifiable for the model,
while others were not. For example, in Table 5.7, I see cascades that were recognized
correctly thousands of times with only a few misidentifications. Similarly, in Table 5.8, I ob-
serve posts misrecognized thousands of times compared to only a few correct identifica-
tions. Interestingly, both tables contain only Swedish ’text’ posts. This could be because
the Swedish subreddit has the largest user base and text is the most popular post type in
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
45
==PAGE:54==
every subreddit. Additionally, certain <subreddit, post type> pairs are more recognizable
than others (Table 5.9): Video cascades were the most recognizable from that table (with
a ratio of 1.56), and generally, Swedish posts were quite identifiable. One reason could
be their sheer number, as it is the largest Nordic subreddit. However, Finnish and Nor-
wegian posts outperformed Danish ones, despite the Danish subreddit being much larger
(as also presented in Table 5.10).
Looking at the visualized graphs, some patterns can be observed, though they are not
strong enough to draw any certain conclusions. The denser (wider and deeper) a Swedish
graph, the easier it is to recognize correctly. This is true for the Danish and Norwegian
subreddits too. On the other hand, for the Finnish and Icelandic subreddits, the opposite
is true: generally, the larger the cascade, the harder it is to recognize them. In other
words, the most identified Finnish and Icelandic posts were small cascades, with only a
few branches, but Finnish ones were larger than Icelandic ones. However, the least iden-
tifiable Finnish and Icelandic posts were larger, with many comments. This could be due
to these being less popular subreddits, with fewer branches and comments, leading the
model to mostly identify a small graph as belonging to one of these two subreddits. When
the model met one of the few larger trees, it likely mistook it for being from a larger sub-
reddit, leading to misidentification. Analyzing Figure 5.8, which contains the most mixed
trees from each subreddit, an interesting observation can be drawn: typically, the smaller
trees, containing only a few nodes, were harder to classify, which seems reasonable.
However, every subreddit except the Swedish one has a few very mixed cascades that
can be considered large, especially the Icelandic one. The reason behind this requires
further work and research. I hypothesize that the significant difference in the number of
user bases among the subreddits might mislead the model, also, the subreddits may be
so similar to each other that the model was not able to differentiate them remarkably.
Analyzing the mixed cascades focusing on the types from Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7,
each result comes from the Swedish subreddit, which is unsurprising as discussed earlier.
Regarding the ’text’ post type, the more comments, sub-branches, and leaves a cascade
has, the easier it is to recognize for the model. More or less, this is true for ’image’ and
’link’ as well, however, the conclusions are hard to draw for the rest of the post types. The
most mixed cascades from Figure 5.9 show no more promising results: it is hard to see
the obvious differences between the top 3 and the least recognizable cascade for any
post type. Perhaps, for the mixed trees, I could say the smaller the graph (narrower and
shallower), the harder it is to distinguish the post type for the model, which is reasonable
and was expected.
6.4
Similarities Between Subreddits
Analyzing the data manually. I created a heatmap to show the results of tests where I
trained the model on data from one subreddit and tested it on another. Initially, I forgot
to balance the data, leading to incorrect results (Figure A.1). However, after balancing
the training sets, I achieved more even results (Figure 5.11). This figure suggests that
Norwegian posts are relatively identifiable by a model trained on Danish subreddit data
(0.65 recognition rate). The reverse is also somewhat true, though to a lesser extent
(0.58 recognition rate). Generally speaking, the connections are bidirectional: training
on subreddit X and testing on Y yields similar results to training on Y and testing on X.
This indicates that some subreddits are more similar to each other than others, just as
our assumption was. The (Norway, Iceland), (Norway, Sweden), and (Finland, Sweden)
pairings are highly similar. However, since most results hover around 0.5, this does not
necessarily mean concrete, valuable knowledge. Nevertheless, measuring this was im-
46
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:55==
portant, and future work could explore these similarities further. It is also possible that
Nordic countries are not that similar, and other subreddit pairs might show more similar-
ity. For instance, investigating the common user base of subreddits and correlating this
data with my results could be insightful. While not many users might be in multiple country
subreddits, overlaps are more likely in subreddits related to politics, hobbies, art, careers,
or other interests. For example, a member of ”r/gardening” is likely also part of ”r/plants”
or ”r/whatsthisplant” subreddits.
Additionally, my thesis work has other limitations. I only used posts and comments from
between 2019 and 2022 (see Figure 3.1). Utilizing more data in the training process could
potentially lead to a better model. It is possible that the current similarity among subreddits
is due to the internet’s internationalization, making it challenging to distinguish between
them. However, this might not have been the case 10 years ago. The content of the
comments were not used neither or their semantic value.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:57==
7
Conclusion
In my thesis project, I sought to answer the following question: Can we distinguish Reddit
posts’ types based solely on their comment structures? For this purpose, I gathered mil-
lions of comments and hundreds of thousands of posts from five different Nordic subred-
dits: ”r/Denmark”, ”r/sweden”, ”r/Iceland”, ”r/Norway”, and ”r/Finland”. Besides my main
question, I also looked into the question whether it is possible to distinguish the posts by
their originating subreddits. Since the primary question concerned post types, and I, on
purpose, chose similar subreddits with comparable cultures and online user behaviors,
I expected a negative answer for this secondary question. On the other hand, I hoped
to find a correlation for the primary question, demonstrating how distinguishable the post
types are by their comment structures’ statistical metrics. After collecting this data, I con-
verted the comments into graphs and these graphs into statistical metrics, considering
numerous properties such as the number of leaves, average degree, virality, and so on. I
then used a machine learning model to analyze them. Considerable time and energy was
spent on fine-tuning the model, selecting the best algorithm for the dataset, and more time
balancing and presenting the diverse dataset to the model to ensure it focused on essen-
tial aspects without bias. I ran test cases tens of thousands of times on DTU’s server.
Finally, I created several scripts to analyze the model’s results and to convert them into
specific figures, which made the results easier to understand beyond numerical data and
without visual representation.
In the end, I found that the chosen subreddits are indeed very similar to each other, so the
model struggled to differentiate the cascades’ subreddits solely based on their comment
tree structure. This is desirable because it means the subreddits’ own cultural behaviors
did not affect the post types’ recognition results, which is what I was hoping to find. Re-
garding the post types, the model was able to distinguish them. As seen in Table 5.1,
when differentiating gallery and link posts from each other, the model achieved a 63%
result, which is not negligible. When it came to (image, link), (link, text), or (image, text),
which are rather popular post types in these subreddits, my model achieved recognition
rates between 55% and 60%. While not significant or very high, this is higher than the
baseline, which hovers around 50% for many type pair (see Table 5.4). For the rest of
the type pairs, my model was not able to significantly differentiate them, performing only
slightly better than the baseline. When it came to poll posts, my model performed even
lower, which can be attributed to the fact that the poll post type is relatively rare in those
subreddits, so there was not enough data to train the model effectively. As indicated in
Table 5.1, poll datasets contained only 20 or 22 rows of data, which is remarkably lower
than the rest of the datasets.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:59==
8
Future Work
In this chapter, I reflect on my work and outline some potential future directions.
Our project could benefit from numerous improvements and reevaluations. For instance,
many countries have multiple subreddits with significantly different main user bases. ”r/Nor-
way” is the English-speaking subreddit for Norway, whereas ”r/norge” is the Norwegian
subreddit. The ”r/Norway” subreddit used in my project is moderately used by foreigners,
along with many Norwegians. Similarly, ”r/Finland” is the international Finnish subreddit,
and ”r/suomi” is the Finnish subreddit. The same goes for ”r/sweden” and ”r/SWARJE”.
Denmark, apart from ”r/Denmark” which is a Danish subreddit, has other subreddits like
”r/dankmark” and ”r/dkfinance”, whose data could also be categorized under the ”Danish
subreddit” class. Interestingly, the Icelandic subreddit is already relatively small that it
did not need the creation of other Icelandic sub-subreddits, as many other subreddits do.
Iceland only has an Icelandic subreddit: their language, Icelandic, has its own subred-
dit: ”r/Icelandic”, which is an international-based subreddit. In the future, one could con-
sider joining and filtering based on these distinctions: for instance, excluding international-
based subreddits from the data could prevent misinterpretations.
However, since many users of various subreddits browse Reddit internationally and par-
ticipate in multiple subreddits, influencing each other, one could argue that there is no
need to filter out international subreddits when comparing regional ones. Nevertheless,
every subreddit, especially those of non-English-speaking countries, has a ”core” group of
users who either do not speak English or are not interested in other international subred-
dits. These people, due to cultural differences, may behave differently on the platform.
The key question is whether there are enough ”core” users to significantly differentiate
the subreddits, or if they are a small portion and thus negligible? This question requires
further research.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
51
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[1]
Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow. “Social media and fake news in the 2016 elec-
tion”. In: Journal of economic perspectives 31.2 (2017), pp. 211–236.
[2]
Priyavrat Chauhan, Nonita Sharma, and Geeta Sikka. “The emergence of social
media data and sentiment analysis in election prediction”. In: Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing 12 (2021), pp. 2601–2627.
[3]
John Allen Hendricks and Dan Schill. “The social media election of 2016”. In: The
2016 US presidential campaign: Political communication and practice (2017), pp. 121–
150.
[4]
Gayatri Wani and Nilesh Alone. “A survey on impact of social media on election
system”. In: International journal of computer science and information technologies
5.6 (2014), pp. 7363–7366.
[5]
Simeon Edosomwan et al. “The history of social media and its impact on business”.
In: Journal of Applied Management and entrepreneurship 16.3 (2011), p. 79.
[6]
Dave Evans, Susan Bratton, and Jake McKee. Social media marketing. AG Printing
& Publishing, 2021.
[7]
Murugesan Saravanakumar and T SuganthaLakshmi. “Social media marketing”. In:
Life science journal 9.4 (2012), pp. 4444–4451.
[8]
Tracy L Tuten and Michael R Solomon. Social media marketing. Sage, 2017.
[9]
Rdouan Faizi, Abdellatif El Afia, and Raddouane Chiheb. “Exploring the potential
benefits of using social media in education”. In: International Journal of Engineering
Pedagogy (iJEP) 3.4 (2013), pp. 50–53.
[10]
Christine Greenhow and Cathy Lewin. “Social media and education: Reconceptu-
alizing the boundaries of formal and informal learning”. In: Learning, media and
technology 41.1 (2016), pp. 6–30.
[11]
Luca Braghieri, Ro’ee Levy, and Alexey Makarin. “Social media and mental health”.
In: American Economic Review 112.11 (2022), pp. 3660–3693.
[12]
Chloe Berryman, Christopher J Ferguson, and Charles Negy. “Social media use and
mental health among young adults”. In: Psychiatric quarterly 89 (2018), pp. 307–
314.
[13]
Bin Bi and Junghoo Cho. “Modeling a retweet network via an adaptive bayesian
approach”. In: Proceedings of the 25th international conference on world wide web.
2016, pp. 459–469.
[14]
Nadeem Akhtar, Hira Javed, and Geetanjali Sengar. “Analysis of Facebook social
network”. In: 2013 5th International Conference and Computational Intelligence and
Communication Networks. IEEE. 2013, pp. 451–454.
[15]
Khanh Nguyen and Duc A Tran. “An analysis of activities in Facebook”. In: 2011
IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC). IEEE. 2011,
pp. 388–392.
[16]
Itai Himelboim. “Social network analysis (social media)”. In: The international ency-
clopedia of communication research methods (2017), pp. 1–15.
[17]
Elena Milani, Emma Weitkamp, and Peter Webb. “The visual vaccine debate on
Twitter: A social network analysis”. In: Media and Communication 8.2 (2020), pp. 364–
375.
[18]
Deborah Hicks, Mary F Cavanagh, and Amy VanScoy. “Social network analysis: A
methodological approach for understanding public libraries and their communities”.
In: Library & Information Science Research 42.3 (2020), p. 101029.
52
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:61==
[19]
Reddit’s 2020 Year in Review. 2020. URL: https://www.redditinc.com/blog/reddits-
2020-year-in-review.
[20]
Galen Weld, Amy X Zhang, and Tim Althoff. “What makes online communities ‘bet-
ter’? Measuring values, consensus, and conflict across thousands of subreddits”.
In: Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.
Vol. 16. 2022, pp. 1121–1132.
[21]
Brady Robards. “Belonging and neo-tribalism on social media site Reddit”. In: Neo-
tribes: Consumption, leisure and tourism (2018), pp. 187–206.
[22]
Adrienne L Massanari. “Contested play: The culture and politics of reddit bots”. In:
Socialbots and their friends. Routledge, 2016, pp. 126–143.
[23]
Christine Lagorio-Chafkin. We are the nerds: The birth and tumultuous life of Reddit,
the internet’s culture laboratory. Hachette UK, 2018.
[24]
Nicholas Proferes et al. “Studying reddit: A systematic overview of disciplines, ap-
proaches, methods, and ethics”. In: Social Media+ Society 7.2 (2021), p. 20563051211019004.
[25]
Matthew R Jamnik and David J Lane. “The use of Reddit as an inexpensive source
for high-quality data”. In: Practical Assessment, Research, and Evaluation 22.1
(2017), p. 5.
[26]
Jason Baumgartner et al. “The pushshift reddit dataset”. In: Proceedings of the in-
ternational AAAI conference on web and social media. Vol. 14. 2020, pp. 830–839.
[27]
Hao Fang, Hao Cheng, and Mari Ostendorf. “Learning latent local conversation
modes for predicting comment endorsement in online discussions”. In: Proceedings
of The Fourth International Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social
Media. 2016, pp. 55–64.
[28]
Victoria Zayats and Mari Ostendorf. “Conversation modeling on Reddit using a
graph-structured LSTM”. In: Transactions of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics 6 (2018), pp. 121–132.
[29]
Alexey N Medvedev, Renaud Lambiotte, and Jean-Charles Delvenne. “The anatomy
of Reddit: An overview of academic research”. In: Dynamics On and Of Complex
Networks III: Machine Learning and Statistical Physics Approaches 10 (2019), pp. 183–
204.
[30]
Benjamin D Horne, Sibel Adali, and Sujoy Sikdar. “Identifying the social signals that
drive online discussions: A case study of reddit communities”. In: 2017 26th Inter-
national Conference on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN). IEEE.
2017, pp. 1–9.
[31]
Nick Boettcher. “Studies of depression and anxiety using reddit as a data source:
Scoping review”. In: JMIR mental health 8.11 (2021), e29487.
[32]
Judy Hanwen Shen and Frank Rudzicz. “Detecting anxiety through reddit”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology—
From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality. 2017, pp. 58–65.
[33]
Emma I Brett et al. “A content analysis of JUUL discussions on social media: Using
Reddit to understand patterns and perceptions of JUUL use”. In: Drug and alcohol
dependence 194 (2019), pp. 358–362.
[34]
Shailik Sarkar et al. “Predicting depression and anxiety on reddit: a multi-task learn-
ing approach”. In: 2022 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social
Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM). IEEE. 2022, pp. 427–435.
[35]
Abhinav Anand and Jalaj Pathak. “WallStreetBets against wall street: The role of
reddit in the gamestop short squeeze”. In: (2021).
[36]
Sameet Sreenivasan et al. “Information cascades in feed-based networks of users
with limited attention”. In: IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering
4.2 (2016), pp. 120–128.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
53
==PAGE:62==
[37]
Béla Bollobás. Modern graph theory. Vol. 184. Springer Science & Business Media,
1998.
[38]
Norman Biggs, E Keith Lloyd, and Robin J Wilson. Graph Theory, 1736-1936. Ox-
ford University Press, 1986.
[39]
Rob Shields. “Cultural topology: The seven bridges of Königsburg, 1736”. In: The-
ory, Culture & Society 29.4-5 (2012), pp. 43–57.
[40]
Dénes König. “Theory of finite and infinite graphs”. In: Theory of Finite and Infinite
Graphs. Springer, 1990, pp. 45–421.
[41]
Anandhan Prathik, K Uma, and J Anuradha. “An Overview of application of Graph
theory”. In: International Journal of ChemTech Research 9.2 (2016), pp. 242–248.
[42]
Alexey N Medvedev, Jean-Charles Delvenne, and Renaud Lambiotte. “Modelling
structure and predicting dynamics of discussion threads in online boards”. In: Jour-
nal of Complex Networks 7.1 (2019), pp. 67–82.
[43]
Vicenç Gómez, Hilbert J Kappen, and Andreas Kaltenbrunner. “Modeling the struc-
ture and evolution of discussion cascades”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM con-
ference on Hypertext and hypermedia. 2011, pp. 181–190.
[44]
Vicenç Gómez et al. “A likelihood-based framework for the analysis of discussion
threads”. In: World Wide Web 16 (2013), pp. 645–675.
[45]
Justin Cheng et al. “Can cascades be predicted?” In: Proceedings of the 23rd inter-
national conference on World wide web. 2014, pp. 925–936.
[46]
Jake M Hofman, Amit Sharma, and Duncan J Watts. “Prediction and explanation in
social systems”. In: Science 355.6324 (2017), pp. 486–488.
[47]
Jonas L. Juul and Johan Ugander. “Comparing information diffusion mechanisms by
matching on cascade size”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
118.46 (2021), e2100786118. URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2100786118.
[48]
P Alex Dow, Lada Adamic, and Adrien Friggeri. “The anatomy of large facebook
cascades”. In: Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media. Vol. 7. 1. 2013, pp. 145–154.
[49]
Adrien Friggeri et al. “Rumor cascades”. In: proceedings of the international AAAI
conference on web and social media. Vol. 8. 1. 2014, pp. 101–110.
[50]
Fabiana Zollo and Walter Quattrociocchi. “Misinformation spreading on Facebook”.
In: Complex spreading phenomena in social systems: Influence and contagion in
real-world social networks (2018), pp. 177–196.
[51]
Sameera Horawalavithana et al. “Mentions of security vulnerabilities on reddit, twit-
ter and github”. In: IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence.
2019, pp. 200–207.
[52]
Maria Glenski and Tim Weninger. “Predicting user-interactions on reddit”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social
Networks Analysis and Mining 2017. 2017, pp. 609–612.
[53]
Tom M Mitchell. Machine learning. 1997.
[54]
Michael I Jordan and Tom M Mitchell. “Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and
prospects”. In: Science 349.6245 (2015), pp. 255–260.
[55]
Issam El Naqa and Martin J Murphy. What is machine learning? Springer, 2015.
[56]
Ameer Sardar Kwekha-Rashid, Heamn N Abduljabbar, and Bilal Alhayani. “Coro-
navirus disease (COVID-19) cases analysis using machine-learning applications”.
In: Applied Nanoscience 13.3 (2023), pp. 2013–2025.
[57]
Javad T Firouzjaee and Pouriya Khaliliyan. “Machine learning model to project the
impact of Ukraine crisis”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01738 (2022).
54
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:63==
[58]
TK Balaji, Chandra Sekhara Rao Annavarapu, and Annushree Bablani. “Machine
learning algorithms for social media analysis: A survey”. In: Computer Science Re-
view 40 (2021), p. 100395.
[59]
K Poojitha et al. “Classification of social media Toxic comments using Machine
learning models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06934 (2023).
[60]
Martin Saveski, Brandon Roy, and Deb Roy. “The structure of toxic conversations
on Twitter”. In: Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. 2021, pp. 1086–1097.
[61]
Naimisha Kolli, N Balakrishnan, and KR Ramakrishnan. “On quantifying predictabil-
ity in online social media cascades using entropy”. In: Proceedings of the 2017
ieee/acm international conference on advances in social networks analysis and min-
ing 2017. 2017, pp. 109–114.
[62]
Chathurani Senevirathna et al. “Influence cascades: Entropy-based characteriza-
tion of behavioral influence patterns in social media”. In: Entropy 23.2 (2021), p. 160.
[63]
Nan Cao et al. “Targetvue: Visual analysis of anomalous user behaviors in on-
line communication systems”. In: IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics 22.1 (2015), pp. 280–289.
[64]
Eugenia Politou, Efthimios Alepis, and Constantinos Patsakis. “A survey on mobile
affective computing”. In: Computer Science Review 25 (2017), pp. 79–100.
[65]
Erik Cambria et al. “Affective computing and sentiment analysis”. In: A practical
guide to sentiment analysis (2017), pp. 1–10.
[66]
Michael P LaValley. “Logistic regression”. In: Circulation 117.18 (2008), pp. 2395–
2399.
[67]
Todd G Nick and Kathleen M Campbell. “Logistic regression”. In: Topics in biostatis-
tics (2007), pp. 273–301.
[68]
Raymond E Wright. “Logistic regression.” In: (1995).
[69]
Scott Menard. Applied logistic regression analysis. 106. Sage, 2002.
[70]
Tirta Hema Jaya Hidayat et al. “Sentiment analysis of twitter data related to Rinca
Island development using Doc2Vec and SVM and logistic regression as classifier”.
In: Procedia Computer Science 197 (2022), pp. 660–667.
[71]
Xiang Zhu et al. “Spammer detection on online social networks based on logis-
tic regression”. In: Web-Age Information Management: WAIM 2015 International
Workshops: HENA, HRSUNE, Qingdao, China, June 8-10, 2015, Revised Selected
Papers. Springer. 2015, pp. 29–40.
[72]
Yuheng Hu, Shelly Farnham, and Kartik Talamadupula. “Predicting user engage-
ment on twitter with real-world events”. In: Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media. Vol. 9. 1. 2015, pp. 168–177.
[73]
ST Indra, Liza Wikarsa, and Rinaldo Turang. “Using logistic regression method to
classify tweets into the selected topics”. In: 2016 international conference on ad-
vanced computer science and information systems (icacsis). IEEE. 2016, pp. 385–
390.
[74]
Twitter API v2. URL: https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/twitter-api/getting-
started/about-twitter-api.
[75]
Reddit API Documentation. URL: https://www.reddit.com/dev/api.
[76]
Reddit API Rules. URL: https://github.com/reddit-archive/reddit/wiki/API.
[77]
Reddit Official Statistics. URL: https://www.redditinc.com/blog/reddits-2020-year-
in-review/.
[78]
Reddit comments/submissions 2005-06 to 2022-12. URL: https://academictorrents.
com/details/7c0645c94321311bb05bd879ddee4d0eba08aaee/tech.
[79]
Scripts for using torrent files. URL: https://github.com/Watchful1/PushshiftDumps.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
55
==PAGE:64==
[80]
Anwesha Chakraborty et al. “Application of graph theory in social media”. In: In-
ternational Journal of Computer Sciences and Engineering 6.10 (2018), pp. 722–
729.
[81]
Sharad Goel et al. “The Structural Virality of Online Diffusion”. In: Management Sci-
ence 62.1 (2015), pp. 180–196.
56
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix
A.1
Type determining script
1
def get_post_type(submission) -> str:
2
if getattr(submission , 'post_hint ', '') == 'image ':
3
return 'image'
4
elif getattr(submission , 'is_gallery ', False):
5
return 'gallery '
6
elif submission.is_video:
7
return 'video'
8
elif hasattr(submission , 'poll_data '):
9
return 'poll'
10
elif hasattr(submission , 'crosspost_parent '):
11
return 'crosspost '
12
elif submission.is_self:
13
return 'text'
14
return 'link'
A.2
Select Size Function
1
def select_sizes(row, filtered_df):
2
size = row['Size']
3
min_size = row['Min Size']
4
combined_samples = pd.DataFrame()
5
6
for subreddit in subreddits:
7
subreddit_samples = []
8
9
for post_type in post_types:
10
subreddit_post_type_sample = filtered_df[
11
(filtered_df['Size'] == size) &
12
(filtered_df['Post Type '] == post_type) &
13
(filtered_df['Subreddit '] == subreddit)
14
].sample(n=min_size , random_state=42)
15
16
subreddit_samples.append(subreddit_post_type_sample)
17
18
combined_samples = pd.concat([combined_samples] + subreddit_samples)
19
20
return combined_samples
21
22
result = size_min_df.apply(
23
lambda row: select_sizes(row, post_type_filtered_df),
24
axis=1
25
)
26
27
concatenated_results = pd.concat(result.tolist())
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
57
==PAGE:66==
A.3
JSON Submission object
{
"archived": true,
"author": "reyoung42",
"author_flair_background_color": null,
"author_flair_css_class": null,
"author_flair_richtext": [],
"author_flair_text": null,
"author_flair_text_color": null,
"author_flair_type": "text",
"brand_safe": true,
"can_gild": true,
"contest_mode": false,
"created_utc": 1262304838,
"distinguished": null,
"domain": "texasnoteco.com",
"edited": false,
"gilded": 0,
"hidden": false,
"hide_score": false,
"id": "ake6u",
"is_crosspostable": false,
"is_reddit_media_domain": false,
"is_self": false,
"is_video": false,
"link_flair_css_class": null,
"link_flair_richtext": [],
"link_flair_text": null,
"link_flair_text_color": "dark",
"link_flair_type": "text",
"locked": false,
"media": null,
"media_embed": {},
"no_follow": true,
"num_comments": 1,
"num_crossposts": 0,
"over_18": false,
"parent_whitelist_status": "all_ads",
"permalink": "/r/reddit.com/comments/ake6u/the_texas_note_company_llc/",
"retrieved_on": 1522880399,
"rte_mode": "markdown",
"score": 0,
"secure_media": null,
"secure_media_embed": {},
"selftext": "",
"send_replies": true,
"spoiler": false,
"stickied": false,
"subreddit": "reddit.com",
"subreddit_id": "t5_6",
58
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:67==
"subreddit_name_prefixed": "r/reddit.com",
"subreddit_type": "archived",
"suggested_sort": null,
"thumbnail": "default",
"thumbnail_height": null,
"thumbnail_width": null,
"title": "The Texas Note Company, LLC",
"url": "http://texasnoteco.com",
"whitelist_status": "all_ads"
}
A.4
JSON Comment object
{
"distinguished": null,
"subreddit_id": "t5_2qh11",
"author_flair_text": null,
"body": "Sounds good to me.",
"name": "t1_c0i12v4",
"retrieved_on": 1426171563,
"controversiality": 0,
"id": "c0i12v4",
"score_hidden": false,
"link_id": "t3_akb50",
"edited": false,
"subreddit": "offbeat",
"author": "JayDurst",
"gilded": 0,
"created_utc": "1262304001",
"score": 2,
"author_flair_css_class": null,
"ups": 2,
"downs": 0,
"archived": true,
"parent_id": "t1_c0i12q0"
}
A.5
Javascript Script to Get Total Size of Comments
1
// Select the size and name elements from the document.
2
let sizeElementList = document.querySelectorAll("td[style='word-break: break-
word;'] + td");
3
let nameElementList = document.querySelectorAll("td[style='word-break: break-
word;']");
4
5
// Convert NodeLists to arrays.
6
let sizeArray = Array.from(sizeElementList);
7
let nameArray = Array.from(nameElementList);
8
9
// Combine the two arrays into an array of pairs.
10
let combinedArray = sizeArray.map((sizeElement , idx) => [sizeElement ,
nameArray[idx]]);
11
12
// Filter to get only the comments.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
59
==PAGE:68==
13
let commentPairs = combinedArray.filter(pair => pair[1].innerHTML.startsWith("
comments"));
14
15
// Function to convert size strings to numbers , taking into account the units
(kB, MB, GB).
16
let convertSizeStringToNumber = (_sizeString) => {
17
if (_sizeString.endsWith("kB")) {
18
return +_sizeString.split("kB")[0] * 10 ** -6;
19
} else if (_sizeString.endsWith("MB")) {
20
return +_sizeString.split("MB")[0] * 10 ** -3;
21
} else {
22
return +_sizeString.split("GB")[0];
23
}
24
}
25
26
// Function to check if the date in the file name is after a given date.
27
let isFileNameDateAfterGivenDate = (fileName , compareYear , compareMonth) => {
28
[year, month] = fileName.split("_")[1].split(".")[0].split("-")
29
const yearAsInt = +year
30
const monthAsInt = +month
31
if (compareYear < yearAsInt) return false
32
if (compareYear > yearAsInt) return true
33
if (compareMonth < monthAsInt) return false
34
return true
35
}
36
37
// Function to get the total size of all comments from files with a date
before a given date.
38
let getCommentSizeBeforeGivenDate = (_year, _month) => commentPairs.map(pair
=> {
39
if (!isFileNameDateAfterGivenDate(pair[1].innerHTML , _year, _month)) {
40
return convertSizeStringToNumber(pair[0].innerHTML)
41
}
42
return 0
43
}).reduce((acc, val) => acc + val, 0);
44
45
// Run the function.
46
getCommentSizeBeforeGivenDate(2019, 1);
47
48
// Result: 978.51 (GB)
60
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:69==
A.6
Statistics regarding the dataset
Feature
Mean
Std
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Average Shortest Distance
0.2890
0.0708
0.0119
0.2433
0.2883
0.3368
0.5398
Degree of root
-0.2490
0.0462
-0.4276
-0.2780
-0.2475
-0.2177
-0.1029
Virality
0.1445
0.0354
0.0060
0.1217
0.1442
0.1684
0.2699
Average Branch
-0.1186
0.1334
-0.5523
-0.2106
-0.1182
-0.0289
0.3213
Maximum degree
0.0998
0.0490
-0.0415
0.0674
0.0990
0.1317
0.2846
No. Peripheries
-0.0790
0.0177
-0.1559
-0.0908
-0.0784
-0.0672
-0.0133
Average Periphery Distance
-0.0702
0.0537
-0.2395
-0.1063
-0.0711
-0.0348
0.1764
No. Leaves
0.0539
0.0101
0.0251
0.0463
0.0517
0.0599
0.0985
Max Depth
0.0104
0.0300
-0.1079
-0.0105
0.0105
0.0313
0.1246
Max Width
0.0061
0.0244
-0.1003
-0.0100
0.0062
0.0223
0.0910
Diameter
0.0061
0.0244
-0.1003
-0.0100
0.0062
0.0223
0.0910
Table A.1: Here is the coefficients dataframe for ’gallery’ and ’link’, where the former is
represented as ’Class 0’ and the latter as ’Class 1’. This means that positive numbers
increase the odds for ’link’, while negative numbers increase the odds for ’gallery’.
Feature
Mean
Std
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Average Branch
0.4490
0.1140
0.0560
0.3763
0.4527
0.5258
0.8658
Average Shortest Distance
-0.4281
0.0662
-0.6486
-0.4687
-0.4259
-0.3837
-0.1864
Degree of root
0.2619
0.0407
0.1206
0.2333
0.2604
0.2891
0.4024
Virality
-0.2141
0.0331
-0.3243
-0.2343
-0.2129
-0.1918
-0.0932
Maximum degree
-0.1599
0.0439
-0.3063
-0.1889
-0.1590
-0.1295
-0.0085
Average Periphery Distance
0.1020
0.0496
-0.0688
0.0685
0.1027
0.1368
0.2501
No. Peripheries
0.0618
0.0152
0.0099
0.0511
0.0614
0.0723
0.1112
Max Depth
0.0560
0.0296
-0.0553
0.0370
0.0571
0.0766
0.1598
No. Leaves
-0.0150
0.0162
-0.0442
-0.0293
-0.0216
-0.0002
0.0283
Max Width
-0.0104
0.0242
-0.0907
-0.0272
-0.0114
0.0058
0.0765
Diameter
-0.0104
0.0242
-0.0907
-0.0272
-0.0114
0.0058
0.0765
Table A.2: Here is the coefficients dataframe for ’link’ and ’video’, where the former is
represented as ’Class 0’ and the latter as ’Class 1’. This means that positive numbers
increase the odds for ’video’, while negative numbers increase the odds for ’link’.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
61
==PAGE:70==
Feature
Mean
Std
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Average Branch
-0.4005
0.0505
-0.5362
-0.4371
-0.4007
-0.3650
-0.2239
Average Shortest Distance
0.2772
0.0203
0.2127
0.2635
0.2772
0.2917
0.3408
Degree of root
-0.1390
0.0103
-0.1731
-0.1461
-0.1389
-0.1318
-0.1098
Virality
0.1386
0.0101
0.1064
0.1317
0.1386
0.1458
0.1704
Maximum degree
0.0552
0.0121
0.0206
0.0467
0.0551
0.0631
0.0942
Max Depth
-0.0327
0.0088
-0.0586
-0.0390
-0.0326
-0.0265
-0.0042
Average Periphery Distance
-0.0202
0.0139
-0.0690
-0.0296
-0.0204
-0.0110
0.0302
No. Leaves
0.0078
0.0142
-0.0170
-0.0061
0.0112
0.0219
0.0259
Max Width
-0.0011
0.0098
-0.0283
-0.0089
-0.0012
0.0073
0.0232
Diameter
-0.0011
0.0098
-0.0283
-0.0089
-0.0012
0.0073
0.0232
No. Peripheries
-0.0006
0.0044
-0.0180
-0.0036
-0.0006
0.0023
0.0142
Table A.3: Here is the coefficients dataframe for ’image’ and ’link’, where the former is
represented as ’Class 0’ and the latter as ’Class 1’. This means that positive numbers
increase the odds for ’link’, while negative numbers increase the odds for ’image’.
A.7
Parameter optimization
• max_iter_values = [500, 1000, 5000]
• tol_values = [1e-6, 1e-5, 1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-2]
• C_values = [0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.25, 1.5, 2]
• fit_intercept_values = [True, False]
• class_weight_values = [None, ’balanced’]
• l1_ratio_values = [0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, None]
• random_state_values = [42, None]
• solver_values = [’newton-cg’, ’lbfgs’, ’liblinear’, ’sag’, ’saga’, ’newton-cholesky’]
solvers_penalties:
• 'lbfgs': ['l2', None]
• 'liblinear': ['l1', 'l2']
• 'newton-cg': ['l2', None]
• 'newton-cholesky': ['l2', None]
• 'sag': ['l2', None]
• 'saga': ['elasticnet', 'l1', 'l2', None]
warm_start_values:
• 'liblinear': [False]
• 'lbfgs': [False, True]
• 'sag': [False, True]
• 'saga': [False, True]
• 'newton-cg': [False, True]
62
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
==PAGE:71==
• 'newton-cholesky': [False, True]
A.8
Heatmap
Figure A.1: This heatmap, intended to describe the correlation between subreddits, has
misleading results. The models were trained on the subreddit represented on the Y axis
and tested on the subreddit represented on the X axis, with each cell showing the resulting
prediction. Among these, the ’Norway’ subreddit seems the most recognizable. However,
the post types were not balanced, leading to results that primarily reflect the distribution
of ’text’ post types in subreddits. I included this chart to emphasize the importance of
balancing the datasets in such analyses.
Classifying content type and subreddit from thread structure on Reddit
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800, Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/
