==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
MSc. Thesis
Multi-task learning for monocular depth estimation
and semantic segmentation
Daniel Paez Martin (s212600)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Bygning 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45256352
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This MSc. thesis was prepared at the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engi-
neering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring an MSc. degree in Autonomous Systems.
Kongens Lyngby, December 4, 2023
Daniel Paez Martin (s212600)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This dissertation is presented as the conclusive report for the Master’s degree in Au-
tonomous Systems at the Denmark Technical University (DTU), situated in Lyngby,
Denmark. The work represents a partial fulfillment of the requirements for the afore-
mentioned degree. Professor Lazaros Nalpantidis serves as the head of studies for the
MSc. program.
I extend my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Professor Lazaros Nalpantidis, for
his unwavering support throughout the project. His ready availability during critical
moments, extensive assistance, and insightful references on the subject matter were
indispensable in the successful execution of this project.
I would like to express my appreciation to Michael Rudolph for generously ad-
dressing my queries related to his work, which forms the foundation upon which this
thesis is built. His feedback, elucidating the rationale behind certain implementa-
tion choices, and his approach to overcoming specific challenges, proved immensely
beneficial in enhancing the clarity of his published paper.
Furthermore, heartfelt thanks are due to my girlfriend, family, and friends for their
steadfast support during the course of this project. Their encouragement, especially
during challenging times, has consistently served as a motivating factor propelling me
forward. I am deeply grateful for their unwavering assistance and encouragement.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Study approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Thesis Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Scope and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Related Work
9
2.1
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Semantic Segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Multi-Task Learning in Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Weighting Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Initial model and baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Weighting startegies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Adjustment of loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Proposed architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
33
4.1
Original model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Multi-task weighting strategy evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Loss function adjustment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Proposed architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Results summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
A
Acronyms
1
B
An Appendix
3
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
In the rapidly evolving landscape of computer vision, this thesis delves into the op-
timization capabilities inherent in Multi-Task learning (MTL) models, particularly
within the realms of monocular depth estimation (MDE) and semantic segmentation,
two pivotal domains within the field of computer vision. The methodology employed
involves the transformation of a single-task model, initially designed for MDE in an
encoder-decoder framework, into a MTL model by replicating the decoder. Subse-
quently, a subset of carefully chosen weighting strategies for MTL is implemented to
harmonize the collective loss function. The model’s performance is rigorously evalu-
ated under each of these distinct strategies. In the concluding phase, a novel archi-
tecture is proposed, drawing inspiration from the State-of-the-Art (SOTA), tailored
to align with the lightweight constraints inherent in the project.
Contrary to initial expectations, the results reveal a performance decline in the
MTL models when compared to their single-task counterpart in the shared task. De-
spite an approximate 18% performance reduction and a marginal increase in model
parameters, the new models demonstrate functionality by successfully undertaking
multiple tasks (two tasks, in this instance) with minimal augmentation in hardware
requirements. These outcomes carry significant implications, suggesting that a MTL
model could emerge as a pragmatic solution for scenarios where performance degra-
dation is tolerable, and the demand for evaluating multiple tasks is paramount.
==PAGE:10==
2
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Monocular Depth estimation (MDE) and Semantic Segmentation, integral compo-
nents of computer vision, play pivotal roles in comprehending and interpreting visual
scenes. The simultaneous exploration of these tasks within the realm of Multi-Task
learning (MTL) stands as a compelling avenue for research. MTL offers a unique
opportunity to harness synergies between tasks, potentially enhancing the under-
standing of spatial relationships and semantic contexts in images. By jointly training
models for MDE and Semantic Segmentation, we aim to unlock eﬀiciencies, improve
computational effectiveness, and foster a deeper understanding of scene complexities.
This research endeavor is motivated by the prospect of advancing the capabilities of
computer vision systems, particularly in scenarios demanding comprehensive scene
analysis, such as autonomous navigation, robotics, and augmented reality. Through
the lens of MTL, we aspire to unravel new insights into the interplay between depth
estimation and semantic understanding, fostering models that exhibit heightened con-
textual awareness and generalization across diverse visual tasks.
One of the main focuses of MTL is the implication each task has on the combined
loss function and how it reflects on the final value. Depending on the combination
method of the different tasks, the end results will be completely different, becoming
a critical issue in MTL [1]. We will implement several weighting strategies that have
been reported to yield the best results on the specific tasks at hand by other studies.
We will study the convergence speed of the chosen strategy and use different metrics
to evaluate the results, analyzing which one is most optimal for the network, tasks,
and dataset at hand.
Another approach will be to fine-tune the architecture by applying State-of-the-
Art (SOTA) methods and evaluating the impact it has on the existing architecture.
We will explore different approaches on how to increase the performance of the model
and optimization paths.
In the realm of computer vision and deep learning, the quest for comprehensive
scene understanding and analysis has been a driving force. The ability to extract rich,
multi-dimensional information from images is fundamental for a plethora of applica-
tions, ranging from autonomous navigation to medical imaging. Two core aspects
of this endeavor are MDE and Semantic Segmentation. Monocular Depth Estima-
tion deals with the challenging task of inferring the three-dimensional structure of a
scene from a single two-dimensional image, providing a key building block for vari-
0The project’s code will be available at https://github.com/DanielPM98/MTL_GuideDepth
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
ous applications. Semantic Segmentation, on the other hand, involves the pixel-wise
classification of objects in an image, contributing to fine-grained scene understanding.
These two tasks have historically been pursued independently, each demanding its
own set of specialized models.
In recent years, a paradigm shift has occurred with the emergence of MTL. It en-
compasses the holistic approach of training models to simultaneously address multiple
interrelated tasks, leveraging the shared information between them. This paradigm
presents a transformative opportunity to advance the fields of Monocular Depth Esti-
mation and Semantic Segmentation. By jointly modeling these tasks within a unified
architecture, MTL has the potential to enhance the understanding of visual scenes
and enable deeper insights into the relationships between objects, spatial layout, and
semantics.
This master’s thesis is dedicated to exploring the synergistic relationship between
MTL, Monocular Depth Estimation, and Semantic Segmentation. Our primary objec-
tive is to demonstrate that these tasks are inherently connected and that a multi-task
approach can significantly improve performance by capturing their latent interdepen-
dencies. We will investigate the design and optimization of MTL models, aiming to
develop architectures that bridge the gap between these tasks effectively.
This research endeavor will address several key aspects:
• Merging of Tasks: The central focus is on devising MTL models that seam-
lessly blend Monocular Depth Estimation and Semantic Segmentation, sharing
knowledge and insights across the domains to promote holistic scene understand-
ing.
• Enhancement Techniques: A critical aspect of this research involves refining
and optimizing MTL models to ensure that they perform as eﬀiciently and
effectively as possible applying SOTA methodology and strategies.
• Performance Assessment: Rigorous performance evaluation and compara-
tive analysis will be conducted, benchmarking MTL models against their single-
task counterparts and state-of-the-art methods.
This thesis represents an effort to bridge the gap between single-task approaches
and harness the potential of Multi-Task Learning in computer vision. It sets the stage
for a deeper exploration of the intricacies involved in developing MTL models for MDE
and semantic segmentation and uncovers the profound impact of this research on the
way we perceive and analyze visual data.
1.1
Research Question
In the ever-evolving landscape of computer vision and deep learning, the integration
of MTL has emerged as a transformative paradigm with the potential to revolutionize
the eﬀiciency and capabilities of computer vision models. This thesis endeavor delves
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Study approach
5
into the dynamic interplay of MTL within the domains of monocular depth estimation
(MDE) and semantic segmentation, two fundamental and interconnected tasks in
computer vision. The central focus of this study revolves around the examination
of how the incorporation of MTL influences the performance of these models when
compared to their single-task counterparts. Furthermore, the research aims to explore
strategies and techniques that can be leveraged to enhance the accuracy and eﬀiciency
of MTL models in the context of MDE and semantic segmentation. This exploration
is propelled by the recognition of the unique relationships and potential synergies
that exist between these two critical computer vision tasks. Therefore the following
question is stated:
How does the integration of MTL impact the performance of computer
vision models in the domains of MDE and semantic segmentation?
1.2
Study approach
The project entailed a comprehensive research initiative to explore the SOTA models
within the domain of computer vision, with a particular emphasis on MTL applied
to MDE and semantic segmentation. The research trajectory ranged from a broad
overview of the field to a progressively refined and specialized investigation. It is
imperative to note that all experimentation and evaluation were conducted using
datasets, as opposed to real-world case scenarios.
This approach aligns with the
study’s primary objective, which centers around a theoretical examination and anal-
ysis, prioritizing the foundational principles and methodologies of MTL within the
context of MDE and semantic segmentation.
The methodology employed will be delineated in greater detail in the subsequent
sections.
1.3
Thesis Goal
The primary objective of this thesis is to investigate the practical benefits of MTL
within the domain of computer vision. It aims to elucidate how the intrinsic inter-
play between diverse tasks can enhance the learning process when contrasted with
single-task models. The study encompasses the implementation of SOTA approaches
designed to enhance MTL. Subsequently, it will evaluate the performance of MTL
models in the domains of MDE and semantic segmentation.
1.4
Resources
The project will utilize pre-existing datasets to facilitate direct comparisons with
prior research efforts, ensuring the reliability and validity of the study. In pursuit
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
of enhanced veracity and alignment with established benchmarks, the chosen dataset
is the NYUv2 dataset, renowned within the computer vision domain for applications
such as depth estimation and semantic segmentation. Given the well-documented
sensitivity of deep learning outcomes to the training and evaluation data, this selec-
tion will enable robust comparisons with other models that have employed the same
dataset.
The training procedure will be executed on the high-performance computing clus-
ter provided by the Denmark Technical University (DTU). All computational models
will be deployed on a Tesla V100 equipped with 16 GB of memory, operating within
the boundaries of practical hardware capabilities.
1.5
Data analysis
The data analysis conducted in this study represents an initial step towards compre-
hending the dataset. Commencing the project, an initial single-task model will be
deployed (Section 3.2.1) to meet specific model requirements. Consequently, data
preprocessing will be performed to align the dataset with these prerequisites.
Subsequently, the project will evaluate the model’s performance through the ap-
plication of benchmark metrics tailored to each task encompassed within the model’s
purview.
For MDE, the evaluation will encompass metrics including Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE), average relative error (rel), log10 error, and δi for i ∈{1, 2, 3}.
In the context of Semantic Segmentation, performance will be assessed using met-
rics such as mean intersection over union (mIoU), mean accuracy (MA), and pixel
accuracy. Finally, the evaluation process will extend to the MTL model’s eﬀiciency,
measured by calculating the average relative improvement over the initially employed
baseline model.
1.6
Scope and limitations
This project is dedicated to the exploration of MTL within the domains of MDE
and semantic segmentation, and the research utilizes the NYUv2 dataset for this pur-
pose. It is important to note that the model’s optimal performance will be observed
in indoor image scenarios, while its performance in other environments may yield
comparatively lower-quality results.
Nonetheless, several limitations have been encountered during the course of this
project. Firstly, there are constraints related to the availability of cluster resources.
The cluster is a shared resource among students and professors, and its usage has been
restricted to designated time frames, which may not always align with project needs.
Secondly, the computational specifications of the cluster have posed challenges. The
model’s resource demands at times exceed the available GPU memory, compromising
hyperparameter selection, such as batch size, to accommodate resource constraints.
Lastly, the project timeline has faced disruptions due to unforeseen issues, leading
==PAGE:15==
1.6 Scope and limitations
7
to recurrent delays. These delays have necessitated project extensions, introducing
various complications and challenges along the way, thereby making the project’s
timeline and duration a notable constraint on its completion.
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
Multi-Task learning (MTL) has garnered substantial attention in the fields of com-
puter vision, particularly in the domains of Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE)
and Semantic Segmentation. This section reviews key research and developments in
MTL, MDE, and Semantic Segmentation, highlighting the approaches, techniques,
and challenges faced in these areas.
2.1
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE)
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) represents the computational endeavor of pre-
dicting the depth value, which corresponds to the spatial distance relative to the
camera, for each individual pixel within a single RGB image. This task, noted for
its intrinsic complexity, holds a pivotal role as a foundational component in the do-
main of scene understanding. It serves as a crucial prerequisite for a multitude of
applications, including 3D scene reconstruction, autonomous driving, and Augmented
Reality (AR). Models are typically evaluated using Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
or absolute relative error [2]. The existing state-of-the-art methods within the realm
of MDE predominantly adhere to one of two fundamental paradigms. The first ap-
proach entails the design of intricately structured neural networks, endowed with the
computational capacity to directly regress the depth map. Alternatively, the second
approach adopts a strategy that involves segmenting the input image into distinct
bins or windows, thereby alleviating the computational complexities associated with
the task.
Eigen et al. introduced a seminal and pioneering approach to Monocular Depth
Estimation (MDE), employing a multi-scale convolutional architecture. This founda-
tional work established a framework for subsequent research, ushering in significant
advancements in depth estimation accuracy [3].
Alhashim et al. made substantial contributions to MDE by introducing transfer
learning techniques designed to enhance accuracy.
This innovative approach har-
nessed pre-trained models on extensive datasets to bolster performance on smaller
datasets, a practice of paramount significance, particularly in resource-constrained
environments [4].
Building upon the research of Alhashim et al., Michael Rudolph and collaborators
proposed a lightweight architecture meticulously engineered to achieve expeditious
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Related Work
and precise depth predictions within resource limitations. The hallmark of this archi-
tecture is the Guided Upsample Block (GUB) integrated into the decoder, which sig-
nificantly refines the depth map reconstruction process. The GUB, inspired by guided
image filtering, employs stacked convolutions and squeeze-and-excitation modules to
enhance the quality of prediction features [5]
Furthermore, Neehar Kondapaneni et al. presented an innovative method aimed
at leveraging automatically generated captions to align text prompts with images.
This alignment strategy elevates the quality of cross-attention maps and augments
the perceptual performance of the models [6].
2.2
Semantic Segmentation
Semantic Segmentation is a fundamental computer vision task with the objective of
categorizing each pixel in an image into a specific class or object category.
This
task aims to generate a detailed pixel-wise segmentation map, where each pixel is
assigned to a distinct class or object. Evaluation of semantic segmentation models
often employs metrics such as Mean Intersection-Over-Union (Mean IoU) and Pixel
Accuracy.
The introduction of the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) architecture by Long
et al. represented a significant milestone in this field, revolutionizing semantic seg-
mentation by enabling end-to-end learning and facilitating real-time applications [7].
Further enhancements in segmentation precision came with the introduction of di-
lated convolutions, as seen in the Deeplab approach, which expanded receptive fields
and improved the segmentation of fine-grained details [8].
Recent developments in the domain of Panoptic Segmentation, a fusion of instance
and semantic segmentation, have drawn substantial attention.
Notably, Panoptic-
DeepLab has emerged as a prominent advancement in this area [9].
Among the notable architectures, the U-Net model, proposed by Olaf Ronneberger
et al., remains highly relevant and widely implemented. U-Net’s design incorporates
a contracting path for context capture and a symmetric expanding path for precise
localization [10].
Additionally, Bowen Yin and colleagues have introduced a novel approach known
as DFormer, which has achieved significant success in semantic segmentation. DFormer
presents two key innovations: the utilization of RGB-D blocks for eﬀicient encoding of
RGB and depth information and the pretraining of the backbone using image-depth
pairs, thereby enabling precise RGB-D representation encoding [11].
2.3
Multi-Task Learning in Computer Vision
Multi-Task learning (MTL) is a prominent technique that has garnered significant
attention in the field of computer vision due to its multifaceted advantages over its
counterpart, Single Task Learning (STL). MTL empowers a model to simultaneously
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Multi-Task Learning in Computer Vision
11
learn from and excel in multiple tasks, offering benefits such as improved general-
ization and robustness through the amalgamation of diverse sources of information.
It mitigates computational expenses and memory usage by sharing parameters and
representations across multiple tasks, capitalizes on inter-task correlations to enhance
each task’s performance, and effectively addresses issues of data scarcity and imbal-
ance by transferring knowledge between tasks.
In computer vision, where numerous interrelated tasks coexist, MTL is especially
valuable. Tasks like object detection, semantic segmentation, pose estimation, and
face recognition can mutually reinforce one another. Moreover, MTL expands the
horizons of computer vision by enabling one-to-many predictions, where a single input
image can yield multiple outputs across different tasks.
This thesis centers on the application of MTL in the domains of monocular depth
estimation (MDE) and semantic segmentation. The fusion of MTL into these domains
promises enhanced eﬀiciency and performance, harnessing the rich potential for shared
knowledge and data-driven synergy between these two pivotal tasks.
The concept of MTL in computer vision has evolved significantly, offering a spec-
trum of approaches and architectural paradigms. Parameter sharing and task-specific
heads facilitate information exchange, while shared backbone networks with task-
specific branches promote task specialization.
The choice of architecture is often
tailored to the specific requirements of the tasks and the design of the model.
Previous work was researched by Yang et al. [12] presenting a joint architecture for
MDE and Semantic Segmentation, demonstrating the potential for cross-task benefits
in scene understanding. Their model utilizes shared feature extraction to enhance
the performance of both tasks. Also, Yuan et al. [13] proposed a mutual guidance
mechanism, where MDE and Semantic Segmentation tasks mutually benefit from
each other’s predictions, enhancing the robustness and accuracy of the model.
In recent developments, the field of MTL within computer vision has seen signifi-
cant contributions from notable researchers and innovative approaches. Vandenhende
and colleagues [14] have explored the effectiveness of a unified model with multiple
specialized heads to address a multitude of tasks. An equally influential contribu-
tion is the ”End-to-End Vision Transformer” [15], which adopts a shared backbone
network strategy, with each branch dedicated to a specific task. Moreover, the Multi-
Task Vision Transformer (MTViT) introduces a multifaceted transformer architecture
designed to process image patches sequentially for various tasks [15].
Moreover, Lei He and collaborators have contributed significantly to this field with
their innovative architecture, Semantic Object Segmentation and Depth Estimation
Network (SOSD-Net) [16]. This novel approach introduces the concept of ”semantic
objectness” to exploit the geometric relationship between Monocular Depth Estima-
tion (MDE) and semantic segmentation. It utilizes self-attention blocks to generate
an attention map supervised by semantic labels, effectively capturing pixel corre-
lations. The architecture further integrates a Feature-Sharing Module (FSM) and
employs a consistency loss mechanism to ensure the cohesive guidance of features
within the model.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Related Work
Additionally, Tianxiao Gao et al. have introduced a pioneering network in their
research, identified as CI-Net [17].
This novel architectural framework integrates
self-attention blocks to craft an attention map, guided by semantic labels, thereby
facilitating the extraction of pixel correlations, both within and across diverse classes.
Furthermore, CI-Net incorporates a feature-sharing module (FSM) to amalgamate
task-specific features and employs a consistency loss mechanism to reinforce the in-
terplay and coherence of these features.
As computer vision continually evolves, MTL stands as a pivotal technique, offer-
ing an avenue to maximize the wealth of available data and amplify the capabilities
of vision models. This thesis delves into the intricate landscape of MTL, particularly
within the realms of MDE and semantic segmentation, to uncover its potential for
revolutionizing computer vision.
2.4
Weighting Strategies
The growing relevance of MTL in recent years has given rise to a dynamic field, where
the significance of individual tasks when combined with others and their impact on
the learning process and model convergence are assessed. The process of combining
losses within MTL is defined as weighting strategies, and the examination of how
these strategies result in varying outcomes is a topic of interest [1].
Notations. Let there be T number of total tasks and t a single task corresponding
to dataset Dt. Also a MTL model usually has two parts of parameters: task-sharing
parameters θ and task-specific parameters {ψt}T
t=1. In this case, θ would denote the
parameters of the encoder which would be shared across all tasks, and ψt represents
the task-specific module for task t, in this case, each of the decoders.
Then, let
lt(Dt; θ, ψt) denote the average loss on Dt for task t. {wt}T
t=1 are task-specific loss
weights for for each t. Such as, wt
l ≥0 [18].
L(θ, {ψt}T
t=1) =
T
∑
t=1
wl
tlt(Dt; θ, ψt)
(2.1)
There are two primary methods for harmonizing the training process among differ-
ent tasks in MTL. The first approach involves loss balancing methods, as elucidated
in Equation 2.1, where losses are computed by assigning weights to each task based on
their respective contributions to the learning process. Various methodologies explore
how different weight assignment strategies lead to distinct convergence patterns. The
second method pertains to gradient balancing techniques, as depicted in Equation 2.2,
where the data gradients are dynamically adjusted to mitigate conflicts between task
gradients.
θ = θ −η
T
∑
t=1
wg
t ∇θlt(Dt; θ, ψt)
(2.2)
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Weighting Strategies
13
Notated that in gradient balancing methods the gradient weights {wg
t }T
t=1 only
affects the task-sharing parameter θ and not the task-specific parameters {ψt}, being
each updated by the t-th task gradient ∇ψtlt(Dt; θ, ψt) [18].
Some of the most commonly used methods for loss balancing with tested im-
proved performance are Uncertainty Weighting (UW) [19], Dynamic Weight Aver-
age (DWA) [20], Impartial Multi-task Learning Loss (IMTL-L) [21], Random Loss
Weighting (RLW) [18], Multi-Objective Meta Learning (MOML) [22] and Geometric
Loss Strategy (GLS) [23]. All these methods try to minimize Equation 2.1, the learn-
ing rate of optimizing each task-specific parameter
Similarly, for gradient balancing, some of the most relevant works include Gradient
Normalization (GradNorm) [24], Gradient sign Dropout (GradDrop) [25], Random
Gradient Weighting (RGW) [18], Impartial Multi-task Learning Gradient (IMTL-G)
[21], Gradient Vaccine (GradVac) [26], Multiple Gradient Descent Algorithm - Upper
Bound (MGDA-UB) [27] or Projecting Conflicting Gradient (PCGrad) [28].
Building upon prior research in the domain of weighting strategies, this thesis
will commence with the implementation of the Equivalent Weighting (EW) strategy
to establish a baseline reference. Subsequently, the investigation will extend to ex-
plore the UW strategy, as corroborated by existing studies [1] [19] [18], which have
demonstrated its exceptional performance in the context of semantic segmentation
and depth estimation using the NYUv2 dataset. Furthermore, the thesis will exam-
ine the potential of the Random Weighting (RW) strategy, given indications in later
studies that it can match or surpass the performance of its predecessors.
2.4.1
Equivalent Weighting (EW)
Equivalent Weighting is a fundamental strategy in MTL, wherein all tasks are assigned
equal importance during training. This means that each task contributes equally to
the loss function, and there is no inherent bias towards one task over another. It is
accomplished by setting wl
t = 1
T from Equation 2.1
LEW (θ, {ψt}T
t=1) = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
lt(Dt; θ, ψt)
(2.3)
The concept of Equivalent Weighting is rooted in the assumption that all tasks
are of equal importance and that their contributions to the model’s learning process
should be balanced.
This approach is particularly useful when there is no prior
knowledge or specific evidence to suggest that certain tasks should carry more weight
than others. By treating all tasks equally, Equivalent Weighting encourages the model
to learn a shared representation that benefits all tasks, leading to a more balanced
and robust multi-task model.
However, it’s important to note that while Equivalent Weighting provides simplic-
ity and symmetry in the assignment of task weights, it may not be the most suitable
strategy when there are varying levels of task complexity, data availability, or im-
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Related Work
portance. In such cases, more sophisticated weighting strategies, such as Relative
Weighting or Uncertainty Weighting, may be more appropriate.
In summary, Equivalent Weighting is a straightforward and often effective ap-
proach in MTL that assigns equal importance to all tasks. It fosters a sense of task
equality and encourages the model to find shared knowledge among tasks. When used
judiciously, it can lead to the development of versatile multi-task models capable of
handling a range of related tasks simultaneously.
2.4.2
Random Weighting (RW)
Random Weighting is an intriguing strategy within MTL, where task weights are
assigned randomly during training.
Random Weighting follows the premise that each task is initialized with an equal
chance of being assigned a particular weight during training. This approach intro-
duces a degree of uncertainty and variability in the influence of each task on the
model. Task weights may vary during different training iterations, and this random-
ness encourages the model to explore different task combinations and their impacts
on the learning process.
While Random Weighting may seem counterintuitive at first glance, it has been
explored in MTL research as a means to introduce diversity and exploration within
the model[18]. This can be particularly useful when dealing with tasks of varying
complexities or when the importance of tasks is not well-defined. By introducing
randomness in task weights, Random Weighting aims to promote robustness and
adaptability in the multi-task model.
The implementation by Baijiong Lin et al.[18] proposed to consider the loss weights
as random variables {wt}T
t=1 for the objective function Equation 2.1 in which they are
sampled from a random distribution. Each iteration ˜wt are sampled from p( ˜w) and
normalize to obtain ∑T
t=1 ˜wt = 1 and ˜wt ∈[0, 1] for all t. Finally, RLW updates the
shared parameters θ by computing the aggregated gradient ∇θ
∑T
t=1 wtlt(Dt; θ, ψt).
The implementation is characterized by its ease and demonstrates enhanced sta-
bility in comparison to the EW strategy. Furthermore, it imposes minimal additional
computational overhead, yet yields favorable and robust outcomes when juxtaposed
with established methodologies.
In conclusion, Random Weighting in MTL is an unconventional strategy that
involves assigning task weights randomly during training. It introduces variability
and diversity in the learning process, which may be useful in specific research contexts.
2.4.3
Uncertainty Weighting (UW)
Uncertainty Weighting (UW) is a sophisticated strategy in MTL that assigns task
weights based on the uncertainty or confidence of task predictions.
In UW, tasks that exhibit higher prediction uncertainty are assigned lower weights,
while tasks with more confident predictions are assigned higher weights. This ap-
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Weighting Strategies
15
Algorithm 1 Training algorithm for RLW
Input: Number of iterations K, number of tasks T, learning rate η, dataset {Dt}T
t=1,
weight distribution
Output: task-sharing parameters θk+1
1: Randomly initialized θ0;
2: for k = 1 to K do
3:
for t = 1 to T do
4:
Sample mini-batch data ˜Dt from Dt;
5:
Compute loss lt( ˜Dt; θk);
6:
end for
7:
Sample weights ˜w from p( ˜w) and normalize via f into w;
▷This is RLW
8:
θk+1 = θk −η∇θ
∑T
t=1 wtlt( ˜Dt; θk)
9: end for
proach ensures that the model places greater emphasis on tasks for which it has a
higher degree of confidence and reliability while being more cautious with tasks where
the model’s predictions are less certain.
UW also aligns with the principle of robustness in MTL.
By assigning lower
weights to uncertain tasks, the model becomes less sensitive to errors in these tasks,
resulting in a more stable overall performance.
Notation. Let there be f W (x) defined as the output of the neural network with
W weights for input x and scalar observation noise σ.
p(y | f W (x)) = N(f W (x), σ2)
(2.4)
The work proposed by Alex Kendall et al. [19] states that in first instance the
probabilistic model is defined as a Gaussian likelihood. However, it could also be rep-
resented for K number of model outputs, such as semantic segmentation for instance
(Equation 2.5)
p(y1, . . . , yK | f W (x)) = p(y1 | f W (x)) . . . p(yK | f W (x))
(2.5)
The maximum likelihood inference is achieved by maximizing the logarithmic
likelihood of the model. In regression, for example, the logarithmic likelihood could
be represented as:
log p(y | f W (x)) ∝−1
2σ2 ∥y −f W (x)∥2 −log σ
(2.6)
Given σ as the model’s observation noise parameter in the output for a Gaus-
sian likelihood. Then, by taking Equation 2.5 it is possible to calculate W, model
parameters and σ, observation noise by maximizing the logarithmic likelihood:
p(y1, . . . , yK | f W (x)) = N(y1; f W (x), σ2
1) . . . N(yK; f W (x), σ2
K)
(2.7)
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Related Work
That leads to the minimization objective loss function L(W, σ1, . . . , σK) for the
multi-output loss function. Where Li(W) = ∥yi −f W (x)∥2:
= −log p(y1, . . . , yK | f W (x))
∝log σ1 . . . σK
K
∑
i=1
1
2σ2
i
∥yi −f W (x)∥
(2.8)
= log σ1 . . . σK
K
∑
i=1
1
2σ2
i
Li(W)
The minimization function (Equation 2.8) is formulated with respect to σi, serving
as the relative learning weight for the adaptive losses Li contingent upon the data.
Notably, an increase in σi corresponds to a reduction in the weights assigned to Li,
and conversely, a decrease in σi results in an augmented emphasis on Li. The initial
term in the expression serves a dual purpose: acting as a regularize for the noise
terms and mitigating the undesirable escalation of noise.
This formulation has been extended to accommodate multiple regression outputs,
a refinement introduced by Alex Kendall et al. This adaptation involves transforming
the model through the application of the softmax function, utilizing a positive σi, to
align with a classification likelihood and compress the scaled version of the model:
p(y | f W (x)) = Softmax
( 1
σ2 f W (x)
)
(2.9)
This interpretation bears semblance to a Boltzmann distribution, wherein the
input undergoes scaling by σ2. This scalar parameter, variably fixed or subject to
learning, dictates the uniformity of the distribution, with its magnitude influencing
the distribution’s entropy—a metric indicative of uncertainty.
Consequently, the
logarithmic likelihood can be expressed in the following terms:
log p(y = c | f W (x), σ) = 1
σ2 f W
c (x) −log
∑
c′
exp
( 1
σ2 f W
c′ (x)
)
(2.10)
with f W
c (x) the c’th element of the vector f W (x).
Next let’s assume the model has multiple outputs that are composed of a contin-
uous output y1 and discrete output y2, modeled with a Gaussian likelihood and a
softmax likelihood respectively. The joint loss (Equation 2.7) could be simplified as
L(W, σ1, σ2), given:
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Weighting Strategies
17
= −log p(y1, y2 = c|f W (x))
= −log N(y1; f W (x), σ2
1) · Softmax(y2 = c; f W (x), σ2)
=
1
2σ2
1
∥y1 −f W (x)∥2 + log σ1 −log p(y2 = c|f W (x), σ2)
(2.11)
=
1
2σ2
1
L1(W) + 1
σ2
2
L2(W) + log σ1 + log
∑
c′ exp
(
1
σ2
2 f W
c′ (x)
)
( ∑
c′ exp
(
f W
c′ (x)
)) 1
σ2
2
≈
1
2σ2
1
L1(W) + 1
σ2
2
L2(W) + log σ1 + log σ2
Where L1(W) = ∥y1 −f W (x)∥2 constitutes the Euclidean loss of y1 and L2(W) =
−log Softmax(y2, f W (x)) for the cross entropy loss of y2 and both optimize with
respect to W as well as the noise parameters σ1 and σ2. Lastly, on the last step, the
following explicit simplification assumption is introduced
1
σ2
∑
c′ exp
(
1
σ2
2 f W
c′ (x)
)
≈
( ∑
c′ exp
(
f W
c′ (x)
)) 1
σ2
2 which becomes an equality when σ2 →1.
This last objective can be seen as learning the relative weights of the losses for
each output. Large scale values σ2 will decrease the contribution of L2(W), whereas
small scale σ2 will increase its contribution. The scale is regulated by the last term
in the equation. The objective is penalized when setting σ2 too large.
==PAGE:26==
18
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
In this section, we present the methodology employed to investigate the optimization
of a MTL framework derived from a single-task model.
The central objective is
to evaluate how the co-training of multiple interrelated tasks within a deep neural
network can lead to performance enhancements and to explore the intrinsic similarities
among these tasks, ultimately impacting the outcomes.
The NYUv2 benchmark
dataset [29] is utilized for both model training and evaluation.
The research commences with the establishment of a baseline model, which serves
as the foundation for subsequent improvements. These enhancements encompass the
implementation of task-specific weighting strategies, architectural refinements, hyper-
parameter optimization, and modifications to the loss functions.
The subsequent
sections of this chapter will provide a comprehensive overview of the specific steps
undertaken and the rationale behind this research study.
3.1
Dataset
3.1.1
Original dataset
The NYUv2 dataset is composed of a set of video sequences from a diversity of indoor
scenes (Figure 3.1), recorded both by RGB and Depth cameras from the Kinect. The
image size is 640x480 pixels.
Figure 3.1: Sample of 8 images from NYUv2 dataset
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Methodology
The dataset is composed of the following featured elements:
• 1449 densely labeled pairs of aligned RGB and depth images
• 464 scenes taken from 3 different cities
• 407024 unlabeled frames
• Each object is labeled with a class and instance number
Figure 3.2: Sample of aligned RGB image, depth and semantic labels for NYUv2
original dataset
A preliminary dataset inspection was conducted to gain insights into the data’s
characteristics. As illustrated (Figure 3.2), the depth images exhibit a range of values
from a minimum of 0.713 meters to a maximum of 9.995 meters. A comprehensive ex-
amination of the label distribution, reveals a notable class imbalance among the labels.
Specifically, the representation of the top 100 labels within the dataset (Figure 3.3),
highlights a disproportionate prevalence of certain labels within this subset.
Figure 3.3: Frequency of the top 100 labels present in the dataset
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Dataset
21
Numerous prior studies have undertaken label reduction efforts by narrowing down
the class count to 14, which includes the unlabeled class. This reduction was achieved
either by selecting the top 14 classes or through the utilization of natural language
processing and machine learning algorithms to merge semantically similar classes. In
light of this previous work, the current investigation will further filter the dataset to
encompass the top 14 classes (Figure 3.4). Notably, the most prevalent labels within
this subset are walls, unlabeled, and floors, reflecting the prominent indoor features
of the dataset. It is also noteworthy that a significant portion of the dataset consists
of unlabeled pixels. The imbalanced distribution of labels within the dataset must
be taken into account as the study progresses.
Figure 3.4: Frequency of the top 14 labels present in the dataset
Filtering the top 14 labels out of the image data values the dataset becomes less
unbalanced since most of the unrepresented labels are removed from the data (Fig-
ure 3.5). However, it is noticeable that by just selecting the top most predominantly
labels the model will have fewer prediction choices but input information remains
with significant voids in the data. For that reason, we will attempt to work with a
pre-processed dataset as will be depicted in Section 3.1.2.
Figure 3.5: Comparison of labeled image vs top 14 classes label
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Methodology
3.1.2
Benchmark dataset
The original dataset encompasses a substantial number of labels, primarily due to the
instance variable, which, for a semantic segmentation model, becomes inconsequential.
Typically, when utilizing the dataset labels, it is customary to reduce the number of
labels to the first 13 most representative classes1, designating the remaining ones as
unlabeled. This reduction transforms the total label count from 895 to 14 classes.
Therefore, the NYUv2 dataset utilized was sourced from the LibMTL benchmark
documentation [30], where the dataset had undergone preprocessing to align with
benchmark requirements for evaluating results against other models using the same
dataset.
The dataset contains a sequence of RGB images, encompassing 795 indoor images
designated for training and an additional 654 images allocated for validation. These
images have been resized to dimensions of 288x384 pixels.
The dataset includes
annotations for three distinct tasks: MDE, semantic segmentation encompassing 13
classes, and surface normal prediction. For the purpose of this project, emphasis will
be placed solely on the first two tasks. Notably, the validation set was bifurcated
into distinct validation and test sets for the project. During the training process, the
validation images are utilized to assess the model’s performance, while the test set,
consisting of unseen images, serves as a means to evaluate the model’s generalization
capabilities to previously unseen data.
Figure 3.6: Sample of aligned RGB image, depth, and semantic labels for NYUv2
benchmark dataset
Conducting an initial examination of the benchmark dataset provided by LibMTL
for the NYUv2 train split, it is observed that the images exhibit reduced resolution
compared to the original dataset. This reduction may potentially lead to diminished
result quality due to image resizing.
The depth values within the training data
range from a minimum of 0 meters to a maximum of 9.990 meters, mirroring the
depth values encountered in the original NYUv2 dataset with minimal deviations.
Notably, the dataset already contains some unlabeled pixels in the target label images
(Figure 3.6), although their prevalence is lower than in the original dataset. A label
1https://github.com/ankurhanda/nyuv2-meta-data
https://github.com/xapharius/pytorch-nyuv2
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Initial model and baseline
23
frequency analysis of the training dataset (Figure 3.7) reveals an imbalance in the
distribution of labels within the data.
To address this issue during training, an
attempt will be made to apply label weighting when calculating the loss function. It
is crucial to highlight that the benchmark dataset lacks a label-to-class-name mapping.
Consequently, labels ranging from 0 to 12 correspond to unknown semantic categories,
while label 13 designates all unlabeled pixels.
Figure 3.7: Frequency of the labels in benchmark dataset
3.2
Initial model and baseline
To establish a foundational reference and serve as a point of origin for our investiga-
tion, we will begin by selecting a single-task model. Subsequently, we will undertake
the task of transforming this single-task model into a MTL model. Our objective
is to meticulously evaluate the eﬀicacy of this transformation by employing a series
of diverse optimization techniques. These optimization methods will encompass ar-
chitectural refinements, fine-tuning of hyperparameters, exploration of loss function
modifications, and examination of task-specific weighting strategies. This comprehen-
sive evaluation aims to elucidate the extent of performance enhancement achieved
through the MTL framework.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Methodology
3.2.1
Initial model
The initial model architecture selected for this research is the ”GuidedDepth” model
(Figure 3.8) introduced by Rudolph et al. in their work [5]. This model is purposefully
designed for MDE and optimized for deployment on resource-constrained embedded
platforms. A key innovation within the proposed architecture is the GUB, which
plays a pivotal role in constructing the decoder. Drawing inspiration from guided
image filtering, GUB utilizes image data to guide the upsampling process, enhancing
both the feature representation and depth map reconstruction.
The result is the
production of high-resolution depth maps replete with fine-grained details.
For the encoder component of the model, we have drawn upon the architecture
presented in ”Deep Dual-resolution Networks for Real-time and Accurate Semantic
Segmentation of Road Scenes” (DDRNet-23) [31]. This encoder introduces a novel
component called the Deep Aggregation Pyramid Pooling Module (DAPPM) to ex-
tend the effective receptive fields and merge multi-scale context, particularly rely-
ing on low-resolution feature maps.
Notably, our model adopts the encoder from
the DDRNet-23-Slim version. This choice aligns with our objective to maintain a
lightweight model with reduced parameter complexity, which is especially critical for
embedded platform deployment.
It is worth emphasizing that the incorporation of this encoder is a deliberate
selection from the DDRNet family of architectures, and we have chosen the DDRNet-
23-Slim version to ensure the model’s eﬀiciency and practicality for deployment on
embedded platforms.
Figure 3.8: Diagram depicting GuideDepth architecture, where (a) corresponds to
the internal structure of the GUB and (b) the stacked convolution used in GUB (Im-
ages taken from Lightweight Monocular Depth Estimation through Guided Decoding
[5])
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Initial model and baseline
25
3.2.2
Establish the baseline
The selected model has undergone training on a pre-processed version of the NYUv2
dataset, as originally prepared by Alhashim et al. [4]. This dataset exclusively com-
prises RGB images paired with corresponding depth ground-truth images extracted
from the NYUv2 dataset. This unique dataset configuration rendered it incompatible
with the concurrent implementation of additional tasks. As it is well-established that
architectural performance is profoundly influenced by the dataset and evaluation con-
ditions, our approach begins with a comprehensive evaluation of this model on the
original dataset. This evaluation encompasses three phases:
1. Direct Evaluation: We initially assess the model’s performance by loading
the pre-trained weights and directly testing it on the NYUv2 test set.
2. Fine-tuning: Subsequently, the model is subject to further training, building
upon the pre-trained weights.
3. Training from Scratch: The final phase entails the complete retraining of
the model from initialization, culminating in an evaluation of the model’s final
performance under these various training conditions.
These iterative evaluations will provide a comprehensive understanding of the
model’s adaptability and performance across different training and evaluation scenar-
ios.
Finally, the aim of the project is to study the effects of MTL on the learning
process of several tasks at the same time while extracting the underlying similitude
between them further improving the end result. Since we aim to convert the actual
single-task model into a multi-task model, the architecture will be modified on the
first instance by duplicating the decoder while preserving the encoder. The encoder
will extract the feature map from the image while each decoder will reconstruct the
image for each task; one for depth estimation and the other for semantic segmentation.
The primary objective of this research project is to investigate the performance
impact that MTL has on similar tasks and the underlying relationships among them
that can be extracted from a single model. The core ambition lies in the transfor-
mation of a conventional single-task model into a multi-task model. To accomplish
this, we will initiate architectural modifications by initially duplicating the decoder
module while retaining the encoder. In this reconfigured architecture, the encoder
will continue to extract essential feature maps from input images. Meanwhile, each
duplicated decoder will individually reconstruct the image, thereby addressing dis-
tinct tasks: one decoder for monocular depth estimation and the other dedicated
to semantic segmentation. This structural adaptation aims to foster a comprehen-
sive understanding of the advantages of MTL in jointly optimizing these two pivotal
computer vision tasks.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Methodology
3.3
Weighting startegies
The first crucial step in our research entails the development of a well-defined strategy
for achieving a balanced contribution of each task within the loss function. This is of
paramount importance as the disproportionate influence of one task over another can
disrupt the convergence of the function and adversely affect the final outcomes. To
embark on this endeavor, we have devised a meticulous plan informed by an initial
investigation of existing weighting strategies and their respective outcomes.
The primary phase of our strategy involves establishing a baseline performance
metric to gauge the potential enhancements achievable through subsequent meth-
ods. To this end, we will employ the Equal Weighting (EW) strategy, a conventional
starting point for task contribution evaluation. Subsequently, we will explore and
implement the RW and UW strategies. These particular strategies have garnered
considerable attention in the field of computer vision, with prior state-of-the-art re-
search underscoring their eﬀicacy, notably in the context of the NYUv2 dataset,
which serves as the foundation of our project. The implementation of the weighting
strategies were taken or inspired by the work of LibMTL [30].
Finally, we will subject these strategies to rigorous testing within the model, fine-
tuning the hyperparameters to identify the optimal parameter combination that yields
the most favorable results in conjunction with the associated strategy, model, and
dataset. This comprehensive evaluation will facilitate the establishment of the most
suitable hyperparameters, thereby paving the way for subsequent testing phases.
3.4
Adjustment of loss function
Subsequent to the meticulous adjustment of hyperparameters for each weighting strat-
egy, the ensuing phase of the research shall focus on the comprehensive examination
of the loss functions employed within the model. This endeavor aims to refine the
loss function to better align them with the objectives of the tasks at hand.
Given that the research project is primarily concerned with evaluating the effects
of MTL with respect to a single-task model, it is essential to maintain a level playing
field for depth estimation. Consequently, the loss function employed for depth esti-
mation will remain unaltered to ensure a fair and unbiased evaluation of the MTL
framework.
Conversely, semantic segmentation is introduced as an additional task within the
model architecture, and, accordingly, its loss function will be subject to modifica-
tions and fine-tuning. As a starting point, the widely accepted cross-entropy loss
(Equation 3.1), a prevalent choice within the field of semantic segmentation, will be
applied. This foundational choice aligns with established practices and serves as the
initial step in the quest to optimize the loss function for the semantic segmentation
task.
Notations. Given we have an input tensor ˆy of size (minibatch, C) or (minibatch, C,
d1, d2, . . . , dK) with K ≥1 for the K-dimensional case and C in range of [0, C) where
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Proposed architecture
27
corresponds to the number of classes. Class imbalance is represented by wy and the
target tensor y.
Lcross =
N
∑
n=1
1
∑N
n=1 wyn
ln
where
ln = −wyn log
exp(ˆyn,yn)
∑C
c=1 exp(ˆyn,c)
(3.1)
Furthermore, the unbalanced representation of each class in the dataset has been
addressed by experimenting with the loss function given different specifications for
the class imbalance parameter, wy:
• Evaluate the model considering each class contribution to the loss function equal:
wy = 1; ∀y ∈[0, 1, . . . , C)
• Remove the unlabeled class from influencing the loss value since we want the
model to focus on the label classes trying to maximize its classification. Setting
wunlabeled = 0
• Optimizing the imbalance parameter for the specific dataset so each class would
contribute proportionally to its frequency, thus balancing the classes. The algo-
rithm used will be a heuristic inspired by Gary King et al. [32] using the library
Scikit-learn [33]: wy =
N
C ny where ny is the number of samples for class y.
This meticulous examination and refinement of the loss function contribute to the
research’s overarching goal of achieving optimal task performance within the multi-
task model.
3.5
Proposed architecture
The ultimate stride toward the enhancement of the Multi-Task Learning (MTL)
model, following the transition from the initial single-task model, involves a paradigm
shift in architecture design. This transformation seeks to depart from the rudimentary
approach of decoder duplication, opting instead for the incorporation of a state-of-
the-art (SOTA) methodology.
The selected approach for this architectural evolution is rooted in the pioneering
work of Lei He et al. as presented in their SOSD-Net architecture [16]. This ap-
proach capitalizes on the geometric relationship inherent in the dual tasks of Monoc-
ular Depth Estimation (MDE) and semantic segmentation. The primary objective
is to enhance the model’s architecture by enabling it to concurrently assimilate the
geometric constraints entailed in both tasks. This strategic choice aligns with the
project’s aspiration to optimize the multi-task model’s proficiency.
Simultaneously, the imperative of preserving the core attributes that defined the
initial model remains a central concern in the architectural transition. To this end, the
newly proposed architecture diligently upholds the incorporation of the GUB, which
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Methodology
was a hallmark of the preceding model. Furthermore, the architectural refinements
ensure that the model retains its characteristic status as a lightweight, parameter-
eﬀicient structure.
In summary, this substantial architectural modification signifies the project’s com-
mitment to advancing the capabilities of the MTL model while staying true to the
foundational elements of the original design.
In the preliminary phase of model development, a critical task involves the ex-
traction of a refined feature pyramid, denoted as fp, from the underlying backbone
architecture (Figure 3.9). A judicious decision guided by architectural considerations
led to the selection of the encoder’s second layer as the source for this feature pyra-
mid. This choice is grounded in the understanding that this specific layer, serving as
the branching point in the encoder, retains crucial information vital for subsequent
processing stages. Importantly, this decision aligns with the overarching goal of mit-
igating structural losses incurred by the stride convolution in subsequent processing
steps.
Figure 3.9: Extracted refined fp representation (green) from the DDRNet encoder
(Image taken and adapted from https://github.com/ydhongHIT/DDRNet
The architectural configuration (Figure 3.10) reveals that the model will adhere
to the methodology proposed by Lei He et al. [16]. In this approach, the decoder
leverages a global feature map obtained from the encoder to generate feature maps for
semantic features, support maps, and depth features. To address structural losses aris-
ing from stride convolution, the decoder strategically incorporates the global feature
map with a refined feature pyramid extracted from the backbone. This meticulous
integration process is aimed at enhancing the model’s ability to capture and preserve
intricate structural details during the decoding phase.
Following the acquisition of the support map, semantic features, and depth fea-
tures, the semantic-to-depth module (Figure 3.11) is strategically deployed to inte-
grate information extracted from both 2D and 3D spatial areas. This integration
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Proposed architecture
29
Figure 3.10: Decoder architecture for combining the encoder output and refined fp
into semantic feature, support map (common representation), and depth feature.
process plays a pivotal role in facilitating the precise estimation of object depth from
a defined perspective.
To meticulously maintain a detailed structure, convolutions with a stride of 1
are employed. The initial two convolutional layers contribute to the generation of a
heatmap representing the semantic feature and support map. These are commonly
referred to as the 2D object latent representation and the 3D latent shared representa-
tion of an object, respectively. The incorporation of batch normalization in this phase
serves a multifaceted purpose — it mitigates the risk of gradient explosion, expedites
the training process, and acts as a preventative measure against overfitting.
The integration of information from both maps is executed through pixel multi-
plication. This combined information, along with the depth feature, is then fed into
a guided upsampling decoder, culminating in the generation of the depth estimation.
It is noteworthy that the architecture of the Guided Upsampling Block (GUB) de-
coder aligns structurally with the one employed by Michael Rudolph et al. [5]. This
strategic choice is made with a cognizant consideration of the eﬀicacy demonstrated
by this decoder configuration in prior research.
In a similar vein, the depth-to-semantic module encompasses a semantic branch
that integrates the profound 2D-3D area feature by consolidating features from preced-
ing components. However, the implementation deviates from the semantic-to-depth
module. In this instance, both the support map and the depth feature traverse two
convolutional layers, each comprising 64 and 32 channels, respectively. The objec-
tive is to generate a latent variable from the pure depth branch specifically for the
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Methodology
Figure 3.11: Structure of the semantic-to-depth module. Convolutional layers de-
picted by * have batch normalization applied.
depth feature (Figure 3.12). The fusion of information from both branches involves
pixel-wise multiplication, followed by passage through a 32-channel convolution with
a square kernel of 1, strategically designed to extract and interpret the semantic cue.
Figure 3.12: Structure of the depth-to-semantic module. Convolutional layers de-
picted by * have batch normalization applied.
==PAGE:39==
3.6 Evaluation metrics
31
3.6
Evaluation metrics
The model’s performance will be quantitatively evaluated in the most widely adopted
measures for each task respectively. In the case of depth estimation, the following
metrics will be adopted.
Notations.
Let there be N number of samples for the dataset.
Having the
predicted tensor ˆy and the target tensor y.
• Average relative error (rel) = 1
N
∑N
i=0
|ˆyi−yi|
yi
• Root mean squared error (RMSE) =
√
1
N
∑N
i=0 | ˆyi −yi |2
• Average log 10 error = 1
N
∑N
i=0 | log10(ˆyi) −log10(yi) |
• Accuracy with threshold t: max
(
yi
ˆyi ,
ˆyi
yi
)
= δ < t where t ∈{1.25, 1.252, 1.253}
The performance evaluation metrics for semantic segmentation will encompass
the calculation of the following widely utilized metrics. The selected metrics include
mIoU, which represents the intersection of the classified classes over their union. Pixel
accuracy will also be computed, reflecting the total correctly classified pixels in the
image. Additionally, MA will be determined as the mean class pixel accuracy over
each present class in the image target.
Additionally, the MTL evaluation metric that will be used to compute the per-
formance variation over the baseline established will be calculated by applying Equa-
tion 3.2 [18][34][35].
Notations. Let there be T number of tasks and Nt the number of metrics for task
t. Where Mt,n denotes the performance of the metric n for the balancing strategy in
task t and M EW
t,n
similarly defined for EW strategy (baseline). Lastly, pt,n is set to 0
if better performance is attained with a higher value for the nth metric in task t and
1 otherwise.
∆p = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
1
Nt
Nt
∑
n=1
(−1)pt,n(Mt,n −M EW
t,n )
M EW
t,n
× 100%
(3.2)
This strategic approach serves as the framework for ensuring a balanced and
effective integration of tasks in our MTL model. Since the project is also estimating
the performance of MTL model over single-task, the previous formula (Equation 3.2)
will be adapted as follows:
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Methodology
∆m = 1
Nt
Nt
∑
n=1
(−1)pt,n(Mt,n −M ST
t,n )
M ST
t,n
× 100%
(3.3)
Where only the task performed by the single-task model will be evaluated and
taken as reference substituting the previous M EW
t,n
for M ST
t,n , which corresponds to
the n metric for the task t performed both by the single-task and the multi-task
model.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this section, an assessment of the empirical findings derived from the methodology
outlined in the preceding chapter (chapter 3) is conducted. Initially, the evaluation
focuses on the original single-task model to establish a baseline for comparison with
subsequent adaptations to MTL and the sequential weighting strategies applied to it.
Subsequently, the results of the proposed hybrid architecture are juxtaposed against
the outcomes obtained from the aforementioned adaptations, enabling the quantifica-
tion of performance variations relative to other project approaches
4.1
Original model
The evaluation begins with an assessment of the single-task original model, distinct
from the one proposed by [5][4], to establish a foundational baseline. This step is
crucial as deep learning models have demonstrated sensitivity to variations in datasets
and training conditions. The evaluation follows the methodology outlined by Michael
Rudolph et al., incorporating consistent data transformations such as horizontal flips
(p = 0.5) and random color channel swaps (p = 0.25). The selected optimizer is Adam
with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, a learning rate of 0.0001, and a batch size of 8 images. All
models undergo training for 20 epochs with a step size of 15.
Table 4.1: Depth baseline results on NYUv2 dataset
Method
Parameters
[M]
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
fps↑
Pre-trained weights
5.8
1.085
0.163
0.076
0.629
0.835
0.864
55.6
Trained +
Pre-trained weights
5.8
1.177
0.142
0.058
0.718
0.840
0.865
Trained
5.8
5.787
2.25
0.897
0.009
0.022
0.044
The examination of metrics (Table 4.1), underscores the substantial influence of
the training dataset on the outcomes (Figure 4.1) of a specific model. The observed
disparities between the model trained from scratch and those initialized with pre-
trained weights are noteworthy. A comparative analysis, including results presented
by Michael et al. [5], reveals that employing pre-trained weights leads to a signifi-
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Results
cant performance enhancement across all metrics since the dataset and conditions for
training the model influences significantly the quality of the outcomes.
Evaluation of the depth map results from models utilizing pre-trained weights,
both through direct assessment and training on top of existing weights with a new
dataset, yields similar outcomes. Training on pre-existing weights, however, results
in a loss of depth in the farther regions of the image, accompanied by a decline
in resolution. Although all metrics, except RMSE, exhibit marginal improvements
with further training, the model without pre-trained weights demonstrates the least
favorable outcomes.
Figure 4.1: Qualitative results from single-task model over different training settings
4.2
Multi-task weighting strategy evaluation
As previously discussed, the transformation of the model from single-task monocular
depth estimation [5] to a MTL model involves duplicating the decoder and adjusting
the output size of the last layer in the semantic decoder. Consequently, the model’s
parameters, which were 5.8 million in the single-task configuration, will increase to
5.9 million in this MTL adaptation, reflecting a parameter increase of approximately
2.16%.
The training of the new MTL model will employ three distinct weighting strate-
gies. Each strategy will undergo multiple iterations, incorporating modifications to
hyperparameters and exploring various permutations and combinations to identify
the most effective configuration for our specific case study (Table 4.2). The hyper-
parameters subject to variation include the learning rate, number of iterations, step
size, and batch size. Notably, batch size adjustments will be made based on optimal
results from prior tests, aiming to minimize computational requirements.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Multi-task weighting strategy evaluation
35
Table 4.2: Combination of hyperparameters and the associated test number
Test Number
Hyperparameters
Iterations
Learning Rate
Step size
1
20
1e−4
15
2
40
1e−4
15
3
20
2e−5
15
4
40
2e−5
15
5
20
1e−4
7
6
40
1e−4
7
7
20
2e−5
7
8
40
2e−5
7
4.2.1
Equivalent weighting (EW)
In the initial phase, we subject the model to the EW strategy to establish the base-
line for the MTL model. This serves as a reference point for gauging performance
improvements when subsequent strategies are applied to the model.
Table 4.3: MTL metrics on NYUv2 dataset applying EW
Test
Depth
Segmentation
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
mIoU↑
MA↑
pxAcc.↑
1
1.206
0.207
0.085
0.582
0.794
0.853
0.196
0.527
0.613
2
1.235
0.248
0.100
0.523
0.757
0.838
0.154
0.442
0.554
3
1.306
0.273
0.104
0.506
0.750
0.833
0.307
0.447
0.564
4
1.305
0.242
0.092
0.559
0.778
0.842
0.353
0.496
0.593
5
1.233
0.209
0.084
0.588
0.799
0.852
0.384
0.535
0.618
6
1.328
0.220
0.085
0.588
0.796
0.851
0.389
0.543
0.621
7
1.306
0.273
0.104
0.506
0.750
0.833
0.307
0.447
0.564
8
1.241
0.226
0.090
0.564
0.783
0.848
0.347
0.492
0.590
Upon implementing the EW strategy, the model’s performance is evaluated based
on the previously outlined metrics (Table 4.3). The results indicate that variations
in hyperparameters have a slight impact on the outcomes, with the most favorable
results consistently arising from hyperparameter combinations 1, 5, and 6. These
results serve as the baseline for the MTL model, forming the basis for evaluating the
subsequent weighting strategies.
Given that EW serves as the baseline, there is no need to calculate the MTL per-
formance variation, denoted as ∆p, for this strategy. However, the primary objective
of the project is to assess the impact of different tasks on each other during training
and discern potential improvements by allowing the model to learn from diverse tasks
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Results
Table 4.4: EW performance metrics
Test
∆p(%) ↑
∆m(%) ↑
fps
∆fps ↑
1
0.000
-20.099
43.48
-12.12
2
-32.025
3
-37.744
4
-28.684
5
-20.210
6
-23.212
7
-37.744
8
-24.994
with underlying patterns. Therefore, by calculating the performance improvement of
EW in MTL over the single-task initial model, it becomes evident that the MTL
baseline model, with equal weighting across tasks, exhibits an overall performance de-
crease of at least 20.099% compared to the single-task model. Across all shared tests
the single-task model consistently outperformed, yielding superior results. As was
previously mentioned when discussing the metrics obtained, the best combinations
are 1, 5, and 6 since they showed the best results across multiple metrics. Also, the
MTL has a 12.12 frames per second (fps) drop compared with the single-task model,
incurring a 21.8% frequency drop approximately.
Figure 4.2: Qualitative results from EW strategy (Test 6)
The outcomes derived from the EW strategy (Figure 4.2) exhibit a suboptimal
performance, aligning with expectations for this strategy commonly employed as an
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Multi-task weighting strategy evaluation
37
initial evaluation baseline in MTL. The depth estimation maps produced by the model
demonstrate notable deficiencies, characterized by blurriness, poor resolution, and
significantly reduced depth compared to the single-task model. The model encounters
challenges in delineating open spaces and outlining objects with precision. In the
context of segmentation, although there is no single-task model for direct comparison,
the class segmentation of objects in the image lacks clarity. The segmentation results
depict a conglomeration of indistinct blobs without clear differentiation or discernible
geometric structure.
4.2.2
Random weighting (RW)
Subsequent to establishing the baseline for weighting strategies, the RW approach will
be applied to the model, mirroring the assessments conducted by the baseline. The
evaluation of model metrics (Table 4.5) aims to discern the most effective combination
of hyperparameters. A preliminary analysis reveals that combinations 2 and 6 exhibit
superior metrics, with the former excelling in segmentation metrics and the latter in
depth estimation.
Table 4.5: MTL metrics on NYUv2 dataset applying RW
Test
Depth
Segmentation
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
mIoU↑
MA↑
pxAcc.↑
1
1.211
0.205
0.088
0.568
0.794
0.853
0.373
0.518
0.614
2
1.244
0.205
0.085
0.585
0.798
0.852
0.386
0.540
0.616
3
1.285
0.274
0.104
0.511
0.743
0.831
0.290
0.429
0.556
4
1.282
0.243
0.095
0.546
0.774
0.843
0.343
0.488
0.584
5
1.210
0.206
0.085
0.588
0.800
0.852
0.367
0.517
0.606
6
1.252
0.206
0.081
0.610
0.801
0.853
0.381
0.532
0.614
7
1.293
0.261
0.101
0.520
0.754
0.856
0.309
0.445
0.564
8
1.248
0.235
0.093
0.549
0.778
0.846
0.347
0.490
0.594
To gauge the impact of the RW strategy relative to the established baseline, we
employ Equation 3.2 for MTL performance evaluation and Equation 3.3 to quantify
the performance increase over the single-task model.
The outcomes presented (Table 4.6) reveal that, for hyperparameter combinations
2, the RW strategy significantly surpasses the established baseline. By scrutinizing
the substantial performance improvements, it becomes evident that these instances
align with scenarios where the baseline exhibited its poorest performance.
Conversely, when evaluating the performance increase relative to the single-task
model, the RW strategy experiences a performance decline of at least 18.695% com-
pared to the single-task model. The most favorable combinations, exhibiting the least
performance drop, are 2, 5, and 6, which consistently correspond to those in which
the model achieved the highest average metrics (Table 4.5). The new strategy is more
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Results
eﬀicient than EW but the single-task model still infers the results about 14.35% faster
than RW.
Table 4.6: RW performance metrics
Test
∆p(%) ↑
∆m(%) ↑
fps
∆fps ↑
1
14.345
-21.122
47.62
-7.98
2
34.881
-20.273
3
-1.742
-37.625
4
-1.380
-29.699
5
-1.436
-19.799
6
0.915
-18.695
7
1.2289
-34.442
8
-0.906
-27.498
The results illustrated in Figure 4.3, following the implementation of the RW
strategy, exhibit depth maps akin to those realized through the EW approach. Nev-
ertheless, this strategy preserves a greater extent of the spatial structure pertaining
to objects, a characteristic achieved by EW, while mitigating errors in the depiction
of the farthest sections of the image, particularly evident in the representation of
higher depth values. In the context of semantic segmentation, the RW strategy main-
tains the robust features observed in the baseline; however, it manifests an increased
incidence of unlabeled classes, represented by the grey color, surpassing the desirable
threshold.
Figure 4.3: Qualitative results from RW strategy (Test 6)
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Multi-task weighting strategy evaluation
39
4.2.3
Uncertainty weighting (UW)
Following the examination of previous weighting strategies, this section delves into the
analysis, measurement, and evaluation of results stemming from the implementation
of the UW strategy, juxtaposed against the established baseline.
Table 4.7: MTL metrics on NYUv2 dataset applying UW
Test
Depth
Segmentation
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
mIoU↑
MA↑
pxAcc.↑
1
1.229
0.202
0.083
0.600
0.800
0.852
0.386
0.537
0.619
2
1.259
0.202
0.086
0.575
0.800
0.856
0.391
0.540
0.623
3
1.245
0.250
0.100
0.516
0.760
0.839
0.323
0.460
0.571
4
1.281
0.245
0.094
0.548
0.774
0.843
0.346
0.489
0.592
5
1.323
0.228
0.087
0.581
0.789
0.847
0.378
0.530
0.615
6
1.270
0.205
0.083
0.597
0.803
0.853
0.385
0.537
0.617
7
1.274
0.256
0.098
0.528
0.765
0.838
0.313
0.457
0.559
8
1.251
0.228
0.090
0.562
0.783
0.847
0.350
0.491
0.594
Upon scrutinizing the metrics derived from the current implementation of the UW
strategy (Table 4.7), discernible improvements become apparent in specific hyperpa-
rameter configurations, notably those designated as numbers 1, 2, and 6. However, a
comprehensive evaluation is imperative to confirm these observations. Therefore, the
performance variance relative to the baseline is calculated to ascertain the extent of
improvement over the established equal weighting baseline.
Table 4.8: UW performance metrics
Test
∆p(%) ↑
∆m(%) ↑
fps
∆fps ↑
1
17.185
-18.746
50.00
-5.6
2
35.452
-20.536
3
3.308
-32.485
4
-0.922
-29.586
5
-2.413
-25.033
6
0.886
-19.669
7
2.334
-32.667
8
0.043
-25.436
The results derived from the UW strategy closely mirror those attained with the
RW strategy. The chosen UW strategy exhibits substantial performance improve-
ments over the baseline in the first two combinations, corresponding to the lowest
metric values achieved. However, when juxtaposed with the single-task model, the
top three combinations with the highest performance are 1, 2, and 6. In this scenario,
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Results
the best performance aligns with similar combinations for both EW and the single-
task model. Nevertheless, the UW strategy still manifests a performance decrease of
at least 18.746% when compared to the initial single-task model and their shared task.
Lastly, the implemented strategy corresponds to the fastest MTL results obtained so
far, achieving 50 fps, resulting in a performance drop of only 10.07% compared to the
single-task model which achieved 55.6 fps.
Figure 4.4: Qualitative results from UW strategy (Test 6)
Upon scrutinizing the outcomes arising from the application of the UW strategy,
distinct observations emerge. In the realm of depth estimation, it becomes evident
that the UW strategy excels in accurately representing the geometric area of objects,
either matching or surpassing the performance of previous strategies. Moreover, it
demonstrates enhanced proficiency in capturing the deepest regions of the image
compared to its predecessors.
In the context of semantic segmentation, the UW strategy reveals a mixed perfor-
mance. Certain images, such as the leftmost example, exhibit relatively satisfactory
representation. However, in images featuring a greater diversity of classes, the results
are somewhat subpar. Despite these shortcomings, it is noteworthy that the majority
of the 3D regions of objects are still discernibly portrayed in the resulting images.
4.2.4
Weighting strategies summary
In summary, after the meticulous implementation of weighting strategies and thor-
ough testing of various hyperparameter configurations, a definitive conclusion has
been reached. Both weighting strategies exhibit improvement over the established
baseline of EW. While the observed improvement across all tests is not significant
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Loss function adjustment
41
enough to exclude EW from subsequent experimentations, an in-depth analysis of the
best combinations reveals that hyperparameter combination 6 consistently ranks in
the top three for each strategy. Consequently, it has been decided to proceed with
hyperparameter values of 40 iterations, a learning rate of 0.0001, and a step size of 7
(test 6) in the upcoming empirical testing. Additional results for other hyperparam-
eter combinations can be found in Appendix B.
Concerning performance relative to a single-task model, the most favorable results
are achieved by implementing the UW strategy, which incurs the smallest performance
and frame drop.
These straightforward solutions employed to transform a single-
task model into MTL demonstrate, in the best-case scenario, a performance drop of
18.746% and a frame drop of 10.07%.
4.3
Loss function adjustment
In this section, we will present the outcomes derived from the application of diverse
methods aimed at balancing the weights within the cross-entropy function, employed
to minimize the error associated with the classification process.
Considering the dataset’s inherent imbalance, with certain classes being dispro-
portionately represented, three distinct weighting strategies will be employed. Firstly,
we will utilize the strategy previously employed in all preceding tests, excluding the
unlabeled class from influencing the loss function. Subsequently, we will endeavor
to rectify class imbalance by assigning specific weights to each class, ensuring pro-
portional contribution based on frequency, implemented by Scikit-learn. Lastly, the
cross-entropy loss function will be applied without accounting for the frequency of
any label within the dataset.
Table 4.9: MTL metrics on NYUv2 dataset applying different weighting balance
methods to the cross-entropy loss function. The best results over each metric are in
bold per weighting strategy.
Method
Depth
Segmentation
fps↑
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
mIoU↑
MA↑
pxAcc.↑
Remove unlabeled
EW
1.262
0.204
0.082
0.600
0.802
0.854
0.391
0.542
0.624
43.49
RW
1.304
0.223
0.086
0.584
0.795
0.850
0.383
0.533
0.613
47.62
UW
1.340
0.221
0.086
0.584
0.797
0.852
0.392
0.542
0.624
50.00
Scikit-learn balancing
EW
1.180
0.198
0.084
0.588
0.801
0.854
0.404
0.543
0.614
38.46
RW
1.297
0.220
0.086
0.586
0.792
0.849
0.397
0.537
0.615
47.62
UW
1.266
0.207
0.084
0.590
0.799
0.853
0.411
0.549
0.627
38.46
No class-weight
EW
1.337
0.232
0.087
0.583
0.789
0.847
0.419
0.551
0.633
37.04
RW
1.264
0.200
0.082
0.597
0.802
0.856
0.415
0.547
0.626
47.62
UW
1.305
0.219
0.085
0.590
0.797
0.850
0.412
0.546
0.628
45.45
Upon scrutinizing the metrics resulting from the various modifications to the cross-
entropy loss function (Table 4.9), an initial observation reveals that EW’s optimal
results are evenly distributed among the three different weighting modifications ap-
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Results
plied to the loss function. In contrast, RW distinctly exhibits superior performance
when no class weighting balances are applied during the loss function calculation,
with each class contributing equally to the loss value. However, UW predominantly
achieves the best results when a balanced set of weights is applied to the loss function,
ensuring that each class contributes proportionally to its frequency in the dataset.
As there is no definitive method for calculating the best result based on the metrics,
we will leverage the performance comparison between the MTL model and the single-
task model, denoted as ∆m.
Table 4.10: Loss function class-weighting performance metrics
Method
∆m(%) ↑
∆fps ↑
Remove unlabeled
EW
-19.082
-12.11
RW
-23.644
-7.98
UW
-23.841
-5.6
Scikit-learn balancing
EW
-18.090
-17.14
RW
-23.225
-7.98
UW
-20.377
-17.14
No class-weight
EW
-25.655
-18.56
RW
-18.672
-7.98
UW
-22.722
-10.15
Analyzing the obtained results (Table 4.10), we can confidently eliminate the first
proposed option of excluding the unlabeled class from contributing to the loss func-
tion, as it does not yield the best performance values. This time, we observe that
the UW strategy obtained results approximately 3.6% worse than those presented in
the previous section (Table 4.7). This discrepancy can be attributed to the variabil-
ity introduced by the probabilistic structure underlying the UW strategy. On the
other hand, RW demonstrated a performance increase of 3.332% compared to the
previous configurations when implementing an unbalanced class weight cross-entropy
loss function. Additionally, calculating the cross-entropy loss without balancing the
classes allows for faster performance in every strategy except RW, which has proven
to be robust in both performance and computational speed. Finally, it is crucial to
note that refraining from applying weights to the loss function for the segmentation
task has resulted in enhancements across all aspects related to semantic segmentation
tasks, yielding their optimal outcomes.
Considering the variability observed with UW and the performance increase with
RW, the decision is made to proceed by applying no weights to the classes when
calculating the cross-entropy loss as it also improves performance on the semantic
segmentation task.
By employing the cross-entropy loss without incorporating any class-balance weight-
ing, the results (Figure 4.5) reveal subtle enhancements in depth estimations, char-
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Proposed architecture
43
Figure 4.5:
RW results from applying cross-entropy loss without class-balance
weights
acterized by a marginal increase in the resolution of depth maps compared to the
previous implementation (Figure 4.3). In terms of semantic segmentation, discernible
improvements in class identification are apparent. Instead of a conglomerate of mul-
tiple labels, objects are now more easily identified compared to the preceding imple-
mentation, as indicated by the mIoU metric, signifying a larger intersection between
the prediction and the ground truth.
4.4
Proposed architecture
The implemented architectural design is a fusion of the methodologies proposed by Lei
He et al. [16] and the GUB devised by Michael Rudolph et al. [5]. This amalgamation
aims to investigate potential enhancements over the initial architecture, which was
subjected to preliminary testing by duplicating the decoder for the establishment of a
MTL model. The architectural modification introduces additional layers and param-
eters, resulting in a model encompassing 6.2 million parameters. This marks a 6.64%
augmentation in parameter count compared to the initial single-task configuration.
4.4.1
Establishing a baseline (EW)
Mirroring the methodology employed with the preceding architecture (see Table 4.2
for reference on hyperparameters combinations), the initial phase involves establish-
ing a baseline for the MTL model. To achieve this, the reference weighting strategy
serving as the benchmark for gauging model performance is the EW strategy. All
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Results
subsequent strategies will undergo comparison against the EW results and their analo-
gous strategies as implemented in the previous architecture. This systematic analysis
aims to discern whether the new architectural iteration represents an improvement
over its predecessor. Furthermore, the evaluation seeks to ascertain the MTL model’s
capability to surpass the performance of the single-task model, which served as the
foundation for its development.
Table 4.11: MTL metrics on NYUv2 dataset applying EW on proposed architecture
Test
Depth
Segmentation
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
mIoU↑
MA↑
pxAcc.↑
1
1.210
0.207
0.088
0.570
0.793
0.851
0.391
0.518
0.617
2
1.231
0.203
0.084
0.592
0.803
0.854
0.415
0.546
0.632
3
1.289
0.273
0.104
0.509
0.748
0.833
0.316
0.435
0.553
4
1.241
0.236
0.093
0.550
0.776
0.844
0.354
0.479
0.588
5
1.265
0.217
0.086
0.583
0.794
0.852
0.399
0.525
0.618
6
1.284
0.206
0.084
0.588
0.803
0.854
0.410
0.535
0.627
7
1.249
0.262
0.103
0.509
0.754
0.835
0.297
0.424
0.545
8
1.248
0.240
0.094
0.548
0.773
0.843
0.352
0.481
0.591
Upon scrutinizing the metrics derived from the model’s implementation of the
EW strategy, it is evident that hyperparameter combination 2 distinctly outperforms
the others, exhibiting the most favorable metric results across nearly all parameters.
Subsequently, combination number 6 follows closely in terms of performance. To pro-
vide a quantitative assessment, the model’s overall performance will be computed, as
previously outlined in Section 4.2, incorporating the performance increase or decrease
between architectures denoted as ∆a derived from Equation 3.2.
Table 4.12: EW performance metrics on proposed architecture
Test
∆p(%) ↑
∆a(%) ↑
∆m(%) ↑
fps
∆fps ↑
1
0.000
15.882
-21.355
40.00
-15.6
2
39.152
-19.266
3
-0.148
-37.473
4
-0.276
-27.571
5
-0.517
-22.392
6
1.822
-20.462
7
-1.068
-35.171
8
-1.430
-28.552
When looking at the strategy performance (Table 4.12) of EW strategy set as
the baseline for the model it is notable that the performance increases with the
first two combinations which is plausible since those were the two tests in which
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Proposed architecture
45
the initial implementation achieved substantially worse results. Regarding the other
combinations, the new model performs overall worse than the previous one besides
combination 6. It is important to remember that the best results obtained with EW
strategy on the previous architecture are either close to the results obtained with the
new one or worse, being number 6, the case with a performance increase of 1.822%.
In this case the new architecture is slower since it has more parameters requiring
more computational cost which produces a drop of 3.48 fps.
On the other hand, when looking at the performance over the single-task model,
this new architecture still experiences a performance drop on the shared task (MDE)
of at least 19.266% and substantially slower with a 15.6 fps drop over the single-task
model.
Figure 4.6: Qualitative results from EW strategy (Test 2) on proposed architecture
Considering the outcomes of applying the EW strategy to the newly proposed
architecture (Figure 4.6), a discernible decrease in the quality of depth estimation
images is apparent. While resembling those obtained from the previous architecture,
the resolution and geometric fidelity of the objects are not as pronounced. In the
segmentation results, the loss of geometric precision in object delineation is more
conspicuous, with segmented objects exhibiting an increased number of small pixels
classified as a different class. Despite these observations, the overall performance of
the model remains comparable to that previously achieved with this strategy.
4.4.2
Random Weighting (RW)
Following the established methodology, the RW strategy is applied to the proposed
architecture to assess its performance with this particular weighting strategy. Given
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Results
that the previous architecture exhibited similar performance compared to its baseline,
similar trends are anticipated in this new model.
Table 4.13: MTL metrics on NYUv2 dataset applying RW on proposed architecture
Test
Depth
Segmentation
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
mIoU↑
MA↑
pxAcc.↑
1
1.257
0.223
0.088
0.575
0.794
0.849
0.388
0.517
0.612
2
1.330
0.224
0.086
0.586
0.793
0.850
0.413
0.544
0.620
3
1.290
0.268
0.101
0.520
0.754
0.834
0.306
0.432
0.551
4
1.211
0.234
0.094
0.545
0.774
0.846
0.361
0.490
0.595
5
1.469
0.296
0.105
0.509
0.748
0.830
0.389
0.523
0.615
6
1.364
0.231
0.088
0.573
0.789
0.850
0.413
0.540
0.630
7
1.223
0.247
0.101
0.514
0.755
0.838
0.290
0.413
0.539
8
1.277
0.246
0.094
0.550
0.773
0.842
0.356
0.480
0.585
By analyzing the metrics derived from the model evaluation (Table 4.13), supe-
rior performance is observed in most metrics for hyperparameter combination two.
However, the distribution of the best metric results appears relatively even across
different combinations.
To discern whether a specific combination yields superior
results, performance metrics will be computed. As explained earlier, the model will
be compared against its baseline results, the previous architecture results under the
same strategy, and the initial single-task model.
Table 4.14: RW performance metrics on proposed architecture
Test
∆p(%) ↑
∆a(%) ↑
∆m(%) ↑
fps
∆fps ↑
1
-1.199
-0.401
-23.801
39.02
-16.58
2
-2.416
-0.107
-24.122
3
-0.059
1.577
-35.645
4
1.016
2.129
-27.316
5
-8.537
-7.822
-43.067
6
-1.967
-1.052
-26.381
7
-0.073
-2.324
-32.274
8
-0.396
-0.911
-29.640
Upon reviewing the performance metrics under the RW strategy, the overall model
performance tends to be slightly inferior to the baseline, with minimal differences
except for a maximum performance drop of 8.537% observed with hyperparameters
combination 5. However, when comparing performance differences with the previous
model, these disparities seem to amplify, resulting in a mean drop of 1.704%. These
results underscore the variability inherent in the RW strategy, contributing to the
development of robust models by sampling from a normal distribution. Despite this,
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Proposed architecture
47
the strategy underperformed, falling short of the expected results it demonstrated
previously. Notably, it exhibited slower frames per second (fps) than the baseline, a
deviation that had not occurred before, with a decline of approximately 1 fps and 8.6
fps compared to the previous architecture.
Lastly, in the comparative analysis with respect to the single-task model, substan-
tial performance drops are evident, reaching at least 23.801% in the best-case scenario
while processing the data at 16.58 fps lower.
Figure 4.7: Qualitative results from RW strategy (Test 2) on proposed architecture
Upon applying the RW strategy to the proposed architecture and comparing the
results (Figure 4.7) to those obtained previously, there is a discernible proximity
between them. The depth images generated exhibit similar resolutions and values to
those obtained by the previous architecture. Conversely, in the evaluation of semantic
segmentation results, it becomes evident that a greater number of objects are correctly
classified than before, as indicated by the mIoU and pixel accuracy metrics, which
achieve higher values. Overall, the results demonstrate a performance decrease in
depth estimation while showcasing an improvement in semantic segmentation between
the previous and the newly proposed architecture.
4.4.3
Uncertainty Weighting (UW)
As the concluding phase of the empirical evaluation concerning different weighting
strategies for the proposed architecture in this project, the UW strategy will be
implemented and its performance assessed with the new model.
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Results
Table 4.15: MTL metrics on NYUv2 dataset applying UW on proposed architecture
Test
Depth
Segmentation
RMSE↓
rel↓
log10↓
δ1 ↑
δ2 ↑
δ3 ↑
mIoU↑
MA↑
pxAcc.↑
1
1.397
0.243
0.091
0.565
0.780
0.845
0.395
0.520
0.624
2
1.238
0.200
0.082
0.604
0.805
0.853
0.413
0.544
0.628
3
1.275
0.262
0.100
0.526
0.760
0.837
0.340
0.469
0.578
4
1.250
0.237
0.093
0.552
0.778
0.845
0.377
0.501
0.605
5
1.239
0.208
0.086
0.581
0.796
0.853
0.398
0.524
0.620
6
1.240
0.209
0.084
0.593
0.798
0.852
0.410
0.542
0.631
7
1.245
0.257
0.101
0.519
0.752
0.836
0.302
0.425
0.553
8
1.271
0.246
0.096
0.535
0.772
0.841
0.347
0.469
0.583
Upon scrutinizing the metrics derived from the application of UW (Table 4.15), it
becomes evident that the combination of hyperparameters 2 attains the highest scores
across nearly all evaluated metrics. However, once again, to gauge the performance
of the model comprehensively, comparisons with the established baselines thus far are
requisite.
Table 4.16: UW performance metrics on proposed architecture
Test
∆p(%) ↑
∆a(%) ↑
∆m(%) ↑
fps
∆fps ↑
1
-2.866
-4.401
-29.580
43.24
-12.36
2
0.207
2.247
-18.140
3
4.521
0.948
-34.125
4
2.296
2.954
-27.710
5
0.500
2.318
-20.955
6
0.488
1.432
-20.213
7
1.064
-2.333
-33.741
8
-1.646
-3.121
-30.517
By analyzing the performance metrics calculated for the current weighting strat-
egy (Table 4.16), several observations emerge. The overall performance of the model
reflects an improvement of up to 4.521% over the established baseline for this ar-
chitecture, with only two instances showcasing a lower performance. Regarding the
implementation of the previous architecture, the metrics present a more nuanced pic-
ture. While performance increases for some metrics, there are concurrent decreases for
others in similar proportions, resulting in a mean difference that is almost negligible.
It is crucial to note that the performance increase occurs specifically for the combina-
tions in which UW yields higher results, thereby demonstrating superior performance
for those hyperparameters over the prior architecture.
Concerning the single-task model, despite still experiencing a performance decline
of at least 18.140%, it has achieved results comparable to the best obtained thus far
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Results summary
49
by UW in terms of single-task performance, which amounted to an 18.090% increase
when balancing the weights of the loss function. However, the model remains compu-
tationally slower, resulting in a frame drop of 12.36 fps compared to the single-task
model.
Figure 4.8: Qualitative results from UW strategy (Test 2) on proposed architecture
Upon scrutinizing the outcomes produced by the model when the UW strategy
is applied (Figure 4.8), several distinctive features come to the fore. Notably, the
results exhibit varying characteristics across different instances. For instance, certain
depth maps display closely aligned values, as illustrated in the image second from
the left, while in other cases, the deepest sections of the images, representing faraway
points, appear more defined in comparison to the results obtained with the previous
architecture. Despite the metrics indicating high values akin to those of the previous
weighting strategy, the specific examples chosen reveal a certain degree of variability
in the model’s performance. Consequently, it would be a judicious inference that, for
these particular images, the model did not optimize its performance to the fullest
extent, especially in terms of semantic metrics.
4.5
Results summary
The initial attempt at constructing a Multi-Task Learning (MTL) model did not yield
the anticipated results. The outcomes revealed a performance decline in monocular
depth estimation, the shared task with the single-task model, with an approximate
18% decrease when employing the UW strategy—considered the best-performing
weighting strategy. Moreover, the model, in the best-case scenario, operated 5.6 fps
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Results
slower than its single-task counterpart. Consequently, this implementation failed to
demonstrate the expected performance enhancement over its single-task equivalent.
Upon introducing a different architecture, the depth estimation results exhibited
similarities to the previous outcomes. Notably, the UW strategy emerged as the top
performer in Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE), showcasing a performance drop
comparable to the previous architecture concerning the single-task model. Conversely,
metrics and results for semantic segmentation showcased improvements compared to
the preceding architecture, despite the latter being lighter and conducting evaluations
at a higher fps.
Both solutions displayed advantages and drawbacks in relation to the single-task
model.
While neither could surpass the performance of the single-task model in
MDE, two MTL models were developed, performing less than 20% worse than the
initial model while concurrently addressing two tasks. The first architecture incurred
only a 2.16% increase in model parameters, and the second, a 6.64% increase. This
underscores that the resource requirements for implementing a MTL model are less
demanding than deploying a single-task model for each specific task, albeit with a
moderate performance decrease.
The first tested architecture operated at 50 fps,
representing a mere 5.6 fps reduction, while the second model, although slower (12-17
fps drop), demonstrated superior results in the semantic segmentation task.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This thesis project was conducted with the primary goal of demonstrating the poten-
tial superiority of a Multi-Task learning (MTL) model over a single-task model, em-
phasizing the ability to learn from multiple tasks simultaneously. Two distinct MTL
models were implemented, incorporating State-of-the-Art (SOTA) training weighting
strategies that had demonstrated optimal performance for the specific tasks under
consideration. The models underwent comprehensive testing and evaluation, includ-
ing the calculation of various metrics, in order to empirically assess the performance
difference between the MTL models and their corresponding single-task counterparts.
Contrary to existing literature and SOTA papers advocating performance improve-
ments in MTL models through the extraction of underlying patterns from diverse task
data, the results of this study did not align with such expectations. The MTL mod-
els developed exhibited an approximate 18% performance decrease compared to their
original single-task models.
Nevertheless, the MTL models showcased the capability to handle twice the num-
ber of tasks compared to their single-task counterparts. Importantly, they maintained
a low implementation requirement, with a maximum increase of 6.64% in model pa-
rameters, aligning with the project’s initial emphasis on lightweight models.
The
computational speed varied, with one model achieving a rapid 50 fps, while another,
slightly slower, delivered superior results in semantic segmentation at 43 fps. Thus, if
the application does not demand highly precise depth estimation images, these MTL
models could be considered as an enhancement over single-task models restricted to
a sole task.
Throughout the project’s development, numerous iterations, methodological ap-
proaches, and research lines were explored; however, none demonstrated a perfor-
mance increase surpassing the rest. The prevalent literature often employs models
with numerous parameters, and the constraint of maintaining lightweight models was
reflected in the final outcomes. Future research endeavors could delve into refining
training methodologies to enhance learning for specific tasks, particularly since se-
mantic segmentation appeared to lag behind monocular depth estimation (MDE)
in every model tested. This raises the question of whether the Guided Upsample
Block (GUB) could better be adapted to fit MTL better.
==PAGE:60==
52
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
T. Gong, T. Lee, C. Stephenson, et al., “A comparison of loss weighting strate-
gies for multi task learning in deep neural networks,” IEEE Access, volume 7,
pages 141 627–141 632, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2943604.
[2]
A. Abuolaim and M. S. Brown, Defocus deblurring using dual-pixel data, 2020.
arXiv: 2005.00305 [eess.IV].
[3]
D. Eigen and R. Fergus, Predicting depth, surface normals and semantic labels
with a common multi-scale convolutional architecture, 2015. arXiv: 1411.4734
[cs.CV].
[4]
I. Alhashim and P. Wonka, “High quality monocular depth estimation via trans-
fer learning,” arXiv e-prints, volume abs/1812.11941, arXiv:1812.11941, 2018.
eprint: 1812.11941. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.11941.
[5]
M. Rudolph, Y. Dawoud, R. Güldenring, L. Nalpantidis, and V. Belagiannis,
Lightweight monocular depth estimation through guided decoding, 2022. arXiv:
2203.04206 [cs.CV].
[6]
N. Kondapaneni, M. Marks, M. Knott, R. Guimarães, and P. Perona, Text-
image alignment for diffusion-based perception, 2023. arXiv: 2310.00031 [cs.CV].
[7]
J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, Fully convolutional networks for semantic
segmentation, 2015. arXiv: 1411.4038 [cs.CV].
[8]
L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille, Deeplab:
Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution,
and fully connected crfs, 2017. arXiv: 1606.00915 [cs.CV].
[9]
B. Cheng, M. D. Collins, Y. Zhu, et al., Panoptic-deeplab: A simple, strong,
and fast baseline for bottom-up panoptic segmentation, 2020. arXiv: 1911.10194
[cs.CV].
[10]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation, 2015. arXiv: 1505.04597 [cs.CV].
[11]
B. Yin, X. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Liu, M.-M. Cheng, and Q. Hou, Dformer: Re-
thinking rgbd representation learning for semantic segmentation, 2023. arXiv:
2309.09668 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:62==
54
Bibliography
[12]
K. Yang, K. Wang, L. M. Bergasa, et al., “Unifying terrain awareness for the vi-
sually impaired through real-time semantic segmentation,” Sensors, volume 18,
number 5, 2018, issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s18051506. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/5/1506.
[13]
S. Huang, S. Qi, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhu, Y. N. Wu, and S.-C. Zhu, Cooperative holistic
scene understanding: Unifying 3d object, layout, and camera pose estimation,
2019. arXiv: 1810.13049 [cs.CV].
[14]
S. Vandenhende, Multi-task learning for visual scene understanding, 2022. arXiv:
2203.14896 [cs.CV].
[15]
Y. Tian and K. Bai, “End-to-end multitask learning with vision transformer,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pages 1–12, 2023.
doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3234166.
[16]
L. He, J. Lu, G. Wang, S. Song, and J. Zhou, Sosd-net: Joint semantic object
segmentation and depth estimation from monocular images, 2021. arXiv: 2101.
07422 [cs.CV].
[17]
T. Gao, W. Wei, Z. Cai, et al., Ci-net: Contextual information for joint semantic
segmentation and depth estimation, 2021. arXiv: 2107.13800 [cs.CV].
[18]
B. Lin, F. Ye, and Y. Zhang, “A closer look at loss weighting in multi-task
learning,” CoRR, volume abs/2111.10603v1, 2021. arXiv: 2111.10603. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.10603v1.
[19]
A. Kendall, Y. Gal, and R. Cipolla, “Multi-task learning using uncertainty to
weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,” CoRR, volume abs/1705.07115,
2017. arXiv: 1705.07115. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.
07115.
[20]
S. Liu, E. Johns, and A. J. Davison, End-to-end multi-task learning with atten-
tion, 2019. arXiv: 1803.10704 [cs.CV].
[21]
L. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Kuang, et al., “Towards impartial multi-task learning,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=IMPnRXEWpvr.
[22]
F. Ye, B. Lin, Z. Yue, P. Guo, Q. Xiao, and Y. Zhang, Multi-objective meta
learning, 2021. arXiv: 2102.07121 [cs.LG].
[23]
S. Chennupati, G. Sistu, S. Yogamani, and S. A. Rawashdeh, Multinet++: Multi-
stream feature aggregation and geometric loss strategy for multi-task learning,
2019. arXiv: 1904.08492 [cs.CV].
[24]
Z. Chen, V. Badrinarayanan, C.-Y. Lee, and A. Rabinovich, Gradnorm: Gradi-
ent normalization for adaptive loss balancing in deep multitask networks, 2018.
arXiv: 1711.02257 [cs.CV].
[25]
Z. Chen, J. Ngiam, Y. Huang, et al., Just pick a sign: Optimizing deep multitask
models with gradient sign dropout, 2020. arXiv: 2010.06808 [cs.LG].
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
55
[26]
Z. Wang, Y. Tsvetkov, O. Firat, and Y. Cao, Gradient vaccine: Investigating
and improving multi-task optimization in massively multilingual models, 2020.
arXiv: 2010.05874 [cs.CL].
[27]
O. Sener and V. Koltun, Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization,
2019. arXiv: 1810.04650 [cs.LG].
[28]
T. Yu, S. Kumar, A. Gupta, S. Levine, K. Hausman, and C. Finn, Gradient
surgery for multi-task learning, 2020. arXiv: 2001.06782 [cs.LG].
[29]
P. K. Nathan Silberman Derek Hoiem and R. Fergus, “Indoor segmentation and
support inference from rgbd images,” in ECCV, 2012.
[30]
B. Lin and Y. Zhang, “LibMTL: A Python library for multi-task learning,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, volume 24, number 209, pages 1–7,
2023.
[31]
Y. Hong, H. Pan, W. Sun, and Y. Jia, Deep dual-resolution networks for real-
time and accurate semantic segmentation of road scenes, 2021. arXiv: 2101.
06085 [cs.CV].
[32]
G. King and L. Zeng, “Logistic regression in rare events data,” Political Analysis,
volume 9, 137–163, Spring 2001.
[33]
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learn-
ing in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, volume 12, pages 2825–
2830, 2011.
[34]
K. Maninis, I. Radosavovic, and I. Kokkinos, “Attentive single-tasking of mul-
tiple tasks,” CoRR, volume abs/1904.08918, 2019. arXiv: 1904.08918. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.08918.
[35]
S. Vandenhende, S. Georgoulis, M. Proesmans, D. Dai, and L. V. Gool, “Revisit-
ing multi-task learning in the deep learning era,” CoRR, volume abs/2004.13379,
2020. arXiv: 2004.13379. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.
13379.
==PAGE:64==
56
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A
Acronyms
MTL
Multi-Task learning
STL
Single Task Learning
SOTA
State-of-the-Art
MDE
monocular depth estimation
BDE
binocular depth estimation
NN
neural network
DTU
Denmark Technical University
CNN
convolutional neural network
GUB
Guided Upsample Block
DAPPM Deep Aggregation Pyramid Pooling Module
EW
Equivalent Weighting
RW
Random Weighting
RLW
Random Loss Weighting
RGW
Random Gradient Weighting
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
rel
average relative error
mIoU
mean intersection over union
MA
mean accuracy
UW
Uncertainty Weighting
DWA
Dynamic Weight Average
MOML Multi-Objective Meta Learning
==PAGE:66==
2
A Acronyms
GLS
Geometric Loss Strategy
MGDA-UB Multiple Gradient Descent Algorithm - Upper Bound
IMTL-L Impartial Multi-task Learning Loss
IMTL-G Impartial Multi-task Learning Gradient
MTViT multitask Vision Transformer
FSM
feature-sharing module
FCN
Fully Convolutional Network
fps
frames per second
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX B
An Appendix
This appendix is designated to present outcomes from additional test configurations
that, while conducted for their relevance, did not yield results of suﬀicient merit to
be incorporated into the main body of the thesis in the Results chapter.
Figure B.1: Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 15
(Test 1)
==PAGE:68==
4
B An Appendix
Figure B.2: Strategy: EW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 15
(Test 2)
Figure B.3: Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 15
(Test 3)
==PAGE:69==
B An Appendix
5
Figure B.4: Strategy: EW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 15
(Test 4)
Figure B.5: Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 7
(Test 5)
==PAGE:70==
6
B An Appendix
Figure B.6: Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 7
(Test 7)
Figure B.7: Strategy: EW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 7
(Test 8)
==PAGE:71==
B An Appendix
7
Figure B.8: Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 15
(Test 1)
Figure B.9: Strategy: RW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 15
(Test 2)
==PAGE:72==
8
B An Appendix
Figure B.10: Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.00002, step size =
15 (Test 3)
Figure B.11: Strategy: RW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.00002, step size =
15 (Test 4)
==PAGE:73==
B An Appendix
9
Figure B.12: Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 7
(Test 5)
Figure B.13: Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 7
(Test 7)
==PAGE:74==
10
B An Appendix
Figure B.14: Strategy: RW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 7
(Test 8)
Figure B.15: Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 15
(Test 1)
==PAGE:75==
B An Appendix
11
Figure B.16: Strategy: UW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 15
(Test 2)
Figure B.17: Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.00002, step size =
15 (Test 3)
==PAGE:76==
12
B An Appendix
Figure B.18: Strategy: UW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.00002, step size =
15 (Test 4)
Figure B.19: Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.0001, step size = 7
(Test 5)
==PAGE:77==
B An Appendix
13
Figure B.20: Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 7
(Test 7)
Figure B.21: Strategy: UW, iterations = 40, learning rate = 0.00002, step size = 7
(Test 8)
==PAGE:78==
14
B An Appendix
Figure B.22: Proposed architecture. Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 15 (Test 1)
Figure B.23: Proposed architecture. Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 15 (Test 3)
==PAGE:79==
B An Appendix
15
Figure B.24: Proposed architecture. Strategy: EW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 15 (Test 4)
Figure B.25: Proposed architecture. Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 7 (Test 5)
==PAGE:80==
16
B An Appendix
Figure B.26: Proposed architecture. Strategy: EW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 7 (Test 6)
Figure B.27: Proposed architecture. Strategy: EW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 7 (Test 7)
==PAGE:81==
B An Appendix
17
Figure B.28: Proposed architecture. Strategy: EW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 7 (Test 8)
Figure B.29: Proposed architecture. Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 15 (Test 1)
==PAGE:82==
18
B An Appendix
Figure B.30: Proposed architecture. Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 15 (Test 3)
Figure B.31: Proposed architecture. Strategy: RW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 15 (Test 4)
==PAGE:83==
B An Appendix
19
Figure B.32: Proposed architecture. Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 7 (Test 5)
Figure B.33: Proposed architecture. Strategy: RW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 7 (Test 6)
==PAGE:84==
20
B An Appendix
Figure B.34: Proposed architecture. Strategy: RW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 7 (Test 7)
Figure B.35: Proposed architecture. Strategy: RW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 7 (Test 8)
==PAGE:85==
B An Appendix
21
Figure B.36: Proposed architecture. Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 15 (Test 1)
Figure B.37: Proposed architecture. Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 15 (Test 3)
==PAGE:86==
22
B An Appendix
Figure B.38: Proposed architecture. Strategy: UW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 15 (Test 4)
Figure B.39: Proposed architecture. Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 7 (Test 5)
==PAGE:87==
B An Appendix
23
Figure B.40: Proposed architecture. Strategy: UW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.0001, step size = 7 (Test 6)
Figure B.41: Proposed architecture. Strategy: UW, iterations = 20, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 7 (Test 7)
==PAGE:88==
24
B An Appendix
Figure B.42: Proposed architecture. Strategy: UW, iterations = 40, learning rate
= 0.00002, step size = 7 (Test 8)
==PAGE:89==
==PAGE:90==
