==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Digital Marbling using Generative Methods
Author: Daniela Bahneanu (s184366)
Supervisor: J. Andreas Bærentzen
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
Many thanks to my supervisors for all the help and support offered throughout the process
of writing this thesis. I would also like to express gratitude to my friends and family for all
the love and moral support given.
Jakob Andreas Bærentzen, Supervisor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com­
puter Science
Pernille Snedker, Cosupervisor, Snedker Studio
2
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Traditional Marbling is an early art form characterised by the creation of unique patterns
in a water medium. The resulted patterns are then transferred on diverse surfaces among
which paper and fabrics. There are different marbling techniques that that originated inde­
pendently from each other, the most prevalent being Erbu and Suminagashi [1] . With the
advances in technologies, many traditional artistic forms are endangered by new digital
art. This thesis aims to digitally simulate the characteristics and capabilities of traditional
marbling. By using fluid dynamics principles it aims to simulate the fluid flow and mimic
the behaviour of paint in a water medium. Throughout the thesis, two methodologies are
used: a grid based Eulerian and a hybrid Semi­Lagrangian approach. Moreover the two
approaches are employed within two different frameworks: Taichi Lang for the Eulerian
simulation and WebGL for the Semi­Lagrangian approach. These methods and frame­
works were chosen in order to develop interactive simulations that allow users to create
marbling patterns within a digital environment. By comparing the generated patterns, the
benefits and limitation of each method and the user preferences it was found that a com­
bination of a Semi­Lagrangian methodology with WebGL allows for a more accurate, vi­
sually pleasing and user friendly simulation. On the other hand, the Eulerian approach,
although interesting and responsive, is predisposed to numerical diffusion. Moreover, as
Taichi Lang required the installation of python and the corresponding packages in order
to run the Eulerian simulation and the limitation of interface design that are characteristic
to Taichi Lang, the web­based approach is often preferred by users. These approaches
will be described throughout the thesis and the resulted patterns will be compared to tra­
ditional marbling patterns.
i
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
1
Introduction
2
2
Previous Work
3
2.1
Traditional Marbling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Literature Review of Fluid Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Theoretical Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Relevant equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Eulerian Fluid Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Semi­Lagrangian Fluid Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.1
Taichi Lang Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3.2
WebGL Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Experiments and Results
28
4.1
Taichi Lang Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2
WebGL patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
User Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Discussion
36
5.1
Future Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
40
A Appendix
43
1
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Traditional marbling is a type of artistic technique that is used to generate colorful pat­
terns on various surfaces. One of the earliest representations of marbling is believed to
be Suminagashi. The technique originated in ancient China over two thousand years ago
[2]. From there, it travelled to Japan, where Shinto priests adopted and utilised it. In­
dependently from Suminagashi, other marbling techniques were taking form across the
globe, among which Ebru (Turkish Marbling).
The idea behind marbling is that inks are spread on thickened water, optionally, depending
on the type of traditional marbling, combs and sticks can be used to alter the appearance
of the patterns. After creating the design, special paper is placed on top of the medium to
transfer the pattern. After which the paper is lifted, rinsed, and dried to reveal the colorful
art [1].
The traditional marbling process is both an art and a science. It necessitates an in­depth
comprehension of the used materials, such as the pigments and the consistency of the
thickened water. Every drop of ink and stroke of the comb contributes to the uniqueness
of the patterns, resulting in one­of­a­kind designs. By leveraging fluid properties and
mastering the marbling techniques, artists make more controlled art pieces.
With the development of technology, traditional art began to be digitally simulated, merg­
ing historical cultural values with modern artistic techniques. This natural evolution from
manual marbling to digital marbling has been largely facilitated by advances in fluid me­
chanics, as the art form inherently entails complex interactions of fluids. In this context,
fluid simulation algorithms offer an attractive method for depicting the intricate and unpre­
dictable patterns found in traditional marbling.
This project is motivated by the need to preserve our artistic heritage. As with many
other traditional art forms, marbling is at the risk of disappearing, particularly as younger
generations shift towards digital media. By adapting and modernizing traditional art forms
for the digital age, we ensure their continued relevance.
This thesis aims to apply fluid dynamic principles to develop fluid simulations that resem­
bles the marbling process. Two techniques will be explored: the Eulerian method and
the Hybrid Semi­Lagrangian method. By developing these simulation using different pro­
gramming languages such as Python and JavaScript, the thesis also aims to give the
artist a relevant feedback on what architecture options are feasible for fluid simulations in
the context of digital marbling.
2
==PAGE:6==
2
Previous Work
2.1
Traditional Marbling
Numerous conventional marbling techniques exist, which vary not only in their aesthetic
characteristics but also in the utensils and socio­cultural environments in which they orig­
inated. Two of these techniques, Suminagashi and Ebru, present an intriguing contrast
in visual appearance of the created pattern, regardless of their common underlying con­
cepts.
Suminagashi (”ink floating” technique), is a captivating Japanese art of paper marbling.
The origins of this technique can be traced back to the Edo period in the 12th century,
although earlier references to comparable methods exist. An elaborate pattern similar to
natural marbled stone is produced by depositing ink onto the surface of a water medium.
Throughout the entire marbling process the ink remains suspended on top of the medium,
thus creating unique patterns of ink [3].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: Traditional Suminagashi Marbling
It is widely believed that Japanese scholars acquired knowledge of Suminagashi from their
Chinese counterparts and subsequently refined it into their unique artistic style. Having
3
==PAGE:7==
both artistic and practical functions, Suminagashi paper evolved into a representative
component of the Japanese culture [4].
On the other hand, Ebru 2.3(b) is a method known for its bright and colourful patterns. It
originated in Central Asia and evolved further in Turkey [1]. Ebru artists employ a diverse
selection of paints, frequently using vibrant tints and tones.
In contrast to the meticulous application of ink in Suminagashi, Ebru artists use manipu­
lation techniques to alter the aspect/pattern of the ink. They use a variety of tools, such
as brushes, combs, and other utensils, to create intricate and captivating designs. Ebru
often combines complex geometric shapes and floral patterns, which are often created by
altering the initial patterns using combs and sticks.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Traditional Ebru Marbling
This colorful type of marbling has a rich history as well. Its naming comes from the turkish
language where the word ”ebru” or ”abru” means ”cloud” or ”water face” respectively. First
occurrences of this marbling variation trace back to the T’ang era (618­907), however the
initial timing of the first occurrence it is still unknown. It is believed to have spread along
the Silk Road reaching Middle East where it was further embraced and practiced as a
form of decorating surfaces [5].
Although different, the underlying principles of the different marbling techniques are the
same. They all consist in dropping ink on a special liquid surface in order to create a sus­
pended pattern that can later be transferred onto some surfaces of choice 2.3(a). These
surfaces are rinsed and dried carefully to preserve the pattern [3]. Paper is used in fig­
ure 2.3(b) however other materials such as fabrics, vases or other objects can also be
decorated in a similar way.
4
==PAGE:8==
(a) Marbling basin
(b) Fresh Marbled Papers
Figure 2.3: Traditional Marbling
Taking inspiration from the core principles of the traditional marbling, digital methods
among which fluid simulations, have gained popularity. Such methods, aim to reproduce
an environment in which the artist can use a virtual canvas to interact with the surface
and create patterns similar to the ones created during the marbling process.
2.2
Literature Review of Fluid Simulations
Early models of fluid simulations focused more on the visual appearance rather than phys­
ical accuracy. Such models used primitive shapes or simple particle systems in order to
animate the fluid flow. Some methods also used noise and random turbulence to replicate
the randomised traits of fluid movement. However, such methods lacked responsiveness
to external forces and user input.
While the initial methods might have simulated fluid on a small scale, they did not suffice.
Therefore, computer scientists began to exploit fluid dynamic principles to replicate the
true behaviour of fluids and not only the visual appearance.
Many of the methods currently used when simulating the traditional marbling process
are based on the Navier­Stokes equations for incompressible fluids or some simplified
variations of them such as Euler’s equations for inviscid flow [6]. These methods offer real­
time interactivity and stability, making possible the transition from computer generated
patterns to allowing users to interactively and dynamically use the methods to create their
own.
The current literature explores two main approaches that use the Navier­Stokes equations
as the fundamental basis for describing the fluid flow: the grid­based Eulerian and the
particle­based Lagrangian methodologies.
5
==PAGE:9==
The Eulerian approach uses a grid as the foundational framework to monitor how the
liquid propagates in space. The grid divides the simulation domain into discrete cells
where each cell represents a fixed spatial location. Fluid properties, such as velocity and
density, are sampled at the centered of the grid cells for each time step of the simulation
[7]. One of the key strengths of the Eulerian methods is their ability to handle complex
boundary conditions and interfaces. Since each grid cell is a fixed point in space, one can
incorporate various boundary conditions such as solid walls, open boundaries or even
more complex geometries.
The particle based Lagrangian concept was initially explored by William T. Reeves in his
1983 paper [8]. This method was proposed as an alternative method for modeling objects
such as smoke, fire and liquid. The idea behind a particle system is that objects are not
represented by primitive surface elements but rather by colonies of particles that define
the object’s volume. Stochastic methods are used to make the particle system dynamic
and alter its appearance based on external conditions. Particle systems offer both compu­
tational efficiency and flexibility, enabling the generation of complex and dynamic effects
within the usual processing time taken by conventional techniques.
Based on this initial particle systems, other methods arised such as Smoothed Particle
Hydro­dynamics (SPH) technique [9], to realistically animate fluids with free surfaces.
Such methods outperform the traditional fluid simulation techniques by directly deriving
viscosity and pressure fields from the Navier­Stokes equations. Additionally, they incorpo­
rate new mechanisms that take into account the surface tension and use smooth kernels
for improved real­time interactivity. A particular strength that Lagrangian methods hold
is the ability to accommodate a large number of particles while sustaining a lag­free real­
time user interaction. This increased performance is possible because such improved
particle systems overcome numerical diffusion and momentum conservation issues thus,
providing a more reliable and stable fluid simulation.
Apart from these two main approaches, hybrid approaches such as Fluid­Implicit­Particle
(FLIP) have been quite popular among real­time fluid simulations. One of the new el­
ements that the these methodologies use, is the grid. Such grid structures act as an
auxiliary data structures incorporated into traditional particle systems. Combining these
two approaches has several computational benefits. For instance, FLIP, uses the grid
to solve the numerical diffusion issue, facilitating more accurate simulations of complex
fluid behaviors, such as turbulence and splashing. In the FLIP method, particle veloci­
ties contribute to a weighted average calculated at each node of a staggered MAC grid.
Followed by the interpolation of the velocities back into the particle system. This strength
makes FLIP particularly apt for simulating inviscid flows like water, where added numerical
viscosity is undesirable [10].
In addition to FLIP, other hybrid approaches like Semi­Lagrangian and Particle­In­Cell
(PIC) methods have also made significant contributions to the field of fluid simulation. The
Semi­Lagrangian method traces fluid parcels backward in time to determine their origins
(backward advection calculation), employing an Eulerian grid for efficient numerical solu­
tion of the Navier­Stokes equations [11]. This technique is highly effective in minimizing
computational artifacts like numerical diffusion, thereby improving the accuracy of the ad­
vection term. It is particularly useful for treating fast­moving or highly vortical flows, making
it a versatile choice for a range of fluid simulation applications among which marbling.
The most recent developments in the fluid simulation field use high­performance comput­
ing platforms and parallel architectures. Methods such as Lattice Boltzmann and Finite
Volume have gained traction [12]. Even more revolutionary is the rise of machine learning­
6
==PAGE:10==
based techniques. Where these new approaches can optimise or even replace traditional
fluid simulations by reducing computational expense while maintaining visual accuracy
[13]. These methods utilise neural networks to predict the fluid’s state based on its pre­
vious states, effectively eliminating the need for solving complex equations at each time
step. The use of graphical processing units (GPUs) for fluid simulations significantly im­
proved computational time complexity, thereby making real­time, high­resolution digital
marbling feasible.
Most of these methods are completed by boundary conditions to crontrol how the fluid
will behave at the eges of the virtual canvas. Methods like the Ghost Fluid Method (GFM)
[14] or Level­Set Method [15] have been used for solving and approximating complex
boundaries and interfaces, allowing for more realistic simulations.
Moreover, as computational capabilities continue to evolve, so does the scope for the next
generation of real­time, interactive, and visually stunning digital marbling. With each ad­
vancement, marbling digitization process moves closer to achieving not just visual appeal,
but also a high degree of physical accuracy and interactivity. On this note it is important
to mention the relevance of the newly created ChatGPT4 with the DALLE 3 integration
that uses Generative AI to create high resolution images subfigure 2.4(a) and subfigure
2.4(b), thus revolutionising the art world [16].
(a) Ebru
(b) Suminagashi
Figure 2.4: Using generative AI to create marbling patterns
2.3
Theoretical Background
To understand fluid mechanics, it is necessary to understand the different flow and liquid
types. There are two main categories of fluids: Real fluids and Ideal fluids.
Ideal fluids assume inviscous flow, meaning that it has no viscosity. Such fluids are only
conceptual and are not representative of the real world. Real fluids however, are charac­
teristic to the real world scenario. Such fluids split in the following categories [17]:
1. Newtonian fluid ­ These kinds of liquids have a constant viscosity that follows New­
7
==PAGE:11==
ton’s Law of viscosity, which is shown in Equation 2.1. Water and air are examples
of Newtonian fluids. In this context, what distinguishes these fluids is the fact that
their viscosity remains constant regardless of the changes in the rate of shear or the
applied stress. This property ensures a linear relationship between the shear stress
and the shear rate, leading to a predictable flow behavior under varying conditions.
2. Non­Newtonian fluid ­ These fluids contradict the conditions from Newton’s law of
viscosity. Compared to the constant viscosity that Newtonian fluids have, the force
exerted on non­Newtonian fluids determines their resistance to flow. This indicates
that their viscosity is prone to variation depending on the level of tension applied.
Usual products like honey and yoghurt are classic examples of non­Newtonian liq­
uids. Due to the fact that the viscosity of these fluids changes when the shear rate
changes, their flow characteristics are more complex and unpredictable than those
of Newtonian systems.
3. Incompressible fluids ­ When external forces are applied to a fluid and its density
remains the same, the fluid is said to be incompressible. This means that the vol­
ume of the fluid doesn’t change regardless of how much pressure or mechanical
force is put on it. This is an idealised behaviour, since most fluids will compress
under very high pressures. However, many liquids, like water at room temperature,
can be thought of as incompressible when conditions are reasonable. This assump­
tion makes fluid dynamic equations easier to understand and is important in many
engineering calculations and situations where changes in density over time or place
don’t have much of an impact on the results.
4. Compressible fluids ­ In contrast to incompressible fluids, compressible fluids have
a particular property in which their density varies when external forces are applied.
This means that compressible fluids can change their volume and density when
they are put under different pressures or mechanical forces. Gases show this kind
of behaviour often as they can be compressed or spread depending on the situation.
The concept of viscosity is fundamental in comprehending these behaviours, since it can
be used to quantify a fluid’s resistance to deformation.
Newton’s law of viscosity [18] given by Equation 2.1 states that the shear stress is directly
proportional to the velocity gradient. In other words it shows how resistant a liquid is to
shear.
τ = µ∂u
∂y
(2.1)
This project makes the assumption of a Newtonian Incompressible fluid. The modeled
fluid will have constant density in response to external forces and it will obey the Newton’s
Law of Viscosity 2.1
2.4
Relevant equations
The Navier­Stokes Equations, in fluid mechanics, are partial differential equations that
describe the flow of incompressible fluids. The equations are given by [6]:
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u = −∇p + ν∇2u + f
(2.2)
8
==PAGE:12==
∇· u = 0
(2.3)
The momentum conservation equation 2.2 describes how the velocity field of a fluid changes
over time and space due to the effect of various external forces.
On the left­hand side of Equation 2.2, the term ∂u
∂t denotes the temporal acceleration of
the fluid, in other words it describes the change in the velocity field u with respect to the
time t and is added to the advection term (also known as convective acceleration) which
is given by (u · ∇)u and denotes the change in velocity of fluid elements with respect to
their flow path.
On the right­hand side of the equation, the term −∇p, is known as the pressure gradient
and describes the changes in pressure across the fluid field as well as its effect of the
fluid acceleration. Its negation shows that fluids move from regions of higher pressure
to those of lower pressure. The pressure gradient is added to the viscosity term given
by ν∇2u which describes the fluid property to resist the relative motion between adjacent
layers. The last term added is f and represents the external forces that may be acting on
the liquid.
Equation 2.3 states that the divergence of the velocity field is equal to 0, meaning that the
liquid is incompressible. A fluid is considered to be incompressible if the volume of any
specific part of the fluid remains unchanged over time 4.
To determine the pressure field required for velocity corrections in the momentum equa­
tion, the pressure­Poisson equation (PPE) is often employed. This equation is presented
as 2.4, where ∇2p signifies the Laplacian of pressure and ρ is the fluid density. The term
∇· un denotes the divergence of the velocity field at the nth timestep. Once the pressure
field is obtained, it can be used to correct the velocity, ensuring divergence­free condi­
tions, as indicated in equation 2.5. This approach ensures the conservation of mass in
the simulation [6].
∇2p = −ρ∇· un
(2.4)
un+1 = un −∇p
(2.5)
When considering the pressure­Poisson equations in fluid simulations, the use of iterative
solvers becomes necessary to complete the pressure approximation. This is a result of
the inherent characteristics of the partial differential equations.
The Jacobi iteration is an example of an iterative method commonly used in numerical
analysis for the purpose of solving systems of linear equations. The Jacobi technique
begins with an initial guess for the solution, then, it updates this guessed solution by using
a simple formula. This process is repeated recursively until the solution converges to
within a particular tolerance. Each new value is calculated using only the values obtained
during previous iterations. Thus, ensuring a clear separation between the old and the
new estimates. This separation is essential in Jacobi iterations because it allows the
paralleling of processes, thereby improving computational efficiency. The mathematical
representation of the Jacobi iterations is given by [19]:
x(k+1)
i
= 1
aii

bi −
∑
j̸=i
aijx(k)
j


(2.6)
9
==PAGE:13==
where,
1. x(k+1)
i
: Represents the new updated value (at iteration k + 1) of the ith
2. aii: Is the diagonal coefficient of the ith .
3. bi: Is the right­hand side of the ith.
4. aij: Represents the coefficient of the jth unknown in the ith.
5. x(k)
j : Is the value (at iteration k) of the jth unknown in the solution.
6. The summation ∑
j̸=i indicates that the sum is taken over all values of j excluding
the case for j = i.
These equations allow for a more accurate simulation and are widely used across fluid
simulations to denote true behaviour of fluids.
For context, if the modeled fluid was to be considered ideal, the viscosity term would be
set to 0 in the Navier Stokes equation as the assumption of inviscid flow would hold. In
such case, the simulation would be modeled after Euler’s equations as they are a simpler
form of the Navier­Stokes equations [20]. Consequently, by setting the viscosity term
equal to 0, the following equation for momentum conservation is obtained:
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u = −∇p + f
(2.7)
While the assumption of an ideal fluid would simplify the implementation process, is not
always perfect for simulating real­world fluids. Therefore, this thesis will refer to the Navier
Stokes equations and to the assumptions stated previously.
For accurately simulating the liquid flow, The Navier Stokes equations have to be sup­
plemented with boundary conditions. Boundary conditions specify the values or behav­
iors of fluid variables such as velocity, pressure, and temperature at the boundaries of
the computational domain. These are essential constraints for solving the Navier­Stokes
equations.
The two primary types of boundary conditions commonly employed in fluid simulations
are Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions, each with distinct characteristics and
applications [21]:
1. No­slip at the wall (Dirichlet BC) ­ This boundary condition implies that the fluid
in immediate contact with the wall will have the same velocity relative to the wall. If
the wall is stationary, then the fluid velocity at the wall is zero.
v|at_the_boundary = Vwall
2. Constant pressure boundary conditions (Dirichlet BC) ­ When the pressure val­
ues at the border are known but not the exact details of how the flow will be dis­
tributed, then constant pressure boundary conditions are used.
pinlet = constant
poutlet = constant
10
==PAGE:14==
3. Symmetry (Neumann BC) ­ This boundary condition implies that the same pro­
cesses exist symmetrically on both sides of the plane. This means that the flow
variables and their derivatives are either symmetric or asymmetric with respect to
that plane, essentially mirroring the flow conditions on either side.
∂ν
∂xm
|at_the_boundary = 0
4. Stress continuity (Neumann BC) ­ The stress continuity boundary condition is
used to model the stress behavior across an interface between two different fluids
or a fluid and a solid. This condition states that the stress tensors in the fluids (or
fluid and solid) must be continuous across the interface
τjk|at_the_boundary = 0
5. No­flux boundary (Neumann BC) [22]: Also known as ”zero­flux boundary con­
dition” is commonly used in various scientific simulations, including fluid dynamics
and diffusion problems. This boundary condition ensures that there is no net flow
or flux of a quantity (concentration, heat, or fluid) across the simulation domain’s
boundaries. Mathematically, it can be expressed as:
∂c
∂n = 0
Moreover, in order to solve the Navier­Stokes equation, interpolation techniques must be
used to approximate fluid properties between data points.
Interpolation is the process of estimating values between two known data points. In the
context of fluid simulation it is used to estimate the values of a field at arbitrary points,
based on the known values at surrounding grid points [23]. Some common interpolation
techniques include:
1. Linear Interpolation: This type of interpolation is used when the data seems to be
forming a straight line. For two points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the interpolated value y
at a point x is [24]:
y = y1 + x −x1
x2 −x1
(y2 −y1)
2. Bilinear Interpolation: The linear interpolation of data on a 2D plane . It performs
linear interpolation first in one direction, and then again in the other direction. For
a point (x, y) within a grid cell defined by (x1, y1), (x2, y1), (x1, y2), and (x2, y2), the
interpolated value f(x, y) is [25]:
f(x, y) =
1
(x2 −x1)(y2 −y1) [f11(x2 −x)(y2 −y) + . . .]
3. Trilinear Interpolation: A 3D grid expansion of bilinear interpolation. The formula
can be derivated from the Bilinear interpolation formula stated above by adding one
extra dimension for the 3D domain.
In the context of Eulerian fluid simulations, attributes such as velocity and temperature
frequently shift from one segment to the next as the fluid traverses this grid. Methods of
interpolation are necessary for this attribute transmission. While advanced interpolation
11
==PAGE:15==
methods like bicubic can enhance accuracy, bilinear or trilinear methods (in 3D scenarios)
are typically preferred due to their straightforward nature and computational effectiveness
[26].
Semi­Lagrangian fluid simulations, on the other hand, monitor fluid characteristics accord­
ing to their temporal motion (it follows particle position back in time), which may result in
positions that do not correspond to a fixed grid. Interpolation is essential for the extrac­
tion of fluid properties from these ”off­grid” locations. Trilinear and bilinear interpolations
continue to be commonly used because of their computational efficacy.
While these equations are commonly employed in fluid simulations to effectively describe
flow patterns, they possess certain constraints. Initially, if the assumption of incompress­
ibility is not made, solving these equations becomes computationally expensive. More­
over, specialized numerical techniques often need to be implemented for ensuring stable
and precise solutions to the equations. In cases involving compressible or non­Newtonian
fluids, supplementary terms or adjustments may be necessary, resulting in potential ap­
proximations and consequently errors within the simulation [27]. It is important to note that
analytical solutions for real­world scenarios using Navier­Stokes equations are generally
unobtainable; hence numerical methods must be utilized instead.
12
==PAGE:16==
3
Methodology
This section focuses on describing the main logic behind both the Eulerian and the Semi­
Lagrangian fluid simulations. It will describe in detail how each of the simulations attempt
to solve the Navier­Stokes equations. Moreover it will dive into the usability of the system
by describing how the user can interact with the marbling simulations.
3.1
Eulerian Fluid Simulation
Taichi Lang (Taichi) is a Python library designed to facilitate computationally demanding
computer graphics simulations [28]. Utilising Taichi Lang has several benefits, one of
which is the ability to execute simulations on both the GPU and the CPU. Consequently,
resulting in optimal computational workloads. This characteristic of Taichi Lang makes
it ideally suited for fluid simulations as they necessitate intensive computations for real­
time rendering. Even though it’s a flexible and effective framework, it does require a basic
grasp of Python. This section will explore the approaches employed in the development
of an Eulerian simulation using Taichi Lang in Python.
Before diving into how the Navier­Stokes equations were approximated, the grid has to
be defined and initialised. A uniform type of grid with res x res, where res = 512 is em­
ployed. Such uniform grids maintain consistent spacing between the neighbouring grid
points. This type of structure enables simple finite difference calculations and allows the
straightforward definition of various fields, among which velocityField and colorField. In
this grid, every cell or point can be identified using a pair of integer indices, denoted as
(i,j). Because of the uniformity, the same spatial discretization can be used across the
entire domain. This makes the numerical treatments consistent and lowers the chance of
errors.
For approximating a solution to the Navier­Stokes equations 2.2 and 2.3 each term of the
equations has to be calculated and approximated. The following section will go one by
one into the methods used to approximate each of the terms.
Advection: The advection term is responsible of the transport and flow of the liquid. It
is computed using finite difference methods on the computational grid. Since this sim­
ulations follows a Eulerian methodology, the advection will be calculated using forward
advection. Often referred to as Forward Tracking, this method of approximating the ad­
vection term, calculates the new coordinates of the fluid based on tracing the motion from
the current position forward in time using the velocity field [7].
Algorithm 1 iterates over each of the cells i,j in the velocity_field. For each of these cells,
it computes the current coordinates at the center of the cell (i,j). This shift towards the
center is ensured by the addition of the [0.5,0.5] vector which shifts the calculation from
the bottom left corner of the current grid cell, to its center where the fluid properties are
13
==PAGE:17==
approximated. Then using this velocity value and the current timestep, dt, the new position
of the fluid is calculated inside the (i,j) cell.
After computing the new coordinates for where the liquid should move, a interpolation
method has to be applied. This is because often the new position is off the grid, by inter­
polating it we ensure that these new coordinates are restricted to the domain. In Algorithm
1, bilinear interpolation is used 3. As explained before, this type of interpolation linearly
interpolates the data on a 2D plane. It initially works on the x axis and then on the y axis.
Consequently, it is used to estimate the quantity of fluid that should be at the new location
after advecting it.
Algorithm 1 Forward Advection Procedure
1: procedure Advection(velocity_field, current_quantity_field, new_quantity_field)
2:
for each cell (i, j) in velocity_field do
3:
Compute current_coord as Vector(i, j) + Vector(0.5, 0.5)
4:
Extract current_velocity from velocity_field at (i, j)
5:
Compute next_coord by adding current_velocity × dt to current_coord
6:
Interpolate
the
value
at
next_coord
to
get
next_quantity
using
Bilerp(current_quantity_field, next_coord[0], next_coord[1], res)
7:
Update new_quantity_field at (i, j) with the value of next_quantity
8:
end for
9: end procedure
Using the Forward Advection Algorithm the new position of the liquid is calculated thus
approximating where the liquid would shift from one grid cell to a neighbouring cell. More­
over, to approximate the derivatives at the domain edges, boundary conditions have to
be used. For the advection step, the boundary condition that has been implemented is
the ”no­slip” 5 boundary condition.
In fluid dynamics simulations involving solid boundaries, the ”no­slip” boundary condition
2 is frequently implemented.
Algorithm 2 No­Slip Boundary Condition for Velocity Field
1: procedure apply_velocity_bc(vf)
▷vf is the field containing velocity vectors
2:
for all i, j ∈vf do
3:
if i ≤0 or i ≥res[0] −1 or j ≥res[1] −1 or j ≤0 then
4:
vf[i, j] ←Vector[0.0, 0.0]
5:
end if
6:
end for
7: end procedure
This boundary condition specifies that the velocity of the fluid should be zero at a solid
boundary. In real life, this means that the particles of the fluid that touch a solid surface
stick to it, which stops the fluid near the border. This behaviour mimics the manner in
which actual fluids interact with solid objects. The process of enforcing the boundary
condition consists of iterating through every cell in the velocity field and checking if it’s
located outside or at the domain’s boundary. When such edge case happens, the velocity
of that cell is set to zero. This action prevents the fluid from moving across or leaking
through the domain’s edges. Thereby, behaving in a similar way to the marbling paint
which is restricted to the medium basin.
Diffusion: The process of moving the liquid from higher concentration regions to lower
14
==PAGE:18==
concentration regions [29]. In Equation 2.2 is given by v∇2u. This term is responsible for
giving a viscous appearance to the liquid by redistributing its velocity based on neighboring
values. The diffusion step in the Taichi Lang simulation is approximated using the Diffusion
Approximation Algorithm 3. The algorithm begins by iterating over the quantity field qf and
extracting all the immediate neighbours of iterator cell (i,j). After extracting the left, right,
top and bottom neighbours the new quantity field is computed.
Algorithm 3 Diffusion Approximation
1: procedure Diffuse(qf, new_qf, diffusion_constant)
2:
for each cell (i, j) in qf do
3:
Extract values from qf at (i −1, j), (i + 1, j), (i, j −1), and (i, j + 1) and store
in qf_left, qf_right, qf_bottom, and qf_top respectively.
4:
Compute new value for new_qf[i, j] as:
qf[i, j] + diffusion_constant × dt × (qf_left + qf_right + qf_bottom + qf_top)
1 + 4 × diffusion_constant × dt
5:
end for
6: end procedure
In order to calculate the new value for the quantity field new_qf, the algorithm uses an
explicit finite difference scheme. The numerator, in line 4 of the algorithm 3 represents
the cumulative effect of diffusion from the neighbouring cells and the combined influence
of the current cell’s state. In this case, the neighbouring cells’ input to the current cell is
found by summing up the effects from the cells on the left, right, top, and bottom, and then
multiplying the result by the diffusion constant and the timestep, dt.
On the other hand, the denominator ensures normalisation. Given that diffusion from four
adjacent cells is taken into account, the value ’4’ is utilised. In order to ensure that the
changes caused by diffusion are accurately captured within the time increment, the term
4 × diffusion_constant × dt scales the diffusion effect. By adding ”1” to this product, the
current cell’s input is shown. This makes sure that the quantity value is updated in a fair
and consistent way.
This diffusion step has been complemented with a zero­concentration boundary condi­
tion 5. Unlike the No­flux boundary condition, which sets the flux at the boundary to zero,
this condition sets the concentrations at the boundaries to be zero.
Algorithm 4 Zero­concentration boundary condition
1: function concentration_with_boundary(cf, i, j, shape)
▷cf is the field containing
concentration values
2:
result ←cf[i, j]
3:
is_boundary ←(i ≤0) ∨(i ≥shape[0] −1) ∨(j ≥shape[1] −1) ∨(j ≤0)
4:
if is_boundary then
5:
result ←0.0
6:
end if
7:
return result
8: end function
This zero­concentration boundary condition 4 acts as a ’closed’ system, setting the con­
centration values at the edges to zero. This simulates the characteristics of real­world
marbling, where color interactions are confined to a specific medium basin. The use of
15
==PAGE:19==
this boundary condition ensures that the diffusion process remains within the physical
limits of the simulation domain.
Pressure given by p enforces the incrompressibility condition of the fluid by ensuring a
divergence­free velocity field. To implement the pressure term in the code the divergence
of the tentative velocity field, corresponding to the right­hand side of the Poisson equation
(2.4), was calculated at each grid cell. Then using the Jacobi iteration to solve the Poisson
equation the pressure field is determined and used to correct the tentative velocity field
as per Equation 2.5.
Algorithm 5 Poisson Equation Solver using Jacobi Iteration
1: procedure update_pressure(div_field, curr_p, next_p)
2:
for each point (i, j) in curr_p do
3:
p_left ←curr_p[i −1, j]
4:
p_right ←curr_p[i + 1, j]
5:
p_top ←curr_p[i, j + 1]
6:
p_bot ←curr_p[i, j −1]
7:
div ←div_field[i, j]
8:
next_p[i, j] ←p_left+p_right+p_top+p_bot−div
4
9:
end for
10: end procedure
11: procedure solve_pressure(p_pair, div_field, num_iter)
12:
for iter in 1 to num_iter do update_pressure(div_field, p_pair.cur, p_pair.nxt)
13:
Swap p_pair.cur and p_pair.nxt
14:
Apply boundary conditions to p_pair.cur
15:
end for
16: end procedure
Algorithm 5 provides a step by step calculation on how the pressure was approximated in
the Taichi Lang Eulerian simulation. Using the update_pressure procedure, the pressure
values at each grid point (i, j) are adjusted. Using the local divergence and neighbouring
pressures—left, right, top, and bottom—a new pressure estimate is computed. The new
pressure, denoted by the symbol next_p[i, j], is calculated by averaging the neighbouring
pressures after the divergence has been introduced. This step contains the main idea
of the Jacobi iteration: recursively updating the pressure in a certain area based on the
values of the neighbouring cells.
In this procedure, a boundary condition known as the ”constant pressure” boundary con­
dition is applied to the pressure field 5. This condition holds the pressure values at the
boundary edges constant, based on adjacent interior points, while setting the pressure at
the corner points equal to zero.
This boundary condition effectively controls how pressure behaves at the edges and cor­
ners of the domain.
External Forces are represented in two ways. The first part accounts for the user inter­
action by reading the mouse input triggered by the user. The code determines if a grid
point lies within the mouse’s trajectory and then either stirs the fluid at that point or simply
updates its velocity based on the mouse’s motion. This is used to inject external forces
by stirring or adding more color into the fluid.
Secondly, the code calculates the curl of the velocity field to determine regions of the fluid
with swirling motion (vortices). The curl is added by increasing the force in areas with
16
==PAGE:20==
Algorithm 6 Constant Pressure Boundary Condition
1: function pressure_with_boundary(pf, i, j, shape)
2:
result ←pf[i, j]
3:
is_corner ←(i = 0 ∧j = 0) ∨(i = shape[0] −1 ∧j = shape[1] −1) ∨(i = 0 ∧j =
shape[1] −1) ∨(i = shape[0] −1 ∧j = 0)
4:
if is_corner then
5:
result ←0.0
6:
else if i = 0 ∨i = shape[0] −1 then
7:
result ←pf[(i = 0)?1 : shape[0] −2, j]
8:
else if j = 0 ∨j = shape[1] −1 then
9:
result ←pf[i, (j = 0)?1 : shape[1] −2]
10:
end if
11:
return result
12: end function
more swirls. This makes the fluid move more like it does in real life.
Dye Injection this part of the code is in charge of adding color to the canvas, it works by
monitoring whether the user presses the needed triggers (space bar + mouse click). If
this is the case it uses primitive geometries as the color base 3.1(a). In the context of this
simulations when the user presses this combination of triggers, the system adds colorful
circles then uses them as the base of color for liquid, creating the illusion that liquid is
carefully dropped then it naturally spreads into creating patterns 3.1(b).
(a) Simple Circle
(b) Pattern created using circles as the color base
Figure 3.1: Injecting Dye and Creating patterns in Taichi Lang
After the terms of the Navier­Stokes equations 2.2 and 2.3 have been defined in terms of
code, the system was adjusted to allow user interactivity.
Taichi­Lang doesn’t offer extensive possibilities for improved user experience but it does
contain a simple GUI package that allowed the creation of a simple customised side panel.
The colors are predefined with their RGB values, each button is matched to the respective
color and is passed in the inject dye functionality of the code. When the user presses the
color, that color becomes the main drawing color. Moreover, pause and export function­
ality was given to the system in order to better capture a specific fluid pattern.
17
==PAGE:21==
3.2
Semi­Lagrangian Fluid Simulation
WebGL is a API for JavaScript, made for creating interactive graphics on web browsers. It
enables fast graphics processing without needing additional plugins. Because of its built­
in capability to carry out multiple calculations simultaneously on the Graphics Processing
Unit (GPU), it is very useful for tasks that require a high amount of computational power.
Such tasks include simulating fluid dynamics [30].
The Semi­Lagrangian fluid simulation was developed using WebGL. There are advan­
tages and disadvantages to using WebGL as the main framework for developing a com­
plex simulation. To work with WebGL, it is important to have a solid grasp of Shading
Language (GLSL) and how the shaders interact with the main code, which is typically
written in JavaScript.
After looking into the Eulerian Fluid simulation in the previous section, this part will fo­
cus on the Semi­Lagrangian simulation. As mentioned in Section 2, the main distinction
between these two approaches lies in how the liquid is tracked on the canvas. While Eu­
lerian simulations keep track of changes at specific spatial coordinates, Semi­Lagrangian
simulations keep track of how discrete fluid parcels move through space and time.
In the Semi­Lagrangian simulation, the user interaction is tracked in a dynamic pointer
array component. Each Pointer object contains the state and attributes of a user interac­
tion point, including coordinates and velocity among others. By dynamically adjusting the
number of particles on the canvas, these pointer objects enable real­time user interaction.
In addition, it should be stated that the ongoing simulation continues to track and update
the positions of fluid particles independently of user interaction. Although these ’interac­
tive particles’ cannot be directly compared to those in Smoothed­Particle Hydrodynamics
(SPH), they function similarly in that they symbolise discrete regions of the fluid. As a
result, the particles function to both determine the fluid’s behaviour as well as allow user
input. Consequently, significantly improving the simulation experience in comparison with
traditional Lagrangian models.
Similar to the Eulerian simulation, the Navier­Stokes equations form the foundation of
the Semi­Lagrangian one. The initial step in building the code base for this simulation
is the creation of shaders. WebGL shaders are scripts written in GLSL that control how
the GPU generates graphics on a web page in real­time. There are two categories of
shaders: Vertex and Fragment. In the following section, we will provide a description for
each shader and its corresponding type.
The primary functionality of the vertex shader is to calculate the coordinates of each ver­
tex on the canvas. In this shader, given by 7, the texture coordinate uv is calculated.
These coordinates are 2D coordinates used for the representation of meshes in computer
graphics. Usually, this notation represents the axis in the 2D space where u stands for
the horizontal axis and v stands for the vertical axis.
Algorithm 7 starts by computing the uv coordinates from the given vertex position aPosi­
tion. The aPosition attribute captures the input vertex position that falls in the range −1.0
to 1.0 in both x and y dimensions. After which, the uv coordinate is computed by shifting
the original range from [−1.0, 1.0] to [0, 2.0] through the addition of vec2(1.0). This shifted
range is subsequently halved by multiplying with 0.5, effectively remapping it to a [0, 1.0]
range.
In texture space, the constant texelSize shows the size of each texel. Offsets in both the
x (texelOffsetX) and y (texelOffsetY) directions can then be found using this information.
18
==PAGE:22==
Algorithm 7 Vertex Shader
1: Input: Vertex positions aPosition, Uniform texel size texelSize
2: Output: Transformed vertex positions, UV and neighboring coordinates
3: procedure VertexShader(aPosition, texelSize)
4:
uv ←(aPosition + vec2(1.0)) × 0.5
5:
texelOffsetX ←(texelSize.x, 0.0)
6:
texelOffsetY ←(0.0, texelSize.y)
7:
left ←uv −texelOffsetX
8:
right ←uv + texelOffsetX
9:
top ←uv + texelOffsetY
10:
bottom ←uv −texelOffsetY
11:
finalPosition ←(aPosition, 0.0, 1.0)
12:
return (finalPosition, uv, left, right, top, bottom)
13: end procedure
These offsets aid in calculating the uv coordinates of adjacent texels, including those
on the left, right, top, and bottom in relation to the current vertex. In the final step, the
shader computes gl_Position, which is the clip­space position of the vertex. The x and y
components are represented by aPosition. The z and w components are assigned to 0.0
and 1.0, respectively. It is important to mention that even though this is a 2D simulation,
the rendering context is 3D, therefore the vertex positions are processed as 4­component
vectors (x, y, z, w).
It is the responsibility of these shaders to establish the final colour of each pixel (or frag­
ment) on the display. In contrast to vertex shaders, fragment shaders operate for each
pixel that a shape occupies on the screen, producing values interpolated across the sur­
face. Consequently, the fragment shaders of the present simulation are responsible for
representing the fluid’s appearance.
Before discussing the fluid properties, it is necessary to define the colour of each pixel.
The colour shader 8 is in charge of carrying out this operation.
Algorithm 8 Color Shader
1: Input: Texture sampler uTexture, Texture coordinate uv
2: Output: Final fragment color
3: procedure ColorShader(uTexture, uv)
4:
sampledColor ←texture2D(uTexture, uv)
▷Sample color from the texture
5:
minColor ←(0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
6:
maxColor ←(1.0, 1.0, 1.0)
7:
sampledColor.rgb ←sampledColor.rgb−minColor
maxColor−minColor
▷Apply contrast stretching
8:
gamma ←(1.0/2.2, 1.0/2.2, 1.0/2.2)
9:
sampledColor.rgb ←pow(sampledColor.rgb, gamma) ▷Apply gamma correction
10:
return sampledColor
11: end procedure
The Color Shader algorithm 8 aims to calculate the final fragment color by taking as input
a texture uTexture and its corresponding coordinates uv. The shader starts by sampling
the color from the texture. Meaning that it retrieves the color value from a point based on
its uv coodinates.
One of the issues encountered when writing this specific shader was computing bright
19
==PAGE:23==
striking colors similar to the colors used when performing traditional marbling. In order
to simulate the intensity of colors, techniques such as contrast stretching and gamma
correction are used.
Often referred to as normalisation, contrast stretching is a straightforward image enhance­
ment method that aims to increase contrast. It works by ”stretching” the intensity values
within an image to include a specified range of values [31]. As seen in line 7 of the Color
Shader 8, contrast stretching is performed by modifying the RGB values of the fluid im­
age. The minimum colour value is subtracted, and the result is then divided by the range
between the minimum and maximum colours. This technique improves the color contrast
making the colors more vibrant and increases the details.
In order to enhance the intensity of colours further, contrast stretching is supplemented
with Gamma Correction [32].
Gamma Correction is a method employed in computer
graphics and is used to alter the brightness and contrast of an image. Consequently,
aligning it with the way in which the human perceives light and colour in the real world.
This method assures the linearity and consistency of the images with respect to human vi­
sual perception by modifying the contrast and luminosity of the sampled colours. In order
to achieve this, the shader employs a gamma value of 2.2. Ultimately, the colour shader
establishes the processed sampledColor as the output colour of the fragment. It is essen­
tial to keep in mind that this shader does not have any influence over the way in which
the fluid flows across space. The primary aim is to ascertain the visual characteristics.
After defining the color of the fluid, the shaders described below will focus on defining
the behaviour of the fluid. As was discussed in the Eulerian simulation as well as in
the equations developed by Navier and Stokes, the advection term is one of the most
important terms that is used to model the behaviour of the fluid.
Algorithm 9 Divergence Shader Calculation
Input: uv, left, right, top, bottom (Varying vector positions)
uVelocity (Texture containing velocity data)
function sampleVelocity(uv)
clampedUV ←clamp(uv, 0.0, 1.0)
multiplier ←sign(1.0 −2.0 × abs(clampedUV −uv))
sampledValue
←
texture2D(uVelocity, clampedUV).xy return multiplier ×
sampledValue
end function
procedure Main
L ←sampleVelocity(left).x
R ←sampleVelocity(right).x
T ←sampleVelocity(top).y
B ←sampleVelocity(bottom).y
divergence ←0.5 × (R −L + T −B)
Set output color to (divergence, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0)
end procedure
Before delving into the advection and pressure calculation, the divergence­free property of
incompressible fluids must be addressed. This property maintains the incompressibility
of the fluid by ensuring that the volume of fluid entering and exiting a given point are
identical 2.3. During the advection step, the velocities will be advected using a Semi­
Lagrangian method. Throughout this computation, the resulting velocity will likely diverge,
20
==PAGE:24==
therefore, to enforce incompressibility, the divergence of this advected field has to be
recalculated. This computation is done by the Divergence Shader 9. This shader is in
charge of computing the divergence of the velocity field.
The shader first clamps the given uv coordinates to ensure they lie within the texture
boundary. It then samples velocities at neighboring grid points and calculates the differ­
ence in velocities between these points. The divergence is computed as the average
difference in the horizontal and vertical components of these sampled velocities. The re­
sulting divergence value is stored in the red channel of the shader’s output, with the other
channels set to default values. This divergence map informs the pressure calculation,
ensuring that the fluid remains incompressible throughout the simulation 9.
The advection is computed using a semi­Lagrangian approach. In contrast to the Eule­
rian simulation, which employs forward advection for calculation, the present simulation
utilises backward advection. This type of advection works by tracking the fluid particles
backward in time in order to computer their new positions 10.
Algorithm 10 Advection Fragment Shader
1: Input:
2:
UV coordinate: vec2 uv
3:
Velocity texture: sampler2D uV elocity
4:
Source texture: sampler2D uSource
5:
Texel size: vec2 texelSize
6:
Time step: float dt
7:
Dissipation factor: float dissipation
8: Output:
9:
Final outputColor
10:
11: procedure main
12:
velocity ←sample(uV elocity, uv).xy
13:
coord ←uv −dt × velocity × texelSize
14:
sourceV alue ←sample(uSource, coord)
15:
outputColor ←dissipation × sourceV alue
16:
outputColor.a ←1.0
17:
return outputColor
18: end procedure
The Advection shader utilises several input parameters to perform its operations. These
include the uv coordinates for the texture, the velocity texture uVelocity which controls
the flow, the texelSize parameter indicating the size of an individual texture element, the
timestep dt, and a dispassion factor that controls the loss of fluid intensity.
The initial part of Algorithm 10 is dedicated to velocity sampling. This process involves
retrieving the velocity value from the uVelocity texture. The shader obtains the velocity
vector that corresponds to the current uv coordinates. For any given point within the
domain, this vector represents the magnitude and direction of liquid motion.
Subsequently, the sampled velocity is utilised to compute the new coordinate. To achieve
this, the product of the velocity vector, uVelocity, the timestep dt, and the texelSize is cal­
culated. The result represents the degree of displacement relative to the initial position.
The new position is determined by subtracting this displacement from the initial coordi­
nates of the uv. This new position is essentially the previous position of the data that has
21
==PAGE:25==
now advected to the current uv location.
Once the new coordinates have been computed, the texture textitSource must be sam­
pled at those coordinates. The result, sourceValue, represents the data that has been
transported to the present location as a consequence of the advection process.
In reality, the liquid being advected would undergo a process of natural decay. For in­
stance, in the context of marbling, the dispersion of the poured paint in the liquid medium
would result in a certain small degree of fading. This specific process is seen in line 19 of
Algorithm 10 by multiplying the sourced value with a disspation factor. As a result, a new
outputColor was computed to encapsulate the new data.
Lastly, the outputColor’s alpha value is set to 1.0 so that the colour generated out of the
advection and dispassion process does not possess any transparency.
After ensuring that the incompressibility condition has been satisfied and the advection
calculation has been completed, the pressure must be determined. The pressure calcu­
lation is presented in 11.
Algorithm 11 Pressure Shader Calculation
1: Input: uv, left, right, top, bottom (Varying vector positions)
2: uPressure (Texture containing pressure data)
3: uDivergence (Texture containing divergence data)
4: procedure Main(uv, left, right, top, bottom, uPressure, uDivergence)
5:
L ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(left, 0.0, 1.0)).x
6:
R ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(right, 0.0, 1.0)).x
7:
T ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(top, 0.0, 1.0)).x
8:
B ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(bottom, 0.0, 1.0)).x
9:
C ←texture2D(uPressure, uv).x
10:
divergence ←texture2D(uDivergence, uv).x ▷Sample divergence at current UV
11:
pressure ←L+R+B+T−divergence
4
▷Calculate average pressure
12:
Set output color to (pressure, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0)
13: end procedure
The pressure calculation uses the Jacobi iterative method to estimate solutions for the
fluid’s pressure distribution. The shader 11 contains the code for performing a single
step of pressure correction. The shader collects the pressures from all the neighbouring
texels (left, right, top, and bottom) in addition to the current texel. Once these values
have been collected, the pressure is averaged and subsequently adjusted by deducting
the divergence value that was previously calculated in the Divergence Shader 9.
On the main script side, this shader logic is applied repeatedly for a set number of iter­
ations using the Jacobi iterative method. With each repetition, the pressure texture is
updated and exchanged, ensuring that the next iteration runs on the newly calculated val­
ues. By performing these iterations, the pressure values across the entire fluid domain
converges, resulting in a more precise pressure distribution within the fluid.
After the calculation of the pressure field, it is important to make the correct corrections
to the velocity field in order to obey the incompressibility condition. This is where the
Gradient Shader is applied.
The calculation starts by sampling the pressures for all the neighbouring grid cells. In order
to ensure that the sampled pressure values fall within valid bounds the clamp function
is used. After sampling all the necessary values, the gradient for the pressure field is
22
==PAGE:26==
Algorithm 12 Gradient Shader Calculation
1: Input:
2:
uv, left, right, top, bottom (Varying vector positions)
3:
uPressure (Texture containing pressure data)
4:
uVelocity (Texture containing velocity data)
5: procedure Main
6:
L ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(left, 0.0, 1.0)).x
7:
R ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(right, 0.0, 1.0)).x
8:
T ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(top, 0.0, 1.0)).x
9:
B ←texture2D(uPressure, clamp(bottom, 0.0, 1.0)).x
10:
gradient ←(vec2(R −L, T −B))
▷Calculate the gradient of the pressure field
11:
velocity ←texture2D(uVelocity, uv).xy −gradient
▷Retrieve the current
velocity and subtract the gradient
12:
Set output color to (velocity, 0.0, 1.0)
13: end procedure
calculated. The velocity field, derived from the uVelocity texture, is further modified by
taking into account the gradient.
Such behaviour is consistent with real­world fluid, in which fluids naturally flow from high­
pressure to low­pressure locations. The velocity is adjusted and the resulting changed
velocity is returned. This shader mainly depicts how the fluid reacts to shifts in pressure.
It is important to mention, that compared to the Taichi Lang simulation, this simulation
didn’t require explicit boundary conditions. While we do account for the size of the canvas,
the placement of the plane vertices, and the size of the fbo, we use inbuilt WebGL clamp
functions to ensure that values are calculated near the boundaries in a way that simulates
boundary conditions without the need for explicit boundary handling. While we do not
directly calculate values at the boundaries, we assume that near these regions the fluid
properties converge to 0 [33].
Last part of the Semi­Lagrangian fluid simulation focuses on applying and implementing
external forces.
The External Force Shader 13 starts by calculating the displacement and distance from
a point. This is done by subtracting the point from the uv coordinated and then checking
the length of the displacement. Which results in determining the direction and magnitude
of a vortex force that simulates the spiraling motion found in fluids.
In fluid simulations, the Gaussian function, characterized by its bell­shaped curve, plays
a fundamental role as it gives a more organic look to the fluid [34]. This function is imple­
mented in order to give a natural diffusion effect to the fluid. The method is calculated by
taking the exponential function of the negated distance squared divided by the radius. The
distance square represents how the value grows rapidly as you move further away from
the origin. By negating it we ensure that the function value approach zero as distance
increases. Furthermore, by dividing the squared distance to the radius, we normalise the
effect of the function. The radius represents the effective ”reach” of the force. A reduced
radius corresponds to a quick decay of the effect, resulting in a limited range.
On the other hand, an increased radius corresponds to a slower decay of the effect, re­
sulting in a wider range. Using this Gaussian function, the shader achieves a controlled
decay of the force, ensuring that it decreases proportionally from the point of origin.
23
==PAGE:27==
Algorithm 13 External Force Shader Calculation
1: Input:
2:
uv (Varying vector coordinate)
3:
uTarget (Texture target)
4:
color (Vector color)
5:
point (Vector point for force origin)
6:
radius (Force radius)
7: procedure Main
8:
displacement ←uv −point
9:
distance ←length(displacement)
10:
perpendicular ←(−displacement.y, displacement.x)
11:
vortexV elocity ←normalize(perpendicular)
12:
vortexStrength ←80.0
13:
force ←vortexStrength
distance+0.01
14:
vortexV elocity ←vortexV elocity × force
15:
gaussForce ←exp(−distance × distance/radius)
16:
splatColor ←gaussForce × color
17:
base ←texture2D(uTarget, uv)
18:
newColor ←mix(base.xyz, splatColor, gaussForce)
19:
Set output color to (newColor, base.w + vortexV elocity)
20: end procedure
After the shaders were computed they are connected to the main part of the script by using
JavaScript. The user input is read straight­forward by using event listeners in JavaScript.
In order to allow a customisable interface and improve user interaction extra functionality
was added. First, a control panel that allows the selection of different colors is added
to the interface. Compared to Taichi Lang, WebGL allows for a greater range of colors
presented in a more user­intuitive interface as seen in figure 3.2
Figure 3.2: Semi­Lagrangian Simulation ­ Color Palette
24
==PAGE:28==
Having the option of displaying the entire color scheme compared to a small subset of
predefined colors gives users more flexibility in terms of interaction. Moreover this simula­
tion contains a slider that allows to control the size of the ”brush” or the drawEffectRadius,
consequently providing more creative freedom.
Adjusting the drawEffectRadius allows the creation of different distinct patterns. A smaller
radius leads to more distinct patterns of fluid. Due to a smaller drawEffectRadius and con­
sequently a smller concentration of fluid, the pattern created consists of small fluid parcels.
On the other hand, when the ”drawEffectRadius” is increased, the individual parcels are
less apparent in relation to the total volume of the fluid. Consequently, resulting in fluids
that are more uniform and lack individual small patterns 3.3.
(a) Smaller drawEffecRadius
(b) Bigger drawEffecRadius
Figure 3.3: drawEffecRadius affecting the aspect of the fluid
An adjustment was made to the user interface by including a toggle button, which allows
the user to gain greater control over the simulation. When this toggle is on, the simula­
tion is paused, assuring that the visual characteristics of the liquid remain constant and
unaltered by any external influences. In addition, during the simulation’s stopped state,
the system does not introduce any additional liquid, thereby protecting particular patterns.
This functionality addresses a weakness that is present in the conventional marbling pro­
cess, allowing users and artists to capture distinctive designs that would otherwise be
unattainable. Upon creating an appealing visual result, users have the option to easily ex­
port the visual composition as a JPEG file through the built­in export image functionality.
3.3
Implementation Details
The two simulations were developed using a MacBook Pro 2022 computer with 16GB
RAM and an M1 processor. In order to run the simulations the following steps are taken:
1. Taichi Lang: In order to run the taichi lang fluid simulation the user requires to run the
code locally. Since it is a real­time fluid simulation in python, it can not be deployed.
First, the user is required to install the packages found in the requirements.txt file
25
==PAGE:29==
found in the root folder of the taichi lang directory. Then, after all libraries have been
installed correctly, the user can start the code by running the python3 main.py
command in a terminal. For interacting with this simulation
2. WebGL simulation: Since webgl is web­based, the simulation has been deployed
on the following link http://danielasmasterthesis.netlify.app
Both simulation accept user input. Throughout the simulations the keys accepted are
slightly different.
WebGL simulation allows inserting liquid only by mouse clicks. The colors can be changed
using the palette found in the top right corned.
Taichi Lang allows both stirring and inserting new color. The stirring is done by hovering
over the taichi lang canvas while simultaneously keeping the space bar pressed. In order
to add new paint, the space bar has to be pressed down and, depending where the user
desires to insert the dye, a mouse click action has to be performed.
Each type of simulation has it’s particular parameters added to it. The parameters were
chosen based on which values makes the system more visually appealing and the fluid
looking organic.
3.3.1
Taichi Lang Parameters
At the base of the taichi lang the following parameters were chosen.
1. mouse_respondDistance = 5 : This parameter defines how sensitive is the fluid
on the mouse acting on it and the range that is affected upon user action.
2. mouse_speed = 20.0: The value of this parameter determines the rate of change
or degree of control that the mouse has over the fluid velocity.
3. mouse_radius = 0.015: This parameter determines the range to which the cursor
influences the simulation.
4. steps = 500: This parameter controls the number of iterative steps the simulation
takes. This number allows the simulation of interesting dynamics without decreasing
the responsiveness. A higher number will make the simulation run slower while a
much lower number will decrease the quality of the fluid graphics.
5. dt = 1/50: This value represents the time step size. A smaller time step produces
more accurate simulations, but it necessitates more computational resources.
6. diffusion_rate = 0.01, dye_diffusion_constant = 0.00001: These values control
how quickly components (like velocity or dye colors) move through the fluid. Re­
duced values indicate a more gradual diffusion process, which increases the reten­
tion of details. There is a similar parameter, velocity_diffusion_constant = 100,
which specifies the diffusion rate for the velocity field.
These parameters were chosen based on appearance and how much the simulated fluid
resembled a real­fluid. It is important to mention that compared to other graphics render­
ing pipelines, Taichi Lang doesn’t operate with a default frame rate. Instead of this, the
simulation loop runs as fast the hardware allows it. Memory is dynamically allocated for
Taichi fields when they are define using functions such as ti.field or ti.Vector.field. These
fields are managed by the Taichi runtime and are usually stored in GPU memory if the
simulation is run on the GPU backend as per our simulation.
26
==PAGE:30==
3.3.2
WebGL Parameters
The webGL simulation offers more flexibility both in terms of user experience and in terms
of the development process. As webGL has more inbuilt features, compared to Taichi
Lang, this simulation was set up in a relatively simpler way. The following parameters
were used:
1. textureResolutionDecrease = 0: The texture resolution parameter controls how
the amount of details would decrease over time. It is set to 0 to minimise the reso­
lution loss over time. It is important to mention that a higher value would increase
computational performance at the cost of visual detail.
2. densityDiffusionRate = 1: This parameter is in charge of controlling the diffusion
rate of the liquid. It defines how fast the liquid spreads out through the canvas. A
higher rate means things mix faster, while a lower rate means substances remain
more separated
3. velocityDecayRate = 0.99: This parameter indicates a damping factor applied to
the velocity field. It is a method of simulating the natural loss of momentum in a fluid
caused by factors such as internal friction and external resistances. A value closer
to 1 indicates less decay of the velocity over time, while a value equal to 0 means
that the fluid loses all its momentum instantly.
4. pressureCalculationSteps = 60: This value sets the number of iterations for the
pressure calculation.
5. drawEffectRadius This variable is set by the user using the slider in the front­end
and it represents the ”brush size” that the cursor has when drawing.
The WebGL simulation utilizes the requestAnimationFrame method, which has the de­
fault value of 60fps. While in the simulation the default value is used, the dt variable
measures the time elapsed between each frame. This variable is used to make the simu­
lation appear smooth, regardless of the actual frame rate.
In this context, memory allocation can be categorised in: Static Memory and Dynamic
Memory.
Static Memory refers to a one­time allocation of GPU memory for textures,
framebuffers, and shader programes during the initialization process. Dynamic Memory
refers to parameters such as pressure, velocity, and density that are updated with each
frame but are allocated space on the GPU to avoid the need for reallocation.
Similar to the Taichi Lang simulation, these parameters were chosen based on their effect
on the visual appearance of the fluid. The next section will dive into showing what patterns
can be created using these two simulations.
27
==PAGE:31==
4
Experiments and Results
The two simulation developed throughout this thesis aim to provide an artistic environment
suited for creating marbling like patterns. Throughout this section, the pattern possibilities
will be explored for both simulation.
It is important to mention that this section will only present the patterns created and user
interaction performed but will not describe nor compare them. This will be done during
the discussion section.
Moreover, the second part of the section will present a small set of user data that will be
used to asses which method is preferred by users.
4.1
Taichi Lang Patterns
Single Color No Stir and Single Color Stir represented by figure 4.1 reflect two different
patterns created using only a single color. The first pattern created only inserts the dye
on the canvas but does not alter the pattern by stirring. In contrast, on the 2nd image,
stirring was used to alter the organic movement of fluid.
(a) No Stirring the fluid
(b) Stirring the fluid
Figure 4.1: Single Color Patterns
Multiple Colors No Stir and Multiple Colors Stir the two patterns are created by adding
multiple colors on the canvas. One of the patterns uses the stir functionality while the other
one allows the fluid to flow organically 4.2.
28
==PAGE:32==
(a) No Stirring the fluid
(b) Fluid with multiple colors no stirring
Figure 4.2: Multiple Color Patterns with stirring
Fading patterns The colors will start fade because of numerical diffusion issue present
in grid­based approaches. 4.3.
(a) Fading Multiple Colors
(b) Fluid with single color
Figure 4.3: Fading Color
Linear Patterns With Taichi Lang, linear patterns can be created by dragging the cursor
in a straight line across the canvas, because of the curl force, the fluid created interesting
swirling patterns 4.4
29
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.4: Linear Pattern Taichi
4.2
WebGL patterns
Slow Actions Slow mouse movements in webGL create different patterns because the
fluid quantity isn’t broken down in parcels 4.5:
Figure 4.5: Slow Action WebGL
Fast Action fast action webGL creates a denser pattern as the fluid breaks down into
smaller patterns 4.6
30
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.6: Fast Action WebGL
Single Color Small Brush vs Big Brush Single Color There is a difference in the density
of the color between the small brush option and the big brush action ??.
(a) Small Brush
(b) Bigh Brush
Figure 4.7: Brush Size WebGL Single Color
Multiple Colors Different patterns can be created depending on the brush size.
31
==PAGE:35==
(a) Small Brush
(b) Bigh Brush
Figure 4.8: Brush Size WebGL Multiple Colors
4.3
User Study
The users were provided with the webGL simulation link and the taichi lang code (all users
with no previous python experience, were instructed on how to install python and all the
necessary requirements in order to run the simulation)
After the experiments the users were provided with a questionnaire meant to asses the
usability of both systems. It is important to mention that is not the aim of the thesis to
perform an extensive user study but rather to get and idea and visual results on how
different users perform using the two different simulations.
This questionnaire was divided into three sections, each concentrating on a distinct aspect
of the users’ experiences:
1. Performance ­ asses user’s opinion in terms of the performance of both systems
2. Usability ­ asses user’s opinion in terms of the usability of both systems
3. Comparison ­ asses user’s preferences in terms of systems, which one do they
prefer using.
By splitting the questionnaire into these three parts, it was easier to get clear information
about different parts of the users’ experiences. This way, they could tell not just which
simulation did better, but also why people preferred it.
Performance section consists of the following questions:
1. How would you rate the responsiveness of the Taichi Lang simulation on your com­
puter?
2. How would you rate the responsiveness of the WebGL fluid simulation on the web?
3. Did you experience any lag or stuttering in either of the simulations? If yes, please
describe.
4. Which simulation do you feel produced more realistic fluid dynamics? Why?
32
==PAGE:36==
These three question will give an overall understanding on the responsiveness of both
simulation. Moreover it will asses which simulation produces results closer to real world
behaviour of fluids.
The results produced in this performance section are displayed in Figure 4.9
(a) Taichi Lang Responsiveness
(b) WebGL responsiveness
(c) Technical Issues
(d) Realistic Results
Figure 4.9: Performance user testing
Usability section aims to get insights on how easy it is to use and understand the two
simulations. The following questions were asked in this section:
1. How easy or difficult was it to start and run the Taichi Lang simulation?
2. How easy or difficult was it to access and interact with the WebGL simulation?
3. Were the controls and features easy to understand and use in the Taichi Lang sim­
ulation?
4. Were the controls and features easy to understand and use in the WebGL simula­
tion?
5. If you encountered any issues while interacting with the simulations, please describe
them. ­ This question is excluded from the figure 4.10 as there are no informative
statistics regarding it. Most users did not encounter any issues when interacting
with the simulations.
The results gathered are presented in Figure 4.10
33
==PAGE:37==
(a) Taichi Lang Difficulty getting started
(b) WebGL Difficulty getting started
(c) Taichi Lang Controls
(d) WebGL Control
Figure 4.10: Usability user testing
Comparison section gathers insights on user’s preferences regarding the simulations. The
questions stated below serve as the foundation for gaining knowledge of user preferences.
These serve as an entry point of evaluating and mapping the context of user interaction
and the impression the two fluid simulations left on users.
1. Which simulation did you find more enjoyable or interesting to use? Why?
2. Were there any features you liked in one simulation that were missing in the other?
3. How likely are you to use the Taichi Lang simulation again?
4. How likely are you to use the WebGL simulation again?
The results of this section are displayed in Figure 4.11. Please keep in mind that this
section is only about giving an objective presentation of the data. The Discussion section
goes on to give all the interpretations, critical evaluations, and theoretical background.
There, we look into the effects of these results, offering insights and drawing conclusions
that are grounded in our data and the implications regarding the fluid simulations.
34
==PAGE:38==
(a) The more enjoyable simulation
(b) Features
(c) Taichi Lang
(d) WebGL
Figure 4.11: Comparison user testing
Moreover, some basic questions regarding whether the user has a technical or non­technical
background, the type of hardware used and whether they have used fluid simulations be­
fore were also given. The aim was to asses if any issues were particular to hardware
and if starting the taichi simulation only seemed difficult to user’s with a non technical
background. These point will be further elaborated in the sections below.
35
==PAGE:39==
5
Discussion
This thesis focused on digitising the traditional marbling process. Throughout the thesis,
fluid mechanics principles were applied in order to develop two fluid simulations that would
mimic the behaviour of paint in a marbling context. In this section these methods will be
compared and the strengths and limitations observed during the implementation process
will be discussed. The research aim is not only to evaluate the accuracy and performance
of the simulations but to understand the practical applicability of the two systems in the
context of digitising the traditional marbling process.
First of all, it is important to mention that the hybrid Semi­Lagrangian methodology com­
bines the advantages that both grid based approaches and particle approaches have.
Strictly comparing it to the grid based Eulerian method would not be fair, therefore the
comparison statements will only refer towards how these methods outperform each other
in the context of simulating the marbling patterns. One of the core differences that can
be observed in the patterns created in sections 4.1 and 4.2 is that the fluid in the Eulerian
Taichi Lang Simulation behaves more like a gas compared to the fluid simulated using the
Semi­Lagrangian methodology. This occurs due to numerical diffusion in grid based ap­
proaches. Semi­Lagrangian methods handle the numerical diffusion issue better because
it tracks the fluid particles more closely by using back­tracking advection. Instead of look­
ing into a fixed grid like the Eulerian method, which can lead to the loss of details due to
the grid’s constraints, the Semi­Lagrangian approach follows the position and properties
of each particle/pointer. It follows them more precisely, back through the fluid’s flow to
find where exactly each particle came from and where it should move to. With the Semi­
Lagrangian methodology, the fluid’s movements and patterns are captured more sharply
and in more detail.
Looking at Section 4.1 ­ The single patterns created by injecting the dye onto the canvas
while moving the cursor, look similar to Suminagashi patterns. As previously mentioned
these patterns are created by dropping ink onto a fluid medium. However, the paint looks
more consistent and viscous in traditional marbling while in the Eulerian simulation, the
aspect is more gaseous. By stirring the pattern with the cursor and disturbing the expected
flow of the liquid, a more interesting and unique pattern is created. When using multiple
colors, the patterns inevitably become more complex. The base colors start mixing with
the new added colors and create an organic looking pattern. When adding stirring to
multiple colors, the resulted pattern contains more swirls that would not occur if the fluid
flow would not be disturbed (figure: 4.2). As previously mentioned, numerical diffusion
is a prevalent issue in the Eulerian approach and can be visualised in Figure 4.3. It can
be seen that with both multiple color and with single colors, the fluid fades and the colors
blend into each other. Other interesting patterns that can be created with the Taichi Lang
simulation is linear patterns 4.4, these patterns are created by moving the mouse into a
straight line while inserting dye onto the canvas. Because of the curl force the pattern,
even though linear contains multiple interesting swirls.
36
==PAGE:40==
Now diving into the patterns created by WebGL 4.2 it can immediately noticed that the
colors are more striking and the fluid looks more viscous. Looking into the patterns created
based on whether the mouse interaction is fast or slow it can be seen that a slow action
(fig 4.5) creates a denser pattern looking, while a fast mouse interaction results in smaller
more chaotic parcels of liquid (fig 4.6). This difference between patterns created with
slow action compared with fast mouse interaction can be motivated by the fact that a slow
interaction allows enough time for the simulation to react and adapt smoothly to the input.
On the other hand, a rapid movement doesn’t give the fluid parcels time to adapt gradually.
Instead, it disrupts them, causing a more chaotic pattern. In technical terms, introducing
a higher velocity difference between the moving object and the fluid causes the fluid to
break up into smaller parcels. Other patterns can be observed by changing the size of
the brush, the patterns created a quite intuitive meaning that a smaller brush size would
create more precise small patter while a bigger bursh size will result in more fluid added
to the screen creating a denser pattern, valid for both single color and multiple colors.
The diffusion, even though still present in small amounts, is not as noticeable as in the
Eulerian simulation therefore the patterns created are more contrasted and have better
defined borders.
Besides the patterns created the frameworks used have both their advantages and disad­
vantages. Using webGL allowed the implementation of a web­based simulation, meaning
that the simulation uses the web browser environment to render the graphics. This prop­
erty allows the webGL simulation to be easily accessible to users, but it also means that it
operates within the constraints of the browser’s refresh rate compared to taichi lang that
runs as fast as the hardware allows it. Moreover, webGL runs directly on the GPU, if the
hardware does not have a dedicated GPU the simulation will not run optimally and lags
and delays are more likely to occur. From a developer perspective, using webGL opened
a gate toward extensive documentation and previous work while Taichi Lang being rela­
tively new and less used does not have a big community or resources to use which had
a influence on the coding process.
Looking into the User Study section 4.3 it can be seen that Taichi Lang runs better on
all machines compared to webGL. This is because taichi lang can run on CPU if GPU
doesn’t suffice for the simualtion, while WebGL encountered some lags for computers
with no dedicated GPU. Most users found that webGL outperformed taichi lang in terms
of visualisations created and how the fluid behaved. This was already mentioned, it’s not
necesarily a issue withing the framework used but it’s related more to the methodology
Eulerian compared to Semi­Lagrangian.
In the Usability questions 4.10 it can be clearly noticed that Taichi Lang was labeled as
being more difficult to use, which was expected as it requires the installation of python and
the corresponding packages to run the simulation. Of course, compared to a web­based
simulation is more difficult to get started with because for the WebGl users only needed to
access the link. This comparison gives insights on which simulation would be more suited
for artistic purposes. For example an artist with no python or scripting experience, would
prefer and find easier to use WebGL. Comparing the controls of the simulation it can be
noticed that 4 of the users rated that they agree that the Taichi Lang controls are easy to
understand while 3 of the users disagreed. On the other side of the spectrum all users
agreed that WebGl controls are easier to understand. This can come to user preference
but Taichi Lang combines two types of input which adds an extra layer of complexity.
However, this extra layer (combining the space bar with the click) was necessary in order
to remove unwanted input when selecting options on the control panel.
37
==PAGE:41==
Diving into the Comparison questions 4.11 users voted that they are more likely to use
the WebGL simulation compared to Taichi Lang. It is likely because WebGL is accessible
through a link and can be opened anytime without the need for additional actions. Conse­
quently, setting up python, installing all the required packages and running the simulation
is often found cumbersome by users. Taichi Lang as WebGL is a powerful tool to build
simulations, however it is better suited for academic and research simulations and not yet
for a user focused simulation as the marbling simulation is. Besides the already stated
limitations, WebGL allows developers to exploit all JavaScript, HTML and CSS capacities
which opens the gate for the creation of customisable UIs. One small example for the
current Semi­Lagrangian simulation is the slider and the color palette. Both are extremely
useful and easy to use and understand. However, in Taichi Lang the GUI package is quite
primitive and such features can not yet be implemented. For the color scheme, the palette
had to be hard­coded to RGB values and bound to the buttons, this resulted in a small
choice of colors and over populated control panel. The small variety o hard­coded colors
were not as visually appealing as the ones in the WebGL palette.
Relating back to the marbling process, both simulation aimed to mimic the behaviour of
paint in the traditional marbling pattern. Even though there are some issues among which
numerical diffusion, there are benefits as well. Both simulations allows the user to pause
them and freeze the pattern which is of course not possible in a traditional context. This
functionality allows the preservation of patterns before they settled into a stable position
which can help create more intricate patterns.
5.1
Future Improvements
Potential future improvements include modifying the way the variables are calculated in
order to reduce the numerical diffusion. In the context of Eulerian simulations, for example,
utilising a method for changing the simulation grid according with the location of the action
could aid in maintaining the clarity and detail of the fluid. Similarly, improving the methods
used to track particles in semi­Lagrangian simulations and handling better that numerical
diffusion issue would contribute to making the fluid simulation closer to the traditional
marbling process. Other possible improvements are creating patterns from droplets, so
if two droplets are overplayed they should spread and create color ripples. This can be
achieved by adding an extra force to the external force computation, for example the
gravitational force. Some other ideas would be to add a kaleidoscope like effect that
can be generated from an existing color base. All these enhancements would not be
possible in traditional marbling and would help digital marbling to gain more popularity
among artists.
38
==PAGE:42==
6
Conclusion
Throughout this thesis two fluid simulation approaches were explored in the context of
digital marbling. While both approaches succeed in simulating the fluid flow, the aspect
of fluid is different across simulations.
The Eulerian based simulation, delivers a more gaseous looking fluid which is particularly
caused by the numerical diffusion issue prevalent in grid based approaches. Because of
this unwanted diffusion the aspect of colors fades over time which make the simulation
less suited for replicating marbling patterns. In a traditional marbling process, the colors
remain bright and the border between adjacent colors is visible compared to the Eulerian
approach where mixing and fading occurs over time. Moreover, because the Eulerian
approach was developed using Taichi Lang, it is more cumbersome for users without a
technical background to use, as it requires the installation of packages and terminal use
to run it. Taichi Lang offers a limited GUI package that doesn’t allow for the creation of
visually interesting control panels. While Taichi Lang is a powerful tool, and can be used
to develop marbling simulations, it might not be suited for artists. On the other hand, if
the simulation would have as target audience people from a technical background then
of course Taichi Lang might be better suited.
By using a Semi­Lagrangian method, the effects of numerical diffusion have been min­
imised and the patterns created are more distinct and contain less loss of colors. More­
over, the colors do not mix as much and the border between them is clearly seen. By
combining it with WebGL, users were provided with a simulation contained within the
browser’s environment which made it very accessible to all users. As WebGL is compat­
ible with HTML and CSS, the interfaces created are much more visually appealing and
diverse.
By performing the user study, the fluid simulation methodology that was preferred in terms
of fluid behaviour is the hybrid Semi­Lagrangian approach. In terms of tools and frame­
works, users also preferred WebGL.
Even though the complete replication of the traditional marbling is not achievable in a
digital environment, this can be further exploited. In a digital environment the possibilities
are endless, the fluid behaviour can be altered, the parameters can be changed to create
a pattern that would be unobtainable in a traditional marbling medium.
39
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Turkish marbling. https://suminagashi.com/turkishmarbling/. Accessed: 01
September 2023. 2014.
[2]
Tokutaro Hamada. “History and Technics of Suminagashi”. In: Journal of the Japanese
Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry 2.1 (1948), pp. 26–30. doi:
10.2524/jtappij1947.2.26.
[3]
C. W. (Charles W.) Woolnough. The Whole Art of Marbling. English. Ed. by C. W. (Charles
W.). Art of Marbling Woolnough. Printed by C. Whittingham & Co. at the Chiswick
Press. London: George Bell & Sons, 1881. isbn: 9928624240001551. url: https:
//www.getty.edu/research/library/.
[4]
url: https://www.green-coursehub.com/research-blog/suminagashi-drop-by-
drop-byandrew-caruso.
[5]
Irem Yaşar. Keeping tradition alive: Turkish art of marbling in spotlight. Jan. 2022.
url: https://www.dailysabah.com/arts/keeping-tradition-alive-turkish-
art-of-marbling-in-spotlight/news.
[6]
Jos Stam. “Stable Fluids”. In: Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference on Com­
puter Graphics and Interactive Techniques. 1999, pp. 121–128.
[7]
Jos Stam. “Real­Time Fluid Dynamics for Games”. In: Alias | wavefront (2003). url:
http://www.dgp.toronto.edu/people/stam/reality/index.html.
[8]
William T. Reeved. “Innovative Techniques for the Lagrangian Representation of
Fire, Clouds, and Liquids”. In: (1983). First introduction of Lagrangian methods for
simulating phenomena such as fire, clouds, and liquids. url: https://www.lri.fr/
~mbl/ENS/IG2/devoir2/files/docs/fuzzyParticles.pdf.
[9]
Matthias Müller, David Charypar, and Markus Gross. “Particle­Based Fluid Sim­
ulation for Interactive Applications”. In: vol. 2003. July 2003, pp. 154–159. isbn:
1581136595.
[10]
J.U. Brackbill, D.B. Kothe, and H.M. Ruppel. “Flip: A low­dissipation, particle­in­cell
method for fluid flow”. In: Computer Physics Communications 48.1 (1988), pp. 25–
38. issn: 0010­4655. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-4655(88)90020-3. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0010465588900203.
[11]
E. Dementyeva, E. Karepova, and V. Shaidurov. “The semi­Lagrangian method for
the Navier­Stokes problem for an incompressible fluid”. In: AIP Conference Pro­
ceedings. Vol. 1895. 2017, p. 110001. doi: 10.1063/1.5007407.
[12]
Yong Wang et al. “A simplified finite volume lattice Boltzmann method for simula­
tions of fluid flows from laminar to turbulent regime, Part I: Numerical framework
and its application to laminar flow simulation”. In: Computers and Mathematics with
Applications 79.5 (2020), pp. 1590–1618. issn: 0898­1221. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.camwa.2019.09.017. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0898122119304675.
[13]
Dmitrii Kochkov et al. “Machine learning–accelerated computational fluid dynamics”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118.21 (2021), e2101784118.
40
==PAGE:44==
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2101784118. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.
1073/pnas.2101784118. url: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
2101784118.
[14]
Pedram Bigdelou et al. “An efficient Ghost Fluid Method to remove overheating
from material interfaces in compressible multi­medium flows”. In: Computers & Flu­
ids 233 (2022), p. 105250. issn: 0045­7930. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.compfluid.2021.105250. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0045793021003546.
[15]
Hao­Liang Wen et al. “A mass­preserving level set method for simulating 2D/3D
fluid flows with deformed interface”. In: Ocean Engineering 283 (2023), p. 115063.
issn: 0029­8018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2023.115063. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029801823014476.
[16]
url: https://openai.com/blog/dall-e-3-is-now-available-in-chatgpt-
plus-and-enterprise.
[17]
Niranjan Dhokarikar. The Different Flow Types. Accessed: [Insert Date You Ac­
cessed The Article]. 2019. url: https://niranjan-dhokarikar19.medium.com/
the-different-flow-types-7c97ad1470b0.
[18]
May 2019. url: https://processfluiddynamics.wordpress.com/newtons-law-
of-viscosity/.
[19]
Admin. Jacobian method ­ formula, properties and solved example. Sept. 2022. url:
https://byjus.com/maths/jacobian-method/#:~:text=Jacobian%20Method%
20Formula,1(k%2B1)..
[20]
An overview of Euler’s equation of motion for inviscid flow. Oct. 2022. url: https:
//resources.system-analysis.cadence.com/blog/msa2022-an-overview-of-
eulers-equation-of-motion-for-inviscid-flow.
[21]
Faith A. Morrison. Boundary Conditions in Mechanics. All rights reserved. 1998. url:
https://pages.mtu.edu/~fmorriso/cm310/bc.pdf.
[22]
url: https://sites.me.ucsb.edu/~moehlis/APC591/tutorials/tutorial5/
node6.html.
[23]
Mar. 2022. url: https://gisresources.com/types-interpolation-methods_3/.
[24]
url: https://study.com/learn/lesson/interpolation-formula.html.
[25]
X­Engineer.org. Home. url: https://x-engineer.org/bilinear-interpolation/.
[26]
J. H. Ferziger and M. Perić. Computational methods for fluid dynamics. Springer,
2002.
[27]
S. Friedlander. “Stability of Flows”. In: Encyclopedia of Mathematical Physics. Ed.
by Jean­Pierre Françoise, Gregory L. Naber, and Tsou Sheung Tsun. Oxford: Aca­
demic Press, 2006, pp. 1–7. isbn: 978­0­12­512666­3. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/B0-12-512666-2/00252-2. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B0125126662002522.
[28]
url: https://docs.taichi-lang.org/.
[29]
Turito. Diffusion in solid, liquid and gases ­ explanation of diffusion ­ turito. Feb.
2023. url: https://www.turito.com/learn/chemistry/diffusion-in-solid-
liquid-gases-grade-6.
[30]
url: https://webglfundamentals.org/webgl/lessons/webgl- fundamentals.
html.
[31]
url: https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/HIPR2/stretch.htm.
[32]
url: https://www.cambridgeincolour.com/tutorials/gamma-correction.htm.
[33]
Misaki Nakano. Stable fluids with three.js. url: https://mofu-dev.com/en/blog/
stable-fluids/.
41
==PAGE:45==
[34]
Yukui Cai et al. “Dynamic behaviours of water droplets impacting on laser ablated
surfaces”. In: Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects
580 (Aug. 2019), p. 123743. doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2019.123743.
42
==PAGE:46==
A
Appendix
The Github repository: https://github.com/pterodactella/MarblingSimulation
43
==PAGE:47==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 1 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
What is your background/experience in digital simulations or digital art creation?
8 responses
No background
no background
I'm an UX designer
None. I can only use Adobe programs to modify and create artworks.
Have you used any fluid simulation software before?
8 responses
If you have used a fluid simulation before, please specify
0 responses
No responses yet for this question.
Performance
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
8 responses
Publish analytics
Copy
Yes
No
100%
==PAGE:48==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 2 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
How would you rate the responsiveness of the Taichi Lang simulation on 
your computer?
8 responses
How would you rate the responsiveness of the WebGL fluid simulation on 
the web?
8 responses
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
1 (12.5%)
3 (37.5%)
4 (50%)
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
8 (100%)
==PAGE:49==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 3 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
Did you experience any lag or stuttering in either of the simulations? If yes, please 
describe.
8 responses
Yes
No lag
Slight lagging
Both simulation worked smoothly
No lag
no
Which simulation do you feel produced more realistic fluid dynamics? Why?
8 responses
WebGl looks more like a fluid and the other one has a more gas feeling
Both seemed realistic, the python based simulation feels more like a deluded fluid or gas, while
the webgl one looks more viscous
webGL because it seemed more like a fluid
webgl, the interaction between fluid strokes was more organic
WebGL simulation, the fluid resembled more a paint while the other one looked more as a gas
I feel they work in 2 slightly different ways that both can be related to a marbling process.
Usability:
==PAGE:50==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 4 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
How easy or difficult was it to start and run the Taichi Lang simulation?
8 responses
How easy or difficult was it to access and interact with the WebGL 
simulation?
8 responses
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
2 (25%)
2 (25%)
1 (12.5%)
3 (37.5%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
8 (100%)
==PAGE:51==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 5 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
Were the controls and features easy to understand and use in the Taichi 
Lang simulation?
8 responses
Were the controls and features easy to understand and use in the WebGL 
simulation?
8 responses
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
3 (37.5%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
4 (50%)
1 (12.5%)
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
8 (100%)
==PAGE:52==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 6 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
If you encountered any issues while interacting with the simulations, please describe 
them.
8 responses
No issues
No issues, but it was initially a bit confusing why the second simulation needs two inputs
(space and click)
slight lag
no issues
The lines were blurred and faded quickly in both programs, which does not correspond to a
marbling process. In marbling the lines are sharply defined. Both programs looked very cloudy
and it was a bit difficult to create patterns. it is easy to work with the programs, but the
patterns fade so quickly that it is hard to create a useful pattern that can be exported. I could
not use light colors, because they all just looked white. It would be useful to be able to make a
preset color scale, so it is easy to find colors that look good together.
Comparison
==PAGE:53==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 7 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
Which simulation did you find more enjoyable or interesting to use? Why?
8 responses
WebGL was more satisfying to play with as it was more calming
webGL was more intuitive and calming, the colors were brighter and the color palette offered
more options
webgl, it was easier to access and more interesting to play with as there were more color
options and adjustable brush size
WebGL, the colors are more vibrant, the settings are easier to control and the final design is
nicer
Both simulations were interesting but I liked more webGL as it looks more appealing visually
WebGL, because it is easy to access via a link. I can change the brush stroke which changes
the pattern and simulation a lot.
Were there any features you liked in one simulation that were missing in the other?
7 responses
I loved the resizing of the brush size in webGL
resize slider for the brush
the colors in webgl and resizable brush
the fact the the webgl simulation is deployed and is easier to access, the color palette is also
more accessible
the color palette in webgl.
==PAGE:54==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 8 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
How likely are you to use the Taichi Lang simulation again? 
8 responses
How likely are you to use the WebGL simulation again?
8 responses
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
3 (37.5%)
5 (62.5%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Copy
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
3 (37.5%)
5 (62.5%)
==PAGE:55==
12/11/2023, 17.35
Fluid Simulation (Taichi Lang vs WebGL)
Page 9 of 10
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/189kJpQ0uLg6OcrX6r7y9PeB_L-EOkvDmUGbkyoh5550/viewanalytics
Do you have any other comments or feedback regarding the digital marbling 
simulations?
8 responses
I would have been very nice to have both simulations deployed
I will not use the webgl simulation to create art pieces but I will used it as a calming tool it's
very nice to play with
Its very nice and smooth
Both simulations work nice when creating patterns but I personally preferred the web based
one
It would be interesting to see how the simulation can be improved and used further in creating
more advance patterns
in general it is difficult to use the patterns / motifs that the programs is creating because it is
very blurry and fussy. But i think it is super interesting and have possibilities with further
development. I would need to be able to work more specific with the colors ad patterns that is
is creating.
Please describe the hardware used  and background. (technical/non technical,
artistic/non artistic) 
8 responses
Technical background - DTU student
Macbook pro m1, technical background, not an artist
Lenovo Laptop (without incorporated gpu), engineer, no artistic knowledge
ux designer, m1 computer
MacOS, technical background - frontend developer
-
This content is neither created nor endorsed by Google. Report Abuse - Terms of Service - Privacy Policy
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
