==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Master’s Thesis
Promoting Wind Energy in Slovakia:
A Comprehensive Study on Strategies for Wind Power, illustrated
by a Case Study of Repowering the Cerova Wind Park
Author
Valentína Remeková
==PAGE:2==
Promoting Wind Energy in Slovakia:
A Comprehensive Study on Strategies for Wind Power, illustrated by a Case Study of
Repowering the Cerova Wind Park
Project period:
June - November 2023
Author:
Valentína Remeková
Supervisors:
Prof. Dr. Ugur Soytas
Jiwon Kim
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Akademivej, Building 358,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This Master’s thesis was prepared over five months at the Department of Technology, Man-
agement and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulfilment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Sustainable Energy
(MSc Eng).
Valentína Remeková, s212686
.............................................
Signature
23. November 2023
Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisors, Ugur Soytas and Jiwon Kim, for enabling me to
work on a topic that is very close to my heart, and for their guidance, valuable advice and
suggestions. I would also like to thank Tomáš Lacko and Ján Karaba for their enthusiasm
and willingness to share their experience and knowledge about wind energy in Slovakia.
Special thanks go to my mother and Igorko for being the most supportive and loving parents.
I am deeply grateful to my fiancé Tomáš for his unwavering support, guidance, reassurance
and motivation.
Finally, I want to thank my friends Amalie and Victoria for helping me translate the abstract
to Danish, and to all my other friends in Denmark and Slovakia for their encouragement and
love.
i
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master’s thesis focuses on the obstacles associated with the adoption of wind energy
within the context of Slovakia. With only one wind park, located in Cerova, which has
been operating in the country for the past two decades, this study identifies and addresses
reasons behind limited onshore wind energy implementation in Slovakia. The thesis further
undertakes an economic feasibility study for repowering possibilities at Cerova Wind Park,
conducted in collaboration with the operator and a major developer of renewables in Slovakia,
Green Energy Slovakia. The analysis relies on data gathered from field expert interviews
and an extensive literature review.
The highlighted key barriers include inefficiencies in
permitting processes, the absence of defined Go-to areas, low social acceptance due to poor
education on this topic, and challenges in support schemes and financing. The economic
feasibility study analyses three cases - full repowering, full repowering with the expansion of
the installed capacity, and life extension of the existing turbines. The positive Net Present
Values, Return on Investments around 40%, and Levelized Costs of Energy ranging from
63 EUR/MWh to 76 EUR/MWh indicate profitability of all three investigated repowering
cases. Overall, this thesis provides essential insights into the challenges of implementing
wind energy in Slovakia and financial considerations for repowering Cerova. By addressing
significant data gaps, it aims to promote the deployment of future wind energy sources in
the country.
Keywords: Green Energy, Slovakia, Renewable Energy, Wind Energy, Cerova Wind Park,
Onshore Wind Energy, Economic Feasibility Study, Repowering, Green Energy Slovakia,
EIA, Go-to areas, Public Education, Net Present Value, NPV, Return on Investments, ROI,
IRR, PBT, LCOE, Levelized Costs of Energy
ii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract in Danish
Denne kandidatafhandling fokuserer på de forhindringer, der er forbundet med vedtagelsen
af vindenergi inden for rammerne af Slovakiet.
Med kun én vindmøllepark beliggende i
Cerova, som har været i drift i landet i de sidste to årtier, identificerer og adresserer denne
undersøgelse årsagerne til den begrænsede implementering af landbaseret vindenergi i Slo-
vakiet. Afhandlingen gennemfører yderligere en økonomisk gennemførlighedsundersøgelse for
repowering-mulighederne ved Cerova vindmøllepark, udført i samarbejde med operatøren og
en større udvikler af vedvarende energi i Slovakiet, Green Energy Slovakia. Analysen bygger
på data indsamlet fra interviews med feltets eksperter og en omfattende litteraturgennem-
gang.
De fremhævede nøglebarrierer omfatter ineffektive tilladelsesprocesser, manglende
definerede Go-to areas, lav social accept på grund af utilstrækkelig uddannelse om emnet
samt udfordringer med støtteordninger og finansiering. Den økonomiske gennemførlighed-
sundersøgelse analyserer tre scenarier: fuld repowering, fuld repowering med udvidelse af
installeret kapacitet og forlængelse af levetiden for de eksisterende turbiner. Positive nettonu-
tidsværdier, en investeringsafkast på omkring 40% og udjævnet energiomkostning mellem 63
EUR/MWh og 76 EUR/MWh indikerer rentabiliteten af alle tre undersøgte repowering-
scenarier. Samlet set leverer denne afhandling afgørende indblik i udfordringerne ved im-
plementering af vindenergi i Slovakiet og økonomiske overvejelser ved repowering af Cerova.
Ved at tackle betydningsfulde datamangler sigter den mod at fremme implementeringen af
fremtidige vindenergikilder i landet.
Nøgleord: Grøn Energi, Slovakiet, Vedvarende Energi, Vindenergi, Cerova Vindmøllepark,
Landbaseret Vindenergi, Økonomisk gennemførlighedsundersøgelse, Repowering, Green En-
ergy Slovakia, EIA, Go-to areas, Offentlig Oplysning, Nutidsværdi, NPV, Investeringsafkast,
ROI, IRR, PBT, LCOE, Udjævnet Energipriser
iii
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
Abbreviations
AEP
Annual Energy Production
CAPEX
Capital Expenditures
CEE
Central and Eastern Europe
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
ENTSO-E
Transmission System Operators for Electricity
EoL
End of Life
EU
European Union
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GHG
Greenhouse Gases
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
LCOE
Levelized Cost of Energy
NECP
National Energy and Climate Plan
NPV
Net Present Value
O&M
Operations and Maintenance
OPEX
Operational Expenditure
PBT
Payback Time
PPA
Power Purchase Agreement
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
ROI
Return On Investment
SAPI
The Slovak Association of the Photovoltaic Industry and RES
SEPS
Slovak Electricity Transmission System
TSO
Transmission System Operator
V4
The Visegrád Group countries
WE
Wind Energy
iv
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Acknowledgments
i
Abstract
ii
Abstract in Danish
iii
Abbreviation
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Data and Methodology
4
2.1
Data Collection Methods and Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Data Analysis Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Assumptions and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Overview of Energy Use and its Importance in Slovakia
6
3.1
Energy Portfolio of Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Energy, Economic Growth, and CO2 Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Energy Demand Projections and Emission Reduction Targets . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Share of Wind Energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Wind Energy in Slovakia: Status and Barriers
11
4.1
Regulatory Framework and Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Grid Integration and Transmission Infrastructure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Land Availability and Site Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Social Acceptance of Wind Energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
Financing and Investment Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.6
Economic Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Wind Farm Repowering in Slovakia: Economic Feasibility Analysis
24
5.1
Characteristics of the Case Study: Cerova Wind Farm . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Assessment of Wind Resource Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Financial Analysis of Wind Farm Repowering and Expansion Cases . . . . .
28
5.4
Cost-benefit Analysis of Wind Farm Expansion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Conclusion and Discussion
38
6.1
Barriers and Challenges Analysis Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Economic Feasibility Analysis Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Implications for Policymakers and Investors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Future Research Implications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
v
==PAGE:9==
Contents
List of Figures
42
List of Tables
43
References
44
A Interview with Dipl.
Ing.
Tomáš Lacko, the CEO of Green Energy
Slovakia s.r.o., 11. August 2023
I
B Interview with Dipl.
Ing.
Tomáš Lacko, the CEO of Green Energy
Slovakia s.r.o., 21. September 2023
VIII
C Interview with Ing. Ján Karaba, MSc., the director of Slovak Association
of Photovoltaic Industry and RES (SAPI), 22. September 2023
XII
D Additional graphs and tables
XVIII
vi
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
The urgent need to combat climate change and meet the climate targets of the European
Union (EU) has brought the importance of sustainable energy sources into sharp focus. As
the EU strives to become the first carbon-neutral continent by 2050, the European Com-
mission needs to accelerate the transition of the most carbon-intensive sectors. The energy
sector generates more than 75% of the EU’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, thus the de-
ployment of renewable sources is crucial, and the targets are ever-growing. As of March
2023, the EU’s overall energy mix should consist of at least 42.5% renewable energy by 2030
[1].
According to a report released by Ember [2] in May 2023, the Central and Eastern
Europe (CEE) region is struggling to meet Europe’s energy transition goals, thus falling
short of unlocking the region’s full potential. Slovakia, as a part of Central Europe, finds
itself occupying the lowest ranks in terms of both national renewable electricity targets
[2] and the percentage of electricity demand covered by wind power in the whole EU [3].
Slovakia’s energy mix is heavily dependent on nuclear power and fossil fuels [4]. Since 2010,
the share of electricity production from renewables has stagnated at around 22%, indicating
the country faces the challenge of increasing the share of renewable energy sources.
In the energy mix of Slovakia, the least utilized renewable source is wind [5]. Slovakia is
a landlocked country with no possibility to deploy wind turbines offshore. Only five onshore
wind turbines are operating in the country: four in Cerova wind park and a single turbine
in Myjava deployed 20 and 19 years ago, respectively. Therefore, the wind energy’s installed
capacity in Slovakia constitutes less than 0.01% of the overall energy mix [4], in contrast to
neighbouring Austria, where wind power accounts for 12% of the power mix [3].
Slovakia’s energy mix transition target of 19.2 percent by 2030 [6] also indicates that
the country’s efforts are not keeping pace with its ambitious neighbours or the broader
European objectives for renewable energy adoption. In comparison, aforementioned Austria
aims to produce 80 percent of its power from renewable sources by 2030. The Ember’s report
underscores that Slovakia is not alone in facing barriers to sustainable energy development
within the CEE. This highlights the need to search for sources of barriers hindering the
progress of the green transition of countries like Slovakia across the region.
1.1
Research problem
This master’s thesis aims to address the urgent need for green energy development in the
Slovak Republic, contributing to the country’s energy transition and aligning with the Euro-
pean Union’s climate goals. Centred around wind energy, the thesis investigates the barriers
obstructing wind power deployment in Slovakia and subsequently conducts a comprehensive
feasibility study for repowering the existing wind park in Cerova. By identifying and miti-
gating these barriers and exploring the economic viability of repowering, this research aims
to generate new information on how to accelerate Slovakia’s transition to sustainable energy
Page 1 of 50
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Research problem
sources, provide valuable insights for stakeholders, and contribute to the broader European
objective of carbon neutrality.
Taking a holistic perspective, the literature review in Chapter 3 introduces the overview
of energy use and its importance in Slovakia, and presents the background of the share of
wind energy in the country. The reasons behind Slovakia’s limited wind park development
are explored in Chapter 4, including a review of regulatory restrictions, technical and land
requirements, social acceptance, and economic challenges. The phrasing of the first research
question stands as:
What are the key barriers that have hindered the development of wind energy projects in
Slovakia, and how can these barriers be effectively addressed to promote the implementation
of wind energy in the country?
The second part analyzes the economic feasibility of repowering the existing wind park
Cerova in collaboration with Green Energy Slovakia s.r.o., the company operating it. As
the wind turbines have reached the end of their lifespan and the mechanical components are
deteriorating, the company needs to either extend the lifespan of the existing turbines or
decommission them to introduce a new production strategy. For this purpose, a financial
analysis of Cerova wind farm repowering feasibility is calculated, including options for full
repowering, expansion and life extension. Sensitivity analysis further assesses how critical
variable parameters affect the project’s feasibility. This problem statement is translated into
the second research question:
What is the economic feasibility of repowering, the life extension and theoretical expansion
of the existing wind park in Cerova?
To determine the barriers hindering the progress of renewable energy in Slovakia, as
outlined in the primary research question, the study employs a qualitative approach. A
rigorous literature review is conducted, including two interviews with Dipl. Ing. Tomas
Lacko, the CEO of Green Energy Slovakia, and one interview with Ing. Jan Karaba, MSc.
from SAPI (The Slovak Association of the Photovoltaic Industry and RES). This combination
of methods provides a deeper understanding of the challenges renewable energy development
faces in Slovakia.
To conduct a thorough economic feasibility analysis in the second part, the study employs
a quantitative approach that encompasses various methodologies. The research incorporates
the key elements of data analysis of the wind resource potential, qualitative cost-benefit
analysis of wind farm expansion, and financial and sensitivity analyses.
These questions are strategically designed to illuminate different facets of the problem,
ultimately contributing to a holistic understanding and the formulation of effective solutions.
The first research question aims to pave the way for a more favourable environment for wind
energy implementation. Through in-depth analysis, it seeks to identify the key roadblocks
Page 2 of 50
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Research objectives
that have impeded progress and provide recommendations for their resolution. The second
research question shifts the focus toward the economic viability of repowering, life extension
and potential expansion of the existing Cerova wind park. This question addresses not only
the sustainability of the existing project but also offers insights into the potential of enhancing
the country’s renewable energy landscape through repowering efforts. The analysis, backed
by economic indicators, contributes to a more comprehensive view of how to leverage existing
resources for maximum impact.
Collectively, these research questions form a cohesive framework that unites the macro-
level challenges of barrier identification and solutions for Slovakia, with the micro-level of
assessing the potential of the individual end-of-life options for Cerova. By weaving these
threads together, this study strives to offer a multifaceted response to the broader research
problem — accelerating Slovakia’s transition to sustainable energy while overcoming the
obstacles that have hindered progress.
1.2
Research objectives
The research objectives are designed to address the identified barriers and provide prac-
tical solutions for promoting wind power generation in Slovakia. With the limited available
documentation on the subject, this master thesis aims to fill in the significant knowledge
gap by integrating the qualitative analysis of wind power development with a quantitative
examination of the repowering (and possible expansion) of the only wind park in Slovakia.
This analysis proposes valuable insights for Cerova’s operating company, as well as industry
stakeholders and energy companies facing the end-of-life of their future projects.
It is worth highlighting that the qualitative and quantitative exploration of repowering
options holds the potential to enhance the understanding of this process, given that no
previous repowering initiatives have taken place within the country. The research findings
will therefore contribute valuable recommendations for policymakers, industry stakeholders,
and energy companies involved in wind energy projects to accelerate the green transition in
Slovakia and similar countries with low wind power shares.
Page 3 of 50
==PAGE:13==
2
Data and Methodology
2.1
Data Collection Methods and Sources
To address the aforementioned research questions, a combination of qualitative and quan-
titative data sources are collected. For this purpose, a ’Mixed Methods’ approach is employed
[7]. This concept allows the use of both qualitative and quantitative data in the same study
to gain a comprehensive understanding of connections or contradictions in the research topic.
The study draws upon a range of sources, both primary and secondary, encompassing in-
terviews, official EU and national documents, relevant legislation, research articles, books,
reports and reviews.
Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 contain an extensive review of official documents and research
papers, supplemented by interviews conducted with experts from the renewable energy sector
in Slovakia. In total, three semi-structured interviews were carried out with two participants.
The first interviewee is Dipl. Ing. Tomáš Lacko, the CEO of Green Energy Slovakia s.r.o.
This company is operating the wind park in Cerova, which is the centrepiece of this thesis.
Green Energy Slovakia is also a prominent player in private-sector investments in renewable
energy within Slovakia. The second interviewee is Ing. Ján Karaba, MSc., the director of the
non-governmental association SAPI (The Slovak Association of the Photovoltaic Industry
and RES). SAPI actively participates in the formulation and evaluation of energy-related
legislation and represents the renewable resources sector in discussions with entities like the
Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic and SEPS (Slovak Electricity Transmission
System).
The initial interview with Mr. Lacko (Appendix A) and the interview with Mr. Karaba
(Appendix C) feature similar open-ended questions of a general nature. These questions aim
to capture personal experiences regarding the stagnant development of sustainable energy
in the country. They provide insights from the perspectives of both a private investor and
a representative from a non-governmental professional interest association. This approach
complements the official information gathered from national documents and legislation with
firsthand experiences from the renewable energy sector in Slovakia. The follow-up interview
with Mr. Lacko (Appendix B) delves into specific numerical and financial details about the
Cerova wind farm. This data is essential for the comprehensive economic feasibility study
outlined in Chapter 5.
2.2
Data Analysis Techniques
In this thesis, a multi-faceted approach to data analysis is employed in order to provide a
thorough examination of the renewable energy development in Slovakia. The Chapter 3 with
literature review utilizes content analysis to systematically categorize and evaluate a wide
array of official documents and research papers, allowing for a nuanced understanding of the
current knowledge landscape. Thematic analysis is chosen as the primary method for dis-
secting the insights gathered from semi-structured interviews and the literature review. This
Page 4 of 50
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Assumptions and Limitations
method facilitates the identification of recurrent themes and patterns, offering relevant qual-
itative insights. The economic feasibility analysis of wind farm repowering cases in Chapter
5 is conducted through a rigorous quantitative financial assessment, incorporating metrics
such as Net Present Value (NPV), Internal Rate of Return (IRR), Payback Period (PBT),
Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE), and Return on Investment (ROI). These metrics are
calculated in a scenario analysis, encompassing three specific cases of repowering, expanding
and extending the lifespan of the Cerova wind farm.
The quantitative research is complemented by a qualitative Cost-Benefit Analysis, which
accounts for non-monetized costs and benefits of the potential expansion of the wind farm.
Sensitivity analysis is applied for the key uncertain variables, ensuring a robust evaluation of
possible outcomes. A qualitative risk analysis incorporates a perspective on potential risks
and challenges of the project cases. Finally, the results are visualized through informative
charts and graphs, enhancing the clarity of the characteristics found. This comprehensive
array of data analysis techniques is chosen to provide a well-rounded examination of the
study, ensuring that the conclusions drawn are both insightful and substantiated.
2.3
Assumptions and Limitations
While this study provides valuable insights, it is essential to acknowledge the underlying
assumptions and inherent limitations that shape its scope and findings. It is assumed that the
literature and documents obtained are current, reliable, and provide accurate information.
In cases where no data were available, missing values and knowledge were approximated
using trustworthy sources from other institutions, countries, or studies with relevance to
Slovakia and the case study, Cerova. Additionally, this thesis assumes that the interviewees
do not harbour hidden biases, accurately represent their professional backgrounds, and pro-
vide honest responses. It is also presumed that there will be no significant changes in the
regulatory environment related to renewable energy in Slovakia during the research period.
Finally, no hidden biases on the part of the author of this thesis are assumed.
The research does have its limitations. Firstly, the sample size of interviews, restricted
by time and resources, is limited to three. This means that any patterns observed in the
responses and findings may not be broadly applicable. Additionally, the study’s time con-
straints affected the depth of the analysis and its ability to fully capture the complexity of the
topic. The scarcity of publicly available data on renewable energy in Slovakia, particularly
in relation to wind energy, due to the limited experience with this technology in the country,
is another significant limitation. This scarcity of data is intertwined with the assumptions
made, potentially leading to slight discrepancies from reality. Lastly, it is important to note
that if there are significant policy changes in Slovakia’s renewable energy sector after the
research, some findings’ validity may be affected.
Page 5 of 50
==PAGE:15==
3
Overview of Energy Use and its Importance in Slovakia
This chapter provides a comprehensive exploration of Slovakia’s energy landscape, eco-
nomic growth dynamics, and the critical role of wind energy (WE) in its sustainable trans-
formation. An overview of Slovakia’s energy mix and historical background of electricity
generation within the Visegrád Group is presented in Section 3.1. Next, an examination of
the relationship between economic growth and environmental impact, including the stud-
ies highlighting Slovakia’s unique position in the context of economic growth and emissions
is introduced. Key strategies, including the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan
(NECP) and the Slovak Energy Policy, are discussed in connection with Slovakia’s climate
neutrality goals in Section 3.3. The last section involves the status of wind energy in Slovakia,
alongside the NECP’s wind power targets.
3.1
Energy Portfolio of Slovakia
Slovakia, as a part of Central Europe, has traditionally relied on nonrenewable sources.
Together with Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, they form a political group The
Visegrád Group (V4). The energy production of the V4 area is historically based on fossil
fuels, as the area possesses an abundance of fossil fuels like hard coal [8]. Another major
source of electricity in the region is nuclear power, contributing a substantial portion to the
Visegrád Group’s power generation.
According to the report from the International Energy Agency [9], Slovakia had globally
the second-largest share of nuclear power in total electricity generation in 2018. Currently,
there are five reactors operating at two locations: two at Jaslovske Bohunice, and three in
Mochovce [10]. Both reactors in Bohunice have been operating since 1984 and 1985, while
the newest reactor was connected to the grid in January 2023 in Mochovce. Plans exist for
a new reactor in each location, both to be commissioned in 2035 and after. Worldwide, it is
discussed that smaller nuclear installations could replace larger power plants in the future,
but Slovakia is currently not following this trend [11].
In 2022, nuclear power produced slightly more than 59% of the electricity in Slovakia
[4]. The lack of gas and oil in the territory [12] limits the generation of electricity from
gas to 8%, and oil to slightly less than 4%. The phase-out of coal mining and electricity
production from coal is planned for the end of 2023 [13]. The country has been struggling
for years to implement more renewable sources (RES) into its energy mix [14]. Renewable
electricity generation is dominated by production from hydropower, accounting for 13.69%
in 2022. Hydropower represents 77% of total renewable installed power, followed by solar PV
(17%) and bioenergy (6%). The installed capacity of wind energy is only 3 MW, and there
is no existing geothermal power plant generating electricity in Slovakia [5]. The complete
distribution of electricity production by source in 2022 is shown in Figure 1.
Page 6 of 50
==PAGE:16==
3.1
Energy Portfolio of Slovakia
Figure 1: Share of electricity production by source in 2022 in Slovakia, [4]
In 2022, 82% of the electricity was generated with minimal emissions mainly due to nu-
clear power being considered to be a low-carbon source. The high share of nuclear electricity
contributes to the decarbonisation of the energy sector, however, it limits the increase of
the renewables’ share [12]. The primary limitation of implementing more electricity gen-
eration from RES is the reliability of the electricity grid. Maintaining a reliable system,
which ensures a balance of demand and supply, requires an adequate level of stable and
flexible resources. Nuclear power provides enough stable resources, but the flexible capacity
is insufficient.
Renewable sources are crucial for both decreasing the usage of fossil fuels and support-
ing the country’s energy security while reducing the reliance on external sources. With the
average EU energy import dependency rate of 57.5%, Slovakia is slightly below the average
with 56.3% imported energy [15]. Before 2006, the country was self-sufficient in electricity
supply. The status of exporter could be regained through strategic investments in both nu-
clear power and renewable energy sources [16]. The importance of self-sufficiency was further
highlighted by the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Before this event, Slovakia
had faced an almost total reliance on Russian imports for natural gas, oil, and nuclear fuel
[14]. Consequently, Slovakia initiated efforts to diversify its sources of these fuels, achieving
success with gas diversification while encountering more limited progress with nuclear fuel.
In response to these developments, the drive to enhance energy security and reduce energy
dependency has emerged as a strategic priority.
Page 7 of 50
==PAGE:17==
3.2
Energy, Economic Growth, and CO2 Emissions
3.2
Energy, Economic Growth, and CO2 Emissions
The connection between economic growth, energy use, and the environment has been a
subject of discussion since the latter part of the previous century. Many experts argue that
continuous economic growth in a world with finite resources is not possible, meaning that
using materials to drive economic growth cannot continue indefinitely [17]. As economies
around the world pursue economic growth, there is an increasing search for ways to achieve
it while minimizing environmental impact. The Environmental Kuznets Curve assumes that
environmental degradation initially worsens with economic growth, but beyond a certain
income threshold, due to increased environmental awareness and the adoption of cleaner
technologies, it improves [18].
The study conducted by Lyeonov et al. [19] investigated the linkage between green in-
vestments and gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, GHG emissions and renewable
energy in European countries from 2008 to 2016. Green investments include private invest-
ments, jobs and gross value added related to circular economy sectors. The findings illustrate
that increasing the share of renewable energy in total energy consumption decreases GHG
emissions. The green investment could provoke the growth of GDP per capita by 6.4%,
reduction of GHG emissions by 3.08% and the increase of renewable energy in the total final
energy consumption by 5.6%. All indicators of green investment, GHG emission and share
of renewable energy in the total energy consumption had a statistically significant impact
on GDP.
Despite vast research and studies on the topic of the relationship between economic
growth, CO2 emissions and energy consumption, the studies conducted for the Visegrád re-
gion are still scarce and limited. The results from the available studies obtained by individual
researchers using various econometric methods often show different results. Myszczyszyn and
Suproń [20], for example, conducted the research that examined the before-mentioned rela-
tionships in V4 in the period of 1996–2020. There is an observable decrease in CO2 emissions
in all studied countries, while a balanced increase in GDP was observed. The results of the
interdependence of the GDP, energy and emissions indicate varied relationships between the
analyzed variables in individual V4 countries. Despite similarities in their economic growth
and emissions compared to the rest of the EU, the countries of V4 have different social and
economic structures. For Slovakia, no long-term dependency was found, while the short-term
linkage of GDP level per capita and energy consumption (bidirectional) was confirmed.
Slovakia has one of the fastest-growing economies in the EU, its real GDP grew by 61%
between 2005 and 2019. The GHG emissions fell by 18.6% in the same period, following the
trend of the EU. Given the economic structure, which is mostly made of automotive and steel
production, the carbon intensity is still 66% above the EU average for 2019. The industry
remains the largest source of Slovakia’s greenhouse gas emissions. As the real GDP continues
to rise and the industrial sector expands, an associated increase in energy consumption is
anticipated. Taking into consideration both the GDP and GHG emissions, over the 14-year
period there was a clear decoupling of GHG emissions from economic performance [12][13].
Page 8 of 50
==PAGE:18==
3.3
Energy Demand Projections and Emission Reduction Targets
3.3
Energy Demand Projections and Emission Reduction Targets
The trend of decoupling needs to continue for Slovakia in order to reach national and
European emission reduction targets. As all scenarios until 2035 suggest, the total energy
consumption is going to grow [6][12], along with gross electricity demand prediction [21],
which is predicted to be around 40 TWh in 2050. In 2019, Slovakia committed to achieving
climate neutrality by 2050 [6].
To ensure the country will reach this ambitious target,
multiple documents and strategies are in force. These strategies are mostly rooted in EU
decarbonization targets, which Slovakia as a part of the European Union needs to adhere to.
One of these is the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for 2021 to 2030, which was
required to be drafted by EU legislation for each member state in 2019 [6]. The document
drafts a 10-year plan, setting out how to reach its national targets. NECP builds on the
Slovak Energy Policy, a strategic document defining the energy sector’s primary objectives
and priorities until 2030 with an outlook to 2050 [22]. NECP sets a national target of a
total share of renewable energy sources of 19.2% by 2030. Compared to an EU 2030 target
of 32%, the Slovakian target is not ambitious enough and is slowing down the EU progress
towards neutrality [11]. The new package proposed by the European Commission aims to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions further to 55% compared to 1990, revisiting the previous
target of 40% [12]. Increasing the decarbonization plans has a huge impact on the Slovak
economy, as it includes several legislative proposals and policy initiatives that affect various
sectors.
3.4
Share of Wind Energy
Wind energy is a vital component for achieving the renewable energy goals outlined
in the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan. However, Slovakia has historically
generated only a minimal amount of electricity from wind, with a capacity of merely 3 MW
installed across five turbines — four in Cerova and one in Myjava [3][5]. The Cerova wind
park, established in 2003, constitutes 2.64 MW of this capacity, while the single turbine in
Ostrý Vrch (Myjava), operational since 2004, contributes 0.5 MW [23][24]. These facilities
are under the ownership and operation of Green Energy Slovakia, s.r.o. Following 2004,
no further WE farms were deployed.
Despite over 60 project propositions listed on the
website of the Ministry of Environment between 2004 and 2013 [25], none have been built.
The comprehensive reasons for these outcomes are examined in detail in Section 4. The
years 2014 to 2019 witnessed a ’stop-state’ policy that restricted new electricity sources from
connecting to the grid; however, this was lifted, leading to new grid capacities and renewed
propositions for wind park projects [26]. The capacities were first allocated in 2021, almost
two years after the cancellation of the stop-state [27]. At the time of writing this thesis (late
2023), no new wind park has obtained final approval for construction.
According to the NECP [6], the wind power target for Slovakia is 500 MW by 2030.
This envisions a linear growth of 50 MW annually starting from 2022 to achieve the goal.
The plan requires a minimum installation of 100 MW of wind power capacity in Slovakia
by 2023. SAPI has presented a document outlining the Slovak electricity market, focus-
Page 9 of 50
==PAGE:19==
3.4
Share of Wind Energy
ing on five renewable technologies for electricity generation [5]. This report highlights an
unfavourable investment environment due to lengthy administrative and permit procedures
lasting approximately eight years. With no final approvals granted, wind turbine orders and
land preparation remain pending. This trend indicates that Slovakia may lag behind its goals
unless substantial changes are made to address the barriers preventing wind development.
Slovakia has the lowest percentage of electricity demand covered by wind compared to
other EU countries, as indicated by WindEurope [3]. The report’s projections foresee Slo-
vakia adding just 10 MW of capacity by 2027. WindEurope’s Chief Policy Officer, Pierre
Tardieu, emphasizes that the country’s untapped wind energy potential could aid in reach-
ing climate targets and offer economic advantages, including job creation, reduced energy
imports, and enhanced energy security.
However, challenges persist in project develop-
ment due to unclear permitting processes and environmental assessment requirements. As
Tardieu states, without improvements, Slovakia will continue to lag behind its neighbours
[28]. SAPI’s findings [29] correspond with this perspective, comparing Slovakia’s 3 MW of in-
stalled capacity to its neighbours: Poland (7864 MW), Austria (3586 MW), Czech Republic
(337 MW), and Hungary (329 MW) in 2022.
Page 10 of 50
==PAGE:20==
4
Wind Energy in Slovakia: Status and Barriers
The fact that there exists only one wind park in the Slovak Republic could imply the
presence of substantial entry barriers. This chapter aims to provide an in-depth examination
of the wind energy landscape in Slovakia. It analyses the existing technological infrastruc-
ture and systems in the country, while also delving into the various barriers that impede the
growth of wind energy deployment. These challenges can be mitigated through the introduc-
tion of new policies, programs, and technological advancements. The chapter categorizes the
barriers into subchapters, addressing regulations and legislation, technical challenges, land-
related issues, social factors, as well as economic constraints. Through this analysis, the text
pinpoints the specific obstacles preventing renewable energy from effectively competing with
traditional sources and impeding its large-scale deployment in Slovakia.
4.1
Regulatory Framework and Legislation
The energy policies in Slovakia are heavily influenced by EU directives, particularly when
it comes to opening up gas and electricity markets. A major strategy in this context is the
European Green Deal [30], which includes various plans and rules to increase clean energy
use in EU countries. To put the Green Deal’s climate goals into action, the Fit for 55 package
[12] was developed. This package looks at how different policies might impact the country
and is overseen by the Ministry of Environment in Slovakia. The package’s analysis tackles
the challenges that have slowed down wind energy growth. One key hurdle according to this
document is the public acceptance, along with the difficulty in figuring out how much wind
energy can realistically be generated. The analysis also points out that the potential for
renewable energy could be even higher than what is laid out in the NECP plan, with wind
and solar energy standing out as cost-effective options for further investment.
The frameworks put forth by the European Commission predominantly encourage renew-
able energy sources and, therefore are the opposite of the barriers to the development of such
sources. Conversely, as highlighted by Tomas Lacko (refer to Appendix A), and SAPI [31],
significant regulatory and legislative barriers exist. These include the Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) process and the overall complexity and unforeseeability of administration
and planning, among other factors that are introduced in the following subsections.
In Slovakia, every wind installation, regardless of its capacity and size, has to undergo
the complete, mandatory Environmental Impact Assessment process. According to the Min-
istry of Environment, EIA is a pivotal environmental policy tool for promoting sustainable
development. Its primary objective is to preempt any adverse effects that human activities,
including potential health impacts, could have on the environment and public health. This
is accomplished through a comprehensive and expert evaluation of the projected impacts of
proposed activities or changes on the environment before making decisions regarding their
location or authorization under specific regulations [32].
The directive from April 2010,
which establishes standards and limits for wind parks in Slovakia, has not been revised de-
spite being labelled as "insufficient and outdated, and in some instances, even detrimental"
Page 11 of 50
==PAGE:21==
4.1
Regulatory Framework and Legislation
by experts in the field [31]. In 2019, the Ministry of Environment announced a forthcoming
modification to the EIA law as part of its legislative update. This amendment is intended
to address the current version of the regulation, but as of the time of writing this study,
the legislative process for this change has not yet commenced. J. Karaba in his interview
(Appendix C) describes the situation with the aforementioned directive: "[...] about 13 years
ago, there were people who fundamentally did not want wind power plants to develop at all.
So they created a directive stating that it is nearly impossible to just build a wind power plant
anywhere in Slovakia". Another approach that could be implemented is the establishment
of the go-to areas, where the regions suitable for developing a wind park would be organized,
and the permitting process would be simplified [3]. Neither of these initiatives has been
announced by the Slovak government yet.
The sequence of obligatory stages within the Environmental Impact Assessment process,
as outlined on the Ministry of Environment’s website [33], begins with an initial environ-
mental study, followed by delineating the extent and timeline of the assessment, preparing
the environmental impact statement, collecting comments on it, holding a public hearing for
the statement, conducting an expert evaluation, and concluding with a final record. Critics,
including private investors, highlight several shortcomings such as the absence of assessment
standards and methodologies, the lack of a legislative timeframe for submitting the proposed
assessment scope, and concerns related to ornithology studies [31]. T. Lacko (Appendix A)
and J. Karaba (Appendix C) underscored similar deficiencies during the interview. As Lacko
stated: "The experiences are very demanding. This process is considerably complicated. The
criteria for the scope of this assessment are not clearly defined. The biggest issue is that the
current legislation does not regulate deadlines for the Ministry of Environment. This causes
the process to significantly prolong or become very intricate".
The absence of a well-defined scope of assessment can lead to subjectivity in decision-
making and adherence to requirements from relevant environmental protection authorities. J.
Karaba points out comparable drawbacks as Lacko while adding the problem of subjectivity:
"... every official determines a different scope, which implies that some investors get a 15-
point scope while others get a 60-point scope. This is just one of many things that creates a
lot of confusion because there is inconsistency in the procedures and approach". Moreover,
the extended duration of the EIA process introduces considerable uncertainties in terms of
time and costs for investors, further discouraging investments. Lacko further explains: "To
make sure that the process does not take 10 years after obtaining a building permit, where
I spend 5 years on environmental impact assessment, then when I have that, I deal with
connecting to the distribution system, and when I have the connection, then I work on the
spatial plan, and then the building permit – we decided to start the EIA process concurrently.
[...] So, we are doing three steps at once. We are taking the risk that the EIA will pass,
and therefore we haven’t done those other two steps for nothing". Karaba believes that only
"some of them (the drawbacks) are a matter of law, but many of them are not".
In addition to the Environmental Impact Assessment, there are several other prerequisites
outlined by the ministries that must be fulfilled before obtaining the final approval [34]. The
first step involves selecting a suitable area from the zoning plan, leading to a zoning decision
that designates the construction location.
Subsequently, a building approval decision is
Page 12 of 50
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Grid Integration and Transmission Infrastructure
issued. The Ministry of Economy also has to issue a certificate for plant construction. To
obtain this certificate, a written application is submitted, including the perspective of the
distribution system operator responsible for connecting the plant. Additionally, the input
of the transmission system operator is mandatory. This certificate holds validity for three
years, during which the plant developer must provide annual updates on the construction
progress to the Ministry. Lastly, an energy business permit needs to be obtained.
4.2
Grid Integration and Transmission Infrastructure
The electricity grid serves as a fundamental pillar of electrification, facilitating the dis-
tribution of power. Yet, in regions lacking adequate interconnection, the potential for col-
laborative regional initiatives remains untapped [2]. Europe has, for some time, fallen short
of investing in its electricity grid. To propel the transition towards a climate-neutral energy
system, Europe must ramp up its investment efforts, aiming to double the current rate [3].
Positioned at the heart of Europe, Slovakia boasts connections with neighbouring countries:
it is linked to Poland in the north, the Czech Republic to the west, and extends southward
to Hungary, which also bridges Croatia and Slovenia. The Ember report [2] displays the
need for significantly expanding transit lines - between Poland, Czechia and Slovakia, allow-
ing for better North-South electricity transits. Beyond its support for renewable energy, a
well-connected EU grid enhances energy security by reducing dependence on imported gas
and coal.
The transmission system of Slovakia is managed by the Slovak Electricity Transmission
System, a.s. (SEPS), which operates independently and is a member of the European Net-
work of the Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) [35]. It comprises a
complex network of 400 kV, 220 kV, and 110 kV technological installations, complemented by
reactive power compensation facilities. This intricate system allows for the efficient distribu-
tion of electricity from producers to end consumers across the national transmission network
[36]. The transmission system operator (TSO) in Slovakia caters to various users, includ-
ing three regional distribution system operators, five direct electricity consumers, and four
electricity producers. Geographically, the power distribution system is divided into three
regions: the Western Slovakian Distribution (ZSD), Central Slovakian Distribution (SSD),
and Eastern Slovakian Distribution (VSD). To address the increasing demand for electric-
ity and replace ageing generation capacities, Slovakia relies on strategic energy documents.
Simultaneously, the ongoing development of smart grids facilitates the decentralization of
energy production, paving the way for a more distributed energy landscape [35][37]. This
approach prioritizes compliance with rigorous safety and reliability standards for manag-
ing and operating the Slovak energy system while ensuring the nation’s electricity supply
security and stability.
According to SEPS and the Ministry of Economy of Slovakia, the electricity supply’s
security and stability were indirectly the key barriers to renewable sources development in
the country in the past years. In 2013, a distinctive measure known as a ’stop-state’ was
introduced to safeguard the stability of the electricity grid, primarily due to insufficient in-
Page 13 of 50
==PAGE:23==
4.3
Land Availability and Site Selection
frastructure and flexible energy sources. This stop-state effectively prohibited the connection
of new electricity producers to the grid, resulting in a stagnation in the progress of renewable
energy source development [26][27]. "The stop-state was a very, very significant influencing
factor in the whole development of renewable sources, not just photovoltaics, but all of them.
[...] We are probably the only ones in Europe, and possibly in the world, who introduced such
a standstill. We have not found any country in the world that implemented it in this way,
a complete and essentially unjustified stop-state", describes J. Karaba in the interview (Ap-
pendix C). This stop-state persisted for a duration of five years and was only lifted in 2019
by the Ministry of Economy following numerous appeals, complaints, and recommendations,
both at the national and European levels [26]. The lifting of this measure, however, did
not signify an immediate green light for variable renewable energy source projects, as the
capacities for solar and wind energy remained capped at 534 MW until 2021. Lacko further
confirms this, stating, "I think the moratorium was lifted in April 2019. They officially said
you could start submitting applications again, but there was no capacity in the electrical grid.
Although the moratorium was lifted, they did not allocate capacity until later".
The allocation of capacities remains a challenge to this day due to several factors. Firstly,
new capacity additions are infrequent, with no additional volumes for 2023 and only 40 MW
allocated for 2024 [38]. This limited increase in capacity is primarily because the energy
mix lacks flexible sources capable of handling fluctuations. Additionally, transparency is
an issue, although SEPS has improved the process by publishing a list of applicants and
their allocated capacities. The status of individual projects is not publicly available, and
capacity allocation does not guarantee project success. If a project remains inactive, the
capacity may be returned to the TSO and reallocated to another investor. SEPS argues that
currently established processes related to the implementation of generation facilities are the
reason behind the low RES implementation, rather than the lack of available capacities [39].
"There are time-consuming processes involved, interconnected in a complicated manner,"
Lacko agrees (Appendix A).
4.3
Land Availability and Site Selection
Selecting the right location is a critical first step in wind park planning, influenced by
various factors such as wind energy potential, environmental impact on biodiversity, legal
constraints, protected natural areas, zoning regulations, and the intricate building permit
process [40]. To streamline this selection process, the European Commission has proposed a
directive as part of its REPowerEU initiative, introducing "renewables go-to areas" [3][41].
These designated areas are carefully chosen to minimize environmental impact by excluding
nature reserves and reservoirs while incorporating wildlife sensitivity mapping. The creation
of areas specifically intended for renewable energy generation could significantly expedite
permitting procedures. As mentioned earlier, the Slovak government has not yet embraced
this initiative.
The nature of Slovakia is perceived as one of the national treasures, represented through
a substantial number of national parks, protected areas, Natura 2000 regions and other
Page 14 of 50
==PAGE:24==
4.3
Land Availability and Site Selection
reserves. For territorial nature and landscape conservation, 5 levels of protection are estab-
lished. Some areas are simultaneously protected at different levels. The system of domestic,
European, and international protected areas, regardless of the level of nature protection,
represents a total area of approximately 1.87 million hectares, which is 38% of Slovakia’s
territory [42]. Slovakia has 9 national parks, making it one of the highest proportions among
EU countries. The Slovakian protected areas and national parks are presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2: National parks and the protected areas of Slovakia (translated from IEP, [42])
When considering wind resources in Slovakia, WindEurope and SAPI agree on the sat-
isfactory wind conditions in the country [28]. SAPI conducted a study evaluating available
sites for wind energy in Slovakia with the primary objective of highlighting ideal wind con-
ditions. According to J. Karaba, the analysis indicated that 20% of the Slovak Republic’s
territory is deemed suitable in terms of wind conditions and economically viable electricity
production (Appendix C). "That would be the absolute maximum that could not be achieved,
but it follows from that, even if we, for example, achieved only 2 percent, like what the Euro-
pean Commission is talking about now, which is 17 gigawatts of installed capacity, the wind
will produce more than the annual consumption of Slovakia", calculates Karaba.
Page 15 of 50
==PAGE:25==
4.3
Land Availability and Site Selection
Figure 3: Mean Wind Speed at 100m in Slovakia (Global Wind Atlas, [43])
The Global Wind Atlas [43] offers a reasonably accurate overview of the wind distribu-
tion, depicted in Figure 3. The northern region, characterized by mountains, experiences
the highest wind speeds, but these areas are also part of national parks, rendering them un-
suitable for wind power development. A more suitable area lies in western Slovakia, which
features flat terrain and an average wind speed of approximately 6 m/s. Most planned wind
park projects awaiting permits are concentrated in this region. Eastern Slovakia also pos-
sesses areas where wind energy could be viable. In the lowlands, represented in green, the
average wind speed hovers around 4 m/s, which, though suboptimal, remains a potential
option for wind energy generation. It is important to emphasize that when dealing with
areas primarily designated as agricultural land or forest, which make up a significant portion
of Slovakia’s landscape [40], constructing renewable energy sources is not possible until a
zoning plan adjustment has been made.
There are two characteristics of the land to be checked: the level of the character of
the territory according to the zoning plan of the municipality, and the level of the type of
land. Legally, the construction of wind parks can only be built on land where it is allowed
by law and is considered a production area, automatically restraining the areas of national
parks, along with agricultural lands and forests [34]. The restriction can be permanently or
temporarily lifted. When the exclusion period ends, the producer is required to return the
land to its original condition. The change of the zoning plan has to be initiated, negotiated
and paid for by the investor, as Lacko mentions (Appendix A). From his experience, the
landowners are either churches, municipalities or private owners. Churches and municipalities
are prone to lease the land, rather than selling it. The private owners prefer selling the land,
as most of them are older people and do not wish to lease for decades.
Page 16 of 50
==PAGE:26==
4.4
Social Acceptance of Wind Energy
Land ownership details, including parcel specifications and owner contact information,
can be accessed through the Cadastre portal. The system, however, faces a challenge due
to the fragmentation of land ownership rights. On average, there are approximately 11.91
co-owners for every single parcel, as per a report by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development of the Slovak Republic [44]. This complexity can pose difficulties for investors
looking to purchase larger plots of land, as negotiations with numerous co-owners are often
required. Once a suitable piece of land is identified, the producer can initiate the permitting
process, which involves obtaining approval for the construction site [34].
Following the
approval of this decision, the next steps involve securing a building permit and subsequently
obtaining building approval. By acquiring these essential documents, the initiation of the
wind park construction may begin.
4.4
Social Acceptance of Wind Energy
Governments are actively driving the green transition by promoting innovative, low-
carbon technologies such as variable renewable energy sources and energy-efficient solutions.
They are also introducing economic measures, like Pigovian taxes, aimed at discouraging
activities with negative environmental impacts. Public engagement and social acceptance
play pivotal roles in the planning and adoption of these solutions [40][45][46][47]. If not
effectively managed and communicated, these factors can become barriers to the transition.
There are two primary aspects of sustainable energy solutions: support, which signifies a
willingness to endorse innovation measures, and adoption, which involves the decision to
personally invest in innovative solutions [45]. Green innovations often encounter challenges
in gaining public acceptance, as they can directly or indirectly affect the lives and perceptions
of citizens [40].
The European Environmental Agency highlights common concerns like operational noise,
shadow flickering, alterations to the landscape’s visual appeal, and potential decreases in
property values near renewable energy facilities, among others. The location of the wind
park is a critical factor influencing social acceptance, as it has a ripple effect on various
other considerations, including impacts on human well-being and the environment. Research
consistently indicates that, as a general trend, individuals are reluctant to reside close to
renewable energy installations due to concerns about the visual disruption they bring to the
natural landscape [40]. This phenomenon is commonly addressed as "Not In My Backyard"
(NIMBY), reflecting the psychological stance of local residents supporting renewable energy
in principle but opposing its implementation in their immediate proximity [46].
Studies from across the EU have shown that trust is a critical aspect in determining the
level of social acceptance [46][47][48]. Enhancing mutual trust between developers and com-
munities can be achieved by establishing transparent processes and addressing community
concerns through active public participation during the planning phase. The research under-
scores that offering financial incentives to communities significantly contributes to the local
acceptance of renewable energy projects [46]. These incentives may include lower energy
costs, employment opportunities, or tax benefits. It is crucial that these advantages are eq-
Page 17 of 50
==PAGE:27==
4.4
Social Acceptance of Wind Energy
uitably distributed among community members. Another strategy to involve local residents
in the planning of wind parks in their vicinity is to introduce shared ownership arrangements.
As an example, Denmark has implemented a co-ownership program mandating developers
to provide 20% of a project’s shares at the closing bid price to local permanent residents
living within 4.5 km [47]. By including community members in the investment process, they
are more likely to embrace a project they have a stake in. Nevertheless, it is essential to
note that citizen investments alone may not be sufficient for increasing acceptance. Studies
highlighting the effectiveness of citizen investments tend to emphasize a prolonged process of
community empowerment, active engagement with local politics, and the experience gained
from previous projects. A similar conclusion emerges from an Austrian study, which under-
scores the importance of early and comprehensive information for concerned citizens, their
involvement in decision-making processes, negotiations regarding the scale of the project,
visualizations, and equitable distribution of financial benefits [48].
It is required for all investors to conduct a public hearing as a part of EIA in the Slovak
Republic. "In principle, at the beginning, we only engage with the representatives of the
community, which means the council members and the community leadership.
Once an
agreement is reached and the process is initiated, we are obliged to hold public deliberations as
part of the EIA process", describes the situation Tomas Lacko (Appendix A). Public opinion
must be taken into account and assessed during the expert review and final record stages, as
well as when the competent authority makes a decision regarding the screening procedure.
Informing the public is facilitated through various channels, including the websites of the
competent authority and impacted municipality, official notice boards and media outlets [49].
Jan Karaba in the interview draws attention to problematic aspects of social engagement in
Slovakia: "[...] it is an open process according to the Aarhus Convention, meaning as soon as
something is in the EIA process, any subject in Slovakia can raise a comment. Since official
representatives usually view it as legitimate, they ask the investors, even if it is something
completely nonsensical, to address it and deal with it.
This is what is called obstructive
behaviour, or obstructive conduct. Many subjects now abuse it in a way that literally forces
you as an investor to cooperate with them, usually for a fee" (Appendix C). The obstructive
behaviour can further slow down the already time-consuming process of EIA for the investors.
Both Jan Karaba and Tomas Lacko recognize the significance of the support from the
locals: "... if we want to undertake such a project, it is not possible without the commu-
nity’s support. The community essentially functions as a building authority today and has a
say in everything, so there needs to be an agreement with the community", explains Lacko
(Appendix A). Since Slovakia lacks existing wind energy projects, the social acceptance
of renewable energy in the country can be comprehended through public opinion research.
A climate change opinion survey conducted in 2022 [50] reveals that 71% of respondents
support measures to combat climate change. Furthermore, 80% of those surveyed favour
economic support for the development of renewable energy sources, with solar energy (82%)
and wind energy (78%) being particularly popular. The European Commission’s Eurobarom-
eter [51] aligns with the previously mentioned public opinion, reporting that 89% of Slovak
respondents consider it "fairly" or "very important" for national governments to establish
ambitious targets for increasing the use of renewable energy by 2030. It is worth noting
Page 18 of 50
==PAGE:28==
4.5
Financing and Investment Challenges
that out of 89%, only 31% of Slovaks perceived this as "very important," which is the lowest
among all EU countries.
In contrast, the Fit for 55 analysis [12] presents a different perspective, asserting that
"public disfavour" is hampering the development of wind energy. It claims that civil society
is often concerned about significant environmental disruption and landscape degradation.
These claims, however, lack specific sources or research to substantiate them. As J. Karaba
notes, the lack of universal political support on a moral level also likely hinders the devel-
opment and acceptance: "No representative, no top government official has stated that yes,
we want to have wind power plants here because it is a good source of electricity. [...] it
would send a very strong political signal that everyone should take it seriously because the
government supports it" (Appendix C).
Multiple studies from V4 countries and specifically Slovakia present an issue of lack of
public awareness about the topic of climate change and the benefits of the green transition
[50][52][53] despite huge campaigns and education spending [8]. There is also a running cam-
paign to support wind energy by SAPI addressing the misinformation and myths regarding
wind energy and its visual impact on the landscape. "I think thanks to the campaign, public
opinion has significantly improved", states J. Karaba (Appendix C). T. Lacko agrees with
the improvement of the situation in recent years, especially after the invasion of Ukraine
when the electricity prices rose [14]. "Over the 20 years I have been involved in this topic, I
would say that public opinion has changed. In the beginning, there was apprehension about
the unknown because it was something new. [...] Perhaps last year was the most positive
period when energy prices skyrocketed due to the conflict in Ukraine. It was presented that by
utilizing available local sources such as solar and wind, we could obtain cheaper electricity.
So, it began to have a more positive outlook, and today I would say it is about 50-50" (Ap-
pendix A). When asked about how he would improve the acceptance rate, Lacko adds: "...
we might need to simplify or accelerate the permitting process. When you talk to someone
in a community for 10 years about building something there, people eventually forget what it
was supposed to be and why it should be there. And if no one gets it done in 10 years, it is
never going to happen."
4.5
Financing and Investment Challenges
The cost of capital is a crucial factor in the decision-making process for investments,
encompassing the expenses and interests associated with securing the necessary funds for
financing potential renewable energy projects. Essentially, it represents the internal rate
of return that equalizes the current stock price with the present value of expected future
cash flows [54]. The construction of a wind farm requires a large amount of capital to be
implemented, where the capital is usually acquired from various sources, including financial
loans from banks or public financial institutions [53]. Competitive financial loans typically
play a crucial role in enabling the project’s construction. Historically, high interest rates have
been applied to the loans offered to wind energy investments, due to improper interference
with governmental policies on the cost of capital. Access to capital is also a fundamental step
Page 19 of 50
==PAGE:29==
4.5
Financing and Investment Challenges
in speeding up the RES developments. The financing processes of banks may be excessively
rigid in handling the inherent risk associated with WE investments. Wind developers might
find it necessary to provide robust assurances, such as power purchasing agreements (PPAs)
or their own capital. In EU countries like the Czech Republic, the debt-to-equity ratio could
be as low as 60:40 [54].
The capital expenses (CAPEX) consist of the cost of the turbine, representing 64% - 84%
of total installed system costs, followed by other major cost components like construction and
foundation work, grid connection, land, and project costs. The cost of the WE projects has
been declining more or less steadily since the 1980s, except for the period between 2002-2009,
when the costs temporarily increased. The overall reduction of upfront capital expenditures
originated in impressive growth in size and capacity factors, further decreasing the CAPEX
and the levelized cost of electricity. The objective of wind plant operators is not to build
capacity at the lowest price but to produce electricity at the lowest possible cost [55].
The systematic review of the barriers to onshore wind energy implementation [53] points
out that some of Slovakia’s main barriers are high initial capital costs and lack of financial
institutions. The wind parks in Slovakia are financed as any other energy project in the
country, as Tomas Lacko describes in the interview (Appendix A). The initial finances used
for the entire development of the project, including costs related to acquiring land – either
through lease, purchase, or establishing easements, all the studies and project documen-
tation, and the grid connection fee (called G-component) has to be paid by the investor’s
private finances. Only after the project obtains a construction permit, which implies that
the investor has all the necessary permits for construction, the indicative offer for financing
can be obtained from the bank. The conditions for being eligible for the loan are standard:
"... you need to establish a pledge on movable and immovable property, and assets, and you
need to present documents like connection agreements, building permits, contracts with the
general contractor, service agreements, insurance, and so on". The energy audit, conducted
by the expert, is also essential as this document for instance evaluates the site’s potential
and capacity for energy production.
The banks offer varying equity-to-debt ratios, ranging from 30% equity and 70% debt
to even higher equity levels, between 45% to 55%. "The interest rates are currently quite
unfavourable due to the recent rise in Euribor. If I recall correctly, it is around 3.5 percent",
reports Lacko. This aligns with the findings of the study by Angelopoulos et al. [54], which
also identified a 70:30 debt-to-equity ratio for Slovakia. The same study reported a Cost of
Debt in the range of 6–7.3% and a weighted average cost of capital of 8.1%.
An alternative means of funding wind projects is through government subsidies, which
have experienced significant fluctuations over the years. The initial form of support was a
feed-in tariff, established in 2008 [56]. This tariff guaranteed investors a fixed price in Euros
per MWh for the first 12 years of a plant’s operation, ensuring stable returns on investment.
However, the downfall of this tariff, possibly contributing to its discontinuation, was its
high-cost calculation. As Lacko recalls from his experience using this tariff for photovoltaic
panels, "The tariff was higher than the actual costs, so some really good business was done in
a short time" (Appendix A). J. Karaba labelled the support to be "exceptionally generous,
Page 20 of 50
==PAGE:30==
4.5
Financing and Investment Challenges
meaning the feed-in tariffs were set so high that practically everyone found it profitable",
further describing it as "rather inconsiderate and politically problematic" (Appendix C).
This higher feed-in tariff ultimately led to increased bills for consumers, which negatively
impacted public favour. The surge in bills stemmed from a nearly 500 million EUR deficit
incurred in the distribution system due to political intervention by the regulatory authority
in tariff price-setting. "The distribution companies were in debt because they had to pay the
producers, and they did not receive it from their partners," outlines Karaba. Consequently,
the feed-in tariff was terminated before the full lift of the stop-state in 2021 and was retained
only for sources below 500 kW.
The following implemented support mechanism, known as the Feed-in premium, was de-
signed for large sources with capacities of up to 50 MW. It represents the final difference
between the offered electricity price and the electricity purchase price set by the Regulatory
Office for Network Industries (ÚRSO). Unfortunately, the auction featuring this type of sur-
charge was cancelled in 2020 due to COVID-19 [57]. When it was re-established in 2022 [58],
it came in the form of direct investment support. This signals a shift in government strategy,
as it will no longer directly subsidize producers for the green energy they generate. Instead,
the focus is on contributing to the investment costs during the construction of the facilities.
The financial condition for this support is tied to the cost efficiency of production, capped at
27 EUR/MWh. One of the key legislative requirements is that the recipient of support must,
within 6 months of the support agreement’s effectiveness, submit to the Ministry of Economy
a confirmation that they have initiated the EIA process. Simultaneously, within a timeframe
ranging from 12 to 22 months, the EIA must be completed. As detailed in Chapter 4.1, the
EIA for wind power plants is under the current permitting processes a lengthy process. This
extended timeline indirectly places a limitation on the success of wind turbine projects in
this auction. "Everyone who applied was for photovoltaics, not a single wind project because
they set the time frame in such a way that no wind power plant could be established within
the time they specified for it to be created", agrees J. Karaba (Appendix C). To secure the
financing of the project during its operation, the investors depend on the PPAs. "One of
the key moves is making sure we have a solid power purchase agreement in place ahead of
time. This agreement essentially acts as the financial backbone during the operation when
the supplement from the government is not available", adds Lacko (Appendix A).
Investors must also pay a fee, known as the G-component, for connection to the distribu-
tion system. According to SAPI [31], the G-component’s cost ranged from 17.000 to 21.000
EUR per MW of installed capacity annually. Tomas Lacko agrees with this figure, noting
that the calculation method in Slovakia differed from that in other European countries. This
high cost persisted until 2020 when it was then reduced to roughly half of its original value.
As Lacko mentioned, the decrease in the price was due to all Slovak producers who took legal
action against distribution companies, arguing that the fee was illegal. The Supreme Court
ruled in favour of the distribution companies at the end: "The Constitutional Court ruled
in our favour, but somehow the distribution companies convinced the Supreme Court, which
overturned the Constitutional Court’s decision and sided with the distribution companies.
Although the fee was reduced, we all still have to pay it. So, we dropped the lawsuits, paid
the fees, and the distribution companies essentially won".
Page 21 of 50
==PAGE:31==
4.6
Economic Perspective
4.6
Economic Perspective
The concept of "barriers to entry" originates from the field of industrial organization
and pertains to the challenges that companies encounter when attempting to establish a
presence in a market.
Prominent economists like Joe S. Bain, Franklin M. Fisher, and
Dennis Carlton / Jeffrey Perlo offer various definitions for this concept [59]. According to
Bain, it involves advantages of existing sellers over potential entrants, allowing them to
sustain prices above competitive levels without attracting new competitors. Fisher defines
it as anything that obstructs entry when it is beneficial for society. Carlton and Perlo echo
this description, stating that it includes factors hindering an entrepreneur from promptly
starting a new venture. They involve both the costs and time required for entry. In the
context of Slovakia’s limited wind projects, Fisher’s and Carlton-Perlo’s definitions align
more closely, as they consider the societal and practical aspects of entry, which are relevant
to the absence of wind projects in the country. Bain’s definition, focused on established
market participants, is not entirely applicable in this context [59].
A barrier to market entry can be classified into two categories: exogenous and endoge-
nous. Exogenous barriers are inherent to market conditions and remain beyond the control
of firms. In contrast, endogenous barriers emerge from strategic market actions and com-
petitive behaviours of established incumbents [60].
Potential entrants typically evaluate
multiple barriers before venturing into a market, though not all barriers carry the same
weight in their decision-making calculus [61]. It is important to note that a combination
of seemingly minor primary barriers can collectively constitute a substantial deterrent to
entry [59]. Economic barriers deterring market entry encompass factors such as economies
of scale, absolute cost advantages, the number of market players, optimal entry timing, and
the capital requirements for market penetration [60][61][62].
Economies of scale refer to the cost advantages gained through an increase in production
volume. In the context of wind projects, the installed costs exhibit economies of scale, par-
ticularly during the transition from small- to medium-sized projects [63]. This cost reduction
per kilowatt is most pronounced when moving from projects of 5 MW or less to those in
the 20-50 MW range. While the decline continues beyond 50 MW, it does so at a lesser
rate. Similar economies of scale are observed in turbine size, as fewer larger turbines can
capture the same amount of wind as a larger number of smaller ones. This trend persists
until projects reach 3 MW or larger. However, government procedures can also impede the
realization of economies of scale. Removing regulatory barriers will pave the way for an in-
creased number of wind parks, fostering economies of scale and leading to reduced operation
and maintenance costs [62].
The concept of absolute cost advantage implies that established firms may possess inher-
ent cost advantages, incentivising new entrants to achieve economies of scale and lower costs
[60]. In the energy industry, the number of major players tends to be limited, resulting in
a highly centralized system that may not readily accommodate smaller, distributed suppli-
ers [64]. Moreover, the timing of market entry is crucial. Early movers gain an advantage
by establishing relationships with potential customers, making it more challenging for late
entrants to match their performance. Research indicates that late entrants often face more
Page 22 of 50
==PAGE:32==
4.6
Economic Perspective
extensive barriers than their early counterparts [60]. Additionally, wind energy projects are
characterized by their capital-intensive nature, with up to 80% of the total costs required
upfront. Without adequate financial support and established institutions in the market, this
can potentially further deter investors [65].
In the context of the Slovak energy market, certain economic barriers carry more weight
than others. Given the virtual non-existence of the wind energy market and the planned
project scale (up to 50 MW), the aforementioned economies of scale could potentially come
into play [58]. The absence of existing projects and the corresponding lack of experience
present challenges for renewable energy developers and producers in securing financing at
rates comparable to those available for fossil fuel projects (Appendix A)[62]. Additionally,
Slovakia’s energy market demonstrates high concentration, primarily dominated by nuclear
power [4]. The concentration leads to market inefficiencies due to limited competition. The
systematic review of onshore wind implementation [53] highlights a significant barrier —
a clash of interest, particularly powerful lobbying from dominant energy utilities against
wind farms in Slovakia. From an economic and financial standpoint, other relevant barriers
encompass economic non-viability, high payback periods, and an unstable microeconomic
environment. Market distortions further compound these challenges, including insufficient
investment in R&D programs, unaccounted externalities, deficient market infrastructure, low
information and awareness levels, tightly controlled energy sector, and restricted access to
technology [53][62][64][66].
Page 23 of 50
==PAGE:33==
5
Wind Farm Repowering in Slovakia: Economic Feasi-
bility Analysis
The first part of the thesis examined the general barriers hindering the development
of wind parks in Slovakia, which are relevant and applicable to all new projects. In this
chapter, the focus shifts to a specific case of Cerova Wind Park to assess the feasibility of
the repowering scenarios.
5.1
Characteristics of the Case Study: Cerova Wind Farm
As wind turbines age, project owners face crucial end-of-life decisions. Over the years,
these turbines have fallen behind the pace of technological advancements seen in newer
models, diminishing the efficiency of the original wind farm compared to its contemporary
counterparts with the same capacity. Considering a lifetime between 20 to 25 years, up
to 80 GW of the EU-installed onshore wind capacity could reach the end of life by 2030
[67]. With older turbines often paid off in their final operational years, owners contemplate
strategies to enhance their returns. One such strategy is repowering, a process involving
either complete or partial replacement of the ageing technology instead of decommissioning
the entire project. Full repowering entails dismantling and replacing all turbine equipment,
while partial repowering focuses on upgrading specific components to boost energy produc-
tion and enhance overall project reliability. As partial repowering was determined to be
less economically attractive than full repowering, this option is disregarded in the feasibility
study of the Cerova wind farm [68].
The fully repowered wind park brings about increased productivity, better grid support,
more efficient use of high-value resource areas, reduced visual impact, lower operation and
maintenance costs, and more reliable equipment. Sometimes, it can even lead to a reduced
number of turbines while increasing the installed capacity [68]. In the case of Cerova, the
wind park commenced operations in October 2003. At the time of writing this thesis, the
wind park is two decades old, signalling the end of its operational life. With the ageing
technology, several malfunctions and periods of non-production have occurred in recent years,
with blade detachment being the most severe incident [69].
As a result, Green Energy Slovakia must reassess the viability of future steps for the
facility, aiming to select the most economically feasible option while ensuring safe operations.
Cerova, a small village in Western Slovakia, is home to just under 2000 residents. Currently,
the facility boasts an installed capacity of 2.64 MW, comprising four Vestas V 47/660 kW
turbines with a tip height of 100 meters [23]. According to the village’s website, the wind
park’s expected annual production is about 4000 MWh. However, due to the malfunctions,
the park’s production in 2022 was nearly half of this projected value. The energy generated
is then transmitted to the public grid at 22 kV, located over 3 km away from the power
plant. Each wind turbine is equipped with its own transformer positioned adjacent to the
tower.
Page 24 of 50
==PAGE:34==
5.1
Characteristics of the Case Study: Cerova Wind Farm
In terms of repowering potential, this thesis investigates three scenarios in the financial
analysis: Case 1 involves replacing the original four wind turbines with a new one. Case
2 entails replacing the original turbines with new ones while also increasing the installed
capacity. Lastly, Case 3 focuses on extending the lifespan of the existing wind turbines. A
detailed breakdown of these cases is shown in Table 1.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Description
Repowering
Repowering
+ Expansion
Life extension
Number
of turbines
1
5
4
Installed
capacity
2.625 MW
13.125 MW
2.64 MW
Projected
lifetime
25 years
25 years
10 years
Turbine model
Siemens SG 2.6-114
Siemens SG 2.6-114
Vestas V47/660 kW
(Original)
Table 1: The summary of the 3 cases investigated in the financial analysis
Given the inherent uncertainty and various fluctuating factors in the economic feasibil-
ity study of the energy project, the financial analysis in this thesis incorporates numerous
assumptions. Due to Cerova’s status as the sole wind park in Slovakia (excluding the single
turbine in Myjava), some information gaps are unavoidable. The park’s establishment dates
back over two decades when regulatory frameworks were significantly underdeveloped. Sub-
sequently, new European renewable energy regulations have been introduced. As previously
noted, the repowering of Cerova is the first project of its kind in Slovakia, therefore specific
legislation governing such projects does not exist. To address the gaps, missing data points
were estimated based on proximate sources related to the case study or obtained during
interviews. The fundamental assumptions are outlined in Table 2.
Page 25 of 50
==PAGE:35==
5.1
Characteristics of the Case Study: Cerova Wind Farm
Topic
Assumptions
Electricity prices
Cases 1 and 2 rely on forecasted electricity prices per MWh, while
Case 3 utilizes a Power Purchase Agreement for sales. Electricity
price volatility is discussed in Sensitivity Analysis, Chapter 5.5.
PPA prices
In Case 3, PPA prices are set at 100 EUR/MWh for the initial 5
years post-life extension, followed by 90 EUR/MWh for the sub-
sequent 5 years. These rates are determined based on T. Lacko’s
preferences and assumptions.
Turbine Model
In Cases 1 and 2, the Siemens SG 2.6-114 turbine model was
selected due to its accessible power curve data and its installed
capacity alignment with the original park size. It is assumed that
this turbine model is readily available.
The power curve
Siemens Gamesa provides a basic outline of the power curve for
their wind turbine.
The precise values are estimated from the
provided graph.
Size of the wind
park
From the interview with T. Lacko (Appendix B), it is understood
that the installed capacity of 2.6 MW is immovable and cannot
be expanded. Consequently, the sizes of Case 1 and Case 3 are
realistic. Case 2 is a theoretical scenario, and the turbine count
is chosen based on available land limitations.
Annual
Energy
Production
The Annual Energy Productions (AEPs) are computed using wind
speed data from 2022. It is assumed that these wind speeds will
remain consistent over the entire project lifespan.
Grid connection
In the event of wind farm expansion, a new grid connection will
need to be established. This involves either constructing a sub-
station or laying down a 12 km cable to the nearest available
substation. The calculation assumes the use of a new substation
due to zoning plan constraints regarding cables.
Depreciation
Linear depreciation is assumed for all cases. The original wind
park is considered fully depreciated, with a current asset value of
0 EUR.
Other input data
Missing data points were approximated using sources related to
the case study or collected during interviews.
Decommission
The decommissioning costs for the original wind farm are factored
into all three cases.
Cases 1 and 2 also account for secondary
decommissioning costs at the end of the repowered lifetime. Ad-
ditionally, it is assumed that during repowering, all technologies
will be modernized to enhance the park’s efficiency.
Table 2: The summary of the assumptions made in the financial analysis of Cerova
Page 26 of 50
==PAGE:36==
5.2
Assessment of Wind Resource Potential
5.2
Assessment of Wind Resource Potential
Evaluating the wind resource potential is crucial for the success of wind energy projects.
The local wind conditions, especially the wind speed, directly influence the calculation of
the park’s Annual Energy Production. Given that Cerova is an established park with com-
prehensive historical data, precise information on wind speeds and production from previous
years is available. Therefore, the data from 2022 is used as the foundation for both wind
speeds and energy production, which will be employed in the analysis.
The actual Annual Energy Production data for the wind park is accessible solely for Case
3, where there is no alteration in the turbine model. In Cases 1 and 2, the AEP is computed
by utilizing hourly wind speeds with the corresponding power curve, depicted in Appendix D,
Figure 14. The monthly production figures for all three cases are detailed in Appendix D,
Table 6, while the final AEPs are outlined in Table 3. As anticipated, production levels are
closely tied to the chosen technology and installed capacity. An intriguing observation arises
when comparing Case 1 with Case 3. Despite both cases having the same installed capacity,
the newer turbine model in Case 1 boasts a higher power coefficient, which is the ratio of
the power extracted by the wind turbine relative to the energy available in the wind stream.
This yields nearly fivefold more electricity compared to the original turbines. Furthermore,
Case 3 exhibits a relatively lower AEP due to recurrent malfunctions attributed to the ageing
technology, which is more inclined to failure. Extending the operational life of the turbines
can lead to an improvement in the AEP by mitigating the occurrence of malfunctions.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
AEP [MWh]
10,106 (calculated)
50,532 (calculated)
2,609 (real)
Table 3: The Annual Energy Productions for all Cases, 2022
The choice of the Siemens Gamesa SG 2.6-114 wind turbine model is based on its ac-
cessible power curve data, the ability to maintain high production levels even in low wind
conditions, and its close match in capacity to the existing installed capacity in Cerova. This
allows for the replacement of the four older turbines with just one, more efficient model in
repowering Case 1. As highlighted in Table 2, Case 1 is the most plausible scenario, con-
sidering that the installed capacity is likely fixed based on the information provided by the
operating company (Appendix B).
The wind turbine model is designed to perform optimally in medium to high wind speeds,
and it also offers a customizing option known as wind class S, enabling users to tailor the
turbine to their specific requirements [70].
Figure 4 presents the wind speeds and their
frequency distribution, indicating the likelihood of various wind speeds occurring throughout
the year. In 2022, the average wind speed was registered at 5.66 m/s, categorized as relatively
low. Nevertheless, the power curve suggests a notable potential for electricity generation even
at modest wind speeds, particularly when contrasted with the older turbines. Opting for
wind class S and tailoring the power curve to accommodate lower wind speeds could result
in even greater production enhancements.
Page 27 of 50
==PAGE:37==
5.3
Financial Analysis of Wind Farm Repowering and Expansion Cases
Figure 4: Annual Wind Speed Histogram for Cerova wind farm, 2022
5.3
Financial Analysis of Wind Farm Repowering and Expansion
Cases
The profitability of repowering the Cerova wind farm is determined through a compre-
hensive economic analysis. The analysis delves into a spectrum of financial metrics, each
carefully selected to provide a multifaceted perspective. The metrics included are Net Present
Value, Internal Rate of Return, Payback Time, Return on Investment and Levelized Cost
of Energy. NPV is a fundamental metric in investment analysis, showing a project’s worth
in today’s value and including both cash outflows and inflows. IRR represents the annual
compounded return rate of a project. When used as a discount rate, it results in an NPV of
zero. Both NPV and IRR consider the time value of money and are closely related. PBT,
when calculated from discounted cumulative cash flows, demonstrates the number of years
needed to recoup the initial investments of a project. ROI evaluates project profitability
by presenting a percentage return on investment. The average lifetime cost over a project
lifetime is represented by LCOE, which is a frequently used indicator. Collectively, these
metrics provide an assessment of feasibility from various angles.
In order to assess feasibility, a substantial set of input data must be available. As detailed
in Chapter 5.1, due to limited available data, some assumptions and estimations were neces-
sary for this analysis. Some of the key values needed in the analysis are CAPEX, Operational
Expenditures (OPEX), grid connection fee, payment for Cerova village, costs of necessary
permits, insurance, discount rate, taxes and decommissioning price. The validation year
is set at 2024, while commissioning is projected at 2026 in Cases 1 and 2, accounting for
the decommissioning of existing turbines and the introduction of new technologies. In Case
3, both validation and commissioning are scheduled for 2024, as no major alterations are
Page 28 of 50
==PAGE:38==
5.3
Financial Analysis of Wind Farm Repowering and Expansion Cases
planned in this scenario. The projected End-of-Life (EoL) is set at 2034 for Case 3 and 2051
for Case 1 and Case 2. However, this can be extended if the wind park continues to operate
efficiently and securely.
For Cases 1 and 2 in Cerova, the CAPEX is allocated as follows: 70% for turbine procure-
ment, 22% for the balance of the system (covering foundation, electrical infrastructure, site
assembly, and installation), and 8% for financial considerations, including contingency and
construction finance for non-operational periods. The pricing is based on NREL estimates
[71], calculated in EUR per kW of installed capacity. Similar capital costs were found by
other studies [72][73]. Additionally, site-specific costs like land acquisition, EIA permit, and
decommissioning of the original turbines are factored into the final CAPEX. In Case 2, a new
substation construction is necessary due to limitations in the existing grid connection point
(Appendix A, Appendix B). The CAPEX in Case 3 only covers turbine repair costs, approx-
imated to be around 100,000 EUR per MW for onshore wind farms [74]. Decommissioning
costs are accounted for in all three cases at their respective EoL years.
In Cerova, operational expenses encompass the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) costs,
projected in line with the EU electricity market trends up to 2050 [75] (refer to Figure 15
in Appendix D), a fixed grid connection fee (G-component), park insurance against damage
and for non-generating periods, and a financial contribution to Cerova village (Appendix B).
These OPEX components remain consistent across all Cases, with only specific values ad-
justed based on the installed capacity. Case 1 and Case 2 anticipate selling electricity at
prices projected for the EU market until 2050 [75] (refer to Figure 16 in Appendix D), whether
through PPA, a broker, or on the spot-market (Appendix B). Meanwhile, Case 3 sustains
revenue generation through fixed 5-year contracts, initially estimated at 100 EUR/MWh
for the first 5 years, followed by 90 EUR/MWh for the subsequent 5 years. The asset’s
value follows a linear depreciation until it reaches zero at the end of its lifespan [71]. With
electricity prices expected to hover below 180 EUR/MWh, no excess profit tax has to be
paid. The sole tax in the calculation is a 21% profit tax (Appendix B)[76]. The analysis is
based on the P-50 scenario for wind production, indicating a 50% likelihood of wind speeds
matching those of 2022. The cash flows are discounted at an estimated rate of 6% [71][77].
All values are adjusted from real to nominal through forecasted inflation rates. For Slovakia,
the inflation rate is anticipated to decline from 5.6% in 2024 to 1.8% in 2028, and then
remain stable at 2% from 2029 onwards [78][79]. The summary table with the key input
parameter values can be found in Table 7 in Appendix D.
Financial metric
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
NPV [EUR]
2,922,620
11,833,148
114,465
LCOE [EUR/MWh]
63.29
68.55
76.58
IRR
10.64%
9.5%
21.24%
PBT [years]
12.4
15.1
3.8
ROI
44.96%
32.67%
41.06%
Table 4: The financial analysis results, nominal values
Page 29 of 50
==PAGE:39==
5.4
Cost-benefit Analysis of Wind Farm Expansion
Table 4 displays the outcomes of the economic feasibility study conducted for Cerova
for the 3 investigated cases. In Case 1, where the wind park undergoes full repowering,
the positive Net Present Value, a robust Return on Investment and a moderate Internal
Rate of Return collectively suggest a financially sound option. Moving to Case 2, involving
both repowering and an expansion of the wind park, the significantly higher NPV indicates
substantial economic gains, but the larger CAPEX and higher risks involved have to be
considered. Although the ROI decreases to 32.67%, the venture remains economically viable.
Case 3, focused on life extension, demonstrates a modest NPV but stands out with the
highest ROI a notable IRR of 21.24%.
The comparatively shorter payback time of 3.8
years in Case 3 suggests a quicker recovery of the initial investment, which is also the lowest
CAPEX of all cases. Overall, the outcomes indicate the profitability of all three scenarios, as
evidenced by positive values for all financial metrics. This implies that each case is expected
to generate a profit based on the current conditions and assumptions. Notably, the payback
time varies across the scenarios, with Case 3 presenting the shortest payback and Case 2 a
more extended payback period, exceeding 15 years, which reflects the increased complexity
of the project.
5.4
Cost-benefit Analysis of Wind Farm Expansion
In Case 2, substantial modifications of the existing technology necessitate further analysis
of their effects on the local area. The previous chapter extensively analyzed the financial
aspects of wind farm repowering. The findings suggest that expanding the wind farm in Case
2 is economically feasible, and promises increased revenue and a positive Net Present Value.
However, it is essential to note that in every project, there are aspects that are challenging to
quantify in purely monetary terms. Wind energy projects, in particular, bring about a range
of effects, some of which are not easily captured by financial metrics. These externalities
encompass both positive and negative aspects, and they play a crucial role in evaluating the
overall feasibility and desirability of such ventures.
Chapter 4.4 delved into the social acceptance of wind farms, highlighting the necessity
of support from the local community. Even though Cerova is already an existing wind park,
the social acceptance of repowering and expansion should not be assumed [80]. Research in
this field indicates that as communities gain experience with wind farms or become more
familiar with them, their attitudes towards the infrastructure tend to shift towards a more
positive outlook over time, but not in every case.
If Cerova were to undergo expansion, it would bring about significant changes to the
landscape. This includes increasing the number of turbines and new regulations mandating
a minimum distance between neighbouring houses and the turbines.
Notably, the rotor
of the new Siemens model has a diameter of 114 meters, which is more than twice the
size of the Vestas V47 with its 47-meter diameter [70]. Consequently, even with similar
tower heights, Siemens turbines would result in significantly higher tip heights, and they
would visually occupy more space. Given that visual impacts play a crucial role in shaping
public perceptions of wind farms [80], it is imperative to create and share visualizations
Page 30 of 50
==PAGE:40==
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
from frequently visible viewpoints within the community to ensure lasting support. If the
community does not express acceptance, the project should be adapted to better align with
their needs and preferences.
From a natural perspective, both costs and benefits can be found in Cerova’s case. The
wind park is currently situated within the National Protected Area of Little Carpathians,
as depicted in Figure 2. Present legislation prohibits any energy projects from being located
inside protected areas to preserve nature and protect wildlife. Therefore, any expansion
should occur a few hundred meters away from the current location to stay outside of the
protected area and prevent wildlife disturbance. On the other hand, with more installed
capacity of clean and sustainable energy in the grid, fewer greenhouse gas emissions are
produced, which protects the climate and ultimately nature and people’s health. Additional
non-quantifiable advantages encompass strengthening energy independence through a local
energy source, conserving natural resources, and potential economic prosperity for the village
and its community, among other factors.
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
In a rapidly evolving environment, undertaking a feasibility study involves computations
based on current input parameters, encompassing assumptions and uncertainties. The unpre-
dictable nature of the future contributes to the lack of perfect information. This introduces
considerable risks, especially in projects where the projected lifespans are reaching decades.
When a lot of uncertainty is involved, sensitivity analysis and risk assessment are advised
in order to mitigate the financial losses for the investor. Typically, these analyses focus on
the most uncertain and variable parameters, acknowledging that some aspects may remain
partially obscured.
For this financial analysis, 6 key variable values are analysed for each case: Discount
rate, Inflation, Energy Prices / PPA prices, CAPEX, OPEX, and AEP volatility. In Case 2,
an additional variable of the number of turbines is investigated with regard to the expansion
of the farm. The input parameters are assessed against the fluctuating NPV, considered
the primary indicator of economic feasibility. Variable ranges are limited to realistic values,
spanning 25% above and below for Energy prices, 20% for OPEX, and 10% for CAPEX. The
discount rate ranges from 3% to 10%, aligning with common values in wind park feasibility
studies. Inflation is projected to fluctuate between 1.5% and 5%, while AEP volatility spans
from P-30 to P-75.
Figure 5 illustrates the impact of varying OPEX and CAPEX on the NPV in repowering
Case 1. The steeper slope of CAPEX compared to OPEX implies that feasibility is more
sensitive to changes in CAPEX, which is reasonable given that CAPEX constitutes a more
substantial portion of the overall costs. The outcomes also indicate that even with borderline
values, the project is expected to generate a substantial positive profit for the company.
Page 31 of 50
==PAGE:41==
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis for Case 1 with variable CAPEX and OPEX as input parameter
Examining the sensitivity of Energy prices, Figure 6 reveals a significantly higher impact
compared to CAPEX and OPEX. A 25% decrease in Energy prices results in a substantial
drop in NPV to 485,454 EUR, which is a significant decrease compared to the base scenario of
almost 3 million EUR. The trendline suggests that further decreases in electricity prices could
potentially turn the feasible project into a non-feasible one, emphasizing the importance of
this parameter in the economic viability of the repowering.
Figure 6: Sensitivity analysis for Case 1 with variable Energy Price as input parameter
Page 32 of 50
==PAGE:42==
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
Examining Figure 7, it is apparent that NPV is most sensitive to the discount rate.
With a 10% discount rate, the NPV drops to 282,118 EUR, representing a substantial risk
compared to the base scenario. Conversely, with a 3% discount rate, the NPV rises to 6.5
million EUR, doubling the base scenario’s NPV. Both inflation and AEP volatility do not
exert a significant effect on the NPV in Case 1.
Figure 7: Sensitivity analysis for Case 1 with variable Discount rate, Inflation and AEP as
input parameters
Figure 8: Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 with variable CAPEX and OPEX as input parameter
Page 33 of 50
==PAGE:43==
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
The sensitivity analysis of NPV concerning CAPEX and OPEX in Case 2, shown in
Figure 8, reveals a pattern similar to that in Case 1: capital expenditures have a more
pronounced impact on feasibility compared to O&M. A 10% increase in CAPEX would
result in a change in NPV from 11.833 million EUR to 8.977 million, representing a 24%
drop.
Figure 9: Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 with variable Energy Price as input parameter
Figure 9 display that in Case 2, a 25% decrease results in a negative NPV of -352,683
EUR. The risk associated with this input parameter is substantial, as it causes an NPV
drop of more than 12 million EUR, transforming the profitable project into a financial
loss. This echoes a similar pattern observed in Case 1, where changes in electricity prices
can significantly impact profitability and pose a risk to the company. In response, Green
Energy Slovakia should reassess their risk strategy and determine whether they are willing
to endanger the project’s feasibility based on energy price fluctuations.
In Case 2, an additional factor considered is the number of turbines in the expansion of
Cerova. Five scenarios are calculated, ranging from 4 to 15 turbines. The base case scenario
involves five power plants, selected due to land limitations in the Cerova area.
Table 5
illustrates the potential impact on NPV for different numbers of turbines. Generally, a trend
emerges indicating that a higher number of turbines corresponds to a higher NPV. With
15 turbines, the NPV quadruples. However, it is essential to note that a greater number of
power plants is also associated with increased risks.
No of turbines
4
Base (5)
6
10
15
NPV [EUR]
8,621,092
11,833,148
15,045,203
27,893,426
43,953,704
Table 5: Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 expansion with variable number of turbines
Page 34 of 50
==PAGE:44==
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
Similar to Case 1, the impact of the discount rate on NPV is the most pronounced in
Case 2, as depicted in Figure 10. A discount rate of 3% elevates the profitability of the
expansion to nearly 30 million EUR, whereas a 10% rate yields a negative NPV. On the
other hand, 5% inflation and a P-75 AEP both result in an NPV of around 8.5 million EUR,
indicating that these variables do not influence revenues as significantly as the discount rate.
Figure 10: Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 with variable Discount rate, Inflation and AEP as
input parameters
Figure 11: Sensitivity analysis for Case 3 with variable CAPEX and OPEX as input param-
eter
Page 35 of 50
==PAGE:45==
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
In Case 3, where the focus is on extending the lifetime of the existing wind turbines, a
distinctive perspective is applied to the project. The trendline in Figure 11 depicting NPV
variations with changes in OPEX and CAPEX differs from that of Case 1 and Case 2. In this
case, profitability proves more sensitive to O&M costs, with the potential to turn negative
if these costs increase by more than 20%. This observation is crucial, as unexpected failures
are possible and even expected, which could severely impact profitability.
On the other
hand, the impact of CAPEX changes is relatively minimal, given that they are in the tens
of thousands and are not anticipated to turn the NPV negative.
Figure 12: Sensitivity analysis for Case 3 with variable PPA Price as input parameter
In contrast to the first two cases, Case 3 anticipates the sale of produced electricity
through a power purchase agreement. In the baseline scenario, the PPA price is expected to
be 100 EUR/MWh for the initial 5 years, followed by a reduction to 90 EUR/MWh in the
subsequent 5 years. The sensitivity analysis in Figure 12 reveals that securing a PPA for
10 years at a rate of 120 EUR/MWh could amplify the NPV nearly fivefold. Conversely, if
the PPA price drops to 80 EUR or below, the project’s feasibility is jeopardized. Notably,
during the interview, T. Lacko mentioned a proposed price of 70 EUR/MWh for a 20-year
fixed agreement, suggesting the potential for a higher rate if the fixation period is shorter
(Appendix B).
The last type of graph also diverges from the previous cases. Figure 13 illustrates that
NPV is most sensitive to inflation, followed by volatility in wind resources. If the average
inflation in the next decade increased to 5%, the NPV would plummet to a negative 37,973
EUR. Similarly, if the wind conditions were significantly lower compared to the 2022 baseline
scenario, the NPV would also decrease significantly. Conversely, achieving the P-30 energy
yield would nearly double the NPV, highlighting the impact of favourable wind conditions
on the project’s financial viability.
Page 36 of 50
==PAGE:46==
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis and Risk Assessment
Figure 13: Sensitivity analysis for Case 3 with variable Discount rate, Inflation and AEP as
input parameters
In addition to the financial risks explored in the sensitivity analysis, the execution of the
wind energy project entails various intangible internal and external risks inherent in such
projects. These risks are categorized into project, market, and management risks [81], fur-
ther segmented into political, economic, social, and technical dimensions [82]. Identifying,
assessing, and managing these potential risks is essential to minimize or prevent adverse
impacts on the project. In the context of Cerova, significant political risks stem from regu-
latory and policy uncertainties, encompassing potential shifts in energy and climate policies,
alterations in permitting regulations, and changes in energy frameworks. The absence of sus-
tained political backing for renewable initiatives poses a considerable and influential factor,
casting a shadow on the future prospects of these projects. Operating in an environment
with frequent changes in government policies, the company needs to exercise extra caution
due to the inherent risks associated with these dynamic shifts.
From the economic perspective, besides the volatility in electricity prices, associated
risks include fluctuating interest rates, insurance premiums, substantial penalties for non-
compliance with supply contracts, and unpredictable force majeure events that could po-
tentially damage the technology, causing substantial financial loss. The limited presence of
wind energy in Slovakia contributes to a lack of comprehensive cost information, introduc-
ing uncertainties and elevating associated risks in the assumptions made. Skilled personnel
availability and public acceptance pose potential social risks.
Uncertainties, such as the
possibility of extreme winds, (even though not captured in 2022, as seen in Figure 4) need
thorough evaluation using more extended wind datasets. Grid integration challenges and
the absence of reactive power in the case of electricity grid sales can impact grid stability.
Additionally, market availability of the chosen turbine model or manufacturing issues may
emerge as concerns during project validation.
Page 37 of 50
==PAGE:47==
6
Conclusion and Discussion
6.1
Barriers and Challenges Analysis Findings
The primary goal of this master’s thesis was to investigate the underdevelopment of wind
energy in Slovakia by examining the barriers that impede the initiation of new projects. The
study delved into regulatory, technical, land, social, and economic challenges, presumed to
have the most significant impact on development. While various issues were identified, the
following section outlines a summary of the findings and provides recommendations on how
to address them.
Firstly, the findings highlight regulatory barriers, such as the complex Environmental
Impact Assessment process, which is administratively demanding and non-digitized. The
absence of defined frameworks and deadlines for wind energy EIA introduces subjectivity and
unwarranted delays in the process. The following recommendations are proposed to enhance
the situation. At first, implementing systematic, transparent, and structured processes in
EIA to mitigate subjectivity and reduce prolonged waiting times for statements from the
Ministry of Environment of Slovakia and other relevant authorities. Next, review permitting
processes to simplify legal and administrative complexities, and update the conditions for
obtaining a permit. Finally, establish transparent and digital procedures for grid connection
applications to streamline the process.
Secondly, from a technical perspective, the analysis revealed that the imposed stop-state
in 2013 had a substantial impact on renewable energy development, preventing the integra-
tion of any new energy sources into the grid. The ongoing challenge of annually allocating
grid availability has resulted in restricted capacities for renewables. As a solution, the flexi-
ble energy sources in the electricity mix should be increased to ensure grid stability amidst
rising fluctuations from wind energy. The introduction of more renewables contributes to
decentralized energy production, thereby enhancing the energy security of Slovakia. Addi-
tionally, there is a recommendation to enhance and sustain the transparency of capacity
allocation.
Thirdly, challenges arise from land fragmentation and ownership issues. Investors seek-
ing larger land plots often have to enter negotiations with numerous co-owners. Furthermore,
a considerable number of nature-protected areas have been designated, limiting the availabil-
ity of land for wind development. Potential solutions to these challenges involve adjusting
zoning plans to reduce the number of co-owners on a single plot. Adopting the concept of Go-
to areas in Slovakia should also accelerate wind energy and renewable projects by allowing
a simpler EIA for designated areas while still safeguarding vulnerable natural areas.
Fourthly, a notable shortage of data is available about the perception of renewable
energy projects from the affected local communities. Thus, public acceptance data in this
thesis relies solely on interviews with field experts or national questionnaires and studies.
The obstructive behaviour was also identified in the interviews, describing how individuals
from the whole country can impede projects, even if not directly affected. This is causing
Page 38 of 50
==PAGE:48==
6.2
Economic Feasibility Analysis Findings
delays as investors must address all objections. Recommendations for improvement include
educating the public on wind energy and ensuring communities have detailed information
in advance. Affected locals should receive financial benefits for inconveniences tied to RES
project development in the community, possibly through implementing a co-ownership model
or taxes. This approach aims to ensure an equitable distribution of perceived benefits and
costs among residents. To mitigate obstructive conduct, permitting processes should only
involve directly affected parties.
Lastly, the economic challenges revolve around the substantial initial costs required to
acquire the necessary wind technology. This undertaking has to be accomplished without an
adequate financial support scheme from the country, as the existing support is practically
inaccessible to wind energy projects due to unattainable deadlines for completing the EIA.
Consequently, financing relies solely on debt and equity, with banks demonstrating minimal
experience in green energy financing. Typically, they offer less favourable interest rates and
equity-to-debt ratios compared to conditions they provide to conventional energy sources.
The system is also considered highly centralized with only a few market players, primarily
dominated by nuclear power. Introducing a support scheme characterized by stability and
longevity, free from constant changes, would mitigate uncertainties and risks for investors
seeking to invest in this technology. Moreover, enhancing information availability and re-
ducing risks for banks would facilitate the process of obtaining debt financing, particularly
in cases where banks lack experience in financing renewable projects.
6.2
Economic Feasibility Analysis Findings
The second objective of the thesis focused on conducting an economic feasibility analysis
of repowering options for the only existing wind park in Slovakia, which has reached the
end of its operational life. Three scenarios were examined: full repowering involving the
replacement of four turbines with one of the same installed capacity, full repowering with an
increased installed capacity, and partial repowering through the life extension of the existing
technology. As Cerova was constructed two decades ago, numerous assumptions had to be
made in the calculations.
Initially, the wind conditions at the location were examined through the analysis of wind
speeds measured throughout 2022. The data indicated an average wind speed of 5.66 m/s,
which falls into the category of relatively low wind speeds. However, contemporary technolo-
gies are designed to be profitable even at lower wind speeds. For the repowering process,
a single model, Siemens Gamesa SG 2.6-114, was selected to replace the four old Vestas
V47/660 kW models. The AEP of the repowered turbine is five times greater compared to
the original old turbines. In the case of expansion, the AEP multiplies with the increasing
number of turbines, while in the life extension scenario, the AEP remains the same.
The financial analysis indicates that, based on the assumptions and approximations, all
three scenarios are profitable and financially viable for Green Energy Slovakia. The Net
Present Value is positive in each case, with the Levelized Cost of Energy ranging from 63
EUR/MWh for Case 1 (repowering) to 76 EUR/MWh for Case 3 (life extension).
The
Page 39 of 50
==PAGE:49==
6.3
Implications for Policymakers and Investors
Internal Rate of Return stands at around 10% for full repowering and 21% for Case 3,
while the Return on Investment is approximately 40% for all three scenarios. The sensitivity
analysis reveals that the NPVs of Cases 1 and 2 are most responsive to fluctuations in energy
prices and discount rates. For Case 3, the sensitivity analysis indicates that Power Purchase
Agreement prices, inflation, and AEP volatility exert the most significant influence on the
feasibility of the scenario. The study briefly explored non-monetizable costs and benefits
and provided a qualitative description of additional risks beyond the financial risks outlined
in the sensitivity analysis.
When comparing the results obtained from the financial model to those documented in
existing literature, the Levelized Cost of Energy for onshore wind energy displays variability
based on the annual full load hours. As reported by Sens et al. [72], the LCOE is approxi-
mately 0.06 ¤2020/kWhel. Similarly, Fraunhofer’s report [73] indicates a range for Germany’s
onshore wind LCOE between 3.94 and 8.29 ¤2020/kWhel. Another source [83] provides an
Internal Rate of Return of 12.12%, a Payback period of 14 years, and a Return on Investment
of 9.33%. Given the project-specific nature of these figures, it is challenging to make direct
comparisons. What is important, the LCOE values for wind energy projects align well with
the outcomes of this economic feasibility study.
6.3
Implications for Policymakers and Investors
Throughout this thesis, various barriers have been identified, accompanied by recom-
mendations applicable to both policymakers and investors. Given the current state of wind
energy in Slovakia, the implementation of effective policies and permitting processes is of
paramount importance, especially if Slovakia is to meet the climate targets set by the Euro-
pean Union. Policy adjustments addressing this issue can significantly enhance the appeal of
onshore wind projects for potential investors. Slovakia’s policies could be adapted to reflect
the best practices of countries with a longstanding history of wind energy projects. In the in-
terview with J. Karaba, it was highlighted that the investors and organizations dealing with
wind energy have lacked robust political support for an extended period. A collaborative
approach involving discussions with field experts and investors in Slovakia could be advan-
tageous as well. By understanding the practical challenges and opportunities, the experts
can offer valuable insights and suggestions for refining and implementing effective policies
that align with the unique characteristics of the Slovak context.
The existing government subsidies pose significant challenges for investors as well. Al-
ternative support schemes such as a feed-in tariff or a feed-in premium accessible to all
renewables projects could enhance investor participation and decrease risks. It should be
noted that fixed tariff schemes only remove price risks for the developers. The proposed
electricity prices may still carry a risk to electricity consumers, who will end up paying high
prices, as happened the last time when Slovakia introduced feed-in tariffs.
From the investor’s perspective, the conclusions drawn from this financial analysis in-
dicate that with appropriate siting and technology choices, wind energy projects can be
financially viable even in the absence of subsidies. Resolving issues related to ineffective
Page 40 of 50
==PAGE:50==
6.4
Future Research Implications
permitting processes and the absence of structured systems is crucial. Once these challenges
are addressed, the findings suggest that investing in wind energy projects becomes not only
feasible but also commercially viable. It is important to acknowledge the elevated risks in-
herent in this market due to limited and asymmetric information, coupled with potential
delays lasting multiple years before project validation and commencement of construction.
Consequently, investors are advised to adopt risk management practices and seek expert
guidance to navigate these complexities effectively.
6.4
Future Research Implications
The study has provided insights into the challenges and opportunities associated with
onshore wind energy implementation only in the current context. Therefore, it is essential
to consider potential future research that can expand upon the findings presented in this
thesis. Firstly, the cumulative impact of approximating multiple values concurrently could
potentially lead to a significant deviation from actual values. For this reason, the company
considering investment in repowering should undertake a more detailed economic study, limit
the assumptions and approximations, and integrate risk assessments into the analysis, before
arriving at a definitive decision.
Secondly, the aspect of financing repowering through bank debt is not considered in the
financial analysis. The assumption is the project is deemed bankable, and the company
possesses the required equity to meet the debt-to-equity ratio while being able to secure
a reasonable cost of debt. To enhance the reality of the results and confirm the project’s
profitability, it is necessary to explore this matter more in detail. Collaboration with financial
institutions to understand their debt conditions and terms offered to investors would provide
a more accurate and insightful evaluation of the project’s financial viability.
Finally, to get a better understanding of the social aspect, a broader range of interviews
from diverse stakeholder groups would be beneficial. Public awareness and acceptance could
be explored through social impact assessment, public perceptions and engagement strategies.
Conducting interviews with local citizens, governmental representatives, and additional Slo-
vak investors, could provide a more comprehensive and nuanced overview. The expansion
in interview scope together with the aforementioned economic propositions may result in a
systematic analysis of a broader problem of stagnant wind power development in Slovakia.
Page 41 of 50
==PAGE:51==
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Share of electricity production by source in 2022 in Slovakia, [4] . . . . . . .
7
2
National parks and the protected areas of Slovakia (translated from IEP, [42])
15
3
Mean Wind Speed at 100m in Slovakia (Global Wind Atlas, [43])
. . . . . .
16
4
Annual Wind Speed Histogram for Cerova wind farm, 2022 . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Sensitivity analysis for Case 1 with variable CAPEX and OPEX as input
parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Sensitivity analysis for Case 1 with variable Energy Price as input parameter
32
7
Sensitivity analysis for Case 1 with variable Discount rate, Inflation and AEP
as input parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8
Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 with variable CAPEX and OPEX as input
parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
9
Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 with variable Energy Price as input parameter
34
10
Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 with variable Discount rate, Inflation and AEP
as input parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
11
Sensitivity analysis for Case 3 with variable CAPEX and OPEX as input
parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
12
Sensitivity analysis for Case 3 with variable PPA Price as input parameter .
36
13
Sensitivity analysis for Case 3 with variable Discount rate, Inflation and AEP
as input parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
14
Power curve of Siemens SG 2.6-114 wind turbine used in Case 1 and Case 2,
approximated according to [70]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XVIII
15
Operations and Maintenance prices forecast, real(2022) [75] and their corre-
sponding nominal values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
16
Electricity prices forecast, real(2022) [75] and their corresponding nominal
values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XX
Page 42 of 50
==PAGE:52==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
The summary of the 3 cases investigated in the financial analysis . . . . . . .
25
2
The summary of the assumptions made in the financial analysis of Cerova . .
26
3
The Annual Energy Productions for all Cases, 2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
The financial analysis results, nominal values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Sensitivity analysis for Case 2 expansion with variable number of turbines . .
34
6
The monthly productions in MWh for all cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
7
The summary of the input parameters in the financial analysis, nominal valuesXX
Page 43 of 50
==PAGE:53==
References
References
[1]
European Comission. Renewable energy targets. Online. url: https://energy.ec.
europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-
and-rules/renewable-energy-targets_en.
[2]
Dr Pawel Czyzak and Harriet Fox. In it together: the road to a cleaner, cheaper CEE
power. Published by: Ember. 2023. url: https://ember-climate.org/insights/
research/in-it-together-cee-power-system/.
[3]
Giuseppe Costanzo, Guy Brindley, Phil Cole. Wind energy in Europe: 2022 Statistics
and the outlook for 2023-2027. Published by: WindEurope. 2023. url: https : / /
windeurope.org/intelligence- platform/product/wind- energy- in- europe-
2022-statistics-and-the-outlook-for-2023-2027/.
[4]
Hannah Ritchie, Max Roser, and Pablo Rosado. “Slovakia: Energy Country Profile”.
In: Our World in Data (2022). https://ourworldindata.org/energy/country/slovakia.
[5]
Marian Maraffko, Boris Valach, Ján Karaba. Slovak Renewable Electricity Market Re-
port 2022. Published by: Slovak Association of Photovoltaic Industry and RES (SAPI).
2023.
[6]
Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for 2021 to 2030. SLOVAK MINISTRY
OF ECONOMY. Dec. 2019. url: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/
2020-03/sk_final_necp_main_en_0.pdf.
[7]
Allison Shorten and Joanna Smith. “Mixed methods research: expanding the evidence
base”. In: Evidence Based Nursing 20.3 (June 2017), pp. 74–75. doi: 10.1136/eb-
2017-102699.
[8]
Adam Sulich and Letycja Sołoducho-Pelc. “Renewable Energy Producers’ Strategies
in the Visegrád Group Countries”. In: Energies 14.11 (May 2021). doi: 10.3390/
en14113048.
[9]
IEA. Nuclear Power in a Clean Energy System. May 2019. url: https://www.iea.
org/reports/nuclear-power-in-a-clean-energy-system.
[10]
Nuclear Power in Slovakia. Online. Aug. 2023. url: https://world-nuclear.org/
information-library/country-profiles/countries-o-s/slovakia.aspx.
[11]
SFPA. Yearbook of Slovakia’s Foreign Policy. Ed. by Peter Brezani. Research Center
of the Slovak Foreign Policy Association, 2022. url: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/359879093_Eastern_policy_of_the_Slovak_Republic_-_the_
end_of_an_era.
[12]
Ministry of Environment Slovak Republic. Impact analysis of the Fit for 55 package.
Research rep. Institute for environmental policy, 2022. url: https://www.minzp.sk/
files/iep/analyza_fit_for_55_en_base_final.pdf.
Page 44 of 50
==PAGE:54==
References
[13]
Gregor ERBACH. Climate action in Slovakia: Latest state of play. European Parlia-
mentary Research Service. European Parliamentary Research Service. Oct. 2021. url:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2021)
698767.
[14]
Veronika Oravcová. Energy Without Russia:The Case of Slovakia. Research rep. FRIEDRICH-
EBERT-STIFTUNG, 2023.
[15]
European Council. Infographic - How dependent are EU member states on energy
imports? url: https : / / www . consilium . europa . eu / en / infographics / how -
dependent-are-eu-member-states-on-energy-imports/.
[16]
Rafael Leal-Arcas and Brian Burstein. “Slovakia: Energy Policy”. In: Encyclopedia of
Mineral and Energy Policy. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2022, pp. 1–17. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-642-40871-7_51-1.
[17]
Roman Vavrek and Jana Chovancova. “Decoupling of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from
Economic Growth in V4 Countries”. In: Procedia Economics and Finance 39 (2016),
pp. 526–533. doi: 10.1016/s2212-5671(16)30295-7.
[18]
Roberto Balado-Naves, José Francisco Baños-Pino, and Matías Mayor. “Do countries
influence neighbouring pollution? A spatial analysis of the EKC for CO2 emissions”.
In: Energy Policy 123 (Dec. 2018), pp. 266–279. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2018.08.059.
[19]
Serhiy Lyeonov et al. “Assessment of Green Investments’ Impact on Sustainable De-
velopment: Linking Gross Domestic Product Per Capita, Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and Renewable Energy”. In: Energies 12.20 (Oct. 2019), p. 3891. doi: 10 . 3390 /
en12203891.
[20]
Janusz Myszczyszyn and Błażej Suproń. “Relationship among Economic Growth, En-
ergy Consumption, CO2 Emission, and Urbanization: An Econometric Perspective
Analysis”. In: Energies 15.24 (Dec. 2022), p. 9647. doi: 10.3390/en15249647.
[21]
The World Bank. A LOW-CARBON GROWTH STUDY FOR SLOVAKIA: imple-
menting the EU 2030 climate and energy policy framework. Jan. 2019. url: https:
//www.minzp.sk/files/iep/2019_01_low-carbon-study.pdf.
[22]
Low-Carbon Development Strategy of the Slovak Republic until 2030 with a View to
2050. Ministry of Environment of Slovak Republic. Dec. 2019. url: https://www.
minzp.sk/files/oblasti/politika-zmeny-klimy/low-carbon-development-
strategy-slovak-republic.pdf.
[23]
Obec Cerova. Veterná elektráreň. online. Sept. 2022. url: https://www.obeccerova.
sk/veterna-elektraren-a24-429.
[24]
Enviroportal. Veterný park Myjava - lokalita Ostrý vrch. online. May 2003. url: https:
//www.enviroportal.sk/en/eia/detail/veterny- park- myjava- lokalita-
ostry-vrch.
[25]
Ministry of Environment. Zoznam zámerov veterných parkov v Slovenskej republike.
url: https://www.enviroportal.sk/zoznam-zamerov-veternych-parkov-v-
slovenskej-republike.
Page 45 of 50
==PAGE:55==
References
[26]
Juraj Vedej. Ministerstvo ukončilo 5 rokov trvajúci „stopstav“. online. Feb. 2019. url:
https://www.sapi.sk/clanok/ministerstvo- ukoncilo- 5- rokov- trvajuci-
stopstav.
[27]
SEPS. SEPS umožní pripojenie ďalších obnoviteľných zdrojov do elektrizačnej sústavy,
plán uvoľňovania sa zatiaľ plní na 125 percent. online. Apr. 2022. url: https://www.
sepsas.sk/tlacove-spravy/seps-umozni-pripojenie-dalsich-obnovitelnych-
zdrojov-do-elektrizacnej-sustavy-plan-uvolnovania-sa-zatial-plni-na-
125-c4ef98c01f3f89d98d946edc4af1ec6376a31004852810700fe7d48aefd162b4/.
[28]
WindEurope. Slovakia has excellent wind conditions but must remove barriers to wind
energy. Dec. 2022. url: https://windeurope.org/newsroom/news/slovakia-has-
excellent-wind-conditions-but-must-remove-barriers-to-wind-energy/.
[29]
SAPI. Veterná energia. online. url: https://www.sapi.sk/veterna-energia.
[30]
European Commission. A European Green Deal. online. url: https://commission.
europa.eu/strategy- and- policy/priorities- 2019- 2024/european- green-
deal_en.
[31]
PhD. Ing. Mgr. Boris Valach. Štúdia rozvoja veternej energetiky na Slovensku - bariéry
a odporúčania. Tech. rep. SAPI, Oct. 2022. url: https://www.sapi.sk/files/
studia-rozvoja-veternej-energetiky-na-slovensku.pdf.
[32]
Enviroportal. EIA. online. url: https://www.enviroportal.sk/en/environmental-
impact-assessment/eia.
[33]
Slovak Republic Ministry of Environment. What are main steps of EIA procedure? on-
line. url: https://www.enviroportal.sk/en/environmental-impact-assessment/
eia/main-steps.
[34]
Andrea Pukova Juraj Ondrejka. THE REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES IN SLOVAKIA. WHAT PROCESSES MUST
THE INVESTORS GO THROUGH? online. Mar. 2021. url: https://www.polacekpartners.
sk/en/article/the-requirements-for-construction-of-renewable-energy-
sources-in-slovakia-what-processes-must-the-investors-go-through.
[35]
SEPS. Main Website. online. url: https://www.sepsas.sk/en/.
[36]
a. s. Slovenská elektrizačná prenosová sústava. TEN-YEAR NETWORK DEVELOP-
MENT PLAN FOR THE PERIOD 2020 – 2029. Tech. rep. Apr. 2019.
[37]
Róbert Štefko, Zsolt Čonka, and Michal Kolcun. “Case Study of Power Plants in the
Slovak Republic and Construction of Microgrid and Smart Grid”. In: Applied Sciences
11.11 (June 2021), p. 5252. doi: 10.3390/app11115252.
[38]
Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic. Oznam o určení inštalovaných výkonov
zariadení na výrobu elektriny s právom napodporu na rok 2024. online. available on
the website. url: https://www.mhsr.sk/uploads/files/khCsJcp0.pdf?csrt=
15689949913291055270.
Page 46 of 50
==PAGE:56==
References
[39]
SEPS. SEPS pristúpi k navyšovaniu kapacity pre pripájanie nových obnoviteľných zdro-
jov po zmenách v systéme. online. June 2023. url: https://www.sepsas.sk/tlacove-
spravy/seps- pristupi- k- navysovaniu- kapacity- pre- pripajanie- novych-
obnovitelnych-zdrojov-po-zmenach-v-systeme/.
[40]
European Environment Agency. Europe’s onshore and offshore wind energy potential:
an assessment of environmental and economic constraints. Publications Office, 2009.
doi: 10.2800/11373.
[41]
European Commission. Acceleration areas for renewables. online. url: https : / /
joint-research-centre.ec.europa.eu/scientific-tools-databases/energy-
and-industry-geography-lab/acceleration-areas-renewables_en.
[42]
M. Gális et al. Národné parky pre 21. storočie. Tech. rep. 13. Inštitút environmentálnej
politiky, Aug. 2022. url: https://www.minzp.sk/files/iep/narodne_parky_pre_
21_stor.pdf.
[43]
Global Wind Atlas. Slovakia. online. 2023. url: https://globalwindatlas.info/
en/area/Slovakia.
[44]
Návrh opatrení na urýchlené vykonanie pozemkových úprav v SR. Ministry of Agricul-
ture and Rural Development of the Slovak Republic. 2019. url: https://www.slov-
lex.sk/legislativne-procesy/-/SK/dokumenty/LP-2019-372.
[45]
Constantine Spandagos, Miguel Angel Tovar Reaños, and Muireann Á. Lynch. “Public
acceptance of sustainable energy innovations in the European Union: A multidimen-
sional comparative framework for national policy”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production
340 (Mar. 2022), p. 130721. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.130721.
[46]
Marco Segreto et al. “Trends in Social Acceptance of Renewable Energy Across Eu-
rope—A Literature Review”. In: International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health 17.24 (Dec. 2020), p. 9161. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17249161.
[47]
Jakob Knauf and Julia le Maitre. “A matter of acceptability? Understanding citizen
investment schemes in the context of onshore wind farm development”. In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 175 (Apr. 2023), p. 113158. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.
2023.113158.
[48]
Patrick Scherhaufer et al. “Patterns of acceptance and non-acceptance within energy
landscapes: A case study on wind energy expansion in Austria”. In: Energy Policy 109
(Oct. 2017), pp. 863–870. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2017.05.057.
[49]
Ministry of Environment of the Slovak Republic. Public participation. online. url:
https://www.enviroportal.sk/en/environmental- impact-assessment/eia/
public-participation.
[50]
Tomáš Chabada et al. Slovenská klíma 2022. Katerda enviromentalnych studii FSS
MU a Institut 2050, 2022. url: https://institut2050.cz/wp-content/uploads/
2022/09/Slovenskaklima2022bonus.pdf.
[51]
European Commission. Directorate General for Climate Action. and Kantar. Climate
change: report. Publications Office, 2019. doi: 10.2834/00469.
Page 47 of 50
==PAGE:57==
References
[52]
OCHRANA KLÍMY OČAMI SLOVENSKEJ VEREJNOSTI. Tech. rep. Slovenská kli-
matická iniciatíva, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, zastúpenie v Slovenskej republike, June
2022. url: https://klimatickainiciativa.sk/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/
Ochrana-klimy-ocami-slovenskej-verejnosti-report.pdf.
[53]
Jamil Ramsi Farkat Diógenes et al. “Barriers to onshore wind energy implementation: A
systematic review”. In: Energy Research &amp Social Science 60 (Feb. 2020), p. 101337.
doi: 10.1016/j.erss.2019.101337.
[54]
Dimitrios Angelopoulos et al. “Risks and cost of capital for onshore wind energy invest-
ments in EU countries”. In: Energy &amp Environment 27.1 (Feb. 2016), pp. 82–104.
doi: 10.1177/0958305x16638573.
[55]
Martin Junginger et al. “Onshore wind energy”. In: Technological Learning in the Tran-
sition to a Low-Carbon Energy System. Elsevier, 2020, pp. 87–102. doi: 10.1016/b978-
0-12-818762-3.00006-6.
[56]
IEA. Feed-in tariffs for renewable energy. online. Dec. 2014. url: https://www.iea.
org/policies/4646-feed-in-tariffs-for-renewable-energy.
[57]
Ministry of Economy. Výzva na predkladanie ponúk na zariadenia s právom na pod-
poru. Online. Mar. 2020. url: https://www.mhsr.sk/energetika/vyzva- na-
predkladanie-ponuk-na-zariadenia-s-pravom-na-podporu.
[58]
Výzvu na predkladanie žiadostí o poskytnutie prostriedkov mechanizmu na podporu ob-
novy a odolnosti zameranú napodporu výstavby nových zariadení na výrobu elektriny z
obnoviteľných zdrojov energie. Tech. rep. Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic,
May 2022. url: https://www.mhsr.sk/uploads/files/Qt45SDwv.pdf.
[59]
Hugo M. Mialon Preston McAfee and Michael A. Williams. “What Is a Barrier to En-
try?” In: The American Economic Review 94.2 (May 2004), pp. 461–465. url: https:
//www.jstor.org/stable/3592928.
[60]
Anders Pehrsson. “Barriers to entry and market strategy: a literature review and a
proposed model”. In: European Business Review 21.1 (Jan. 2009), pp. 64–77. doi:
10.1108/09555340910925184.
[61]
Fahri Karakaya. “Barriers to entry in industrial markets”. In: Journal of Business &amp
Industrial Marketing 17.5 (Sept. 2002), pp. 379–388. doi: 10.1108/08858620210439059.
[62]
Seetharaman et al. “Breaking barriers in deployment of renewable energy”. In: Heliyon
5.1 (Jan. 2019), e01166. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01166.
[63]
Mark Wiser Ryan H & Bolinger. 2018 Wind Technologies Market Report. Ed. by
U.S. Department of Energy. LBL Publications, 2019. url: https://escholarship.
org/uc/item/2tc1819q.
[64]
Souvik Sen and Sourav Ganguly. “Opportunities, barriers and issues with renewable
energy development – A discussion”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
69 (Mar. 2017), pp. 1170–1181. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.137.
Page 48 of 50
==PAGE:58==
References
[65]
María Isabel Blanco. “The economics of wind energy”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 13.6-7 (Aug. 2009), pp. 1372–1382. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2008.09.
004.
[66]
J.P.Painuly. “Barriers to renewable energy penetration; a framework for analysis”. In:
Renewable Energy 24 (Sept. 2000), pp. 73–89.
[67]
Iván Pineda Aloys Nghiem. Wind energy in Europe: Scenarios for 2030. Research rep.
Wind Europe, Sept. 2017. url: https://windeurope.org/wp-content/uploads/
files/about-wind/reports/Wind-energy-in-Europe-Scenarios-for-2030.pdf.
[68]
Eric Lantz, Michael Leventhal, and Ian Baring-Gould. Wind Power Project Repower-
ing: Financial Feasibility, Decision Drivers, and Supply Chain Effects. Tech. rep. Dec.
2013. doi: 10.2172/1117058.
[69]
Tv Markiza. Z rotoru vo veternej elektrárni sa odtrhol jeden list. Spadol z 50-metrovej
výšky. online. July 2022. url: https://tvnoviny.sk/domace/clanok/218226-
z-rotoru-vo-veternej-elektrarni-sa-odtrhol-jeden-list-spadol-z-50-
metrovej-vysky.
[70]
Siemens Gamesa. SG 2.6-114: Boosting production at sites with medium and high
winds. online. Nov. 2021. url: https://www.siemensgamesa.com/en-int/-/media/
siemensgamesa/downloads/en/products- and- services/onshore/brochures/
siemens - gamesa - onshore - wind - turbine - sg - 2 - 6 - 114 - en . pdf ? ste _ sid =
8547dd95e198a073edbdaab7d14ff355.
[71]
Tyler Stehly and Patrick Duffy. 2021 Cost of Wind Energy Review. Tech. rep. Dec.
2022. url: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy23osti/84774.pdf.
[72]
Lucas Sens, Ulf Neuling, and Martin Kaltschmitt. “Capital expenditure and levelized
cost of electricity of photovoltaic plants and wind turbines – Development by 2050”.
In: Renewable Energy 185 (Feb. 2022), pp. 525–537. issn: 0960-1481. doi: 10.1016/
j.renene.2021.12.042.
[73]
C. Kost et. al. LEVELIZED COST OF ELECTRICITY RENEWABLE ENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES. Tech. rep. FRAUNHOFER INSTITUTE FOR SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEMS ISE, June 2021. url: https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/en/publications/
studies/cost-of-electricity.html.
[74]
Babak Nejad. Wind power: extending beyond the design life. Tech. rep. WTW, Jan.
2023. url: https://www.wtwco.com/en- gb/insights/2023/02/wind- power-
extending-beyond-the-design-life.
[75]
Mathias Mier. “European electricity prices in times of multiple crises”. In: 394 (May
2023). url: https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/272301.
[76]
OECD. SLOVAK REPUBLIC: INVENTORY OF ESTIMATED BUDGETARY SUP-
PORTAND TAX EXPENDITURES FOR FOSSIL-FUELS. online. url: https://
www.oecd.org/fossil-fuels/SVK.pdf.
Page 49 of 50
==PAGE:59==
References
[77]
Aidan Duffy et al. “Land-based wind energy cost trends in Germany, Denmark, Ireland,
Norway, Sweden and the United States”. In: Applied Energy 277 (Nov. 2020), p. 114777.
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114777.
[78]
Národná banka Slovenska. Economic and Monetary Developments. Tech. rep. 3. Oct.
2023. url: https://nbs.sk/dokument/5f75d378-c0b7-43bc-a6f6-2d3e87f9b53f/
stiahnut?force=false.
[79]
International Monetary Fund. Inflation rate, average consumer prices. online. 2023.
url: https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/PCPIPCH@WEO/SVK?zoom=SVK&
highlight=SVK.
[80]
Rebecca Windemer. “Acceptance should not be assumed. How the dynamics of social
acceptance changes over time, impacting onshore wind repowering”. In: Energy Policy
173 (Feb. 2023), p. 113363. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2022.113363.
[81]
Yurii Rolik. “Risk Management in Implementing Wind Energy Project”. In: Procedia
Engineering 178 (2017), pp. 278–288. doi: 10.1016/j.proeng.2017.01.115.
[82]
J. Michelez et al. Risk Quantification and Risk Management in Renewable Energy
Projects. https://globalclimateactionpartnership.org/app/uploads/2015/07/
Risk-Quantification-and-Risk-Management-in-Renewable-Energy-Projects.
pdf. 2010.
[83]
Géremi Gilson Dranka et al. “Economic evaluation methodologies for renewable energy
projects”. In: AIMS Energy 8.2 (2020), pp. 339–364. issn: 2333-8334. doi: 10.3934/
energy.2020.2.339.
Page 50 of 50
==PAGE:60==
A
Interview with Dipl. Ing. Tomáš Lacko, the CEO of
Green Energy Slovakia s.r.o., 11. August 2023
Note: The interview was held in Slovak language, and translated to English by the author of
the master’s thesis.
What is your experience with environmental impact assessment?
The experiences are very demanding. This process is considerably complicated. The criteria
for the scope of this assessment are not clearly defined. And the biggest issue is that the
current legislation does not regulate deadlines for the Ministry of Environment. This causes
the process to significantly prolong or become very intricate. I would definitely recommend
that deadlines and procedures be established by the ministry. The ministry gathers com-
ments from relevant authorities, institutions, or the public, and determines the scope of the
assessment. There are no specific time constraints for this. In one case, we waited as long
as 21 months to determine the scope of the assessment. Therefore, it is essential for set
deadlines to exist. When we are given 3 years to prepare an assessment report, logically the
ministry should also have a specified timeframe for its actions. I believe this is the main
issue, that the ministry does not have established deadlines.
Can you comment on the grid capacities allocation by the Ministry of Economy?
How much is allocated every year?
The Ministry of Economy, in cooperation with SEPS, which is an institution responsible for
the security and reliability of electricity supply, has set a certain amount of capacity that
can be connected to the transmission and distribution system for new sources of electric-
ity. They have also defined specific capacity for so-called unpredictable electricity sources,
namely photovoltaic and wind energy. This capacity was, I believe, 478 or 487 megawatts,
which is currently depleted. The waiting period is for individual projects to progress to the
implementation stage, or in case someone terminates a project and returns the capacity so
that those who wish to undertake a project can apply for capacity. So, it is somewhat unclear,
and less transparent, and currently, no one knows the phase of a project that received the
capacity, whether the project is active or not. it is a waiting game because this information
is not publicly disclosed. We also obtained capacity, so we had a deadline after obtaining the
Ministry of Economy’s approval to issue a certificate. We needed to obtain a statement from
SEPS, the concerned municipality, and by December 31, 2022, we were required to submit
an application to the Ministry of Economy for the issuance of the certificate. The Ministry
reviewed our application and if it was complete, they issued us a certificate of compliance
with the energy concept of the Slovak Republic. The certificate is valid for 3 years. Within
this 3-year period, we must secure a connection agreement with the distribution system,
which means we must also pay a connection fee. This is when those who are serious about
the project can proceed with territorial or construction permits. There are time-consuming
processes involved, interconnected in a complicated manner.
Page I of XX
==PAGE:61==
Is it possible to meet this deadline?
Yes, it is. The original deadline was that the opinion of the distribution company was valid
for 1 year, but last year, through an amendment to the law, they shortened its validity until
December 31, 2022. So, everyone who had it had to submit the application for the certificate
issuance by the end of December, and all new statements that come from the distribution
company are valid for only 6 months. In the past, it was 12 months, so the time has been
shortened to speed up the crystallization of whether it is a speculator or someone who gen-
uinely wants to undertake a real project. it is not simple; you asked if it can be done, it is
not simple, but it can be done.
How quickly are these capacities used up?
Well, when you consider that there were 470 megawatts allocated for solar and wind energy,
and that was for the entire Slovakia, and if I divide it among the 3 distribution companies,
it is 150 megawatts for each solar and wind. A single wind farm project has a capacity of
around 40 to 50 megawatts, so just having 3 to 4 projects depletes the capacity. Capacities
are not allocated annually; their quantity corresponds to Slovakia’s resource structures. So,
if they allocated a larger amount, they would not be able to ensure the reliability of supply.
If there is a change in the energy mix in Slovakia, there is a possibility to increase the ca-
pacity, but currently, it is capped.
That means no additional capacities were added for the year 2023?
No.
And is it known if any will be added for the year 2024?
It is known. A study on flexibility, or whatever it is called, has been conducted, which allows
for some additional capacity, but this decision will be addressed by the new government. it
is said that there’s not an issue with the system, but the focus is on the lack of flexible
sources that can handle the fluctuations. For instance, we had combined cycle gas turbines,
but the price of gas increased, so those power plants were shut down, and we lacked that
capacity. One of the solutions could be batteries. Last year, there were perhaps 3 or 4 amend-
ments or changes to laws, so everything is somehow adjusting to that trend. But very slowly.
Is the capacity allocation a fair process for all investors?
Probably not very much. As I mentioned, the process is already more transparent. I believe
that by the end of 2022, only the Eastern Slovak Energy SEPS had officially published a list
of applicants along with the allocated capacity. Such a list did not exist for the central and
western parts of Slovakia. Now all distribution companies have such lists, currently showing
zero available capacity.
What is your experience with the public perception of wind energy?
Over the 20 years I have been involved in this topic, I would say that public opinion has
changed. In the beginning, there was apprehension about the unknown because it was some-
Page II of XX
==PAGE:62==
thing new.
Then we went through a period when there was a belief that we would all
contribute to the electricity price that the investor would receive and they would profit, as
the price was regulated by the state. Perhaps last year was the most positive period when
energy prices skyrocketed due to the conflict in Ukraine. It was presented that by utilizing
available local sources such as solar and wind, we could obtain cheaper electricity. So, it
began to have a more positive outlook, and today I would say it is about 50-50. There will
always be opponents who do not like it, who read something on the internet and spread it,
trying to influence others. But today, it is about half and half.
And when you were commissioning Cerová, how did you take social acceptance
into account?
At that time, the Environmental Impact Assessment law was not yet in effect, so the pro-
cess was actually incredibly simple compared to today. Of course, without the support of
the local community, the project would not have been possible. We collaborated with the
community on the project. But nowadays, if we want to undertake such a project, it is
not possible without the community’s support. The community essentially functions as a
building authority today and has a say in everything, so there needs to be an agreement
with the community.
When you talk about the community, are you referring more to the representa-
tives or the citizens?
I am talking about the community as a whole. I am not referring to the mayor and rep-
resentatives who essentially represent the citizens, but it always involves a form of public
deliberation where citizens come and ask us questions. According to the EIA, there must be
a public deliberation, and the record of that deliberation is part of the final EIA report.
Do you also engage with citizens at the beginning of the process, before you
propose a project to the community?
In principle, at the beginning, we only engage with the representatives of the community,
which means the council members and the community leadership. Once an agreement is
reached and the process is initiated, we are obliged to hold public deliberations as part of
the EIA process.
The EU Barometer indicates that people perceive the climate crisis as a serious
issue. However, some Slovak documents, such as Fit for 55, claim that people
do not want renewable sources. What are your thoughts on this?
There are people who are convinced that renewable sources should be utilized. These are
sources that are available, environmentally friendly, reduce costs, and so on. And then there
will always be opponents who claim that it is just causing harm. They believe it has a
negative impact, occupies space, and so on. So, it is about 50-50.
Page III of XX
==PAGE:63==
What recommendations would you give to legislators and investors who aim to
increase the acceptance of wind parks?
An investor can only do what is allowed by legislation or the law. But if we wanted to make
a more significant shift and perhaps improve public awareness, we might need to simplify or
accelerate the permitting process. When you talk to someone in a community for 10 years
about building something there, people eventually forget what it was supposed to be and
why it should be there. And if no one gets it done in 10 years, it is never going to happen.
So, this is the biggest complication – the lengthy preparation time before you can even begin
the implementation. People have no idea how complex the process is.
How does the fee for accessing the distribution network (G-component) work?
In the past, when the feed-in tariff to support photovoltaics was established, no G-component
was paid. However, distribution companies had internal costs related to the connection of
new sources that the state needed to compensate in some way. So, the G-component was
invented, but it is calculated significantly differently in other countries. I think the proposal
was that the connection fee, or the G-component, should be 50 cents to 1€ per generated
megawatt-hour. Until 2020, the G-component was nearly 20,000€ per megawatt of installed
capacity per year. Now it has been reduced to 50 percent. But it is now a fee that no one
initially expected because the G-component wasn’t an institute at the beginning.
We even sued the distribution companies; all manufacturers in Slovakia argued that this fee
was illegal. The Constitutional Court ruled in our favour, but somehow the distribution
companies convinced the Supreme Court, which overturned the Constitutional Court’s de-
cision and sided with the distribution companies. Although the fee was reduced, we all still
have to pay it. So, we dropped the lawsuits, paid the fees, and the distribution companies
essentially won.
How is a wind park financed in Slovakia?
Similar to any other energy project. The development of the project is managed by the
investor using their own or any other resources. Basically, when the project obtains the
construction permit, meaning it has all the necessary permits for construction, then it is
possible to approach banks that provide an indicative offer for financing. This offer outlines
the percentage of the total costs that must come from the investor’s own resources. A por-
tion of those own resources is often accepted as part of the development the investor has
undertaken until then. There was a specific amount that the bank was willing to accept. For
photovoltaic projects, it was 250,000€ which represented the cost of project development
that I did not necessarily have to spend but was counted as part of the total costs.
One of the key moves is making sure we have a solid power purchase agreement in place
ahead of time. This agreement essentially acts as the financial backbone during the oper-
ation when the supplement from the government is not available. It locks in a fixed price,
which brings us an extra layer of security.
What are the typical equity-to-debt ratios for bank loans in these cases?
Just a month ago, we were arranging to finance a photovoltaic project where we managed
Page IV of XX
==PAGE:64==
to achieve a 30 to 70 ratio – 30 percent from our own resources and 70 percent from bank
financing, which was the best offer. The worst offer was at 45 to 55. The interest rates
are currently quite unfavourable due to the recent rise in Euribor. If I recall correctly, it is
around 3.5 percent.
The conditions are, of course, standard: you need to establish a pledge on movable and im-
movable property, and assets, and you need to present documents like connection agreements,
building permits, contracts with the general contractor, service agreements, insurance, and
so on. All the documents ensure the existence of the intended source. Then, of course, you
need an energy audit. It is a report from an independent expert who evaluates, for instance,
the wind park’s site and assesses the site’s potential and capacity in terms of energy pro-
duction.
What capital investments does an investor have to cover to connect a wind park
to the electrical grid?
As I mentioned earlier, the investor needs to finance the entire development of the project,
which includes costs related to acquiring land – either through lease, purchase, or establish-
ing easements. They need to finance all the studies, and project documentation, and pay
the connection fee, which involves the connection agreement, and that’s about it.
Could you describe the situation from 2009 when the feed-in tariff for solar pan-
els was established?
During that period, the state set an installed capacity limit for photovoltaics at 120 megawatts
and calculated a price of 425.38€ per megawatt-hour for the electricity produced. It was
something like that. There was a somewhat non-transparent competition to allocate ca-
pacities, and a few projects received this capacity. These were all projects with a capacity
greater than 1 megawatt, as you needed the approval of SEPS (Slovak Electricity Transmis-
sion System) and a license from the ministry for that. However, many, including us, realized
that projects under 1 megawatt did not require SEPS approval or even a business license.
As a result, many small projects of 1 megawatt and smaller emerged. When the state saw
that there were already quite a few projects, it lowered the price in 2010 to 385€ until June
30, 2011. Many projects were still created at that time, but the price continued to drop,
and later, the category of projects on open land was even abolished. Projects could only
be on roofs and facades, so the state-regulated it because they saw a lot of these projects.
Of course, it had a positive outcome as these sources were created because the feed-in price
made sense. Despite this, the price was somewhat higher than the actual costs for us, so
some really good business was done in a short time.
Unfortunately, during that time, electricity for households also became a bit more expensive
because we were all „financing“ these renewable sources. To reassure people, each invoice
had on its last page the percentage of energy from sun, water, and biomass, indicating where
the electricity was generated. Fortunately, this has passed as well because even the price of
electricity has decreased. Actually, the price of electricity increased, so things have somewhat
stabilized now. Today, it is the opposite again, with electricity from such sources potentially
being cheaper than the electricity currently sold.
Page V of XX
==PAGE:65==
What are the steps to acquire land on which a wind farm can be built?
The steps, well, I’ll put it like this: in Slovakia, the so-called cadastre portal is still function-
ing, where you can electronically view land options in different municipalities where you’d
like to realize your project. You can identify parcel numbers, and find out the owner, and
their address. Then you have to find a way to contact them, either by phone or by physically
going there. And you negotiate. Much of the land is owned by the church. Some churches
do not want to offer or lease the land at all. There are churches that are willing to lease
the land. In rare cases, I have heard that some churches sold the land. Through leasing,
they get significantly more money than what farmers pay them. Then there’s the category
of municipal land, where the municipality is interested in leasing the land to investors, not
selling it, because the municipality makes a profit from it. And then there’s private land,
which in most cases private owners want to sell, as they do not want to have it leased for 30
years, and these owners are mostly older people. These lands are usually not inherited, etc.
So, it varies from case to case, but you have to deal with it.
When you buy land, it is actually agricultural land. If you want to build a project in a
certain municipality, your project must be in line with the current spatial planning docu-
mentation. The municipality has a spatial plan that outlines where houses will be built,
where a playground will be, where sewage treatment plants will be placed, etc. Then as an
investor, we come in. We negotiate with them, and if they agree, you must ensure a change
or an addition to the spatial plan. So, a new plan is created that will indicate that it is
possible to build a wind farm in a particular zone. And then, when you proceed with the
spatial planning process, you can then apply to remove the land from the agricultural land
fund for the purpose of construction. But that must follow the spatial plan first. Then the
land becomes construction land on which you can build.
To make sure that the process does not take 10 years after obtaining a building permit,
I spend 5 years on EIA, then when I have that, I deal with connecting to the distribution
system, and when I have the connection, I work on the spatial plan, and then the building
permit – we decided to start the EIA process concurrently. We initiated the process and
obtained a certificate, so now we are preparing documentation for building our own substa-
tion for connection to the grid. The third parallel step was that we had already concluded
the process of amending and supplementing the spatial plans. In municipalities where I do
not have the EIA completed yet, the land has already been allocated for so-called industrial
production in the spatial plan. This means the renewable sources category. So, when I finish
the EIA and go through the spatial planning process, I already have that spatial plan. I do
not need to start that then because it is a process that takes 9 to 12 months, for example.
So, we are doing three steps at once. we are taking the risk that the EIA will pass, and
therefore we have not done those other two steps for nothing.
Page VI of XX
==PAGE:66==
How did you perceive the moratorium (stop-state) of 2013? How did it impact
you?
The moratorium was an invented obstruction by the government that did not have any legal
basis. It was in effect from December 2013 when distribution companies announced that
they would not issue any positive conclusions for connecting new energy sources. The reason
given was that they needed to complete electrical lines to Hungary. When the Mochovce nu-
clear power plant starts operating, we would not know what to do with the excess electricity.
Even today, we are exporting electricity, but without the infrastructure, we have nowhere to
export it. So, if Mochovce connected, it would create a significant surplus. When the state
guarantees renewable energy producers connection, a price, and the right of access, it would
essentially hurt itself, so they blocked everything. I think the moratorium was lifted in April
2019. They officially said you could start submitting applications again, but there was no
capacity in the electrical grid. Although the moratorium was lifted, they didn’t allocate
capacity until later.
In the meantime, the power lines to Hungary, two 400-kilovolt lines, were completed, so that
technical problem was resolved. Meanwhile, I think the power plants in Nováky and Vojany
ceased operation; they were brown coal power plants. Vojany, I believe, was coal-based, and
now they’re trying a combination with wood chips or bio-waste to present it as a renewable
source. So, we had a higher output from these two power plants at that time, maybe around
500-600 megawatts.
So when Mochovce starts operating at full capacity, they won’t need to import
electricity anymore? Looks like I might have found incorrect information.
Could I also be mistaken? Yes, but that’s more or less how it was argued, that we would
be shutting down certain sources, and in the meantime, a new source would come online,
gradually gearing up as it is prepared. I am not sure if, by 2030 or 2035, there will be only
one nuclear power plant – Jaslovské Bohunice – in operation. So, when this power plant
ends its operation, we realistically need a new source, which is already being planned, and
it seems that it will be a new nuclear one.
What is the reason behind shutting down the Jaslovske Bohunice power station?
Jaslovské Bohunice are being shut down because of their age. They have reached a point
where they are quite old. This was a commitment we made when joining the European
Union. Austria, for instance, had significant protests against nuclear power plants, so a
couple of blocks were shut down there, and now the whole Jaslovské Bohunice is gradually
being decommissioned. The concern is rooted in the history of the Chernobyl disaster and
the technology used in these reactors, which is of Russian origin.
It is quite interesting that if this power plant is going to shut down, we will need
a new source.
And not just that. These are Russian reactors, and nobody else could actually supply us
with the fuel except the Russians. Currently, we have fuel for maybe 1 or 2 years, and we
are searching for a supplier for this fuel, so it is not that straightforward.
Page VII of XX
==PAGE:67==
B
Interview with Dipl. Ing. Tomáš Lacko, the CEO of
Green Energy Slovakia s.r.o., 21. September 2023
Note: The interview was held in Slovak language, and translated to English by the author of
the master’s thesis.
What are the existing connections to the Cerová electrical grid and what are the
available capacities near the wind park?
Well, we have a connection agreement there. It has a capacity of 2640 kilowatts. In the
nearest vicinity, there is no available capacity. The closest available capacity is in the elec-
trical station 12km away in Senica.
So, this is actually my second question: what would need to be modernized,
added, or replaced if we wanted to expand the wind park?
Either build a 12-kilometre connection to that electrical station, or the second option, which
is currently only theoretical, would require direct approval to connect to the 110 kilovolts
distribution company’s grid nearby. So, if we were to get approval, we could build a substa-
tion from 110 to 22 kilovolts. However, probably more than two turbines could not be placed
in that location. Building a substation is currently around 3-3.5 million EUR, which would
likely be unprofitable for just two turbines. So, even those 12 kilometres would be cheaper,
but again, it is very complicated due to property rights. Therefore, we are considering the
capacity, which is 2640 MW, or maybe around 2.5 megawatts, or 3 megawatts with some
power limitation. When I asked about it, they told me that today, if I wanted that capacity
of 2640 MW that I currently have, they would not give it to me. The conditions in the grid
have changed, so I would get even less than what we have today. So, either one large turbine
and a 12km cable pull, or two turbines and a substation for 3.5 million.
Fun fact, we have a new update in the legislation: since August 1st, the methodological
guideline of the Public Health Authority of Slovakia has been in effect. It clearly states that
in the EIA process for wind park design, in order to protect public health, the minimum
distance from the nearest residential areas to wind turbines should be as follows: for the
category we are dealing with, if the wind turbine height is more than 150m, including the
blade, the minimum distance is 3000m from residences. So, all the projects currently on
the environmental portal may be discarded because everyone is proposing distances up to
1000m. Now, we want to find out on what parameters the authority established this.
If the wind park could be expanded, how many turbines could be fitted in the
area?
Well, up there on that specific site, there is a space for a total of 2 big new wind turbines.
Page VIII of XX
==PAGE:68==
There are many separate residential buildings in the area. If I wanted to meet the current
hygiene standard, not even considering the 3000m, I would still need at least 700-800m. So,
more in the area up there is not possible.
If not right next to each other, could they be placed somewhere in the nearby
surrounding area, for example?
Well, we had the location Hlboké in Senica. Currently, we are working on the Hlboké site,
where we have four proposed wind turbines, so yes, it is in the village of Hlboké near Senica.
It is not far from Cerová, about 10km away, where theoretically such a park could be built,
but with the obligation to construct a distribution system. Up on that hill in Cerová, when
I say 2, it means that I would replace those 4 with 1 new turbine, and I could even build
another one there. Currently, one of them, which is close to the Rozbehy area, is only about
600m away from the nearest house. So, we want to remove this one and instead of those 4,
which is the farthest one, I want to reach a distance of around 850 or 900m, but you cannot
go further because then the hill slopes down quite a bit.
What is the price of land in Cerová? How much did you pay for that location?
That was a long time ago, and today, it is like this: 2/3 of the land belongs to us, and 1/3
belongs to the village. So, the land has two owners. In the village, we pay about 200 EUR
in annual rent for those 4 turbines, so it is completely marginal. Even when we bought it,
we bought it from some individuals, so I do not know, today we are talking about possibly
buying the land. I think it is around 10 EUR per square meter.
Could you give me an estimate of how much land will be needed?
I am not sure, maybe around 3000 square meters. Yes, it looks like I hit the mark because
it is supposed to be around 30,000€ .That would be the price for those 2 new replaced
turbines. I have to enlarge the land, I need to have a larger reinforced area, and so on, so it
is calculated at those 3000 square meters. In general, the price of land depends on whether
it is agricultural land or another type of area. If it is agricultural land, the price ranges from
2500€ to 5000€ per hectare. The rent is somewhere around 2000€ per hectare per year.
What is the approximate cost of the EIA?
The cost of the EIA for the first stage is, let’s say, up to 5000€ ˙For the second stage, when
there is already monitoring and all those assessment reports, it can be around 15,000€ to
20,000€ , depending on the size of the location.
Is that for the entire EIA or just for the second stage?
For the second stage. The second stage includes bird monitoring, bat monitoring, vibroacous-
tic assessment, visibility, and shadow flicker, plus the person who has the capability processes
it into an assessment report and evaluates all comments, so it is around 15,000€ to 20,000€ .
Page IX of XX
==PAGE:69==
Is the price of the EIA dependent on the installed capacity?
Or is it a fixed
price?
No, whether I install a 3-megawatt or a 50-megawatt installation, the prices will be more or
less the same.
What do you consider a profitable PPA contract?
Currently, we are getting 358€ per megawatt-hour in Cerová. But we pay 168€ of it as
excessive income tax. So, in fact, I am receiving 190€ per megawatt-hour. I do not have the
price for next year yet. And if I wanted a price that I would be satisfied with, I’d say 100€
and above. 85€ to 95€ will be a price where all costs are covered plus some reserve and a
small profit.
What is the duration of your PPA?
Now, the contract we have is with a trader. So, it is not a normal distribution company,
but it is a private firm. If we were dealing with a PPA contract, i.e., with a direct buyer, it
would be for at least 5 years. But financing depends on that too, so the longer the contract,
the lower the price. It is very debatable, and this form of PPA is just starting in Slovakia.
I had an offer from Slovak Telecom, they wanted a 20-year contract, and we talked about
around 70€ and less.
How do you deal with producing less or more electricity than you forecast?
That is what we call a contract for the purchase of electricity with responsibility for devi-
ation. So, whatever I produce, I deliver, they pay me for it, and in the price they pay us,
they take into account that instability. I have no penalties there.
And if, for instance, you produced more and did not have this trader but sup-
plied to a distribution company, can you imagine selling the excess to the grid?
Since we do not have such a case, I cannot answer that practically, but I think it probably
would not be a problem for the contractual partner to take all the quantity. Maybe there
would be a different price for it. I do not know, I’m speculating.
Could you provide an explanation regarding how the state imposes taxes on the
price of electricity?
The excess income tax is determined based on the electricity purchase price, effective from
January 1, 2023. Electricity sales are exempt from tax up to a rate of 180 EUR per MWh.
We are also required, as a legal entity, to pay a profit tax according to the law, which cur-
rently stands at 21%.
What is the price of the insurance of the wind park in Cerova?
The insurance price depends on the value of the insured property. We have coverage for
power outages during unexpected events. We pay approximately 25,000 EUR annually.
Page X of XX
==PAGE:70==
How much do you pay to the nearby village of Cerova?
The profit for the village of Cerova ranges up to 10,000 EUR per year. The village has no
expenses associated with the operation and maintenance of the wind turbines. In the case of
repowering, we would like to establish a fixed amount of 7,000 EUR per year for the village.
In this scenario, the investment will be fully covered by us without any contribution from
the village.
Who were the investors in capital for Cerová? I found that besides you, there
was some European fund or something like that. Do you remember?
The project was co-financed from the PHARE fund. Those were sort of entry funds, so they
received, I do not remember if it was 1.6 or 1.9 million EUR, 600,000 I think was from the
state budget, and the rest we provided as a loan. So, the total cost was 3 million, and 2.4
million was the co-financing.
So, the owner of that park is the municipality of Cerová?
Yes. We operate it based on an agreement.
So when the electricity is sold, the money goes to you.
Yes, because we have the right to use it. We pay for maintenance, we pay for insurance, and
we bear all the costs of operation, so the municipality is repaying the loan and also receives
an annual share of the electricity production.
So, if you wanted to replace those turbines, who would pay for it?
Now, if we were dealing with the repowering, we would actually initiate the termination of
the cooperation agreement with the municipality and propose a new model where we would
be the owners of the technology. The municipality would only receive a financial contribution
on the grounds that the project is located in its cadastral area. So, the private company
would be the 100% owner.
What were the reasons why the expansion did not happen when you attempted
it a few years back?
Limited capacity in the distribution system. That was the main reason.
Alright, and what other obstacles could potentially hinder this expansion?
Perhaps property rights issues. Because we already had land ready for these existing tur-
bines. Ten years ago, we wanted to build two sets of two megawatts. We had the land
secured, but we could not resolve the 12 kilometres to the substation.
Would the cable go underground or above ground?
Underground. They probably would not allow an overhead cable. Conservationists want it
to be underground.
Page XI of XX
==PAGE:71==
Do you think the EIA would pass at this moment, considering Cerová is essen-
tially within the Malé Karpaty National Park?
Well, in 2008, it was successfully concluded. So, we had a positive assessment with spec-
ified conditions for building the two new towers. It is not clear today if, when I want to
replace these four with one, I will have to do a new EIA as if I were starting a completely
new project, or if it falls under the new European legislation, which requires expediting the
processes within 12 months. So, I am optimistic and firmly believe that since it is essentially
replacing existing technology with new, it should not be a problem.
C
Interview with Ing. Ján Karaba, MSc., the director of
Slovak Association of Photovoltaic Industry and RES
(SAPI), 22. September 2023
Note: The interview was held in Slovak language, and translated to English by the author of
the master’s thesis.
What is your experience with environmental impact assessment?
The EIA process is essentially a process that all activities listed in Annex 8 of the EIA Act
must go through. It is precisely and exhaustively enumerated. Slovakia has the strictest
legislation in the European Union regarding this, because any wind turbine, even the small-
est one, must undergo not just a simple EIA process, but what is known as a mandatory
assessment. This means it is a two-stage process, and it is as complicated as it gets. All
activities have to go through this assessment. First, you have to create an intention. This
intention is then made public, and then it is somehow subject to comments, and based on
that, what is called the scope of the assessment is developed. This is essentially a brief on
what the investor has to evaluate and assess throughout the whole process. Here is where
we have a problem in Slovakia; this scope tends to be very, let’s say, unpredictable. It means
that every official determines a different scope, which implies that some investors get a 15-
point scope while others get a 60-point scope. This is just one of many things that creates a
lot of confusion because there is inconsistency in the procedures and approach. We do not
really have a unified methodology for assessing what should not be done, especially when
it comes to wind power plants. And that is because, about 13 years ago, there were people
who fundamentally did not want wind power plants to develop at all. So they created a
directive stating that it is nearly impossible to just build a wind power plant anywhere in
Slovakia. This directive basically outlines all the requirements that must be met, and in
essence, it is not binding for anyone, but anyone interested can find different information in
it. It serves as a kind of reference for someone who wants to create problems, they can refer
to this directive. Because it is the only document for wind power plants, no other document
really exists in Slovakia.
Page XII of XX
==PAGE:72==
And of course, it does not end there. The Ministry of Environment, which is the responsible
authority for issuing what is called final opinions, has several other bodies under it. This
includes regional offices, district offices, and the environmental departments at the district
level. And there are some issues everywhere. It depends on the officials, whether they have
experience with it or not. If they do have some experience, they tend not to comply with
the legal deadlines. It gets prolonged and stretched out. Simply put, the process takes an
incredibly long time, not just in the case of wind, but in principle for any other activity.
Because we have come to understand that this problem applies to construction, to anything,
basically wherever there is a large EIA, they have huge problems with it, because it takes
3-4 years for everything to go through.
So, the experiences are decidedly negative.
It is very poorly set up here, not so much
the legislation itself because the law is not entirely catastrophically bad. But the way it is
applied, that is the issue, the application level. It often happens that investors face obstruc-
tions.
By the way, one of the problematic levels of the EIA is that it is an open process according
to the Aarhus Convention, meaning as soon as something is in the EIA process, any subject
in Slovakia can raise a comment. Since official representatives usually view it as legitimate,
they ask the investors, even if it is something completely nonsensical, to address it and deal
with it. This is what is called obstructive behaviour, or obstructive conduct. Many subjects
now abuse it in a way that literally forces you as an investor to cooperate with them, usually
for a fee. So, this then has negative effects, secondarily, in terms of prolonging the admin-
istrative processes, the financial demands, and so on. So, yes, in principle, the EIA is a
dysfunctional process, or very poorly functional, and it needs to be fundamentally reformed,
not only in terms of legislation but mainly in terms of the approach of state authorities, who
are inexperienced, and when they are, they often do not follow a consistent process, they
lack guidelines, they lack a system to follow. Basically, there is a lot of what could be called
a cop-out, because no one wants to take responsibility for something. What is not properly
written anywhere, they prefer to avoid. Essentially, they pass it off to someone else to deal
with it.
What would you propose to improve this problem?
Well, there are actually quite a few corrective measures already devised. They generally fall
into several categories. The first category is to prevent counterproductive actions, meaning
to prevent unwarranted parties from entering the process, not only when the EIA is finished,
but even when the project is in the final inspection phase. Even there, a party can still raise
some comment.
The second category is that the law itself needs to be changed, particularly regarding the
Annex. There are so-called threshold values, and these threshold values essentially deter-
mine when an activity must be assessed. We have threshold values that literally do not make
Page XIII of XX
==PAGE:73==
sense. A small wind turbine must go through the entire EIA assessment. So, I think we
need to reach some consensus quickly, meaning increase the threshold values. Additionally,
we need to adjust some legal deadlines in the law, because for issuing certain decisions and
determining certain steps in the whole assessment process, there are delays due to the lack
of defined deadlines. And the official knows this well, so they will prolong it as much as suits
them.
The third category is to digitize the process. Instead of exchanging physical documents
or anything else, everything should be delivered electronically. This needs to be seriously
addressed and completely digitized.
The fourth category is methodology, explicitly developing a unified methodology for as-
sessment, determining the scope of assessment, what should be assessed, what should not,
what makes sense, and how. These criteria should be objectively set, not subjectively. This
is currently being worked on by the government. The Ministry is resisting the establishment
of methodologies that would in any way bind them. The former Minister of Environment had
no interest in supporting anything, no renewable sources, green economy or green energy.
So, it really comes down to who the minister is, and who holds the highest political position.
When this is set correctly, when there are people who understand it and want to address it,
then it will gradually be resolved.
So, in short? These four things can be achieved. Some of them are a matter of law, but
many of them are not.
How do you perceive public opinion regarding wind energy in Slovakia?
Well, we are currently running a campaign to support wind energy, so we have done quite a
bit of research on this. The first thing we addressed were myths and misinformation about
wind farms, and we spent a lot of time on that. We published various informational articles
and graphics. These were focused on helping people understand that, firstly, wind turbines
do not kill birds. Not that they cannot, but they are not machines designed to destroy
birds, or any fauna for that matter. Assuming, of course, they are correctly placed, which is
precisely the result of the EIA process. And since we have the most precise assessments in
Slovakia, that is how it is.
Secondly, they do not harm health, meaning they do not have a negative impact on health.
The safety distances we recommend, about 600 to 800 meters, depending on the location, are
large enough so that they are basically inaudible. There are no vibrations or flicker effects.
People only see them on the horizon.
And that was the third area we addressed, specifically, the visual impact on the landscape.
Of course, it is visible, but firstly, there will not be as many as in Austria, because people
have this idea that forests made of wind turbines will sprout up here, which is not true
because the technologies are completely different. The latest technologies in Denmark in-
Page XIV of XX
==PAGE:74==
volve taller towers and larger blades, meaning one turbine can have two to three times the
capacity of previously installed turbines. So, you will only have a few in a wind park. The
second aspect is that you can model how it will look, and fundamentally, people, when they
get used to a chimney from a heating facility or a very tall high-voltage pylon, they will not
have trouble adjusting to a wind power plant. Plus, it is also about how involved people are
in the project. If it is the local government or the people who have direct benefits from the
operation of the wind project, then this issue suddenly becomes irrelevant. Essentially, it is
about how you can engage the specific residents in the operation of that park.
So, we fundamentally addressed these points, and we also investigated whether it is windy in
Slovakia, which was an important topic, because people imagine that if they do not feel the
wind on themselves on the ground, then it is not windy, so why build wind turbines? There
are plenty of negatives, so we tackled them one by one. I think thanks to the campaign,
public opinion has significantly improved. Of course, there are still detractors who we will
never convince. These are like eternal naysayers, under no circumstances. But a lot of people
already understand the benefits of wind energy. So, it has improved, and we continue the
campaign. In the coming year, we will also target the regional and local levels, so we will
talk to mayors and local authorities. We are the main voice of wind energy in Slovakia, so
we are working on it because we realize that public opinion is crucial for projects to succeed.
People need to have accurate information about what we are offering. Let’s not make up
stories, but present technical and precise information as it is.
In Austria, for example, we did a media trip, and there is no problem even though there
are forests made of wind turbines. It does not bother the residents because they know they
are getting ecological electricity. That is their main incentive in all of this, and they are
not particularly bothered by it. Maybe it is also a matter of increased interest; even visitors
and tourists have increased because of the wind turbines. Yes, there was a study conducted
on this correlation between the number of visitors in Styria and Burgenland, and it was
found that one of the factors was indeed the presence of wind turbines. These people are
even financially involved in the operation of the wind park. In some places, local authorities
financed it through these people themselves, making it a community investment.
What would you recommend to lawmakers and investors to further improve pub-
lic opinion?
For lawmakers, there is one simple thing that has not been implemented in Slovakia yet but
would greatly improve the situation if adopted. It is a special law on local fees for wind
power plants, which would establish the possibility for local governments to tax wind power
plants. In Slovakia, local governments cannot just collect money from investors. So, the
investor might say, "Alright, I will contribute something to you," but it is mostly in the form
of a gift. This is a fairly inappropriate structure because the local government never has the
assurance that the investor will keep their word. They also have no assurance of how much
money it will be, they have no control over it at all. They could calculate it and know that
for the next 10 years, they could get x amount per year from such a project.
Page XV of XX
==PAGE:75==
The second thing, of course, is that public opinion depends on how they express themselves
about this source, and so far, there has not really been universal political support at the
level of moral support. No representative, no top government official has stated that yes, we
want to have wind power plants here because it is a good source of electricity. That we need
to have it here because it is our own electricity that we generate. This has not been the
case, but it would send a very strong political signal that everyone should take it seriously
because the government supports it.
Investors, of course, should first and foremost be professional and adhere to an unwritten
code of conduct for how investors should behave. A serious investor, under no circumstances,
underestimates any of these processes. They follow the rules, and above all, offer fair par-
ticipation to the individual parties involved. So, they take care of public relations.
How is a typical wind park financed in Slovakia?
The finances will be acquired purely through commercial means in any case. This means
you have your own resources, you have a loan, and by combining these two things, the
construction is essentially financed. Wind power plants do not have a feed-in tariff, they
do not have anything guaranteed, and they do not have a right to subsidies from the state
budget or European funds. Some of the current financial mechanisms might support wind
power plants. Or it might be part of a modernization fund that supports decarbonization,
for example, in industry, and within that framework, it supports it. But these are isolated
cases. The vast majority of all projects arise on a purely commercial basis.
I saw that the Ministry of Economy has issued an auction to support CAPEX,
I think up to 50 megawatts installed capacity?
Everyone who applied was for photovoltaics, not a single wind project, because they set the
time frame in such a way that no wind power plant could be established within the time
they specified for it to be created. So, fundamentally, the focus was mainly on photovoltaic
projects, especially those on rooftops.
What are the typical ratios of equity to debt for bank loans?
The best answer would be that it varies case by case. But generally, for wind power plants,
you can get up to 70 percent of the loan, which means 30 percent equity.
On your website, you mentioned that you created a document evaluating the
availability of sites for wind energy in Slovakia. Could you comment on what
you found and where the available areas are mostly located?
The result of this analysis of wind energy potential was that up to 20 percent of the territory
of the Slovak Republic is suitable in terms of wind parameters for economic electricity pro-
duction from wind. That is a relatively high number because it means that almost in every
region or district in Slovakia, it is possible to build quite a number of wind turbines, and
it makes sense to build wind power plants. The total potential was at 169 gigawatts. That
Page XVI of XX
==PAGE:76==
would be the absolute maximum that could not be achieved, but it follows from that, even
if we, for example, achieved only 2 percent, like what the European Commission is talking
about now, which is 17 gigawatts of installed capacity, the wind will produce more than the
annual consumption of Slovakia.
In your calculations, you considered turbine spacing of at least 600 meters?
Yes.
But if it is 800 meters, the numbers will not change significantly.
It will still be
enormous, like going from 17 gigawatts to 14 gigawatts for 2 percent of the total capacity.
So it is still a number that is in the realm of science fiction in Slovakia, when we have
five wind turbines here with a total installed capacity of 3 megawatts, and they were all
installed between 2000 and 2004. That was one of the main goals, not that there is no
wind in Slovakia, but that there is, and it blows perfectly fine. There are sufficient condi-
tions here that advanced technologies can easily utilize to justify building these power plants.
Could you please describe the situation in 2009 when support for renewable en-
ergy was introduced in the form of a guaranteed purchase price?
The support for photovoltaics was exceptionally generous, meaning the feed-in tariffs were
set so high that practically everyone found it profitable, and everyone did everything to be
able to build such sources. It was rather inconsiderate and politically problematic. Corrup-
tion can still be clearly seen behind it. Permits were distributed in a way they were never
supposed to be. SEPS actually conducted a quasi-selection process, which no one knew
about, and received exactly 30 applications for 120 megawatts within two days. It was a
dark period for support, especially for photovoltaics. The system itself was not bad. Guar-
anteed purchase prices are an extremely effective way of support, but the legislator or public
authority must also consider the consequences and set up the system sustainably. One huge
problem in Slovakia was that it was not set up to function properly. Distribution companies
paid for it, and they literally had nothing to do with it. They placed the burden on the
distribution companies, which was never meant to be their responsibility. They ended up in
deficit because the regulatory authority politically intervened, not granting them sufficient
tariffs or increases in tariffs that were needed to cover it, resulting in a deficit of almost
500 million EUR. The distribution companies were in debt because they had to pay the
producers, and they did not receive it from their partners.
Then, the state seemed to have completely incorrect analytical data and either could not or
did not want to analyze the actual cost-effectiveness of those power plants. For example,
this led to a stop-state. This stop-state lasted from 2013 until 2021, so it lasted more than
7 years. The stop-state was a very, very significant influencing factor in the whole devel-
opment of renewable sources, not just photovoltaics, but all of them. So you can imagine
that nothing was developing here. This is not the way to do it. We were established as
an association solely in response to this system because we did not consider the system to
be a fortunate one, and we criticized it. But it took a long, long 9 years until the system
was set up in a way that actually made sense. In 2018, an amendment was adopted that fi-
nally gave the system the right parameters, and that is how it has been working up until now.
Page XVII of XX
==PAGE:77==
You have just answered my next question about the stop-state. What have you
thought of it?
We are probably the only ones in Europe, and possibly in the world, who introduced such
a standstill. We have not found any country in the world that implemented it in this way,
a complete and essentially unjustified stop-state. It was clearly politically motivated, done
to prevent these surcharges from being transferred to the final price of electricity. Yes, they
justified it by citing concerns about the capacity of the system and so on, but in reality, that
was not true. It was about the fact that we had the socialist government of SMER-SD, and
SMER-SD had a mantra about stable electricity prices. So, the prices could not increase,
and if they could not increase, then deficits had to arise somewhere, right? So, they did rise.
D
Additional graphs and tables
Figure 14: Power curve of Siemens SG 2.6-114 wind turbine used in Case 1 and Case 2,
approximated according to [70]
Page XVIII of XX
==PAGE:78==
Month [MWh]
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
January
1,328
6,643
618
February
1,180
5,900
563
March
853
4,263
83
April
920
4,601
152
May
510
2,551
57
June
598
2,989
66
July
663
3,314
69
August
653
3,265
107
September
797
3,986
161
October
930
4,648
256
November
803
4,016
228
December
871
4,356
250
Table 6: The monthly productions in MWh for all cases
Figure 15: Operations and Maintenance prices forecast, real(2022) [75] and their correspond-
ing nominal values
Page XIX of XX
==PAGE:79==
Figure 16: Electricity prices forecast, real(2022) [75] and their corresponding nominal values
Input Parameter
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
CAPEX [EUR]
6,218,338
35,940,120
278,784
O&M
Approximated according to [75]
G-Component [EUR]
26,250
131,250
26,400
Insurance
25,000
125,000
25,000
Fee for village [EUR]
7,000
35,000
10,000
Tax
Profit tax = 21%
Electricity/PPA price
Approximated according to [75]
100;
from 2031:
90 EUR/MWh
Discount rate
Approximated = 6%
Inflation
from 5.6% in 2024 to 1.8% in 2028, then 2% until EoL
Decommission [EUR]
508,094
2,936,629
348,372
Table 7: The summary of the input parameters in the financial analysis, nominal values
Page XX of XX
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tlf: 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
