==PAGE:1==
Deep learning framework for ship detection in commercial SAR images
Constantin G¨unzel, Kristian Aalling Sørensen, Peder Heiselberg, Henning Heiselberga
aTechnical University of Denmark - Center for Security DTU, Anker Engelunds Vej 101, Kongens Lyngby, 2800, Denmark
Abstract
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) plays an increasing role in satellite-based ship detection and hereby enhances maritime security
in all weather conditions, day and night. This paper specifically addresses so-called dark ships (ships without AIS signal), through
the analysis of high-resolution ICEYE SAR imagery. Leveraging sophisticated deep learning models like YOLOv8, our proposed
framework achieves a detection rate surpassing 85%, and thereby bridges the gap to the extensive existing knowledge about ship
detection in low-resolution imagery.
Our contribution extends beyond the model architecture itself, encompassing a comprehensive pipeline essential for the deploy-
ment of the model in future military scenarios. This framework includes components such as result filtering, AIS signal matching,
and supplementary metadata collection. By elucidating these aspects, this paper provides a holistic understanding of the dark ship
detection process, advancing the application of cutting-edge technology in the context of maritime security.
Keywords: Dark ship detection, Deep learning, ICEYE, Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
1. Introduction
With a steady increase of maritime traffic throughout his-
tory, but specifically over 300% in the last decades (Tournadre,
2014), the shipping industry is responsible for more than 80%
of the trading volume worldwide. This led to organisational
and technological advances in the fields of vessel tracking and
collision avoidance, such as the automatic identification system
(AIS) introduced in the year 2000, which broadcasts the iden-
tity of the vessel as well as relevant metadata like its course
over ground (CoG), speed over ground (SoG) and position.
AIS transmissions can be lost, e.g., by poor coverage or over-
crowded areas (Windward, 2019), or turned off purposefully.
Ships with disabled AIS are defined as so-called dark ships,
which pose a major risk to maritime security and might take
part in illegal fishing activities, environmental crimes, piracy,
drug smuggling, trading of sanctioned goods, human trafficking
or acts of military sabotage. Tracking and identifying exactly
those ships without relying on AIS data is therefore of huge in-
terest in the military domain and necessary for the sovereignty
of a modern state.
Ships can be detected using satellite-based imagery. Syn-
thetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images are of great interest and
have been gaining traction in the Earth Observation market over
the last decade for offering advantages over optical images as
they provide visual on the target through atmospheric effects
(,i.e., clouds) and at night. On the contrary, optical satellite im-
agery and thermal infrared data (Li et al., 2019) are strongly
dependent on atmospheric conditions and thus unreliable for
surveillance tasks. As much effort has been devoted to ship
detection, there is a broad amount of research and knowledge
available in this field. Existing studies can be grouped by fun-
damentally different parameters and means of ship detection.
Generally speaking, either the ship or the wake of the ship can
be detected (Heiselberg, 2016), although most research focuses
on the ship itself as the reflected signal is less dependent on the
sea state, has a higher intensity and also works during the ab-
sence of a wake. Due to the structure of the ship, radar waves
can undergo corner reflections when hitting a ship, whereas a
calm ocean surface reflects the radar wave in a specular way
with minimal echos. On a calm open sea, this ideally leads to
high-intensity bright vessels on a dark background. Therefore,
a lot of conventional methods of ship detection focus on image
analysis approaches, Hough transforms and statistical distribu-
tions to detect bright ships in SAR images, for example, seen in
Prasad et al. (2023). Most commonly, a method called constant
false alarm rate (CFAR) is used, which adapts a threshold value
for ship detection to the pixel distribution in the detection win-
dow (Jiaqiu et al., 2011; Gao, 2011; Wang et al., 2017). Targets
exceeding this threshold are marked as ships. As a disadvan-
tage, this only works for strong-intensity targets on relatively
calm oceans and does not only detect ships but anything with
a high reflection in comparison to the wavelength of the radar.
This leads to a high rate of false alarms in broader testing. Ad-
ditionally, most research done in this field focuses on homoge-
neous images (Guang Yang, 2013; Shi et al., 2014), meaning the
image shows only water (and ships). Non-homogeneous images
also show harbours, islands, land masses and other man-made
structures, which can provide similar reflection characteristics
as ships. These scenes pose a challenge for conventional meth-
ods of ship detection, rendering the approach of filtering for
high-intensity targets on low-intensity backgrounds highly in-
effective.
Consequently, instead of relying on conventional methods,
this paper introduces a deep learning model designed to de-
tect ships in non-homogeneous images worldwide. Supervised
Preprint submitted to ELSEVIER Remote Sensing of Environment
November 30, 2023
==PAGE:2==
one-stage object detectors, meaning model architectures, which
skip the so-called region proposal stage and treat object detec-
tion as a regression problem, were already used to address dark
ship detection in the past. These works mostly focus on Single-
Shot Detector (SSD) and You Only Look Once (YOLO), are ap-
plied to already existing datasets and aim to improve the detec-
tion accuracy and prove general superiority over CFAR, gener-
alised likelihood ratio test (GLRT) (Iervolino and Guida, 2017)
or Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) based ship detection.
Most projects heavily focus on broadly available public-access
Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 data (Zhang et al., 2021; Heiselberg
et al., 2022), which have a comparably low resolution (10 to
20 meters for Sentinel-1) and make the detection less reliable
or even impossible for ships much smaller than the image res-
olution. In comparison, this paper focuses on high-resolution
ICEYE SAR images, which not only allow smaller ships to be
detected but due to more details being visible also a more accu-
rate differentiation between ships and other objects in the sea,
man-made or natural, as well as clutter and noise. Furthermore,
the constellation of 27 X-band satellites offers a distinct advan-
tage in terms of low latency and daily revisit times, facilitating
global persistent monitoring capabilities. In instances where
a specific oceanic region becomes of interest due to the pres-
ence of a dark ship, ICEYE can promptly provide images within
hours. Recognizing the critical importance of rapid response in
dark ship detection, any delay in image provisioning compli-
cates the tracking of moving vessels. Thus, the imperative for
low latency is paramount, aligning seamlessly with the require-
ments of a robust surveillance infrastructure for any nation and,
consequently, serving the potential military applications of this
project.
To bridge the gap between the extensive existing knowl-
edge in ship detection in low and medium-resolution SAR im-
agery and the uprise of private high-resolution satellites, this
article proposes a rapid algorithm to identify ships in high-
resolution ICEYE SAR imagery and correlates these results
with AIS data to detect dark ships. The workflow is based on a
self-constructed vessel dataset and YOLOv8’s single-shot fully
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN).
The subsequent sections provide detailed descriptions of the
used ICEYE SAR and AIS data (Section 2), the methodol-
ogy encompassing the complete workflow, dataset creation, and
model details, along with potential challenges (Section 3). Key
results are presented and compared with other data sources and
previous work in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 offers a compre-
hensive discussion and outlook.
2. Input data and data acquisition
2.1. ICEYE
ICEYE Ltd., a Finnish company renowned for its advanced
microsatellite constellation, provides high-resolution imagery
with resolutions reaching as low as one meter. They offer a
diverse range of products, imaging modes and formats.
Given the time-consuming nature of ordering images and the
necessity to estimate the potential location of dark ships up to
that point, a strategic trade-off is required in selecting the imag-
ing mode. Figure 1 illustrates that ICEYE satellites can either
deliver data of a larger region with a lower resolution or fo-
cus on a smaller area with higher resolution based on a steer-
able SAR antenna and thus higher illumination times (eoPortal,
2023). Therefore, a trade-off between spatial extent and spatial
resolution has to be made when selecting the imaging mode. As
the location of the vessel has to be estimated up to that point in
time and might therefore be inaccurate, a large enough region
is needed (excluding Spot and Dwell mode), while still main-
taining a high resolution (thus excluding Scan mode). For this
reason, Strip mode was selected.
Figure 1: Comparison of different ICEYE imaging modes, their spatial extent
and resolution (GRD format)
Image source: ICEYE SAR data brochure
Strip mode represents ICEYE’s standard X-band imaging
mode, featuring resolutions of 3x3 meters (Ground Range
Detected (GRD)) and 0.5-2.5x3 meters (Single Look Com-
plex (SLC)), respectively, with scene extents of approximately
30x50 kilometres. The actual scene extent may vary between
images, and the specified values outlined in ICEYE’s product
brochure serve as a general reference for Strip mode. We ac-
quired four demo scenes in VV polarisation containing mar-
itime traffic from different locations, times and oceans around
the globe to form a diversified dataset. A visualisation of this
diversification can be found in Appendix A. Specific parame-
ters for each demo scene in GRD format are detailed in Table
1.
All images are single-channel representations with a 16-bit
depth, resulting in pixel intensities ranging from 0 to 65535
(216 −1). For each scene, the packed archive includes a quick-
view .png file, the high-resolution image in GeoTiff .tif format
(or .h5 for SLC), and relevant metadata encapsulated in a sepa-
rate .xml file.
2
==PAGE:3==
Table 1: Overview of key parameters for each ICEYE GRD demo scene
Scene location
Parameter
Value
Str. of Singapore
Spatial extent [km]
42.09 x 67.18
No. of pixels [px]
16892 x 26855
Spatial resolution [m]
2.5 x 2.5
Engl. Channel
Spatial extent [km]
43.95 x 66.94
No. of pixels [px]
17579 x 26849
Spatial resolution [m]
2.5 x 2.5
Lima, Peru
Spatial extent [km]
36.35 x 81.01
No. of pixels [px]
14347 x 32255
Spatial resolution [m]
2.5 x 2.5
Lampedusa, Italy
Spatial extent [km]
44.27 x 67.36
No. of pixels [px]
17693 x 26863
Spatial resolution [m]
2.5 x 2.5
2.2. Automatic Identification System (AIS)
To complement our SAR imagery, AIS data is collaboratively
acquired with GateHouse Maritime and spatially aligned with
the corresponding Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) scenes. As
the acquisition time of each SAR scene is precisely known, this
temporal information can be used to filter the AIS data in the
time domain as well. As AIS is not sending permanently, but
only at certain points in time and AIS dropouts naturally occur
for shorter time intervals, the AIS data for one ship at one pre-
cise point in time is not known. Therefore, the AIS information
for each ship is interpolated across a two-hour window before
and after the selected sensing time, following the approach pro-
posed by Heiselberg et al. (2022).
Throughout the project, hundreds of AIS messages are
queried, each containing a comprehensive set of informa-
tion, including date/time, callsign, Course over Ground (CoG)
[°], vessel destination, draught[m], Estimated Time of Ar-
rival (ETA), IMO identification number, current latitude, vessel
length [m], current longitude, Maritime Mobile Service Iden-
tity (MMSI) for identification, navigation status, vessel name,
Speed over Ground (SoG) [kts], ship type, and vessel width [m].
An exemplary AIS message is illustrated below:
2022-06-24 23:06:42, AWKM, 242.0, B EAST ANCH. MUMBAI,
4.2, 2022-05-19 02:00:00, 9393424, 18.93666667, 74, 72.86000000,
419000997, At anchor, MANA, 0.0, Other type of ship, 16
However, it is important to note that not all fields within an
AIS message are mandatory and rely on manual input by the
crew. Fields may therefore also be left blank and are prone to
errors.
In addition to potential errors in AIS messages, it is antici-
pated that some ships within the SAR images will not have an
AIS signal. This can be attributed to various factors:
• AIS System Absence: Not all vessels are equipped with
AIS systems.
The International Maritime Organization
mandates AIS usage only for vessels over 500 gross tons,
for vessels on international voyages over 300 gross tons
and for all passenger vessels. Smaller boats, in particular,
may lack AIS systems or might be equipped with other
collision avoidance systems.
• Unintentional AIS dropouts: Weak signal strength or
signal interference can lead to unintentional AIS dropouts.
Each AIS cell has a maximum capacity for signals, and in
densely trafficked regions like major harbour areas, not all
signals may be recognised.
• Malicious AIS Shutdown:
Deliberate and purposeful
AIS shutdowns by certain vessels, particularly those en-
gaging in illicit activities, form the key focus of this
project. These intentional AIS turn-offs necessitate ad-
vanced detection techniques for enhanced maritime secu-
rity.
3. Methods
3.1. Full workflow
The full workflow of this research project is divided into two
fundamental parts: the processing steps required to create a
model for ship detection and the steps needed to apply such a
model as a potential end-user.
To train a deep learning model tailored for ship detection,
the model needed as much input as possible in the form of
ships in ICEYE’s strip mode. To form such a ship dataset for
later use, ICEYE images (s. section 2.1) were downloaded and
pre-processed in Python. This pre-processing included the ex-
traction of relevant metadata. Subsequently, a ship dataset was
created by identifying high-intensity targets on the water with
the use of a cell-averaging constant false alarm rate and hand-
picking the vessels (s. section 3.2.1), followed by labelling and
dataset augmentation processes. Multiple models were trained
using the dataset, and the results compared, with YOLOv8
emerging as the most accurate and applicable model. Subse-
quently, subsection 3.2.5 provides a comprehensive exploration
of the architecture of YOLOv8 and delves into the specifics of
the model training process.
3.2. Model creation
3.2.1. CA-CFAR and ship dataset creation
In order to form a comprehensive dataset for dark ship de-
tection, the first step involved the extraction of ship locations
within a larger SAR scene. This necessitated a preliminary ship
detection process to form said ship dataset. While manual iden-
tification of ships in processed ICEYE images was theoretically
possible, it proved inefficient both in terms of time and results,
particularly given the limited visibility of many ships without
substantial zoom. To address this, an initial ship detection task
was undertaken using a Constant False Alarm Rate (CFAR) al-
gorithm. Despite this kind of algorithm being introduced as in-
ferior, especially in areas with low-intensity targets and clutter,
it adequately detected most ships and facilitated the creation of
a foundational ship dataset. The accuracy of the CFAR algo-
rithm and especially its filtering is not corresponding to the ac-
curacy of the deep learning model, and vice versa. That means
a model could potentially detect all vessels present in an image,
although the algorithm responsible for the underlying dataset
can only detect some of them.
3
==PAGE:4==
Figure 2: Flowchart of the full process described in this paper, the blue part (left) being the part necessary to create a deep learning model and the green part (right)
being the algorithm processing steps called for every new ICEYE image analysed for dark ships by a potential user
A CFAR detector is a form of adaptive algorithm, allowing
to set a threshold above which the echo of the target can be
considered a target against a background of noise, clutter and
interference. Usually, this is accomplished by accepting only
the top 1% or 0.1% of pixel intensities as targets, but especially
in larger scenes with changing incidence angles and scene illu-
mination, this can lead to challenges as seen in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Example scene of the Strait of Singapore (original: left, CFAR results:
right - showing an area full of false positive targets), red circle focussing on an
area rendered useless
Original image source: ICEYE
To adapt to these challenges arising from seemingly chang-
ing pixel intensities of the water, a Cell-Averaging Constant
False Alarm Rate (CA-CFAR) algorithm was implemented.
This method involves a sliding window analyzing the intensity
of the Cell Under Test (CUT) and comparing it to the aver-
age intensity of a significantly larger background window. Tar-
gets were considered targets, when the intensity of the CUT
exceeded the threshold based on the surrounding average in-
tensity, indicating a conspicuous brightness relative to the sur-
roundings.
The use of CA-CFAR with non-homogeneous images led to
numerous reflective false alarms on land, which were filtered
using a basic landmask. It is important to note, that CFAR, as
an object detector, identified objects that may not exclusively be
ships, but contained generally highly reflective targets on wa-
ter, including piers, oil platforms, other man-made structures
at sea or even natural sources with rough surfaces in compari-
son to the SAR wavelength like rocks, waves and sand banks.
Additionally, these results were filtered and morphed to avoid
target fragmentation, target duplication and reduce the overall
amount of noise. The resulting locations were visualised in Fig-
ure 4. The resulting locations were manually filtered to retain
only those containing actual ships. The quantitative influence
of these filter steps can be observed in Table 2.
Table 2: Visualisation of the decrease in possible targets after each processing
step: columns from left to right: number of targets after application of a CA-
CFAR algorithm on the scene, filtering these results with a landmask, morphing
these results to remove noise and combine close points and finally removing
all non-ship targets by hand, Scene 1: Strait of Singapore, Scene 2: English
Channel, Scene 3: Lima, Peru, Scene 4: Lampedusa, Italy
Scene
CA-CFAR
CA-CFAR +
CA-CFAR
Manual
landmask
(morphed)
filtering
1
27844
3694
357
186
2
3205
451
146
25
3
25406
491
50
10
4
398
31
10
6
4
==PAGE:5==
Figure 4: Resulting locations (green) after using CA-CFAR detection and land-
masking in an ICEYE SAR image of the Strait of Singapore
The resulting image coordinates were used to generate cut-
out sub-images of the ships detected by the CA-CFAR detector
(s. Figure 5 and Figure 6, left) and were stored along with per-
tinent metadata. The exported metadata for each ship includes
the following details:
• the image product level
• the ICEYE dataset used
• the timestamp of the image
• the latitude and longitude of the ship
• the incidence angle at that location
• the range and azimuth spacing in this scene
The geo-referenced coordinates were calculated by using the
image coordinates and the ground control points (GCP) pro-
vided by ICEYE for that exact image. GCPs, acting as a net-
work of points covering the entire image, offer both georefer-
enced and image coordinates for each point. By interpolating
between adjacent GCPs, latitude and longitude can be deter-
mined for any given image coordinate. At this stage, the dataset
was prepared for the subsequent deep learning.
3.2.2. Initial ship dataset
The exported ship subsets consisted of 227 images. How-
ever, this number does not resemble the total amount of ships,
as several images contained multiple vessels. Furthermore, the
size of the vessels varied strongly. Therefore, the ships were
divided into large and small ships for future deep learning with
examples for both classes presented in Figure 5 and their distri-
bution found in Table 3:
Table 3: Distribution of objects (both large and small vessels) of all four scenes
as well as the number of images
Note: Those values refer only to the vessel subsets in GRD format.
Scene
No. of image
Small
Large
subsets
ships
ships
Strait of Singapore
186
138
84
English Channel
25
21
4
Lima, Peru
10
34
2
Lampedusa, Italy
6
6
0
Total
227
199
90
Figure 5: left column: 2 examples for large vessels, right column: 2 examples
for smaller vessels, all four scenes having the same spatial extend and resolution
The compiled dataset contained a total of 289 vessels. To en-
sure robust model training and validation, three out of the four
available scenes were allocated for these purposes. The valida-
tion set plays a crucial role in fine-tuning model hyperparam-
eters following each evaluation, thereby indirectly influencing
the model’s performance. In adherence to established practices
(cf. Tarang Shah (2017)), the fourth scene, representing the En-
glish Channel, was deliberately left untouched and reserved as
the testing set for evaluating final model results. The selection
of the English Channel scene was seen as optimal for this study,
as it encompasses approximately 9% of the total vessels in the
dataset. This proportion strikes a balance, ensuring that an am-
ple number of ships remain available for training and validation
while providing a sufficient number of ships for comprehensive
performance evaluation on a full scene.
Each ship subset within the dataset was exported with a stan-
dardized size of 256 by 256 pixels, resulting in a spatial extent
5
==PAGE:6==
of 640 by 640 meters. This sizing choice ensured that even the
largest vessels were fully represented within one image. All
image subsets are saved as 16-bit .png files of ICEYE’s GRD
format in Strip mode. For enhanced insights into the dataset
composition, a label correlogram is provided in Appendix B.
3.2.3. Annotation and augmentation
Image annotation. Following the dataset creation, a necessary
step in preparing it for machine learning tasks involved image
annotation (also referred to as labelling), where ground truth
data is created to later present ”true” data for comparison for
every recognised object when training the model. Annotation
includes the following:
• Creation of distinct object classes (i.e.: large ships, small
ships, piers, oil platforms, natural ocean structures (sand-
banks, rocks, ...), etc.)
• Creation of bounding boxes for each object in each image
to encapsulate the spatial extent of individual objects
• Selection of an object class for each bounding box
To streamline the annotation process, the online tool Roboflow,
developed by Dwyer, B., Nelson, J., Solawetz, J., et. al. (2022)
was used. An illustrative example of a labelled image resulting
from this annotation process is presented in Figure 6 (centre).
Figure 6: Example ship from self-made ICEYE ship dataset (left), after anno-
tation (centre) and after augmentation (right)
Image augmentation. To enhance dataset diversity, a feature
called Image Augmentation was used. Recognizing that a larger
dataset enhances the learning experience for deep neural net-
works, and consequently leads to a more precise model, this
dataset expansion was introduced. This was important due to
the given restraints on ICEYE image access. Augmentation in-
volves the alteration of existing images, presenting these mod-
ified versions to the model as distinct instances and thereby re-
ducing the model’s reliance on specific attributes like position
or colour. Augmentation includes, but is not limited to, im-
age rotation, flipping, shifting, noising, blurring, mosaicing and
contrast changing and therefore effectively increases the diver-
sity of the dataset by introducing variations of existing content
without the need for additional data.
3.2.4. Terminology for deep learning evaluation
To comprehend and compare the parameters chosen for train-
ing and evaluate the results of the deep learning model, the fol-
lowing terminology and metrics are defined:
True Positives (TP):. The model predicts a class that aligns
with the ground truth, indicating correct identification of a real
ship by the model (cf. Google - Machine Learning Founda-
tional courses (2022)).
True Negatives (TN):. Neither the model nor the ground truth
detects an object, demonstrating the model’s correct abstention
from making predictions when no ship is present (cf. Google -
Machine Learning Foundational courses (2022)).
False Positives (FP):. Model prediction and ground truth do
not match, indicating a false identification of a ship by the
model when none exists (Type I Error) (cf. Google - Machine
Learning Foundational courses (2022)).
False Negatives (FN):. Model prediction and ground truth do
not match, signifying a failure to identify a ship by the model
when one is present (Type II Error) (cf. Google - Machine
Learning Foundational courses (2022)).
Precision (P):. The ratio of true positives to the sum of all
(positive) predictions, expressing the accuracy of positive pre-
dictions for a given class. A precision of 1 means no false pos-
itives were created. Mathematically, this can be expressed as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP .
(1)
Generally, a higher confidence (meaning how confident the
model is about seeing, e.g., a ship), results in a higher precision.
Higher precision signifies fewer false positives and more cor-
rect positive classifications. However, overly high confidence
may lead to the exclusion of objects with lower confidence, po-
tentially resulting in a loss of targets. (Google - Machine Learn-
ing Foundational courses, 2022).
Intersection over Union (IoU):. A threshold defining the min-
imum ratio of the area of overlap to the area of union between
the estimated bounding box and the ground truth of one ob-
ject. Bounding boxes with an IoU value below the threshold
are dropped and disregarded for further processing.
Confidence (C):. Confidence is divided into box confidence
and class confidence. Class confidence is the product of the
IoU value, the probability of a certain class, and its objectness
score, indicating the certainty of the model about an object be-
longing to a specific class. Box confidence on the other hand
is a measure of the certainty of the model of a bounding box
containing an object of interest. Together, they form the overall
confidence, a metric plotted on the x-axis of various graphs in
this paper (Glenn Jocher, 2023).
Recall (R):. Measurement of the amount of correctly detected
objects, described as:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN .
(2)
The recall curve typically decreases with rising confidence, as
the model becomes more selective in its detections. A Recall
6
==PAGE:7==
value of 1 means, e.g., all ships have been detected without
regard to how many false positives were introduced. Recall
measures quantity, while precision measures quality. (Google -
Machine Learning Foundational courses, 2022).
Average Precision (AP):. A metric combining precision and
recall, reflecting their interdependence.
High-confidence
bounding boxes may lead to high precision but lower recall,
and vice versa. When precision is plotted over recall, the area
under the curve resembles the AP. If both precision and recall
are high, the model is robust. The average precision is a single
value for the weighted average of all precisions from the recall
intervals for one class (Jonathan Hui, 2018; KiKaBeN, 2022).
It is defined as:
AP =
Z 1
0
P(r) dr .
(3)
Mean average precision (mAP):. The mean value of the AP
across all classes, commonly used to assess the performance of
object detection algorithms.
mAP = 1
n
k=n
X
k=1
APk
(4)
(with APk being the AP for class k and n as the number of
classes)
F1 score:. The F1 score is a combination of the precision,
which increases with increasing confidence (if the model is very
certain it sees a ship, it most likely is identified correctly) and
the recall curve, which usually decreases with rising confidence
(the more objects the model identifies as ships, the more ”real”
ships it will identify correctly). This can be described by:
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall .
(5)
An F1 score curve therefore represents the balance between pre-
cision and recall for a trained model and has usually a parabolic
shape.
3.2.5. Deep learning model
YOLO - You only look once. Object detection combines the
application of image classification (= What is the image show-
ing?)
and object localisation (= Where is a certain object
in my image?) and thus detects if and where a certain ob-
ject is present in a given image. Multiple deep learning mod-
els were explored for object detection, ranging from simple,
custom-made convolutional networks using TensorFlow Keras
to sophisticated state-of-the-art algorithms. The chosen frame-
work, Ultralytic’s You Only Look Once (common abbreviation:
YOLO), was first introduced in 2015 (Redmon et al., 2016) and
quickly gained broad recognition in the scientific community
due to its remarkable speed and exceptional mean Average Pre-
cision. As implied by its name, YOLO performs object de-
tection predictions in a single forward propagation through the
neural network, distinguishing it from multi-stage approaches.
YOLO offers a range of pre-trained models, initially trained
on the COCO1 dataset, which users continue training upon
for their specific applications. For this project, the pre-trained
model YOLOv8m was selected. As detailed in Table C.10 in
Appendix C, YOLOv8m strikes a balance between mAP and
speed, providing sufficient accuracy for detecting vessels while
handling large ICEYE scenes with millions of pixels in near
real-time.
The backbone, based on earlier YOLO versions, features a
CSPDarknet53 architecture with 53 convolutional layers, com-
pressing input images into feature maps. This component is re-
sponsible for extracting both low- and high-level features from
the input data. The neck takes feature maps from various back-
bone layers, aggregates the most representative features (via
max-pooling), and merges the data meaningfully before for-
warding it to the head. The head is instrumental in providing
the actual classification by leveraging these features and pre-
dicting bounding boxes, objectness scores, and class probabili-
ties (Akshit Mehra, 2023; Jacob Solawetz, 2020).
For a deeper understanding of YOLO, its architecture and
potential applications, readers are encouraged to refer to Ultra-
lytics’s documentation: https://docs.ultralytics.com/.
Model training and optimisation. The YOLOv8m model was
trained using the dataset introduced in section 3.2.2. The initial
training involved 200 epochs, with the best result achieved at
epoch 40. The training parameters included a batch size of 16,
a nominal batch size of 64, a learning rate of 0.01 (both initial
and final), a momentum of 0.937, and a weight decay of 0.0005.
A comprehensive list of all training parameters is available in
Appendix F.
To enhance model training and overall accuracy, adjustments
were made to the training dataset. This involved the inclusion
of ICEYE Grid mode SLC image subsets, background images
for improved differentiation from objects on land, and model
pre-training on Sentinel-1 ship subsets. Notably, the valida-
tion and testing sets remained unchanged, consisting solely of
GRD format ship subsets for validation and one entire ICEYE
scene for testing. Details regarding model testing and overall
performance are discussed in the results section. The training
outcome was compared in Table 4. The F1 curves of all four
models can be found in Figure 7, and additional precision and
recall curves are available in Appendix E.
The inclusion of SLC images significantly enhanced the
model, and stability further improved with the addition of back-
ground images. Transfer learning and pretraining on Sentinel-
1 images resulted in minor changes to the F1 curve, but no-
table enhancements were observed in the recall for small ships
in low-confidence regions, albeit at a slight cost to precision.
Given the nature of ship detection, where detecting as many
ships as possible is crucial and false positives can be addressed
post-detection, the last model (number 4 in Fig. 7) was selected
for further use. This model was initially trained with Sentinel-
1 images and subsequently continued training with both GRD
and SLC ship subsets, as well as background images.
1COCO, Common Objects In Context, is a publicly available large-scale ob-
ject detection and segmentation dataset containing 1.5 million object instances
7
==PAGE:8==
Figure 7: Comparison of the F1 curve of all four models, 1: standard GRD
training dataset, 2: mixed GRD and SLC dataset, 3: mixed GRD and SLC
dataset with additional background images, 4: pre-training on 1000 Sentinel-1
images + transfer learning to mixed GRD and SLC dataset with background
images
Table 4: Influence of different changes on the input training dataset: Training
outcome after validation with the exact same validation set consisting of 20
ship subsets (GRD format). set size: number of images/ labels of the training
set, best epoch: number of epochs after which the model stopped improving,
max. F1 large/ small: maximum of the F1 curve for thei respective ship class,
R: Recall, mAP50: mAP at an IoU threshold of 0.5
GRD
GRD
GRD+SLC
pretrained,
only
+SLC
+
GRD+SLC
background
+backgr.
set
182
362
406
1000
size
+406
best
40
57
105
178
epoch
max. F1
0.82
0.78
0.84
0.83
(large)
(@0.08)
(@0.08)
(@0.08)
(@0.04)
max. F1
0.41
1
1
1
(small)
(@0.40)
(@0.82)
(@0.82)
(@0.82)
max. F1
0.56
0.65
0.85
0.83
(total)
(@0.10)
(@0.32)
(@0.51)
(@0.57)
R
0.85
0.81
0.83
0.80
mAP50
0.68
0.91
0.95
0.94
3.3. Model application
Model training, which was described up until here, happens
before this algorithm would be used for any detection and is
completed before it is handed over to a potential user. However,
once the YOLOv8 model was trained, the process of detecting
dark ships in a specific region involves the following steps, as
illustrated in the green-marked section of Figure 2 and has to be
undergone for every new image.
• Define region of interest: The user needs to specify the
approximate area of the potential dark ship and request the
relevant ICEYE image for that region.
• Apply trained model: The deep learning model is applied
to the specific image to detect ships.
• Calculate geo-referenced coordinates: Geo-referenced
coordinates are calculated for each ship image coordinate
to enable spatial mapping.
• Filter false alarms: False alarms, such as false positives
on land, are filtered to refine the results.
• Merge with AIS signals: The detected ship locations are
compared to existing AIS signals in the area to validate
and enhance the results.
• Metadata extraction: Relevant metadata, including the
vessels length and width, are calculated and extracted.
8
==PAGE:9==
The model can be applied to full ICEYE scenes and does not
require pre-processing steps like CFAR, saving time and mak-
ing the detection process near-real-time applicable. Given the
large size of high-resolution images (see overview in Table 1),
the process requires an immense amount of Graphics Process-
ing Unit (GPU) memory to be available. To address this issue
and to make the application available for many consumer-of-
the-shelf computers, each ICEYE image is automatically sliced
into nine equal parts (s. Figure 8), analysed individually and
then combined again. This approach reduces the amount of
memory needed exponentially.
Figure 8: Visualisation of image slicing: each of the 9 smaller images is anal-
ysed successively with the right side showing the unfiltered YOLO results of
one slice at this step, including false positives
For predictions, an IoU threshold of 0.4 was selected, mean-
ing the area of overlap divided by the area of union must exceed
40%. This threshold, instead of a more stringent IoU, was se-
lected considering the challenges posed by satellite-based data,
where ship boundaries can be difficult to define on a pixel-scale
due to blurriness and noise. A shift by multiple pixels can there-
fore be neglected.
A confidence threshold of 0.2 is chosen, indicating that the
model only needs to be 20% certain to label an object as a ship.
This decision is based on the F1 curve (Figure 7, Graph 4) and
the precision and recall curve (Figure 9), achieving a precision
of over 60% and a recall of more than 90% at this confidence
level.
While a low confidence threshold introduces false alarms,
such as detecting ”ships” on land, it also ensures the detection
of most real ships. Simply speaking, the model shall not ne-
glect real vessels due to uncertainty as it is seen as easier to
filter the data later than to miss ships initially due to stringent
model restrictions. The complete set of prediction parameters
can be found in Appendix G.
Figure 9: Precision and recall curve for the chosen YOLO model with the gray
dotted line visualising the chosen confidence
3.3.1. Slice combination back to full image
The results obtained from the YOLO prediction include in-
formation such as detected classes, the object’s centre, and its
width and height for each identified object. YOLOv8 utilises
a normalised format for these coordinates, where the top-left
corner is represented as (0,0), the bottom-right corner of the
image as (1,1), and the other two corners as (1,0) and (0,1), re-
spectively. Each point (X,Y) in the image is given as a value
relative to the height (H) and width (W) of the image, ranging
from 0 to 1.
Since the full ICEYE image is sliced into nine parts for anal-
ysis, the coordinates generated by YOLOv8 need to be trans-
formed back into absolute image coordinates, ranging from 0
to the number of pixels in the corresponding image dimension.
This transformation is mathematically expressed as follows:
Xabs = XYOLO · Wslice + Wle ft−sided−slices ,
(6)
Yabs = YYOLO · Hslice
|          {z          }
absolute coord. of image slice
+ Hupper−slices .
(7)
9
==PAGE:10==
In a similar process, the height and width of each bounding
box are transformed to a height and weight in full-sized image
pixels.
Following this transformation, all coordinates were brought
back to the image coordinates of the original full ICEYE image,
facilitating further analysis and interpretation of the detected
objects.
3.3.2. Landmask application and false target elimination
The absolute image pixel coordinates retrieved from sec-
tion 3.3.1 were used to interpolate geo-referenced latitudes
and longitudes for each detected ship. This interpolation was
achieved using ground control points, as described in section
3.2.1. Knowing the latitude and longitude of each ship not only
facilitated further integration with AIS data but also enabled the
removal of false targets on land through the application of a so-
called landmask.
Several options for applying a landmask to the project were
considered:
• Basemap: Python mapping extension for Matplotlib with
varying resolutions for its is land() function.
It uses
the Global Self-consistent, Hierarchical, High-resolution
Shoreline (GSHHS) database for coastlines and the
Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) database for rivers.
• Cartopy: A geospatial data processing Python module pro-
viding land features in 10, 50, and 110m resolutions based
on Natural Earth’s ’physical’ ’land’ shapefile.
• Custom land mass information files, e.g., in the form of
custom netCDF files for different regions worldwide.
After a thorough trade-off comparison and multiple implemen-
tations, Cartopy’s 10m resolution land features were chosen, as
it offers moderate precision along the coast, while also show-
ing accurate results in larger rivers, addressing issues observed
with Basemap. While custom shape files might provide better
results, they lack a fixed source and reliability. In theory, such a
file could potentially provide a higher resolution than Basemap
and Cartopy, but as the algorithm presented in this paper shall
be able to be applied worldwide, this alternative lacked consis-
tency and availability. An example of the chosen Cartopy 10m
landmask applied to the Strait of Singapore is shown in Figure
10.
Additionally, landmasses can be morphed smaller to con-
sider more coastline regions as water areas. This helps avoid
inadvertently classifying ships along piers and harbors as false
positives due to insufficient landmask resolution. While future
projects may explore more complex landmasks, change detec-
tions across multiple images, and advanced filtering techniques,
such approaches were beyond the scope of this project.
3.3.3. SAR and AIS correlation
The AIS data was received and interpolated as outlined in
section 2.2. To establish a correlation between AIS and SAR
data, the relevant AIS data points, filtered spatially and tempo-
rally to match the SAR scene, were combined with the geo-
referenced SAR data.
It’s important to note that each SAR
Figure 10: Visualisation of a Cartopy 10m resolution landmask calculated for
every 100th pixel in an ICEYE example image of the Strait of Singapore, land
is displayed as green, water is displayed as blue
scene typically contained more vessels in the SAR image than
AIS vessels (noS AR > noAIS ), as explained in section 2.2.
Consequently, as noS AR , noAIS , matching can not be solved
as a linear problem. This paper therefore suggests an advanced
nearest-neighbour approach. First, for each AIS data point, the
geodesic distance (Karney, 2013) is calculated to each SAR
data point. This method calculates the shortest distance on the
surface of the WGS-84 ellipsoid, which is the default ellipsoid
model of the Earth, taking varying distances per degree longi-
tude (approaching the poles) into account. In contrast, other
distance calculations, such as the great circle distance, use only
a spherical model of the earth, resulting in errors of up to 0.5%.
The matches with the closest distances are grouped together
based on distance thresholds. In high-density maritime traffic
areas, these thresholds could be set at 100m, 300m, and 700m.
In open areas with fewer ships, larger thresholds may be appro-
priate. Explicitally, for one given AIS signal the distance to all
ships in the SAR image is calculated. The ship with the closest
distance is then compared to the thresholds. If the distance is
lower than a set threshold, the ship counts as matched and is
flagged as the corresponding matching category. Ships in the
closest matching group, i.e., (<100m), are considered highly
likely to be correct matches. As the distance between AIS and
10
==PAGE:11==
SAR positions increases, the possibility of other ships being al-
ternatives for the matching also increases, making the process
more prone to errors. Therefore, ships that cannot be matched
within any of the three distance categories are not matched at
all.
3.3.4. Metadata collection
In order to provide the operator with more comprehensive in-
formation about the ships detected in the given scene and facil-
itate further comparisons, additional metadata about the ships
is collected, created, and exported. One crucial value is the
spatial extent of each ship based on the SAR image. Calculat-
ing the length and width of each vessel allows for comparisons
with the AIS length and width of a matched vessel to further
confirm the match, to be compared to online ship databases if
no (or incorrect) AIS data is given or estimate ship dimensions
for AIS-unmatched dark ships.
Conventional digital image processing techniques with
OpenCV are used for length-width-calculation, which can be
summarised in the following steps:
1. Region definition: Utilizing the location of a vessel from
the filtered YOLO results, information about the detected
YOLO bounding boxes is used to extract a small area
around each ship (s. Fig. 11, top left).
2. Pre-processing: The new ship image is converted to a
uint8 image with pixel values ranging from 0 to 255 and
blurred to reduce the influence of noise.
3. Thresholding: The area is thresholded to retain only the
ship (and some minor clutter), using the CFAR principle
explained in section3.2.1.
An adaptive threshold is set
based on the top pixel intensities in each new image. Typ-
ically, values of 1% - 5% are far too low to threshold the
whole ship, whereas values much larger than 10% thresh-
old too much. For this project, 10% is chosen, meaning
10% of pixels present in the picture are above that thresh-
old value (s. Fig. 11, top right).
4. Morphing: Morphological operations with small kernel
sizes allow a reduction of noise and connect all ship parts.
As a ship is not equally reflective throughout its whole
structure only parts have been thresholded in the step prior
(s. Fig. 11, bottom left).
5. Contouring: Simple contours are drawn around all re-
maining white areas, and only the largest contour (repre-
senting the ship) is considered in further steps.
6. Rotated bounding box: All contour points are enclosed
by a rotated rectangle.
The smallest possible rectangle
containing all points serves as a bounding box for the ship.
The length of this box equals the length of the ship in pix-
els and, consequently, in meters after multiplication with
the image resolution (s. Figure 11, bottom right).
While the bounding box can be used to estimate the length of
the vessel, it is not suitable for estimating the width accurately
due to the inclusion of the layover effect of the bridge of the
ship, introducing marginal errors, as seen in Figure 11 (bottom
right). Two alternative approaches were explored for width es-
timation:
Figure 11: Steps undergone for SAR length/ width estimation: top left - initial
area, top right - thresholded area, bottom left - morphed area, bottom right -
resulting bounding box
Firstly, the midpoints of the long sides of the bounding box
were calculated and connected via an additional line. The pixel
values along this line were analysed to create a ratio of the ini-
tially marked ”white ship area” in the morphed image.
The second approach was estimating the width based on the
length, as many modern ships follow dimensions where the
width equals roughly 1
7 of the length.
Both approaches provide closer results to the real width than
using the width of the bounding rectangle, but both approaches
are also prone to errors each in their own way. Checking the
width of the thresholded area in the centre of the ship (approach
1) can provide very accurate results, but in some cases, the mor-
phing in the middle is inaccurate and therefore introduces er-
rors. Additionally, if the ship was loaded very high, i.e., many
containers stacked above each other, the same layover effect as
with the tower will occur, influencing the results of the calcu-
lation. In direct comparison, the way simpler ’ 1
7’-approach can
be inaccurate by a few meters as a ship can be slightly wider or
slimmer than 1
7 of its width, but overall provides more accurate
and constant results than the first approach. It was therefore
chosen as the width output of this algorithm.
4. Key results
The primary objective of this project was to implement a full
pipeline for training a deep learning model and consequently,
detecting ships in high-resolution ICEYE imagery. The ensuing
results will address both the effectiveness and applicability of
this model for third parties. Specifically, the evaluation will
focus on the performance of the model in relation to alternative
methods, along with a quantification of results from auxiliary
11
==PAGE:12==
components such as landmasking, AIS-SAR correlation, and
ship dimension estimation.
4.1. Ship detection
The algorithm developed in this project demonstrated the ca-
pability to detect both larger and smaller ships in previously
unknown full ICEYE images. The model, based on a dataset
pre-trained on Sentinel-1 images and subsequently fine-tuned
with ICEYE ship and background subsets in GRD and SLC
formats, achieved the following results as depicted in the con-
fusion matrix (Table 5). Training and testing were carried out
with the scenes Strait of Singapore, Lampedusa and Lima, and
for testing purposes the new full scene of the English Chan-
nel was used. The English Channel was processed as a whole
without the creation of subsets as per the goal of this algorithm.
As seen in the confusion matrix, 85.3% (29/34) ships were de-
Table 5: Confusion matrix: The left column represents the predicted results,
and the top row represents the ground-truth. Note: the sum of both predicted
values (29 positives and 22 negatives) does not result in the total number of
predictions (64), as there are also 13 double detections, meaning a single ship
had two positive detections.
True Positive
True Negative
(34)
(∞)
Predicted Pos.
29
22
(64)
Predicted Neg.
5
/
(0)
tected, while producing 34.4% (22/64) False Positives. This
detection rate was considered successful, especially given the
constraints of a minimal dataset and limited scene availabil-
ity. Adjustments to parameters, such as lowering the confidence
threshold, might increase true positives but at the cost of higher
false positives. However, improvement in both parameters is
expected with a larger and more diverse training dataset.
A comparison with a CA-CFAR (Cell Averaging-Constant
False Alarm Rate) detection over the same scene revealed that
the YOLO model significantly reduced the number of false pos-
itives. As displayed in the beginning, in Table 2, CA-CFAR
resulted in ca. 500 targets in said scene for the same 34 ships.
CA-CFAR, as an object detector, should only be used with an
additional object classification step. However, if CA-CFAR is
combined with,e.g., a deep learning model to further filter these
results, then the question arises of why not using such a model
in the first place and thus renders CA-CFAR expendable.
Corresponding to how CA-CFAR has a multiple times larger
number of detected targets on water (mostly false positives) af-
ter a landmask was applied, it also has more false positives
on land before filtering. The number of targets removed on
land can be seen in Table 6 and is 10 to 20 times higher for
CA-CFAR. It can therefore be concluded, that CA-CFAR de-
pends strongly on an accurate landmask, which makes it prone
to errors and poses a disadvantage in comparison to the YOLO
model.
Table 6: Number of false positives removed by landmask
No. targets
No. targets
Scene
filtered w/
filtered w/
CA-CFAR
YOLO
Strait of Singapore
24150
214
Engl. Channel
2754
108
Lima, Peru
24915
197
Lampedusa, Italy
367
15
Additionally, the time efficiency of the deep learning ap-
proach was evident. While YOLO processing took 153.78 sec-
onds (136.10s for prediction, 17.68s for formatting and filter-
ing) for one full ICEYE image, CA-CFAR detection required
over 2 hours (133.77 minutes with 10 threads in GRD mode),
making the deep learning model more suitable for near-real-
time applications.2 Specifically in the military domain, where
quick decisions can be crucial, this is a huge advantage.
Apart from deep learning, the choice of ICEYE data proved
to be useful as it enabled the identification of various ship types,
including small motorboats. Figure 12 shows a bay with a high
concentration of tourist boats, which were (partly) picked up by
the deep learning model. Detections like these are a clear ad-
vantage over lower resolution SAR sources as they might suffer
from a loss of small targets due to their restraints in resolution.
However, the presence of noise and sea clutter in ICEYE
images posed challenges. This effect is assumed to be mostly
caused by the X-band radar used by ICEYE in comparison to
the C-band used by Sentinel-1. It is therefore believed that
even fine scale roughness in the ocean introduces ”noise” to
the scene. Supporting this assumption are the findings of Tings
et al. (2023) comparing different SAR satellite systems in their
ability to detect ship wakes. Referring to this study, X-band has
a leap over C-band, as especially Kelvin waves and V-narrow
wake arms are far better visible and detailed in X-band im-
agery. This sensitivity to wakes might be an advantage when
detecting large ships, as the wake might provide additional in-
formation, but a disadvantage when ”hiding” small boats. This
difference in the general look of ship and ocean images in IC-
EYE and Sentinel-1 images is also thought to be the reason
why pre-training on Sentinel images had only a small boost in
mAP, whereas adding SLC images in training lead to a highly
increased mAP.
4.2. Landmasking
In addition to the results of the underlying deep learning
model, more parts of the software were evaluated for the over-
all performance of the whole pipeline. In assessing the perfor-
mance of the landmasking component, ground truth data (white
area in Figure 13) was manually created for each ICEYE scene
and compared to the Cartopy 10m landmask (green contour in
Figure 13). The evaluation aimed to determine the accuracy of
2List of testing hardware can be found in Appendix D
12
==PAGE:13==
Figure 12: Touristic bay close to Lima, Peru - top left: ICEYE SAR image in
Strip mode, bottom left: same bay in optical satellite imagery for comparison,
bottom right: close up of the small boats (Source of optical imagery: Google
Earth Pro)
the landmask and its impact on the ship detection pipeline. The
results, quantifying the distribution of land and water as well as
the overlapping areas, are presented in Table 7.
Table 7: Analysis of the four ICEYE scenes shown in figure 13 showing how
each scene is composed and how accurate the landmask is; all values are noted
in relation to the total pixel count of the image
Scene location
Land
Water
Match
Mismatch
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
Strait of Singapore
45.0
55.0
90.7
9.3
Engl. Channel
27.3
72.7
98.9
1.1
Lima, Peru
50.7
49.3
99.0
1.0
Lampedusa, Italy
0.7
99.3
99.6
0.4
From Table 7 follows that the Cartopy landmask demon-
strated a mean accuracy of over 97% for scenes with large spa-
tial extents. It was further analysed, what the mismatched pixels
were identified as. This differentiation is shown in table 8.
If a region is wrongfully flagged as land, all targets (including
ships), are deleted, which is why a misidentification as water is
strongly preferable and a mean misidentification as water of
over 76% out of the 3% incorrectly flagged areas acceptable.
This also means a total of 0.72% of the image contains regions
where ship targets might be lost due to misidentification. This
area is typically very close to the coast, especially in regions
with uneven coastlines and potential tidal effects. While the
Figure 13: Manually created ground truth (white: land masses, black: water
bodies) in comparison to the Cartopy 10m resolution landmask (green contour)
of the four publicly available ICEYE Strip mode scenes, from top left to bottom
right: Strait of Singapore, English Channel, Lima (Peru), Lampedusa (Italy)
Table 8: Analysis of all pixels, where the landmask was inaccurate: Distribution
of area misidentified as land (although it is water) and area misidentified as
water (although it is land) in % of the all incorrect pixel of the scene
Scene location
Misidentified
Misidentified
as land [%]
as water [%]
Strait of Singapore
14.45
85.55
Engl. Channel
45.88
54.12
Lima, Peru
16.74
83.26
Lampedusa, Italy
18.90
81.10
landmasking process is effective in minimizing false positives
on land, it might lead to a loss of ship targets in specific regions.
The effectiveness of landmasking depends on the characteris-
tics of the coastline. In areas with curved and twisted coastlines,
rivers, bays, and fjords, the negative impact of landmasking
might be more significant. For application in specific surveil-
lance regions, creating a highly accurate custom landmask or
improving the ship detection model to reduce false alarms on
land and removing the landmask completely, would be valu-
able. This distinguishes a deep learning model further from
13
==PAGE:14==
CFAR, as the model can be improved and thus work indepen-
dently from any landmask, whereas CFAR, based on its high
rate of detections as seen in the previous section, relies heavily
on a landmask.
4.3. SoG estimation by Azimuth offset analysis
The study explored the estimation of the SoG of a vessel
through azimuth offset analysis. In SAR images, a shift of all
moving objects is observed due to the Doppler Effect, which
is utilized by SAR processors for azimuth localization of static
targets. However, when the target has a velocity component in
the range direction, moving objects appear shifted in the result-
ing image (Stefan M¨uhlbauer, 2016). As SoG and azimuth off-
set are coherent, it was possible to calculate the SoG of moving
ships.
The proof-of-concept analysis focused on the container ship
MSC ISABELLA (MMSI: 353590000). The initial route (red in
Figure 14) and azimuth displacement (blue in Figure 14) of the
ship were analyzed, with the azimuth offset formula provided
by Heiselberg et al. (2023) used to calculate the SoG. The for-
mula, solved for SoG, is represented as:
S oG =
d · vS at
RS R · sin(θ) · sin(CoGproj) · 1852 ,
(8)
where
S oG
: estimated SoG of the vessel [kts]
d
: offset in azimuth direction [m]
vS at
: velocity of the satellite [ m
h ]
RS R
: slant range between satellite and ship [m]
θ
: angle of incidence
CoGproj : CoG with respect to satellite direction
Upon inserting all relevant parameters into the equation, the
calculated SoG matched the value of 11 knots given in the AIS
data for that vessel:
S oG =
150 · 27.3 · 106
56150 · sin(21.58◦) · sin(65.7◦) · 1852 = 11.7 .(9)
This value matches the SoG of 11 knots given in the AIS data
of that vessel. This analysis showcases the potential of utilizing
azimuth offset in SAR images for estimating the speed of mov-
ing ships, providing a valuable additional metric for maritime
monitoring and analysis.
4.4. AIS-SAR correlation
As stated in previous sections, there is usually a higher
amount of SAR targets than unique AIS signals present for each
scene. However, even for corresponding signals, it needs to be
acknowledged that there exists a spatial distance between the
SAR and AIS positions. This discrepancy is influenced by two
main factors:
• The exact AIS location of a vessel at the time of SAR ac-
quisition is interpolated and is subject to errors, especially
considering changes in the speed over ground and course
over ground between two known AIS data points.
Figure 14: Example for the spatial offset in ICEYE SAR images due to the
Doppler-shift of a moving object with the red line visualising the initial course
of the ship (following the wake) and the visualised offset from the actual posi-
tion in blue
• Due to the Azimuth Doppler-Effect in SAR images, mov-
ing objects experience an offset and appear shifted in the
resulting image as previously discussed in section 4.3.
In areas with high maritime traffic density, unique identification
of AIS signals to corresponding ships in SAR images becomes
challenging, particularly for larger groups of ships operating
closely. The study used a nearest-neighbor approach to match
AIS signals to SAR ships based on spatial proximity. Generally
speaking, the larger the distance in between SAR and AIS sig-
nal, the lower the probability of these two ships actually belong-
ing together, which is why probability classes based on distance
thresholds were introduced. The rate of AIS signals matched (in
relation to the total number of AIS signals) in regards to the dis-
tance used as a maximum threshold for matching, is displayed
in Figure 15.
Figure 15: Ratio of AIS matches (number of matches/ total number of AIS
signals) over the distance between the ship visible in the SAR image and the
AIS signal
The results indicate that only a small fraction of AIS signals
(18%) are in the direct vicinity of the vessel, likely representing
anchored ships outside harbors. These ships usually have their
AIS turned on (in comparison to harboured ships), but have no
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure 16: All 116 AIS (green) signals and 222 SAR ships (red) plotted in the Strait of Singapore with a zoom visualising why a nearest-neighbour-approach mostly
works
azimuth offset as they lack range velocity. The majority of mov-
ing (and therefore offset) ships are matched within a few hun-
dred meters, leading to a strong increase in matches. Everything
above a distance of 700 meters is seen as highly unlikely pairs
of AIS signals and SAR ships. The higher a matching thresh-
old is picked for a nearest-neighbour approach, the more AIS/
SAR signals might be paired, but the more the likelihood of
this pair being a correct match decreases. Signals, which were
not matched, can be the result of an incorrect location, e.g., due
to their AIS data starting after or ending before the image was
taken and therefore no interpolation and thus recent location
being available.
Several probability classes with varying distance thresholds
(100, 300, and 700 meters) were employed. In the case of the
Strait of Singapore, containing 222 SAR ships and 116 AIS
signals, 71 ships were matched across all three classes. Out of
these matches, 44 contained additional vessel information such
as length and height of the vessel contributing valuable insights
to further maritime monitoring and analysis.
4.5. Ship dimension estimation
Length and width estimation:. The evaluation of ship dimen-
sion estimation involved comparing the estimated length and
width of 40 matched AIS-SAR pairs with AIS metadata. The
results are summarized in Table 9, and a visual representation
is provided in Figure 17.
Table 9: Statistical analysis of the difference between the length/ width estima-
tion and the AIS data in relation to the AIS length/ width (in %) in regards of
their minimum difference (min.), maximum difference (max.), mean difference,
standard deviation (σ), variance (σ2) and interquartile range (IQR) (all values
rounded to two decimal digits
Length [%]
Width [%]
Min.
0.03
0.85
Max.
28.38
204.94
Mean
7.62
21.26
σ
7.43
33.28
σ2
55.19
1107.35
IQR
6.25
10.23
The analysis yields several key observations:
• The length estimation demonstrated an accuracy of over
92% for more than 68% of the ships, as indicated by the
standard deviation. With this level of accuracy, the length
could potentially serve as a parameter for enhanced AIS-
SAR matching and contribute valuable information for
identifying detected dark ships.
• The estimated width exhibited a higher deviation from the
corresponding AIS values than the length, as it was ex-
pected since not every ship has an exact width of 1
7 of its
length.
• The majority of ships had a lower estimated width than
their AIS width, suggesting that most ships might be
15
==PAGE:16==
Figure 17: Absolute values (blue) of the estimated length and width of each ves-
sel in comparison to their corresponding AIS value with the optimum marked
in gray
slightly wider than 1
7 of their length, e.g., 1
6 or
2
13 of their
length.
• A notable outlier in the width comparison resulted in a
maximum error of 205%. This outlier is associated with a
ship having unusual dimensions (158 meters in length and
9 meters in width). Such anomalies emphasize the need to
consider potential errors in width estimation, particularly
for ships with atypical dimensions.
While the length estimation provides valuable results, it’s im-
portant for users to be cautious in the subsequent utilisation
of these values. The reliance on morphological operations for
length and width estimation implies that other large reflective
objects in close proximity to the vessel may alter the resulting
dimensions. This could for example be two boats in a harbour
area sailing very close to each other. Furthermore, if such fea-
tures were used for AIS matching, discrepancies between AIS
and SAR ship dimensions attributed to potential human errors
(in manually inputting AIS ship dimensions by crew members)
might negatively impact matching.
3D parameter extraction from 2D SAR data:. In addition to
the length and width of the vessels, even 3-dimensional param-
eters can be extracted from the 2-dimensional SAR data, en-
hancing ship identification and classification. Figure 18 illus-
trates how distortions are introduced to the image plane. In the
case of ship detection in ICEYE images, most ship bridges are
struck by the electromagnetic radar wave first, before the deck
of the ship is hit. This temporal difference is translated into a
distance, causing the bridge to appear closer to the satellite in
the radar image than it is in reality (see Layover: b’-a’ vs b-a in
Figure 18).
Figure 18: ’Radar images are cylindrical projections of the scene onto the image
plane, leading to characteristic distortions’ (sar, p.21, fig.1-9)
The temporal difference resulting from this phenomenon
leads to layover effects where the bridge seems to ”stick out”
from the rest of the vessel in the radar image. The extent to
which the bridge protrudes depends on the height of the bridge
(HBr.,opt.), the CoG of the vessel (CoG), and the inclination an-
gle (i) of the satellite.
Figure 19: Comparison between the geometry of a SAR vessel with layover
distortion and an optical/ real vessel
16
==PAGE:17==
This correlation between the width of the bridge in the SAR
image (WBr.,S AR) and its actual height can be expressed mathe-
matically:
HBr.,opt. =
WBr.,S AR
cot(i) · cos(CoG) .
(10)
Similarly, the width of the shadow in the SAR image (WS h.,S AR)
correlates with the height of the deck (HDeck,opt.), as the deck
obstructs the satellite’s view of the ocean behind it. The higher
the deck is, the more ocean is blocked. This correlation is ex-
pressed as:
HDeck,opt. = WS h.,S AR · cos(i) · sin(i) · cos(CoG) .
(11)
As a proof of concept, this concept was applied to the crude
oil tanker ’Australian Spirit’ (MMSI: 311498000) in the Strait
of Singapore scene. The depth (deck to keel) of the vessel is
published as 20.4 meters with a draft of 14.02 meters (Marine
MAN Ltd.), resulting in a freeboard (height above the water-
line) of approximately 6 meters, depending on various factors,
such as the load. In the SAR image in Figure 20, both the deck
and the bridge are visible, along with a shadow to the right of
the vessel.
Figure 20: Dimensions of the ship presented in this PoC - deck: ca. 215 · 38 m,
bridge: ca. 57 · 30 m (green), shadow width: ca. 25 m (red), CoG (with respect
to satellite heading): 326°(blue)
The calculations presented in this section result in the follow-
ing values for the height of the bridge and the deck:
HBr.,opt. =
57
cot(21.8◦) · cos(326◦) ≈27.5m ,
(12)
HDeck,opt. = 25·cos(21.8◦)·sin(21.8◦)·cos(326◦) ≈7m .(13)
The calculations based on this data produced plausible values
for the height of the bridge and the height of the deck. These
values were found to align well with real photographs of the
ship.
5. Discussion
The discussion section synthesizes the findings and impli-
cations of the research conducted, highlighting key points and
addressing the potential applications of the developed model.
It was proven how deep learning, particularly the YOLOv8
model, can be leveraged for advanced ship detection in com-
bination with high-resolution ICEYE Synthetic Aperture Radar
imagery. The synthesis of cutting-edge technology and innova-
tive methodologies culminates in a model addressing the needs
of maritime security, particularly in the identification of dark
ships.
The following are considered key takeaways from this paper:
Model performance and limitations:. The data presented in
section 4.1 suggests that more than 85% of ships can be iden-
tified in a previously unknown scene, while maintaining an ac-
ceptable amount of false detections. This paper therefore also
proved the process of training a model on small images (256
· 256 pixels), but applying it on thousands of times larger im-
ages for prediction as effective. Additional steps like Slicing
Aided Hyper Inference (SAHI) were shown to be unnecessary
for this application. While the current accuracy is considered
a success, there is acknowledgment that the model may miss
some ships posing problems for real-life military applications
and therefore emphasises the need for access to more imagery
to enhance model performance.
ICEYE as data source:. In regards of the high-resolution im-
age source, Strip mode images from ICEYE were deemed well-
suited for detecting middle to large-sized ships. The high reso-
lution allowed for detailed ship data gathering and comparisons
with optical imagery. However, the noise produced by the water
surface in ICEYE images, especially in comparison to C-band
SAR satellites like Sentinel-1, presents challenges, particularly
for detecting very small ships. In summary, the high sensitivity
to the roughness of the surface can be advantageous, for exam-
ple for wake analysis, but can also be a disadvantage due to the
introduction of noise.
Landmasking:. The landmasking technique, using Cartopy
10m landmask, provided the result of an average of 0.72% of
each scene to be a potential black spot for ships, which might
sound negligible. However, based on this finding, this results in
approximately 10 to 20 square kilometers of area being missed
in each scene. With improved model performance and fewer
false detections on land, it is hypothesised that a future ship de-
tection model could potentially operate without the need for a
landmask. Alternatively, if the region of application is known,
an exact custom landmask could solve the problem of losing
targets.
Dimension estimations:. The dimension estimation aspect of
the study reveals valuable insights into the potential applica-
tions and limitations of extracting ship dimensions from SAR
images. First, the length calculation, based on conventional
digital image processing techniques, showed potential for dif-
ferentiation between ships based on their lengths. However, the
17
==PAGE:18==
study recognises that many ships did not provide any additional
AIS fields, including ship dimensions. Additionally, the relia-
bility of these parameters is questioned due to potential human
errors. As a result, these dimensions were not (yet) included
in the general matching process between AIS signals and SAR
ships.
Secondly, this paper successfully demonstrated the con-
nection between the 2-dimensional SAR image and the 3-
dimensional geometry of the ship with a correlation being
proven between the layover effect of the bridge in the SAR im-
age and the real height of it, as well as the width of the SAR
radar shadow and the real height of the deck. These findings
bypass the common problem of a SAR image not being able to
be transformed back into a 3D environment as one SAR point
can be caused by an infinite point of real points (even more so
due to the influence of foreshortening and lay-over effects). Due
to the restraints in the geometry of the ship, this was proven to
be possible for ships, which allows deeper insights in the fu-
ture. One noteworthy application could be the estimation of the
cargo weight of the vessel, as we propose that as a vessel be-
comes heavier and sinks deeper into the water, the deck height
is reduced, affecting the SAR shadow. The analysis of the SAR
shadow could therefore provide a novel method for estimating
cargo load, which was previously thought to be impossible from
SAR images.
For future research, expanding the ship dataset is highly rec-
ommended. Avenues for future research could include a deeper
comparison of the wavelength, signal-to-noise and sigma0 val-
ues of both ICEYE and Sentinel-1, exploring their effects on
ship detection or the possibility to become fully independent
from a landmask.
This paper suggests that deep learning models in high-
resolution images, particularly in combination with SAR data,
have significant potential for maritime surveillance. It is very
plausible, that a system based on this type of technology could
be widely used in the maritime security industry in the future,
as it offers clear advantages over conventional methods.
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to the dark ship work group of DTU Security
for providing all the necessary insights and the opportunity to
work on this project
We also thank ICEYE for providing SAR demo scenes free
of charge to enable this project, as well as Roboflow for its free
Annotation tool, which was easy to use and helpful. Further-
more, thanks to the whole scientific community, which provides
the backbone for all research no matter how specific the topic.
References
, . Chapter 1 Synthetic Aperture Radars (SAR) Imaging Basics. URL: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18199098.
Akshit Mehra, 2023. Understanding YOLOv8 Architecture, Applications Fea-
tures. https://www.labellerr.com/blog/understanding-yolov
8-architecture-applications-features/.
Dwyer, B., Nelson, J., Solawetz, J., et. al., 2022. Roboflow (Version 1.0) [Soft-
ware]. Available from https://roboflow.com.
eoPortal, 2023. ICEYE Microsatellites Constellation. https://www.eoport
al.org/satellite-missions/iceye-constellation#space-and
-hardware-components.
Gao, G., 2011. A parzen-window-kernel-based cfar algorithm for ship detection
in sar images. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sensing Lett. 8, 557–561. doi:10.110
9/LGRS.2010.2090492.
Glenn Jocher, 2023. How is confidence calculated by YOLOv8?
https:
//github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics/issues/4149#issueco
mment-1665801157.
Google - Machine Learning Foundational courses, 2022. Classification: True
vs. False and Positive vs. Negative. https://developers.google.com/
machine-learning/crash-course/classification/true-false
-positive-negative.
Guang Yang, Bo Li, S.J.F.G.Q.X., 2013. Ship detection from optical satellite
images based on sea surface analysis. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Letters 11. doi:10.1109/LGRS.2013.2273552.
Heiselberg, H., 2016. A direct and fast methodology for ship recognition in
sentinel-2 multispectral imagery. Remote Sensing 8. doi:10.3390/rs8121
033.
Heiselberg, P., Sørensen, K., Heiselberg, H., Andersen, O., 2022.
Sar
ship–iceberg discrimination in arctic conditions using deep learning. Re-
mote Sensing 14. doi:10.3390/rs14092236.
Heiselberg, P., Sørensen, K., Heiselberg, H., 2023. Ship velocity estimation in
sar images using multitask deep learning. Remote Sensing of Environment
288, 113492. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ar
ticle/pii/S0034425723000433, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rse.2023.113492.
Iervolino, P., Guida, R., 2017. A novel ship detector based on the generalized-
likelihood ratio test for sar imagery. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing PP, 1–15. doi:10.1109/
JSTARS.2017.2692820.
Jacob Solawetz, 2020. What is YOLOv4? A Detailed Breakdown. https:
//blog.roboflow.com/a-thorough-breakdown-of-yolov4/.
Jiaqiu, A., Xiangyang, Q., Weidong, Y., Yunkai, D., Fan, L., Li, S., Yafei, J.,
2011. A novel ship wake cfar detection algorithm based on scr enhancement
and normalized hough transform. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Letters 8, 681–685. doi:10.1109/LGRS.2010.2100076.
Jonathan Hui, 2018.
mAP (mean Average Precision) for Object Detection.
https://jonathan-hui.medium.com/map-mean-average-precisi
on-for-object-detection-45c121a31173.
Karney, C.F., 2013. Algorithms for geodesics. Journal of Geodesy 87. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00190-012-0578-z, doi:10.1007/s0
0190-012-0578-z.
KiKaBeN, 2022. Object Detection: mean Average Precision (mAP). https:
//kikaben.com/object-detection-mean-average-precision/.
Li, Y., Li, Z., Zhu, Y., Li, B., Xiong, W., Huang, Y., 2019. Thermal infrared
small ship detection in sea clutter based on morphological reconstruction
and multi-feature analysis. Applied Sciences 9. URL: https://www.mdpi
.com/2076-3417/9/18/3786, doi:10.3390/app9183786.
18
==PAGE:19==
Marine MAN Ltd., . AUSTRALIAN SPIRIT. https://ships.jobmarinem
an.com/australian-spirit-9247455/.
Prasad, M.S., Verma, S., Shichkina, Y.A., 2023. Dark ship detection: Sar im-
ages, in: 2023 XXVI International Conference on Soft Computing and Mea-
surements (SCM), pp. 341–344. doi:10.1109/SCM58628.2023.101590
62.
Redmon, J., Divvala, S., Girshick, R., Farhadi, A., 2016. You only look once:
Unified, real-time object detection. arXiv:1506.02640.
Shi, Z., Yu, X., Jiang, Z., Li, B., 2014. Ship detection in high-resolution optical
imagery based on anomaly detector and local shape feature. IEEE Transac-
tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 52, 4511–4523. doi:10.1109/TG
RS.2013.2282355.
Stefan M¨uhlbauer, 2016. Moving objects and their displacement in SAR im-
ages.
Tarang Shah, 2017. About Train, Validation and Test Sets in Machine Learning.
https://towardsdatascience.com/train-validation-and-tes
t-sets-72cb40cba9e7.
Tings, B., Pleskachevsky, A., Wiehle, S., 2023.
Comparison of detectabil-
ity of ship wake components between c-band and x-band synthetic aperture
radar sensors operating under different slant ranges. ISPRS Journal of Pho-
togrammetry and Remote Sensing 196, 306–324. URL: https://www.sc
iencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924271622003239,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2022.12.008.
Tournadre, J., 2014. Anthropogenic pressure on the open ocean: the growth of
ship traffic revealed by altimeter data analysis. AGU - Advancing Earth and
Space Sciences doi:10.1002/2014GL061786.
Wang, C., Bi, F., Zhang, W., Chen, L., 2017. An intensity-space domain cfar
method for ship detection in hr sar images. IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters 14, 529–533. doi:10.1109/LGRS.2017.2654450.
Windward, 2019. Mind the AIS gap. https://windward.ai/blog/mind-t
he-ais-gap/.
Zhang, X., Huo, C., Xu, N., Jiang, H., Cao, Y., Ni, L., Pan, C., 2021. Multitask
learning for ship detection from synthetic aperture radar images. IEEE Jour-
nal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing
14, 8048–8062. doi:10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3102989.
Appendix A. Visualisation of demo scenes
All four ICEYE Strip mode demo scenes are visually repre-
sented on the globe in Figure A.21.
All data is publicly available and can be accessed at:
https://www.iceye.com/downloads/datasets
Figure A.21: All ICEYE Strip mode SAR images (white) used in this project
visualised in Mercator Earth projection and highlighted with red circles
Appendix B. Dataset label correlogram
This correlogram contains detailed information about the
spatial distribution, heights, and widths of all labelled vessels,
offering a comprehensive reference for subsequent analyses. It
is important to note that the bounding box of a diagonally seen
vessel is a square. Subsequently, this means the height and
width of the labels do not accurately represent the dimensions
of each ship!
Furthermore, most labels are centred in the image centre,
which was expected as the center of each image is the returned
value of the CA-CFAR algorithm. Other label centre points in
the image subsets were usually only introduced when multiple
vessels were present in the image.
Figure B.22: Correlogram for YOLO labels in ICEYE GRD format
19
==PAGE:20==
Appendix C. Comparison
between
pre-trained
YOLO
models
Ultralytics offers a series of pre-trained models for their
YOLO framework. The main difference between different mod-
els is the size of their backbone network, in which a higher
complexity leads to a higher mAP, but also takes more time
processing. All pre-trained models were trained on the COCO
dataset and are compared in the table below:
Table C.10: Performance values compared for different models trained on the
COCO dataset containing 80 pre-trained classes, this table and other perfor-
mance metrics can be found here: https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics
Model
mAP
Speed (CPU ONNX)
params
FLOPs
50-95
(ms)
(M)
(B)
YOLOv8n
37.3
80.4
3.2
8.7
YOLOv8s
44.9
128.4
11.2
28.6
YOLOv8m
50.2
234.7
25.9
78.9
YOLOv8l
52.9
375.2
43.7
165.2
YOLOv8x
53.9
479.1
68.2
257.8
Appendix D. Hardware used for testing
As the timings given in this paper are mostly dependent on
the hardware used, this section provides the reader with a rep-
resentative overview of all (relevant) parts used in the training
and testing system.
Table D.11: Hardware used for training and testing (CPU: Central Processing
Unit, GPU: Graphics Processing Unit, RAM: Random Access Memory)
Component
Type/ Version
Operating System
MS Windows 10 Pro (v.10.0.19045)
Python framework
Version 3.10.2
CPU
Intel(R) Core i7-8700K
GPU
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3800
RAM
32GB
Mainboard
ASRock Z370 Extreme4
Appendix E. Recall and precision curves for all trained
models
For model training in section 3.2.5, four YOLO models were
compared. Although all four F1 curves were shown, a deeper
comparison can only be undertaken with access to their preci-
sion and, even more importantly, recall curves as seen in Figure
E.23 and E.24. The selected model is displayed as number 4
with the best available recall-confidence curve and an accept-
able precision.
Figure E.23: Comparison of the precision curve of all four models, 1: standard
GRD training dataset, 2: mixed GRD and SLC dataset, 3: mixed GRD and SLC
dataset with additional background images, 4: pre-training on 1000 Sentinel-
1 images, transfer learning to mixed GRD and SLC dataset with background
images
20
==PAGE:21==
Figure E.24: Comparison of the recall curve of all four models, 1: standard
GRD training dataset, 2: mixed GRD and SLC dataset, 3: mixed GRD and SLC
dataset with additional background images, 4: pre-training on 1000 Sentinel-
1 images, transfer learning to mixed GRD and SLC dataset with background
images
Appendix F. Full list of YOLOv8 training parameters
This section contains all training parameters for further re-
producibility. Most parameters are left as their default values,
although the number of workers and the batch size can be ad-
justed depending on the hardware used.
Table F.12: Full list of YOLOv8 training parameters (1/2)
Name
Value
task
detect
mode
train
model
yolov8m.pt
data
data.yaml
epochs
200
patience
50
batch
16
imgsz
256
save
true
save period
-1
cache
false
device
null
workers
4
project
null
exist ok
false
pretrained
true
optimizer
auto
verbose
true
seed
0
deterministic
true
single cls
false
rect
false
cos lr
false
close mosaic
10
resume
false
amp
true
fraction
1.0
profile
false
overlap mask
true
mask ratio
4
dropout
0.0
val
true
split
val
save json
false
save hybrid
false
conf
null
half
false
dnn
false
workspace
4
nms
false
lr0
0.01
lrf
0.01
momentum
0.937
weight decay
0.0005
warmup epochs
3.0
warmup momentum
0.8
warmup bias lr
0.1
21
==PAGE:22==
Table F.13: Full list of YOLOv8 training parameters (2/2)
Name
Value
box
7.5
cls
0.5
dfl
1.5
pose
12.0
kobj
1.0
label smoothing
0.0
nbs
64
hsv h
0.015
hsv s
0.7
hsv v
0.4
translate
0.1
scale
0.5
mosaic
1.0
mixup
0.0
copy paste
0.0
cfg
null
tracker
botsort.yaml
save dir
removed
Appendix G. Full list of YOLOv8 prediction parameters
This section contains all prediction parameters for further re-
producibility. For most parameters, the YOLO default values
were used. The confidence and IoU threshold were adapted
for a better detection performance and the line width was
slightly increased. Additionally, the output was saved as a text
(save txt) for further usage.
Table G.14: Full list of YOLOv8 prediction parameters
Name
Value
agnostic nms
False
augment
Flase
boxes
True
conf
0.2
classes
[2,3]
device
None
hide conf
False
hide labels
False
imgsz
slice size
iou
0.4
line width
2
max det
300
rect
True
save
True
save conf
False
save crop
False
save txt
True
show
False
show conf
False
source
image slice
visualize
False
22
