==PAGE:1==
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
through
priming
with
methyl
jasmonate,
pipecolic acid and ectomycorrhizia
Master Thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
through priming with methyl jasmonate, pipecolic acid and ectomycorrhizia
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Frederik Friborg Nexø
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
NIBIO - Frederik Friborg Nexø (2023)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This Master’s Thesis has been prepared over 5 months at The Norwegian Institute of
Bioeconomy Research (NIBIO) under the supervision of the Department of Biotechnology
and Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Biotechnology.
Frederik Friborg Nexø - s184261
Signature
Date
2
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
14th January 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this study it was determined if soaking of Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karst) seeds
in methyl jasmonate, pipecolic acid or both increases resistance against the phytopathogen
Botrytris cinerea. It was also evaluated whether the seed treatment confers negative or
positive effects on plant health and germination. The study used resistance phenotyping
and RT-qPCR to assess if defense response were increased by treatment. The study
used measurements of germination rate, morphological changes and concentration of
chlorophyll A / B and total carotenoids to determine if treatment affected plant health and
growth. The findings indicate that seed priming elicits defense responses which in turn
carries a metabolic tax, shown as a decrease in germination degree and growth. The
inoculation with ECM fungi T. terrestris alleviates some of these negative effects. These
findings therefore warrant further studies on the interaction of treatments, before suggest-
ing plant nurseries to implement seed treatment and ECM inoculation.
Importance
Norway spruce is used in reforestation efforts and for commercial lumbering. With an in-
creasing focus on sustainability these markets have experienced increased activity. The
increased demand is reflected in the sales of Norway spruce seeds. The Norwegian For-
est Seed Center experienced a 223% increase in sales of spruce seeds in 2021 compared
to 2020 (Solvin & Fløistad, 2023). Natural regeneration of Norway spruce was used in
15% of total regeneration in the years 2007-2010. This is partly due to the importance of
timing clear-cutting with seed production. The success of natural regeneration is depen-
dent on the surrounding vegetation and time elapsed since clear-cutting. Instead of rely-
ing on natural regeneration, the practice of out-planting seedlings has been the favoured
method. By outplanting, the Norway spruce seedlings are given an advantage compared
to the competing shrubs, due to their size and stage of development. Areas where natural
regeneration was used, the recommended density of seedlings was only projected to be
reached in less than 60% of the cases (Fløistad et al., 2018). Therefore ensuring a stable
supply of Norway spruce seedlings is instrumental for ensuring the regeneration of lumber
stands and reforestation efforts.
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
3
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Frederik Friborg Nexø, Stud.MSc.Eng, DTU
Author
Lars Jelsbak, Professor with Special Responsibilities, DTU
Supervisor
Melissa H. Magerøy, Researcher, NIBIO
Secondary supervisor
Ngan Bao Huynh, PhD candidate, NIBIO
Tertiary supervisor
Preface
I’d like to extend my deepest gratitude to the staff at NIBIO for giving me such a warm welcome and providing
guidance throughout my time there. I’d like to thank Melissa for broadening my understanding on the subject
of plants, and for being a great mentor, always available for sparring. Furthermore, I’d like to thank Ngan for
her input on the statistical work and for providing guidance in the laboratory, in addition to accompanying me
alongside her other master’s student. I’d like to thank my supervisors for providing support in times of need
and for their kindness. I’d like to thank Veronica for her help as a fellow master’s student and wish her the best
of luck with her own master’s thesis. I’d also like to thank my family for their unwavering support throughout
my academic career, and for inspiring me to pursue my dreams. Lastly, I’d like to thank my partner, Mina
Elise for her encouraging words and emotional support throughout my studies. This study would not have
been possible without the support of those people, and for that I am grateful.
4
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:7==
Glossary
JA
Jasmonic acid
MJ
Methyl jasmonate
PA
Pipecolic acid
SA
Salicylic acid
PR
Pathogenesis related
Chi4
Chitinase type IV
LOX
13-lipoxygenase
EIN3
Ethylene-Insensitive3
MYC
Myelocytomatosis oncogenes
TPS-car
Terpene synthesis 3-carene
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
5
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Glossary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1
Introduction
9
2
Material and methods
19
2.1
Sterilization of seeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.2
Treatment of seeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3
Germination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.4
Cultivation and inoculation of fungal strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Ectomycorrhiza . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Phytopathogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.5
Nucleotide extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
RNA extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
DNA extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.6
cDNA synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.7
RT-qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.8
List of primers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.9
Semi-quantitative PCR (Agarose gel electrophoresis)
. . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.10 Resistance phenotyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.11 Morphological phenotpying
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.12 Chlorophyll analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.13 Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3
Results
29
3.1
Determination of chemical treatment effects on germination rate
. . . . . . 29
3.2
Effects of seed treatment and ectomycorrhizal inoculation on chlorophyll A
/ B and total carotenoid concentration in Norway spruce seedlings
. . . . . 30
3.3
Morphological changes induced by seed treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.4
Effects of seed treatment and ectomycorrhizae colonization on resistance
phenotype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.5
Effects of seed treatment and ectomycorrhizal colonization on hormone
biosynthesis and defence-related gene expression before and after Botrytis
cinerea infection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Discussion
37
Effects of seed treatment and ECM inoculation on resistance towards B.
cinerea in Norway spruce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Effects of seed treatment and ECM inoculation on health and development
of Norway spruce
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Consideration of alternative approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Limitations of methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5
Conclusion
45
6
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:9==
A appendix: Test of primer pairs
54
B appendix: Primer design
56
C appendix: Comparison of germination
57
D appendix: Phenotyping example
58
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
7
==PAGE:10==
8
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karst) is an ecologically and economically important
conifer native to Northern Europe. Norway spruce is a dominant tree species in the Euro-
pean boreal forests. Boreal forests support a wide array of animals and insects by provid-
ing a habitat. Additionally, boreal forests contribute important ecosystem services such as
carbon sequestration, water quality, and erosion prevention (Caudullo et al., 2016). Due
to its quality as a building material, Norway spruce has been widely planted throughout
Europe (Hlásný et al., 2019). This introduction of Norway spruce outside of its natural
range increases forest disturbances such as windfall and bark beetle outbreaks (Hlásný
et al., 2019). Additionally, increased globalization and importation of foreign plant mate-
rial, such as peat moss (Sphagnum spp.) has increased the risk of introducing non-native
pests and pathogens, endangering Norway spruce (Ángeles-Argáiz et al., 2016).
To support the demand for Norway spruce timber and ensure reforestation, seedlings
are out-planted after clear-cutting. This has given rise to an industry focusing on grow-
ing Norway spruce from seed to seedling. Norway, Sweden, and Finland alone produce
nearly 344 million Norway spruce seedlings a year (Solvin & Fløistad, 2023). To meet
this demand, seedlings are usually grown under intense growing conditions, such as high
nutrient availability and in close proximity to one another as seen in figure 1.1.
Figure (1.1)
Spruce seedlings grown in a nursery. Image retrieved from (Poteri et al., 2021).
High-density growing conditions in combination with other forest nursery practices, like
cold storage, can increase Norway spruce seedling susceptibility to opportunistic phy-
topathogens, such as Botrytis cinerea (Nielsen et al., 2023). B. cinerea, more commonly
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
9
==PAGE:12==
known as grey mould, is a ubiquitous and diverse phytopathogen from the Sclerotiniaceae
family. It has a broad range of hosts and causes cell death and lesions in infected plants.
B. cinerea is often described as a necrotrophic phytopathogen. However, recent publica-
tions have proposed a hemibiotrophic lifestyle, since in the early stages of infection, B.
cinerea exhibits biotrophic feeding before transitioning to necrotrophic feeding (Bi et al.,
2023). B. cinerea possesses a diverse arsenal of infection mechanisms, such as oxalic
acid and cell wall degrading enzymes (Cheung et al., 2020). These are however not
species-specific and prove challenging for plants to develop defences against. Following
germination of the conidiospores, B. cinerea can enter a host through the stomata or by
forming an appressorium and physically forcing entry into host cells. Following entrance
into the cells, B. cinerea proliferates in the infection site through different stages. Dur-
ing the first stages of infection, a biotrophic feeding is proposed. B. cinerea forces entry
into live cells and feeds off the living tissue. B. cinerea forms a local infection site and ex-
hibits limited spreading. The beginning of the second phase is initiated when an adequate
concentration of fungal biomass has accumulated. The infection progresses by lesion ex-
pansion. This rapid expansion is supported by increased fungal virulence. Cell death
occurs in a halo formation around the initial site of infection and the main fungal feeding
mechanism is necrotrophic. The third stage is characterised by vast cell death, likely in-
duced by both the host and B. cinerea. The hypersensitive response in plants, causes
regulated cell death (RCD) to combat biotrophs. This RCD is thought to be exploited by
B. cinerea when exhibiting necrotrophic feeding (Bi et al., 2023).
Forest nurseries have been using these fungicides to combat fungal infections such as
B. cinerea.
These fungicides include: fenhexamid, fluopyram, cyprodinil, fludioxonil,
thiophanate-methyl and methyl benzimidazole carbamate. The usage of fungicides is
falling out of favour, as new legislation emerges based upon safety concerns (J. Liu et al.,
2019). For example, methyl benzimidazole carbamate is no longer approved in Norway
as of 2021 (Nielsen et al., 2023). In addition to a decreasing number of approved fungi-
cides available for use in nurseries, some fungicides are no longer effective due to the
development of resistant fungal strains. For example, the usage of fungicides to con-
trol disease in forest nurseries has led to resistance development in strains of B. cinerea
(Nielsen et al., 2023). This poses a huge problem for controlling B. cinerea outbreaks in
greenhouse production. Therefore, it is crucial for forest nurseries to find other ways of
protecting their plants from pathogens.
Plants are not defenceless, but have evolved complex mechanisms to defend themselves.
10
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:13==
Plant defences are regulated by phytohormones such as ethylene, jasmonic acid and sal-
icylic acid (Figure 1.2). Ethylene serves multiple purposes in the plant cell, as it regulates
growth, differentiation, and stress responses to necrotrophic pathogens (Wen, 2015). No-
tably, ethylene regulates leaf senescence, as well as the transition from vegetative growth
to reproductive growth in addition to controlling the ripening of fruiting bodies (Iqbal et
al., 2017). Studies have shown that in addition to regulating different parts of a plant’s
lifecycle, an increase of ethylene results in an upregulation of defensive genes in pota-
toes (Solanum tuberosum). The study found that seedlings sprayed with 0.2 mmol∙L−1 of
ethephon, a compound that releases ethylene upon uptake, upregulated the expression
of PR-3 among other defence genes (Yang et al., 2020). These studies have however
mostly focused on angiosperm and the effects of ethylene on defence gene expression
have not been studied to the same degree in gymnosperms. Ethylene is synthesized from
S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM). In the first step of ethylene synthesis SAM is converted
to 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) by 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic
acid synthase (ACS) shown in figure 1.2 (Pattyn et al., 2021). This step is proposed to be
the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis pathway of ethylene (Pattyn et al., 2021). ACS
has been studied in angiosperms and has been described in gymnosperms (Ralph et al.,
2007a). A study on Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis) revealed that the expression of ACS
is induced when the trees are mechanically wounded. Furthermore, the study described
that the basal expression level of ACS is very low compared to the other enzymes in the
ethylene synthesis pathway (Ralph et al., 2007b).
Like ethylene, jasmonates have a role in necrotrophic pathogen defence responses, as
well as, regulation of defence responses to herbivores. Additionally, jasmonic acid gov-
erns the germination of seeds, roots and overall growth, and ageing of cells (Wasternack
& Song, 2016). Jasmonates are found in all parts of the plant and concentrations rise
when the plant is wounded. Wounded plants also release the volatile methyl ester jas-
monate derivative, methyl jasmonate (MJ) (Wasternack & Song, 2017). Studies on the
exogenous application of MJ on gymnosperms have shown the induction of chemical de-
fences. The increased production of resin-based defences was notable up to two years
post application (Vázquez-González et al., 2022). A study showed that this increase in
resin production is accompanied by an increase in transcripts of terpene synthesis 3-
carene (TPS-car). The accumulation of the monoterpene 3-carene was also shown to
be associated with increased resistance in Norway spruce when treated with MJ (Fäldt
et al., 2003). The first step in jasmonic acid synthesis is the conversion of α-linolenic
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
11
==PAGE:14==
acid via 13-lipoxygenase (LOX) (Figure 1.2). To form the active jasmonate derivative,
jasmonic acid-isoleucine (JA-Ile), jasmonic acid is conjugated with isoleucine. JA-Ile acts
on Ethylene-Insensitive3 (EIN3) and myelocytomatosis oncogenes (MYC) (Figure 1.2)
(Zheng et al., 2017). EIN3 is a transcription factor exerting control defence genes, related
to resisting fungal infections. In the absence of ethylene, EIN3 is ubiquitinated and quickly
degraded by proteasomes (Zhu et al., 2011). MYC is a basic helix–loop–helix transcrip-
tion factor that regulates responses to wounding, development of roots and metabolism
of plants (Kazan & Manners, 2013).
In contrast to ethylene and jasmonic acid, salicylic acid mediated defence responses
are generally activated against hemi-biotrophs and biotrophs when studying Arabidopsis
(Glazebrook, 2005). It does so by decreasing the permeability of cell walls, by relocat-
ing resources to enhance the cell wall rigidity, and as such acts on fatty acid recruitment
(Borrelli et al., 2021). These findings stem from studies, which used Arabidopsis as their
model organism. However, the findings are likely applicable to a broader array of plants
(X. Wang et al., 2006). In angiosperms, two biosynthetic pathways for salicylic acid syn-
thesis have been described (Figure 1.2). Both pathways utilize chorismate as the starting
precursor. However, they are different from one another in the enzymatic steps. In one
pathway, isochorismate synthase (ICS) converts chorismate to isochorismate, which is
then converted to salicylic acid. Alternatively, phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) con-
verts chorismate to trans-cinnamic acid, which is then converted to benzoic acid and
then salicylic acid. These hormone biosynthesis pathways have been studied in other
plant species, but have not been verified in Norway spruce (Lefevere et al., 2020). Re-
cent literature indicates a synergistic mode of action for N-hydroxypipecolic acid together
with salicylic acid. It was found that the levels of N-hydroxypipecolic acid drastically in-
crease when Arabidopsis is subjected to pathogen infections (Huang et al., 2020). The
pipecolic acid biosynthesis pathway have been shown to be instrumental in the activation
of systemic acquired resistance in Arabidopsis. Furthermore, mutant studies have shown
pipecolic acid being instrumental for inducible resistances. Mutant plants with defective
biosynthetic pathways for pipecolic acid were unable to mount a defence response (Ding
et al., 2016). Additionally, (Návarová et al., 2013) showed that pipecolic acid is a critical
metabolic mediator for the induction of inducible defences in plants. Li et al., 2020 showed
that a mutation in genes coding for proteins catalyzing de-methylation of heterochromatin
resulted in lower expression of defence-related genes and decreased levels of pipecolic
acid. The defence response was remediated by spraying the mutant plants with pipecolic
12
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:15==
acid (Li et al., 2020). The effect of exogenous application with pipecolic acid on defence
responses has not been tested in gymnosperms, to the knowledge of the author. These
phytohormone-induced defences are governed by a network of interactions which exhibit
crosstalk as illustrated in figure 1.2. Studies on angiosperms have shown salicylic acid
regulates the jasmonic acid and ethylene pathways used to elicit plant defences, by in-
hibiting MYC and EIN3 directly or through NRP1 (Huang et al., 2020) shown in figure
1.2. However, crosstalk occurring between the different plant defence pathways in Nor-
way spruce has not yet been fully described. Additionally, the phytohormones involved
in plant defences are also regulatory hubs governing integral processes in plants, includ-
ing response to nutrient starvation, germination processes, and light availability (Borrelli
et al., 2021).
Figure (1.2)
Simplified overview of the biosynthesis pathway and regulatory effects of plant hor-
mones: Ethylene, Jasmonic Acid, and Salicylic Acid. Compounds are shown in labelled boxes,
and enzymes are represented as free-floating text. Blue arrows indicate a stimulatory effect, while
red lines denote an inhibitory effect.
Norway spruce has both constitutive and inducible defences. The constitutive defences
include physical structures, such as thick bark, cellulosic cell walls and sclerenchyma
stone cells, which deter non-specialised pathogens from readily degrading the plant tissue
(Krokene, 2015). Norway spruce also produces defensive chemicals, such as terpenoids
including monoterpene, sesquiterpenes, and diterpenes. These terpenes are stored in the
glandular trichomes on the surface of the needles (Celedon et al., 2020). In addition to
glandular trichomes, Norway spruce has cortical resin ducts in its bark. These resin ducts
are lined with epithelial cells that synthesize and excrete terpenes into the duct. These
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
13
==PAGE:16==
terpenes make up the resin, which is a crucial component in Norway Spruce defence.
The resin is stored under pressure and will flow into wounded areas, where it will adhere
to phytopathogens, hindering motility and stopping their proliferation, due to its intrinsic
toxicity. Hence why terpenes act as both a physical barrier and as a chemical defence
(Franceschi et al., 2000; Krokene, 2015).
When Norway spruce is challenged by a pathogen, such as B. cinerea, the constitutive de-
fences seldom suffice. Therefore, Norway spruce induces additional defences. These de-
fences include an increased production of terpenoids, as well as the formation of traumatic
resin ducts. The inducible defences can also include enzymatic responses. Enzymatic
defences encompass pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins. This group of proteins is com-
posed of 17 families of proteins that have been detected at elevated levels in plants when
challenged with a phytopathogen. These protein families include many defence-related
proteins such as chitinases, proteinase inhibitors and thaumatin-like proteins (TLP), the
former and latter of which exhibit anti-fungal effects (Y. Liu et al., 2021). PR-1 proteins
have been extensively studied and are highly conserved across species. Yet their en-
zymatic function is elusive and still unclear (van Loon et al., 2006). Some PR encoding
genes were shown to be induced upon wounding or infection such as PR3, PR4 and PR5
(Mageroy, Wilkinson, et al., 2020). The PR-3/4/8 proteins exhibit endo/exo-chitinase ac-
tivity, spanning chitinase type I, II, IV, V, VI, VII and III. This chitinase activity is integral for
resisting fungal infections. Chitinase IV (Chi4) among other chitinase genes have been
described in Norway spruce. Studies show the expression of Chi4 is upregulated in Nor-
way spruce when challenged with the pathogen Heterobasidion annonsum (Hietala et al.,
2004).
Inducible defences contribute to acquired resistance or an enhanced ability to resist pathogen
infection and pest attack (Mauch-Mani et al., 2017). Acquired resistance can be split into
two main modes of action. The first of which is prolonged upregulation of defences. Pro-
longed upregulation carries a metabolic tax which can stunt plant growth and can ham-
per other pathways within the plant. Prolonged upregulation of defence responses has
been shown to occur in Norway spruce, following chemical priming with methyl jasmonate.
Mageroy, Christiansen, et al., 2020 showed the prolonged upregulation of terpene syn-
thesis and other defence genes to be detectable up to 35 days following treatment of the
trees. The impact on growth was not easily measurable as the Norway spruce used in
the study, were fully grown trees, stemming from a 48-year-old stand of trees.
The second mode of action is defence priming, where defences may be transiently upreg-
14
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:17==
ulated in response to a stimulus before returning to baseline levels. Defence priming stim-
uli include pathogen infection, insect attack and chemical treatments. When the primed
plant is subjected to a second challenge after a while, transcription of defence genes
happens at a much more rapid pace and to a higher degree as shown in figure 1.3. The
proposed mechanism of priming includes phosphorylation by inactive mitogen-activated
protein kinases, which have been observed in plants treated with salicylic acid homologs
(Beckers et al., 2009). Epigenetic mechanisms also have an important role in long-term
defence priming. These mechanisms include DNA methylation and histone modifications
which can condense and de-condense the chromatin strand. By de-condensing the chro-
matin near stretches of defensive genes, the genes are more readily transcribed, since
polymerases have easier access. Long-term defence priming can also be transgenera-
tional (Wilkinson et al., 2019). It is unknown if transgenerational priming exists in Norway
spruce. However, recently two studies have investigated the priming abilities of methyl
jasmonate by spray application onto the bark of Norway spruce (Mageroy, Christiansen, et
al., 2020; Mageroy, Wilkinson, et al., 2020). The jasmonate derivative methyl jasmonate
has been used to study inducible defences in conifers for decades (Boughton et al., 2005;
Król et al., 2015; Senthil-Nathan, 2019).
In angiosperms, mycorrhizae such as Piriformospora indica has been shown to elicit the
inducible defences in Arabidopsis thaliana. P. indica is an endophyte, similiar to that of
arbuscular mycorrhizae. The inoculation led to increased resistance towards powdery
mildew (Golovinomyces orontii), however, it also conferred a statistically significant de-
crease in main root length (Stein et al., 2008). Through mutation experiments, the study
found NPR1 in addition to the JA pathway to be instrumental for the increase in resis-
tance. JA and NPR1 deficient mutants had decreased resistance, whereas SA deficient
mutants were efficient in resisting G. orontii (Stein et al., 2008). Arbuscular mycorrhizae
are present in approximately 80% of angiosperms and occur in gymnosperms as well.
However, the majority of mycorrhizae in tree species, mainly gymnosperms, are ecto-
mycorrhizae, which differ from arbuscular mycorrhizae in their mode of colonization. Ar-
buscular mycorrhizae enters the host cell cytoplasm, whereas ectomycorrhizae develops
a mantel surrounding the lateral roots, and proliferates between the root cells, without
entering the plant host cells (Mondal et al., 2022).
Similarly to arbuscular mycorrhizae, studies have investigated the ability of beneficial ec-
tomycorrhizal (ECM) fungi to trigger the inducible defences. A recent study showed that
inoculation with ECM fungus Hymenochaete sp. in the rhizosphere of Japanese pine
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
15
==PAGE:18==
Figure (1.3)
Overview of acquired resistance defence responses. Prolonged upregulated in-
ducible defences and priming of defences responses. Hatched area denotes the timeframe where
plants are challenged. Bold lines represent the defence response of plants possessing acquired
resistance. Dashed lines represent the defence response in plants lacking acquired resistance.
Adapted from (Wilkinson et al., 2019)
(Pinus thunbergia) induced an upregulation in the expression of PR3 and PR5 genes.
Seedlings inoculated with Hymenochaete sp. and a bacterium facilitating better ECM
colonisation, showed enhanced resistance towards fungal phytopathogen Sphaeropsis
sapinea (Y. H. Wang et al., 2022).
The relation between the host plant’s roots and symbiotic root fungi is a well-known phe-
nomenon, occurring across several families of plants (Smith et al., 2008). Coniferous
plants have been shown to share up to 16% of their net primary production with ECM fungi
(Hobbie, 2006) in return gaining vital components for plant growth. By leveraging the abil-
ity of fungi to metabolize a wide array of nitrogen and phosphorous sources, plants gain
an advantage when competing for the limited resources in the soil. Furthermore, the area
16
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:19==
covered by the mycelium network is greater than that of the roots extending the range from
which the plant can acquire resources (Simard & Durall, 2004). Therefore, plants barter
carbohydrates in exchange for nitrogen and phosphorous from ECM fungi (Almeida et al.,
2023). The standard plant nursery practice is to grow seeds in nitrogen and phosphorous-
fertilized peat. However, this heavy use of nitrogen and phosphorus fertilisers reduces
the degree of association between nursery plants and mycorrhizae (Vaario et al., 2009).
This decrease in colonization has been shown to occur in spruce seedlings as well, where
fertilised spruce seedlings had lower ECM diversity according to (Flykt et al., 2008). By
fertilizing the seedlings in the nurseries, their dependence on establishing an ECM com-
munity is diminished. When the fertilized seedlings are out-planted, the seedlings will
experience an abrupt decrease in available nutrients, leaving them vulnerable to infection
as they’re put under stress. Therefore establishing a strong ECM community before out-
planting is instrumental for ensuring successful establishment in their new environment
(Vaario et al., 2009; Zong et al., 2015).
Besides nutrient status, the species composition of ECM communities is impacted by host
species and genotype (Korkama et al., 2006; Miyamoto et al., 2022; Velmala et al., 2013).
These preferences for hosts are thought to have developed as the fungi have switched
from a biotrophic to symbiotic lifestyle (Martin et al., 2001). Therefore compatibility be-
tween the ECM fungi and host plant is an important factor, if nurseries were to inoculate
with cultivated ECM fungi. The ECM Thelephora terrestris is known to associate with
tree species within the Pinacea family (López-Gutiérrez et al., 2018a). T. terrestris is
a fast-growing ECM and a dominant species in nursery-grown Norway spruce microbial
communities (Vaario et al., 2009). However, there is a lack of understanding about how
and when colonization of nursery-grown Norway spruce by T. terrestris occurs and how
the symbiosis affects seedling health and disease resistance. Additionally, studies on
the interactions between plants and mycorrhizae have mainly been done in angiosperms.
Whether this knowledge is applicable to Norway spruce is unknown.
The main objectives of this study were to (i) determine if seed priming with phytohor-
mone derivatives increases resistance against the phytopathogen Botrytris cinerea. (ii)
Test if inoculation of Norway spruce seedlings with Thelephora terrestris affects seedling
resistance and/or exhibits synergistic effects with chemical seed treatment on increas-
ing resistance of Norway spruce. (iii) To investigate how seed treatment with phytohor-
mone derivatives can affect plant health parameters and seedling development. Lastly,
(iv) whether inoculation with T. terrestris alleviates any potential negative effects on plant
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
17
==PAGE:20==
health and germination, caused by the seed treatment.
To study these objectives, an experiment was set up where surface sterilized Norway
spruce seeds were treated with MJ, PA or a combination of both (MIX). After germination
and development of the roots, the growth medium was either kept sterile or inoculated
with ECM fungi T. terrestris. Lastly, plant resistance was assessed by infecting them
with a fungicide-resistant B. cinerea isolated from a Norway spruce nursery. Through-
out the experiment, several parameters relating to plant health and disease resistance
were tested. The findings from the experiment formed the conclusion on whether Nor-
way spruce nurseries should employ seed treatment and inoculation with beneficial ECM
fungi as an alternative plant protection strategy to combat the rise of fungicide-resistant
phytopathogens.
18
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:21==
2
Material and methods
Figure (2.1)
Experimental overview: Seeds are treated in either sterile water, 0.5 mM methyl
jasmonate (MJ), 0.5 mM pipecolic acid (PA) or a mix consisting of equal parts MJ and PA (MIX).
3 weeks after planting, seedlings receive the beneficial ectomycorrhizal fungi (EMF) Thelephora
terrestris or sterile milli-Q water. After 4 weeks from inoculation with EMF, plants are challenged
by inoculation with the fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea. Timeline showcases when assays are
carried out and when sampling is done. The split in the timeline denotes which of the plants from
each cohort received neither B. cinerea or mock inoculation.
2.1
Sterilization of seeds
Norway spruce seeds (seedlot F15-016, harvested from Kviteseid, Telemark, 59.31º lat-
itude in 2015) were purchased from Skogfrøverket (Skogførverket, 2022). 2000 seeds
were surface sterilized by submerging them in a 3.5% sodium hypochlorite solution (VWR
chemicals, 27896.291) for 5 minutes with continuous agitation. Following sterilization, the
seeds were transferred to a sieve and rinsed for approximately 10 minutes with water be-
fore being transferred to a 1 L flask of sterilized water. The seeds were shaken overnight
at 100 rpm on a benchtop shaker (Heidolph, Rotamax 120). The following day the steril-
ized seeds were transferred to an autoclaved sieve and transferred to another 1 L flask of
sterile milli-Q water, before being shaken overnight, to ensure residual sodium hypochlo-
rite was removed from the seed coat.
2.2
Treatment of seeds
Seeds were treated by submerging them in 100 mL of either 0.5 mM methyl jasmonate
(MJ), 0.5 mM pipecolic Acid (PA) or a 1:1 mixture of the MJ and PA solutions (MIX) (0.25
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
19
==PAGE:22==
mM final concentration of each chemical). Sterile milli-q water served as the control treat-
ment. 500 seeds were treated per treatment. The seeds in the treatment solution were
shaken overnight as described above. The following day the seeds were rinsed with ster-
ilized water and transferred onto filter paper inside Petri dishes. The Petri dishes were
sealed with parafilm and placed in a plastic bag to retain moisture. The seeds were stored
at 5ºC in darkness for 5 days to cold stratify the seeds, in order to synchronize germination
of the seeds.
2.3
Germination
Following treatment and cold stratification, the seeds were planted into autoclaved vermi-
culite (HydroGarden Ltd, 2023) inside γ irradiated Phytatrays™II (Sigma-Aldrich, P5929,
114 mm x 86 mm x 102 mm L x W x H ). The seeds were planted into the Phytatrays™
with sterilized forceps at approximately 4 mm depth, ensuring each seed was adequately
covered by vermiculite. Each Phytatray™contained 40 seeds, with three containers per
treatment, for a total of 48 containers. Each Phytatray™was watered with 140 mL ster-
ile water. The containers were closed to retain moisture and prevent contamination with
fungal spores. The Phytatrays™were labelled from 1-48 and were assigned a position
in the growth chamber using a truly random integer generator (Haahr, 1998) as shown in
table 2.1. The seedlings were grown at 25ºC with a photoperiod consisting of six hours
of darkness and 18 hours of light from three fluorescent tubes (Osram, L36W/20). With a
light intensity of 60 µmol*m−2s−1 next to the light fixtures and 50 µmol*m−2s−1 through the
Phytatrays™lid at seed base height. The germination rate of the seedlings was recorded
at 2-3 day intervals for 20 days following planting. Moisture in the Phytatrays™was as-
sessed daily, and additional water was not added until 21 days after germination.
Table (2.1)
Overview of positions in the growth chamber. Each tray contained 3 x 4 PhytaTrays™.
23
27
40
5
18
24
43
8
34
28
31
33
46
15
13
17
22
32
36
26
21
16
45
11
48
1
47
9
25
35
10
14
20
30
38
29
2
41
3
19
4
12
42
44
37
7
6
39
20
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:23==
2.4
Cultivation and inoculation of fungal strains
Ectomycorrhiza
Thelephora terrestris, strain R-NCII was provided by Taina Pennanen at Natural Re-
sources Institute Finland (LUKE). The ectomycorrhiza was grown in 50% Modified Melin-
Norkrans (MMN) [0.05 g/L CaCl2·2 H2O, 0.025 g/L NaCl, 0.15 g/L MgSO4· 7H2O, 0.0168
g/L Fe-EDTA, 0.01 g/L thiamine-HCl, 5 g/L malt extract, 0.25 g/L (NH4)2HPO4, 0.5 g/L
KH2PO4 and 1.25 g/L glucose] medium for 11 weeks in darkness at 18-22ºC under agi-
tation (Velmala et al., 2014). At weeks seven and nine, the medium was exchanged for
fresh 50% MMN medium. After 11 weeks of growing, the fungal culture was spun down
at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes. The supernatant was decanted and the pellet was resus-
pended in 250 mL sterile water. T. terrestris hyphae were homogenized by the use of
an immersion blender. Half of the Phytatrays™(24) received 10 mL of T. terrestris, and
the remaining half was mock inoculated with 10 mL sterile water. Following inoculation,
the Phytatrays™were returned to the growth chamber for an additional 28 days. The
Phytatrays™were grouped into cohorts which had either been treated with an aqueous
solution of T. terrestris or with sterile water control, in order to minimize the chance of
cross-contamination. 14 days after inoculation with EMF, the presence of T. terrestris
was checked by the use of species-specific primers (2.3). A semi-quantitative PCR was
run on the extract of samples to validate the presence. The results were checked against a
mock-inoculated seedling, a pure culture of T. terrestris and a pure culture of Amphinema
spp.
Phytopathogen
Botrytis cinerea, strain FG48 (Nielsen et al., 2023) was grown for six days at 21ºC on
3.9% Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) in Petri dishes after being revived from -80ºC stock.
Following the initial growth, the Petri dishes were placed under UV light, until harvesting
of the ascospores two weeks later. To infect the spruce seedling with B. cinerae, the
seedlings were uprooted from the vermiculite and transferred to Petri dishes lined with
filter paper. The roots were covered with filter paper and watered with 2 mL sterile milli-Q
water. 5 mL of a sterile water containing Botrytis cinerea at a concentration of 106 spores
/ mL was pipetted over the needles. The challenged seedlings were stored in the dark
at 21ºC in parafilm-sealed Petri dishes. An overview of the treatment combinations are
shown in table 2.2.
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
21
==PAGE:24==
Table (2.2)
Three biological replicates were carried out per combination of treatment, ectomy-
corrhiza and phytopathogen challenge. PhytaTrays™were labelled accordingly and randomly
assigned a position in the growth chamber.
Phytatray #
Abbreviation
Treatment
Ectomycorrhiza
Challenge
1.2.3
Control : Sterile
Control
Sterile
Sterile
4.5.6
Control : ECM
Control
Thelephora terrestris
Sterile
7.8.9
Control : Sterile
Control
Sterile
Botrytis cinerea
10.11.12
Control : ECM
Control
Thelephora terrestris
Botrytis cinerea
13.14.15
MJ : Sterile
Methyl jasmonate
Sterile
Sterile
16.17.18
MJ : ECM
Methyl jasmonate
Thelephora terrestris
Sterile
19.20.21
MJ : Sterile
Methyl jasmonate
Sterile
Botrytis cinerea
22.23.24
MJ : ECM
Methyl jasmonate
Thelephora terrestris
Botrytis cinerea
25.26.27
PA : Sterile
Pipecolic acid
Sterile
Sterile
28.29.30
PA : ECM
Pipecolic acid
Thelephora terrestris
Sterile
31.32.33
PA : Sterile
Pipecolic acid
Sterile
Botrytis cinerea
34.35.36
PA : ECM
Pipecolic acid
Thelephora terrestris
Botrytis cinerea
37.38.39
MIX : Sterile
MIX
Sterile
Sterile
40.41.42
MIX : ECM
MIX
Thelephora terrestris
Sterile
43.44.45
MIX : Sterile
MIX
Sterile
Botrytis cinerea
46.47.48
MIX : ECM
MIX
Thelephora terrestris
Botrytis cinerea
2.5
Nucleotide extraction
To determine the effects of chemical treatment and ECM on seedling defence responses
and regulation, mock and Botrytis cinerea challenged seedlings were harvested 24 hours
after infection. Five seedlings were pooled from each treatment for one biological repli-
cate. Five biological replicates were harvested per treatment type. Vermiculite was re-
moved from roots by rinsing with sterilized water. The seedlings were submerged in liquid
nitrogen immediately after harvesting. Samples were stored at -80ºC before being ground
and aliquoted. Whole seedlings were ground to a fine powder in a liquid nitrogen-filled
mortar with a pre-chilled pestle. The ground samples were transferred to pre-chilled 2
mL Eppendorf tubes and aliquoted into 15 mg samples. Samples were stored in liquid
nitrogen immediately after being ground. Samples were stored at -80ºC when not being
used.
RNA extraction
For RNA extraction, 652 µL per sample of lysis buffer [3% CTAB; 100 mM Tris; 50 mM
EDTA; 1.4 M NaCl; 1.3 µL β-Mercaptoethanol; 13 mg polyvinylchloride (PVP)] was added.
Samples were kept on ice throughout the procedure unless otherwise stated. After the
addition of 652 µL lysis buffer to each sample, the samples were shaken at 1000 rpm at
60ºC for 15 minutes on a ThermoShaker (Grant Bio PHMT, PSC24N). Thereafter, 40 µL
22
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:25==
of 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added to each sample, followed by vigorous
vortexing. The samples were then centrifuged at 150000 rpm at 4ºC for 15 minutes in
a cooled centrifuge (Eppendorf, Centrifuge 5424). The samples contained three distinct
layers, a pellicle on top, a supernatant and a debris pellet. Using a double-tipped pipette,
the supernatant was transferred to new 2 mL tubes. RNA was preferentially precipitated
by adding 7.5 M LiCl corresponding to half the volume of the supernatant yield. Tubes
were inverted 40 times before being placed at 4ºC ON. After incubation, the tubes were
centrifuged at 4ºC at 15000 rpm for one hour in a cooled centrifuge (Eppendorf, Cen-
trifuge 5424). The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed with 1000 µL
ice cold 75% ethanol twice, spinning down the pellet between each wash at 4ºC for 15
minutes. The washed pellet was dried and re-suspended in 30 µL 60ºC nuclease-free wa-
ter by vortexing. The RNA yield was quantified on a NanoDrop (NanoDrop Technologies,
NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer).
DNA extraction
For DNA extraction, the same protocol as described above for RNA extraction was used
until the precipitation step. For DNA precipitation, 0.1 volume of 3 M sodium acetate and
0.75 volume of ice-cold isopropanol were added for each sample. Following this, the
samples were inverted to mix and incubated on ice for 15 minutes. The samples were
centrifuged at 4ºC at 15000 rpm for 45 minutes before washing with ice-cold 75% ethanol
twice. The washed pellet was dried and re-suspended in 20 µL 60ºC nuclease-free water
by vortexing. The DNA yield was quantified on a NanoDrop (NanoDrop Technologies,
NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer).
2.6
cDNA synthesis
Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from extracted RNA using a Maxima First
Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT-qPCR, with dsDNase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, K1671)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 8 µL of 25 ng/µL RNA was added to each 20
µL reaction. The cDNA was kept at 4ºC after synthesis and stored at -80ºC.
2.7
RT-qPCR
Reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was carried out in a ViiA7 real-time
PCR system (Applied Biosystems, 4453534). Each reaction contained. 1 µL of primer [4
µM primers forward + reverse], 5 µL Fast SYBR® (Applied Biosystems™, 385612) and
1 µL of cDNA [10 ng/µL]. The reaction volume was brought up to 10 µL by the addition
of nuclease-free water. No-Template-Controls were included to assess the presence of
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
23
==PAGE:26==
contamination and non-specific amplification. The thermocycler program consisted of 20
seconds at 95ºC. Then 1 second at 95ºC and 20 seconds at 60ºC for 40 cycles, followed
by 60 seconds at 60ºC and 15 seconds at 95ºC. At the end of the program, a melting
curve analysis was carried out to assess the purity and quality of the run.
Expression of target genes was normalized using the geometric mean of three house-
keeping genes Actin, ubiquitin and Alpha-tubulin. Primer sequences for all housekeeping
and target genes can be found in table 2.3 alongside the references for previous work
using these primers. The mean cycle threshold (CT) value of the housekeeping genes
is subtracted from the CT of the target gene yielding ΔCT. The ΔΔCT is then calculated
by subtracting the obtained ΔCT value from the ΔCT of control:sterile within the target
gene pool. The fold-change of the target gene is expressed as 2-ΔΔCT. To increase the
normality of the distribution, the fold-change values are log-transformed before statistical
analysis.
2.8
List of primers
Table (2.3)
Overview of target genes, sequences, description and origin of primers used. Sup-
plementary material for primer design and evaluation are described in appendix B.
Target
Sequence
Description
Reference
Actin
F
TGAGCTCCCTGATGGGCAGGTGA
Housekeeping gene
(Yakovlev et al., 2006)
R
TGGATACCAGCAGCTTCCATCCCAAT
Ubiquitin
F
GTTGATTTTTGCTGGCAAGC
Housekeeping gene
(Schmidt & Gershenzon, 2007)
R
GTTGATTTTTGCTGGCAAGC
Alpha-tubulin
F
GGCATACCGGCAGCTCTTC
Housekeeping gene
(Hietala et al., 2004)
R
AAGTTGTTGGCGG CGTCTT
Chi4
F
GCGAGGGCAAGGGATTCTAC
Defence related chitinase
(Hietala et al., 2004)
R
GTGGTGCCAAAT CCAGAAA
PR3
F
AAGAGCGACTACTGCGATTCC
Pathogenesis related protein
(Wilkinson et al., 2022)
R
CGCGCCCAGATAAGTTCCA
PR4
F
CGCAGCCAGTACAAATGGA
Pathogenesis related protein
(Wilkinson et al., 2022)
R
AATACGCACAGTCACGCTTT
PR5
F
TGCCACTGACTACTCGAAGGT
Pathogenesis related protein
(Wilkinson et al., 2022)
R
GCCTGGGTGCAGGTGAAAG
ACS
F
CAAGCAGAATCCCTATGATGCCGAAA
Ethylene synthesis
(Yaqoob et al., 2012)
R
TCTGGATGAGACTTGAGCCAACCTTC
TPS-Car
F
GGTGGTACCAGGCAGACAGG
Terpenoid synthesis
(Zulak et al., 2009)
R
CAGTGTAGCCATCTCGATAATTGT
LOX
F
ACCCTTGGTATAGCCCTCATA
Jasmonic acid synthesis
(Arnerup et al., 2011)
R
ATCGTCACTCCATTCTCTCGT
EIN3
F
AGTTGGTGACTTCTCGTTTAGG
Ethylene defence regulator
(Mageroy, Wilkinson, et al., 2020)
R
TGCTCAAATGCTGTGTTTCTCT
MYC
F
AGGCATCTGTGTTCGCTGAA
Jasmonic acid defence regulator
(Wilkinson et al., 2022)
R
GGCTTCGGTCTGCTGAGTTA
5.8S ITS
F
TTGTTGCTGGCCCTCATAGG
T. terrestris species marker
This study
R
CTGCGTTCTTCATCGATGCG
2.9
Semi-quantitative PCR (Agarose gel electrophoresis)
To verify the colonization of seedlings with Thelephora terrestris, semi-quantitative PCR
was performed using extracted DNA. Species-specific primers for T. terrestris were de-
signed by overlapping intron sequences of target genes related to kinases and oxoglu-
24
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:27==
tarate dehydrogenase, due to their intrinsic involvement in the TCA cycles, as well as the
Internal transcribed spacer (ITS) surrounding 5.8S and 18.5S RNA sequences. Primers
were designed with the aid of primer3.et.nu with a target Tm of 58ºC, and the occurrence
of hairpins was an exclusion criterion. The kinase gm1.22 and 5.8s ITS primers showed
selectivity for T. terrestris contrary to Amphiniema spp.. Both primers were used to ver-
ify the presence T. terrestris in spruce seedlings. Supplementary materials for primer
evaluation are shown in Appendix A Figure A.1. Each semi-quantitative PCR reaction
contained 10 µL of REDTaq(R) ReadyMix™PCR Reaction Mix (Sigma-Aldrich, R2523-
100RXN), 1 µL of primer [10 µM of forward + reverse primers], 5 µL of DNA [5 ng/µL] and
4 µL of nuclease-free water for a total volume of 20 µL. The thermocycler program was
as follows: 30s @ 94ºC then, 60s @ 55ºC and 60s @ 72ºC for 45 cycles, followed by
30s @ 72ºC before being held at 4ºC indefinitely. For the agarose gel electrophoresis,
1% w/w agarose gels were cast with Standard Agarose - Type LE (BioNordika, BN50004)
to which 1X TBE (90 mM Tris, 90 mM Boric acid, 2 mM EDTA) was added. For visual-
izing the bands 0.01% V/V SYBR® Safe DNA gel stain (Invitrogen, S33102) was added.
Gels were photographed with a Chemidoc (BioRad, 12003154) and inverted to increase
contrast.
2.10
Resistance phenotyping
Resistance phenotyping was carried out by sampling 15 seedlings per treatment combi-
nation. Samples were phenotyped seven days post B. cinerea inoculation. The seedlings
were assigned to each category following these guidelines:
• Healthy: Firm vibrant green needles and stem
• Symptomatic: Dark green needles or spotty stems, somewhat firm needles and
stems
• Dead: Dark green needles, dark green or black stems. Limp stem or needles
The cohorts of treatment combinations were photographed for future reference after be-
ing divided into groups based on the guidelines. An example of how a cohort has been
categorised is shown in appendix D.
2.11
Morphological phenotpying
Norway spruce seedlings were harvested 37 days following ECM inoculation to assess
the growth impact and lateral root development. Samples were photographed next to a
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
25
==PAGE:28==
Figure (2.2)
37 days old seedling photographed next to a 10 mm scale bar. Arrows indicate the
sectioning of the plant.
scale bar with a fixed camera setup. Stem length, total length, root length and area of the
seedling were measured in the image-analysis program Fiji (Schindelin et al., 2012). A
universal scale bar of 10 millimetres was defined based on the scale bar in the images.
Distances were measured by tracing a segmented line onto the images. The start and
end points for stem, total and root length are illustrated in Figure 2.2. The start point of
stem length is at the base of the needles. The start root point is specified as the region
where the green stem transforms into a white or beige translucent portion. The end root
point is the longest shortest path between the start root point and the tips of the roots.
Classifications were done twice and showed less than a 4 mm deviation between the two
measurements.
2.12
Chlorophyll analysis
On the 16th of October, 57 days after planting, five seedlings per treatment type were
harvested. Roots were removed and stems and needles were placed in a 2 mL Eppendorf
tube with a steel ball. The samples were frozen and milled for 30 seconds at a frequency of
30 using a vibration ball mill (Retsch, MM300). As chlorophyll readily degrades outside of
the cell due to light exposure and temperature, samples were shielded from light and kept
in liquid nitrogen when possible. 1400 µL of ice-cold 80% acetone was added to the milled
sample and incubated for 5 minutes in the dark at 20ºC and 1000 rpm on a ThermoShaker
(Grant Bio PHMT, PSC24N). Following incubation the samples were spun at 15000 rpm
and 4ºC for 5 minutes. The absorbance was measured at 470 nm, 663 nm and 646 nm
in a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-Vis Spectrophotometer, Model UV-1601) (Major
& Mosseler, 2021). The wavelengths correspond to the absorption peak of chlorophyll
A, chlorophyll B and carotenoids, respectively. The pellet from the sample was dried for
26
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:29==
24 hours before being weighed (Sun et al., 2021; Wellburn, 1994). The concentration of
chlorophyll or total carotenoids was calculated using the following equations adapted from
(Schiop et al., 2017) to express the concentration as µg of chlorophyll or total carotenoids
per mg of sample.
Chlorophylla = 12.21 ∗A663 −2.81 ∗A646
Chlorophyllb = 20.13 ∗A646 −5.03 ∗A663
Totalcarotenoids = 1000∗A470−3.27∗Chla−104∗Chlb
227
2.13
Statistics
All statistic was carried out in version 4.3.1 of R (R Core Team, 2023a). Graphs were ren-
dered using the ”ggplot2” package (Wickham, 2016) and arranged with ”ggarrange” from
the ”patchwork” package (Pedersen, 2023). The interaction of treatment, ectomycorrhizal
status and whether the cohort had received the mock or botrytis challenge was modelled
using the function ”lm” from the ”stats” package (R Core Team, 2023b). One-way and
Two-way ANOVA was carried out using the Anova function from the ”Car” package (Fox
& Weisberg, 2019). Post-hoc Tukey tests were modeled using the ”emmeans” function
from the package ”emmeans” (Lenth, 2023) and a pair-wise comparison was done using
function ”cld” from the ”multcomp” package (Hothorn et al., 2008). For plotting the 95%
confidence intervals, the function ”group.CI” from package ”Rmisc” (Hope, 2022) was
used. For categorical data, a cumulative link model was made using the function ”clm”
from the ”ordinal” package (Christensen, 2022). The final germination rate was analysed
using a logistic regression model by the ”glm” function (R Core Team, 2023b).
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
27
==PAGE:30==
28
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:31==
3
Results
3.1
Determination of chemical treatment effects on
germination rate
(a) Germination rates across treatments and germi-
nation degree..
(b) Barplot of germination percentage at final mea-
surement.
Figure (3.1)
Effects of different seed chemical treatments on germination rate and total germi-
nation. (a) Seed germination was recorded every 2 - 3 days up to 20 days after sowing. Each
line represents the number of germinated seeds in a Phytatray™. Bold line shows the average
germination among all Phytatrays™containing seeds which received the same treatment. The
shaded area shows the 95% confidence interval of the average. (b) The total seed germination
percentage is shown for each seed treatment. Error bars represent the 95% confidence inter-
val. Treatments with different letters are significantly different (Logistic regression followed by a
Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) post-hoc test for pairwise comparisons between
treatments, p < 0.05).
Phytohormones are known to exhibit effects on germination. Therefore the germination of
treated seeds was followed to analyse the impact of seed treatment with MJ, PA or MIX.
Over the course of three weeks, the germination percentage was recorded by counting
the amount of germinated seeds. As a precaution, it was investigated if the position of the
Phytatrays™affected germination. This was shown to have no effect (One-way ANOVA,
P >0.05). Seeds treated with MIX germinated significantly slower over time compared
to the control, MJ and PA-treated seeds (Figure 3.1a). A plot showcasing the different
mean germination degrees side by side is available in appendix C Figure C.1. The fi-
nal germination percentage of the total initial seeds showed MIX seed treatment had a
significantly lower germination rate than all other treatments (Figure 3.1b). These results
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
29
==PAGE:32==
indicate that seed treatment with both JA and SA-associated phytohormones can interfere
with the germination process. After assessing the germination rate, half of the seedlings
from each seed treatment were inoculated with T. terrestris by adding the inoculate to
the vermiculite. The combination of seed treatment and ECM status will be referred to as
indicated in the ”Abbreviation” column of table 2.2.
3.2
Effects of seed treatment and ectomycorrhizal inoculation
on chlorophyll A / B and total carotenoid concentration in
Norway spruce seedlings
Figure (3.2)
Mean concentrations (µg / mg) of chlorophyll A, chlorophyll B and carotenoids in
seedlings in response to different seed treatments and ECM treatment. Error bars show the 95%
confidence interval and ”X” shows individual replicate values (n = 5 for each treatment). For each
pigment, treatments (seed + ECM status) with different letters are significantly different (Two-way
ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test for pairwise comparisons, p < 0.05).
30
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:33==
The chlorophyll and carotenoid concentration of the seedlings was investigated to eval-
uate the impact of treatments and ectomycorrhizal status on health and growth parame-
ters. The concentration of chlorophyll A / B and total carotenoids was determined for each
treatment combination by a spectrophotometric analysis. A statistically significant effect
of treatments on chlorophyll A and chlorophyll B was observed (Two-way ANOVA, p <
0.05). A post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test showed a statistically significant increase in chloro-
phyll A concentration in MIX:sterile and PA:sterile, compared to control:sterile seedlings
(p < 0.05) (Figure 3.2). Whereas for chlorophyll B, a significant difference was only seen
between PA:ECM seedlings and control:ECM seedlings (P < 0.05) (Figure 3.2). No sig-
nificant change was seen in the carotenoid level regardless of treatment and ECM status
combination (Figure 3.2). These findings suggest that both seed treatment and ECM
inoculation status affect chlorophyll A and B concentration, but not total carotenoid con-
centration.
3.3
Morphological changes induced by seed treatment
To investigate if chemical seed treatments and inoculation with T. terrestris influences the
morphology of the seedlings, stem, root and total length of 58-day-old seedlings were
measured. Measurements were taken from 25 samples from each cohort.
A statistically significant effect caused by seed treatment was observed across all mor-
phology measurements (Two-way ANOVA, p < 0.01), as well as an interaction between
seed treatment and ECM status (Two-way ANOVA, p < 0.05). Seedlings from seeds
treated with MJ or MIX had significantly shorter stem lengths than control and PA-treated
seedlings in both sterile and ECM-inoculated vermiculite (Figure 3.3). Additionally, MJ:sterile
seedlings had a significantly shorter stem length than MIX:sterile seedlings (Figure 3.3).
However, the same trend was not observed in ECM-inoculated seedlings, with MJ:ECM
seedlings not being significantly shorter than MIX:ECM seedlings (Figure 3.3). Seedlings
from control seeds had the longest root lengths, regardless of ECM status (Figure 3.3).
MIX:sterile and MJ:sterile seedlings had significantly shorter root lengths than control:sterile
seedlings. Seedlings from MIX:ECM treatment also had significantly shorter roots com-
pared to control:ECM seedlings (Figure 3.3). The inoculation of MJ treated seeds with
T. terrestris, remediated the inhibition in root growth (Figure 3.3). Similar to stem length,
seedlings from seeds treated with MJ or MIX were significantly shorter, compared to PA
and control seedlings, regardless of ECM status (Figure 3.3). Moreover, inoculation of
MJ-treated seeds with T. terrestris resulted in an increase in total length, as MJ:ECM
seedlings had significantly higher total length than MJ:sterile seedlings (Figure 3.3).
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
31
==PAGE:34==
Figure (3.3)
Mean length (millimeters) of the stem, root and entire seedling. Error bars show 95%
confidence interval and crosses represent individual data points (n = 25 for each treatment). For
each classification, treatments (seed + ECM status) with different letters are significantly different
(Two-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test for pairwise comparisons, p < 0.05).
3.4
Effects of seed treatment and ectomycorrhizae
colonization on resistance phenotype
To investigate the ability of seed treatments and ECM inoculation to alter seedling re-
sistance to B. cinerea infection, plants were inoculated with B. cinerea. One week after
inoculation, plants were assigned one of three categories; healthy, symptomatic or dead.
A statistical significance was found for the interaction of treatment and ECM status (Two-
32
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:35==
way Anova, p < 0.05). However, subsequent post-hoc tests showed insignificance be-
tween treatments and ECM status. Therefore, it is difficult to make any conclusion about
the effects of seed treatment and ECM status on seedling resistance.
Figure (3.4)
Health status of Botrytis cinerea-infected Norway spruce seedlings with different
seed treatments and grown in sterile or T. terrestris-inoculated vermiculite. Health status was
evaluated a week post-inoculation. Pink bars = healthy plants that still have firm and vibrant green
needles and stems; light purple = symptomatic plants with partially firm and dark green needles;
dark purple = dead plants that are completely mushed and have dark green needles and stems.
Two-way ANOVA of a cumulative link model followed by a Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test for pairwise
comparisons across all treatment combinations showed no significant results (p > 0.05).
3.5
Effects of seed treatment and ectomycorrhizal colonization
on hormone biosynthesis and defence-related gene
expression before and after Botrytis cinerea infection
To assess the effect of seed treatments and ECM status on the expression of defence
genes, RT-qPCR was carried out on RNA isolated from seedlings 24 hours after B. cinerea
infection. Gene expressions were analyzed in a Three-way ANOVA to check how different
factors affect the expression level individually or interact with each other (Table 3.1). The
results showed a strong statistical significance difference in gene expression between
before and after B. cinerea infection for all genes (Table 3.1). In general, gene expres-
sion was induced by B. cinerea infection, except for TPS-Car and ACS (Figure 3.5). A
significant interaction between the effects of treatment and ECM status was observed on
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
33
==PAGE:36==
the expression of Chi4, TPS-Car and EIN3. The difference in gene expression was not
the same across treatments (Figure 3.5). In addition, a significant interaction between
the effects of treatment and B. cinerea infection was found on the expression of TPS-
car. Lastly, the expression of MYC showed a significant interaction between the effects
of ECM and B. cinerea infection, which none of the other genes displayed (Table 3.1).
Table (3.1)
F-values from three-way ANOVAs on defence-related gene expression before and
after B. cinerea infection in Norway spruce seedlings with different seed priming treatments and
ECM statuses. Asterisks (*) represent the level of significance (*p < 0.005, **p < 0.01, ***p <
0.001).
LOX
Chi4
PR3
PR4
PR5
EIN3
TPS-car
ACS
MYC
Treatment
3.65
0.38
3.46
1.65
4.06
3.57
19.41
0.44
2.20
F3,64
*
*
*
*
***
ECM
0.58
1.15
5.51
4.53
0.79
0.92
0.19
0.56
5.42
F1,64
*
*
*
Challenge
49.80
53.30
194.56
156.23
45.56
80.93
6.02
23.45
46.22
F1,64
***
***
***
***
***
***
*
***
***
Treatment:ECM
0.81
2.77
2.56
1.73
1.35
3.53
4.64
2.11
1.74
F3,64
*
*
**
Treatment:Challenge
1.03
0.46
0.30
0.76
0.33
0.83
15.52
2.47
0.18
F3,64
***
ECM:Challenge
0.58
1.29
1.20
0.82
3.44
0.23
3.33
0.17
4.89
F3,64
*
Treatment:ECM:Challenge
1.90
1.03
2.23
0.85
0.13
2.08
2.34
1.20
1.22
F3,64
To further explore the effects of B. cinerea infection on gene expression, pairwise com-
parisons between seedlings from the same seed treatment and ECM status before and
after B. cinerea infection were performed using Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference
(HSD) test. B. cinerea inoculation of control:sterile seedlings up-regulated gene expres-
sion of LOX, PR3, PR4 and EIN3, while infection of control:ECM seedling only upregu-
lated PR3 expression. PR3 and PR4 were also upregulated after infection in MJ:sterile
and PA:sterile. ACS however was down-regulated after infection in PA:sterile. PR3 and
PR4 were also found upregulated after infection in MJ:ECM, PA:ECM, and MIX:ECM.
PA:ECM also showed upregulation of MYC after B. cinerea infection. MYC was upregu-
lated in MIX:ECM after B. cinerea infection compared to MIX:ECM before infection. This
was also true for the genes EIN3 and TPS-car.
To investigate if there was an effect of ECM inoculation in the absence of seed treatment,
control plants in sterile and ECM-inoculated vermiculite were compared before and after
B. cinerea infection. There was no significant effect of ECM status on the expression of
any genes in control plants, either before or after the B. cinerea infection (Figure 3.5, Table
3.2). Conversely, the effect of treatment in the absence of ECM fungi was investigated,
34
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:37==
by comparing plants from treated seeds to plants from control seeds in sterile vermiculite,
before and after fungal inoculation. Again, there were no significant differences in gene
expression among plants from seeds with different treatments, regardless of B. cinerea
infection status (Figure 3.5, Table 3.2).
Then it was investigated whether the incorporation of ECM alters the effect of seed treat-
ment by examining pairs of plants from treated seeds with and without ECM, before and af-
ter B. cinerea infection, separately. A significant increase in the expressions of TPS-CAR
and MYC was observed when comparing MIX:ECM seedlings to MIX:sterile seedlings
after the B. cinerea infection.
Table (3.2)
Compact letter display of Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test on gene
expression. Groups are only comparable column-wise
Treatment
ECM
Challenge
LOX
Chi4
PR3
PR4
PR5
EIN3
TPS-CAR
ACS
MYC
Control
Sterile vermiculite
No challenge
ab
abcd
ab
a
abcd
ab
abc
abc
a
Control
T. terrestris
No challenge
ab
ab
bcde
abc
abc
ab
abc
abc
a
Control
Sterile vermiculite
B. cinerea
d
abcd
f
d
bcd
c
abc
abc
ab
Control
T. terrestris
B. cinerea
abcd
bcd
f
cd
abcd
bc
a
abc
abc
MIX
Sterile vermiculite
No challenge
abcd
ab
abcd
ab
abc
a
abc
bc
ab
MIX
T. terrestris
No challenge
abc
abcd
abcd
abc
abcd
ab
abc
abc
ab
MIX
Sterile vermiculite
B. cinerea
bcd
abcd
cdef
bcd
cd
abc
c
abc
ab
MIX
T. terrestris
B. cinerea
cd
d
f
d
d
c
d
abc
c
MJ
Sterile vermiculite
No challenge
ab
a
a
a
a
ab
c
abc
a
MJ
T. terrestris
No challenge
ab
abc
abc
ab
abc
ab
bc
abc
ab
MJ
Sterile vermiculite
B. cinerea
abcd
abcd
def
bcd
abcd
abc
abc
abc
abc
MJ
T. terrestris
B. cinerea
abcd
abcd
ef
d
abcd
abc
abc
ab
abc
PA
Sterile vermiculite
No challenge
a
abc
abcd
ab
ab
a
bc
c
ab
PA
T. terrestris
No challenge
ab
a
abcd
ab
abc
a
abc
c
a
PA
Sterile vermiculite
B. cinerea
abcd
cd
f
d
cd
bc
abc
a
abc
PA
T. terrestris
B. cinerea
abcd
abcd
ef
d
abcd
abc
ab
abc
bc
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
35
==PAGE:38==
Figure (3.5)
Changes in expression of hormone biosynthesis and defence related genes 24 hours
post-Botrytis cinerea foliar inoculation. Relative gene expressed was shown as log-transformed
2−∆∆CT values relative to the geometric mean of housekeeping genes: Actin, Ubiquitin, and α-
Tubulin. Bars show the average fold-change for 5 biological replicates. ”X” shows individual repli-
cate values. Results from the post-hoc Tukey’s HSD pairwise test can be found in table 3.2.
36
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:39==
4
Discussion
This study has tested the ability of chemical seed treatment and/or inoculation with the
ECM T. terretris to protect Norway spruce against Botrytis cinerea. Additionally, ulterior
effects of these treatments on plant health were evaluated. Furthermore, an assessment
of the limitations of the research methods has identified points where the approach can
be improved for further study. Lastly, the investigation has given rise to interesting new
research questions.
Effects of seed treatment and ECM inoculation on resistance towards B.
cinerea in Norway spruce
The first study objective (i) was to evaluate whether seed treatment with MJ, PA or MIX
induces increased resistance to B. cinerea in Norway spruce seedlings. Unfortunately, the
results from the resistance assay make it difficult to conclude the effects of seed treatment
on seedlings’ resistance. No significant differences in the resistance phenotype were
observed between seedlings from control seeds and seedlings from chemically treated
seeds. However, the large proportion of dead and symptomatic plants in all treatments
could indicate that B. cinerea strain FG48 was a very virulent variant. Populations of B.
cinerea have shown a large variance in virulence (Choquer et al., 2007). Using a strain
with high virulence can result in a loss of distinction between resistance phenotypes, due
to the infection spreading too quickly (Lebeda & Svabova, 2010). Additionally, the spore
load used to inoculate the plants may have been too high. The infection volume in this
study was much higher than what would be found in natural conditions. Given such a
high spore load, the time between infection and phenotyping could have been too long.
Resistance phenotypes between treatments may have been distinguishable at an earlier
time point. But at the time of assessment, all treatments were diseased. This was shown
in a subsequent experiment in the laboratory. Alteration in one or more of these three
factors could result in a more normal distribution of symptoms with a greater amount of
symptomatic seedlings compared to healthy and dead.
In relation to this, the second study objective (ii) concerned itself with how inoculating the
growth medium of Norway spruce seedlings with ECM fungus T. terrestris affects seedling
resistance. Previous studies on Norway spruce have shown ECM communities containing
Tricholoma vaccinum, lead to an increased resistance towards B. cinerea and Heteroba-
sidion annosum (Wagner et al., 2019). Those findings demonstrate the beneficial effects
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
37
==PAGE:40==
of ECM fungus on disease resistance as well as growth benefits. In addition, the study
objective poses the question of whether T. terrestris exhibits synergistic effects with chem-
ical seed treatment on increasing resistance. The phenotype assay showed signs of two
trends, where seed treatment with MJ translates to a larger proportion of healthy seedlings
compared to control seedlings. Additionally, a trend was seen where T. terrestris inocu-
lation of seedlings from control seeds led to a larger proportion of symptomatic seedlings
compared to dead seedlings. However, these trends are not substantiated by the sta-
tistical tests and raises the question of whether an n = 15 was sufficient to deduce any
meaningful conclusions.
Even though the resistance phenotype assay was inconclusive, the effects of B. cinerea
infection on gene expression were observed 24 hours after challenge. A three-way ANOVA
showed a significant increase in the expression of defence genes, when comparing B.
cinerea-infected with mock-challenged plants. This observation indicates the infection
was successful in triggering the expression of plant defence-related genes. When per-
forming a pairwise comparison, the study found indications of T. terrestris increasing the
defence response in a synergistic manner when colonizing seedlings from MIX-treated
seeds. The RT-qPCR assay showed the TPS-car and MYC genes to be significantly
upregulated in B. cinerea infected MIX:ECM seedlings, when compared to B. cinerea in-
fected MIX:sterile seedlings. Zulak et al., 2009 showed an upregulation of TPS-car in
Norway spruce, after exogenous application of MJ to Norway spruce saplings. The study
found TPS-car to be strongly upregulated for up to eight days following application of
MJ before returning to near constitutive levels. In the current study, RT-qPCR sampling
was done eight weeks after chemical seed treatment. This indicates that the significant
changes in TPS-car expression was not due to prolonged upregulation after seed treat-
ment, but instead likely caused by defence priming.
This gives evidence that chemical priming of seeds is a viable alternative to priming of
seedlings or mature trees. Priming at the seed stage has been shown in angiosperm,
where the exogenous application of MJ on seeds of tomato Solanum lycopersicon L. and
rice Oryza sativa L. was proven by (Król et al., 2015) and (Senthil-Nathan, 2019) respec-
tively. Mageroy, Christiansen, et al., 2020 investigated whether treatment with MJ on
48-year-old Norway spruce trees could lead to priming of the terpene biosynthesis path-
way. They found the expression of TPS-car and Chi4 to be upregulated 14 days after
spray application of MJ on Norway spruce. Comparing these results to this study, treat-
ment with MIX:ECM elicited an upregulation of TPS-car. Whereas MJ:ECM and PA:ECM
38
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:41==
did not lead to an upregulation of TPS-car when infected with B. cinerea (Table 3.2). This
could indicate the stimuli from MJ and PA on their own are not sufficient. But together
they’re capable of eliciting upregulation of TPS-car.
The current study did not show a significant change when comparing unchallenged con-
trol:sterile seedlings to control:ecm seedlings. In comparison, a transcriptomic analysis
study on Pinus sylvestris showed that inoculation with ECM fungus Laccaria bicolor led to
down-regulation of general defence genes (Heller et al., 2008). The experimental strategy
of this study was however not suited to investigate this, as no sampling was carried out im-
mediately after ECM inoculation. Therefore it’s proposed to include a sampling point after
T. terrestris inoculation, to deduce whether the inoculation reduces defence responses.
Effects of seed treatment and ECM inoculation on health and development of
Norway spruce
The third study objective (iii) was to investigate how seed treatment with phytohormone
derivatives can affect plant health parameters and seedling development. To address this
objective, the germination rate and morphology were recorded, in addition to measuring
the photosynthetic capacity of the plants. The final germination percentage in MIX treat-
ment was the lowest compared to the other treatments. In addition, the study found detri-
mental effects of MJ and MIX on seedling growth. MJ:sterile/ECM and MIX:sterile/ECM
had significantly shorter stems and total length compared to their control counterparts.
Whereas PA-treated seeds were on par with the control in all the measurements, re-
gardless of T. terrestris inoculation status.
Furthermore, root length was significantly
decreased for MIX:sterile/ECM and MJ:sterile, whereas MJ:ECM had an insignificant
difference compared to control:ECM (Figure 3.3). These findings have been shown in
angiosperms, where MJ led to a decrease in germination degree and height in tomato
Solanum lycopersicon L. when applied at various concentrations. The study used con-
centrations ranging from 100 µM to 1 mM, with 0.4 mM resulting in 60% germination com-
pared to the control exhibiting 90% germination 20 days after sowing (Paudel et al., 2014).
The study found concentrations as low as 0.1 mM of MJ to be sufficient to significantly
reduce the height of the tomato plants (Paudel et al., 2014). Bhavanam and Stout, 2021
showed seed treatment with a higher concentration, 2.5 mM, of MJ in rice Oryza sativa
to significantly reduce both root and shoot length. The findings of the current study stand
in contrast, with the application of 0.5 mM of MJ not eliciting any changes in germination
on Norway spruce. This indicates that although similar, some aspects of phytohormone
regulation is different in angiosperms and gymnosperms. In angiosperms, application of
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
39
==PAGE:42==
low concentrations of exogenous SA promoted seed germination under drought stress,
whereas application of JA exhibits inhibitory effects on seed germination under normal
conditions (Kunpratum et al., 2023; Paudel et al., 2014), in the same manner SA inhibits
germination under normal conditions (El-Mergawi & Abd El-Wahed, 2020). In the current
study, the MIX-treatment led to a significantly lower germination rate. This result could
indicate that JA and SA have a synergistic effect in spruce seedlings. This synergistic
effect has been shown to occur in angiosperms under normal conditions (El-Mergawi &
Abd El-Wahed, 2020).
With regards to photosynthesis capacity, the current study found seed treatment with
PA:sterile/ECM or MIX:sterile/ECM to increase the concentration of chlorophyll A com-
pared to the control, regardless of T. terrestris inoculation status. PA:ECM showed a sig-
nificant increase in the concentration of chlorophyll B, compared to control:sterile. Neither
treatment nor inoculation with T. terrestris led to a significant change in the concentration
of total carotenoids. These findings make a compelling case for treating seeds with PA
and T. terrestris if the main objective is to increase photosynthesis capacity since this
combination yields elevated levels of chlorophyll A and B. Similarly Yildirim et al., 2008
showed a significant increase of total chlorophyll in cucumber Cucumis sativus when fo-
liar application of 0.5 mM SA was applied under normal stress-free conditions. These
findings underline some of the similarities of PA and SA pathways in angiosperms and
gymnosperms. Gould et al., 2008; Jung, 2004 found detrimental effects of MJ on chloro-
phyll content in Arabidopsis thaliana and transient effects in Pinus radiata respectively.
The findings of the current study did not show any significant detrimental effects caused
by MJ, but instead showed MIX:sterile treated plants to exhibit increased levels of chloro-
phyll A compared to control:sterile. This indicates PA was capable of increasing chloro-
phyll levels in the seedlings, but MJ exhibits antagonistic effects, leading to insignificant
results. With regards to an indication of crosstalk, trends were observed in the chloro-
phyll assay. Figure 3.2 shows that seedlings treated with MIX have a mean concentration
of chlorophyll A and B, situated between that of MJ and PA-treated seedlings. A similar
trend was also seen in stem length, root length and total length. Curiously, when inocu-
lated with ECM fungus, MIX-treated seeds had a significantly shorter length compared to
PA-treated seeds inoculated with ECM fungus. Whereas MIX:sterile and PA:sterile had
an insignificant difference in root length.
The fourth study objective (iv) focused on whether inoculation with T. terrestris alleviates
any potential negative effects on plant health and germination, caused by the seed treat-
40
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:43==
ment. Since ectomycorrhizal fungi are known to increase the growth of plants through
an increase of photosynthetic activity (Huey et al., 2020). Although seed treatment with
MJ or MIX confers negative effects on plant growth, inoculation with T. terrestris partially
negates the negative effects seen in MJ-treated seedlings. Thus MJ:ECM did not show
significantly reduced growth compared to control seedlings inoculated with T. terrestris.
These findings show that seed treatment with MJ or MIX has a significant negative effect
on seedling growth in the absence of T. terrestris. This was also shown in Regvar and
Gogala, 1996. They tested if inoculation of Norway spruce with ECM fungi Pisolithus tinc-
torius combined with exogenous application of 5.0 µM of JA directly onto the roots would
elicit any change. They found an increase in the length of lateral roots when 5.0 µM of
JA was applied on P. tinctorius inoculated seedlings. Whereas in the absence of P. tinc-
torius, application of the JA significantly decreased the length of lateral and main roots.
This highlights how inoculation with ECM fungi alongside chemical treatment can lead to
different changes in host morphology, compared to chemical treatment or inoculation with
ECM on its own.
Studies on other gymnosperms have shown inoculation with T. terrestris to significantly
increase the shoot length of Pinus pringlei in addition to increasing the amount of mycor-
rhizal roots and total roots was observed (López-Gutiérrez et al., 2018b). Another study
investigated the effect of T. terrestris inoculation of Pinus pinaster, and how fertilization
affects plant growth. The growth medium was non-sterilised forest soil, which mimics that
of an out-planted seedling. The study found that T. terrestris significantly increased the
biomass of seedlings when seedlings were fertilized. The control group did not gain a
significant increase despite being fertilized, further underlining the importance of nutrient
uptake facilitated by ECM fungi (Sousa et al., 2012). With regards to the choice of growth
medium for the current study, vermiculite contains similar levels of micro-nutrients com-
pared to that of soil. In addition, the water-holding capacity of vermiculite is excellent,
allowing for less frequent watering, bearing the risk of introducing contaminants (Chatzis-
tathis et al., 2021). The seedlings in the current study did not gain any statistically signif-
icant benefits in growth from being solely inoculated with T. terrestris. However, a trend
was seen in the resistance phenotype assay, indicating an increase in resistance towards
B. cinerea. Wagner et al., 2019 showed co-inoculation of Tricholoma vaccinum isolated
from the rhizosphere of a spruce tree, to reduce growth of B. cinerea in vitro. These find-
ings do not allow for a conclusive remark to be made, but warrant further exploration of
the topic, to increase the knowledge of ECM inoculation on Norway spruce as a means
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
41
==PAGE:44==
of increasing resistance.
Consideration of alternative approaches
Alternative approaches to phytohormone seed treatment to increase seedling resistance
to B. cinerea infections in nurseries were considered by exploring literature on the subject
of resistance priming. According to the literature on abiotic stimuli for resistance priming,
nutrient starvation and heat shock have led to priming of inducible defences (Pajerowska-
Mukhtar et al., 2012). A study has shown Fe deficiency-induced resistance in Arabidopsis
thaliana, which leads to increased resistance towards necrotrophic and hemi-biotrophic
phytopathogens, such as Pseudomonas syringae. A potential concern from nurseries
with regards to nutrient starvation is the impact on growth, which was not considered in
the study (Trapet et al., 2021).
Defence priming by heat shock has been tested in angiosperms. Exposing tomato Solanum
lycopersicum seedlings to 45ºC for 2 minutes yielded an increase in PR genes and con-
ferred increased resistance towards Pseudomonas syringae (Arofatullah et al., 2019).
The main function of Heat Shock Proteins 70 (HSP-70s) is facilitating the correct folding
of proteins through the consumption of ATP under stress-inducing conditions. HSP-70s
are highly conserved across species and have been described to great extent in animals
compared to plants. A literature review on HSP-70 in plants and its post-translational
and post-transcriptional regulation has highlighted its potential as a defence regulator.
An upregulation in the expression of HSP-70s in Arabidopsis thaliana has been observed
when challenged with biotic stressors (Berka et al., 2022). Furthermore, a review of tran-
scriptomic differences highlighted elevated levels of HSP-70s in a (Solanum spp.) tomato
strain resistant towards hemi-biotroph Phytophthora parasitica compared to a suscepti-
ble wildtype (Naveed & Ali, 2018). However, the knowledge of HSP70’s role in disease
resistance in Norway spruce (Picea abies) is limited.
Solely using ECM fungi to confer induced resistance and elicit priming is a possible strat-
egy. However, the addition of mycorrhizal helper bacteria, such as Bacillus pumilus, has
been shown to decrease the disease incidence of Pinus thunbergii challenged with fun-
gal phytopathogen Sphaeropsis sapinea. When inoculated with Hymenochaete spp. the
disease incidence was at 90%, however a co-inoculation with B. pumilus led to a 30%
disease incidence rate. The study showed a priming response of PR3 compared to the
control, with significant upregulation after 6 hours and 24 hours, compared to the signif-
icant upregulation of the control which occurred after 48 hours of S. sapinea inoculation
(Y. H. Wang et al., 2022). The approach of using ECM togeher with beneficial rhizobac-
42
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:45==
teria is a promising method for increasing resistance towards fungal infections. However,
the intricacy of reliably establishing an ECM community has also been the focus of other
studies. Himanen et al., 2023 showed the importance of growing medium and the some-
times transient growth effect of using ECM fungi. Nevertheless, a combination of ECM
fungi, helper bacterium and potentially chemical seed treatment could pave the way for
greatly reducing pesticide usage in nurseries and lead to better performance in plants
when out-planted.
Limitations of methods
The time frame of the experiments has to the best of the author’s knowledge not been
tried before. As a result, the findings have shown the feasibility of investigating certain
aspects of plant health and resistance against B. cinerea. This shortened time frame how-
ever imposes limitations, with regards to establishing colonization of the roots. Since the
development of lateral roots is instrumental for colonization (Duffy & Cassells, 2004). Cer-
tain limitations became evident throughout the study, mainly the ability to confidently state
the presence and degree of Thelephora terrestris in the fine root hairs of the seedlings.
In an effort to semi-quantify the amount of T. terrestris on the seedlings, four primer pairs
were designed and tested. Of which two showed promising results when being run on ge-
netic material extracted from homogenized T. terrestris using the DNA extraction method
described. The primers were tested against a seedling without any ECM, and against
Amphinema spp.. Following the semi-quantitative PCR and gel electrophoresis, both
pairs did not show any bands in the wells containing Amphinema spp. or the seedling.
However, when testing seedlings from the experimental cohort, the gel showed multi-
ple bands for some and single bands for others as seen in appendix A Figure A.2. A
common strong band was present in the majority of the wells. However, the identity of
this band is unknown. A revision of the sampling method is proposed, using only the
root part of the seedling, compared to the entire seedling. Furthermore, the specificity of
the primer pair should be reassessed. A potential tool to help increase the certainty of
colonisation would be the usage of microscopy to assess the presence of fine root hairs,
and whether T. terrestris was detectable around the roots (Sakakibara et al., 2002). To
better detect T. terrestris on the roots, the implementation of fluorescence is proposed.
Kemppainen and Pardo, 2021 showed the possibility of establishing fluorescence in the
ECM fungus Laccaria bicolor. Combined with microscopy, this approach would allow re-
searchers to quickly establish whether roots had been colonized by T. terrestris. Another
area of improvement would be the usage of a complete ECM community, comprised of
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
43
==PAGE:46==
helper bacterium and more than one ECM fungi. Since naturally occurring ECM colonies
are seldom mono-cultures (Korkama et al., 2006). By increasing the amount of variables
concerning the ECM community, the study should solely focus on one phytohormone,
to retain a realistic amount of samples. Since this study struggled with the power of as-
serting conclusive remarks. Furthermore Korkama et al., 2006 finds that Norway spruce
clones have different community compositions, and exhibit growth differences as a result
thereof. This indicates an issue of reliably establishing the same community across sev-
eral seedlings, even if clonal seedlings are used. They found growth differences within
similar communities as well, hinting at the differential effects shown by ECM communities
within the same host species (Korkama et al., 2006).
With regards to the phenotyping of seedlings, following infection with B. cinerea, it be-
came evident the power of the sampling size was insufficient to deduce any statistically
significant results. A study has shown that eight days after B. cinerea inoculation, more
than 80% of needles were discoloured and showed signs of infection when inoculating
1-month-old seedlings. Whereas for 3-month-old seedlings, only 20% of needles are dis-
eased eight days after inoculation (Petäistö et al., 2004). Therefore, it’s stipulated that a
decreased spore concentration or older seedlings would lead to a greater survival rate.
However, the increase in resistance by using older seedlings may obfuscate the effect of
seed treatment (Petäistö et al., 2004).
The method used for determining chlorophyll concentration proved difficult. As samples
had to be kept on ice and in the dark. The liquid nitrogen increased the brittleness of
the Eppendorf tubes, and the subsequent ball mill treatment introduced fractions and
exploded some of the tubes. This led to leakage of the 80% acetone, which in return
dissolved the markings on the tubes. Furthermore, the holder for the ball mill rubbed
off markings as well. Therefore it’s proposed to use smaller steel balls and increase
the reinforcement of the Eppendorf tube lid. As well as using markings resistant to 80%
acetone and rubbing. To combat light degradation, the use of opaque tubes is proposed.
Another point of improvement would be sampling needles only, as stem length differs
greatly and impacts the chlorophyll content. By decreasing the volume of 80% acetone,
the absorbance could be kept within the resolution of the spectrophotometer (Major &
Mosseler, 2021).
44
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusion
Enhancing Norway spruce’s resistance towards fungicide-resistant Botrytis cinerea by de-
fence priming is an appealing solution to the increasingly problematic use of fungicides.
This study identified both beneficial and detrimental aspects of phytohormone seed treat-
ment. Some of these negative effects of seed treatment were alleviated by inoculation
with ECM T. terrestris. Additionally, the study observed a trend, indicating that the inoc-
ulation of control seedlings with T. terrestris also had beneficial effects.
While this study has shown promising results, further work is needed to substantiate
claims regarding phytohormone seed treatment and ECM inoculation, before implement-
ing the findings in forest nurseries. A revision of the experimental methods has been
proposed. These revisions include focusing on improving the method of verifying the
presence of T. terrestris. Additionally, the inoculation with ECM should be done at a later
time point, since a low degree of lateral roots was observed in this study. Furthermore,
an increase in sample size for the resistance assay and RT-qPCR would increase the
statistical power of the study.
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
45
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
Almeida, J. P., Menichetti, L., Ekblad, A., Rosenstock, N. P., & Wallander, H. (2023). Phos-
phorus regulates ectomycorrhizal fungi biomass production in a norway spruce
forest. Biogeosciences, 20(7), 1443–1458. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-20-1443-
2023
Ángeles-Argáiz, R. E., Flores-García, A., Ulloa, M., & Garibay-Orijel, R. (2016). Com-
mercial sphagnum peat moss is a vector for exotic ectomycorrhizal mushrooms.
Biological Invasions, 18(1), 89–101. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10530-015-0992-2
Arnerup, J., Lind, M., Olson, K., Stenlid, J., Elfstrand, M., & Näsholm, T. (2011). The
pathogenic white-rot fungus heterobasidion parviporum triggers non-specific de-
fence responses in the bark of norway spruce. Tree Physiology, 31(11), 1262–
1272. https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/tpr113
Arofatullah, N. A., Hasegawa, M., Tanabata, S., Ogiwara, I., & Sato, T. (2019). Heat shock-
induced resistance against pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (okabe) young et
al. via heat shock transcription factors in tomato. Agronomy, 9(1), 2. https://doi.
org/10.3390/agronomy9010002
Beckers, G. J., Jaskiewicz, M., Liu, Y., Underwood, W. R., He, S. Y., Zhang, S., & Conrath,
U. (2009). Mitogen-activated protein kinases 3 and 6 are required for full priming
of stress responses in arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell, 21(3), 944–953. https://
doi.org/10.1105/tpc.108.062158
Berka, M., Kopecká, R., Berková, V., Brzobohatý, B., & Černý, M. (2022). Regulation of
heat shock proteins 70 and their role in plant immunity (R. Hancock, Ed.). Journal
of Experimental Botany, 73(7), 1894–1909. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erab549
Bhavanam, S., & Stout, M. (2021). Seed treatment with jasmonic acid and methyl jas-
monate induces resistance to insects but reduces plant growth and yield in rice,
oryza sativa. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12, 691768. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.
2021.691768
Bi, K., Liang, Y., Mengiste, T., & Sharon, A. (2023). Killing softly: A roadmap of botrytis
cinerea pathogenicity. Trends in Plant Science, 28(2), 211–222. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tplants.2022.08.024
Borrelli, V., Lanubile, A., & Marocco, A. (2021). Chapter 1, plant hormones and plant de-
fense response against pathogens. Hormones and Plant Response, 1–28. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-77477-6_1
Boughton, A. J., Hoover, K., & Felton, G. W. (2005). Methyl jasmonate application induces
increased densities of glandular trichomes on tomato, lycopersicon esculentum.
Journal of Chemical Ecology, 31(9), 2211–2216. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10886-
005-6228-7
Caudullo, G., Tinner, W., & de Rigo, D. (2016, March). Picea abies in europe: Distribution,
habitat, usage and threats.
Celedon, J. M., Whitehill, J. G., Madilao, L. L., & Bohlmann, J. (2020). Gymnosperm glan-
dular trichomes: Expanded dimensions of the conifer terpenoid defense system.
Scientific Reports, 10(1), 12464. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-69373-5
Chatzistathis, T., Papaioannou, E., Giannakoula, A., & Papadakis, I. E. (2021). Zeolite
and vermiculite as inorganic soil amendments modify shoot-root allocation, min-
eral nutrition, photosystem ii activity and gas exchange parameters of chestnut
(castanea sativa mill) plants. Agronomy, 11(1), 109. https://doi.org/10.3390/
agronomy11010109
46
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:49==
Cheung, N., Tian, L., Liu, X., & Li, X. (2020). The destructive fungal pathogen botrytis
cinerea—insights from genes studied with mutant analysis. Pathogens, 9(11), 1–
46. https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens9110923
Choquer, M., Fournier, E., Kunz, C., Levis, C., Pradier, J. M., Simon, A., & Viaud, M.
(2007). Botrytis cinerea virulence factors: New insights into a necrotrophic and
polyphageous pathogen. Fems Microbiology Letters, 277(1), 1–10. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2007.00930.x
Christensen, R. H. B. (2022). Ordinal—regression models for ordinal data [R package
version 2022.11-16. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=ordinal].
Ding, P., Rekhter, D., Ding, Y., Feussner, K., Busta, L., Haroth, S., Xu, S., Li, X., Jetter, R.,
Feussner, I., & Zhang, Y. (2016). Characterization of a pipecolic acid biosynthesis
pathway required for systemic acquired resistance. Plant Cell, 28(10), 2603–2615.
https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.16.00486
Duffy, E., & Cassells, A. (2004). Root development | mycorrhizae. Encyclopedia of Applied
Plant Sciences, 1107–1115. https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-227050-9/00043-0
El-Mergawi, R. A., & Abd El-Wahed, M. S. A. (2020). Effect of exogenous salicylic acid or
indole acetic acid on their endogenous levels, germination, and growth in maize.
Bulletin of the National Research Centre, 44(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s42269-
020-00416-7
Fäldt, J., Martin, D., Miller, B., Rawat, S., & Bohlmann, J. (2003). Traumatic resin defense
in norway spruce (picea abies): Methyl jasmonate-induced terpene synthase gene
expression, and cdna cloning and functional characterization of (+)-3-carene syn-
thase. Plant Molecular Biology, 51(1), 119–133. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A :
1020714403780
Fløistad, I. S., Hylen, G., Hanssen, K. H., & Granhus, A. (2018). Germination and seedling
establishment of norway spruce (picea abies) after clear-cutting is affected by tim-
ing of soil scarification. New Forests, 49(2), 231–247. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11056-017-9616-2
Flykt, E., Timonen, S., & Pennanen, T. (2008). Variation of ectomycorrhizal colonisation
in norway spruce seedlings in finnish forest nurseries. Silva Fennica, 42(4), 571–
585. https://doi.org/10.14214/sf.234
Fox, J., & Weisberg, S. (2019). An R companion to applied regression (Third). Sage.
https://socialsciences.mcmaster.ca/jfox/Books/Companion/
Franceschi, V. R., Krokene, P., Krekling, T., & Christiansen, E. (2000). Phloem parenchyma
cells are involved in local and distant defense responses to fungal inoculation
or bark-beetle attack in norway spruce (pinaceae). American Journal of Botany,
87(3), 314–26.
Glazebrook, J. (2005). Contrasting mechanisms of defense against biotrophic and necrotrophic
pathogens. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 43(1), 205–227. https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev.phyto.43.040204.135923
Gould, N., Reglinski, T., Spiers, M., & Taylor, J. T. (2008). Physiological trade-offs as-
sociated with methyl jasmonate - induced resistance in pinus radiata. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research, 38(4), 677–684. https://doi.org/10.1139/X07-193
Haahr, M. (1998). RANDOM.ORG: True Random Number Service.
Heller, G., Adomas, A., Li, G., Osborne, J., Van Zyl, L., Sederoff, R., Finlay, R. D., Sten-
lid, J., & Asiegbu, F. O. (2008). Transcriptional analysis of pinus sylvestris roots
challenged with the ectomycorrhizal fungus laccaria bicolor. Bmc Plant Biology,
8(1), 19. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2229-8-19
Hietala, A. M., Kvaalen, H., Schmidt, A., Jøhnk, N., Solheim, H., & Fossdal, C. G. (2004).
Temporal and spatial profiles of chitinase expression by norway spruce in re-
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
47
==PAGE:50==
sponse to bark colonization by heterobasidion annosum. Applied and Environ-
mental Microbiology, 70(7), 3948–3953. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.70.7.3948-
3953.2004
Himanen, K., Nygren, M., & Pennanen, T. (2023). Mycelial inoculation of containerized
norway spruce seedlings with ectomycorrhizal fungi. New Forests. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11056-023-09964-y
Hlásný, T., Krokene, P., Liebhold, A., Montagné-Huck, C., Müller, J., Qin, H., Raffa, K.,
Schelhaas, M.-J., Seidl, R., Svoboda, M., & Viiri, H. (2019). Living with bark bee-
tles: Impacts, outlook and management options (Vol. 8). European Forest Institute.
https://doi.org/10.36333/fs08
Hobbie, E. A. (2006). Carbon allocation to ectomycorrhizal fungi correlates with below-
ground allocation in culture studies. Ecology, 87(3), 563–569. https://doi.org/10.
1890/05-0755
Hope, R. M. (2022). Rmisc: Ryan miscellaneous [R package version 1.5.1]. https://CRAN.
R-project.org/package=Rmisc
Hothorn, T., Bretz, F., & Westfall, P. (2008). Simultaneous inference in general parametric
models. Biometrical Journal, 50(3), 346–363.
Huang, W., Wang, Y., Li, X., & Zhang, Y. (2020). Biosynthesis and regulation of salicylic
acid and n-hydroxypipecolic acid in plant immunity. Molecular Plant, 13(1), 31–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2019.12.008
Huey, C. J., Gopinath, S. C., Uda, M. N., Zulhaimi, H. I., Jaafar, M. N., Kasim, F. H.,
& Yaakub, A. R. W. (2020). Mycorrhiza: A natural resource assists plant growth
under varied soil conditions. 3 Biotech, 10(5), 204. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-
020-02188-3
HydroGarden Ltd. (2023). Plant!t - Vermiculite product page [Accessed: 24/10/2023].
Iqbal, N., Khan, N. A., Ferrante, A., Trivellini, A., Francini, A., & Khan, M. I. (2017). Ethy-
lene role in plant growth, development and senescence: Interaction with other
phytohormones. Frontiers in Plant Science, 8, 475. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.
2017.00475
Jung, S. (2004). Effect of chlorophyll reduction in arabidopsis thaliana by methyl jas-
monate or norflurazon on antioxidant systems. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry,
42(3), 225–231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2004.01.001
Kazan, K., & Manners, J. M. (2013). Myc2: The master in action. Molecular Plant, 6(3),
686–703. https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/sss128
Kemppainen, M., & Pardo, A. (2021). Nucleus-directed fluorescent reporter system for
promoter studies in the ectomycorrhizal fungus laccaria bicolor. Journal of Micro-
biological Methods, 190, 106341. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mimet.
2021.106341
Korkama, T., Pakkanen, A., & Pennanen, T. (2006). Ectomycorrhizal community structure
varies among norway spruce (picea abies) clones. New Phytologist, 171(4), 815–
824. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2006.01786.x
Krokene, P. (2015). Conifer defense and resistance to bark beetles. Bark Beetles: Biology
and Ecology of Native and Invasive Species, 177–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-417156-5.00005-8
Król, P., Igielski, R., Pollmann, S., & Kepczyńska, E. (2015). Priming of seeds with methyl
jasmonate induced resistance to hemi-biotroph fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycoper-
sici in tomato via 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid, salicylic acid, and flavonol accumula-
tion. Journal of Plant Physiology, 179, 122–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.
2015.01.018
48
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:51==
Kunpratum, N., Phalawat, C., Thoradit, T., Kamoltheptawin, K., Thongyoo, K., Khiaokhoen,
P., Tunprasert, L., Jiajitsawat, S., & Pooam, M. (2023). Effect of salicylic acid on
germination and seedling growth of khaorai leum pua petchabun (oryza sativa l.)
under combined drought stress. Plant Physiology Reports, 1–14. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40502-023-00771-3
Lebeda, A., & Svabova, L. (2010). In vitro screening methods for assessing plant disease
resistance. IAEA. http://www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/TDL-
001_web.pdf%20LK%20- %20http://www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/
publications.asp%20http://inis.iaea.org/search/search.aspx?orig_q=RN:42079620
Lefevere, H., Bauters, L., & Gheysen, G. (2020). Salicylic acid biosynthesis in plants.
Frontiers in Plant Science, 11, 338. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.00338
Lenth, R. V. (2023). Emmeans: Estimated marginal means, aka least-squares means [R
package version 1.8.9]. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=emmeans
Li, D., Liu, R., Singh, D., Yuan, X., Kachroo, P., & Raina, R. (2020). Jmj14 encoded h3k4
demethylase modulates immune responses by regulating defence gene expres-
sion and pipecolic acid levels. New Phytologist, 225(5), 2108–2121. https://doi.
org/10.1111/nph.16270
Liu, J., Zhang, P., Zhao, Y., & Zhang, H. (2019). Low dose carbendazim disrupts mouse
spermatogenesis might be through estrogen receptor related histone and dna
methylation. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 176, 242–249. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.03.103
Liu, Y., Liu, L., Asiegbu, F. O., Yang, C., Han, S., Yang, S., Zeng, Q., & Liu, Y. (2021).
Molecular identification and antifungal properties of four thaumatin-like proteins
in spruce (picea likiangensis). Forests, 12(9), 1268. https://doi.org/10.3390/
f12091268
López-Gutiérrez, A., Pérez-Moreno, J., Hernándezsantiago, F., Uscanga-Mortera, E., García-
Esteva, A., Cetina-Alcalá, V. M., Del Rosario Cardoso-Villanueva, M., & Xoconostle-
Cázares, B. (2018a). Nutrient mobilization, growth and field survival of pinus pringlei
inoculated with three ectomycorrhizal mushrooms. Botanical Sciences, 96(2), 286–
304. https://doi.org/10.17129/BOTSCI.1239
López-Gutiérrez, A., Pérez-Moreno, J., Hernándezsantiago, F., Uscanga-Mortera, E., García-
Esteva, A., Cetina-Alcalá, V. M., Del Rosario Cardoso-Villanueva, M., & Xoconostle-
Cázares, B. (2018b). Nutrient mobilization, growth and field survival of pinus pringlei
inoculated with three ectomycorrhizal mushrooms. Botanical Sciences, 96(2), 286–
304. https://doi.org/10.17129/BOTSCI.1239
Mageroy, M. H., Christiansen, E., Långström, B., Borg-Karlson, A. K., Solheim, H., Björk-
lund, N., Zhao, T., Schmidt, A., Fossdal, C. G., & Krokene, P. (2020). Priming of
inducible defenses protects norway spruce against tree-killing bark beetles. Plant
Cell and Environment, 43(2), 420–430. https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.13661
Mageroy, M. H., Wilkinson, S. W., Tengs, T., Cross, H., Almvik, M., Pétriacq, P., Vivian-
Smith, A., Zhao, T., Fossdal, C. G., & Krokene, P. (2020). Molecular underpinnings
of methyl jasmonate-induced resistance in norway spruce. Plant Cell and Environ-
ment, 43(8), 1827–1843. https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.13774
Major, J. E., & Mosseler, A. (2021). Chlorophyll pigment and needle macronutrient re-
sponses and interactions to soil moisture and atmospheric co2 treatments of eight
pine and spruce species. Trees - Structure and Function, 35(6), 2069–2085. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00468-021-02173-0
Martin, F., Duplessis, S., Ditengou, F., Lagrange, H., Voiblet, C., & Lapeyrie, F. (2001). De-
velopmental cross talking in the ectomycorrhizal symbiosis: Signals and commu-
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
49
==PAGE:52==
nication genes. New Phytologist, 151(1), 145–154. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-
8137.2001.00169.x
Mauch-Mani, B., Baccelli, I., Luna, E., & Flors, V. (2017). Defense priming: An adaptive
part of induced resistance (S. Merchant, Ed.). Annual Review of Plant Biology,
68(1), 485–512. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-arplant-042916-041132
Miyamoto, Y., Maximov, T. C., Bryanin, S. V., Kononov, A., & Sugimoto, A. (2022). Host
phylogeny is the primary determinant of ectomycorrhizal fungal community com-
position in the permafrost ecosystem of eastern siberia at a regional scale. Fungal
Ecology, 55, 101117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.funeco.2021.101117
Mondal, S., Halder, S. K., & Mondal, K. C. (2022). Revisiting soil-plant-microbes interac-
tions: Key factors for soil health and productivity. Trends of Applied Microbiology
for Sustainable Economy, 125–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-91595-
3.00022-7
Návarová, H., Bernsdorff, F., Döring, A. C., & Zeier, J. (2013). Pipecolic acid, an en-
dogenous mediator of defense amplification and priming, is a critical regulator of
inducible plant immunity. Plant Cell, 24(12), 5123–5141. https://doi.org/10.1105/
tpc.112.103564
Naveed, Z. A., & Ali, G. S. (2018). Comparative transcriptome analysis between a resistant
and a susceptible wild tomato accession in response to phytophthora parasitica.
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 19(12), 3735. https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijms19123735
Nielsen, K. A. G., Skårn, M. N., Talgø, V., Pettersson, M., Fløistad, I. S., Strømeng, G. M.,
Brurberg, M. B., & Stensvand, A. (2023). Fungicide-resistant botrytis in forest nurs-
eries may impact disease control in norway spruce. Plant Disease. https://doi.
org/10.1094/PDIS-01-23-0037-RE
Pajerowska-Mukhtar, K. M., Wang, W., Tada, Y., Oka, N., Tucker, C. L., Fonseca, J. P., &
Dong, X. (2012). The hsf-like transcription factor tbf1 is a major molecular switch
for plant growth-to-defense transition. Current Biology, 22(2), 103–112. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.12.015
Pattyn, J., Vaughan-Hirsch, J., & Van de Poel, B. (2021). The regulation of ethylene
biosynthesis: A complex multilevel control circuitry. New Phytologist, 229(2), 770–
782. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.16873
Paudel, S., Rajotte, E. G., & Felton, G. W. (2014). Benefits and costs of tomato seed
treatment with plant defense elicitors for insect resistance. Arthropod-plant Inter-
actions, 8(6), 539–545. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11829-014-9335-y
Pedersen, T. L. (2023). Patchwork: The composer of plots [https://patchwork.data-imaginist.com,
https://github.com/thomasp85/patchwork].
Petäistö, R. L., Heiskanen, J., & Pulkkinen, A. (2004). Susceptibility of norway spruce
seedlings to grey mould in the greenhouse during the first growing season. Scan-
dinavian Journal of Forest Research, 19(1), 30–37. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02827580310019581
Poteri, M., Kasanen, R., & Asiegbu, F. O. (2021). Mycobiome of forest tree nurseries.
Forest Microbiology: Volume 1: Tree Microbiome: Phyllosphere, Endosphere and
Rhizosphere, 305–325. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822542-4.00005-X
R Core Team. (2023a). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/
R Core Team. (2023b). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/
Ralph, S. G., Hudgins, J. W., Jancsik, S., Franceschi, V. R., & Bohlmann, J. (2007a).
Aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid synthase is a regulated step in ethylene-dependent
50
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:53==
induced conifer defense. full-length cdna cloning of a multigene family, differential
constitutive, and wound- and insect-induced expression, and cellular and subcel-
lular localization in spruce and douglas fir. Plant Physiology, 143(1), 410–424.
https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.106.089425
Ralph, S. G., Hudgins, J. W., Jancsik, S., Franceschi, V. R., & Bohlmann, J. (2007b).
Aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid synthase is a regulated step in ethylene-dependent
induced conifer defense. full-length cdna cloning of a multigene family, differential
constitutive, and wound- and insect-induced expression, and cellular and subcel-
lular localization in spruce and douglas fir. Plant Physiology, 143(1), 410–424.
https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.106.089425
Regvar, M., & Gogala, N. (1996). Changes in root growth patterns of (picea abies) spruce
roots by inoculation with an ectomycorrhizal funguspisolithus tinctorius and jas-
monic acid treatment. Trees, 10(6), 410–414. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02185645
Sakakibara, S. M., Jones, M. D., Gillespie, M., Hagerman, S. M., Forrest, M. E., Simard,
S. W., & Durall, D. M. (2002). A comparison of ectomycorrhiza identification based
on morphotyping and pcr-rflp analysis. Mycological Research, 106(8), 868–878.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0953756202006263
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch,
S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., Tinevez, J. Y., White, D. J., Hartenstein,
V., Eliceiri, K., Tomancak, P., & Cardona, A. (2012). Fiji: An open-source platform
for biological-image analysis. Nature Methods, 9(7), 676–682. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nmeth.2019
Schiop, S. T., Al Hassan, M., Sestras, A. F., Boscaiu, M., Sestras, R. E., & Vicente, O.
(2017). Biochemical responses to drought, at the seedling stage, of several ro-
manian carpathian populations of norway spruce (picea abies l. karst). Trees -
Structure and Function, 31(5), 1479–1490. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00468-017-
1563-1
Schmidt, A., & Gershenzon, J. (2007). Cloning and characterization of isoprenyl diphos-
phate synthases with farnesyl diphosphate and geranylgeranyl diphosphate syn-
thase activity from norway spruce (picea abies) and their relation to induced ole-
oresin formation. Phytochemistry, 68(21), 2649–2659. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
phytochem.2007.05.037
Senthil-Nathan, S. (2019). Effect of methyl jasmonate (meja)-induced defenses in rice
against the rice leaffolder cnaphalocrocis medinalis (guenèe) (lepidoptera: Pyrali-
dae). Pest Management Science, 75(2), 460–465. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.5139
Simard, S. W., & Durall, D. M. (2004). Mycorrhizal networks: A review of their extent,
function, and importance. Canadian Journal of Botany, 82(8), 1140–1165. https:
//doi.org/10.1139/B04-116
Skogførverket. (2022). FRØPLANTASJE NR. 1107 KILEN [Accessed: 24/10/2023].
Smith, S. E., Read, D., Smith, S., & Read, D. (2008). Mycorrhizal symbiosis third edition
introduction. Mycorrhizal Symbiosis, 3rd Edition, 1–9.
Solvin, T., & Fløistad, I. S. (2023). Statistics: Forest seeds and plants in the nordic region
2023. (2023:02). https://doi.org/10.53780/QOUB7866
Sousa, N. R., Franco, A. R., Oliveira, R. S., & Castro, P. M. (2012). Ectomycorrhizal fungi
as an alternative to the use of chemical fertilisers in nursery production of pinus
pinaster. Journal of Environmental Management, 95(Suppl. S), S269–S274. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.07.016
Stein, E., Molitor, A., Kogel, K. H., & Waller, F. (2008). Systemic resistance in arabidopsis
conferred by the mycorrhizal fungus piriformospora indica requires jasmonic acid
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
51
==PAGE:54==
signaling and the cytoplasmic function of npr1. Plant and Cell Physiology, 49(11),
1747–1751. https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcn147
Sun, H., Liu, S., Chen, K., & Li, G. (2021). Spectrophotometric determination of chloro-
phylls in different solvents related to the leaf traits of the main tree species in
northeast china. Iop Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 836(1),
012008. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/836/1/012008
Trapet, P. L., Verbon, E. H., Bosma, R. R., Voordendag, K., Van Pelt, J. A., & Pieterse,
C. M. (2021). Mechanisms underlying iron deficiency-induced resistance against
pathogens with different lifestyles (J. Balk, Ed.). Journal of Experimental Botany,
72(6), 2231–2241. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/eraa535
Vaario, L. M., Tervonen, A., Haukioja, K., Haukioja, M., Pennanen, T., & Timonen, S.
(2009). The effect of nursery substrate and fertilization on the growth and ectomyc-
orrhizal status of containerized and outplanted seedlings of picea abies. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research, 39(1), 64–75. https://doi.org/10.1139/X08-156
van Loon, L., Rep, M., & Pieterse, C. (2006). Significance of inducible defense-related
proteins in infected plants. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 44, 135–162. https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev.phyto.44.070505.143425
Vázquez-González, C., Sampedro, L., López-Goldar, X., Solla, A., Vivas, M., Rozas, V.,
Josefa Lombardero, M., & Zas, R. (2022). Inducibility of chemical defences by
exogenous application of methyl jasmonate is long-lasting and conserved among
populations in mature pinus pinaster trees. Forest Ecology and Management, 518,
120280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2022.120280
Velmala, S. M., Rajala, T., Haapanen, M., Taylor, A. F., & Pennanen, T. (2013). Genetic
host-tree effects on the ectomycorrhizal community and root characteristics of nor-
way spruce. Mycorrhiza, 23(1), 21–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-012-0446-y
Velmala, S. M., Rajala, T., Heinonsalo, J., Taylor, A. F., & Pennanen, T. (2014). Profiling
functions of ectomycorrhizal diversity and root structuring in seedlings of norway
spruce (picea abies) with fast- and slow-growing phenotypes. New Phytologist,
201(2), 610–622. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.12542
Wagner, K., Krause, K., Gallegos-Monterrosa, R., Sammer, D., Kovács, Á. T., & Kothe, E.
(2019). The ectomycorrhizospheric habitat of norway spruce and tricholoma vac-
cinum: Promotion of plant growth and fitness by a rich microorganismic commu-
nity. Frontiers in Microbiology, 10, 307. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.00307
Wang, X., Devaiah, S. P., Zhang, W., & Welti, R. (2006). Signaling functions of phospha-
tidic acid. Progress in Lipid Research, 45(3), 250–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
plipres.2006.01.005
Wang, Y. H., Dai, Y., Kong, W. L., Zhu, M. L., & Wu, X. Q. (2022). Improvement of
sphaeropsis shoot blight disease resistance by applying the ectomycorrhizal fun-
gus hymenochaete sp. rl and mycorrhizal helper bacterium bacillus pumilus hr10
to pinus thunbergii. Phytopathology, 112(6), 1226–1234. https://doi.org/10.1094/
PHYTO-09-21-0392-R
Wasternack, C., & Song, S. (2016). Jasmonates: biosynthesis, metabolism, and signal-
ing by proteins activating and repressing transcription. Journal of Experimental
Botany, 68(6), 1303–1321. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erw443
Wasternack, C., & Song, S. (2017). Jasmonates: Biosynthesis, metabolism, and signal-
ing by proteins activating and repressing transcription. Journal of Experimental
Botany, 68(6), 1303–1321. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erw443
Wellburn, A. (1994). The spectral determination of chlorophyll-a and chlorophhyll-b, as
well as total carotenoids, using various solvents with spectrophotometers of dif-
52
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:55==
ferent resolution. Journal of Plant Physiology, 144(3), 307–313. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0176-1617(11)81192-2
Wen, C.-K. (2015). Ethylene in plants. Springer.
Wickham, H. (2016). Ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis. Springer-Verlag New
York. https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org
Wilkinson, S. W., Dalen, L. S., Skrautvol, T. O., Ton, J., Krokene, P., & Mageroy, M. H.
(2022). Transcriptomic changes during the establishment of long-term methyl jasmonate-
induced resistance in norway spruce. Plant Cell and Environment, 45(6), 1891–
1913. https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.14320
Wilkinson, S. W., Mageroslashy, M. H., Lopez Sanchez, A., Smith, L. M., Furci, L., Cotton,
T. E., Krokene, P., & Ton, J. (2019). Surviving in a hostile world: Plant strategies
to resist pests and diseases. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 57(1), 505–529.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-082718-095959
Yakovlev, I. A., Fossdal, C. G., Johnsen, Ø., Junttila, O., & Skrøppa, T. (2006). Analysis
of gene expression during bud burst initiation in norway spruce via ests from sub-
tracted cdna libraries. Tree Genetics and Genomes, 2(1), 39–52. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11295-005-0031-z
Yang, X., Chen, L., Yang, Y., Guo, X., Chen, G., Xiong, X., Dong, D., & Li, G. (2020).
Transcriptome analysis reveals that exogenous ethylene activates immune and
defense responses in a high late blight resistant potato genotype. Scientific Re-
ports, 10(1), 21294. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-78027-5
Yaqoob, N., Yakovlev, I. A., Krokene, P., Kvaalen, H., Solheim, H., & Fossdal, C. G.
(2012). Defence-related gene expression in bark and sapwood of norway spruce
in response to heterobasidion parviporum and methyl jasmonate. Physiological
and Molecular Plant Pathology, 77(1), 10–16. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pmpp.2011.11.001
Yildirim, E., Turan, M., & Guvenc, I. (2008). Effect of foliar salicylic acid applications on
growth, chlorophyll, and mineral content of cucumber grown under salt stress.
Journal of Plant Nutrition, 31(3), 593–612. https://doi.org/10.1080/01904160801895118
Zheng, Y., Lan, Y., Shi, T., & Zhu, Z. (2017). Diverse contributions of myc2 and ein3 in
the regulation of arabidopsis jasmonate-responsive gene expression. Plant Direct,
1(4), e00015. https://doi.org/10.1002/pld3.15
Zhu, Z., An, F., Feng, Y., Li, P., Xue, L., A, M., Jiang, Z., Kim, J. M., To, T. K., Li, W.,
Zhang, X., Yu, Q., Dong, Z., Chen, W. Q., Seki, M., Zhou, J. M., & Guo, H. (2011).
Derepression of ethylene-stabilized transcription factors (ein3/eil1) mediates jas-
monate and ethylene signaling synergy in arabidopsis. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(30), 12539–
12544. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1103959108
Zong, K., Huang, J., Nara, K., Chen, Y., Shen, Z., & Lian, C. (2015). Inoculation of ectomy-
corrhizal fungi contributes to the survival of tree seedlings in a copper mine tailing.
Journal of Forest Research, 20(6), 493–500. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10310-015-
0506-1
Zulak, K. G., Lippert, D. N., Kuzyk, M. A., Domanski, D., Chou, T., Borchers, C. H., &
Bohlmann, J. (2009). Targeted proteomics using selected reaction monitoring re-
veals the induction of specific terpene synthases in a multi-level study of methyl
jasmonate-treated norway spruce (picea abies). Plant Journal, 60(6), 1015–1030.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04020.x
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
53
==PAGE:56==
A
appendix: Test of primer pairs
Figure (A.1)
Test of primers in Thelephora terrestis and Amphinema spp..
54
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:57==
Figure (A.2)
Experimental results of primer 5.8ITS on 40 samples. Top left to bottom right in
intervals of 5: control:sterile, control:ECM, MJ:sterile, MJ:ECM, PA:sterile, PA:ECM, MIX:sterile,
MIX:ECM.
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
55
==PAGE:58==
B
appendix: Primer design
Species-specific primers for Telephora terrestis were designed by overlapping intron se-
quences of target genes related to kinases and oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, due to their
intrinsic involvement in the TCA cycles, as well as the Internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
surrounding 5.8S and 18.5S RNA sequences. Primers were designed with the aid of
primer3.et.nu with a target melting temperature (Tm) of 58 ºC, and the occurrence of hair-
pins was an exclusion criterion. The gm1.22 kinase primer pair and 5.8s ITS primer pair
showed selectivity for T. terrestis contrary to Amphiniema spp. as shown in figure A.1.
56
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:59==
C
appendix: Comparison of germination
Figure (C.1)
Comparison of the average germination rate between the four different treatments.
Each line is labelled with the corresponding treatment it represents. The germination of seeds
treated with MIX (PA and MJ) was significantly lower than the other treatments (one-way ANOVA,
p-value < 0.05).
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
57
==PAGE:60==
D
appendix: Phenotyping example
Figure (D.1)
Pipecolic acid treated seedlings grown in sterile vermiculite. Seedlings are grouped
according to their symptoms.
58
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
==PAGE:61==
Enhancing spruce disease resistances
59
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts plads, Building 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
