==PAGE:1==
 
MSc Eng thesis
Jesper Spenter Ifversen - s220327
Investigating
the
Effectiveness
of
Modern
Wardriving for Identifying Vulnerable Bluetooth-
Enabled IoT Devices
Academic advisor: Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis
Submitted: December 30, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Author:
Jesper Spenter Ifversen - s220327
Affiliation:
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science,
Technical University of Denmark
Title:
Investigating the Effectiveness of Modern Wardriv-
ing for Identifying Vulnerable Bluetooth-Enabled IoT
Devices
Academic advisor:
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis
Submitted:
December 30, 2023
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master’s thesis investigates the effectiveness of modern wardriv-
ing techniques in identifying and mapping vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled
IoT devices in Copenhagen. The thesis employs a blend of qualitative
and quantitative research methods. Quantitatively, wardriving is used
to collect real-world data on IoT devices, while a natural language ma-
chine learning model sorts the devices, facilitating the exploration of
vulnerabilities. Qualitatively, the thesis conducts an in-depth analysis
of the security challenges faced by these devices, specifically those con-
nected via Bluetooth technology, encompassing both Bluetooth Classic
and Low Energy variants.
The research introduces a Python-based tool designed to categorize IoT
devices detected during wardriving. Additionally, it provides a detailed
examination of the top 10 most vulnerable IoT devices identified during
the wardriving process, highlighting potential exploitation methods.
Overall, the findings of this thesis contribute to the growing knowledge
of Bluetooth-enabled IoT security, and offer a tool to investigate IoT
devices when looking for vulnerable devices. The thesis underscores the
significance of addressing device vulnerabilities and the role of wardriving
and data processing in bringing these issues to light.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Hypothesis and Motive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.1
Data Collection Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.2
Data Analysis Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.3
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.4
Methodological Choices and Justification
. . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
The Internet of Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
What is an Internet of Things Device? . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
The Expansion of Bluetooth-Enabled IoT Devices
. . .
6
2.1.3
Security Challenges in IoT Devices . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Vulnerabilities in Consumer IoT Devices . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
The Bluetooth Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Bluetooth Classic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Bluetooth Low Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Bluetooth Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Bluetooth Classic Security Features
. . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Bluetooth Low Energy Security Features . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Specific Threats Targeting Bluetooth-enabled IoT Devices . . .
15
2.5
Wardriving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.1
Bluetooth Wardriving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Related Work
20
3.1
Bluetooth and IoT Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
IoT’s Layered Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Challenges in IoT Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
iv
==PAGE:5==
3.1.3
Bluetooth and IoT Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Bluetooth Wardriving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Operational Range and Device Discovery
. . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Device Discovery Tools, Techniques, and Implications
.
23
3.2.3
Privacy Risks and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.4
Continued Significance of Bluetooth Classic . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Contributions to Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Bluetooth Wardriving
26
4.1
Wardriving and Python-Based Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.1
Running the Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Tool Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.3
Tool Output Files
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Overview of Wardriving in Copenhagen
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Explanation of Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
Rigshospitalet Wardriving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Bluetooth Wardriving: Results
37
5.1
Top 10 Vulnerable IoT Devices Identified
. . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
iPhones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2
Hikvision Surveillance Camera
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.3
Oneplus Phone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.4
Linksys Router . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.5
Nest Cam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.6
Philips Smart Bridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.7
Tile Tracker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.8
Bose Soundtouch Speaker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.9
Huawei Smartwatch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.10 Bekey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
IoT Device Exploitation Demonstration
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.1
iPhone Vulnerability: Notification Spam & Crashes . . .
47
5.2.2
Hikvision Vulnerability: Information Disclosure . . . . .
48
5.2.3
Hikvision Vulnerability: Unauthorized Access . . . . . .
49
5.2.4
Nest Cam Vulnerability: Brute Force . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
52
6.1
Effectiveness of Bluetooth Wardriving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1.1
Device Category Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1.2
Radio Type Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Limitations and Implications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Conclusion
55
v
==PAGE:6==
Bibliography
56
A Running Kismet and GPSd Client
64
A1
Kismet and GPSd Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A2
Connecting the Phone and Computer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A3
Executing the Wardrive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
vi
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The increasing proliferation of Internet of things (IoT) devices has brought
about a paradigm shift in how people live their lives. These devices, such as
smart light bulbs and smart wearables, have become essential tools for com-
munication, entertainment, and daily tasks. However, this convenience comes
with a cost. As the number of IoT devices has grown, so have the security
risks associated with them. Increasingly many IoT devices are left unsecured
and are vulnerable to a range of exploits that can compromise the security of
the user’s data, and even the integrity of the device itself. This has become a
major concern for both individuals and organizations who rely on IoT devices
for their daily activities [78, 65].
One technology that has facilitated the growth of IoT devices is Bluetooth.
Among other technologies, Bluetooth has enabled devices to connect wire-
lessly, creating a convenient user experience, making it a popular choice for IoT
devices. However, the use of Bluetooth also introduces several vulnerabilities
that can be exploited by attackers. The potential for attacks on Bluetooth-
enabled devices has been demonstrated by numerous studies and real-world
incidents. These attacks can range from simple eavesdropping and data theft
to more sophisticated attacks such as malware injection and remote control of
the device. Given the increasing prevalence of Bluetooth-enabled devices, the
need to address these vulnerabilities is more important than ever [35, 47].
In this thesis, a distinctive approach is adopted. Wardriving is employed to
discover vulnerable devices, and their vulnerabilities are subsequently unveiled
using a dedicated Python-based tool developed for this specific investigation.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Objective
The goal of this master’s thesis is to investigate the effectiveness of modern
wardriving in identifying vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled IoT devices, analyze
the identified devices for vulnerabilities, and showcase their potential exploits.
Additionally, another objective is to provide a Python-based tool that allows
users to load wardriving data and visualize IoT devices on a map to detect
vulnerable devices. Finally, the thesis aims to raise awareness of the secu-
rity risks posed by Bluetooth-enabled IoT devices to relevant stakeholders,
ultimately contributing to the growing body of research on IoT security.
1.2
Research Questions
To complete the thesis’ objective, the following research questions will be
answered:
1. How can wardriving be used to identify vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled
IoT devices?
• How common are these vulnerable devices?
• How severe are these vulnerabilities?
• How can these vulnerabilities be exploited?
2. Is it feasible to develop a Python-based tool with natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) functionalities to identify vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled
IoT devices, which can then undergo further analysis?
1.3
Hypothesis and Motive
This thesis hypothesizes that there exists a significant number of vulnera-
ble Bluetooth-enabled IoT devices in Copenhagen, which can be identified by
Bluetooth wardriving and mapped through a Python-based tool to identify
vulnerabilities.
The motivation behind this research is two-fold: firstly, to demonstrate the
effectiveness of wardriving in identifying vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled IoT
devices, and secondly, to provide a tool for mapping these devices and em-
phasize the potential security risks they pose. This thesis aims to go beyond
mere identification of vulnerabilities by actively demonstrating the practical
implications through ethical hacking. In short, the thesis undertakes the task
of scanning Copenhagen, collecting real-world data to locate these devices,
developing and utilizing the Python-based tool to visually represent and pin-
point vulnerable devices, such that they can be ethically exploited.
2
==PAGE:9==
1.4
Research Methodology
This thesis employs a mixed-method research design, integrating qualitative
and quantitative analyses [46]. The qualitative analysis provides an in-depth
understanding of vulnerabilities, and the quantitative assessment measures
the prevalence of these vulnerabilities within the target area.
1.4.1
Data Collection Strategy
The research centers on collecting real-world data through wardriving, a tech-
nique that involves detecting signals for data acquisition [10].
Wardriving
was chosen because of its capability to provide a comprehensive overview of
Bluetooth-enabled IoT devices easily. A predetermined route across Østerbro,
Nørrebro, and Frederiksberg will ensure even coverage, capturing Bluetooth
signals throughout. A previous wardriving dataset will also be used to expand
the data pool.
1.4.2
Data Analysis Methods
After the collection of data, it undergoes exportation for processing. Quanti-
tative data analysis will be conducted using a Python program, which focuses
on visualizing the distribution and vulnerabilities of IoT devices. For quali-
tative analysis, Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) databases are
utilized to explore the potential implications of the vulnerabilities discovered
in these devices.
1.4.3
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Given the vast number of IoT devices and the different types of vulnerabilities,
it is essential to narrow down the focus:
• Inclusion Criteria:
1. Devices that are Bluetooth-enabled and are detected within the
chosen zones of Copenhagen.
• Exclusion Criteria:
1. Devices that do not employ Bluetooth for connectivity.
2. Devices without valid identifiers, such as a MAC address, or with-
out an identifiable manufacturer or device name.
3. Devices that are identified as duplicate entries.
3
==PAGE:10==
1.4.4
Methodological Choices and Justification
The methodologies incorporated in this research draw inspiration from prior
studies in the domain. Specifically, the wardriving techniques and their appli-
cations were inspired by the works Chernyshev et al. [19] and Valeros et al. [74].
Additionally, investigating IoT vulnerabilities is inspired by Meneghello et al. [47].
The decision adopt a mixed-method research strategy, combining qualitative
and quantitative analysis, was determined to be optimal due to its ability to
provide a holistic understanding of the vulnerabilities [46]. While alternative
methodologies could have been considered, this approach was deemed most
representative of the real-world scenario.
1.5
Outline
The Background chapter offers a comprehensive overview of IoT, emphasizing
Bluetooth, its security challenges, and wardriving applications. The Related
Work chapter reviews existing literature on IoT and Bluetooth security, BLE
significance, and wardriving approaches.
The Bluetooth Wardriving chap-
ter details the thesis’ setup, execution, and maps generated by the Python-
based tool. The Results chapter explores vulnerabilities in the top 10 IoT
devices, demonstrating potential exploits.
The Discussion critically exam-
ines the study’s effectiveness, limitations, and offers suggestions for further
research. The Conclusion summarizes key findings and revisits the research
questions, with additional technical details in the Appendices.
4
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
The aim of this chapter is to furnish information for understanding of the thesis
and its objectives. It entails a description of IoT devices, an exploration of
the intricacies of Bluetooth, particularly emphasizing its security aspects, and
a clarification of the process involved in discovering vulnerable IoT devices.
2.1
The Internet of Things
IoT is a network of physical objects or "things" embedded with sensors, soft-
ware, and connectivity, enabling them to collect and exchange data over the
internet.
The European Research Cluster [39] defines the IoT as a global
network infrastructure that links physical and virtual ’things,’ characterized
by self-configuring capabilities, unique identities, and intelligent interfaces for
seamless integration into the information network.
Hence, IoT devices to-
gether creates a network of interconnected devices known as the Internet of
things. This allows for the automation of various processes, resulting in in-
creased efficiency, productivity, and convenience. IoT devices can range from
consumer products to industrial machinery used in manufacturing and logis-
tics. They have the potential to transform many industries and aspects of
daily life, leading to the development of new applications that can improve
quality of life [27].
2.1.1
What is an Internet of Things Device?
An IoT device is an electronic device that is capable of connecting to the
internet and communicate with other devices and networks. They may have
sensors and other technologies that enable them to collect and analyze data
from the environment and user, making them context-aware.
IoT devices
can also operate autonomously, meaning they can perform computing and
decision-making tasks without requiring constant human input. Additionally,
IoT devices can connect to other devices wirelessly or through a wired connec-
tion to exchange data [1] [2] [65]. In Manuel et al. [65], an IoT device is defined
as a context-aware electronic device capable of performing autonomous com-
puting and connecting to other devices wire or wirelessly for data exchange.
5
==PAGE:12==
This definition describes a flexible range of electronic devices [65]. In Table 2.1
the most popular home IoT devices are shown [24].
IoT Device Categories
IoT Devices
Smart Security Cameras
Amazon Cloud Cam, NetGear Arlo
Q, Nest Cam IQ, Wyze Cam Pan
Doorbell Cameras
Google Nest Hello, Ring Video
Doorbell, Arlo Audio Doorbell
Smart Locks
Kwikset with Amazon Key,
August Smart Lock Pro
Smart Speakers
Amazon Echo, Google Home
Max, Apple’s HomePod
Smart Hubs
Wink Hub 2, Samsung
SmartThings Hub, Google Wifi
Smart Light Bulbs
Philips Hue, GE C-Life
Smart Bulbs
Smart Thermostats
Nest Thermostat E, Ecobee4
SmartThermostat
Smart Switches
TP-Link HS200 Smart Wi-Fi
Light Switch
Smart Security Systems
SimpleSafe, Ring
Smart Plugs
Belkin WeMo Insight Smart Plug,
TP-Link Kasa Smart Wi-Fi Plug,
Amazon Smart Plug
Smart Smoke Detectors
Google Nest Protect, Ring Alarm
Smart Appliances
LG Signature Series Refrigerator,
Samsung Electric Cooktop,
LG TurboSteam Washer and Dryer
Smart Vacuums
iRobot Roomba, Shark
IQ Robot, ECOVACS DEEBOT
Table 2.1: Home IoT devices and their corresponding category.
2.1.2
The Expansion of Bluetooth-Enabled IoT Devices
The proliferation of Bluetooth-enabled devices is showing no signs of slowing
down. According to the Bluetooth Market Update [63], by 2027, 7,6 billion
Bluetooth devices will be shipped annually. These statistics highlight a no-
table shift: while Bluetooth Classic remains integral, especially in devices like
smartphones, tablets, and increasingly in TVs, there is a surge in the adop-
tion of Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE). Over the last half-decade, the majority
of Bluetooth devices shipped have been, and will continue to be, dual-mode,
combining the features of both Bluetooth Classic and BLE. However, given
the continued strong growth in peripherals and the introduction of LE Au-
6
==PAGE:13==
dio, single-mode BLE devices are set to see a tremendous growth. By 2027,
single-mode BLE device shipments will almost equal dual-mode shipments.
Even more telling, by this same year, 97 percent of all Bluetooth devices will
incorporate BLE [63]. This rapid expansion of Bluetooth, especially BLE, in
the market underscores the ever-growing need for robust security measures
across all IoT devices [77] [47].
2.1.3
Security Challenges in IoT Devices
Securing data, both in transit and in storage, has become an increasing con-
cern. However, many IoT devices are produced inexpensively and without
standardization, often resulting in a lack of essential security features, includ-
ing data confidentiality. This absence of standardization not only compromises
security but also impedes interoperability, hindering effective communication
between devices from different manufacturers. This issue spans wireless pro-
tocols, technologies, and data standards leading to proprietary standards that
further isolate devices [5]. Unified standardization is vital for interoperabil-
ity and successful system integration, enhancing security by simplifying the
protection of connected devices across manufacturers [5, 75]. However, some
manufacturers prioritize cost reduction over security, making these devices
prime targets for malicious actors due to their vulnerabilities [28].
There have been studies examining the security of widely-used consumer and
industrial IoT devices, revealing notable security flaws. Some research even
points towards IoT infrastructure as an extremely likely attack vector since the
devices often are positioned in environments that are potentially unsafe and
exposed [79]. Therefore, addressing their heightened security risks becomes a
crucial concern [24].
2.1.4
Vulnerabilities in Consumer IoT Devices
A comprehensive study by Williams et al. [77] using Nessus, a popular vulner-
ability assessment tool, highlights the vulnerabilities in consumer IoT devices.
Their study revealed that 12,92% of the IoT devices assessed, specifically
20237 out of 156680, presented various risk levels ranging from ’Low’ to ’Crit-
ical’. These risk levels are based on the Common Vulnerability Scoring System
(CVSS) [60], an open industry standard for assessing the severity of system se-
curity vulnerabilities. The scores in this study, determined purely by Nessus,
are detailed in table 2.2.
7
==PAGE:14==
Risk Level
CVSS Range
Examples of Vulnerabilities
Critical
10,0
Default Credentials,
Unsupported Unix Operating System
High
7,0–9,9
SQL Injections, OpenSSH Vulnerabilities,
Buffer Overflows
Medium
4,0–6,9
DoS, XSS, Browsable Web Directories,
Modbus Coil Access
Low
0,1–3,9
Cleartext Submission of Credentials,
Authentication Without HTTPS
None (Informational)
0,0
Generic Parameter Injections,
Web Mirroring
Table 2.2: Risk levels, CVSS range, and examples of vulnerabilities in IoT
devices.
Specifically, the study found that:
• 10,58% of these vulnerable devices displayed ’Critical’ vulnerabilities.
• 40,35% indicated ’High’ vulnerabilities.
• A staggering 67,96% had ’Medium’ vulnerabilities.
• 42,04% showcased ’Low’ vulnerabilities [77].
Further analysis of specific device categories revealed that:
• 40,16% of the vulnerable devices were webcams, with D-Link being the
predominant brand at 72,01%, followed by Axis and AVTECH.
• 7,1% were smart TVs, where Samsung emerged as the primary manu-
facturer of these vulnerable devices at 26,58%.
• Printers constituted a significant 52,75%, with HP dominating the cat-
egory with a whopping 82,95% of the vulnerable devices [77].
8
==PAGE:15==
2.2
The Bluetooth Technology
Bluetooth is a wireless communication technology that was developed by Eric-
sson, IBM, Intel, Nokia, and Toshiba in the late winter of 1998. The develop-
ment of Bluetooth is yet ongoing and hence, various versions exists today. To
encourage the wide acceptance of Bluetooth technology, the Bluetooth Special
Industry Group (SIG) was formed to develop and promote a global solution
for short-range wireless communication. The SIG offers all the intellectual
property included in the Bluetooth specification royalty-free to adopter mem-
bers of the technology when it is used to introduce Bluetooth products in the
market. For this reason, Bluetooth has received widespread recognition and
acceptance.
Bluetooth is an open standard for short-range radio frequency (RF) commu-
nication and has been integrated into a wide range of business and consumer
devices. It allows users to form ad hoc networks between different devices to
transfer data on an ad hoc basis, which is known as a piconet. A piconet is
composed of two or more Bluetooth devices in close physical proximity, oper-
ating on the same channel using the same frequency hopping sequence. An
example of a piconet is a connection between a cell phone and a headset using
Bluetooth wireless technology [11, 53].
As of today, Bluetooth primarily supports two modes of operation:
• Bluetooth Classic, or Bluetooth Basic Rate/Enhanced Data Rate (BR/EDR).
• Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), formerly Bluetooth Smart [44].
2.2.1
Bluetooth Classic
Bluetooth Classic, also known as Bluetooth Basic Rate (BR)/Enhanced Data
Rate (EDR), was initially designed as a short-range wireless technology for mo-
bile phones, computers, and accessories such as Bluetooth headsets, speakers,
keyboards, and mice. However, it was never designed for low-power appli-
cations requiring battery-powered devices for IoT applications, such as 1-to-
many and machine-to-machine (M2M) communication, which require a secure,
reliable, and scalable wireless network. To support these new use-cases, the
Bluetooth SIG developed BLE technology, which was introduced in Bluetooth
specification version 4.0 released in 2010 [44, 11, 47].
2.2.2
Bluetooth Low Energy
The primary distinction between Bluetooth Classic and BLE is their purpose
and performance optimization. While Bluetooth Classic is tailored for higher
9
==PAGE:16==
data transfer speeds and extended range, BLE prioritizes minimal power con-
sumption, prolonged battery life, and is tailored for short-range communi-
cations between devices [44]. Conceived to cater to IoT requirements, BLE
offers reliable wireless communication with lower data rates. This makes it
particularly suitable for IoT devices that need an extended battery life and
only transmit short data spurts rather than streaming large data volumes.
Since its debut in 2010 as a component of the Bluetooth Specification ver-
sion 4.0, these advantages have facilitated its widespread acceptance in IoT
environments [47].
2.2.2.1
Architecture
Within a BLE network, the architecture primarily consists of master and slave
devices. The master devices, often termed Bluetooth Smart Ready, serve a
pivotal role as hubs with dual-mode radios. This allows them to connect to
both Bluetooth Classic and BLE devices, using a singular Bluetooth device
address for both radio types. These master devices are essential when inter-
net connectivity is needed, as BLE slaves typically cannot establish internet
connections on their own. The BLE communication primarily adopts a star
topology, where each slave connects to only one master [47].
To envision a practical application: imagine a mobile phone functioning as
a Bluetooth Smart Ready master. This phone, while streaming audio to a
Bluetooth Classic headset, can concurrently gather temperature data from a
BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) thermometer slave. Acting as a central hub, it
then relays this temperature data to an external server, such as a hospital’s
system.
In this scenario, the phone essentially acts as an IoT device [32],
represented in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Representative BLE architecture for Bluetooth-integrated IoT de-
vices.
10
==PAGE:17==
2.3
Bluetooth Security
The wireless nature of the Bluetooth interface allows attackers to exploit
certain vulnerabilities without needing close proximity.
Among the poten-
tial threats are eavesdropping, DoS attacks, spoofing, connection hijacking,
and device tracking. The Bluetooth protocol provides defenses against these
threats, including varied pairing methods, optional encryption, connection
authentication, and address randomization. However, their efficacy hinges on
proper implementation. Due to the continued use of older Bluetooth modules
and devices without updates, compatibility with earlier protocol versions re-
mains significant, even for new devices [23, 53].
2.3.1
Bluetooth Classic Security Features
Bluetooth Classic serves as the backbone for many traditional wireless com-
munication tasks. Over time, Bluetooth Classic has experienced multiple evo-
lutions to enhance its security features [53].
2.3.1.1
Foundations of Pairing: The Link Key
In Bluetooth Classic, the foundation of secure connections is the Link Key,
similar to the Long Term Key in BLE. Bluetooth Classic employs methods
like PIN Pairing and Secure Simple Pairing (SSP) for generating the Link Key,
while BLE uses different key generation techniques.
Initially, Bluetooth connections utilized a shared Personal Identification Num-
ber (PIN) for pairing. However, this method was vulnerable to brute force
attacks, leading to the development of more secure pairing methods. With
the introduction of Bluetooth 2.1, SSP significantly enhanced security using
the Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) protocol. SSP provided robust re-
sistance to passive eavesdropping and MITM attacks. This method not only
streamlined the pairing process but also ensured enhanced protection, a fea-
ture that was further refined in Bluetooth 4.2 [53].
2.3.1.2
Authentication in Bluetooth Classic
Bluetooth Classic primarily uses a challenge-response mechanism centered on
Link Key knowledge. The shift to the ECDH-based Secure Authentication
in Bluetooth 4.2 from Legacy Authentication significantly bolstered defenses
against eavesdropping and MITM threats [53].
11
==PAGE:18==
2.3.1.3
Ensuring Data Confidentiality in Bluetooth Classic
Bluetooth Classic has four security modes for pairing and authentication, each
with different security levels. However, in this thesis, only BLE security modes
are covered. In addition to Bluetooth Classic security modes, three encryption
modes can be configured:
• Mode 1: No encryption.
• Mode 2: Individual traffic is encrypted using unique link keys, but
broadcasts remain unencrypted.
• Mode 3: Every piece of traffic gets encrypted with the master link key.
While the E0 encryption algorithm was originally employed, the adoption of
AES-CCM in Bluetooth 4.2 has significantly bolstered data confidentiality
and authentication [53].
2.3.1.4
Authorization Mechanisms in Bluetooth Classic
Within Bluetooth Classic, devices are labeled as ’trusted’ or ’untrusted’, which
dictates their access to services. While Bluetooth protocols predominantly au-
thenticate devices, there is also the Security Manager, a component responsible
for managing pairing, authentication, and encryption processes. The Security
Manager can facilitate user-based authentication, allowing for more nuanced
access control [53, 64].
2.3.2
Bluetooth Low Energy Security Features
As previously stated, BLE powers a multitude of devices in the IoT landscape.
Since BLE is designed for devices with computational and storage constraints,
it has evolved with distinct security protocols separate from its counterpart,
Bluetooth Classic [44].
2.3.2.1
Key Distinctions in Bluetooth Low Energy Security
BLE and Bluetooth Classic differ notably in their pairing processes:
• Early BLE versions had devices create and share a Long-Term Key
(LTK).
• In contrast, Bluetooth Classic follows a procedure where both devices
collaboratively generate a shared Link Key.
Bluetooth version 4.0 brought the inclusion of the Advanced Encryption Stan-
dard–Counter with CBC-MAC (AES-CCM) to the BLE security framework,
significantly enhancing encryption capabilities. Additionally, Bluetooth 4.2
12
==PAGE:19==
introduced the Secure Connections feature to enhance BLE security.
This
development allowed devices to reuse keys across various physical transports,
making it feasible for devices to interchangeably use the LTK for low energy
and the Link Key for Bluetooth Classic without the need for re-pairing [53].
2.3.2.2
Critical Cryptographic Keys in Bluetooth Low Energy
Two crucial cryptographic keys underpin the BLE security paradigm: the
Identity Resolving Key (IRK) and the Connection Signature Resolving Key
(CSRK):
• The IRK is fundamental in enhancing user privacy. Instead of broad-
casting a static address, the IRK allows devices to broadcast a dynamic,
randomized Resolvable Private Address (RPA), which is more secure
and ensures user privacy.
• The CSRK, on the other hand, enhances security by verifying cryptographically-
signed data frames on unencrypted links.
This process adds another
layer of security, ensuring data integrity even on unencrypted chan-
nels [53].
2.3.2.3
Delineation of Bluetooth Low Energy Security Modes
BLE security modes are similar to those of Bluetooth Classic, offering service-
level security modalities and allowing each service to set its security require-
ments. BLE permits each service request to assert its security prerequisites,
a feature not commonly found in traditional Bluetooth protocols. The de-
vice ensures that these requirements are met by aligning with the designated
security mode and level:
• BLE Security Mode 1 revolves around encryption. At its most ba-
sic, Level 1 provides no encryption or authentication. Level 2 mandates
unauthenticated pairing combined with encryption, while Level 3 em-
phasizes authenticated pairing alongside encryption. The introduction
of Bluetooth 4.2 added Level 4, which requires authenticated BLE Se-
cure Connections pairing and encryption.
• BLE Security Mode 2 focuses primarily on data integrity through
data signing without prioritizing data confidentiality.
While Level 1
requires unauthenticated pairing with data signing, Level 2 necessitates
authenticated pairing combined with data signing.
When there is a discrepancy between the security modes or levels specified
for a service request and the linked service, the more rigorous security criteria
take precedence. The recommendations from the National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology (NIST) offer clarity on this: for BLE 4.2 connections,
13
==PAGE:20==
Security Mode 1 Level 4, which leverages cutting-edge encryption techniques
like AES-CMAC and the P-256 elliptic curve, is endorsed as the most secure.
In contrast, for BLE 4.0 and 4.1, Security Mode 1 Level 3 is recommended.
Using the least secure mode, Security Mode 1 Level 1, is generally advised
against due to its vulnerabilities [53].
2.3.2.4
Enhancements in Bluetooth Low Energy 4.2: Secure
Connections Only Mode
Beginning with BLE version 4.2, Secure Connections Only Mode was intro-
duced. This mandates the exclusive use of Security Mode 1 Level 4 for all BLE
services, with the sole exception being services that only require Security Mode
1 Level 1. While this mode ensures stringent, FIPS-approved encryption al-
gorithms on BLE transport, it lacks backward compatibility with earlier BLE
versions such as 4.0 and 4.1 due to the constraints associated with the P-256
elliptic curve [53].
2.3.2.5
Foundations of Bluetooth Low Energy Encryption and
Authentication
BLE’s encryption and authentication leverage the AES-CCM framework with
128-bit keys. This symmetry in master-slave communication is established
during the pairing process, which involves three key steps:
1. Initial Interaction: Devices begin an unencrypted dialogue, transpar-
ently conveying their authentication capabilities and needs.
2. Key Generation and Affirmation: Devices either cooperatively de-
rive or exchange a temporary key (TK) using specific pairing techniques.
Following this, the mutual consistency of the TK is confirmed. Subse-
quently, an STK, which is derived from the TK, is employed to encrypt
data transmissions.
3. Bonding Phase (Optional): Once paired, devices can optionally en-
gage in a bonding phase. This phase is characterized by the mutual
sharing and storage of link keys or bonds, facilitating seamless future
reconnections.
Traditionally, BLE utilized several primary pairing methodologies. ’Just Works’
was a basic method where the TK was set to 0, offering minimal security. ’Out
of Band’ involved transferring the TK through an external means like NFC,
with its security dependent on the adopted medium. ’Passkey Entry’ required
a user-mediated exchange of a six-digit TK, balancing security with the need
for user interaction.
14
==PAGE:21==
BLE 4.2 introduced significant changes in pairing methodologies, incorporat-
ing elliptic curve cryptography. Both devices now independently produce an
ECDH key pair and exchange public keys, enabling the derivation of a DHKey
based on elliptic curve principles. This paves the way for generating a LTK
for symmetric data encryption. Enhanced pairing techniques in BLE 4.2 saw
the retention of the ’Just Works’ approach, but with added nonce and vali-
dation metrics for non-initiators. ’Numeric Comparison’ was an upgrade to
’Just Works’, requiring manual validation of a value based on public keys
and nonces. ’Out of Band’ now demanded an exchange of random values and
commitment metrics through an external channel. ’Passkey Entry’ was refined
to ask users to supply a secret passkey, bolstered by a two-step verification
process, thus enhancing connection security [47].
2.3.2.6
Legacy vs. Modern Bluetooth Low Energy Key
Generation
In legacy BLE key generation up to Bluetooth 4.1, the key generation pro-
cess started with a TK from which a Short Term Key (STK) was derived.
The STK was crucial for encrypting the communication channel and for dis-
seminating the primary keys, which include the LTK, IRK, and CSRK. The
transportation of these keys during the pairing process, however, introduced
potential security vulnerabilities.
From Bluetooth 4.2 onward, BLE adopted the ECDH public key cryptography.
This advancement eliminated the need for the intermediate STK step seen in
the legacy pairing method. After the initial sharing of pairing attributes, de-
vices exchange public keys, leading to the creation of the LTK. This modern
approach to key generation enhanced encryption measures to ensure the LTK
is never openly transmitted, bolstering overall security.
In both the legacy and modern BLE pairing scenarios, maintaining the in-
tegrity and security of the LTK remains crucial. Once compromised, it be-
comes a target for malicious actors seeking to breach BLE connections [53] [64].
2.4
Specific Threats Targeting Bluetooth-enabled
IoT Devices
To thoroughly understand the security landscape of Bluetooth-enabled IoT
devices, it is essential to recognize and categorize prevalent threats. The fol-
lowing Table 2.3 explains specific attack vectors and vulnerabilities associated
with these devices [45]:
15
==PAGE:22==
Attack
Description
Citation
Pairing Process
The pairing process is a main contributor to se-
curity issues in Bluetooth. Attacks can be ex-
ecuted at different stages, such as before the
pairing process concludes or after devices have
paired.
For instance, attackers might execute
Man-in-the-Middle attacks using data acquired
post-pairing.
[20]
MAC Spoofing
Performed before encryption during piconet for-
mation. Attackers imitate another user, inter-
rupt connections, or modify data using special
tools.
[48]
PIN Cracking
During device pairing; attackers use frequency
sniffer to capture the RAND and BD_ADDR
of the target, then employ brute-force to deduce
the PIN.
[48]
Man-in-the-Middle
During device pairing, attackers relay messages
between devices, often misleading users into be-
lieving the pairing was successful.
[48, 54, 61]
BlueJacking
Attackers send unsolicited messages to a device,
persuading the user to use an access code, which
grants unauthorized access to device files.
[48]
BlueSnarfing
Targets a mobile phone, stealing data like con-
tacts or images. The OBEX File Transfer Proto-
col is exploited for unauthorized device pairing.
[48, 49, 4]
BlueBugging
Within the RFCOMM protocol, attackers access
the target’s "AT" commands, controlling the de-
vice and accessing its services and settings.
[48, 8]
BlueBump
Due to link key vulnerabilities, users unknow-
ingly maintain an active connection to the at-
tacker, who can later pair without authentica-
tion.
[14, 70]
BlueDump
Attackers spoof the BD_ADDR of one device to
pair with another. Some targeted devices may
delete their link key, entering pairing mode.
[70]
BluePrinting
Uses
disclosed
device
details
to
determine
further information like the manufacturer or
firmware
version.
Requires
knowledge
of
BD_ADDR.
[48? ]
Blueover
Auditing tools to assess Bluetooth vulnerabili-
ties; can also initiate a BlueBugging attack.
[48]
BlueBorne
Exploits a stack buffer overflow flaw, hijacking
Bluetooth connections to control a device’s em-
bedded content and functions.
[57, 6]
Table 2.3: Overview of common Bluetooth attacks, their descriptions, and
relevant citations.
16
==PAGE:23==
Attack
Description
Citation
Fuzzing
Malformed data packets are sent to observe de-
vice reactions.
Irregular behavior can hint at
vulnerabilities.
[73, 53]
Off-Line PIN Recovery
Intercepts values like IN_RAND or SRES.
Brute-force determines a matching PIN to the
intercepted SRES value.
[54]
Brute-Force
BD_ADDR
Scans
the
last
three
bytes
of
a
device’s
BD_ADDR. The first three bytes, being pub-
lic, can remain fixed.
[48, 54]
Reflection/Relay
The attacker impersonates a device and aims
to authenticate the connection by reflecting or
relaying device information rather than seeking
undisclosed info.
[48, 54]
Backdoor
Occurs during trusted relationship establish-
ment.
The adversary remains invisible in the
paired device list but has access to the device’s
resources and services once the relationship is
built.
Requires knowledge of the BD_ADDR
and the target’s vulnerability.
[48, 54]
Denial of Service
Encompasses DDoS and ordinary DoS. They
may crash the network, restart systems, or re-
strict network access.
Targets might be the
Physical Layer or layers above. Examples are
BD_ADDR duplication, BlueSmack, and oth-
ers.
[50, 34]
Worm
Involves malicious software or trojan files that
propagate themselves to available Bluetooth de-
vices. Notable worms: Cabir, Skulls, and Lasco.
[48, 17]
Bluesmack
A DoS attack analogous to “Ping of Death” at-
tacks on networked IP devices. It involves send-
ing large pings or L2CAP echo requests, causing
buffer overflow and knocking out the target.
[71, 53]
MultiBlue
Requires attacker’s physical access. Uses Multi-
Blue dongle to access and take over targets,
sending pairing requests. Requires a pre-shared
key for authentication and encryption.
[52]
HeloMoto
A blend of BlueSnarfing and BlueBugging ex-
ploiting a flaw in Motorola’s “trusted devices”
implementation. After a vcard is sent, BlueBug-
ging is used for control.
[8, 72]
Bluecasing/Bluetooth
wardriving
Attackers use antennas and software to detect
vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled devices and ex-
ploit their vulnerabilities to gain access.
[73]
Table 2.3 (continued): Overview of common Bluetooth attacks, their descrip-
tions, and relevant citations.
17
==PAGE:24==
2.5
Wardriving
’Wardriving’ stands out as a method adapted to examine wireless networks.
Originally, it is known as the practice of scanning for Wireless Access Points
(WAPs) using a wireless card set to monitor mode. This setting allows the
card to capture all traffic on a particular frequency. It involves noting details
of detected WAPs, including MAC (Media Access Control) addresses, names,
and signal strengths. MAC addresses, being unique, serve as identifiers for
discovered devices.
Today’s technology allows for devices as compact as a
smartphone to detect signals efficiently [10, 33]. While wardriving initially
focused on discovering Wi-Fi networks, it has evolved to encompass other
technologies, such as Bluetooth [74].
2.5.1
Bluetooth Wardriving
Bluetooth wardriving is instrumental for locating and mapping Bluetooth-
enabled IoT devices. One packet that can be detected is advertisement (ADV)
packets [74, 12]. These packets have diverse applications, such as device posi-
tioning, connecting peripherals, and conveying point-of-interest data [58, 59].
2.5.1.1
BLE Device Tracking
BLE functions in two modes: connected and advertising [31]. In the advertis-
ing mode, devices emit ADV packets, which can be detected by any nearby
device in listening mode. Captured ADV packets can reveal details about the
broadcasting device, including elements like a header, MAC address, a unique
identifier, and, manufacturer-tailored data [42, 66].
Location trackers, such as Tile and Airtag, leverage ADV packets to broadcast
their coordinates. To address privacy concerns, Airtags, for instance, feature
a Privacy Mode, periodically changing their MAC address to counteract po-
tential misuse [12]. Concurrently, the adoption of BLE advertising technology
in mobile phones is on the rise [42, 18]. Many contemporary devices employ
MAC address randomization to bolster user privacy. Still, older phone models
remain susceptible to unauthorized tracking [25].
18
==PAGE:25==
2.5.1.2
MAC Addresses
The MAC address is a unique identifier integral to a network interface card [38].
Consisting of a 48-bit format, the first three octets are called the Organiza-
tionally Unique Identifier (OUI), identifying a manufacturer or organization.
The subsequent trio formulates the complete address. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 2.2, this structure ensures the uniqueness of each MAC address.
Figure 2.2: The construction of MAC addresses.
Embedded into all types of network interface cards, like Ethernet cards, WiFi
cards, and Bluetooth cards, the MAC address stands as an immutable hard-
ware signature. In the Open Systems Interconnection model, it operates in the
data link layer, facilitating reliable data exchange between network nodes [7].
19
==PAGE:26==
3
Related Work
In this chapter, the exploration delves into studies on IoT security, Bluetooth
technology, and wardriving. The multi-layered architecture of IoT is detailed,
highlighting the complexities in its design. Additionally, this examination in-
cludes an investigation of Bluetooth’s vulnerabilities and concerns surrounding
Bluetooth wardriving.
3.1
Bluetooth and IoT Security
The evolution of the IoT has prompted studies addressing its security land-
scape.
This section first explores the layered architecture of IoT, drawing
insights from Suo et al. [68]. Following this, it emphasizes the role of Blue-
tooth in IoT, focusing on vulnerabilities, potential solutions, and the concern
of Bluetooth wardriving, drawing from Lonzetta et al. [45] and other articles.
3.1.1
IoT’s Layered Architecture
Recent studies, notably by Suo et al. [68], introduce the "smart life" concept
that outlines the IoT applications landscape. Emphasizing IoT security chal-
lenges arising from increased device interconnectivity, the study presents a
multi-tiered IoT architecture divided into four primary layers [15, 68]:
1. The Perceptual Layer: Central to capturing and discerning the phys-
ical world, this layer employs devices like sensors and RFID readers.
The constraints it faces are twofold: limited computational capability
and inadequate storage. Such limitations make the employment of con-
ventional security tactics, such as frequency hopping and public key
encryption, particularly challenging.
2. The Network Layer: This layer shoulders the responsibility of depend-
able data transmission and its initial processing. Although it boasts a
robust safety framework, it remains susceptible to a spectrum of threats
including Man-in-the-Middle Attacks, data transmission congestion, and
viruses.
20
==PAGE:27==
3. The Support Layer: Positioned as the computational powerhouse, it
uses cloud computing and network grids. Within its vast data processing
obligations lies the challenge of distinguishing and thwarting malicious
data.
4. The Application Layer: Tailoring personalized services for users is
its mainstay, but with the feature of data sharing, it becomes a focal
point for concerns about data privacy, access protocols, and unautho-
rized information disclosures [29].
3.1.2
Challenges in IoT Security
Drawing from recent research, prominently showcased by Suo et al. [68], this
subsection dives into the security complexities that arise from the multi-
faceted architecture of IoT.
3.1.2.1
The Need for a Comprehensive Security Framework
While it is imperative to grasp the individual layers of IoT, the overarching
challenge, as highlighted by Chao et al. [15], is in developing a holistic security
framework. The inherent intricacies of IoT dictate that a mere amalgamation
of security mechanisms from separate layers will not culminate in an effective
defense strategy. What is imperative is a unified security infrastructure that
harmoniously integrates both control and informational aspects, ensuring the
robustness of the entire system.
3.1.2.2
Key Management Challenges
A pivotal aspect of numerous security protocols, key management, continues
to pose challenges. Despite being a recurrent theme in research, achieving
impeccable cryptographic security remains an uphill battle. Pioneering so-
lutions like lightweight cryptographic algorithms and augmented sensor node
performance have been proposed and are seen as promising avenues. However,
their complete implementation in expansive sensor networks remains a work in
progress, as underscored by studies like Chao et al. [15] and Chasaki et al. [16].
3.1.2.3
Legal and Regulatory Frontiers
As proposed by Hu [37], a legal void is apparent when considering IoT’s inter-
section with critical sectors such as national security, business confidentiality,
and individual privacy. Therefore, a strong call for legal planning arises to
ensure that IoT operations adhere to legal boundaries.
21
==PAGE:28==
3.1.2.4
Addressing Emerging Technological Paradigms
In the wake of rapid technological evolution, emerging paradigms such as
WSNs (Wireless Sensor Networks), Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID),
pervasive computing, and avant-garde network communication are gaining
traction. Such advancements are paving the way for the conceptualization
and actualization of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) within the IoT frame-
work, as detailed by Wan et al. [76] and Yu et al. [80]. These sophisticated
systems command heightened security standards. Thus, it becomes imperative
to institute stringent security protocols to guarantee their optimal operation,
as also mentioned in Suo et al. [68].
3.1.3
Bluetooth and IoT Security
Recent research, such as Lonzetta et al. [45], underscores the pivotal role of
Bluetooth, and more specifically its BLE variant, in shaping the wireless com-
munication landscape of IoT. Originally conceived to bolster ad hoc, short-
range wireless networks, Bluetooth’s primary aim was to simplify device in-
terconnections. Despite its numerous advantages, the decentralized nature of
its security design poses substantial vulnerabilities. The vulnerabilities, as
highlighted in real-world examples from Lonzetta et al. [45], accentuate the
pressing need for robust security enhancements. Moreover, the same study
proffers valuable insights and measures to fortify Bluetooth communication,
especially within the realm of IoT.
BLE’s increasing prominence in the world of IoT, as detailed by research like
Harris et al. [36] and Suo et al. [68], is noteworthy. These studies explain BLE’s
unique attributes that have contributed to its widespread adoption. One of
the standout features, for instance, is its efficient power consumption during
data transactions. Additionally, Harris et al. [36] emphasizes BLE’s capabil-
ity to maintain consistent communication ranges during such transactions, a
characteristic that markedly enhances the functionalities of IoT devices across
varied scenarios.
3.1.3.1
Security Vulnerabilities in Bluetooth
The ubiquity of Bluetooth, spanning a diverse range of devices from everyday
smartphones to advanced smart home ecosystems, intensifies the associated se-
curity dilemmas. Studies, particularly Lonzetta et al. [45] and Minar et al. [48],
underscore these concerns. While Bluetooth is an invaluable asset, its absence
of a centralized security apparatus emerges as a challenge. With its escalating
integration, there is an amplified call for vigilance towards potential security
pitfalls, such as threats like BlueBugging, BlueJacking, and BlueBorne.
22
==PAGE:29==
Another pivotal study by Sevier et al. [62] explains the intricacies of BLE,
detailing its crucial role in IoT device communications. This research offers a
critique of BLE’s security framework, keeping in view its genesis as a core facet
of the Bluetooth 4.0 specification, tailored for devices with stringent energy
constraints. A concerning disclosure from this analysis is the fragility of BLE’s
Temporary Key, which can be decrypted if its handshake procedure is compro-
mised. This revelation, coupled with insights from Minar et al. [48], highlight
the exigency for heightened precautions, particularly in scenarios demanding
elevated security or where sensitive data is at play. Bolstering this perspective,
guidelines from Rakic et al. [55] advocate for comprehensive awareness and
education on Bluetooth-associated risks. Their key recommendations include
persistent firmware upgrades and the timely application of security patches as
proactive measures against Bluetooth-related threats [55].
3.2
Bluetooth Wardriving
The rapid proliferation of Bluetooth-enabled devices and their assimilation
into the IoT landscape have incited questions about privacy and security.
Gaining insights from two essential studies Valeros et al. [74] and Cherny-
shev et al. [19], this section details privacy vulnerabilities, potential risks sur-
rounding Bluetooth technology, and war-nibbling, also known as Bluetooth
wardriving.
3.2.1
Operational Range and Device Discovery
Both investigations draw attention to the myths and realities surrounding
Bluetooth’s operational boundaries. The study by Valeros et al. [74] counters
the popular belief about Bluetooth’s confined operational range, revealing that
with an adept antenna, devices can be detected from distances surpassing 1
km. Such findings amplify concerns, particularly considering that numerous
Bluetooth devices can be singularly linked with their users, potentially indi-
cating their proximity.
In a parallel discussion, Chernyshev et al. [19] elucidates on Bluetooth War-
nibbling, a method mirroring Wi-Fi-based Wardriving. The essence of this
technique is detection of Bluetooth devices, predominantly employing mobile
sensors.
Significantly, this study’s limelight remains on Bluetooth Classic
devices, which endure in their market dominance. Forecasts suggest that a
mere 27% of Bluetooth consignments in 2021 would encompass BLE devices.
3.2.2
Device Discovery Tools, Techniques, and Implications
Valeros et al. [74] introduces "bluedriving," a tool engineered to sensitize the
populace about the extent of personal data exposure through Bluetooth. Dis-
23
==PAGE:30==
tinct from conventional data harvesting by cellular providers and tech compa-
nies like Google and Apple, this tool capacitates the public to anonymously
procure Bluetooth data. Its unique capability to amalgamate Bluetooth data
with GPS underlines the potential to not just trace individuals based on their
Bluetooth devices but also to decipher their behavioral trajectories.
Building on device discovery methods, Chernyshev et al. [19] accentuates that
these techniques harbor dual functionalities. Beyond mere device localization,
they are pivotal in earmarking potential targets for subsequent cyber-attacks.
Within this context, the potential of Ubertooth One is explored. Contrasted
with traditional Bluetooth Classic inquiry methods, Ubertooth One manifests
a markedly higher device discovery rate, fortifying its indispensability for con-
temporary wardriving.
3.2.3
Privacy Risks and Challenges
The main point of Valeros et al. [74] is the inadvertent and extensive data
leakage from Bluetooth gadgets. When synergized with GPS intel, Bluetooth
metamorphoses into a potent instrument for privacy breaches. The revelations
call for introspection on Bluetooth’s convenience versus its privacy perils, ad-
vocating for heightened public cognizance and judicious technology utiliza-
tion. Further, Chernyshev et al. [19] explores the inadvertent privacy threats
accompanying passive discovery. Although such methodologies might circum-
vent extracting auxiliary device details like friendly names or complete BD
ADDR data, they remain susceptible to unintended location privacy disclo-
sures. Effectively countering these perils mandates radical overhauls to the
Classic Bluetooth protocol, a venture beleaguered by legacy device constraints
and concomitant implementation adversities.
3.2.4
Continued Significance of Bluetooth Classic
In short, Chernyshev et al. [19] reflects on the augmented privacy attributes
of the BLE protocol, like address randomization.
Nevertheless, the study
emphasizes that irrespective of BLE’s progressive features, it is not envisaged
to eclipse Bluetooth Classic in the impending years. Such insights are pivotal
for wardriving pursuits, especially when zeroing in on older, and conceivably,
more susceptible devices.
24
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Contributions to Related Work
The studies has showcased the complexity of IoT’s structure and security
challenges in Bluetooth-enabled devices. Vulnerabilities stemming from Blue-
tooth’s decentralized security design and the potential threats from Bluetooth
wardriving techniques have also been highlighted.
Given this backdrop, this thesis aims to extend knowledge of wardriving
Bluetooth-enabled IoT devices, emphasizing its utility in exposing and map-
ping vulnerable devices in urban cities. To achieve this a Python-based tool
is developed that categorizes and maps Bluetooth-enabled devices from raw
wardriving data, employing a state-of-the-art NLP model to achieve optimal
results. Employing this tool as an accessible resource for the public to enhance
security measures is another objective of the thesis.
25
==PAGE:32==
4
Bluetooth Wardriving
This chapter details the Bluetooth wardriving process conducted in this thesis.
A laptop and an Android phone for GPS data were used for data collection.
The collected data was processed through a Python-based tool developed for
this thesis, utilizing the DistilBERT machine learning model. This model was
fine-tuned on labeled wardriving data collected in this thesis, and then used
to categorize IoT devices. The tool’s outputs, including an interactive map,
categorization charts, and detailed device listings, enhanced the IoT device
analysis greatly.
Additionally, the efficiency of DistilBERT in categorizing
IoT devices from wardriving data was compared against BERT using metrics
like F1 score and precision.
The workflow of this chapter is illustrated in
Figure 4.1.
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.1: Workflow visualization of the master’s thesis, encompassing six
phases: initial wardriving setup, DistilBERT fine-tuning, IoT device catego-
rization, result visualization, model performance evaluation, and device se-
lecting with ethically hacking.
27
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Wardriving and Python-Based Tool
For wardriving, only a laptop with Bluetooth capability equipped with Kismet
software, alongside an Android phone running the GPSd app for GPS coor-
dinates, were used. Kismet was chosen for its extensive logging capabilities
and sqlite3 compatibility. The typical Kismet interface during a wardrive is
shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Bluetooth signal capture during the wardrive as displayed on an
Android phone connected via SSH to the laptop.
28
==PAGE:35==
4.1.1
Running the Tool
Following the wardrive, Kismet produces a .kismet file. The Python-based
tool is also compatible with Wigle files. For the tool to operate, the following
steps need to be done:
1. Use sqlite3 to extract data from .kismet in .txt format after wardriv-
ing:
sqlite3 <kismet-output-file> "SELECT * FROM devices" > rawdata.txt
2. Run the tool’s graphical user interface (GUI) with python3:
python3 mapping-tool/gui
3. Select the rawdata.txt file(s) with ’Load Data’, and then click ’Run
Tool’. The GUI is shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Screenshot of the tool’s GUI with six loaded files.
4. Open the generated files in mapping-tool/outputs directory to see the
results: three graphs, a map highlighting all devices, and a device list.
29
==PAGE:36==
4.1.2
Tool Overview
The Python-based tool developed for this thesis categorizes and visualizes
data from Bluetooth wardriving. It employs the DistilBERT model for ma-
chine learning-based classification to categorize IoT devices based on their
manufacturer and device name, as identified during wardriving. Manufactur-
ers are determined based on the device’s MAC address, using a MAC vendor
lookup dataset provided by ieee.org, while the device name is derived from
the device itself if it is provided by device owner or manufacturer. The tool
produces interactive visualizations, such as maps and charts, illustrating the
distribution of devices and highlighting potentially vulnerable ones.
4.1.2.1
Fine-tuning DistilBERT
To categorize devices effectively, the tool employs the DistilBERT model, a
deep learning NLP model. The DistilBERT model is fine-tuned with a labeled
wardriving dataset, that labels devices based on keywords found in the manu-
facturer and device names. The labeled wardriving dataset is generated from
wardriving data collected during this thesis. The labeled dataset is then split
into training (80%) and validation (20%) sets, specifically used for fine-tuning
DistilBERT. After fine-tuning, the model is loaded into the tool, where it cat-
egorizes each device, found during wardriving, based on device manufacturer
and device name. The categorization is based on predefined labels the model
was trained on. If the model’s confidence in a predicted category exceeds a
threshold of 0.9, the device is categorized accordingly. If it falls short, the
device is labeled as ’Uncategorized’, ensuring precision in classification.
4.1.3
Tool Output Files
The files (figures and map) within the mapping-tool/outputs directory are
generated after running the tool on the wardriving data. The output consists
of five files:
• map.html: An interactive map file displaying the geographical locations
of devices. It allows for the categorization-based visualization of devices,
tracking of devices over time, and access to detailed information via
clickable device markers.
• bt_type.html: An interactive bar chart file showing the count of devices
by their Bluetooth type, differentiating between BLE and Bluetooth
Classic.
• device_categories.html: An interactive bar chart that visualizes the
number of devices per category, using a color-coded scheme to represent
the distribution across different categories.
30
==PAGE:37==
• scatter.html: An interactive scatter plot that essentially combines
device_categories_plot_bar.html and bt_type.html.
• devices_for_inspection.txt: A sorted text file listing unique com-
binations of manufacturer, common name, category, MAC address, and
location for each detected device. It serves as a textual database for
further inspection or analysis.
4.1.3.1
Evaluating Model Performance
Similar to the approach in [30], this thesis evaluates the performance of Dis-
tilBERT relative to its predecessor, BERT. Both models were fine-tuned on
identical wardriving data sets and assessed using the same evaluation script.
Model
F1 Score
Precision
Score
Evaluation
Loss
Runtime
BERT
0,9951
0,995
0,0442
588
DistilBERT
0,9965
0,996
0,0318
166
DistilBERT
Improvement
in percentage
1,4%
0,1%
28,0%
71,8%
Table 4.1: Comparison of BERT and DistilBERT model results.
The evaluation metrics provide insights into the performance of each model.
The F1 score, a harmonic mean of precision and recall, indicates overall model
accuracy, where a higher score reflects minimized false positives and false neg-
atives. Precision score, which measures the accuracy of positive predictions,
and evaluation loss, a metric for performance on unseen data, are also critical.
Additionally, runtime is a significant factor, especially in tasks requiring heavy
data processing [13, 26].
DistilBERT showcased notable performance across these metrics. It achieved a
higher F1 score and precision score than BERT, indicating its greater effective-
ness in accurate predictions and in correctly identifying categories. Addition-
ally, DistilBERT’s evaluation loss was lower, suggesting better generalization
in scenarios involving unseen devices. Furthermore, in terms of runtime, Dis-
tilBERT completed evaluations much more quickly, highlighting its efficiency
in handling data-intensive tasks.
31
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Overview of Wardriving in Copenhagen
The wardriving activity spanned five primary areas: Østerbro, Nørrebro, Fred-
eriksberg, Indre By, and the region north of Copenhagen. The data from Indre
By and regions north of Copenhagen was fetched from previous wardriving
datasets. During the Østerbro wardriving, Rigshospitalet was specifically tar-
geted to demonstrate the possibility of discovering vulnerable IoT devices
within critical infrastructure. The collective wardriving route performed in
this thesis is depicted in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Wardriving route undertaken in this thesis.
32
==PAGE:39==
4.2.1
Explanation of Plots
The figures below are based on data gathered through wardriving and are gen-
erated by the tool. Each figure can be found the directory mapping-tool/outputs.
Figure 4.5 displays the distribution of devices split into categories, as defined
within the tool, which DistilBERT was fine-tuned on to categorize with higher
accuracy. Specifically, the figure shows 15 different categories into which all
the identified devices are split. For instance, more than 16000 devices were
categorized as Smart Audio Devices, such as wireless earbuds and home audio
systems. The category ’Uncategorized’ includes the remaining devices that
fell below DistilBERT’s confidence threshold of 0.9. Figure 4.6 shows the dif-
ferent device categories and their corresponding percentage of BLE volume
compared to Bluetooth Classic in a scatter plot.
Figures 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9 present the output map from the tool.
Specifi-
cally, Figure 4.7 displays vehicles and smartphones, while Figure 4.8 showcases
smart lighting systems and smart surveillance systems. Figure 4.9 illustrates
vehicles with lines between those observed twice. The interactive map file,
map.html, can be opened to inspect additional details for each device, such
as location, device name, manufacturer, MAC address, and radio type. This
enables users to identify and map potentially vulnerable devices.
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.5: Aggregate categorization of all detected IoT devices.
Figure 4.6: Scatter plot showing BLE percentage compared to Bluetooth Clas-
sic (x-axis) and device volume (y-axis) for each category.
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.7:
Map view highlighting
vehicles (lightblue) and smartphones
(violet).
Figure 4.8:
Map view highlighting
smart lightning systems (gold) and
smart surveillance (cyan).
Figure 4.9: Map view highlighting vehicle tracking through lines connecting
vehicles observed twice, specifically those with the same MAC address detected
on separate wardriving trips.
35
==PAGE:42==
4.2.2
Rigshospitalet Wardriving
The figures below are the results of wardriving for Bluetooth-enabled IoT de-
vices at Rigshospitalet in Østerbro. Figure 4.10 shows the device distribution,
and 4.11 shows an example of the map filtering for specific IoT devices.
Figure 4.10: Aggregate categorization of all detected IoT devices at Rigshos-
pitalet.
Figure 4.11: Map view at Rigshospitalet, highlighting smart TV’s (beige),
smartphones (violet), smartwatches (lightgreen), and computers (orange).
36
==PAGE:43==
5
Bluetooth Wardriving:
Results
In this chapter, the results of Bluetooth wardriving in Copenhagen are pre-
sented. The findings focus on vulnerable IoT devices, examining them to high-
light their vulnerabilities. To ascertain these vulnerabilities, cvedetails.com[21]
and cve.mitre.org[22] were utilized to compile a top 10 list of vulnerable de-
vices. Some of these devices were selected for ethical hacking demonstrations
to practically illustrate their vulnerabilities.
5.1
Top 10 Vulnerable IoT Devices Identified
This section presents a list of the most vulnerable IoT devices identified during
the wardriving. Selection criteria for these devices included:
1. Prevalence in Copenhagen (frequency of detection).
2. CVE ratings obtained from subsequent research.
3. The recency of CVE publication dates.
The focus was exclusively on CVEs related to Bluetooth vulnerabilities. Each
device in the list only has a single CVE detailed, which has the highest CVE
score while having a Bluetooth correlation. The devices are ranked from the
most to the least vulnerable, with a summary provided in Table 5.1.
37
==PAGE:44==
Rank
Device
Total
Detections
CVE
Max
CVE
Base
Score
Published
Patched
Category
by the
Tool
#1
iPhone
5769
-
-
2023-10-01
-
Apple
Inc.
#2
Hikvision
Surveillance
Camera
2
CVE-2017-7921
10
2017-05-06
2017-12-19
Smart
Surveillance
#3
Oneplus
Phone
5038
CVE-2017-5554
9,3
2017-01-23
2019-10-03
Smartphone
#4
Linksys
Router
16
CVE-2020-35713
10
2020-12-26
2020-12-28
Smart
Router
#5
Nest Cam
5
CVE-2019-5035
9.0
2019-08-20
2022-06-27
Smart
Surveillance
#6
Philips
Smart
Bridge
291
CVE-2020-6007
7,9
2020-01-23
2023-03-01
Smart
Lighting
#7
Tile Tracker
36
CVE-2014-10374
6,6
2019-07-15
2019-07-24
Smart
Tracking
Device
#8
Bose
Soundtouch
Speaker
2679
CVE-2018-12638
6,1
2019-03-21
2019-03-21
Smart
Audio
Device
#9
Huawei
Smartwatch
425
CVE-2022-48305
5,5
2023-02-27
2023-03-07
Smartwatch
#10
Bekey
369
-
-
-
-
Smart
Door
Lock
Table 5.1: Summary of top 10 IoT findings.
5.1.1
iPhones
During the wardriving, 5769 devices from Apple were detected. In the Python-
based tool developed as part of this thesis, devices from Apple were categorized
as Apple Inc. since the tool could only recognize manufacturer names and
not specific device names from Apple devices. However, it is assumed that
several of the devices were iPhones. While no known Bluetooth-related CVE
exists for iPhones [21] [22], a zero-day exploit was published in September
2023 [69, 56].
5.1.1.1
Apple Device Vulnerability: Notification Spam & Crashes
Apple devices, specifically iPhones, leverage ADV packets for diverse function-
alities. Given the open detectability of these packets, they become vulnerable
to malicious cloning and subsequent modifications. This susceptibility allows
38
==PAGE:45==
threat actors to induce spam notifications or cause crashes on iPhones running
iOS 17.
• Attack Vector and Complexity: The attack primarily capitalizes
on the flawed handling of ADV packets by iOS 17. An attacker can
emulate these packets causing iPhones within the device’s proximity to
be flooded with notifications or system crashes. The complexity of the
attack requires only necessary tools for emulation.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: Malefactors can capture legiti-
mate ADV packets, then replicate and modify them for malicious intent.
• Potential Risk Environments: Public spaces with a high density of
iPhone users, especially those running iOS 17, are most at risk. This
includes urban centers, public transportation hubs, and events.
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: Apart from the direct exploitation of
the ADV packet vulnerability, the foundational issue lies in the flawed
processing of BLE packets by the iOS system.
This presents oppor-
tunities for other BLE-centric attacks, especially if the iPhone’s BLE
functionalities are misconfigured or if backward compatibility modes are
active [69, 56].
5.1.2
Hikvision Surveillance Camera
During the wardriving, two devices from Hikvision were detected.
These
devices were categorized as Smart Surveillance by the tool.
According
to [21] [22], six documented CVEs in Hikvision cameras exist.
5.1.2.1
CVE-2017-7921
Certain Hikvision camera models across various firmware builds have been
identified with an incorrect user authentication issue. This issue arises when
the device’s application does not stringently validate user identities [21] [22].
• Attack Vector and Complexity: To exploit this vulnerability, a ma-
licious actor would need intricate knowledge of BLE’s encryption and
authentication frameworks, especially if these camera models use BLE
versions before 4.2, which lack the robustness of Secure Connections
Only Mode.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: Malefactors could exploit the
weak authentication system to escalate their system privileges, accessing
restricted features or data. If these cameras utilize BLE’s legacy key
generation, where keys were transported openly during pairing, they
could be at higher risk.
39
==PAGE:46==
• Potential Risk Environments: Environments where these Hikvision
camera models are installed, especially if their authentication mecha-
nisms remain at default settings or are inadequately configured in align-
ment with the BLE security modes and levels, are most susceptible.
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: If these cameras utilize early BLE ver-
sions, their use of a Long-Term Key (LTK) might render them suscep-
tible to attacks that target this key. Conversely, if they implement the
BLE 4.2 specifications, their defenses against the Pairing Process Attack
would likely be more robust, but vulnerabilities could still emerge from
misconfigurations or backward compatibility issues.
5.1.3
Oneplus Phone
During the wardriving, 5038 devices from OnePlus were detected.
Among
them were OnePlus 2, OnePlus 3s, and OnePlus 5 phones.
These devices
were categorized as Smartphone by the tool. According to [21] [22], 15 CVEs
in OnePlus phones exist.
5.1.3.1
CVE-2017-5554
OxygenOS’s ABOOT in OnePlus 3 and 3T before 4.0.2 contains a vulner-
ability wherein attackers can reboot the device into fastboot mode without
authentication. This allows attackers to put the device’s SELinux in a per-
missive state, considerably weakening its security [21] [22].
• Attack Vector and Complexity: The ABOOT component of OxygenOS
serves as the primary attack vector. Rebooting the device into fastboot
mode without authentication exposes the device’s inherent weaknesses.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: Attackers, using physical access
or ADB, can reboot the device into fastboot mode, bypassing BLE’s
AES-CCM encryption. This move sets SELinux in a permissive state,
weakening AES-CCM-based encryption and authentication.
• Potential Risk Environments: Environments allowing physical or
ADB access, especially where Legacy BLE Key Generation is practiced,
pose higher risks. The transmission of LTK, IRK, and CSRK keys during
pairing amplifies interception vulnerabilities.
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: Through a BlueDump Attack, attackers
can spoof the BD_ADDR of the OnePlus device, potentially deleting
the link key and bypassing BLE’s service-level security protocols. Simi-
larly, a Pairing Process Attack in legacy BLE versions might undermine
the Bluetooth pairing security, enabling attackers to intercept the trans-
mitted LTK and achieve unauthorized access.
40
==PAGE:47==
5.1.4
Linksys Router
During the wardriving, 16 devices from Linksys were identified, with 14 being
manufactured by Belkin International and 2 being manufactured by Cisco.
These devices were categorized as Smart Routes by the tool.
According
to [21] [22], 94 documented vulnerabilities in various models of Linksys routers
exist.
5.1.4.1
CVE-2020-35713
Certain Belkin LINKSYS devices exhibit an exploitable command execution
vulnerability associated with their Weave Legacy Pairing functionality. Ex-
plicitly, remote attackers can wield arbitrary commands or even instate a
new password via the transmission of shell metacharacters to the goform/set-
SysAdm page [21] [22].
• Attack Vector and Complexity: The root cause of this vulnerability
lies in the Weave Legacy Pairing functionality of the Belkin LINKSYS
devices. An adversarial entity can exploit this weak point by sending
malicious payloads to the goform/setSysAdm page during device pairing
or re-pairing.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: During the pairing phase, this
vulnerability can be exploited by delivering shell metacharacters to the
targeted page, which can enact arbitrary commands or reconfigure the
device’s password. Proper implementation of BLE’s foundational en-
cryption and authentication, specifically AES-CCM with 128-bit keys,
could act as a significant deterrent against these threats.
• Potential Risk Environments: Settings where Belkin LINKSYS de-
vices are in the process of pairing or re-pairing, especially with the Weave
Legacy Pairing functionality active and accessible, are at elevated risk
of compromise.
• Bluetooth-specific correlation: This vulnerability primarily concerns
unauthorized command execution during the pairing sequence. Hence a
Pairing Process Attack can be achieved where malicious activities can
be initialized before or subsequent to Bluetooth pairing.
5.1.5
Nest Cam
During the wardriving, 11 devices from Nest Labs were detected, of which five
were Nest Cams. These devices were categorized as Smart Surveillance by
the tool. According to [21] [22], six documented CVEs in Nest Cams exist.
41
==PAGE:48==
5.1.5.1
CVE-2019-5035
The Nest Cam IQ Indoor exhibits an exploitable information disclosure vulner-
ability within the Weave PASE pairing functionality. This weakness permits
an attacker to brute force a pairing code through a series of specially crafted
weave packets, thereby granting potentially unauthorized Weave access and
full device control [21] [22].
• Attack Vector and Complexity: The main attack vector targets the
device’s Weave PASE pairing feature. To exploit this, an attacker sends
specific packets.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: Strategically designed weave pack-
ets can brute force the device’s pairing code.
• Potential Risk Environments: Vulnerability exploitation can occur
in environments where the Weave PASE pairing functionality is both
active and accessible. Given the emphasis on Long-Term Key (LTK)
in BLE security, if an attacker gains access to it, the device could be
further compromised since the LTK is fundamental to encrypted com-
munication.
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: The CVE pertains to Weave PASE pair-
ing, but its connection to BLE is highlighted by the use of pairing codes.
A Pairing Process Attack could target BLE’s key creation and verifica-
tion stages.
In BLE versions up to 4.1, key exposure during pairing
presents security risks. Additionally, a PIN Cracking Attack might at-
tempt to decipher the pairing code.
5.1.6
Philips Smart Bridge
To control a Philips Smart Lightning via phone, a smart bridge connected to
the router is required, suggesting that a majority of users likely have a bridge
as well. During the wardriving, 291 Hue devices from Philips were detected.
They were categorized as Smart Lighting by the tool. According to [21] [22],
three documented CVEs in Philips Hue lighting systems and their bridges
exist.
5.1.6.1
CVE-2020-6007
The Philips Hue Bridge, which utilizes the Zigbee communication standard,
contains a heap-based buffer overflow vulnerability when handling a long ZCL
(Zigbee Cluster Library) string during the commissioning phase. This ZCL
string is a sequence of data within the Zigbee protocol. Improper management
of these strings can lead to remote code execution [21] [22].
42
==PAGE:49==
• Attack Vector and Complexity: To effectively exploit this weakness,
an attacker would need a comprehensive understanding of the specific
device’s protocols and possibly BLE’s encryption and authentication
mechanism, which is anchored on the AES-CCM framework with 128-
bit keys.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: Attackers could leverage known
vulnerabilities in early BLE pairing processes to execute arbitrary code
on the Philips Hue Bridge. This exploitation strategy builds upon classic
BLE threats but targets the device’s unique operational stage.
• Potential Risk Environments: Environments at risk include any
setting where the Philips Hue Bridge is undergoing its commissioning
phase. An area with inadequate enforcement of BLE security modes,
especially those below Security Mode 1 Level 4, could be particularly
vulnerable.
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: In BLE versions up to 4.1, key transport
during pairing presents security risks. If an attacker breaches the LTK at
creation or use, they can access and send malicious ZCL strings during
commissioning, turning potential vulnerabilities into real threats.
5.1.7
Tile Tracker
During the wardriving, 36 Tile trackers were detected. These devices were
categorized as Smart Tracking Device by the tool. No documented CVEs
for Tile trackers were found during the research, however, the absence of
MAC randomization in Tile devices, could facilitate individual tracking [12].
Interestingly, similar to Tile trackers, Fitbit smartwatches also do not utilize
MAC randomization, also leading to trackability. However, a CVE exists for
Fitbit smartwatches detailing this specific vulnearablity [21] [22].
5.1.7.1
CVE-2014-10374
Fitbit activity-trackers, like Tile Trackers, exhibit a privacy vulnerability due
to unchanging addresses in their BLE advertising packets. Despite indicating
random addresses, these constant addresses lead to potential user trackability
without any anonymization options, raising significant privacy concerns as
highlighted in the popets-2019-0036.pdf document [21] [22].
• Attack Vector and Complexity: The vulnerability’s primary attack
vector is the BLE advertising mechanism of Fitbit devices. Exploitation
is possible through passive sniffing of BLE advertising packets.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: An adversary can exploit this
vulnerability by setting up passive sniffing in multiple locations.
By
43
==PAGE:50==
capturing and analyzing BLE packets, the adversary can track the de-
vice’s movement.
• Potential Risk Environments: The risk of exploitation is particu-
larly high in environments where multiple BLE sniffing setups are fea-
sible. The stationary nature of these BLE addresses makes it easier for
adversaries to track devices over time and across different locations.
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: Although the vulnerability primarily con-
cerns permanent address usage in BLE advertising packets, it highlights
broader privacy issues in BLE’s addressing mechanisms.
The persis-
tent nature of these addresses could allow for additional attack vectors
focused on long-term tracking and user privacy invasion.
5.1.8
Bose Soundtouch Speaker
During the wardriving, 2679 Bose devices were detected.
However, deter-
mining which of these devices employ the SoundTouch technology is not de-
termined by the tool. Although, examining the device names individually,
such as device name ’BoseSoundTouchSetupIOS’, it is evident that certain de-
vices do utilize the SoundTouch technology. These devices were categorized as
Smart Audio Device by the tool. According to [21] [22], five CVEs in Bose
SoundTouch devices exist.
5.1.8.1
CVE-2018-12638
The Bose Soundtouch application for iOS was found to be vulnerable due to
improper validation of the input for the device’s name. This vulnerability
may permit malicious JavaScript code to execute within a linked Bose User
Account once a speaker is connected [21] [22].
• Attack Vector and Complexity: The main vector for this vulner-
ability is via the device’s naming mechanism within the application,
potentially during a BLE setup via a Bluetooth connection.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: An attacker can employ a mali-
cious string containing the JavaScript payload as the device name. Once
this device gets linked to the Bose User Account, the payload might get
executed, paving the way for unintended consequences.
• Potential Risk Environments: Any environment where the Bose
Soundtouch application is deployed for speaker connectivity becomes a
potential target, especially during initial BLE device setup or renaming
of devices.
44
==PAGE:51==
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: Although the core vulnerability roots in
an XSS attack, the device naming vector may often come into play during
the BLE setup or pairing process. If an adversary successfully leverages
BLE vulnerabilities, such as the traditional Just Works or Passkey Entry
pairing methodologies, or exploits key generation mechanisms in both
legacy and modern BLE, they could be in a prime position to capitalize
on this XSS flaw.
5.1.9
Huawei Smartwatch
During the wardriving, 425 devices from Huawei were detected, of which 32
were Huawei smartwatches. These devices were categorized as Smartwatch by
the tool. According to [21] [22], five CVEs in Huawei smartwatches exist.
5.1.9.1
CVE-2022-48305
An identity authentication bypass vulnerability is identified in the Huawei
Simba Children Smart Watch. A successful exploit could lead to unauthorized
access and a subsequent failure of access control for specific apps [21] [22].
• Attack Vector and Complexity: To exploit the device’s authentica-
tion, knowledge of BLE pairing methods is needed. Devices using legacy
techniques like Just Works, which default the TK to 0, are less secure
than newer BLE 4.2 ECDH methods.
• Potential Exploitation Strategies: Drawing from the changes in-
troduced in BLE 4.2, attackers could exploit the way devices alternate
between using the LTK for low energy communications and the Link
Key for Bluetooth Classic.
• Potential Risk Environments: Environments where the watch’s ap-
plications necessitate authentication aligning with either BLE Security
Mode 1 or BLE Security Mode 2 are potential hotspots. Especially, if
the service request fails to meet the linked service’s rigorous security
criteria, it becomes susceptible to threats.
• Bluetooth-specific attacks: An attacker could implement a PIN Crack-
ing Attack by targeting devices relying on Passkey Entry for pairing.
Given that BLE traditionally requires a user-mediated exchange of a
six-digit TK between devices, it becomes a likely target for brute-force
attempts to infer the PIN.
45
==PAGE:52==
5.1.10
Bekey
Bekey offers a Bluetooth-based digital access solution primarily for residential
properties, enabling convenient remote access management using Bluetooth
on your smartphone [9]. During wardriving, 369 Bekey locks were detected,
categorized as Smart Door Locks by the tool. While no CVEs were docu-
mented, Bekey’s reliance on Bluetooth makes it susceptible to sniffing and
Man-in-the-Middle attacks. Its encryption, presumably AES-CCM, provides
some defense, but the technology’s open broadcasting nature could expose it
to interception risks. Additionally, devices using Bluetooth up to version 4.1
might be vulnerable to attacks targeting the transition from TK to STK and
the primary keys like LTK and IRK.
46
==PAGE:53==
5.2
IoT Device Exploitation Demonstration
This section shows examples of how Bluetooth-enabled IoT devices discovered
during wardriving can be exploited, with an emphasis on Bluetooth-related
attacks.
5.2.1
iPhone Vulnerability: Notification Spam & Crashes
Apple iPhones employ ADV packets for functionalities like AirDrop, Apple
Watch, and AirTag connectivity. As these packets are openly detectable, they
are susceptible to cloning and subsequent modifications, enabling spam noti-
fications or crashes on iPhones running the latest firmware.
One device that can exploit this is the Flipper Zero, as it can capture and em-
ulate BLE ADV packets, allowing the creation of simulated devices around an
iPhone user. This leads to excessive notifications on iPhones within range [51,
69]. In addition, emulating modified packets with randomized values in sec-
tions usually filled with specific data can crash iPhones in range. When such
deceptive packets are processed, the iOS system malfunctions, causing a sys-
tem crash followed by a reboot [56]. Figure 5.1 and 5.2 showcase BLE spam-
ming an iPhone and Figure 5.3 showcase an iPhone crashing by a malformed
BLE ADV packet.
5.2.1.1
Other Affected Devices by BLE Spam
While Apple’s iOS devices are particularly susceptible to the aforementioned
BLE ADV packet spam exploit, they are not the sole victims. Recent discover-
ies show that Android phones and Windows machines with Swift Pair enabled
also are affected by similar BLE spam when Bluetooth is active. However,
these devices do not crash [3]. An instance of Android BLE spam is displayed
in Figure 5.4.
5.2.1.2
Dissecting the Exploit
Packet analysis using Wireshark of AirTags showed a consistent data structure
pattern, with slight variations. This structure allowed data replication via the
Flipper Zero. A sample of captured data:
0x1E, // Length
0xFF, // Type
0x4C, 0x00, // Apple, Inc.
0x0719050055100000014eca9189f2e68aa8c7dc1e4ac7d331ef52d3
// AirTag data
Simplifying this data revealed the essential part for generating a notification:
47
==PAGE:54==
0x0719050055100000014eca9189f2e68aa8c7dc1e4ac7d331ef52d3
// Airtag Data
0x071905005500000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
// Core Data for Notification
The consistent structure suggests that, once captured, the BLE data can be
replicated and simplified. Essentially, the exploit is based on iOS’s unauthen-
ticated processing of ADV packets.
Figure 5.1: Example of iPhone "Air-
play and Homekit" notification.
Figure 5.2: Example of iPhone "Un-
supported Device" notification.
Figure 5.3:
iPhone crashing due to
malformed BLE ADV packet.
Figure
5.4:
Example
of
Android
"JBL" notification.
5.2.2
Hikvision Vulnerability: Information Disclosure
As of writing this thesis, cameras by Hikvision are vulnerable to information
disclosure. Subdomain probing a Hikvision camera using Gobuster on Kali
Linux uncovered:
http://<camera ip>/doc/i18n/en/Login.json
http://<camera ip>/doc/i18n/en/Wizard.json
http://<camera ip>/doc/i18n/en/Common.json
48
==PAGE:55==
Further inspection of these subdomains suggest the use of default passwords,
as shown in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Default passwords identified from the subdomains.
5.2.3
Hikvision Vulnerability: Unauthorized Access
Some Hikvision camera models possess a vulnerability allowing unauthorized
access to live snapshots, user lists, and camera configurations. This arises due
to an oversight in the web interface authentication. For instance, in order to
grab snapshot from the camera, users can access the following URL for a given
camera:
http://<camera ip>/onvif-http/snapshot
However, this prompts the user for authentication credentials. Although, users
can exploit a loophole by appending an authentication string to attain a snapt-
shot bypassing credentials:
http://<camera ip>/onvif-http/snapshot?auth=YWRtaW46MTEK
In other words, simply appending auth=YWRtaW46MTEK provides unauthorized
access to the camera. An example is shown in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Bypassing Hikvision’s web interface access control with hardcoded
auth string. Image source found at [41].
49
==PAGE:56==
Further exploration reveals bypass methods for viewing the entire camera
configuration or retrieving user lists, as in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Bypassing Hikvision’s access control with hardcoded auth string.
Image source found at [41].
The auth parameter, ’YWRtaW46MTEK’, is Base64 encoded, translating to "ad-
min:11" [43]. This vulnerability mirrors challenges in Bluetooth devices with
legacy pairing methods. The CVE underscores risks in systems with insuf-
ficient authentication or encryption, prevalent in Bluetooth-enabled devices.
This CVE was disclosed on 2017-05-06 and updated on 2017-12-19 [21] [22].
50
==PAGE:57==
5.2.4
Nest Cam Vulnerability: Brute Force
Nest devices utilize the Weave protocol for communication, which, similar to
Bluetooth, is a protocol designed for efficient and secure communication be-
tween IoT devices. The Weave protocol, divided into message, exchange, and
data layers, handles the complexity of device-to-device interaction. This is
analogous to how Bluetooth manages connections and data exchange between
devices, albeit with different technical implementations.
During Nest device setup, users employ a QR or a six-character code on
the device for JPAKE authentication. Given the computational intensity of
the JPAKE cycle, brute forcing typically appears unfeasible. Yet, these six-
character codes were found to align with Verhoeff base32 checksum values.
This alignment reduces the key space from 326 to 325, making brute force
attacks plausible. Benchmarks showed WeaveDeviceManager’s PASE pairing
had about 100 iterations in 1.3 seconds, implying brute forcing the entire key
space would roughly take a month [40].
Hence, if an attacker identifies the code for an unconfigured device, they can
replicate pairing and gaining full control of the device [40]. This CVE was
disclosed on 2019-08-20 and updated on 2022-06-27 [21] [22].
A theoretical sample terminal command for the brute force is:
$ python nest_bruteforce.py --target <nest_device_ip>
--code <six-character_code>
[INFO] Starting brute force attack on Nest device at
<nest_device_ip>
[INFO] Using base code: <six-character_code>
[INFO] Estimated iterations: 33,554,432
[...]
[SUCCESS] Match found! Pairing code: ABC123
[INFO] Device paired to attacker account.
51
==PAGE:58==
6
Discussion
This chapter offers a discussion of the collected data, emphasizing the broad
implications of Bluetooth wardriving in urban environments like Copenhagen.
It examines the data categorization process, implications of the findings, and
ideas for future work.
6.1
Effectiveness of Bluetooth Wardriving
The effectiveness of modern wardriving in identifying Bluetooth-enabled de-
vices in Copenhagen, as conducted in this thesis, is evident. The Python-
based tool developed for this thesis implemented a fine-tuned DistilBERT,
which successfully was fine-tuned on wardriving data collected for this thesis.
The tool proved successful as the model managed to categorize 93% of all de-
vices with a 0,9 confidence threshold, leaving only 7% in the ’uncategorized’
category. Notably, 87,5% of these devices utilized BLE, with the remaining
12,5% operating on Bluetooth Classic.
6.1.1
Device Category Assessment
The tool categorized the discovered devices into 15 distinct categories. Al-
though expanding the categories could have enabled more precise categoriza-
tions for certain devices, a deliberate choice was made to prioritize the simplic-
ity of obtaining an overview. The specific devices within each category can be
subsequently looked up in the device list outputted by the tool. The selected
categories were based on the prevalence of the most frequently occurring IoT
devices and chosen for their perceived likelihood to harbor vulnerabilities.
52
==PAGE:59==
6.1.2
Radio Type Assessment
BLE devices accounted for 87,5% of the detections, raising concerns about
general device security, as BLE is typically used in IoT devices focusing more
on power efficiency than security. The remaining 12,5% of devices using Blue-
tooth Classic are also noteworthy, especially since Bluetooth Classic has known
vulnerabilities in earlier versions, as detailed in the background chapter and
highlighted by NIST [53].
6.2
Limitations and Implications
One implication of the thesis was the tool’s inability to categorize the remain-
ing 7% of the devices. Also, even with a high confidence threshold of 0,9 in
the fine-tuned DistilBERT, some false positives were generated by the model.
These can be found in the device list located at
mapping-tool/outputs/devices_for_inspection.
These flaws might be
due to an improper fine-tuning, limitations in the code, or new, unrecognized
MAC addresses. Another challenge was to properly categorize devices from
Samsung Electronic, Apple Inc., and Logitech as only their manufacturer
names were available when wardriving. It is unclear whether this is a bug in
the code or a result of privacy features (encryption) in the devices. However,
a significant portion of these devices are likely smartphones, considering their
popularity in Denmark [67].
Finally, in the raw wardriving files, it was observed that the combined datasets
contained 752716 devices. After filtering for valid MAC addresses, location,
and identifiable manufacturer or device name, only 61168 devices remained.
Precisely, 91,87% of the devices were excluded from further analysis.
The
cause of this was not determined in this thesis, but it is likely that the filtered
devices used a high Bluetooth security mode and level, encrypting their data.
53
==PAGE:60==
6.3
Future Work
Future research may expand wardriving into additional areas, refining cate-
gorization models, and updating data processing techniques to capture more
IoT devices. This data could be leveraged to further fine-tune DistilBERT,
reducing the likelihood of device miscategorization and unrecognized devices.
Another project could be fine-tuning DistilBERT with the latest CVEs on a
regular basis. This approach would enable it to assign a potential risk score to
each detected device, aiding in the prompt identification of vulnerable devices
and notifying their owners.
Additionally, there is potential for developing a website similar to wigle.com,
tailored specifically for Bluetooth wardriving. Such a platform would enable
users to collectively upload data from Bluetooth-enabled wardriving, encour-
aging community involvement in addressing IoT security concerns. The de-
velopment process would include sending IoT device data to a server and
displaying the results on a website with a corresponding risk score.
Lastly, another aspect of the tool to investigate, is its potential ability to track
individuals and gain insight into user habits. In a real-world scenario, a store
can monitor individual customers’ shopping habits by identifying their per-
sonal items as they enter and exit the store. For example, a Bluetooth-enabled
smartwatch can be detected, and its movement through different departments
of the store can be traced, displaying the information on the tool’s map.
54
==PAGE:61==
7
Conclusion
The primary goal of this master’s thesis was to evaluate the effectiveness of
modern wardriving in identifying and mapping vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled
IoT devices within Copenhagen. Successfully achieved, this thesis has demon-
strated the capability of wardriving to achieve this, while also providing a
comprehensive exploration of the current state of IoT devices in Copenhagen.
Additionally, the development of the Python-based tool facilitated further
analysis of the data, revealing that a substantial number of the identified
Bluetooth-enabled devices could be systematically categorized and analyzed
for vulnerabilities. The findings were visualized on plots and an interactive
map, providing an accessible tool for the public to comprehend the ease with
which these devices can be detected and their vulnerabilities assessed.
Revisiting the research questions outlined in the introduction, it becomes ap-
parent that vulnerable IoT devices exist in Copenhagen and can be identified
through wardriving. Moreover, their vulnerabilities are observable, spanning
from low to highly critical levels. Additionally, it is evident that a Python-
based tool utilizing NLP could be developed to enhance the analysis.
In conclusion, this thesis contributes not only to the growing knowledge on
IoT security but also offers a tool that allows mapping and identification of
vulnerable Bluetooth-enabled devices.
It is hoped that these findings will
encourage further research and lead to the implementation of more stringent
security measures in the IoT landscape.
55
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
What
is
the
Internet
of
Things?,
chapter
1,
pages
1–27.
John
Wiley
Sons,
Ltd,
2013.
ISBN
9781118647059.
doi:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/9781118647059.ch1.
URL
https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/abs/
10.1002/9781118647059.ch1.
[2]
Internet of Things Definitions and Frameworks,
chapter 2,
pages
28–47.
John Wiley
Sons, Ltd, 2013.
ISBN 9781118647059.
doi:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/9781118647059.ch2.
URL
https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/abs/
10.1002/9781118647059.ch2.
[3]
Spam
ios,
android
and
windows
with
bluetooth
pairing
mes-
sages
using
flipper
zero
or
android
smartphone,
October
2023.
URL
https://www.mobile-hacker.com/2023/10/17/
spam-ios-android-and-windows-with-bluetooth-pairing-messages-using-flipper-zero-
Accessed: 2023-11-22.
[4]
M. Ahmed, A. Musleh, A. Marouf, A. Mahmoud, and M. Abu-
Amara.
Bluetooth security.
https://www.slideshare.net/ram_ari/
bluetooth-security, 2018. Accessed: 2023-09-02.
[5]
Sarah A. Al-Qaseemi, Hajer A. Almulhim, Maria F. Almulhim, and
Saqib Rasool Chaudhry. Iot architecture challenges and issues: Lack of
standardization. In 2016 Future Technologies Conference (FTC), pages
731–738, 2016. doi: 10.1109/FTC.2016.7821686.
[6]
Armis. The attack vector “blueborne” exposes almost every connected
device. https://www.armis.com/blueborne/, 2018. Accessed: 2023-09-
02.
[7]
Monika Asija.
Mac address.
IRA-International Journal of Technol-
ogy
Engineering (ISSN 2455-4480), 3(1), 2016. ISSN 2455-4480. doi:
56
==PAGE:63==
10.21013/jte.v3.n1.p5. URL https://research-advances.org/index.
php/IRAJTE/article/view/125.
[8]
A. Becker. Bluetooth security & hacks. https://gsyc.urjc.es/~anto/
ubicuos2/bluetooth_security_and_hacks.pdf, 2007. Accessed: 2023-
09-02.
[9]
Bekey. Bekey - home, 2023. URL https://www.bekey.dk/. Accessed:
2023-11-22.
[10] Hal Berghel. Wireless infidelity i: War driving. Communications of the
ACM, 47(9), 2004.
[11] C. Bisdikian. An overview of the bluetooth wireless technology. IEEE
Communications Magazine, 39(12):86–94, 2001. doi: 10.1109/35.968817.
[12] Jimmy Briggs and Christine Geeng. Ble-doubt: Smartphone-based detec-
tion of malicious bluetooth trackers. In 2022 IEEE Security and Privacy
Workshops (SPW), pages 208–214, 2022. doi: 10.1109/SPW54247.2022.
9833870.
[13] Carla Campàs Gené. Fine tuning transformer models for domain spe-
cific feature extraction. B.S. thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya,
2023.
[14] Luca Carettoni, Claudio Merloni, and Stefano Zanero. Studying blue-
tooth malware propagation: The bluebag project. IEEE Security & Pri-
vacy, 5(2):17–25, 2007.
[15] Ding Chao, Yang Lijun, and Wu Meng. Security architecture and key
technologies for iot/cps.
ZTE communications, 17:11–16, 2011.
URL
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:63572206.
[16] Danai Chasaki and Christopher Mansour. Security challenges in the in-
ternet of things. International Journal of Space Based and Situated Com-
puting, Special Issue on Future Internet: Services and Data Management,
5, 01 2015. doi: 10.1504/IJSSC.2015.070945.
[17] A Chatterjee, A Arora, A Pandey, and H Thakkar. Analysis and elicita-
tion of bluetooth versions and bluetooth attacks. Int. J. Mod. Comput.
Sci, 5:3–17, 2017.
[18] Dongyao Chen, Kang G. Shin, Yurong Jiang, and Kyu-Han Kim. Lo-
cating and tracking ble beacons with smartphones. CoNEXT ’17, page
263–275, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
ISBN 9781450354226.
doi: 10.1145/3143361.3143385.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3143361.3143385.
57
==PAGE:64==
[19] Maxim Chernyshev, Craig Valli, and Michael Johnstone. Revisiting ur-
ban war nibbling: Mobile passive discovery of classic bluetooth devices
using ubertooth one. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, 12(7):1625–1636, 2017.
[20] Peter Cope, Joseph Campbell, and Thaier Hayajneh. An investigation of
bluetooth security vulnerabilities. In 2017 IEEE 7th annual computing
and communication workshop and conference (CCWC), pages 1–7. IEEE,
2017.
[21] CVEDetails. Cvedetails vulnerabilities. https://www.cvedetails.com/
vulnerability-list/l, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[22] CVEDetails.
Cvemitre vulnerabilities.
https://cve.mitre.org/cve/
search_cve_list.html, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[23] Matthias Cäsar, Tobias Pawelke, Jan Steffan, and Gabriel Terhorst. A
survey on bluetooth low energy security and privacy.
Computer Net-
works, 205:108712, 2022. ISSN 1389-1286. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
comnet.2021.108712. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1389128621005697.
[24] Brittany D. Davis, Janelle C. Mason, and Mohd Anwar. Vulnerability
studies and security postures of iot devices: A smart home case study.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(10):10102–10110, 2020. doi: 10.1109/
JIOT.2020.2983983.
[25] Ellis Fenske, Dane Brown, Jeremy Martin, Travis Mayberry, Peter Ryan,
and Erik C Rye. Three years later: A study of mac address randomization
in mobile devices and when it succeeds. Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol.,
2021(3):164–181, 2021.
[26] Peter Flach.
Performance evaluation in machine learning: The good,
the bad, the ugly, and the way forward. Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, 33(01):9808–9814, Jul. 2019. doi: 10.
1609/aaai.v33i01.33019808.
URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/
AAAI/article/view/5055.
[27] Elgar Fleisch.
What is the internet of things?
an economic per-
spective. http://www.alexandria.unisg.ch/Publikationen/68983, Auto-ID
White Paper, 01 2007.
[28] Mario Frustaci, Pasquale Pace, Gianluca Aloi, and Giancarlo Fortino.
Evaluating critical security issues of the iot world: Present and future
challenges. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 5(4):2483–2495, 2018. doi:
10.1109/JIOT.2017.2767291.
58
==PAGE:65==
[29] Yang Geng, Xu Jian, Chen Wei, Qian Zhenghua, and Wang Haiyong.
Security characteristic and technology in the internet of things. Journal
of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 30:20–29, 2010.
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:168147020.
[30] Dimitrios Georgoulias, Jens Myrup Pedersen, Alice Hutchings, Morten
Falch, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. In the market for a botnet? an
in-depth analysis of botnet-related listings on darkweb marketplaces. In
Symposium on Electronic Crime Research (eCrime), 2023.
[31] Mohammad Ghamari, Emma Villeneuve, Cinna Soltanpur, Javad Khang-
osstar, Balazs Janko, R. Simon Sherratt, and William Harwin. Detailed
examination of a packet collision model for bluetooth low energy adver-
tising mode. IEEE Access, 6:46066–46073, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2018.2866323.
[32] Naresh
Gupta.
6.3.2
bluetooth
smart
ready
(hubs),
2016.
URL
https://app.knovel.com/hotlink/khtml/id:kt012GL621/
inside-bluetooth-low/bluetooth-smart-ready.
[33] Stuti Gupta, Bharat Chaudhari, and Boudhayan Chakrabarty. Vulner-
able network analysis using war driving and security intelligence. Lec-
ture Notes in Networks and Systems, pages 465–471, 11 2018.
doi:
10.1007/978-981-10-3812-9_49.
[34] K. Haataja. Security threats and countermeasures in bluetooth-enabled
systems.
2009.
URL http://epublications.uef.fi/pub/urn_isbn_
978-951-27-0111-7/urn_isbn_978-951-27-0111-7.pdf. Kuopio Uni-
versity Publications H. Business and Information Technology 13. Page
75.
[35] Albert F. Harris III, Vansh Khanna, Guliz Tuncay, Roy Want, and Robin
Kravets. Bluetooth low energy in dense iot environments. IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, 54(12):30–36, 2016. doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2016.
1600546CM.
[36] Albert F Harris III, Vansh Khanna, Guliz Tuncay, Roy Want, and Robin
Kravets. Bluetooth low energy in dense iot environments. IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, 54(12):30–36, 2016.
[37] Zhihua Hu. The research of several key question of internet of things. In
2011 International Conference on Intelligence Science and Information
Engineering, pages 362–365, 2011. doi: 10.1109/ISIE.2011.107.
[38] IEEE.
Ieee registration authority - products & programs.
https:
//standards.ieee.org/products-programs/regauth/, Sep 2021. Ac-
cessed: 2023-09-25.
59
==PAGE:66==
[39] IERC. Internet of things. http://www.internet-of-things-research.
eu/about_iot.htm, 2014. Accessed: 2023-09-25.
[40] Talos
Intelligence.
Vulnerability
reports.
https://www.
talosintelligence.com/vulnerability_reports/TALOS-2019-0798,
2019. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[41] IPVM. Hikvision’s hidden security camera backdoor exposed. https:
//ipvm.com/reports/hik-exploit, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[42] Kang Eun Jeon, James She, Perm Soonsawad, and Pai Chet Ng. Ble
beacons for internet of things applications: Survey, challenges, and op-
portunities. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 5(2):811–828, 2018. doi:
10.1109/JIOT.2017.2788449.
[43] JrDw0.
Cve-2017-7921
exploit.
https://github.com/JrDw0/
CVE-2017-7921-EXP, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[44] Anil Kumar, Jafer Hussain, and Anthony Chun. Connecting the Internet
of Things: IoT Connectivity Standards and Solutions. Apress, 1 edition,
2023. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8897-9.
[45] Angela M. Lonzetta, Peter Cope, Joseph Campbell, Bassam J. Mohd,
and Thaier Hayajneh. Security vulnerabilities in bluetooth technology
as used in iot.
Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, 7(3), 2018.
ISSN 2224-2708. doi: 10.3390/jsan7030028. URL https://www.mdpi.
com/2224-2708/7/3/28.
[46] Alison Mackey and Lara Bryfonski.
Mixed Methodology, pages 103–
121. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 2018. ISBN 978-1-137-59900-1.
doi: 10.1057/978-1-137-59900-1_5.
URL https://doi.org/10.1057/
978-1-137-59900-1_5.
[47] Francesca Meneghello, Matteo Calore, Daniel Zucchetto, Michele Polese,
and Andrea Zanella. Iot: Internet of threats? a survey of practical secu-
rity vulnerabilities in real iot devices. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
6(5):8182–8201, 2019. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2935189.
[48] Nateq Be-Nazir Ibn Minar and Mohammed Tarique. Bluetooth security
threats and solutions: a survey. International Journal of Distributed and
Parallel Systems, 3(1):127, 2012. doi: 10.5121/ijdps.2012.3110.
[49] A. Moreno and E. Okamoto. Bluesnarf revisited: Obex ftp service direc-
tory traversal.
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%
2F978-3-642-23041-7_16.pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2023-09-02.
60
==PAGE:67==
[50] Mukrimah Nawir, Amiza Amir, Naimah Yaakob, and Ong Bi Lynn. In-
ternet of things (iot): Taxonomy of security attacks. In 2016 3rd inter-
national conference on electronic design (ICED), pages 321–326. IEEE,
2016.
[51] noproto. Apple ble spam for ofw. https://github.com/noproto/apple_
ble_spam_ofw, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[52] Null-Byte.
Using
multiblue
to
control
any
mobile
de-
vice.
https://null-byte.wonderhowto.com/how-to/
hack-bluetooth-part-2-using-multiblue-control-any-mobile-device-0164377/,
2018. Accessed: 2023-09-25.
[53] J. Padgette et al. Guide to bluetooth security, 2nd ed. Technical Report
800-121 Rev. 2, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
2022.
[54] Trishna Panse and Prashant Panse. A survey on security threats and
vulnerability attacks on bluetooth communication. International Journal
of Computer Science and Information Technologies, 4(5):741–746, 2013.
[55] Marija Rakic-Skokovic. Guidelines for overcoming some iot security is-
sues. In Proceedings of the XVII International Scientific Conference on
Industrial Systems (IS’17), Novi Sad, Serbia, pages 4–6, 2017.
[56] RapierXbox.
Ios17 crash exploit.
https://github.com/RapierXbox/
ESP32-Sour-Apple, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[57] RedHat. Cve-2017-1000251. https://access.redhat.com/security/
cve/cve-2017-1000251, 2017. Accessed: 2023-09-02.
[58] Jenny Röbesaat, Peilin Zhang, Mohamed Abdelaal, and Oliver Theel. An
improved ble indoor localization with kalman-based fusion: An experi-
mental study. Sensors, 17(5):951, 2017.
[59] Gab-Sang Ryu. Ble beacon based online offline tourism and solutions for
regional tourism activation. Journal of Internet of Things and Conver-
gence, 2(2):21–26, 2016.
[60] Sagar Samtani, Shuo Yu, Hongyi Zhu, Mark Patton, and Hsinchun Chen.
Identifying scada vulnerabilities using passive and active vulnerability
assessment techniques.
In 2016 IEEE Conference on Intelligence and
Security Informatics (ISI), pages 25–30. IEEE, 2016.
[61] K Saravanan, L Vijayanand, and RK Negesh. A novel bluetooth man-
in-the-middle attack based on ssp using oob association model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1203.4649, 2012.
61
==PAGE:68==
[62] Seth Sevier and Ali Tekeoglu. Analyzing the security of bluetooth low en-
ergy. In 2019 International Conference on Electronics, Information, and
Communication (ICEIC), pages 1–5, 2019. doi: 10.23919/ELINFOCOM.
2019.8706457.
[63] Bluetooth SIG. 2020 bluetooth market update. Technical report, Blue-
tooth Special Interest Group, 2020.
[64] Bluetooth SIG. Bluetooth core specification version 5.3. Technical report,
Bluetooth Special Interest Group, 2023.
[65] Manuel Silverio, Suresh Renukappa, and Subashini Suresh.
What is
a smart device?
- a conceptualisation within the paradigm of the
internet of things.
Visualization in Engineering, 6, 05 2018.
doi:
10.1186/s40327-018-0063-8.
[66] Petros Spachos and Konstantinos Plataniotis. Ble beacons in the smart
city: Applications, challenges, and research opportunities. IEEE Internet
of Things Magazine, 3(1):14–18, 2020. doi: 10.1109/IOTM.0001.1900073.
[67] Danmarks
Statistik.
Elektronik
i
hjemmet,
2023.
URL
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/oekonomi/forbrug/
elektronik-i-hjemmet. Accessed: 2023-11-22.
[68] Hui Suo, Jiafu Wan, Caifeng Zou, and Jianqi Liu. Security in the internet
of things: A review.
In 2012 International Conference on Computer
Science and Electronics Engineering, volume 3, pages 648–651, 2012. doi:
10.1109/ICCSEE.2012.373.
[69] Techryptic.
Annoying
apple
fans:
The
flipper
zero
blue-
tooth prank revealed.
https://techryptic.github.io/2023/09/01/
Annoying-Apple-Fans/, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[70] Trifinite.
Bluedump.
https://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_
bluedump.html, 2018. Accessed: 2023-09-02.
[71] Trifinite.
Blueprinting.
https://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_
bluesmack.html, 2018. Accessed: 2023-09-25.
[72] Trifinite.
Thelomoto.
https://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_
helomoto.html, 2018. Accessed: 2023-09-25.
[73] Vikethozo Tsira, Gypsy Nandi, et al.
Bluetooth technology: Security
issues and its prevention. A Survey. In International Journal of Computer
Technology and Applications (IJCTA) Vol, 5, 2014.
[74] Verónica Valeros and Sebastián García. How bluetooth may jeopardize
your privacy. an analysis of people behavioral patterns in the street.
MatesLab Hackspace, Mar del Plata, Argentina, 2013.
62
==PAGE:69==
[75] Tomislav Vresk and Igor Čavrak. Architecture of an interoperable iot
platform based on microservices. In 2016 39th International Convention
on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Micro-
electronics (MIPRO), pages 1196–1201, 2016. doi: 10.1109/MIPRO.2016.
7522321.
[76] Jiafu Wan, Hui Suo, Hehua Yan, and Jianqi Liu. A general test plat-
form for cyber physical systems: Unmanned vehicle with wireless sensor
network navigation.
Procedia Engineering, 24:123–127, 12 2011.
doi:
10.1016/j.proeng.2011.11.2613.
[77] Ryan Williams, Emma McMahon, Sagar Samtani, Mark Patton, and
Hsinchun Chen. Identifying vulnerabilities of consumer internet of things
(iot) devices: A scalable approach. In XD Zheng, H Zhang, CX Xing,
GA Wang, L Zhou, and B Luo, editors, 2017 IEEE INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY INFORMAT-
ICS (ISI), pages 179–181. IEEE Intelligent Transportat Systems Soc;
Univ Arizona, Off Vice President Res; Univ Arizona, Elle Coll Manage-
ment; Univ Arizona, Dept Management Informat Systems; Univ Arizona,
Artificial Intelligence Lab; Univ Chinese Acad Sci, 2017. ISBN 978-1-
5090-6727-5.
15th IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and
Security Informatics - Security and Big Data (ISI), Beijing, PEOPLES R
CHINA, JUL 22-24, 2017.
[78] Jacob Wurm, Khoa Hoang, Orlando Arias, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and
Yier Jin. Security analysis on consumer and industrial iot devices. In
2016 21st Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-
DAC), pages 519–524, 2016. doi: 10.1109/ASPDAC.2016.7428064.
[79] Jacob Wurm, Khoa Hoang, Orlando Arias, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and
Yier Jin. Security analysis on consumer and industrial iot devices. In
2016 21st Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-
DAC), pages 519–524, 2016. doi: 10.1109/ASPDAC.2016.7428064.
[80] Zhenhua Yu, Hongxia Gao, Xuya Cong, Naiqi Wu, and Houbing Song.
A survey on cyber-physical systems security. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, PP, 06 2023. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3289625.
63
==PAGE:70==
A
Running Kismet and
GPSd Client
A1
Kismet and GPSd Configuration
To prepare Kismet and GPSd, follow these steps:
1. Install the GPSd Client app on the Android phone via the Google Store.
2. On the computer, install GPSd and Kismet:
• sudo apt install gpsd
• sudo apt install kismet
3. Edit the Kismet configuration file (/etc/kismet/kismet.conf) and un-
comment:
• # gps=gpsd:host=localhost,port=2947
This ensures Kismet will start GPSd via systemd if it isn’t running. Note:
errors will be logged if the phone isn’t connected as a GPS source.
4. Open the GPSd configuration file:
• sudo vim /etc/default/gpsd
5. Update the gpsd configuration file as:
• OPTIONS="udp://*:9999"
6. Start GPSd and check its status:
• systemctl start gpsd
• systemctl status gpsd
7. Tether the computer to the phone via USB to utilize the phone’s 4G
network for connectivity. If your Wi-Fi adapter supports monitor mode,
you can use it for Wi-Fi wardriving as well.
64
==PAGE:71==
8. Ensure firewalls, like UFW, are not blocking unexpected connections or
ports.
9. Start GPSd Forwarder on your phone and send GPS coordinates to your
computer by entering your computer’s local IP address and a desired
port. To verify real-time GPS data reception on your computer, type:
• gpsmon
A2
Connecting the Phone and Computer
Next, establish a secure shell (SSH) connection from your phone to your com-
puter.
This allows remote monitoring and command execution during the
wardrive:
1. If OpenSSH Server is not installed on your Linux distribution, install it:
a) sudo apt install openssh-server
2. Start the SSH server:
• systemctl start ssh
3. Connect your phone to the computer’s SSH server using the app JuiceSSH
for Android.
A3
Executing the Wardrive
Once the initial setup is completed, the wardriving process can begin. This
primarily involves running Kismet and monitoring the progress.
1. Launch Kismet on the computer through the SSH connection from your
phone:
• sudo kismet
2. After starting, Kismet will display a port number in the terminal.
3. Access the Kismet interface by entering the computer’s local IP address
and the provided port in your phone’s browser.
4. Activate the built-in Bluetooth adapter in Kismet and ensure Bluetooth
signals are captured alongside GPS coordinates.
65
