==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis (2023-2024)
Human-centered Artificial Intelligence Engineering
Self-Supervised Denoising for Rician Image
Data
Author:
Thina Lundsgaard Thøgersen
(s165541)
Kongens Lyngby, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors: Assistant Professor Marco Pizzolato & Associate Professor Siavash Bigdeli
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In various image applications, denoising is a very important task, for uncovering
details in the image contrast. Recently, deep learning has been applied to denoise
data.
However, for these methods, you need to have access to the ground truth.
Obtaining high-quality ground truth data is in many applications expensive, this is
the case with medical imaging. Moreover, there is a risk, that the ground truths do
not include enough instances of abnormalities (e.g. pathology), potentially causing
the deep learning network to remove them. Self-supervised approaches, which do not
rely on ground truths, may then be used. While there are numerous of such methods,
these are mostly dealing with Gaussian noise. However, in medical imaging, such
as in MRI, we have Rician and Non-central Chi noise. In this thesis, we investigate
self-supervised denoising methods dealing with Gaussian, non-central chi, and Rician
noise distributions.
In particular, to achieve self-supervised denoising, we investigate risk estimates
which are approximations of the mean squared error (MSE) in the absence of a ground
truth. In the case of Gaussian noise we investigate the Stein’s unbiased risk estimate
(SURE), and in the case of Rician (non-central chi) noise, chi-square unbiased risk
estimate (CURE). The calculation of these risk estimates requires the knowledge of
the first-order derivatives of the network with respect to its noisy input. In particular,
for SURE this is required to calculate a divergence term. Moreover, for CURE we
also need knowledge of the second-order derivates, which are required for calculating
the elements of the network Hessian’s diagonal.
We proposed to use ”flow-like network architectures” which borrow strategies from
Normalizing Flows that allow a more straightforward calculation of the derivatives.
In particular, we propose a fast analytical version of SURE in the case of Gaussian
noise, which reduces the computation time compared to the state-of-the-art Monte
Carlo version. We finally proposed Monte Carlo CURE, an effective method to use
CURE in the context of self-supervised deep learning for denoising.
Keywords: Rician noise, Gaussian noise, Stein’s unbiased risk estimate, chi-
squared unbiased risk estimate, denoising, machine learning, self-supervised.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This project is conducted in fulfillment of the master’s in Human-centered Artificial
Intelligence at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project is written
with the Image Analysis Department at DTU Compute. The thesis presents work
conducted during the fall 2023.
Kongens Lyngby, 4th January 2024
Thina Lundsgaard Thøgersen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Assistant
Professor Marco Pizzolato and Associate Professor Siavash M. Bigdeli, for their invalu-
able inspiration, unwavering motivation, and countless innovative ideas throughout
this thesis. I am deeply grateful for all of the engaging discussions, their knowledge
and creativity, and for providing me with the opportunity to delve into research. I
extend my heartfelt thanks to Paula for her support, motivation, and scientific con-
tributions to this thesis.
I also want to thank my friends and family for always supporting and understand-
ing me it truly means the world. I appreciate our wonderful fun moments over the
years.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
AHT
Aﬀine hyperbolic tangent
CURE
Chi-square unbiased risk estimate
CNN
Convolutional neural network
DnCNN
Dense convolutional neural network
FCNN
Fully connected neural network
MC-CURE
Monte Carlo chi-squared unbiased risk estimate
MC-SURE
Monte Carlo Stein’s unbiased risk estimate
MLP
Multi-layer perceptron
MSE
Mean squared error
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
NF
Normalizing Flows
NSF
Neural Spline Flow
PDF
Probability density function
RQ
Rational-quadratic
SURE
Stein’s unbiased risk estimate
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aim of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Derivatives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Normalizing Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Aﬀine transformation and coupling layer . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Neural Spline Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Unbiased Risk Estimates of MSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Stein’s unbiased risk estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Monte-Carlo SURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Chi-squared unbiased risk estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methods
13
3.1
Derivation of CURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Monte Carlo CURE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Network Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.1
Aﬀine Hyperbolic Tangent Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Spline Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Implementation Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Data and modifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.4.2
Training pipelines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.3
Experiments setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Experiments
21
4.1
Gaussian data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Exact divergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Network convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Comparison of network performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Rician data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.1
Performance of CURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.2
Analytical diagonal Hessian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.3
Derivatives using automatic differentiation . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.4
Approximation (MC-CURE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.5
Method errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.6
Comparison of network performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Discussion
33
5.1
Interpretation of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Conclusion
37
Appendices
39
A.1 Derivation of CURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.1.1
Model and distribution of the noisy observations . . . . . . . .
41
A.1.2
Unbiased MSE estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.1.3
Derivation E(xnfn(y)) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.1.4
Estimation of x2
n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.1.5
Combining terms 1 and 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
B.2
Hessian of AHT Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Image denoising is a crucial step in many practical applications. It has become a
classical topic within computer vision and has sustained its interest in the era of
deep learning. This has led to numerous methods developed within image analysis
to increase signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). These methods aim to increase the SNR and
ideally to recover the underlying true values of an acquired image polluted with noise.
Low SNR in practical applications affects the further processing of the images, where
accurate analysis and modeling depend on high image quality.
An example of this is Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI). Due to thermal fluc-
tuations, when MRI images are acquired they are polluted with complex Gaussian
noise, i.e. the real and imaginary parts of the images are noisy with noise following a
zero-mean Gaussian distribution. In most MRI applications, the magnitude image is
obtained from the real and imaginary parts, where noise now follows a Rician distri-
bution [1]. This Rician distribution does not exhibit the same characteristics as the
Gaussian noise. It is not a simple addition to the true underlying image values. In
the Rician case, the amount of distortion of the image also depends on the underlying
image values. The noise is non-additive and depends on the true signal intensities,
therefore it cannot be seen as a separate distribution [1].
Let’s consider the true underlying image µ from which we have acquired a noisy
measurement m. Here µ can be described by its imaginary and real components. A
combination of additive zero-mean Gaussian noise to µ two parts is Magnitude image
m
|mn| = ((Re{µn} + N0,σ2)2 + (Im{µn} + N0,σ2)2)
1
2 , n = 1...N
(1.1)
for all N images pixels [2].
The Rician noise distribution introduces a problem for modeling and analysis of
images and since we cannot acquire µ, we need to find a denoising method that
depends solely on m. In this thesis, we focus on self-supervised denoising strategies
on deep learning.
In particular, we use deep learning in combination with losses
defined via ”risk estimates” both for Gaussian and Rician noise. These risk estimates
are predictors for the mean squared error between the noisy images and the ground
truth images. Using risk estimates it is then possible to train a denoising network in
a self-supervised manner, i.e. without having any ground-truth image.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Previous work
A common example of Rician data is MRI. Image enhancement within MRI is crucial
for the further processing of the images. Here common preprocessing steps are arti-
fact correction, noise reduction, and resolution enhancement. Here recent advances
in deep learning have shown promising results when being applied to MRI [3]. In gen-
eral, many conventual image analysis methods have been fine-tuned to denoise images
affected by Rician noise, an overview can be found in Mishro et al. [4]. However, the
advancement within deep learning networks for denoising has been applied to MRI,
but still, few are tailored to denoise this specific type of noise on the magnitude images.
Different approaches have been focusing on denoising Rician data as a supervised
problem using artificial data to train their model. Jiang et al. [5] proposed a con-
volutional neural network (CNN) with a multi-channel approach to the Dense CNN
(DnCNN) by Zhang et al. [6]. In their multi-channel approach, they make use of
the neighboring slices’ information to denoise the current slice and use the mean
squared error as a loss between the residuals. Ran et al. [7] proposed to utilize a
residual encoder-decoder Wasserstein generative adversarial network (RED-WGAN)
with contextual information between slices to denoise magnitude images.
It is crucial to notice that while those are all supervised methods, the quality of
the method also depends on the quality of the artificial data used to train the mod-
els. In supervised networks, there is the potential drawback of overlooking crucial
information related to tissue abnormalities. The network might not have encountered
enough instances of these abnormalities during training, and so it treats them as er-
rors to be corrected. However, these abnormalities could represent various diseases
that we aim to identify. To address this, the network needs to adapt by learning to
recognize the residuals, i.e., the differences between the predicted and actual values,
and understand their impact on the genuine image values.
Advances within deep learning have aimed at solving denoising as a self-supervised
problem when the true underlying images are unknown. In the case of Gaussian data,
a variety of self-supervised methods have been proposed. Some of the methods can
be categorized as Noise2X models where the target is modeled using different algo-
rithms [8]. The various methods that utilize this strategy [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] assume
zero-mean additive Gaussian noise.
Another group of self-supervised approaches is based on Stein’s unbiased risk
estimate (SURE) proposed by Stein [14] as a loss function, which is a statistical
equivalent to the mean squared error (MSE). He expands the MSE and finds that it
can be estimated through the noisy image, denoised image, and divergence of the de-
noiser function. Giving us an equivalent that can be used in a setting with Gaussian
noise, where the true images are unknown. Then Ramani et al. [15] found a way to
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Aim of thesis
3
approximate the divergence term in cases where we cannot find the derivatives of the
function with respect to the inputs. These findings were then used to train a DnCNN
in a self-supervised way in a paper by Soltanayev et al. [16]. They showed that the
MC-SURE performance comes close to using the MSE with the ground truth image
when using the DnCNN neural network. Pfaff et al. [17] showed similar results using
a U-net architecture.
SURE has also been used for denoising the real and imaginary parts in k-space
in an unsupervised manner [18], here the noise on the imaginary and real images
are Gaussian distributed. This, however, does not take the Rician distribution of
the magnitude images into account. Here we can simply not rely on the methods
that assume Gaussian noise or even zero mean Gaussian noise due to the Rician
distribution’s nature. A benefit of the self-supervised methods is that they all learn
the residuals of the images. Then by learning the residuals the abnormalities in the
underlying images are kept and this improves further analysis and may give more
reassurance in the field of medical imaging.
1.2
Aim of thesis
The influence of Rician noise on images differs significantly from the impact of Gaus-
sian noise, leaving many existing methods unsuitable for Rician data. Therefore, the
focus of this thesis is to address the denoising of images characterized by a Rician
distribution. Due to the nature of MRI acquisition, the true underlying image cannot
be acquired.
Therefore the aim is to denoise in a self-supervised manner using a
machine(deep) learning approach. To achieve this goal, we propose the development
of a novel deep learning approach specifically tailored for self-supervised denoising in
the presence of Rician noise.
We aim to present the background of our study in Chapter 2 including a brief
introduction to deep learning, Normalizing Flows, and the risk estimates.
In the
following Chapter 3 we present our modifications making it possible to calculate the
exact diagonal Jacobian, rederivation of CURE, and the approximation Monte Carlo
CURE. Then aim to identify the feasibility of the proposed methods through a series
of experiments in Chapter 4. Finally, discussion of the methods, limitations, and
possible research avenues in Chapter 5. A summary of the findings will in the end be
presented in the Conclusion Chapter.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In this chapter, we will cover the fundamentals of neural networks, their architecture,
the role of loss functions, and their derivatives. Moreover, we will broadly explain
the architecture of Normalizing Flows since our method borrows similar strategies.
Lastly, we will to some extent cover the different types of unbiased risk estimates of
the MSE for Gaussian and Rician noise.
2.1
Neural Networks
Neural networks have gained significant popularity for their capability to learn com-
plex, nonlinear patterns within datasets. They find extensive application in various
tasks, including denoising. The learning process of a neural network involves several
stages. It is an iterative learning process in which the data is processed through the
network in small batches (known as the forward pass) and a loss function is com-
puted that measures the distance between the current and the expected output for
that batch. The minimization of this cost function is achieved by backpropagating
the gradients throughout the network architecture and the different parameters that
define it are updated accordingly.
2.1.1
Loss function
To nudge the weights in the right direction, we need an estimate of the prediction
error. That is the role of the loss function. The gradients of the loss function tell the
network the significance of the error and then this error gets backpropagated through
the network to update all learnable parameters. A common choice of loss function is
the mean squared error (MSE) in the setting of supervised learning tasks.
MSE measures the average of the squared distance between the ground truth and
the output of the neural network.
MSE is an expected risk estimate and can be
used to penalize large distances between outputs from the network/function and the
ground truth.
MSE(h(y; θ)) = 1
N ||x −h(y; θ)||2
(2.1)
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
where h(y; θ) is our function/denoiser that receive the noisy image y as input and
has parameters θ. The ||·||2 is the Euclidean norm and N is the number of data points.
2.1.2
Derivatives
There are three main ways to compute derivatives: numerically, analytically, and
using automatic differentiation. Numerical differentiation provides an approximation
while analytical and automatic differentiation provide accurate differentiations. In our
case, we look for the partial derivatives of the outputs of the network with respect to
the inputs to the network. To compute derivatives we iteratively apply the chain rule
and multiplication rule to different mathematical expressions in the neural network.
Automatic differentiation is commonly used in machine- and deep-learning in gradient
descent algorithms to train neural networks. To do gradient descent, the gradients
of the loss function with respect to the parameters of the model are calculated. In
principle, it decomposes the function we want to differentiate into simpler expressions
and uses the chain rule to find the derivatives of the function [19].
The partial derivatives of neural network NN(y) with respect to the inputs y consist
of all local partial derivatives. Each neuron in the network consists of a learning weight
and activation function, and other mathematical transformations to which we find
the partial derivatives with respect to. In reverse automatic differentiation, a graph
of all computations during the forward pass is recorded. Thus the full expression
uses the chain rule for all paths in the computational graph from y to single output
NNi(y) [20].
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Normalizing Flows
7
2.2
Normalizing Flows
In this section, we give an overview of some of the building blocks of Normalizing
Flows which we will be using and modifying in the methods chapter. The notation
will follow the notation from the review of Normalizing Flows by Papamakarios et
al. [21]. Normalizing Flow is a series of bijective functions that can transform a simple
distribution into a more expressive probability distribution. The initial simple distri-
bution for example a Gaussian distribution flows through layers of bijective functions
Ti by applying the change of variable rule. At the end of applying the change of
variable rule by using the transformations Ti, we obtain a true probability distribu-
tion [22].
The underlying idea of Flow-based modeling is expressing v = T(u) of D-dimensional
data vector u sampled from the base distribution pu(u).
The transformation T :
RD →RD relates the define the series of bijective mappings relating v and u. The
transformation T is a set of bijective mappings Ti with each mapping being invertible
and differentiable. The composition of these bijections T = T1 ◦T2 ◦· · · ◦TN is in
itself invertible and differentiable. Following these conditions the density of v can be
found by a change of variables:
pv(v) = pu(u)|detJT (u)|−1
(2.2)
To construct the Jacobian JT (u) we need all partial derivatives of transformation
T:
JT (u) =


∂T1
∂u1
· · ·
∂T1
∂un
...
...
...
∂Tm
∂u1
· · ·
∂Tm
∂un


(2.3)
Then the relation 2.2 quantifies the function T ability to compress and expand
the density of the base distribution by the determinant of the Jacobian of T on u.
Training the flow is done by minimizing the total log-likelihood ∑
n log pv(v(n)) in
consideration of the parameters of T. A neural network is often used to parameterize
T and the base density pu(u) is a simple density as the multivariate Gaussian distri-
bution.
2.2.1
Aﬀine transformation and coupling layer
In Dinh et al. [23] they show that the transformation T can be constructed in a way
such that, it is both invertible, differentiable, and flexible. An example is the aﬀine
transformation used in Dinh et al. [24] which is a simple linear transformation with
the parameters hi = {α, β}. Where the parameters α and β are often found using a
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
simple neural network. (Then Ti assume this shape)
τ(zi; hi) = αizi + βi
(2.4)
The derivative of the linear transformation is simply the scale parameter α. This
is used for eﬀicient calculation of the forward transformation, the invertible transfor-
mation, and the partial derivatives needed for the finding determinant of the Jacobian.
The coupling layer using aﬀine transformations consists of the following steps
z1:d, zd+1:D = split(z)
(2.5)
y1:d = z1:d
(2.6)
yd+1:D = exp(α(z1:d)) ◦zd+1:D + β(z1:d)
(2.7)
This type of flow ensures the following structure of the Jacobian:
JT =
[
I
0
A
D
]
(2.8)
here I is the d×d identity matrix, the zero matrix 0 with the dimensions d×(D−d),
A = ∂yd+1:D
∂zT
d+1:D with dimensions (D−d)×d, and D = diag(exp{α(z1:d)}) with dimension
(D −d) × (D −d). When the Jacobian is lower triangular it makes the determinant
easy to compute as the product of the diagonal.
2.2.2
Neural Spline Flow
A way to make the Flow more flexible is by implementing the transformation as
monotonic rational-quadratic (RQ) splines as proposed by Durkan et al. [25]. This
replaces the aﬀine transformation with a piecewise function consisting of K spline
segments rk each defined by a quotient of two quadratic polynomials.
Figure 2.1.
Left: 10 monotonic rational-quadratic spline segments are fitted using 11
knots in the interval [−B, B].
The blue line shows the RQ Spline transformation while
the orange shows its inverse transformation. Right: The corresponding derivatives of the
rational-quadratic spline segments. Image source [25]
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Normalizing Flows
9
rk(ξ) = ak(ξ)
bk(ξ) = yk +
∆yk[skξ2 + δkξ(1 −ξ)]
sk + [δk+1 + δk −2sk]ξ(1 −ξ)
(2.9)
The boundaries of these spline segments are set by K + 1 knots with coordinates
{(x(k), y(k)} in the interval [−B, B]. Then ξ(x) =
(x−xk)
(xk+1−x) and sk = yk+1−yk
xk+1−xk . Then
the determinant of Jacobian can be found as the product of the derivatives of the
transformation concerning the inputs. It can be expressed by
det(JT ) = det
( ∂Ti
∂xj
)
=
d
∏
i=1
1 ×
D
∏
i=d+1
∂fi
∂xi
=
D
∏
i=d+1
∂rk
∂xi
(2.10)
Finally, they state that the derivatives for an RQ spline segment can be found ana-
lytically by
∂rk
∂x = s2
k[δk+1ξ2 + 2skξ(1 −ξ) + δk(1 −ξ)2]
[sk + [δk+1 + δk −2sk]ξ(1 −ξ)]2
.
(2.11)
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background
2.3
Unbiased Risk Estimates of MSE
A neural network that is self-supervised does not depend on ground truths to learn.
A way to obtain this for denoising is by letting the loss function or risk estimate only
depend on the noisy input images and the knowledge about the noise distribution.
One way to make the deep learning network self-supervised is by creating an unbiased
risk estimate of the MSE derived from the probability density function of the noise
distribution. A risk function is said to be an unbiased risk estimate of the MSE if
the expectation of the function on average gives the same results as the MSE. It is
possible to estimate the MSE for different noise types. For example, Gaussian noise
can be removed with Stein’s unbiased risk estimate [14], for mixed Poisson-Gaussian
noise with Poisson unbiased risk estimate [26] or for noncentral chi-square noise with
chi-square unbiased risk estimate [2]. Our main focus is to arrive at an unbiased risk
estimate in the case where images are governed by the Rician distribution. To do so
we aim to explain the MSE, and SURE, and an estimate for chi-square unbiased risk
estimate (CURE).
2.3.1
Stein’s unbiased risk estimate
SURE is an unbiased risk estimator of the MSE. An image corrupted by Gaussian
noise can be modeled as
y = x + n
(2.12)
Where x ∈RK is the unknown image following an underlying function x ∼p(x) and
y ∈RK is the known measurement. The last term is an additive white Gaussian
noise n ∈RK where n ∼N(0, σ2I). Next to estimate x from y we define a function
on y for h(y) from RK to RK. SURE for the, in our case, denoiser function h(y) can
be written on the form
η(h(y)) = ||y −h(y)||2
K
−σ2 + 2σ2
K
K
∑
i=1
∂hi(y)
∂yi
(2.13)
Then Ramani et al. [15] provides a theorem stating that the random variable
η(h(y)) is an unbiased estimator of
MSE(h(y)) = 1
K ||x −h(y)||2
(2.14)
so
En∼N0,σ2{ 1
K ||x −h(y)||2} = En∼N0,σ2{η(h(y))}
(2.15)
here the En∼N0,σ2{} is the expectation operator on η and x is a fixed, deterministic
vector. Calculating the unbiased estimator is a challenge, due to the calculation of
the divergence term in the unbiased risk estimate, while σ2 can be estimated and
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Unbiased Risk Estimates of MSE
11
||y −h(y)||2 only requires the estimator and the noisy input.
2.3.2
Monte-Carlo SURE
In this approach, a Monte Carlo (MC) technique is used to approximate the divergence
term in the unbiased risk estimate SURE. The technique is introduced by Ramani et
al [15] and used for denoising algorithms. This is especially applicable for denoising
algorithms where partial derivatives are diﬀicult or even impossible to calculate.
If we let ˜n ∼N0,1 ∈RK to be independent of n and y, then
K
∑
i=1
∂hi(y)
∂yi
= lim
ϵ→0 E˜n{˜nT
(h(y + ϵ˜n) −h(y)
ϵ
)
}
(2.16)
given that h(y) has a well-defined second-order Taylor expansion. If this is not the
case, then it is still valid in a weak sense if h(y) is tempered.
Using these constraints on h(y), the divergence term can be approximated using
only one realization of ˜n ∼N0,1 and a small positive value for ϵ:
1
K
K
∑
i=1
∂hi(y)
∂yi
≈
1
ϵK ˜nT (h(y + ϵ˜n) −h(y))
(2.17)
here T is the transpose operator.
2.3.3
Chi-squared unbiased risk estimate
CURE is an unbiased risk estimate of the MSE when the noise follows a chi-squared
distribution. To derive this unbiased estimate F. Luisier and P. J. Wolfe [2] found an
expression for the MSE based only on the noisy measurements by using the probabil-
ity density function for the non-central chi-squared distribution.
Stating that the following random variable is an unbiased estimate of the expected
MSE
ε = 1
N (||f(y)||2 +||y||2 −8T y)+8−2
N ((y−2)T f(y)−4((y−1)T ∂f(y)−yT ∂2f(y)))
(2.18)
meaning
E{MSE} = E{ε}
(2.19)
Where y is the noisy measurements following a non-central chi-squared distribution,
f(y) is our denoised estimates, 8 is a vector of eights and N is the number of samples.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background
The ∂f(y) is the first-order unmixed partial derivatives of the function with respect
to the inputs also mentioned as the diagonal Jacobian and ∂2f(y) is the second-order
unmixed partial derivatives with respect to the inputs also mentioned as the diagonal
Hessian.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
CURE is the backbone of our self-supervised method and the most crucial steps in the
derivations are presented. To use CURE as a loss function for a neural network poses
some constraints on the architecture of the network. The network must compute the
Jacobian and Hessian diagonal in a forward pass or be differentiable such that those
can be calculated. So the methods presented are modified to fulfill these constraints.
Therefore, we will in this Chapter present the following contributions:
1. Analytical SURE for Gaussian data due to the coupling layers architec-
ture in the flows
2. Rederivation of CURE
3. Analytical CURE with the exact calculation of the Hessian diagonal
4. Monte Carlo CURE an approximation approach to calculating the deriva-
tives
3.1
Derivation of CURE
Following the results in article [2] [27] we rederived CURE from the probability den-
sity function (PDF) of a non-central chi-squared distribution and this can be found in
appendix A. Here we just aim to explain the central concepts and main ideas behind
deriving an unbiased estimate for the MSE. The goal is to arrive at an unbiased es-
timate of the MSE which only depends on the noisy measurements similar to SURE,
but in the case of non-central chi-squared distributed noise.
Let the expectation of the MSE be expanded to
E(MSE) = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
(E(fn(y)2) −2 E(xnfn(y)) + x2
n)
(3.1)
Then the two last terms depend on the unknown xn, so here we need to find an
unbiased estimate depending only on y and the model outputs fn(y).
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Methods
An example of images with Rician noise is magnitude images in MRI. Here the
noisy signal can be modeled by adding Gaussian distributed noise to the imaginary
and real image parts.
|mn| = ((Re{µn} + N0,σ2)2 + (Im{µn} + N0,σ2)2)
1
2 , n = 1...N
(3.2)
Then due to how the two parts are combined, the values are governed by a Rician
distribution, which is a special case of the non-central chi distribution. Then following,
the definition of magnitude images, we define two N-dimensional vectors one for the
clean images and one for the noisy image
x = [|µn|2/σ2]1≤n≤N ∈RN
+
(3.3)
y = [|mn|2/σ2]1≤n≤N ∈RN
+
(3.4)
Now the distribution for the variable y is non-central chi-squared with non-central
parameter x. So the relation between the observed variables y and the latent variables
x is the product of N independent non-central chi-squared distributions.
p(y|x) =
N
∏
n=1
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
(3.5)
Where I0 is the zero-order modified Bessel function of the first kind. Given the mea-
surement model p(y|x) the problem can be defined as estimating the noncentrality
parameter xn of a non-central chi-squared distribution.
The term E(xnfn(y)) from the expanded MSE depends on the underlying im-
age. However, an expression only depended on yn can be derived. We arrive at the
following expression after a few algebraic operations
E{xnfn(y)} = E{(yn −2)fn(y)} −4 E{(yn −1) ∂
∂yn
fn(y) −yn
∂2
∂y2n
fn(y)}
(3.6)
Then to estimate x2
n we start by finding the relation between the expectation of
yn and the variable xn. Where yn is the n-th element of y. Since we defined y as
a transformation from a noisy magnitude image which again is defined from a clean
signal with Rician noise. Then this can be used to replace xn and so we can define
the following relation of xn depending only on yn.
x2
n = E{xn(yn −2)} = E{y2
n} −8 E{yn} + 8
(3.7)
Then substituting two terms into Equation 3.1
ε = 1
N (||f(y)||2+||y||2−8T y)+8−2
N ((y−2)T f(y)−4((y−1)T ∂f(y)
∂y
−yT ∂2f(y)
∂y2
))
(3.8)
Equation 3.8 is thus an unbiased estimate of the MSE and can be used as a substitu-
tion when we want to denoise where the values follow a chi-squared distribution.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Monte Carlo CURE
15
3.2
Monte Carlo CURE
We want to calculate the second-order derivatives in Equation 3.8, this is in general
not feasible. However, we present Monte Carlo CURE (MC-CURE) where the exact
diagonal Hessian is replaced with a Monte Carlo approximation. Following similar
approach to that proposed by Ramani et al. [15] to approximate the divergence term
in SURE, we perform a Taylor expansion of each unmixed partial derivative at a time.
∂fi(y)
∂yi
= Ji ≈˜ni
fi(y + ϵ · ˜n) −fi(y)
ϵ
(3.9)
Where the denoiser f is a general denoising function and J is the diagonal elements
of the Jacobian. To use this for approximating the partial derivatives required to
calculate CURE we use the diagonal of Jacobian calculated during the forward pass
of the flow to approximate each derivative. We propose the following approximation
of the second-order derivatives
∂2fi(y)
∂y2
i
= ∂Ji
∂yi
≈˜ni
Ji(y + ϵ · ˜n) −Ji(y)
ϵ
(3.10)
Here Ji is the i-th element of the diagonal of the Jacobian calculated during the
forward pass in the Flow structure. These calculations are simple to do if we adopt
a coupling layer architecture. In the next section, we will explain how this can easily
be calculated.
y is the noisy input vector to the Flow which we aim to find the
second-order unmixed partial derivatives with respect to. ˜n is a vector of zero mean
Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of 1 and ϵ is the step size.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Methods
3.3
Network Architecture
CURE imposes the calculations of the second-order derivatives, which in general is
diﬀicult to calculate for neural networks with standard architectures. In general, for
larger network architecture, it is very time-consuming and memory-heavy to do re-
verse automatic differentiation three times through the network. It is feasible for
shallow architectures for example multi-layer perceptions, but then we compromise
the denoising capabilities. Therefore, we chose to use a convenient architecture in-
spired by the coupling layer of Normalizing Flows. In Normalizing Flows it is easy
to obtain the unmixed partial derivatives analytically during the forward pass of the
model. Since the diagonal of the Jacobian and Hessian only consists of these unmixed
partial derivatives. It also provided us with the opportunity to add a non-linear term
to the aﬀine transformation and analytically calculate the second-order unmixed par-
tial derivatives. We will cover two approaches Aﬀine Hyperbolic Tangent Flow (AHT
Flow) and Spline Flow modified from their Normalizing Flow structure by not includ-
ing the inverse transformation and calculation of the determinant of the Jacobian. For
each proposed flow architecture, we calculate the partial derivatives (first and second
order) by using the chain rule of differentiation which is possible in a straightforward
manner due to the coupling layers and transformations.
3.3.1
Aﬀine Hyperbolic Tangent Flow
The AHT Flow is based on the coupling structure and modification to the trans-
formation by Dinh et al. [24]. The modifications are done in consideration of the
requirements of CURE, where we would like to calculate both first and second-order
unmixed partial derivatives during the forward pass of the network. Unlike in a typ-
ical Normalizing Flows architecture, here we are not interested in the invertibility
of the transformations. We are rather interested in eﬀicient ways of calculating the
first and second-order derivatives, which is what the coupling layers can provide. In
order to ensure that the flow has non-zero second-order derivatives, we decided to
add the non-linear term hyperbolic tangent in the transformations of the input data
z. The transformation becomes τ(zi; θi) = αizi + βi + tanh(zi). Then as in the origi-
nal method, we employ a fully connected neural network (FCNN) for computing the
scale α and translation β parameters θ.
A layer in an AHT Flow consists of two stacked coupling layers in the following
operations
z1:d, zd+1:D = split(z)
(3.11)
α(zd+1:D), β(zd+1:D) = FCNN(zd+1:D)
(3.12)
τ1:d = α(zd+1:D) ◦z1:d + β(zd+1:D) + tanh(z1:d)
(3.13)
α(τ1:d), β(τ1:d) = FCNN(y1:d)
(3.14)
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Network Architecture
17
τd+1:D = α(τ1:d) ◦zd+1:D + β(τ1:d) + tanh(zd+1:D)
(3.15)
Here D is the size of z and d = D
2 .
Then for each layer, we can calculate the derivatives of this transformation
∂τ1:d
∂z1:d
= α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d)
(3.16)
and
∂τd+1:D
∂zd+1:D
= α(τ1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D)
(3.17)
For all layers in the AHT Flow, the diagonal of the jacobian is calculated. For
the combined coupling layer, the Jacobian is the product of two triangular matrices.
The Jacobian for one layer of the combined coupling layer is defined as
J =
[ ∂τ1:d
∂z1:d
∂τ1:d
∂τd+1:D
0
I
] [
I
0
∂τd+1:D
∂z1:d
∂τd+1:D
∂zd+1:D
]
=
[
∂τ1:d
∂z1:d
∂τ1:d
∂τd+1:D
∂τd+1:D
∂zd+1:D
∂τd+1:D
∂z1:d
∂τd+1:D
∂zd+1:D
]
(3.18)
Then all coupling layers the diagonal of Jacobian are propagated through the
layers by using the chain rule.
∂f(g(z))
∂z
= ∂f(g)
∂g
· ∂g(z)
∂z
(3.19)
Analytical second-order unmixed partial derivatives
We will assume that the off-diagonal elements are zero and therefore we can get the
diagonal of the Hessian in a forward pass as second-order unmixed partial derivatives
of τ(z). So similar to the first-order partial derivatives we can calculate the second-
order partial derivatives during the forward pass of the Flow model. The second-order
derivatives for our ATH transformation are given as
∂2τ1:d
∂z2
1:d
= tanh(z1:d)
cosh2(z1:d)
(3.20)
and
∂2τd+1:D
∂z2
d+1:D
= tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)
(3.21)
For higher-order partial derivatives e.g. the Hessian, the chain rule is more com-
plex. Skorski M. reports in [28] the chain rule for the second-order partial derivatives
and in particular the Hessian. For completeness, we will state this expression here
∂2f(g(z))
∂z2
=
(∂2f(g)
∂g2
· ∂g(z)
∂z
)
· ∂g(z)
∂z
+ ∂f(g)
∂g
· ∂2g(z)
∂z2
(3.22)
Therefore, we can acquire the diagonal of the Hessian directly during the forward
pass of the flow.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Methods
3.3.2
Spline Flow
The Spline Flow is based on the Neural Spline Flow by Durkan et al. [25]. The differ-
ences are similar to the changes for the AHT FLow where we do not use the inverse
transformation and compute the diagonal Jacobian of the coupling layers instead of
the determinant of the Jacobian.
We use the monotonic RQ transformations in each coupling layer and its derivatives
evaluated at the inputs. Then we propagated the diagonal of the Jacobian through
the coupling layers using the chain rule.
Also here a layer in a Spline Flow consists of two coupling layers combined in the
following operations and we will state it here for completeness [25]
z1:d, zd+1:D = split(z)
(3.23)
W1:K, H1:K, D1:K−1 = FCNN(zd+1:D)
(3.24)
W1:K, H1:K = softmax(W1:K) · 2B, softmax(H1:K) · 2B
(3.25)
D1:K−1 = softplus(D1:K−1)
(3.26)
Then D1:K−1 is interpreted as the values for δk at the knots and W1:K, H1:K are
the widths and heights of each of the bins. Then this is used in Equation 2.2.2 to
calculate the spline segments.
The second-order unmixed partial derivatives are approximated using two differ-
ent methods opposite to the AHT Flow we do not calculate the analytical Hessian.
We approximate the diagonal of the Hessian by a Monte Carlo technique presented
previously and by reverse automatic differentiation.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Implementation Details
19
3.4
Implementation Details
The practical details of our experiment setup are presented in the following Sections.
Some method-specific choices were made in the training setup, hyperparameters of
the models, and alterations to the input data. Here we present these details for the
flows. In general, the experiments with FCNN are different from the hyperparame-
ter setting of the flows, this will be presented with the presentation of the experiments.
3.4.1
Data and modifications
For the experiment setup, we have been testing the methods on images of handwritten
digits from the MNIST dataset [29]. MNIST compromise of 6.000 samples of each
number from 0 to 9. Each image is normalized between 0 and 1. To create our noisy
samples we added noise to the images and used the clean images as ground truths to
evaluate our models. The noise could either be additive zero-mean Gaussian noise or
the more complex Rician noise.
In general, variations are added to the ground truths following a Gaussian distri-
bution. For the Gaussian data, it is added following equation 2.12. For the Rician
data a few modifications are made to the data see equation 3.4. Thus the noise on
the data in reality follows a chi-square distribution [2]. On the MNIST data set this
will correspond to the following
y = (IMNIST + n0,σ)2 + n2
0,σ
σ2
(3.27)
Here IMNIST is the MNIST images while n is our noise matrix with each value
drawn independently from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution with standard devia-
tion σ = 0.1 and with the same shape as IMNIST.
3.4.2
Training pipelines
The pipeline for training the flows for denoising Gaussian data. The MNIST images
IMNIST are loaded and transformed by adding variations to the intensities following a
Gaussian distribution IMNIST +n0,σ. Then for a number of iterations, we trained our
flows using SURE as a loss function. The flow takes as input a vector. To capture the
information in a neighborhood we used pixel unshuffle [30] and then to transform the
image back used pixel shuffle. We used a specific number of epochs as the stopping
criterion.
Similarly, the pipeline for training the flows for denoising Rician data. The MNIST
images IMNIST are loaded and transformed by modifying the intensities to follow a chi-
square distribution see in equation 3.27. Then for a number of iterations, we trained
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Methods
the network with CURE as loss using various methods of calculating the diagonal
Hessian. Again the flow takes as input a vector, so to inform the model about the
neighbourhood we used pixel unshuffle and pixel shuffle. A specific number of epochs
as the stopping criterion was chosen.
3.4.3
Experiments setup
The experiments were all trained interactively on Nvidia-Volta-100 GPUs except the
experiments with SURE- and CURE-FCNN. All code is implemented in Python us-
ing the open machine-learning framework Pytorch. In the training process we used
specific hyperparameters setting for the flow models and this can be found in Table
3.1.
Table 3.1. Hyperparameter settings for training and testing the flows.
Hyperparameter
Training samples
48.000
Validation samples
12.000
Test samples
20.000
Optimizer
Adam
Learning rate
0.01
Mini-batch size
400
Epochs
100-200
Epsilon
0.01
Table 3.2. AHT Flow and Spline Flow model parameter settings.
AHT Flow
Spline Flow
B
–
7
K
–
28
Coupling layers
4
4
FCNN hidden dimensions
32
32
For specific model parameters, we employed for testing the models is seen in
Table 3.2. The parameters for the Spline Flow deviate on purpose from the optimal
parameters found in previous work [25]. We have added more flexibility to the model
by increasing the parameters B and K.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments
In this chapter, we will assess various methods for denoising performed on Gaussian
and Rician data.
Initially, we will evaluate the networks on Gaussian data using
SURE as a risk estimate using the closed-form divergence.
Then the closed-form
divergence in SURE is compared to the approximation of the divergence used in MC-
SURE and MSE. Finally, we will denoise Rician data with the CURE and MC-CURE
using the different networks FCNN, AHT flow, and Spline flow. The goal is to assess
the equivalence between the various combinations of losses and networks to the MSE.
4.1
Gaussian data
The experiments in this section aim to figure out if SURE with closed-form divergence
can be used to optimize neural networks instead of its Monte Carlo approximation.
If the equivalence is proven we would have obtained a faster way of calculating SURE
because we don’t need to run the model twice to calculate the approximation. This
is why we are particularly interested in calculating the divergence during the forward
pass which is possible in the flows presented previously. Further, we investigate SURE
equivalence to the MSE and compare the Monte Carlo approximation to the exact
divergence in the Flow structures.
4.1.1
Exact divergence
In prior work [16], a neural network was used to denoise (Gaussian data) in com-
bination with a Monte Carlo calculation [15] of the divergence term required for
calculating the SURE loss. Here we demonstrate that the exact or closed-form diver-
gence for a neural network can be used to train a neural network for denoising. We
show this using a fully connected neural network (FCNN) using reverse automatic
differentiation to calculate the derivatives required to calculate the divergence. This
is implemented as part of PyTorch framework [31].
Usually one would compute the Jacobian vector product which sums over the
rows of the Jacobian, but we calculate the partial derivatives, which is the sum of
the elements on the Jacobian’s diagonal (the trace of the Jacobian). This does not
benefit from the optimization of calculating the Jacobian vector product as one usually
experiences when during backpropagation. Therefore, the calculation is slow when
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Experiments
calculating for each derivative. However, for a small FCNN, this is feasible and the
optimization of the FCNN using SURE is shown in Figure 4.1 (a).
((a)) SURE convergence
((b)) Divergence
Figure 4.1. (a) shows the convergence of FCNN using SURE with closed-form divergence.
This uses automatic differentiation to calculate the sum of the first-order unmixed partial
derivatives. (b) compares the closed-form divergence and its Monte Carlo approximation
for the FCNN when MSE is used as the loss function.
The training in Figure 4.1 was performed using only 800 random images from
MNIST with a mini-batch size of 20 images. The training time for FCNN-SURE is
6 hours for training 100 epochs and reaching a validation loss of 15 and validation
PSNR of 17.5. The method would be infeasible for a larger training set and increasing
image size.
This would mean that if we used the full MNIST data set of 60.000
images, then the training time would be increased by a factor of approximately 60
since the model would need to process 60 times the amount of data.
We would
increase the number of mini-batches, where for each pass of a mini-batch the model
is optimized accordingly. This would amount to a training time of around 360 hours.
This following the convergence plot would also lead to a decrease in loss and an
increase in PSNR.
((a))
((b))
((c))
((d))
Figure 4.2. Using an FCNN with 3 hidden layers and 32 dimensions in each hidden layer
to denoise MNIST images. Here (a) shows the clean images, (b) is after adding noise, (c)
is the denoise images with analytical SURE, and (d) is the denoised image using MSE.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Gaussian data
23
The equivalence between the SURE and MSE is also inspected visually by training
the two models by giving the same hyperparameters and number of training samples.
This can be viewed in Figure 4.2.
The images from training using SURE Figure 4.2(c) and MSE Figure 4.2(d) look
remarkably similar, even though the tests show that a shallow FCNN model has a
poor capacity to denoise. In the following, we will look at networks with a higher
capacity and the higher potential to be better at denoising the images, but still with
the possibility to calculate the exact divergence.
4.1.2
Network convergence
While it is in general possible to calculate the Jacobian diagonal from a network,
this task becomes very expensive already for relatively small networks, making it
practally unfeasible.
However, if we use the coupling layer architecture this task
becomes much simpler. In fact, we can calculate the exact diagonal of the Jacobian.
Since we can calculate the exact diagonal of the Jacobian of the flow networks during
the forward pass, there is potentially no need to approximate them. To test this
use of the exact Jacobian, we employed a test setup as described in Section 3.4 and
used it to evaluate the proposed methods. The training and validation loss for each
iteration as it converges can be found in Figure 4.3 for the flows.
((a)) AHT Flow SURE
((b)) Spline Flow SURE
Figure 4.3.
The two networks trained using SURE loss with the closed-form trace of
Jacobian and the corresponding MSE calculated for each iteration. (a) shows SURE loss
for the AHT-Flow while (b) shows SURE loss for the Spline Flow.
Figure 4.3 shows that for both AHT (aﬀine hyperbolic tangent) Flow and Spline
Flow the SURE loss starts being equivalent to the MSE. However, it also shows that
after around 50 epochs the SURE loss goes negative and some instabilities occur for
the AHT Flow. However, the Spline Flow quickly starts to diverge from the MSE
and goes eventually negative after some iterations.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Experiments
For completeness, we compare our approach to the MC-SURE loss function com-
bined with the flows. The flows trained by MC-SURE can be found in Figure 4.4.
((a)) AHT-Flow SURE
((b)) Spline Flow SURE
Figure 4.4. The two networks trained using MC-SURE loss with the approximate trace of
Jacobian and the corresponding MSE calculated for each epoch. (a) shows MC-SURE loss
for the AHT-Flow while (b) shows MC-SURE loss for the Spline Flow.
An important aspect to notice is that the instability seen in the previous Figure
4.3 does not occur within the same number of epochs and beyond.
The MC-SURE comes with extra hyperparameters for the step size of the approx-
imation ϵ we based the value on the optimal value found in other works [16]. We will
be discussing the issue and possible causes of the instability issue in Section 5.1.
((a)) Divergence AHT-Flow
((b)) Divergence Spline Flow
Figure 4.5. AHT-Flow and Spline Flow trained using the MSE as loss function and then
calculating the MC divergence and the closed form divergence based on the derivatives
calculated during the forward pass of the models. (a) This shows the divergences for the
AHT-Flow while (b) shows the divergences calculated for the Spline Flow.
Figure 4.5 show how the trace of the diagonal calculated during the forward pass
of the flow corresponds to the approximation calculated using two passes of the model.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Gaussian data
25
Therefore, in theory, training the model using the exact divergence should be twice
as fast to train compared to MC-SURE.
4.1.3
Comparison of network performance
The results were evaluated based on both MSE and PSNR. Normally in a self-
supervised setting, we can not calculate the MSE and PSNR. Therefore, when com-
paring methods the lowest, validation loss was chosen as an earlier stopping criterion.
The convergence Figure 4.3 shows better MSE at an earlier stage than with the used
stopping criteria.
((a))
((b))
((c))
((d))
((e))
((f))
Figure 4.6. From the MNIST test set the clean target (a) and the Gaussian noise input
(d). The noisy images were denoised with AHT Flow SURE (b) or MC-SURE(c). Then
the noisy images denoised with Spline Flow SURE (e) or MC-SURE (f).
Another important aspect of training a neural network is Hyperparameter tuning
to optimize the model. The focus of this project has not been on tuning the models,
but instead, this experiment aims to identify possible methods for denoising using
the exact divergence.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Experiments
SURE loss
MSE
PSNR
AHT Flow
78.49
78.48
12.97
AHT Flow MC
1.02
1.01
31.97
Spline Flow
-0.13
1.50
30.20
Spline Flow MC
0.87
0.88
32.69
Figure 4.7. Table of the SURE loss, the calculated MSE and the PSNR for the test set.
The Table 4.7 also shows the issue AHT Flow and Spline Flow.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Rician data
27
4.2
Rician data
In this section, we will show the networks optimized using CURE and MC-CURE and
compare their equivalence to the MSE on Rician data. The Rician data are modified
to follow the approach in [2] so all methods are given the input data y following the
transformation in equation 3.27. We will evaluate the errors by the proposed methods
for calculating the diagonal Hessian and evaluate the methods using PSNR.
4.2.1
Performance of CURE
For a small toy example, we have tested CURE using reverse automatic differentiation
as implemented in PyTorch. We calculate the exact first- and second-order unmixed
partial derivatives during the forward pass and then propagate them during a back-
ward pass through the FCNN. This is the same approach as seen in Figure 4.2(c), with
the modification of calculating the diagonal Hessian using automatic differentiation.
Figure 4.8. Shows the convergence of an FCNN using CURE with exact calculated deriva-
tives for a small toy setup. The blue line shows the CURE loss while the orange line shows
the MSE calculated for each iteration.
Figure 4.8 illustrates the proportionality between the CURE loss and MSE cal-
culated when optimizing for the CURE loss. Even though they do not seem to be
equivalent given this setup, we see a similar convergence between the two. This is
only an indicator and further tests would be needed. The time frame for calculating
these is similar to the previous test with SURE-FCNN unfeasible. For the small test
setup, it took nearly 24 hours to run 18 epochs using a batch size of 16 images, a
mini-batch size of 2 images, and then 4 images for validation. This setup is too small
to assess the quality of the denoising performance. Therefore, we need faster ways to
calculate the diagonal Jacobian and diagonal Hessian, and networks that are more
capable of denoising.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Experiments
4.2.2
Analytical diagonal Hessian
Given some assumptions, it is possible to calculate the diagonal elements of the Hes-
sian during the forward pass of the AHT flow. The exact analytical Hessian comes
only with a minimal computational cost with a few extra calculations during the
forward pass. Therefore, this would be ideal in terms of speed and accuracy. The
analytical approach is based on the assumption that the Hessian of a layer was trian-
gular.
Figure 4.9. Here we compare the CURE using the analytical diagonal Hessian with the
MSE calculated for each batch. CURE using the analytical diagonal Hessian diverges signif-
icantly from the MSE.
In Figure 4.9 we however witness that the CURE loss using this analytical Hes-
sian is not proportional to the MSE. In fact, it diverges quite a bit and goes negative
quickly. CURE is proportional given the exact derivatives, therefore we will investi-
gate further why the analytical diagonal Hessian does not correspond to MSE.
4.2.3
Derivatives using automatic differentiation
When we could not calculate the diagonal elements easily, we chose to calculate them
using reverse automatic differentiation. However, as shown earlier it is infeasible to
calculate the exact derivatives, so we calculated the Jacobian vector product. The
Jacobian vector product sums over the rows of the Jacobian, this is not a problem if
we assume that all of the off-diagonal elements are zero.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Rician data
29
((a)) AHT-Flow
((b)) Spline Flow
Figure 4.10. AHT-Flow and Spline Flow trained using the CURE as loss function with
the derivatives calculated using automatic differentiation. (a) This shows the loss for the
AHT-Flow while (b) shows the loss calculated for the Spline Flow.
Figure 4.10 shows how the training of the network using CURE with Jacobian
vector product does not result in proportional convergence between CURE and MSE.
However, we build this solution on the assumption about the Hessian matrix of the
AHT Flow. In Section 5.1 we will discuss why this assumption is not valid.
4.2.4
Approximation (MC-CURE)
The diﬀiculty in calculating the exact diagonal Hessian led us to approximate it using
a Monte Carlo technique. The MC-CURE requires two passes of the flows one with the
noisy images and one with more noise added to the noisy images. The approximation
depends on the diagonal Jacobian which we can calculate exactly during the forward
pass.
((a)) AHT-Flow
((b)) Spline Flow
Figure 4.11.
AHT-Flow and Spline Flow trained using the MC-CURE as loss function.
(a) This shows the loss for the AHT-Flow while (b) shows the loss calculated for the Spline
Flow.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Experiments
Figure 4.3 not show exact equivalence between the CURE using the flows and the
MSE. However, the losses seem to converge proportionally. Using this method, there
is an extra hyperparameter the noise step epsilon. Since this is a novel technique we
can not base our estimation on the best value of epsilon on prior work. To find the
most optimal setting one would need to do something similar to a grid search over
possible values to find the optimal value. However, this is not within the scope of the
project.
4.2.5
Method errors
We have experimented with multiple methods for calculating the diagonal Hessian.
Calculating the diagonal Hessian analytically and using automatic differentiation was
only correct under certain assumptions. To assess the validity of these assumptions,
we have calculated the absolute error scaled by the maximum value in Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12. The absolute errors scaled by the maximum between the different methods
of calculating the diagonal Hessian and the exact diagonal Hessian are reported in logscale.
We report the errors for the analytic, autograd, and Monte Carlo ways of calculating the
diagonal Hessian.
The absolute errors scaled by the maximum value were obtained with a small test
setup with the AHT flow, with a shallow FCNN, a training batch size of 16 images,
and a mini-batch of 2 images. For all other hyperparameters, we followed the settings
specified in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2. Then for 5 epochs, the diagonal Hessian was cal-
culated using the analytical approach, automatic differentiation (autograd), and MC
approximation. To calculate the error we also calculated the exact diagonal Hessian.
In general, calculating the exact diagonal Hessian using automatic differentiation for
the flow is not a feasible solution due to the time and memory consumption. This way
we can calculate the errors for given some uncertainty as the errors for the autograd
solution decrease with the training of the flow. The comparison between the meth-
ods shows that the analytical diagonal of Hessian does not correspond to the exact
diagonal Hessian and that the error is significantly different from the exact values.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Rician data
31
4.2.6
Comparison of network performance
Through the experiments, it is clear that the training is sensitive to how we chose to
calculate the diagonal Hessian. This is also clear when visually inspecting the results
that the quality denoising depends on how the diagonal Hessian is calculated. In
Figure 4.13 the method of calculating the diagonal Hessian for CURE is compared.
((a))
((b))
((c))
((d))
((e))
((f))
Figure 4.13. From the MNIST test set the clean targets (a) and images with Rician noise
(d). Then the denoised images using AHT Flow CURE (b) and MC-CURE (c). Then the
denoised images using Spline Flow CURE (e) and MC-CURE (f)
Here the CURE versions Images 4.13 (b) and (e) are using the automatic differ-
entiation (autograd) to calculate the diagonal Hessian and as we showed this is not
exact, but due to the small values in the off-diagonal elements it only shows small
errors. This however does not correspond to the convergence plot in Figure 4.10,
where the convergence between CURE and the MSE is not proportional. Contrary to
this MC-CURE shows similar convergence as the MSE for both flows in Figure 4.11.
The visual appearance of the denoised images in Figure 4.13 shows fewer artifacts
and numbers appear to fall within the same image intensity as the target.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Experiments
CURE loss
MSE
PSNR
AHT Flow
21.52
49.25
29.19
AHT Flow MC
47.96
19.06
33.24
Spline Flow MC
3.42
70.35
27.66
Figure 4.14. Table of the CURE loss, the calculated MSE, and the PSNR for the test set
modified to follow equation 3.27.
Table 4.14 underlines the results of the findings, that for our experiments the two
losses are not equivalent. Causes and possible solutions will be discussed in Section
5.1.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
Denoising is essential in many real-world applications including MRI where the im-
age intensities are governed by a Rician distribution. Like in many other modalities,
also in MRI, it is impossible to acquire the true signal without noise.
Therefore,
this study aims to identify a self-supervised method to denoise Rician data using
machine(deep)-learning. This methodological study found a possible solution using
flows. Investigating the many possible techniques to improve the denoising capabili-
ties of the flows is a possible avenue left for further exploration. Here we will state
the limitations of the proposed methods and possible solutions or additional research
directions.
5.1
Interpretation of Results
S. Soltanayev et al. [16] showed how to combine the MC-SURE by S. Ramani et
al. [15] with the DnCNN by K. Zhang et al. [6] for denoising without the ground
truth. The problem is that this method assumes Gaussian distributed noise and the
Rician noise is more complex and depends on the image values. SURE by Stein [14]
is a predictor of the MSE in the case of additive Gaussian noise. In the case of Rician
and non-central chi-square noise, the predictor of the MSE is given by CURE [2]. In
MC-SURE the divergence is approximated with high accuracy as seen in experiments
in Figure 4.1. They sum over the unmixed partial derivatives of the network also re-
ferred to as the divergence. However, as noted before, CURE requires each first- and
second-order unmixed partial derivative, so we found an analytical way to calculate
them using the AHT Flow. However, the analytical method is not accurate as the
diagonal of the Hessian in the AHT Flow is complex see Appendix B.2 for further
details on the Hessian. Following this revelation we went to calculate the diagonal
using automatic differentiation. However, the calculation of the Hessian in Appendix
B.2 also shows that it is not a diagonal matrix and therefore can not be calculated
eﬀiciently. The automatic differentiation as calculated in Pytorch [31] will sum over
the rows of the Hessian resulting in the Jacobian vector product. This again will
result in the calculated elements being wrong with significant differences from the
exact derivatives.
When the off-diagonal Hessian depends on the derivatives of the neural network,
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Discussion
calculating the exact derivatives is unfeasible for the denoising tasks as we witnessed
for the FCNN CURE in Section 4.2.1. These lead back to the approximation of the
derivatives which also can be approximated one by one as seen in equation 3.2. From
the exact Jacobian diagonal, it is possible with only two passes of the flows to calcu-
late the approximate Hessian. The MC-CURE we proposed shows better alignment
with the MSE in Figure 4.11. This could potentially lead to a double approximation
of the diagonal Jacobian and the diagonal Hessian.
Another important aspect of the methods is the choice of risk estimate. The risk
estimates are used as loss functions to optimize our models. The problem with both
SURE and CURE is that they can become negative. In SURE this happens when
the divergence term becomes negative. This can happen in the Flows. The optimizer
will keep decreasing the divergence term and this affects the model’s performance and
leads to instability and nan values in the loss. This is suboptimal and cannot occur
with the MSE which can not become negative due to the squared errors. We are faced
with the same issue regarding CURE which can also become negative. Here when
the first-order derivatives become large or the diagonal Hessian becomes negative the
loss will keep decreasing beyond zero.
5.2
Limitations
A weakness of the approach is the instability when using the diagonal Jacobian from
the flows. The cause of the instability is assumed to be due to tanh function added
in the transformation in the AHT Flow. Further testing of the Aﬀine flow [23] would
uncover if this is the true cause of the instability.
A limitation of our study and a possible research avenue is the estimation of the
standard deviation of the noise. CURE expects the data to be scaled with the vari-
ance of the noise. Therefore, we need to know the standard deviation of the Gaussian
noise added to the real and imaginary parts before combining them into the Magni-
tude image. CURE expects a single standard deviation to be suﬀicient for the entire
image. The estimation of the Gaussian standard deviation could be done using the
background as Luisier et al. [2] proposes when using CURE combined with Haar-
Wavelet transform to denoise MRI. However, the noise in MRI is spatially-varying
with significantly more noise in the foreground [32].
Similarly, we need to consider the limitations of the chosen data set MNIST. We
have modified the data to follow a Rician distribution when evaluating the denoising
abilities of CURE. This is a simplification of the real MRI data, where more issues
arise i.e. correlated noise, multi-coil acquisition, and spatial varying noise. To ac-
count for these problems one would have to develop our approach further. Given
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Future work
35
these problems, we come up with suggestions for further research possibilities.
5.3
Future work
One of the dilemmas with both SURE and CURE is that they can become negative
which the MSE can not. A possibility is to square the loss CURE2. In CURE2 one
of the benefits is that the optimal value would be positive and the optimization algo-
rithm can’t decrease the loss beyond zero. This would require further exploration of
their optimization landscape to test the equivalence with the MSE squared.
A possibility to calculate the Hessian is to do an approximation of the approxi-
mation diagonal Jacobian. This would amount to some uncertainty in the calculated
elements of the diagonal Hessian. However, we could expect the convergence of the
loss to be similar to MC-SURE. This would need to be tested further. A benefit is
that with an approximation of CURE, we could combine it with the DnCNN by K.
Chang et al. [6]. The DnCNN has a high capacity for and is designed to denoise. It has
already been successfully used to denoise in a supervised and self-supervised setting
in the presence of Gaussian, mixed poisson-Gaussian, and other types of noise [6] [16].
In this ongoing project, several issues have not been addressed. We have used
MRI as an example of where we in the real scenario could find Rician data. Some
of the properties of the noise on MRI that have not been addressed are multi-coil
acquisition, spatially varying, and correlated noise.
In this study, we only investigated noise corresponding to single/dual coil acqui-
sition. Leading to a chi-square distribution with two degrees of freedom. In reality,
the magnitude images are acquired using multiple coils with a feasible number of
coils being 64 [33]. For the method to account for this, we would need to change the
risk estimate from using a chi-square distribution with 2 degrees of freedom to 64
degrees of freedom. This is possible using the generalized version of CURE found by
F. Luisier et al. [27] which is an equivalent to MSE with k-degrees of freedom.
Another property of noise on MRI is that the noise variance is not equally valued
on entire the magnitude image. It is spatially varying, therefore one possibility could
be to modify the random noise term in MC-CURE according to what is done in
spatially varying SURE (svSURE) as proposed by Pizzolato et al. [32]. This was
done for MC-SURE, while using a neural network architecture, by [17].
==PAGE:48==
36
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion
The thesis tackled the issue of self-supervised denoising with Machine learning and
the contribution includes
1. The AHT Flow and Spline Flow, modified to calculate the analytical Jacobian.
2. Denoising using SURE with the exact divergence of neural networks i.e. trace
of the analytical diagonal Jacobian.
3. Rederivation of CURE
4. Analytical CURE with an exact calculation of the Hessian diagonal due to the
transformation in the AHT Flow
5. MC-CURE with an approximation of the diagonal Hessian
Motivated by the complexity of Rician data where previous self-supervised meth-
ods do not consider the complexity. We found that the analytical diagonal Jacobian
can then be used in SURE for denoising Gaussian data in combination with neural
networks. For this purpose, we presented modified flows AHT Flow and Spline Flow.
In these flows, it is possible to calculate the analytical diagonal Jacobian due to the
Coupling layer architecture and their transformations.
For Rician data, we can use CURE as an unbiased risk estimate of the MSE and
we rederived it from the expansion of the MSE following Luisier et al. [27] in Appendix
A. To use CURE as a loss for the training of a denoiser one needs the diagonal Ja-
cobian and diagonal Hessian of the function. To calculate during the forward pass
of the network, we present a flow with analytical Hessian. Further analysis of the
Hessian and based on our experiments, we show that CURE is not proportional to
the MSE using this analytical Hessian. However, we present the correct calculation
in Appendix B.
To avoid making assumptions about the flows Hessian, we demonstrate an ap-
proximate version of the unbiased risk estimate MC-CURE. In MC-CURE we make
a Taylor expansion using the diagonal Jacobian of the flows and use it to approximate
the diagonal Hessian. We show in our experiments that this is proportional to the
MSE and capable of denoising but with the limitation of some instabilities.
==PAGE:50==
38
Conclusion
In addition, our work leads to further research avenues that could overcome some
of the limitations of this study. These research avenues, span from CURE2 to ap-
proximation MCMC-CURE to account for more complex noise in MRI.
==PAGE:51==
Appendices
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
Appendix Appendix
41
A.1
Derivation of CURE
F. Luisier and P. J. Wolfe [2] show a SURE-like method to estimate the parameters
of the non-central chi-squared random variables with two degrees of freedom. This
method is used instead of SURE for denoising algorithms where the noise on the data
follows a non-central chi-squared distribution as the squared Rician distribution. In
the following, we will derive how to get to this Chi-Square Unbiased Risk Estimate
(CURE).
A.1.1
Model and distribution of the noisy observations
From the noisy magnitude images the aim is to recover the underlying noise-free
magnitude image
|µn| = (Re{µn}2 + Im{µn}2)
1
2 , n = 1...N
(1)
The noisy measurements |mn|, where both the real image Re and the imaginary image
Im are polluted by zero-mean white Gaussian noise with variance σ2. This is written
as Re{mn} ∼Re{µn} + N0,σ2 and Im{mn} ∼Im{µn} + N0,σ2.
Then following, the definition of magnitude images, we define two N-dimensional
vectors
x = [|µn|2/σ2]1≤n≤N ∈RN
+
(2)
y = [|mn|2/σ2]1≤n≤N ∈RN
+
(3)
The measurement model for y given x is the product of N independent noncentral
chi-square distributions. For this observation model, the distributions all have two
degrees of freedom and non-centrality parameter xn:
p(y|x) =
N
∏
n=1
p(yn|xn) =
N
∏
n=1
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
(4)
Here the I0 is the zero-order modified Bessel function of the first kind
I0(√xnyn) =
∑
k∈N
(xnyn)k
4k(k!)2
(5)
This reduces the problem of noise reduction to estimate the noncentrality parameter
xn of a noncentral chi-square distribution.
A.1.2
Unbiased MSE estimate
We can not calculate the true MSE between x and our denoising function of the noisy
measurement f(y), when the true signal x is unknown. Instead, we want to find an
==PAGE:54==
42
Appendix Appendix
unbiased estimate of its risk, that can be calculated solely based on the observed data
y. The expected MSE can be written as
E(MSE) = E( 1
N ||f(y) −x||2) = E( 1
N
N
∑
n=1
(fn(y) −xn)2))
(6)
= 1
N
N
∑
n=1
E((fn(y) −xn)2) = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
E(fn(y)2 + x2
n −2fn(y)xn)
(7)
= 1
N
N
∑
n=1
(E(fn(y)2) −2 E(xnfn(y)) + x2
n)
(8)
For the input vector y the equation is calculated for all observed values.
To use our denoising function f(y) in this setting it must follow some technical
requirements. For a random vector, where y ∈RN
+, follows a noncentral chi-square
distribution with two degrees of freedom with x ∈RN
+ as a noncentrality parame-
ter. Then f(y) must be an N-dimensional vector function restricted by the following
criteria:





E{|∂2fn(y)/∂y2
n|}
< ∞
limyn→∞|fn(y)|p(y|x)
= 0
limyn→∞|∂fn(y)/∂yn|p(y|x)
= 0
(9)
This means that fn(y) must be continuously differentiable concerning the input yn.
Going forward we will use the following notation ∂f(y) = ∂fn(y)/∂yn and ∂2f(y) =
∂2fn(y)/∂y2
n.
Given these restrictions of the choice of f(y) the following random variable defines
an unbiased estimate of the expected MSE
E{MSE} = E{ε}
(10)
ε = 1
N (||f(y)||2 + ||y||2 −8T y)+8 −2
N ((y −2)T f(y) −4((y −1)T ∂f(y) −yT ∂2f(y)))
(11)
When the true MSE can not be calculated we want to arrive at a unbiased esti-
mator of the MSE for a specific noise distribution. We aim to arrive at a statistical
equivalent. Back at the expectation for the MSE in equation 8, we could see that two
terms depended on xn. We will now derive an unbiased estimate of these two terms
depending only on f(y) and y.
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A.1 Derivation of CURE
43
A.1.3
Derivation E(xnfn(y))
To derive an estimate of E(xnfn(y)) we will start by defining the Fourier transform
of the probability density function (pdf). This lets us define the pdf in the frequency
domain
ˆp(ω|x) =
N
∏
n=1
exp
{
−jωnxn
1+2jωn
}
1 + 2jωn
(12)
Then by differentiating the logarithm of equation 12 with respect to ωn. When
differentiating a combined function, we use the chain rule, and since the
∂
∂x log(x) = 1
x
we get
∂
∂ωn
log(ˆp(ωn|x)) =
1
ˆp(ω|x)
∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x)
(13)
Then if we insert ˆp(ω|x) and find the derivative of the two divided functions by using
the quotient rule on equation 13 we arrive at
=
(1 + 2jωn) ∂
∂ω exp
{
−jωnxn
1+2jωn
}
−exp
{
−jωnxn
1+2jωn
}
∂
∂ω(1 + 2jωn)
(1 + 2jωn)2
1 + 2jωn
exp
{
−jωnxn
1+2jωn
}
(14)
Computing the partial derivatives using respectively the chain rule and then the
quotient rule on the exponent, and then the derivative of a linear function
=
(1 + 2jωn)
(
−
jxn exp{−jωnxn
1+2jωn }
(1+2jωn)2
)
−exp
{
−jωnxn
1+2jωn
}
2j
(1 + 2jωn)2
1 + 2jωn
exp
{
−jωnxn
1+2jωn
}
(15)
Rearranging the equation by multiplying the two fractions the expectation cancels
out
=
(1 + 2jωn)2 (
−
jxn
(1+2jωn)2
)
−2j(1 + 2jωn)
(1 + 2jωn)2
= −
jxn
(1 + 2jωn)2 −
2j
1 + 2jωn
(16)
So we arrive at the following differential relation
1
ˆp(ω|x)
∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x) = −
jxn
(1 + 2jωn)2 −
2j
1 + 2jωn
(17)
Then rewriting the equation
∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x) = −
jxn
(1 + 2jωn)2 ˆp(ω|x) −
2j
1 + 2jωn
ˆp(ω|x)
(18)
==PAGE:56==
44
Appendix Appendix
Multiplying by (1 + 2jωn)2
(1 + 2jωn)2 ∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x) = −jxnˆp(ω|x) −2j(1 + 2jωn)ˆp(ω|x)
(19)
Rearranging
(1 + 2jωn)2 ∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x) + 2j(1 + 2jωn)ˆp(ω|x) = −jxnˆp(ω|x)
(20)
Multiplying with the imaginary number j, where we remember that j · j = −1
xnˆp(ω|x) = j(1 + 2jωn)2 ∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x) −2(1 + 2jωn)ˆp(ω|x)
(21)
Then expanding the square of the sum
xnˆp(ω|x) = j(1 + 4jωn + 4(jωn)2) ∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x) −2(1 + 2jωn)ˆp(ω|x)
(22)
Then since the pdf is in the Fourier domain a differentiation is simply a multiplica-
tion. So multiplication by jωn is the same as differentiating with yn. Therefore, the
two following relationships hold for the transformation of the pdf back to the space
domain
jωnˆp(ω|x) = F( ∂
∂yn
p(y|x))
(23)
(jωn)2ˆp(ω|x) = F( ∂2
∂y2n
p(y|x))
(24)
Then differentiating of the pdf in the Fourier domain with respect to ωn corresponds
to a multiplication with −jyn. So, we introduce the following
∂
∂ωn
ˆp(ω|x) = F(−jynp(y|x))
(25)
By using equation 25 in equation 22 we arrive at
xnˆp(ω|x) = ynˆp(ω|x) + 4jωnynˆp(ω|x) + 4(jωn)2ynˆp(ω|x) −2(1 + 2jωn)ˆp(ω|x) (26)
Then by substituting equation 23 and equation 24 in the above equation the pdf
satisfies the below relation
xnp(y|x) = ynp(y|x) + 4 ∂
∂yn
(
ynp(y|x)
)
+ 4 ∂2
∂y2n
(
ynp(y|x)
)
−2
(
p(y|x) + 2 ∂
∂yn
p(y|x)
)
(27)
Using the linear relationship of the Fourier transform we arrive at this. Inserting
equation 4 into the above gives
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A.1 Derivation of CURE
45
xn
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn) = yn
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)+
4 ∂
∂yn
(
yn
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
)
+4 ∂2
∂y2n
(
yn
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
)
−exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn) −4 ∂
∂yn
(1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
)
(28)
First, we look at each term in the above equation individually before putting it
all together. We start with the second term by differentiating using the product rule
4 ∂
∂yn
(
yn
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
)
= 2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
−yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn) + 2yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)
(29)
Thus we will take a look at the double differentiated pdf with respect to yn and
differentiate it twice by using the product rule, the chain rule on the exponential term,
and the sum rule
4 ∂2
∂y2n
(yn
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)) =
∂
∂yn
(2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn))
−
∂
∂yn
(yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)) +
∂
∂yn
(2yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)))
= −exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn) + 2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)
−exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn) + 1
2yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
−yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn) + 2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)
−yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn) + 2yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂2
∂y2n
I0(√xnyn)
(30)
Lastly, using the product rule to differentiate the last term
−4 ∂
∂yn
(1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)) = exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)
−2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)
(31)
==PAGE:58==
46
Appendix Appendix
Combining everything from equation 28, 29, 30 and 31, many terms cancel out
and we are left with the following
xn
1
2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn) = 2 exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)
+ 2yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂2
∂y2n
I0(√xnyn)
(32)
Then dividing by the exponential term
xn
1
2I0(√xnyn) = 2 ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn) + 2yn
∂2
∂y2n
I0(√xnyn)
(33)
Multiplying by 2
xnI0(√xnyn) = 4 ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn) + 4yn
∂2
∂y2n
I0(√xnyn) = 4 ∂
∂yn
(yn
∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn))
(34)
Aligned with the above findings we substitute equation 34 into the expected value
formula for continuous random variables
E{xn} =
∫∞
∞
xnp(yn|xn)
(35)
Here p(y|x) is the probability density function for the chi-squared distribution, so
inserting equation 4 into the above equation
E{xnfn(y)} = 1
2
∫
RN
+
xnfn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)dNy
(36)
Then it follows from equation 34 that xnI0(√xnyn) can be replaced by differential
relation depending only on yn. So these are substituted into the equation 36
E{xnfn(y)} = 1
2
∫
RN
+
fn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
4 ∂
∂yn
(
yn
∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)
)
dNy
(37)
By using the integration by parts formula
∫b
a
u(x)v′(x)dx = [u(x)v(x)]b
a −
∫b
a
u′(x)v(x)dx
(38)
On equation 37
E{xnfn(y)} = 1
2(4[fn(y)yn exp
{
−xn + yn
2
} ∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)]RN
+
−
∫
RN
+
∂
∂yn
(fn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
)4yn
∂
∂yn
I0(√xnyn)dNy
(39)
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A.1 Derivation of CURE
47
We can ignore the first term since exponential to minus infinity is 0 and the modified
Bessel function to 0 is also 0. Then we use the integration by parts formula again on
the remainder
= 1
2(−[ ∂
∂yn
(fn(y)) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
4ynI0(√xnyn)]RN
+
+
∫
RN
+
∂
∂yn
( ∂
∂yn
(fn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
)4yn
)
I0(√xnyn)dNy)
(40)
Then for yn = 0 and the exponential to minus infinity the first term vanishes. Then
we are left with the final integration where we will use the pdf of non-central chi
distribution to find the expectation
= 1
2(4
∫
RN
+
∂
∂yn
( ∂
∂yn
(fn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
)yn)I0(√xnyn)dNy)
= 1
2(4
∫
RN
+
∂
∂yn
(∂fn(y)
∂yn
exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
−1
2fn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
)yn)I0(√xnyn)dNy)
= 1
2(4
∫
RN
+
((∂2fn(y)
∂yn
exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
−1
2
∂fn(y)
∂yn
exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
−1
2
∂fn(y)
∂yn
exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
+ 1
4fn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
)yn+
∂fn(y)
∂yn
exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
−1
2fn(y) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
)I0(√xnyn)dNy)
= 1
2(4
∫
RN
+
((∂2fn(y)
∂yn
yn −1
2
∂fn(y)
∂yn
yn −1
2
∂fn(y)
∂yn
yn + 1
4fn(y)yn)+
∂fn(y)
∂yn
−1
2fn(y)) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)dNy)
= 1
2(4
∫
RN
+
(∂2fn(y)
∂yn
yn−∂fn(y)
∂yn
(yn−1)+1
4fn(y)(yn−2)) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)dNy)
= 1
2(4
∫
RN
+
(∂2fn(y)
∂yn
yn −∂fn(y)
∂yn
(yn −1)) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)dNy)
+ 1
2(
∫
RN
+
(fn(y)(yn −2)) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)dNy)
= −1
2(4
∫
RN
+
(−∂2fn(y)
∂yn
yn + ∂fn(y)
∂yn
(yn −1)) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)dNy)
+ 1
2(
∫
RN
+
(fn(y)(yn −2)) exp
{
−xn + yn
2
}
I0(√xnyn)dNy)
(41)
==PAGE:60==
48
Appendix Appendix
Then by remembering the equation 35 for expected values
= −4 E{−∂2fn(y)
∂yn
yn + ∂fn(y)
∂yn
(yn −1)} + E{fn(y)(yn −2)}
(42)
Therefore, we arrive at the following estimate of the expectation which only de-
pends on yn.
E{xnfn(y)} = E{(yn −2)fn(y)} −4 E{(yn −1) ∂
∂yn
fn(y) −yn
∂2
∂y2n
fn(y)}
(43)
A.1.4
Estimation of x2
n
Finally, to estimate the second part we will first derive that E{yn} = xn + 2 since
E{|mn|2/σ2} = E{(Re{µn} + N0,σ)2 + (Im{µn} + N0,σ)2
σ2
}
(44)
Here we choose to write the Gaussian noise as a summation N(Re{µn}, σ2) = Re{µn}+
N0,σ
= E{(Re{µn} + N0,σ)2 + (Im{µn} + N0,σ)2)} 1
σ2
(45)
= E{Re{µn}2 + N 2
0,σ + 2 Re{µn}N0,σ + Im{µn}2 + N 2
0,σ + 2 Im{µn}N0,σ} 1
σ2
(46)
= E{Re{µn}2 + Im{µn}2} 1
σ2 + E{2 Re{µn}N0,σ + 2N 2
0,σ + 2 Im{µn}N0,σ} 1
σ2 (47)
and using equation 1 we can isolate xn
= xn + E{2 Re{µn}N0,σ + 2N 2
0,σ + 2 Im{µn}N0,σ} 1
σ2
(48)
= xn + 2
σ2 E{Re{µn}} E{N0,σ} + 2
σ2 E{N 2
0,σ} + 2
σ2 E{Im{µn}} E{N0,σ}}
(49)
Since E{N0,σ} = 0 and E{N 2
0,σ} = σ2 then
= xn + 2
(50)
Therefore we can write
xn = E{yn −2}
(51)
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A.1 Derivation of CURE
49
This then leads to
x2
n = E{xn(yn −2)}
(52)
Where if we use equation 43
E{xn(yn −2)} = E{(yn −2)(yn −2)} −4 E{(yn −1)∂(yn −2)
∂yn
−yn
∂2(yn −2)
∂y2n
} (53)
Then if we differentiate the yn −2 and rewrite the squared differences
= E{y2 + 4 −4y} −4 E{(yn −1)}
(54)
= E{y2} + 4 −E{4y} −4 E{(yn)} + 4 = E{y2
n} −8 E{yn} + 8
(55)
Then we see that 52 leads to the following relation
x2
n = E{xn(yn −2)} = E{y2
n} −8 E{yn} + 8
(56)
This was the derivation of the second term.
A.1.5
Combining terms 1 and 2
In this step, we combine the two terms to arrive at the final unbiased estimate for
the MSE depending only on the known signal yn and denoise function fn(y).
E{MSE} = E{ε}
(57)
and
E{MSE} = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
(E(fn(y)2) −2 E(xnfn(y)) + x2
n)
(58)
Now that we have found an expression for E(xnfn(y)) and x2
n which only depends
on yn.
E{ε} = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
(E{fn(y)2} −2(E{(yn −2)fn(y)}−
4 E{(yn −1)∂fn(y)
∂yn
−yn
∂2fn(y)
∂y2n
}) + E{y2
n} −8 E{yn} + 8)
= E{ 1
N
N
∑
n=1
(fn(y)2 −2((yn −2)fn(y)−4(yn −1)∂fn(y)
∂yn
−yn
∂2fn(y)
∂yn
)+y2
n −8yn +8)}
= E{ 1
N (||f(y)||2−2((y−2)T f(y)−4(y−1)T ∂f(y)
∂y
−yT ∂2f(y)
∂y
)+||y||2−8T y+8N)}
= E{ 1
N (||f(y)||2+||y||2−8T y)+8−2
N ((y−2)T f(y)−4((y−1)T ∂f(y)
∂y
−yT ∂2f(y)
∂y2
)}
(59)
==PAGE:62==
50
Appendix Appendix
ε = 1
N (||f(y)||2+||y||2−8T y)+8−2
N ((y−2)T f(y)−4((y−1)T ∂f(y)−yT ∂2f(y))) (60)
Epsilon is thus by using the statistical properties of the Chi-squared distribution an
unbiased risk estimate of the MSE.
==PAGE:63==
Appendix B.2 Hessian of AHT Flow
51
B.2
Hessian of AHT Flow
In the following, we derived in our discussions the Hessian in a one-layer AHT Flow.
Here we need to calculate the chain rule for higher-order derivatives as reported by
Storski et al. [28]. To calculate the Hessian using the chain rule for the first layer,
we need both the Jacobian and the Hessian. We will start by defining some of the
nomenclature for the calculations. z is the image reshaped into a vector, g is the
function or the change of variable applied in the first part of the layer while f is the
change of variable in the second part of the layer. α and β are parameters calculated
using a neural network NN(z). Then input z has been divided into two parts with
dimension (1 : d) and (d + 1 : D) where D is the length of z. τ is the result of the
transformation in the AHT Flow of z.
∂g(z)
∂z
=
[
I
0
∂τd+1:D
∂z1:d
∂τd+1:D
∂zd+1:D
]
=
[
I
0
∂
∂z1:d NN(τ1:d)
α(y1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D)
]
(61)
∂f(g)
∂g
=
[ ∂τ1:d
∂z1:d
∂τ1:d
∂τd+1:D
0
I
]
=
[α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d)
∂
∂zd+1:D NN(zd+1:D)
0
I
]
(62)
∂2g(z)
∂z2
=
[
0
0
∂2
∂z2
1:d NN(τ1:d)
−2 tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)
]
(63)
∂2f(g)
∂g2
=
[ tanh(z1:d)
cosh2(z1:d)
−2
∂2
∂z2
d+1:D NN(zd+1:D)
0
0
]
(64)
Then having defined all the different terms involved in the chain rule for the
Hessian. We will now calculate it
∂2f(g(z))
∂z2
=
(∂2f(g)
∂g2
· ∂g(z)
∂z
)
· ∂g(z)
∂z
+ ∂f(g)
∂g
· ∂2g(z)
∂z2
(65)
==PAGE:64==
52
Appendix Appendix
H =
([
0
0
∂2
∂z2
1:d NN(τ1:d)
−2 tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)
]
·
[
I
0
∂
∂z1:d NN(τ1:d)
α(y1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D)
])
·
[
I
0
∂
∂z1:d NN(τ1:d)
α(y1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D)
]
+
[α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d)
∂
∂zd+1:D NN(zd+1:D)
0
I
]
·
[
−2 tanh(z1:d)
cosh2(z1:d)
∂2
∂z2
d+1:D NN(zd+1:D)
0
0
]
=
[
0
0
∂2
∂z2
1:d NN(τ1:d) + −2
∂
∂z1:d NN(τ1:d) tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)
−2 tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)(α(y1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D))
]
·
[
I
0
∂
∂z1:d NN(τ1:d)
α(y1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D)
]
+
[
−2 tanh(z1:d)
cosh2(z1:d)(α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d))
∂2
∂z2
d+1:D NN(zd+1:D)(α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d))
0
0
]
=
[
0
0
∂2
∂z2
1:d NN(τ1:d) −4
∂
∂z1:d NN(τ1:d) tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)
−2 tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)(α(y1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D))2
]
+
[
−2 tanh(z1:d)
cosh2(z1:d)(α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d))
∂2
∂z2
d+1:D NN(zd+1:D)(α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d))
0
0
]
=


−2 tanh(z1:d)
cosh2(z1:d)(α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d))
∂2
∂z2
d+1:D NN(zd+1:D)(α(zd+1:D) +
1
cosh2(z1:d))
∂2
∂z2
1:d NN(τ1:d) −4
∂
∂z1:d NN(τ1:d) tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)
−2 tanh(zd+1:D)
cosh2(zd+1:D)(α(y1:d) +
1
cosh2(zd+1:D))2


(66)
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
H. Gudbjartsson and S. Patz, “The rician distribution of noisy mri data,” Mag-
netic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 34, pp. 910–914, 1995.
[2]
F. Luisier and P. J. Wolfe, “Chi-square unbiased risk estimate for denoising
magnitude mr images,” pp. 1561–1564, 2011.
[3]
Z. Chen, K. Pawar, M. Ekanayake, C. Pain, S. Zhong, and G. F. Egan, “Deep
learning for image enhancement and correction in magnetic resonance imaging—
state-of-the-art and challenges,” 2 2023.
[4]
P. K. Mishro, S. Agrawal, R. Panda, and A. Abraham, “A survey on state-of-the-
art denoising techniques for brain magnetic resonance images,” IEEE Reviews
in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 15, pp. 184–199, 2021.
[5]
D. Jiang, W. Dou, L. Vosters, X. Xu, Y. Sun, and T. Tan, “Denoising of 3d
magnetic resonance images with multi-channel residual learning of convolutional
neural network,” Japanese journal of radiology, vol. 36, pp. 566–574, 2018.
[6]
K. Zhang, W. Zuo, Y. Chen, D. Meng, and L. Zhang, “Beyond a gaussian de-
noiser: Residual learning of deep cnn for image denoising,” IEEE transactions
on image processing, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 3142–3155, 2017.
[7]
M. Ran, J. Hu, Y. Chen, H. Chen, H. Sun, J. Zhou, and Y. Zhang, “Denoising
of 3d magnetic resonance images using a residual encoder–decoder wasserstein
generative adversarial network,” Medical Image Analysis, vol. 55, pp. 165–180, 7
2019.
[8]
K. Kim and J. C. Ye, “Noise2score: tweedie’s approach to self-supervised image
denoising without clean images,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 34, pp. 864–874, 2021.
[9]
J. Batson and L. Royer, “Noise2self:
Blind denoising by self-supervision,”
pp. 524–533, 2019.
[10] A. Maleky, S. Kousha, M. S. Brown, and M. A. Brubaker, “Noise2noiseflow:
realistic camera noise modeling without clean images,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17632–
17641, 2022.
==PAGE:66==
54
Bibliography
[11] K. Lee and W. K. Jeong, “Noise2kernel: Adaptive self-supervised blind denoising
using a dilated convolutional kernel architecture,” Sensors, vol. 22, 6 2022.
[12] H. Yu, M. Wang, X. Song, H. Shan, H. Qiu, J. Wang, and K. Yang, “Noise2clean:
Cross-device side-channel traces denoising with unsupervised deep learning,”
Electronics (Switzerland), vol. 12, 2 2023.
[13] Y. Quan, M. Chen, T. Pang, and H. Ji, “Self2self with dropout: Learning self-
supervised denoising from single image,” pp. 1887–1895, IEEE Computer Society,
2020.
[14] C. M. Stein, “Estimation of the mean of a multivariate normal distribution,” The
annals of Statistics, pp. 1135–1151, 1981.
[15] S. Ramani, T. Blu, and M. Unser, “Monte-carlo sure: A black-box optimization
of regularization parameters for general denoising algorithms,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Image Processing, vol. 17, pp. 1540–1554, 2008.
[16] S. Soltanayev and S. Y. Chun, “Training deep learning based denoisers without
ground truth data,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 31,
2018.
[17] L. Pfaff, J. Hossbach, E. Preuhs, F. Wagner, S. Arroyo Camejo, S. Kannengiesser,
D. Nickel, T. Wuerfl, and A. Maier, “Self-supervised mri denoising: leveraging
stein’s unbiased risk estimator and spatially resolved noise maps,” Scientific Re-
ports, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 22629, 2023.
[18] M. M. López, J. M. Frederick, and J. Ventura, “Evaluation of mri denoising
methods using unsupervised learning,” Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 4,
6 2021.
[19] S. Laue, “On the equivalence of automatic and symbolic differentiation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.02990, 2019.
[20] “Autograd mechanics.” https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/notes/autograd.
html. Accessed: 2023-12-09.
[21] G. Papamakarios, E. Nalisnick, D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and B. Lakshmi-
narayanan, “Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference,” The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 2617–2680, 2021.
[22] D. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing flows,”
pp. 1530–1538, 2015.
[23] L. Dinh, D. Krueger, and Y. Bengio, “Nice: Non-linear independent components
estimation,” 2014.
[24] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation using real nvp,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
55
[25] C. Durkan, A. Bekasov, I. Murray, and G. Papamakarios, “Neural spline flows,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[26] U. M. Luisier F, Blu T, “Image denoising in mixed poisson-gaussian noise,” 3
2011.
[27] F. Luisier, T. Blu, and P. J. Wolfe, “A cure for noisy magnetic resonance images:
Chi-square unbiased risk estimation,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 3454–3466, 2012.
[28] M. Skorski, “Chain rules for hessian and higher derivatives made easy by tensor
calculus,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.13292, 2019.
[29] L. Deng, “The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning
research,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 141–142, 2012.
[30] W. Shi, J. Caballero, F. Huszár, J. Totz, A. P. Aitken, R. Bishop, D. Rueck-
ert, and Z. Wang, “Real-time single image and video super-resolution using an
eﬀicient sub-pixel convolutional neural network,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1874–1883, 2016.
[31] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin, A. Des-
maison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Automatic differentiation in pytorch,” 2017.
[32] M. Pizzolato, R. Deriche, E. J. Canales-Rodriguez, and J.-P. Thiran, “Spatially
varying monte carlo sure for the regularization of biomedical images,” 2019.
[33] S. Aja-Fernández, V. Brion, and A. Tristán-Vega, “Effective noise estimation and
filtering from correlated multiple-coil mr data,” Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
vol. 31, pp. 272–285, 2 2013.
==PAGE:68==
