==PAGE:1==
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial
audio reproduction
Author: Wenmiao Gao, s212619
Supervisor: Efren Fernandez Grande Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán
DTU Acoustic
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
Supervisor: Efren Fernandez Grande Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán
October, 2023
By
Wenmiao Gao
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Eigenmike in a spherical coordinate
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Brovej, Build­
ing 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Electrical and Pho­
tonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of acoustic and acoustic
signal processing.
Wenmiao Gao ­ s212619
Signature
Date
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Spherical microphone arrays, with their exceptional performance characteristics, play a
pivotal role in the domain of sound source localization. This thesis discusses deeply the
classic spherical harmonic domain algorithms for estimating the direction of arrival (DoA)
of sound sources using spherical microphone arrays.
To comprehensively evaluate these algorithms, an detailed parameter analysis was under­
taken. During this procedure, various influencing factors were taken into account, includ­
ing the diversity of signals, the number and distribution of microphones, the singularity
of sound sources (single or multiple), and the multi­array configurations in acoustical en­
vironments. Moreover, the Signal­to­Noise Ratio (SNRs) and reverberation time (RT60s)
were incorporated to ensure that the analysis remains widely adaptable across diverse real­
world application scenarios.
Building upon the theoretical research, simulations as well as real­world data sets were
employed for experimental validation. These experiments aimed to holistically assess the
performance and stability of the studied algorithms in practical applications, ensuring their
significant advantages not only in theory but also in actual operations.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis marks the end of my two­year journey in Engineering Acoustics at DTU. Al­
though this period was not long, it was filled with memorable experiences. Over the past
five months, the topic I worked on was challenging, intriguing, and of great significance
to me. Throughout this process, I gained a wealth of valuable knowledge.
First and foremost, I would like to express my deep gratitude to Professor Efren Fernandez
Grande. It was he who provided me with this fascinating project and offered invaluable
guidance and supervision. Secondly, I especially want to thank my co­supervisor Anto­
nio Andrés Figueroa Durán. He has been instrumental in providing a lot of professional
assistance, from theoretical knowledge to programming skills. His advice, which not only
pertained to my thesis but also to my overall learning and research, has been immensely
beneficial. I feel very fortunate and grateful to have completed this project under their
guidance. Additionally, I would like to thank the other professors and classmates in the
Acoustics department. Their teachings and collaborations over these two years have en­
riched my theoretical knowledge and academic life.
On a personal note, I would also like to extend my heartfelt thanks to my girlfriend and
my close friends. They have always been there to listen and support me. Lastly, I want to
sincerely thank my beloved parents. Their unconditional love, care, encouragement, and
support have always been the driving force in my life’s journey.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Thesis outline
7
3
Mathematical modeling of the sound field
8
3.1
Analysis in spherical harmonic domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Sound source localization algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Room impulse response modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Simulation results
20
4.1
Simulation setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Result and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Real Data Evaluation
40
6
Conclusions and Outlook
43
6.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Bibliography
45
A Appendix A
49
A.1
Detail for plane wave decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2
Frequency smoothing [37]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
v
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AIR
Acoustic Impulse Response
CSSM
Coherent Subspace Method
DAS
Delay and Sum
DOA
Direction Of Arrival
DPDT
Direct Path Dominance Test
ESPRIT
Estimation of Signal Parameters via Rotational Invariance Techniques
EVD
Eigenvalue Decomposition
ISM
Image Source Method
ISSM
Incoherent Subspace Methods
MLE
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
MUSIC
Multiple Signal Classification
MVDR
Minimum Variance Distortionless Response
PWD
Plane Wave Decomposition
RIR
Room Impulse Response
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
RT
Reverberation Time
SH­MUSIC
Spherical Harmonic MUSIC
SHD
Spherical Harmonic Decomposition
SH
Spherical Harmonic
SMA
Spherical Microphone Array
SNR
Signal to Noise Ratio
SSL
Sound Source Localization
STFT
Short­Time Fourier Transform
TDOA
Time Difference of Arrival
TF
Time­Frequency
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
vi
==PAGE:8==
Operators
(.)′
Derivative
(.)∗
Complex conjugate
(.)H
Hermitian transpose
(.)T
Transpose
diag(.)
Diagonal operator
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
vii
==PAGE:9==
Variables
αq
Sampling weights of each microphone
Ω
Direction (θ, ϕ)
ϕ
Azimuth ∈[0, 2π)
Σ
Eigenvalues matrix
R
Covariance Matrix
U
Eigenvectors Matrix
θ
Elevation ∈[0,π]
anm
Spherical harmonic coefficient compensated by the structure of sphere
of order n and degree m
bn(kr)
Far­field radial function
c
Speed of sound in standard atmospheric pressure at room temperature
k
Wave number
L
Number of microphones
l
Microphone index
m
Spherical harmonic degree
n
Spherical harmonic order
Ndec
Maximum spherical harmonic order
Pnm
Legendre function of order n and degree m
pnm
Spherical harmonic coefficient of order n and degree m
Q
Number of microphones
q
Microphone index
r
Radius of sphere
sl(k)
Magnitude of incident plane wave l with wave number k
Ynm
Spherical harmonic basis function of order n and degree m
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The perception of sound in humans is an innate behavior, which relies on the collec­
tive functioning of the auditory system. In this process, sound source localization (SSL)
plays a crucial role in our perception of sound­producing objects. Our auditory system
combines multiple cues for SSL, including interaural time differences (ITD), interaural
level differences (ILD), level differences, and spectral information [1].
Recognizing the important role of sound source localization (SSL), researchers have
gradually turned their focus to technological advances in this field. Inspired by advances
in radar­based source localization techniques, the need for the development of voice com­
munications, and binaural localization bionics, there has been a growing interest in SSL re­
search using microphone arrays [2]. This technique has gained widespread application and
interest in a variety of fields such as machine audio recognition, noise detection, speech
enhancement, and security monitoring. This approach involves an array system of two
or more microphone units configured in a particular way, which is capable of effectively
localizing the sound source by using the spatial information contained in the differences
in the signals captured in each microphone in combination with advanced acoustic signal
processing algorithms.
Recently, due to the good characteristics of spherical microphone arrays (SMAs) for
capturing the spatial properties of the sound field, and their excellent performance in sound
field analysis and reconstruction [3]. The SMAs have been introduced to sound source
localization (SSL). The process of spherical harmonic sound source localization begins
by capturing the signal using SMA. These signals are then converted to the spherical har­
monic domain by the spherical Fourier transform. After this conversion, an array of signal
processing algorithms performs a more in­depth analysis [4], which ultimately leads to the
localization of the sound source.
A distinctive feature of the spherical harmonic method is its capability to decouple
frequency and directional information based on the positioning of the microphones. This
unique capability enhances its popularity in SSL applications. The SMA offers significant
advantages over one­ and two­dimensional arrays. It comprehensively captures sound
field information, facilitating DoA estimation. Compared to the more challenging task
of 3D sound source localization, estimating the direction of arrival (DoA) of a target is a
relatively straightforward preliminary task. In DoA estimation, the primary concern is the
direction from which the sound arrives, without considering the distance. However, the
SMA also has great potential for localizing the 3D position of the object (including range).
In addition, it offers excellent resistance to noise and environmental interference. Its high
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
2
==PAGE:11==
spatial resolution also means higher accuracy in SSL.
In this thesis, the main focus is on reproducing and discussing a variety of traditional
array signal processing DoA estimation methods based on the spherical harmonic domain.
It’s important to highlight that all the methods discussed operate under the plane wave
assumption. This assumption posits that the sound waves arriving at the microphone array
are plane waves, simplifying the underlying mathematics and algorithms.
1.2
Literature Review
According to [5], the three classic methods for sound source localization can be
categorized as localization methods based on Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA), Beam­
forming localization based on maximum output power, and localization based on vector
subspace.
The TDOA algorithm mainly consists of two steps. Firstly, it involves calculating
the time difference between the signals from a common sound source arriving at a pair of
microphones. Then based on the geometric relationship between the microphone array el­
ements, the position of the sound source can be determined [6]. Beamforming localization
methods based on maximum output power rely heavily on the weighted summation of the
signals received by each microphone in the array. First, the algorithm presets or scans all
possible sound source directions. For each preset direction, the algorithm computes a set
of weights that are intended to adjust the phase and amplitude of the signals from each
microphone such that the source signals from the preset directions are superimposed and
enhanced on all microphones. When these adjusted signals are weighted and summed, they
form a beam, a process known as beamforming. The main goal of beamforming is to maxi­
mize the output power of signals coming from a predetermined direction while minimizing
interference from other directions. After repeating this process in all the predefined direc­
tions, the algorithm finds the direction with the highest output power and identifies it as the
most probable direction of the sound source [7]. The common beamforming algorithms
are Delay And Sum (DAS), and Minimum Variance Distortionless Response (MVDR). It
can be said that the beamforming method is a maximization or minimization estimation of
the statistical properties of the spatial position, and its global search of the whole space, so
it is more suitable for real scene sound source localization in room acoustics [8]. However
its disadvantages are its large arithmetic volume, high computational complexity, and not
easy­to­realize real­time sound source localization algorithms. The last widely used SSL
method is based on the orthogonality of the signal and noise subspaces, where the spatial
spectrum is constructed by obtaining the cross­correlation matrix of the received signals
and finally searching for the extremes of the spatial spectrum.
Compared to one­dimensional linear arrays and two­dimensional planar arrays,
spherical arrays offer significant spatial advantages. They can capture sound omnidirec­
tional, collecting full spatial sound field data at once, and providing higher spatial resolu­
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
3
==PAGE:12==
tion and a uniform directional response. This makes them especially effective for sound
source localization and analysis in three­dimensional space. Crucially, spherical arrays
allow for the transformation of sound source localization from the traditional spatial do­
main to the spherical harmonic domain. Within this domain, sound source signals can
be decomposed using spherical harmonic functions, achieving a decoupling of frequency
and angle. This allows for the independent analysis of the sound’s frequency character­
istics and source direction, making the identification and localization of sound sources
in complex environments, such as multi­source or noisy backgrounds, more accurate and
efficient.
The theory of spherical harmonics plays a pivotal role in sound source localization.
The central idea is that the sound field at any point on the sphere can be represented by a set
of linear combinations of complete orthogonal basis functions whose weights are based on
the sphere as the order N tends to infinity. However, in practice, it is common to approx­
imate this representation using finite summation due to the need to maintain operational
feasibility. By sampling the sound field using a microphone array, the corresponding
spherical harmonic functions can be obtained for further analysis of the sound field. The
samples taken from the microphone array can be extended to obtain information about
the sound field at any point on the entire sphere [3]. Different spherical spatial sampling
strategies determine the spatial location of the microphone and the use of the spherical
Fourier transform. Regarding sampling strategies, [3] summarizes three sampling meth­
ods: equiangular, Gaussian, and homogeneous sampling, and theoretically analyzes each
sampling method.
In the study of beamforming with spherical arrays, [9] introduced a spherical har­
monic beamforming algorithm based on the plane wave assumption. The main idea is
to decompose the signals captured by the microphones into spherical harmonic functions.
These functions are then fed into a beamformer to create beams. This approach effectively
separates the beamformer from the microphone positions. The end result is a directional
map of the sound source. [10] studied several methods for sampling the sound field on
the sphere, considering open and rigid spherical configurations. The analysis also took
into account errors introduced by finite­order effects, spatial sampling errors, spatial alias­
ing, and provided methods for selecting array design parameters. For the open sphere, at
certain operating frequencies, the spherical Bessel function can exhibit zero values, lead­
ing to instability in the output of the spherical array. To address this, a double­sphere
array (open dual­sphere array) is introduced in [10]. This design employs two spherical
arrays with different radii. The key is that spheres of different radii have spherical Bessel
function values of zero at different frequencies, and the zeroes lead to missing informa­
tion in one sphere that can be obtained from the other. By utilizing both arrays, they can
complement each other, effectively overcoming the zero­value issue inherent in individual
spherical arrays. Among them, the commonly used spherical harmonic domain beamform­
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
4
==PAGE:13==
ing methods are, Delay And Sum (DAS [11]), Plane Wave Decomposition (PWD [12]),
and Minimum Variance Distortionless Response (MVDR [4]), where the PWD and DAS
methods are more robust, but with weaker spatial resolution and poorer response to low
frequencies, whereas MVDR has stronger spatial resolution by introducing a minimum
variance constraint, but with a larger arithmetic capacity. Additionally, [13] proposed the
steered response power density (SRPD) and an entropy­based hierarchical grid refinement
method, which can reduce the number of steering directions needed for DoA estimation
and enhance the algorithm’s performance in localizing near­coherent sources.
In addition to Beamforming methods, two popular sound source localization methods
based on subspace (e.g. MUSIC [14], ESPRIT [15]) have been extended to the spherical
harmonic domain with good performance[16][17]. The Spherical Harmonics MUSIC (SH­
MUSIC) algorithm processes signals from a microphone array in the spherical harmonic
domain to form an autocorrelation matrix. Using eigenvalue decomposition (EVD), it
separates signal and noise subspaces. The orthogonality between the array steering vector
and noise subspace results in a clear peak in the power spectrum, indicating the signal’s
direction. However, a limitation of SH­MUSIC is that it requires a complex spatial search
based on the power spectrum to determine the azimuth and elevation of the DoA. To ad­
dress this, spherical harmonics estimation of signal parameters via rotational invariance
technique (SH­ESPRIT) and spherical harmonics root MUSIC [18] were introduced. Un­
like SH­MUSIC, they do not require a comprehensive spatial search to estimate the DoA.
Both methods derive the DoA directly from an algebraic perspective by analyzing the
eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the received signal’s data matrix in spherical harmonics.
While subspace algorithms can provide high spatial resolution localization results,
their performance is suboptimal in low signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) environments and in
localizing coherent sound sources under high reverberation conditions. [4] summarized
the SH­MVDR, DAS, PWD, and SH­MUSIC algorithms for DOA estimation of early
reflected sound in a room, respectively, and concluded that SH­MVDR has better per­
formance. [19] introduced the wavelet transform to decompose the impulse response
within a room. Subsequently, they extracted the energy peaks corresponding to the di­
rect sound and reflected sound. Utilizing the spherical harmonic decomposition (SHD)
and DAS algorithm, they were able to determine the DOA of early reflections within the
room. A maximum likelihood method for DoA estimation is introduced in the spheri­
cal harmonic domain, termed SHMLE [20], this SHMLE approach, when applied under
the Open­sphere array configuration, can circumvent the division of the spherical Bessel
function, making it applicable at any frequency. Furthermore, this method can be readily
extended for implementation in broadband scenarios.
To further extend these algorithms for the localization of broadband sources, the In­
coherent Signal Subspace Method (ISSM) was introduced. It works by decomposing a
broadband signal into multiple narrowband signals and then applying a localization algo­
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
5
==PAGE:14==
rithm to each narrowband signal. However, ISSM tends to perform poorly when dealing
with broadband signals in reverberant environments. To solve this problem, the Coherent
Signal Subspace Method (CSSM) [21] was developed. Instead of analyzing the signals
directly, CSSM first examines the covariance matrices of each narrowband signal. These
matrices are then focused with a selected reference frequency. By summing and averaging
these focused matrices, it is ensured that the resulting covariance matrix is full rank. This
is critical as it allows the method to manage correlated signals. Once the averaged covari­
ance matrix is obtained, it can be used in narrowband processing to estimate the location
of broadband signals.
However, The Coherent Signal Subspace Method (CSSM) presents a significant chal­
lenge due to its reliance on a focusing matrix, which is contingent upon an initial estimate
of the direction of arrival (DOA). A biased initial DOA estimate can detrimentally influ­
ence the focusing covariance matrix, subsequently impacting processes like beamforming
and source localization. However, an alternative approach can be found in the spherical
harmonic domain. By decomposing the three­dimensional sound field using spherical har­
monics, one can effectively segregate the signal’s frequency information from its angular
information. Leveraging this property, one might focus on averaging and smoothing only
the frequency­related components. This approach offers a solution to broadband signal
processing challenges, eliminating the need for an initial DOA estimate when determin­
ing the focusing matrix. Rafaely et al. proposed a frequency smoothing algorithm based
on CSSM in spherical domain [22].
To enhance the robustness of the aforementioned spherical harmonic domain algo­
rithms in reverberant environments, Nadiri and Rafaely introduced the Direct Path Domi­
nance Test (DPDT) algorithm. This method improves algorithm performance by identify­
ing whether there is a directional component in each time­frequency frame [23]￿
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
6
==PAGE:15==
2
Thesis outline
The content of this thesis is structured as follows:
• Chapter 1: Introduction ­ This chapter elucidates the research significance and
background of sound source localization. It also presents the current state of research
on sound source localization algorithms based on spherical microphone arrays.
• Chapter 3: Mathematical Background ­ This chapter introduces the mathematical
model of spherical harmonic decomposition and the definition of the spherical coor­
dinate system. It further analyzes the impact of different spherical array structures
on sound source localization. Additionally, the room reverberation model is defined,
and the principles of various algorithms are discussed.
• Chapter 4: Simulation Results ­ This chapter provides a parameter analysis sim­
ulation for various spherical harmonic domain localization algorithms. It considers
different types of signals, quantities of microphones, scenarios of single and multi­
ple sound sources, various SNRs and RT60s, and multiple array configurations for
single­source localization.
• Chapter 5: Real Data Evaluation ­ This chapter introduces a real­life AIR dataset
to evaluate the performance of the algorithms in localizing a single sound source in
reverberant and noisy environments.
• Chapter 6: Conclusion and Outlook ­ This chapter summarizes the work of the
thesis, the successes and limitations of the evaluated algorithms, both in simulated
and real­world datasets, are highlighted. Looking ahead, potential areas for future
research, possible improvements to existing algorithms, and anticipated challenges
in sound source localization are discussed.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Mathematical modeling of the sound field
3.1
Analysis in spherical harmonic domain
3.1.1
Spherical coordinate
In this thesis, the standard spherical coordinate system is mainly applied, as shown in
Fig. 3.1, where any point on the spherical coordinate system can be expressed as (r, θ, ϕ) or
in a more concise form as (r, Ω), where r denotes the distance from the point to the origin
of the spherical coordinate system, Ω= (θ, ϕ) denotes a DOA, θ ∈[0°, 180°] denotes
the inclination from the z­axis, and ϕ ∈[0°, 360°] denotes the angle of counterclockwise
rotation from the x­axis in the xy­plane.
Figure 3.1: The standard spherical coordinate
The relation between the coordinates [x, y, z] in the Cartesian coordinate system and
spherical coordinates is as follows.
x = rsinθcosϕ
(3.1)
y = rsinθsinϕ
(3.2)
z = rcosθ
(3.3)
3.1.2
Spherical Harmonic Functions
Any square­integrable function f(θ, ϕ) on the unit sphere can be represented as a
linear combination of spherical harmonic functions Y m
n (θ, ϕ) with weighted values, due
to the fact that the spherical harmonic functions Y m
n (θ, ϕ) form a complete basis. This
implies that a finite number of spherical harmonic functions can be used to approximate
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
8
==PAGE:17==
the target function. By selecting appropriate coefficients fnm, this approximation can be
made as close as possible in the ℓ2 norm sense. Thus the expression for the sound pressure
at the (Ω) position on a unit sphere can be described by the following Eq. 3.4.
p(θ, ϕ) =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
pnmY m
n (θ, ϕ)
(3.4)
Where pnm are the spherical Fourier transform coefficients, which can be derived by the
inverse transform shown as Eq. 3.5.
pnm =
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
f(θ, ϕ)Y m
n (θ, ϕ)∗sin(θ)dθdϕ
(3.5)
Where ∗denotes the complex conjugate. And the spherical harmonics are defined as Eq.
3.6:
Y m
n (θ, ϕ) = Y m
n (θ, ϕ) =
s
(2n + 1)(n −m)!
4π(n + m)!
P m
n (cos θ)eimϕ
(3.6)
Where n is the order of the spherical harmonics, m is the degree of the spherical harmonics
(|m| ≤n), P m
n (cos θ) are the associated Legendre polynomials and i2 = −1.
Fig. 3.2 illustrates the ballon plot of the spherical harmonic function from n = 0
(top) ton = 4th (bottom) order [3].
Figure 3.2: Ballon plot of the spherical harmonics for n = 0 to n = 4
Spherical harmonics have numerous properties. In this paper, a few properties that
can support subsequent derivations, namely the orthogonality and additivity of spherical
harmonics, will be mentioned. The orthogonality property of spherical harmonics can be
expressed as:
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
Y m
n (θ, ϕ)Y m′
n′ (θ, ϕ) sin(θ)dθdϕ = δnn′δmm′
(3.7)
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
9
==PAGE:18==
Where δnn′ is the Kronecker delta function, which is 1 when n = n′ and 0 otherwise.
The additivity property of spherical harmonics can be expressed as:
2n + 1
4π
Pn(cos Θ) =
n
X
m=−n
Y m
n (θ, ϕ)Y m
n (θ′, ϕ′)∗
(3.8)
Where Θ is the angle between the two points (θ, ϕ) and (θ′, ϕ′) on the sphere.
cos Θ = cos θ cos θ′ + cos(ϕ −ϕ′) sin θ sin θ′
(3.9)
3.1.3
Signal representation in spherical harmonic domain
Consider a spherical microphone array with a radius of a, comprising Q uniformly
distributed microphones. This array is situated within an acoustic field formed by L plane
waves. The DOA for each plane wave is given by ψl = (θl, ϕl), with an associated am­
plitude represented as sl(k), where k denotes the wavenumber. The spatial coordinate
position of each microphone is defined by Ωq = (θq, ϕq), and the center of the micro­
phone array coincides with the origin of the spherical coordinate system [10].
Then the sound pressure at the qth microphone at this point can be expressed as:
p(kr, Ωq) =
L
X
l=1
sl(k)eikT
l rq ≈
L
X
l=1
sl(k)
N
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
bn(kr)[Yn,m(Ψl)]∗Yn,m(Ωq)
(3.10)
where kl = −k(cos ϕl sin θl, sin ϕl sin θl, cos θq)T represents the wave vector of l th plane
wave, rq represents the Cartesian coordinate of qth microphone on the sphere. N is the
maximum order of the plane wave decomposition of the spherical array that satisfies (N +
1)2 < Q. bn(kr) is a radial function related to the structure of a spherical microphone
array, which can be written as [3]:
brigid
n
(kr) = 4πin

jn(kr) −j′
n(ka)
h′2
n (ka)h2
n(kr)

(3.11)
bopen
n
(kr) = 4πinjn(kr)
(3.12)
where jn(·) and hn(·) represent the spherical Bessel function and the second kind spherical
Hankel function, respectively.
The details of bn(kr) will be derived in the appendix A.1.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
10
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.3: The magnitude of bn(kr) for n= 0,...,4 for a rigid sphere with r = ra and an open
sphere
From Fig. 3.3, it can be clearly seen that the magnitude of bn(kr) for rigid sphere
and open sphere respectively. The radial function corresponding to the open configuration
bn(kr) has some low amplitudes at certain corresponding orders n and frequency points,
which will result in unstable calculations and incorrect output results when obtaining the
coefficients of the expansion in Eq. 3.10. However, the problem of pathological zeros at
some kr is eliminated for the Bessel function in the rigid sphere configuration compared
to the open sphere, and since the rigid sphere introduces scattering into the sound field,
the total sound field becomes a superposition of the incident and scattered sound fields,
and the amplitude of bn(kr) is relatively higher, i.e. the magnitude of bn(kr) is higher at
higher orders of the harmonic decomposition of the sphere and at lower frequencies, so
the array will improve the SNR of the signal at low­frequency range [24], and another
advantage is that, in practice, the installation of rigid sphere microphone arrays is much
simpler.
Therefore, most of the current research and applications for spherical microphone
arrays are based on the rigid sphere structure, and the subsequent theoretical derivations,
simulations, and experimental analyses in this thesis are based on rigid spherical micro­
phone arrays. The Fig. 3.4 shows a real­life rigid sphere microphone array. It is the
EM 32 model microphone produced by MH Acoustics, composed of 32 microphones and
forming a sphere with a radius of 4.2 cm.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.4: MH Acoustics EM32 Eigenmike Microphone Array with 32 channels on a rigid sphere
[25]
In order to facilitate the calculation and subsequent simulation, the representation
of sound pressure at q th microphone Eq. 3.10 can be carried out in the form of a matrix
there [20]:
p(kr, Ωq) = yT(Ωq)B(kr)YH(Ψ)s(k)
(3.13)
where
y(Ωq) = [Y 0
0 (Ωq), Y −1
1
(Ωq), Y 0
1 (Ωq), ...,N
N (Ωq)]T
(3.14)
y(Ψl) = [Y 0
0 (Ψl), Y −1
1
(Ψl), Y 0
1 (Ψl), Y N
N (Ψl)]T
(3.15)
Y(Ψ) = [y(Ψl), y(Ψ2), ..., y(Ψl)]T
(3.16)
B(kr) = diag{b0(kr), b1(kr), b2(kr), ..., bN(kr)}
(3.17)
s(k) = [s1(k), s2(k), ..., sL(k)]T
(3.18)
Ψ = [Ψ1, Ψ2, ..., ΨL]
(3.19)
where y(Ωq) is a (N + 1)2 × 1 vector representing the spherical harmonics at the position
of the q th microphone. y(Ψl) is a (N +1)2×1 vector representing the spherical harmonics
for the l th incident plane wave, B(kr) is a (N +1)2×(N +1)2 diagonal matrix describing
the radial function corresponding to the SMA structure. Y (Ψ) is a (N + 1)2 × l matrix
which includes all the spherical harmonics for l incident plane wave.
Consider introducing simple Gaussian noise with mean 0 and variance σ2
v, which
is uncorrelated with the signal, as additive noise v(k) = [v1(k), v2(k), ..., vQ(k)], and
then consider the sound pressure at the location of all the microphones on the microphone
array in a matrix p(kr, Ω) to express, that is the sound pressure captured by the SMA that
defined in Eq. 3.20.
p(kr, Ω) ≈Y(Ω)B(kr)YH(Ψ)s(k) + v(k)
(3.20)
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
12
==PAGE:21==
with
Y (Ω) = [y(Ω1), y(Ω2), ..., y(Ωq)]T
(3.21)
p(kr, Ω) = [p(kr, Ω1), p(kr, Ω2), ..., p(kr, ΩQ)]T
(3.22)
Considering the microphones are approximately uniformly distributed on the sphere,
the sampling weights coefficient α1 = α2 = ...αQ = 4π
Q is a constant and satisfies the
following spherical harmonic function’s orthogonal relation as Eq. 3.7:
4π
Q YH(Ω)Y(Ω) = I(N+1)2
(3.23)
Combining the sound pressure of the whole microphone array in Eq. 3.20 and the
orthogonality for uniformly distributed structure in Eq. 3.23, the spherical harmonic coef­
ficient for the SMA pnm(kr) can be derived as:
pnm(kr) ≈B(kr)YH(Ψ)s(k) + vnm(k)
(3.24)
Here pnm contains a vector of spherical harmonic coefficients from (N + 1)2, where for
each order n, the degree m ∈[−n, n]
pnm(kr) = [p0
0(kr), p−1
1 (kr), p0
1(kr), p1
1(kr), ..., pN
N(kr)]T
(3.25)
3.1.4
Multiple spherical microphone arrays for localization
Various structures of spherical microphone arrays aim to achieve higher localization
performance. To obtain a higher spherical harmonic decomposition of Q ≥(N + 1)2
and improved localization resolution, an increased number of microphones is typically
required. However, due to the structural limitations of a single spherical array, there’s
always a performance ceiling. Therefore, multi­spherical arrays have been introduced to
further enhance algorithmic performance [26].
The core idea is to assume that all microphone arrays are placed on a circle with the
sound source at its center, meaning that the distance from each array to the source is equal.
This setup simplifies the analysis to just considering phase variations. Each spherical
microphone array locates the sound source within its local coordinate system. Assuming
the coordinate system of array M is the global one, the sound field data collected by
arrays M1 and M2 can be projected onto the M coordinate system through a coordinate
transformation. This enhances data localization in the global coordinate system, thereby
improving spatial resolution and localization performance.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.5: The geometry model of multiple spherical microphone arrays for localization
Then, the expression of Eq. 3.10 the q th microphone on the z th SMA can be
expressed as:
pz(kr, Ωq) =
L
X
l=1
sl(k)eikT
l (roz+rd)·ys
(3.26)
where ys is the steering vector related to source s, roz is the steering vector from the origin
of the global coordinate system to the center of the z­th sphere. rd is the steering vector
from the center of the z­th sphere (considered as the origin of the local coordinate system)
to the d­th microphone on the sphere’s surface. Here, |roz| = R, where R is the distance
from the sound source to the spherical microphone array, and |rd| = r, where r is the
radius of the individual spherical array.
For narrowband signals, a direct phase transformation in the time domain can project
from the local to the global coordinate system. For broadband signals, which encompass
multiple frequencies, an initial STFT transformation is required. For each frequency f,
the corresponding phase transformation is computed and then multiplied with the obtained
spectrogram. This allows data from the local microphone array to be projected onto the
global coordinate system. Finally, using ISTFT, the frequency­domain signal is converted
back to the time domain. By blending the adjusted signals from all arrays, an enhanced
signal is obtained for algorithmic processing.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
14
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Sound source localization algorithms
This chapter will delve into the principles of three distinct types of sound source local­
ization algorithms: Beamforming, Sub­space, and Maximum Likelihood in the spherical
harmonic domain.
3.2.1
Beamforming algorithm
In the previous section, the expression of the signal acquired by the spherical micro­
phone array in the spherical harmonic domain has been obtained, and the next step is to
discuss how to beamform the signal in the spherical harmonic domain, and to consider the
signal acquired by the microphone array as the input to the beamformer, which is fed into
the spatial filter to perform the DOA estimation of the sound source. The output of the
array can be expressed as:
y =
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
[w(k, θ, ϕ)]∗p(k, r, θ, ϕ)sinθdθdϕ
(3.27)
where [w(k, θ, ϕ)]∗is the coefficients of weights. A spherical Fourier transform of the
Eq. 3.27 allows the beamforming equation in the spatial domain to be expressed in the
spherical harmonic domain as:
y =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
wnm(k)∗pnm(kr)
(3.28)
Given wnm(k) and pnm(k), these are the expressions obtained after the Spherical Har­
monic Transform of w(k, θ, ϕ) and p(k, r, θ, ϕ) respectively. Both of them are represented
as (N + 1)2 × 1 vectors. In matrix notation, this can be represented as:
y = wH
nmpnm
(3.29)
If the sound field at this point is generated by a plane wave of the simplest unit am­
plitude, then the expression for the sound pressure coefficient at this point can be obtained
for the open­sphere sphere as:
pnm(kr) = 4πinjn(kr)[Y m
n (θk, ϕk]∗= bopen
n
(kr)[Y m
n (θk, ϕk]∗
(3.30)
while Eq. 3.29 represents the array output as the product of the array input and the weight­
ing coefficient vector. By introducing sampling vectors, the weighting vector can be ad­
justed for various sphere structures or microphone distributions.
Plane Wave Decomposition (PWD)
For plane wave decomposition algorithm (PWD), in
the uniform scheme, the weight coefficients are set as constants to achieve the maximum
directionality index, and then the weight coefficients are downscaled to a one­dimensional
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
15
==PAGE:24==
function[9].
[wnm(k)]∗= dn(k)
bn(kr)Y m
n (θl, ϕl)
(3.31)
where dn(k) is the new beamforming weights coefficient, which is only related to n.
(θl, ϕl) represents the observation direction of the array. Substituting Eq. 3.31 into Eq.
3.29, an expression for the plane wave decomposition (PWD) in the spherical harmonic
domain is obtained:
yPWD =
N
X
n=0
1
bn(kr)
n
X
m=−n
pnm(kr)Y m
n (θl, ϕl)
(3.32)
Delay and Sum (DAS)
The Delay and Sum (DAS) beamforming technique operates on
the principle of time delays. By precisely selecting these delays, it ensures that signals
arriving from a specific direction have matched phases across all microphones. These
phase­aligned signals, when combined, reinforce each other, resulting in maximized out­
put in that particular direction. Thus, DAS achieves optimized enhancement of sound
from a specific direction by adjusting time delays and summing microphone signals.
Then the axisymmetric beamforming weights dn(k) of DAS are:
dn(k) = |bn(kr)|2
(3.33)
The corresponding equation for DAS is
yDAS =
N
X
n=0
bn(kr)
n
X
m=−n
pnm(kr)Y m
n (θl, ϕl)
(3.34)
Minimum Variance Distortionless Response(MVDR)
In array signal processing, the core
objective of MVDR beamforming is to minimize the array’s output variance E[|y|2] while
ensuring a distortionless response for a signal from a predetermined direction. This implies
that while preserving the target signal, signals from other directions should be attenuated
maximally. In practical scenarios, the data captured by the array often encompasses not
just the target signal but also noise and other interferences. Given the challenges in directly
estimating the noise covariance matrix, the covariance matrix of the received signal is
typically used as a substitute. Hence, in the spherical harmonic domain, the optimization
problem for MVDR beamforming can be represented under specific constraints.
minimizewnm
wH
nmRPnmwnm
subject to
wH
nmUnm = 1
(3.35)
where RPnm represents the covariance matrix of the received signal in spherical domain
RPnm = E[pnmpnmH], and Unm denotes the steering vector which represents the transfer
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
16
==PAGE:25==
function from the source sl(k) to the array input. If the incident plane wave signal is a
unit amplitude plane wave, then the steering vector Unm is equivalent to pnm · sl(k) with
sl(k) = 1.
Subsequently, by employing the Lagrange multiplier method, the constrained opti­
mization problem is transformed into an unconstrained one [27]. Through computation,
the weight vector for the spherical harmonic domain MVDR beamformer is derived as:
wnm =
R−1
pnmUmn
UH
nmR−1
PnmUnm
(3.36)
Then by substituting Eq. 3.36 into Eq. 3.35, the power spectrum of MVDR beam­
former can be calculated as:
PMV DR = wH
nmRPnmwnm =
1
UH
nm(θ, ϕ)R−1
PnmUnm(θ, ϕ)
(3.37)
3.2.2
Sub­space algorithm
Multiple Signal Classification (MUSIC)
The space spanned by the steering matrix U co­
incides with the signal subspace formed by the eigenvectors corresponding to the large
eigenvalues of the covariance matrix Rpnm. By leveraging the orthogonality between the
signal subspace and the noise subspace, the spatial parameters of the signal can be esti­
mated.
The covariance matrix of the received signal can be computed as:
RPnm = E[pnmpnm
H]
(3.38)
After that, the eigenvalue decomposition of RPnm gives us the signal and noise subspaces.
eigen (Rpnm) = [Ea, En]
(3.39)
where Ea and En represents the signal subspace and noise subspace, respectively. Then,
the eigenvectors are selected based on the number of sources known a priori and the
pseudo­spectral equations are derived with respect to the direction of the sources:
PMUSIC =
1
Y m
n (θ, ϕ)EnE∗
n[Y m
n (θ, ϕ)]H
(3.40)
3.2.3
Maximum likelihood algorithm
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) is a statistical method that determines the di­
rection of a signal source by optimizing a likelihood function. This likelihood function
describes the probability of the actual observed data occurring given the direction param­
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
17
==PAGE:26==
eter.The goal of MLE is to find the direction parameter that maximizes this likelihood
function, thus providing the most probable estimate of the direction of the signal source
[28].
In the article [20][29], it is defined that, given a vector Θ containing unknown parameters,
the likelihood function of the spherical harmonic signal pnm can be expressed as:
f(pnm; Θ) = exp{−Pkmax
k=kmin[pnm(kr) −Vnm(kr, Ψ)s(k)]HR−1
nm[pnm(kr) −Vnm(kr, Ψ)s(k)]}
(π(N+1)2|Rnm|)kmax−kmin
(3.41)
where Θ = [ΨT, ST, σ2
n]T is the vector which includes all the unknown parameters, S =
[s(kmin)T, ..., s(kmax)T]T represents the magnitudes of the source signals, and kmin and
kmax are the minimum wave vector and maximum vector, respectively. Ψ, s and σ2
v are
set to be deterministic and unknown, and the received signal pnm is considered as random.
Vnm(k, Ψ) = B(kr)Y H(Ψ) is the steering matrix. Then the estimated DoA of MLE
method can be derived as.
ˆΨ = arg min
Ψ
kmax
X
k=kmin
pnm(k) −V nm(k, Ψ)V nm(k, Ψ)−1pnm(k)
2
(3.42)
3.2.4
Summary
In summary, this section reviews the localization principles of various algorithms in
the spherical harmonic domain, and the expressions of the various algorithms are summa­
rized in the Tab. 3.1.
Name of Algorithm
Cost function
PWD
20 log10 ∥y(Ψ)⊤B(kr)pnm(kr)∥
DAS
20 log10 ∥B(kr)pnm(kr)y(Ψ)⊤∥
SHMUSIC
−20 log10 ∥y(Ψ)⊤ENEH
Ny∗(Ψ)∥
MVDR
20 log10 ∥w⊤
nmRpnm(kr)wnm∥
SHMLE
−20 log10
Pkmax
k=kmin
 pnm(k) −V nm(k, Ψ)V nm(k, Ψ)−1pnm(k)

Table 3.1: Summary of Cost function of various algorithms in spherical harmonic domains
3.3
Room impulse response modeling
Room impulse response plays a crucial role in room acoustics, it is used to char­
acterize all the effects in the sound propagation path from the source to the microphone,
which can be divided into three main parts, the direct path, the early reflections and the
reverberation tail. Fig. 3.6 displays the main components of a Room Impulse Response.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.6: The main parts of room impulse response, figure from [30]
As sound source signals travel, they encounter reflections, leading to multipath prop­
agation. This phenomenon is a significant factor behind the reverberation of the sound
signal. To better replicate the effects of room reverberation and reflection, [31] developed
a room impulse response based on the Image Source Method (ISM). The model, illustrated
in Fig. 3.7, treats the sound source signal as a point and employs a mirroring approach.
The source signal reflects continuously between obstacles (like walls, tables, chairs, etc.)
to create echoes. Each mirrored source then generates further mirrored sources. While the
ISM provides a conceptual framework for understanding room reverberation, it’s worth
noting that it doesn’t capture the intricacies of sound source reflections in a room precisely,
it ignores the diffraction and scattering in the room.
Figure 3.7: The main parts of room impulse response, figure from [32]
Across this thesis, all simulations are based on the ”shoebox” model created by
Pyroomacoustics [33], which is a library function in Python called to implement the
IMAGE­model simulation in the room to efficiently generate the room impulse response
and simulate the propagation between the source and the receiver.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
19
==PAGE:28==
4
Simulation results
4.1
Simulation setup
In this thesis simulation, the simulation detailed parameters are mainly as follows:
• Room Simulation: The room geometry is based on room 019 in Building 352 of the
DTU, which can be approximated as a rectangular room and has dimensions 9×6×3
m [34].
• Microphone Array Simulation: The simulation of the spherical microphone array is
based on the ”Eigenmike EM32” product from MH ACOUSTIC [35], which con­
sists of Q = 32 microphone channels and has an array radius of a = 4.2cm. The
coordinates of each transducer are shown in the table in the appendix A.1. The mi­
crophones are considered omnidirectional and each microphone is sampled with a
weight of 1. The maximum spherical harmonic order is set to N = 4.
• Sound Source Simulation: In the defined spherical coordinate system, the micro­
phone array’s center serves as the origin, aligning with the room’s geometric center.
The sound source is oriented at (θs, ϕs), with θs = 50° and ϕs = 230°. Positioned at
a distance of r = 2.1 m from the array’s center, the sound source comprises a single­
frequency tone and a 2­second clean speech sample uttering the phrase ’Please Call
Stella’ [36] with sampling frequency fs = 16 kHz, frame length K = 1024.
• Grid Simulation: To assess the Direction of Arrival (DoA) throughout the space, a
grid­based methodology is employed. The space is discretized into a network of
points, and each algorithm is applied to traverse this grid. The resolution is set at 1°,
resulting in a spherical grid of 360 × 180 points in the space. Each point on this grid
corresponds to a combination of a horizontal angle ϕ and an elevation angle θ.
(a) Single source from θs
=
50°, ϕs = 230° in the simulated
room
(b) 32 microphones distributed
nearly uniformly in space
(c) Simulated grid for possible
points in the space with grid
resolution = 10°
Figure 4.1: Simulation visualization
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
20
==PAGE:29==
In the simulation, the room geometry, microphone array, and sound source are vi­
sualized as depicted in Fig. 4.1a. A search grid is established in the space to identify
potential points based on angles, illustrated in Fig. 4.1c. The resolution of this search grid
is set to 10°, meaning that for every 10° in both azimuth and elevation, a potential point
is determined.
The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) serves as the metric for evaluating the accu­
racy of the localization algorithms. It is defined as
RMSE =
q
E((Ψ −ˆΨ)(Ψ −
ˆ
Ψ)T
(4.1)
All the simulations are based on Python 3.8 and are debugged using VSCode remote
connection to JupyterLab. The computer used is configured with a 12 vCPU Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Platinum 8255C CPU(2.5GHz).
4.2
Result and discussion
4.2.1
Narrowband signal localization
In this section, localization results for a single narrowband signal in an anechoic
environment at an SNR of 20 are presented. From Fig. 3.3, it can be observed that the open­
sphere structure introduces some zero­points. Here, an attempt is made to evaluate the
narrowband localization results of five different spherical harmonic domain localization
algorithms at certain null frequencies, such as ka = 3.142, ka = 4.496, etc. For this
discussion, ka = 4.496 is chosen. Here the white Gaussian noise is added to the signal in
order to keep the SNR of the signal is 15.
(a) PWD with open­sphere
(b) PWD with rigid­sphere
Figure 4.2: Narrowband localization results of the PWD algorithm for an open­sphere array and a
rigid array with N = 4, kr = 4.496, and Q = 32
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) SHMUSIC with open­sphere
(b) SHMUSIC with rigid­sphere
Figure 4.3: Narrowband localization results of the SHMUSIC algorithm
(a) MVDR with open­sphere
(b) MVDR with rigid­sphere
Figure 4.4: Narrowband localization results of the MVDR algorithm
(a) DAS with open­sphere
(b) DAS with rigid­sphere
Figure 4.5: Narrowband localization results of the DAS algorithm
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
22
==PAGE:31==
(a) SHMLE with open­sphere
(b) SHMLE with rigid­sphere
Figure 4.6: Narrowband localization results of the SHMLE algorithm
From Fig. 4.2 to Fig. 4.6, five algorithms are demonstrated processing signals cap­
tured by arrays with both open­sphere and rigid­sphere structures. The true source coordi­
nates are set to (θl = 50°, ϕl = 230°). In the spectral power plots, the true source location
is indicated by a blue cross, while the estimated DoA by the algorithms is marked with a
red circle.
The zero points of the spherical Bessel function of the first kind, jn(kr), at certain
frequencies, can lead to inaccuracies in the localization of microphone arrays with an
open­sphere structure. Using a rigid­sphere structure can overcome this issue, as shown
in Fig. 3.3. In addition, the remaining three algorithms are able to perform the localization
well. Furthermore, to make the results more comparative, the localization results under
all scenarios have been normalized with their respective maximum values and truncated
to energy levels between [0, −14] dB. Among them, the MVDR and SHMLE algorithms
exhibit higher spatial resolution than the DAS.
Table 4.1: Comparison of Algorithms for Narrowband Localization with SNR of 15
Real Pos.
Algo.
Open­Sphere (± RMSE)
Rigid­Sphere (± RMSE)
Time (min)
(50◦, 230◦)
MVDR
(50◦, 231◦) ± 1.00
(48◦, 232◦) ± 2.83
1.21
PWD
(154◦, 122◦) ± 104.40
(48◦, 232◦) ± 2.83
0.89
DAS
(50◦, 230◦) ± 0.00
(49◦, 231◦) ± 1.41
0.90
SHMUSIC
(115◦, 183◦) ± 47.17
(49◦, 232◦) ± 2.83
0.97
SHMLE
(49◦, 230◦) ± 1.00
(48◦, 231◦) ± 2.24
1.06
Based on the localization results from the MVDR and SHMLE algorithms for dif­
ferent array structures, it can be obviously seen from the Fig. 4.8 and 4.6 that the in­
troduction of the rigid sphere might lead to a certain loss in spatial resolution. This loss
might be attributed to the scattered sound field caused by the rigid structure. However, the
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
23
==PAGE:32==
rigid sphere offers practical installation convenience and ensures universal applicability
across all frequencies by avoiding the zero­point condition. As evident from the figures,
the MVDR and SHMLE algorithms can ensure a high spatial resolution while operating
normally under an open­sphere structure. Therefore, this trade­off is acceptable. Further­
more, Tab. 4.1 displays the localization results of each algorithm under an SNR of 20 for
narrowband signals, as well as the corresponding time taken.
4.2.2
Broadband signal localization
In this section, the primary focus is on broadband signals, specifically speech sig­
nals. Unless otherwise specified, it is assumed that the speech signals are processed in a
reverberant room with a T60 of 0.63s and an SNR of 15dB. The dimensions of the room
are (9 × 6 × 3) m3.
Single Source Localization in ”ShoeBox” room
In order to extend the localization algorithms in narrowband signals to broadband
signals, the frequency smoothing technique (detail in appendix A.2) is introduced [37].
Due to the decoupling of angle and frequency in the spherical harmonic domain, it be­
comes possible to estimate the focusing matrix without the need for prior DoA values. In
the spherical harmonic domain, frequency smoothing can be achieved by decomposing
frequency­related components into individual narrowband frequencies, processing them
separately, and then averaging. This approach can be used to address broadband signal
localization.
(a) Time domain
(b) STFT domain
Figure 4.7: Clear speech signal in an anechoic environment
Fig. 4.7a and Fig. 4.7b represent the signal in the time domain and STFT domain,
respectively. In the time domain representation, it can be clearly seen that the signal lasts
for 2 seconds and displays the waveform of three distinct words. In the spectrogram, most
of the signal’s energy is concentrated below 4000Hz. The initial sounds in ”Please” with
”P”, in ”Call” with ”C”, and in ”Stella” with ”St”, which contain plosive sounds, exhibit
a noticeable increase in energy at the beginning of each word. This indicates a significant
amount of frequency components in a short time, represented as vertical bright stripes
in the spectrogram. Meanwhile, the vowels, having more consistent frequencies that are
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
24
==PAGE:33==
integer multiples of the fundamental frequency, appear as extended bright areas on the
time axis in the spectrogram.
(a) Time domain
(b) STFT domain
Figure 4.8: Speech signal in a reverberant environment with SNR of 15dB and RT60 of 0.63s
Fig. 4.8a and Fig. 4.8b depict the speech signal in the time domain and STFT do­
main under reverberant and noisy conditions, respectively. Compared to the clear signal
in an anechoic chamber, the reverberation results in multiple reflections and overlays of
the original signal within the room. This phenomenon manifests in the time domain rep­
resentation as trailing echoes or delays, causing the signal structure to become blurred. In
contrast, the clear signal showcases distinct amplitude variations, with noticeable peaks
and troughs corresponding to specific pronunciations. In the STFT domain, an extended
duration of certain frequency components can be observed, such as at 512Hz.
Fig. 4.9 presents the outcomes of five algorithms operating in the spherical har­
monic domain and one in the spatial domain. These localization results were acquired for
a single sound source under conditions characterized by an RT60 of 0.63s and an SNR
of 15. Notably, the MVDR, SHMLE, SHMUSIC, and MUSIC algorithms exhibit supe­
rior spatial resolution in comparison to the other algorithms. The estimated DoA values
from these algorithms align closely with the actual DoA value of (50◦, 230◦), with RMSE
values of 6.4°, 5.7°, and 4.5° as indicated in the Tab. 4.2, respectively. Furthermore, the
computational cost time reveals that the MUSIC algorithm, despite its precision, demands
a substantially longer duration (417.86 minutes) relative to its counterparts. In contrast,
algorithms such as PWD and DAS are more time­efficient, averaging around 2 minutes,
though they might compromise some spatial resolution and accuracy for this expedited
processing.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
25
==PAGE:34==
(a) PWD
(b) DAS
(c) MVDR
(d) SHMLE
(e) SHMUSIC
(f) MUSIC
Figure 4.9: Source Localization in a reverberant environment with RT60=0.63s and SNR=15 (a)
PWD (b) DAS (c) MVDR (d) SHMLE (e) SHMUSIC (f) MUSIC]
PWD and DAS computations are relatively straightforward and direct, accounting
for their shorter runtimes. MVDR, on the other hand, involves matrix inversion operations,
making it computationally more intensive. SHMUSIC, being based on the MUSIC algo­
rithm, necessitates the computation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors, followed by sorting
of these eigenvectors, adding to its computational load. The traditional MUSIC algorithm
employs the Short­Time Fourier Transform (STFT) to handle broadband signals, process­
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
26
==PAGE:35==
ing them frame­by­frame in the STFT domain. Each frame is applied for localization
respectively, and thus, the choice of window length can influence the processing speed of
the MUSIC algorithm, which is a primary reason for its substantial computational demand.
Table 4.2: Comparison of different algorithms performance for broadband localization with SNR
of 15
Real DoA
Algorithm
Estimated DoA (± RMSE)
Cost Time (Minute)
(50◦, 230◦)
PWD
(53◦, 234◦) ± 5.00
2.13
DAS
(56◦, 239◦) ± 10.8
2.22
MVDR
(54◦, 235◦) ± 6.4
17.22
SHMLE
(54◦, 234◦) ± 5.7
9.08
SHMUSIC
(52◦, 234◦) ± 4.5
33.37
MUSIC
(51◦, 230◦) ± 1.00
417.86
Figure 4.10: The main procedure for sound source localization in spherical domain
From Fig. 4.10, the entire process of sound source localization in the spherical
harmonic domain can be observed. It begins with signal collection from the microphone
array, followed by preprocessing. The signal is then identified as either broadband or
narrowband. If it’s a broadband signal, a specific effective frequency range is selected,
and operations such as spherical harmonic decomposition and frequency smoothing are
performed. The broadband signal is then decomposed into a narrowband signal which is
fed into the algorithm. The algorithm subsequently scans the entire space to search for the
DoA.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
27
==PAGE:36==
Localization with arrays of different numbers of microphones
In this section, three spherical arrays with varying numbers of microphones are utilized.
The simulation setup is depicted in Fig. 4.11.
(a) 8 microphones distributed with a cube
shape
(b) 16 microphones distributed nearly uni­
formly in space
Figure 4.11: Arrays of different numbers of microphones
Each microphone is omnidirectional and has an equal sampling weight of 1. The
first is a cubic array consisting of 8 microphones with a side length of 2.425cm. These
8 microphones are evenly distributed on a sphere with a radius of 4.2cm, thus it can also
be considered as a type of spherical microphone array, as shown in Fig. 4.11a. Following
that is a spherical microphone array with 16 microphones evenly distributed, as depicted
in Fig. 4.21b. Lastly, there is a spherical microphone array consisting of 32 microphones,
simulated based on the Eigenmike em32 array, with its distribution presented in Fig. 3.4.
Table 4.3: Comparison of localization performance for broadband signals with different numbers
of microphones
Real DoA
Number of Mics
Estimated DoA (± RMSE)
(50◦, 230◦)
8mic
(54◦, 233◦) ± 5.00
16mic
(53◦, 231◦) ± 3.16
32mic
(51◦, 231◦) ± 1.41
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
28
==PAGE:37==
(a) PWD localization with 8 mics
(b) PWD localization with 16 mics
(c) PWD localization with 32 mics
Figure 4.12: Performance of the PWD algorithm in the case of microphone arrays with different
numbers of microphones
Fig. 4.12 and Tab. 4.3 display the results of using the PWD algorithm to localize a
broadband sound source located at (50°, 230°) with spherical microphone arrays of differ­
ent quantities. It is evident that, while keeping the radius of the spherical array consistent,
as the number of microphones increases, the accuracy of the array’s localization improves
and the spatial resolution becomes higher. This is intuitive, as an increase in the number
of microphones implies an increase in the number of spatial sampling points of the sound
field. Consequently, more spatial information about the sound field is captured, leading
to a better reconstruction of the entire sound field. However, the trade­off is the need for
more computational resources and the practical challenge of placing more microphones
on the same array due to manufacturing complexities.
Multiple sources localization
In this section, the localization of a single broadband source is extended to encompass
multiple sources. During the simulation, two sources are introduced, both situated in an
environment characterized by a reverberation time of T60 = 0.25s and SNR of 15. The
angular separation between these sources is evaluated at two distinct angles: 80°, and 100°.
This angular separation serves as a practical measure of an algorithm’s spatial resolution,
which essentially gauges its ability to distinguish between two closely spaced sources. The
essence of spatial resolution lies in the minimum distance at which two sources can still be
independently identified by the algorithm; a smaller distance indicates a higher resolution.
As illustrated in Fig. 4.13 and Fig. 4.14, the experiments evaluate the impact of
angular separation on the localization of two sources. At an 80° separation, only the
SHMUSIC algorithm can distinguish and locate the two sources. In contrast, the other
two algorithms fail to differentiate between the two sources, resulting in a single DOA
estimate that appears between the positions of the two sources. However, when the angu­
lar separation between the two sources is less than 80°, none of the three algorithms can
function properly.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) MVDR
(b) SHMLE
(c) SHMUSIC
Figure 4.13: The 80° interval between two sources
However, as the distance between the two sources increases, reaching an angular
separation of 100°, it is observed that for identical sources, all three algorithms can roughly
estimate the DOA of both sources.
(a) MVDR
(b) SHMLE
(c) SHMUSIC
Figure 4.14: The 100° interval between two sources
(a) Another clear speech signal
(b) SHMUSIC for two sources
with same signal
(c) SHMUSIC for two sources
with different signals
Figure 4.15: The 60° interval between two sources
As depicted in Fig. 4.15, when the angular separation between the two sources is set
to 60° and both sources emit the same voice signal as shown in Fig. 4.7a, the result from
the SHMUSIC algorithm, as presented in Fig. 4.15b, indicates that the algorithm cannot
differentiate between the two identical voice signals, yielding only a single localization
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
30
==PAGE:39==
result. However, when introducing another voice signal as shown in Fig. 4.15a, with the
two sources emitting distinct voice signals, the SHMUSIC algorithm successfully locates
both sources.
This can be explained by the fact that each algorithm has its inherent spatial resolu­
tion. When the angular separation between two sources is less than the spatial resolution of
the algorithm, it may struggle to distinguish between the two sources. In the previous sec­
tion, when localizing a single broadband source, the SHMUSIC algorithm demonstrated a
relatively higher resolution. This explains why, at an 80° separation, only the SHMUSIC
algorithm could differentiate between the two sources. Furthermore, when two sources
emit the same signal, they exhibit a high degree of cross­correlation. As a result, the
spatial sound field patterns they produce are quite similar, making them challenging to
distinguish.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
31
==PAGE:40==
Localization with various SNR in Anechoic
In this section, the performance of the five spherical domain algorithms is assessed
under varying signal­to­noise ratios (SNRs) within an anechoic chamber. Gaussian noise
is added to the original signal, resulting in SNRs ranging from ­10 to 20 dB. The true
Direction of Arrival (DoA) of the sound source is (50°, 230°).
From Fig.4.16, the RMSE of single­source and dual­source localization by differ­
ent algorithms in an anechoic room with varying signal­to­noise ratios (SNRs) can be
observed. To enhance the reliability of the results, the RMSE was averaged over 10 itera­
tion.
Figure 4.16: Variation of single­source localization RMSE with SNR for five spherical harmonic
domain algorithms
Table 4.4: RMSE values for different algorithms at various SNRs.
SNR (dB)
PWD (deg)
DAS (deg)
MVDR (deg)
SHMLE (deg)
SHMUSIC (deg)
­5
5.00
5.39
3.16
3.16
82.46
0
11.31
2.83
1.00
1.41
22.36
5
4.24
2.00
1.00
0.00
4.12
10
5.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
3.16
15
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.41
20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
As shown in Tab. 4.6, among the two algorithms with smaller computational power,
DAS exhibits stronger robustness in low SNR environments. In contrast, the MVDR and
SHMLE algorithms perform well under most SNR conditions. However, the subspace al­
gorithm SHMUSIC, which is based on the principle that the signal subspace is orthogonal
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
32
==PAGE:41==
to the noise subspace, is significantly affected by noise. Under low SNR conditions, it
essentially fails. At this time, the estimated noise subspace has a large error and no longer
satisfies orthogonality, making it difficult to accurately locate the pseudospectrum. [38]
Localization with various rt60 in reverberant room
In this section, the performance of the five algorithms in the spherical harmonic do­
main is evaluated under different reverberation times (RT60) conditions within a ”Shoe­
box” room of dimensions (9 × 6 × 3) m3. The SNR is set at 15dB, and RT60 ranges from
0.25 to 2.25 s.
Figure 4.17: Variation of single­source localization RMSE for five spherical harmonic domain
algorithms
Table 4.5: RMSE values for different algorithms at various T60.
T60 (s)
PWD (deg)
DAS (deg)
MVDR (deg)
SHMLE (deg)
SHMUSIC (deg)
0.2
5.39
3.16
4.12
3.16
3.61
0.43
8.60
4.47
5.39
3.61
4.24
0.84
10.63
6.40
5.83
3.61
5.00
1.31
13.60
8.06
7.07
4.24
5.83
1.78
14.76
9.43
8.60
5.39
6.40
2.24
15.52
11.40
10.82
8.06
9.22
Fig. 4.17 displays the variation in localization error (RMSE) for different algorithms
at various reverberation times. As the reverberation time increases, the RMSE for each
algorithm also shows an upward trend. For instance, when T60 increases from 0.2s to
2.24s, the RMSE for PWD rises from 5.39°to 15.52°, while SHMLE only increases from
3.16°to 8.06°.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
33
==PAGE:42==
Tab. 4.5 further confirms these observations. SHMLE consistently exhibits the low­
est RMSE across all reverberation times, highlighting its robustness to reverberation. This
might be attributed to the SHMLE algorithm’s ability to effectively utilize the statistical
information in the reverberation, thereby enhancing accuracy. In contrast, the PWD algo­
rithm is most sensitive to reverberation, possibly due to its reduced robustness in handling
multipath effects. Other algorithms, such as DAS and MVDR, also show increased RMSE
as the reverberation time rises, but their growth rate lies between SHMLE and PWD.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
34
==PAGE:43==
Localization with multiple spherical microphone array in an anechoic environment
In this section, a multi­spherical microphone array is introduced, which is used for
localization of narrowband and broadband signals in an anechoic chamber environment.
Figure 4.18: The sound source originating from (θl, ϕl) = (90°, 180°) in the global coordinate
system.
(a) result from SMA 1 perspective
(b) result from SMA 2 perspective
(c) Enhanced results from global
microphone array perspective
Figure 4.19: Narrowband signal with 500 Hz sin wave
(a) result from SMA 1 perspective
(b) result from SMA 2 perspective
(c) Enhanced results from global
microphone array perspective
Figure 4.20: Broadband signal with clean speech
As shown in Fig. 4.18, it is assumed that the DoA (Direction of Arrival) of the sound
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
35
==PAGE:44==
source relative to the global microphone array is (θl, ϕl) = (90°, 180°). Both microphone
arrays 1 and 2 are the same eigenmike em32 array. The sound sources are set as narrow­
band and broadband signals, respectively. The SHMUSIC algorithm is used in this case.
The final results are shown in Fig. 4.19 and Fig. 4.20, respectively. It can be seen that
both in the case of narrowband and broadband signals, the multisphere array will have a
sharper peak in the energy spectrum relative to the single­sphere array, which also has a
higher spatial resolution.
Table 4.6: RMSE values for SMA and MMA at various SNRs.
SNR (dB)
SMA (deg)
MMA (deg)
­5
82.46
92.33
0
22.36
10.32
5
4.12
1.36
10
3.16
0.00
15
1.41
0.00
20
1.00
0.00
As shown in Tab. 4.6, the localization performance of single­sphere and dual­sphere
microphone arrays was compared using the SHMUSIC algorithm by varying the sound
source’s SNR from ­5dB to 20dB. Except for the ­5dB scenario where the MUSIC al­
gorithm fails, the double spherical arrays consistently achieve a smaller RMSE in DoA
estimation compared to the single­sphere array for all other SNR values.
Localization for early reflections with Impulse Response in low reverberant room
In previous background discussions, the Room Impulse Response (RIR) was intro­
duced as a pivotal parameter for describing the acoustical characteristics of a room. It
not only captures the overall acoustic properties of the space but also reveals the specific
propagation paths of sound within the room.
By further decomposing the RIR, specific peaks can be identified, representing the
reflection paths of sound from various surfaces in the room. Each peak corresponds to a
particular reflection path, allowing for the determination of the Direction of Arrival (DoA)
for some early first­order reflections.
In the simulation, a continuous 10­second exponential sine sweep served as the exci­
tation signal. By constraining the maximum reflection order for each surface in the room
to 1, it implies that the direct sound in the room would only be reflected once by each wall,
limiting the room impulse response to only the first­order early reflections. Consequently,
the reverberation time of the room T60 is set to 0.022s. The genuine DoA for the sound
source was designated as (θl, ϕl) = (90°, 180°). This translates to a Cartesian coordinate
of (2.4, 3, 1.5) m, with the origin situated at one corner of the room. The microphone
array, positioned at Cartesian coordinates (4.5, 3, 1.5) m, acts as the reference point for
the spherical coordinate system.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
36
==PAGE:45==
As shown in Fig. 4.21 the captured RIR was truncated in the time domain using a
window function. This process got distinct peaks corresponding to different arrival times.
These peaks represent the direct sound and the first­order reflections emanating from var­
ious surfaces within the room.
(a) Source from (θl = 90°, ϕl = 180°)
(b) Direct sound from the source and first­order
early reflections in the room
Figure 4.21: Localization for early reflections based on room impulse response
As illustrated in Fig. 4.21a, three distinct colors are utilized to differentiate the six
walls of the room. Assuming the observation perspective aligns with the current orien­
tation of the microphone array and is viewed along the positive half­axis of x, the walls
labeled with blue numerals, 1 and 2, represent the front and rear walls, respectively. The
side walls are denoted by black numbers, 3 and 4, while the ceiling and floor are indicated
by purple numbers, 5 and 6.
Given the limited number of reflections in this scenario, only a select few peaks,
corresponding to these reflections, are discernible. By identifying local maxima in the
data and setting a threshold at 20% of the direct sound’s amplitude, it becomes feasible to
pinpoint the reflection peaks associated with each wall surface.
To capture each peak in its entirety, a windowing technique is applied. A rectangular
window, specifically designed to fully encompass a peak, is chosen. Each peak serves as
the center of this window. For this purpose, a window spanning 60 samples both before
and after each peak is employed, effectively truncating the data around the peak. This
window extracts approximately 0.005ms of data, equivalent to around 120 time frame
samples. Once truncated, these windowed segments are processed using the algorithm
for sound source localization. This facilitates the estimation of DoA for not only the
direct sound but also the reflections. By subsequently processing these segments with
the MUSIC algorithm, accurate DoA estimates for the room’s first­order early reflections
can be derived.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Direct part
(b) Reflections from floor and ceiling, wall 5,6
(c) Relfections from two side, wall 3,4
(d) Reflection from the wall behind, wall 1
(e) Reflection from the wall front, wall 2
Figure 4.22: Localization for early reflections based on impulse response
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
38
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.7: Comparison of true and measured early reflection DoA values using RMSE
Source
True Value
Measured Value
RMSE
Direct Sound
(90, 180)
(89, 176)
2.92
Ceiling
(145, 180)
(146, 180)
0.71
Floor
(35, 180)
(36, 180)
0.71
Left Side
(90, 109)
(90, 107)
1.41
Right Side
(90, 251)
(87, 254)
3.00
Behind
(90, 2)
(90, 358)
2.83
Front
(90, 180)
(90, 183)
2.12
It is clear from the Fig. 4.22 that DoA estimation of first­order reflections from room
walls can be performed using the MUSIC algorithm for the impulse response containing
only first­order reflections after truncation with the window function, and hanning win­
dows are also used for truncation in addition to rectangular windows, but the performance
does not change significantly.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
39
==PAGE:48==
5
Real Data Evaluation
In the previous two sections, a variety of narrowband algorithms in the spherical har­
monic domain have been by means of simulation and their extension to wideband signals,
in this section, in order to validate the performance of these algorithms on real data, a real
RIR dataset is introduced to validate the algorithms.
The dataset used here is the Eigenmike em 32 Acoustic Impulse Response Dataset
v0.1.0 from METU SPARG Laboratory [39]. This dataset was recorded in a highly rever­
berant rectangular room with dimensions 6.5 × 8.3 × 2.9m3 and a reverberation time of
T60 = 1.2 s. The AIRs were measured at 240 points on a grid with a horizontal resolution
of 0.5 m and a vertical resolution of 0.3 m. This covers the entire azimuthal range from 0°
to 360° with the array as the origin, as well as an elevation range of approximately ±50°
from the horizontal plane. The measurement positions can be shown as following Fig.
5.1.
Figure 5.1: Measurement positions and the indexing convention used in this dataset [40]
10 source positions were randomly selected among them, which corresponded to a
DoA direction for the experiment, and the results are as follows.
Fig. 5.2 shows the localization results of the different algorithms using RIR for a
real reverberation time t60 = 1.2s, and it can be seen that the algorithms work well in this
case and the results are similar to the simulation.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
40
==PAGE:49==
(a) PWD
(b) DAS
(c) MVDR
(d) SHMLE
(e) SHMUSIC
Figure 5.2: Localization corresponds to real DoA (80°, 236°) (a) PWD (b) DAS (c)MVDR (d)
SHMLE (e) SHMUSIC (f) MUSIC
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
41
==PAGE:50==
True Value
PWD
SHMUSIC
SHMVDR
DAS
SHMLE
(88, 45)
1.41
0.00
1.41
1.00
1.41
(59, 90)
72.11
72.11
47.00
46.00
49.00
(90, 90)
1.41
1.41
1.00
1.41
1.41
(90, 0)
2.00
2.00
1
2
1
(0, 0)
5.83
5.83
2.00
5.00
3.61
(90, 123)
2.24
2.24
1.41
1.00
1.00
(104, 223)
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
(59, 270)
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
(73, 270)
211.60
211.60
272.44
273.43
268.15
(90, 135)
4.12
4.12
2.24
3.00
3.00
Table 5.1: RMSE values for different algorithms
Figure 5.3: RMSE performance of localization algorithms in selected real data without outliers
From Tab. 5.1 and Fig. 5.3, the localization results of 10 randomly selected po­
sitions from the dataset can be observed. Fig. 5.3 omits two outliers. It is evident that
the five algorithms perform relatively well in real data localization, with most cases hav­
ing an RMSE of around 2°. The three algorithms with higher resolution, namely SHMLE,
SHMUSIC, and MVDR, perform as expected based on the simulations. They require more
computational resources compared to the PWD and DAS algorithms but yield more pre­
cise localization results. Among them, the MVDR algorithm performs the best. However,
since all the algorithms are based on an on­grid approach, a finer grid resolution might
lead to even more accurate results.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
42
==PAGE:51==
6
Conclusions and Outlook
6.1
Conclusions
This thesis offers a comprehensive review of classical sound source localization
techniques, specifically focusing on methods in the spherical domain such as SHMUSIC,
MVDR, SHMLE, PWD, and DAS. The study then delves into the replication of various
three­dimensional sound source localization algorithms within the spherical harmonic do­
main. Furthermore, the research investigates the influence of several parameters on these
algorithms’ performance, including the type and number of sound sources, the quantity of
microphones and microphone arrays, the room’s reverberation time, and the SNR.
1. Considering the type of sound source, different algorithms were initially employed to
locate narrowband signals in an anechoic chamber environment with an SNR of 15. Ad­
ditionally, the capability of the rigid sphere to overcome the zero­point challenges posed
by the spherical Bessel function was explored. Subsequently, frequency smoothing tech­
niques were utilized to extend the narrowband localization algorithms to broadband sig­
nals. When localizing vocal signals in environments with reverberation and noise, it was
observed that algorithms like MVDR, SHMLE, and SHMUSIC, despite demanding more
computational resources, can achieve higher spatial resolution and more precise localiza­
tion results. Notably, the MVDR and SHMLE algorithms effectively address the zero­
point issues associated with open spheres.
2. The study delves into the number of microphones that make up the array. It was ob­
served that as the number of microphones increases, more sound field information is col­
lected in space, leading to more accurate localization results.
3. Considering the case of two sound sources, the different algorithms are explored to
discriminate between the two sources, where the SHMUSIC algorithm performs a little
better. However, the MVDR algorithm and SHMLE do not require a priori knowledge of
the number of sound sources.
4. In an anechoic environment, by changing the SNR, the performance of different algo­
rithms is observed. With a fixed SNR in a reverberant environment, the performance of
different algorithms is observed by changing the room’s rt60.
5. Considering the use of two identical spherical microphone arrays to locate a single
narrowband and broadband sound source in an anechoic chamber environment, it was
found that as the number of spherical microphone arrays increases, spatial resolution and
localization accuracy rise.
6. By limiting the maximum number of reflections in the room, the MUSIC algorithm
is used to locate the direct sound’s early first­order reflections from the room impulse
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
43
==PAGE:52==
response.
7. The effectiveness of the algorithms is verified on a real dataset, and it was found that
the results are consistent with the simulation results.
6.2
Outlook
Due to time and level constraints, there are a number of improvements, and here are
a few ideas for future work:
1. Firstly, due to time constraints, there was no enough time to obtain experimental data
from on­site measurements, making it impossible to experimentally validate certain
simulations.
2. Although the algorithms studied in this thesis can work in any convex room geome­
try, due to time limitations only shoebox­like rooms were analysed.
3. In our current study, DoA estimations for early reflections rely on the impulse re­
sponse up to a reflection order of 1. There’s potential for improvement. A future
direction could involve leveraging models like PHALCOR [41], which treats the
reflected signal as a delayed and scaled version of the direct sound, to estimate the
early reflections.
4. The methods adopted in this paper for sound source localization in the spherical har­
monic domain are relatively traditional. In the future, it might be worthwhile to con­
sider incorporating techniques based on compressed sensing, such as L1 SVD [42],
and the L1 SVD combined with the DPDT method [43]. Data­driven approaches
are also a current hot topic in DoA estimation, suggesting the potential integration
of neural networks for DoA estimation [44][45].
5. Nowadays, in addition to spherical arrays, distributed microphones are widely popu­
lar because of their ease of installation, and distributed microphone­based algorithms
can be considered for future research.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
44
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
John van Opstal. “Chapter 7 ­ Acoustic Localization Cues”. In: The Auditory System and
Human Sound­Localization Behavior. 2016, pp. 171–208. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-801529-2.00007-6.
[2]
H.F. Silverman et al. “A digital processing system for source location and sound capture by
large microphone arrays”. In: 1997 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing. Vol. 1. 1997, 251–254 vol.1. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.1997.599616.
[3]
Boaz Rafaely. “Fundamentals of Spherical Array Processing”. In: Fundamentals of Spheri­
cal Array Processing. 2015. DOI: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-662-
45664-4.
[4]
Haohai Sun et al. “Localization of Distinct Reflections in Rooms Using Spherical Micro­
phone Array Eigenbeam Processing”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America.
Vol. 131. 4. 2012, pp. 2828–2840. DOI: 10.1121/1.3688476.
[5]
M. Brandstein and D. Ward. “Microphone Arrays Signal Processing Techniques and Ap­
plications”. In: Digital Signal Processing. 2001. DOI: https : / / www . scirp . org /
(S(vtj3fa45qm1ean45vvffcz55 ) ) / reference / ReferencesPapers . aspx ? ReferenceID =
455519.
[6]
Y.T. Chan and K.C. Ho. “A simple and efficient estimator for hyperbolic location”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing 42.8 (1994), pp. 1905–1915. DOI: 10.1109/78.301830.
[7]
B.D. Van Veen and K.M. Buckley. “Beamforming: a versatile approach to spatial filtering”.
In: IEEE ASSP Magazine 5.2 (1988), pp. 4–24. DOI: 10.1109/53.665.
[8]
Roberto Macho­Pedroso et al. “Optimal microphone placement for indoor acoustic localiza­
tion using evolutionary optimization”. In: 2016 International Conference on Indoor Posi­
tioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN). 2016, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/IPIN.2016.7743609.
[9]
Jens Meyer and Gary Elko. “A highly scalable spherical microphone array based on an
orthonormal decomposition of the soundfield”. In: 2002 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Vol. 2. 2002, pp. II­1781­II–1784. DOI: 10.1109/
ICASSP.2002.5744968.
[10]
B. Rafaely. “Analysis and design of spherical microphone arrays”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Speech and Audio Processing 13.1 (2005), pp. 135–143. DOI: 10.1109/TSA.2004.839244.
[11]
B. Rafaely. “Phase­mode versus delay­and­sum spherical microphone array processing”. In:
IEEE Signal Processing Letters 12.10 (2005), pp. 713–716. DOI: 10.1109/LSP.2005.
855542.
[12]
Boaz Rafaely. “Plane­wave decomposition of the sound field on a sphere by spherical con­
volution”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 116.4 (Oct. 2004). tex.eprint:
https://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article­pdf/116/4/2149/8094414/2149\_1\_online.pdf,
pp. 2149–2157. ISSN: 0001­4966. DOI: 10 . 1121 / 1 . 1792643. URL: https : / / doi .
org/10.1121/1.1792643.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
45
==PAGE:54==
[13]
Mert Burkay Çöteli, Orhun Olgun, and Hüseyin Hacıhabiboğlu. “Multiple Sound Source
Localization With Steered Response Power Density and Hierarchical Grid Refinement”.
In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 26.11 (2018),
pp. 2215–2229. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2018.2858932.
[14]
R. Schmidt. “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estimation”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Antennas and Propagation 34.3 (1986), pp. 276–280. DOI: 10.1109/TAP.1986.
1143830.
[15]
R. Roy and T. Kailath. “ESPRIT­estimation of signal parameters via rotational invari­
ance techniques”. In: IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 37.7
(1989), pp. 984–995. DOI: 10.1109/29.32276.
[16]
Xuan Li et al. “Spherical Harmonics MUSIC versus Conventional MUSIC”. In: Applied
Acoustics 72.9 (2011), pp. 646–652. DOI: 10.1016/j.apacoust.2011.02.010.
[17]
Haohai Sun et al. “Robust Localization of Multiple Sources in Reverberant Environments
Using EB­ESPRIT with Spherical Microphone Arrays”. In: 2011 IEEE International Con­
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (2011), pp. 117–120. DOI:
10.1109/ICASSP.2011.5946342.
[18]
Lalan Kumar, Guoan Bi, and Rajesh M. Hegde. “The spherical harmonics root­music”. In:
2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)
(2016), pp. 3046–3050. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2016.7472237.
[19]
Frederico Heloui de Araujo, Fernando Augusto de Noronha Castro Pinto, and Julio Ce­
sar Boscher Torres. “Room reflections analysis with the use of spherical beamforming and
wavelets”. In: Applied Acoustics 131 (Feb. 1, 2018), pp. 192–202. ISSN: 0003­682X. DOI:
10.1016/j.apacoust.2017.10.030. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0003682X17306035 (visited on 09/12/2023).
[20]
Yuxiang Hu, Jing Lu, and Xiaojun Qiu. “A maximum likelihood direction of arrival estima­
tion method for open­sphere microphone arrays in the spherical harmonic domain”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 138.2 (Aug. 11, 2015), pp. 791–794. ISSN:
0001­4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.4926907. URL: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4926907 (visited
on 09/26/2023).
[21]
H. Wang and M. Kaveh. “Coherent signal­subspace processing for the detection and estima­
tion of angles of arrival of multiple wide­band sources”. In: IEEE Transactions on Acous­
tics, Speech, and Signal Processing 33.4 (1985), pp. 823–831. DOI: 10.1109/TASSP.1985.
1164667.
[22]
Dima Khaykin and Boaz Rafaely. “Coherent Signals Direction­of­Arrival Estimation Us­
ing a Spherical Microphone Array: Frequency Smoothing Approach”. In: 2009 IEEE Work­
shop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics. 2009 IEEE Workshop
on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics. Oct. 2009, pp. 221–224. DOI:
10.1109/ASPAA.2009.5346492.
[23]
O. Nadiri and B. Rafaely. “Localization of Multiple Speakers under High Reverberation
Using a Spherical Microphone Array and the Direct­Path Dominance Test”. In: IEEE/ACM
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
46
==PAGE:55==
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 22.10 (Oct. 2014), pp. 1494–
1505. ISSN: 2329­9304. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2014.2337846.
[24]
Haohai Sun et al. “Spherical harmonics based optimal minimum sidelobe beamforming for
spherical sensor arrays”. In: 2010 International ITG Workshop on Smart Antennas (WSA).
2010, pp. 286–291. DOI: 10.1109/WSA.2010.5456430.
[25]
Rhino Trade LLC. MH Acoustics EM32 Eigenmike Microphone Array EMIB Interface Box
w/ Case Accs. 2023. URL: https://www.rhinotradellc.com/shop/mh-acoustics-em32-
eigenmike-microphone-array-emib-interface-box-w-case-accs/.
[26]
Fangzhou Wang and Xi Pan. “Acoustic Sources Localization in 3D Using Multiple Spherical
Arrays”. In: Journal of Electrical Engineering and Technology 11.3 (May 1, 2016), pp. 759–
768. ISSN: 1975­0102. DOI: 10.5370/JEET.2016.11.3.759. URL: http://koreascience.
or.kr/journal/view.jsp?kj=E1EEFQ&py=2016&vnc=v11n3&sp=759 (visited on
10/05/2023).
[27]
Harry L Van Trees. Optimum array processing: Part IV of detection, estimation, and modu­
lation theory. John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
[28]
C. E. Chen et al. “Maximum Likelihood DOA Estimation of Multiple Wideband Sources in
the Presence of Nonuniform Sensor Noise”. In: EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal
Processing 2008.1 (Dec. 2007), p. 835079. ISSN: 1687­6180. DOI: 10.1155/2008/835079.
URL: https://asp-eurasipjournals.springeropen.com/articles/10.1155/2008/835079
(visited on 09/30/2023).
[29]
Yuxiang Hu, Jing Lu, and Xiaojun Qiu. “Direction of arrival estimation of multiple acoustic
sources using a maximum likelihood method in the spherical harmonic domain”. In: Applied
Acoustics 135 (June 1, 2018), pp. 85–90. ISSN: 0003­682X. DOI: 10.1016/j.apacoust.2018.
02.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0003682X17309258
(visited on 09/30/2023).
[30]
Lee2008. English: A properly relabeled version of a room’s impulse response. Jan. 15, 2016.
URL: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Corrected_Room_Impulse_Response.
png (visited on 09/30/2023).
[31]
Jont B. Allen and David A. Berkley. “Image method for efficiently simulating small­room
acoustics”. In: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 65.4 (Apr. 1979), pp. 943–950. ISSN: 0001­4966. DOI:
10.1121/1.382599.
[32]
Anjana Rathnayake and W. K. Wanniarachchi. “Image Source Method Based Acoustic Sim­
ulation For 3­D Room Environment”. In: International Journal of Scientific Technology
Research 8 (Nov. 2019), pp. 222–228.
[33]
Robin Scheibler, Eric Bezzam, and Ivan Dokmanić. “Pyroomacoustics: A Python Package
for Audio Room Simulation and Array Processing Algorithms”. In: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2018, pp. 351–355. DOI:
10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8461310.
[34]
Efren Fernandez­Grande et al. “DTU three­channel room impulse response dataset for di­
rection of arrival estimation 2020”. In: IEEE Dataport (2021).
[35]
mhacoustics.com. URL: https://mhacoustics.com/ (visited on 10/01/2023).
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
47
==PAGE:56==
[36]
Tobias May. Acoustic Signal Processing. Course Notes. 2021.
[37]
Dima Khaykin and Boaz Rafaely. “Coherent signals direction­of­arrival estimation using a
spherical microphone array: Frequency smoothing approach”. In: 2009 IEEE Workshop on
Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics. IEEE. 2009, pp. 221–224.
[38]
Xavier Mestre and Miguel Ángel Lagunas. “Modified Subspace Algorithms for DoA Estima­
tion With Large Arrays”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 56.2 (2008), pp. 598–
614. DOI: 10.1109/TSP.2007.907884.
[39]
Mert Burkay Çöteli, Orhun Olgun, and Hüseyin Hacıhabiboğlu. “Multiple Sound Source
Localization With Steered Response Power Density and Hierarchical Grid Refinement”.
In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 26.11 (2018),
pp. 2215–2229. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2018.2858932.
[40]
Alexander Kmoch and Evelyn Uuemaa. Geo­referencing of journal articles and platform
design for spatial query capabilities. Version 1.0.0. Jan. 29, 2018. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.
1153887. URL: https://zenodo.org/record/1153887 (visited on 10/03/2023).
[41]
Tom Shlomo and Boaz Rafaely. “Blind Localization of Early Room Reflections Using
Phase Aligned Spatial Correlation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 69 (2021),
pp. 1213–1225. DOI: 10.1109/TSP.2021.3057495.
[42]
D. Malioutov, M. Cetin, and A. S. Willsky. “A sparse signal reconstruction perspective for
source localization with sensor arrays”. In: IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 53.8 (July 2005),
pp. 3010–3022. DOI: 10.1109/TSP.2005.850882.
[43]
Changwei Sun and Xiefeng Cheng. “Improved L1­SVD Sound Localization Algorithm in
the Spherical Harmonic Domain under Reverberant Environments”. In: Journal of Wuhan
University (Natural Science Edition) 64.5 (2018), pp. 459–470.
[44]
Pierre­Amaury Grumiaux et al. “A Survey of Sound Source Localization with Deep Learn­
ing Methods”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 152.1 (July 5, 2022),
pp. 107–151. ISSN: 0001­4966. DOI: 10.1121/10.0011809. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1121/10.0011809 (visited on 05/02/2023).
[45]
Dor H. Shmuel et al. “Deep Root Music Algorithm for Data­Driven Doa Estimation”. In:
ICASSP 2023 ­ 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro­
cessing (ICASSP). 2023, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10096504.
[46]
Christopher R. Landschoot and Ning Xiang. “Model­based Bayesian direction of arrival
analysis for sound sources using a spherical microphone array”. In: The Journal of the Acous­
tical Society of America 146.6 (Dec. 1, 2019), pp. 4936–4946. ISSN: 0001­4966, 1520­8524.
DOI: 10.1121/1.5138126. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/146/6/4936/955631/
Model-based-Bayesian-direction-of-arrival-analysis (visited on 10/03/2023).
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
48
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix A
A.1
Detail for plane wave decomposition
Consider a unit­amplitude, single­frequency plane wave from the direction (θk, ϕk) and
with wave vector k = (k, θk, ϕk), which can then be expressed as a linear combination of
the spherical harmonic function and the Bessel function:
p(k, r, θ, ϕ) = e−ik·r =
∞
X
n=0
m=n
X
m=−n
4πinjn(kr)[Y m
n (θk, ϕk)]∗Y m
n (θ, ϕ)
(A.1)
From Eq. A.1, it is evident that approximating a plane wave using a combination of spher­
ical harmonic functions involves an infinite summation, aiming for the highest accuracy
in the approximation. However, in practical scenarios, it becomes imperative to truncate
the infinite summation to a finite one to render the operation feasible:
p(k, r, θ, ϕ) ≈
N
X
n=0
m=n
X
m=−n
4πinjn(kr)[Y m
n (θk, ϕk)]∗Y m
n (θ, ϕ)
(A.2)
Now the approximated p(k, r, θ, ϕ) is the expression obtained for a unit amplitude plane
wave incident on a spherical surface (r, θ, ϕ), then it can be considered to use the spherical
Fourier transform on it, assuming that the Fourier transform coefficients of it are pnm(k, r).
Then after some simple derivation, the expression for pnm can be written as:
pnm(k, r) = 4πinjn(kr)[Y m
n (θk, ϕk)]∗
(A.3)
From the given equation A.3, it’s clear that the magnitude of pnm scales with jn(kr). Al­
though using finite summation in place of infinite summation introduces truncation errors
during reconstruction, a non­aliased sampling result for the finite­order function is attain­
able when Q > (N + 1)2.
A.1.1
Multiple plane waves
Given the context, let’s express the sound pressure in terms of the directional amplitude
density a(k, θk, ϕk) for an acoustic field composed of infinitely many plane waves and
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
49
==PAGE:58==
continuous plane waves:
p(r, θ, ϕ) =
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
a(k, θk, ϕk)eikr cos(θ−θk) sin(θk)dθkdϕk
=
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
4πinjn(kr)Y m
n (θk, ϕk) ×
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
a(k, θk, ϕk)[Y m
n (θk, ϕk)]∗sinθkdθkdϕk
=
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
4πinanm(k)jn(kr)Y m
n (θk, ϕk)
(A.4)
where anm is the spherical Fourier transform of directional amplitude density a(k, θk, ϕk).
Comparing Eq. A.4 and Eq. A.2, for the sound field consists of a single unit plane wave,
the expression can be written as:
anm(k) = [Y m
n (θk, ϕk)]∗
(A.5)
Again, since the Dirac­delta function and the spherical harmonic function are a pair of
Fourier transform pairs with respect to each other, we can easily obtain the directional
amplitude density a(k, θk, ϕk) at this point which can be written as:
a(k, θ, ϕ) = δ(cosθ −cosθk)δ(ϕ −ϕk)
(A.6)
To summarize then, an estimated sound field consisting of plane waves on a surface of
radius r can be expressed in terms of spherical harmonic functions as:
pnm(k, r) = 4πinanm(k)jn(kr)
(A.7)
A very important property of processing signals in the spherical harmonic domain is ex­
emplified by the above equation, when the plane wave amplitude density anm, which
generates the acoustic field, is directly linked to the measured spherical harmonic coef­
ficients pnm. In other words, the sound pressure p(k, r, θ, ϕ) at the current position can
be measured by the microphone array element placed on the sphere, and the correspond­
ing spherical Fourier coefficients pnm(kr) can be obtained through the spherical Fourier
transform3.4, and the sound pressure at any point (r′, θ′, ϕ′) in space can be obtained by
the following equation:
p(k, r′, θ′, ϕ′) =
N
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
jn(kr′
jn(kr)pnm(k, r)Y m
n (θ′, ϕ′)
(A.8)
where (r′, θ′, ϕ′) is the point outside the measured sphere. However, the spherical Bessel
function jn(kr) will have some zeros at some frequencies, which can lead to the ill condi­
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
50
==PAGE:59==
tion problem of zeros in open sphere arrays.
A.1.2
Sound pressure around the rigid sphere in SH domain
Rigid spherical microphone arrays are microphones arranged on a spherical enclosure
made of a rigid, all­reflective material. The rigid sphere has the effect of scattering the
sound pressure. So the sound pressure captured by the microphone on the rigid sphere
consists mainly of the incident and scattered sound fields.
At this point assume a rigid sphere of radius ra and then assume that it is totally reflective,
that is, with the boundary condition.
ur(k, ra, θ, ϕ) = 0
(A.9)
Then because of this boundary condition, sound cannot have radial motion here, and com­
bining this with Euler’s equations of motion in a spherical coordinate system gives an
expression for the speed of sound from the pressure:
iρ0cku(k, r, θ, ϕ) = ∇p(k, r, θ, ϕ)
(A.10)
After some derivations and introducing the incident and scattering components, Eq. A.10
can be simplified to:
∂
∂r[pi(k, r, θ, ϕ] + ps(k, r, θ, ϕ)]|r=ra = 0
(A.11)
Then the scattering components can be decomposed by spherical harmonic functions:
ps(k, r, θ, ϕ) =
∞
X
n=0
m=n
X
m=−n
cnm(k)h(
n2)(kr)Y m
n (θ, ϕ)
(A.12)
where h(
n2)(kr) is the second kind of spherical Hankel function while the scattering wave
is from the inside of sphere with radius r. Then combining Eq.A.12 and Eq.A.11, the
spherical coefficient for scattering components cnm(k) can be calculated as:
cnm(k) = −anm(k)4πin jn(kra)′
h(2)
n ()kr′
a
(A.13)
Then substitute the coefficient cnm(k) into Eq. A.12, the sound pressure around the rigid
sphere can be expressed as:
ps(k, r, θ, ϕ) =
∞
X
n=0
m=n
X
m=−n
anm(k)4πin[jn(kr) −j′
n(kra)
h(2)
n (kra)′h(2)
n (kr)Y m
n (θ, ϕ)]
(A.14)
So in the end, if we consider the constant term and the Bessel and Hankel functions as a
whole with respect to the sphere structure, we get the expression for the parameter bn(kr)
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
51
==PAGE:60==
defined in the main text with respect to the ”open­sphere” and the ”rigid­sphere”:
brigid
n
(kr) = 4πin

jn(kr) −j′
n(ka)
h′2
n (ka)h2
n(kr)

(A.15)
bopen
n
(kr) = 4πinjn(kr)
(A.16)
Table A.1: Spherical coordinates for simulated 32 channels spherical microphone array
Number
Radius r
Elevation θ
Azimuth ϕ
1
0.042
69.0
0.0
2
0.042
90.0
32.0
3
0.042
111.0
0.0
4
0.042
90.0
328.0
5
0.042
32.0
0.0
6
0.042
55.0
45.0
7
0.042
99.0
69.0
8
0.042
125.0
45.0
9
0.042
148.0
0.0
10
0.042
125.0
315.0
11
0.042
90.0
291.0
12
0.042
55.0
315.0
13
0.042
21.0
91.0
14
0.042
58.0
90.0
15
0.042
121.0
90.0
16
0.042
159.0
89.0
17
0.042
69.0
180.0
18
0.042
90.0
212.0
19
0.042
111.0
180.0
20
0.042
90.0
148.0
21
0.042
32.0
180.0
22
0.042
55.0
225.0
23
0.042
90.0
249.0
24
0.042
125.0
225.0
25
0.042
148.0
180.0
26
0.042
125.0
135.0
27
0.042
90.0
111.0
28
0.042
55.0
135.0
29
0.042
21.0
269.0
30
0.042
58.0
270.0
31
0.042
122.0
270.0
32
0.042
159.0
271.0
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
52
==PAGE:61==
Table A.2: Spherical coordinates for simulated 16 channels spherical microphone array, coordinate
from [46]
Number
Radius r
Elevation θ
Azimuth ϕ
1
0.042
0.0
0.0
2
0.042
48.94
0.0
3
0.042
54.66
278.66
4
0.042
52.54
199.40
5
0.042
52.54
131.62
6
0.042
61.80
66.21
7
0.042
116.42
64.17
8
0.042
99.50
15.51
9
0.042
89.89
323.60
10
0.042
116.42
280.86
11
0.042
89.89
233.71
12
0.042
101.04
172.52
13
0.042
99.50
116.91
14
0.042
149.26
345.51
15
0.042
140.84
218.59
16
0.042
151.83
123.47
Table A.3: Spherical coordinates for simulated 8 channels Cube Mic Array
Number
Radius
Elevationθ
Azimuthϕ
1
0.138
125.26
­135.0
2
0.138
125.26
­45.0
3
0.138
125.26
45.0
4
0.138
125.26
135.0
5
0.138
54.74
­135.0
6
0.138
54.74
­45.0
7
0.138
54.74
45.0
8
0.138
54.74
135.0
A.2
Frequency smoothing [37]
The main idea of frequency smoothing is calculating the average of the covariance matrices
¯R at different frequency points kf to obtain the smoothed covariance matrix. It can be
represented by:
¯R = 1
F
F
X
f=1
R(kf)
(A.17)
where F is the total number of frequency points considered. while the covariance matrix
of the received signal can be computed as Eq. 3.38. Then the above equation can be
simplified as:
¯R = 1
F
F
X
f=1
VfRs(kf)V H
f + σ2I
(A.18)
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
53
==PAGE:62==
Where Vf = V (kf) represents the steering matrix, this matrix characterizes the phase
delay experienced by a plane wave as it reaches the sensor array from a specific direction,
and this relationship is influenced by frequency. In the spatial domain, for coherent signals,
the introduction of the focusing matrix is essential to ensure that the covariance matrix of
the received signal has full rank. This matrix transforms the steering matrix Vq from a
specific frequency to a generalized frequency.
TqVq = Vo
(A.19)
In the spatial domain, the selection of the focusing matrix requires knowledge of the a pri­
ori DoA estimation, since it is then possible to know which particular direction to enhance
the signal. But in spherical domain, the frequency components is independent on the angle
components, and the frequency smoothing technique can be applied without focusing the
matrix.
Normalizing the spherical array structure parameters to the equation 3.24 yields a spherical
harmonic domain coefficient independent of the spherical array structure anm(k).
anm(k) = Y H(Ψ)s(k) + ¯vnm(k)
(A.20)
In this thesis all noise is considered as Gaussian additive white noise, so the discussion of
noise is ignored here.
Then the covariance matrix in the spherical domain for each frequency k can be repre­
sented as:
Sanm(k) = E[anm(k)anm(k)H] = Y H(Ψ)Ss(k)Y (Ψ)
(A.21)
Then the frequency smoothing technique can be applied:
¯Sanm = 1
F
F
X
f=1
Sanm(kf) = Y H(Ψ) ¯
SsY (Ψ)
(A.22)
where ¯
Ss = 1
F
PF
f=1 Ss(kf) The smoothed covariance matrix is full­ranked in most sce­
narios. While the steering matrix in the spherical domain is replaced by the spherical
harmonic matrix Y H(Ψ), the requirement for the focusing matrix is removed.
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
54
==PAGE:63==
Sound source localization in rooms for spatial audio reproduction
55
==PAGE:64==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
