==PAGE:1==
Common Path Spatial Offset Optical Coher-
ence Tomography Through a Multicore Fibre
Stefan Mark Jensen
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technologies
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Common Path Spatial Offset Optical Coherence Tomography Through a Multicore
Fibre
Master Thesis
30th Nov. 2023
By
Stefan Mark Jensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this thesis in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Stefan Mark Jensen, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technologies, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis work has been prepared as the outcome of a 30 ETCS master thesis project
over approximately 6 months as part of graduating from the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU) with a MSc. degree in Engineering Light (Biophotonics). The work has been
conducted at the laboratory of the Biophotonics Imaging Group at DTU Health Tech. in
Kongens Lyngby. This submitted work has been supervised by Gavrielle R. Untracht,
Madhu Veettikazhy and Peter E. Andersen. The polarization−maintaining multicore fibre
used for these experiments was provided to the Biophotonics Imaging Group by Esben R.
Andresen from the University of Lille during the project: Two-Photon Selective Plane Illu-
mination Microscopy through Fibres (T−SPIF). The fibre cleaning, polishing and cleaving
were handled in collaboration with the Fiber sensors and Supercontinuum Group at DTU
Electro.
The novelty prospects of this initial work are being prepared for a poster submission to
Photonics Europe 2024 in Strasbourg.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) represents a tremendous potential for disease di-
agnostics and image-guided surgery if the technology could be utilized inside the body.
Therefore, research interest in endoscopic OCT has grown rapidly due to technological
advances and the availability of the first commercial technologies.
OCT is a non−invasive label-free optical imaging modality providing cross−sectional and
volumetric images at depths of 1 −3mm with a spatial resolution of several micrometres.
From the images and tissue properties, disease progression and morphology can be in-
ferred.
However, at depth rapid signal degradation due to multiple scattering diminishes imag-
ing contrast. Prior work has postulated that decoupling the illumination path and collec-
tion path by introducing a spatial offset between them leads to a preferential collection
of multiple scattered, improving the OCT contrast at depth. This OCT modality is called
spatial−offset OCT (SO−OCT).
In multicore fibres (MCFs), the core pitch defined by the stack−and−draw process pro-
vides a natural spatial offset. enabling the miniaturization of the spatial offset OCT modal-
ity (SO−OCT), for decoupling the illumination path from the collection path.
This thesis work investigates the potential of using multicore fibres (MCF) for decoupling
the illumination path and collection path with the future prospect of endoscopic implemen-
tation. To mitigate dispersion mismatch and polarization scrambling, a common−path
OCT (CP−OCT) design is implemented. Preliminary results indicate that MCF−based
common−path spatial offset OCT (CP−SO−OCT) does suppress ballistic scattered light
from the surface while improving contrast at depth as the theory predicts.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
The submission of this thesis report conclude the end of three and half years collabo-
ration with the Biophotonic Imaging Group at DTU Tech, both as a student and student
assistant. It is fair to say, that I wouldn’t be the person and scientist I am today without
the experiences encountered during my time with the group. I have had the privilege of
sharing an office, lunch and laboratory with too many amazing and brilliant personalities
for me to mention everybody here. Thanks to all of you. To Anja L. Borre and M. Pilar
J. Stella for welcoming me into your office space and thinking of me as an equal, even
though I was ”just a student”. What started as a scientific discussion over coffee, became
collaborations and in the end evolved into a great friendship outside of work. To former
supervisor Dominik Marti for valuable insights and discussions. To former supervisor Lars
R. Lindvold for good talks and fruitful collaborations on different projects. To Callum R.
Smith from the Fiber Sensors and Supercontinuum Group at DTU Electro for help with
the fibre handling.
A special thanks to my wonderful partner for always believing in me and to my family
for your constant support.
Finally, thanks to my supervisory team for your guidance during this project and your
continuing belief in the success of this project through all the challenges faced:
Peter E. Andersen, Supervisor, Group leader, Senior Researcher, DTU Health Tech
Gavrielle R. Untracht, Supervisor, Postdoc, DTU Health
Madhu Veettikazhy, Supervisor,Postdoc, DTU Health
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
An illustration of a CP-OCT system based on a fiber coupler with light
source S(k) and photodetector IPD(k), incident electric field Ei, sample
electric field Es and reference electric field ER. The fiber coupler is consid-
ered achromatic. The reference plane given by the last optical surface in
the sample path is highlighted by a black dotted line. The mixing plane of
the sample and reference paths is highlighted in a blue dotted line. . . . . .
4
2.2
A schematic definition of the scanning orientation commonly used in OCT
for image formation. Adapted from [23]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Calculated coherence lengths and maximum probing depths for typical val-
ues of illumination source parameters and spectrograph configurations.
The white dotted line represents the Thorlabs SLD830S−A20W and the
BaySpec Basler spl2048 −140km spectrograph used for the experiments
.
7
2.4
Calculated beam parameters for an evolving Gaussian beam based on pre-
sented equations for parameters commonly found in OCT literature. The
graphs highlight the unavoidable trade−off between achieving an extended
DOF and high lateral resolution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
An illustration of the sample arm geometry for SO−OCT in comparison with
conventional OCT. The geometry introduces a lateral offset s0 between the
illumination and collection paths. The illustration is adapted from [12]. . . . 10
2.6
Calculated contributions for individual terms of the Heterodyne efficiency
factor, depth at which multiple scattered light becomes dominant and het-
erodyne efficiency factor and normalized contrast at varying offsets. The
parameters used to describe the system for all these calculations: λ0 =
830nm, w0 = 1.5mm, f = 36mm, n = 1.4, µs = 10/mm, µa = 0/mm,
θrms = 0.3. The angles are in units of radians and here is assumed dy-
namic focusing.[12] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.7
An illustration of a hexagonal MCF with graded−idex profile, adapted from
[39]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.8
The V−number and the mode total supported for a step−index fiber with in-
dex contrast ∆= 0.0068. The parameters for the Thorlabs SLD830S−A20W
and a similar MCF as used for the experiments are highlighted (white dashed
line). The MCF is a PM−MCF with parameters published in [43, 48]. The
birefringence is not taken into account in the simulations.
. . . . . . . . . . 16
2.9
The fractional modal power distribution of a single core in the PM−MCF.
The Fringe pattern is observed in the far field by the interference of the ref-
erence core with a spatial offset core. This illustrates the working principle
of the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.10 Schematic of the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT imaging geometry
with ABCD matrix descriptors. highlighted is part of the illumination beam
path (red) focused onto the discontinuity plane and part of the back−reflected
reference beam path (green). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.11 Schematic of the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT imaging geometry
with ABCD matrix descriptors. highlighted is part of the illumination beam
path (red) focused onto the discontinuity plane and part of the back−reflected
reference beam path (green). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
v
==PAGE:8==
3.1
Experimental setup for passively coupling light into the multicore fibre for
distal end imaging and measuring coupling efficiency. SLD830S−20W: Il-
lumination source, ND: Neutral density filter, P: Pinhole, TL: Tube lens,
Obj: Objective, PM−MCF: Polarization maintaining multicore fibre, CMOS:
CMOS camera. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
Experimental setup for single core common-path optical coherence tomog-
raphy using a polarization maintaining multicore fibre with graded−index
optics for distal end focusing. SLD830S−20W: Illumination source, 50 : 50
FC/APC: 50 : 50 fibre-optic coupler, L: Collimator lens, PM−MCF: Polar-
ization maintaining multicore fibre, Obj: Objective, GRIN lens: Graded−index
lens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
The beam spot at the focal plane of the GRIN lens GRIN2308A. The Gaus-
sian fit (red curve) of both lateral dimensions (x, y) and the estimated FWHM =
17.25µm. The confirmation by simulation in MATLAB, using both ABCD−matrix
and BPM−Matlab to estimate the distance of 545µm between the PM−MCF
and the GRIN lens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
The axial point spread function determined from A−scan of a mirror. The
width of the mirror reflection is 13.1µm. The expected system sensitivity for
10ms (black) and 100ms (red) exposure time overlayed with measured sen-
sitivity at 100ms (red dots) at the reference powers of −29.21dB, −26.2dB
and −23.98dB.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Experimental setup for single core common-path spatial offset optical co-
herence tomography using a polarization maintaining multicore fibre with
graded−index optics for distal end focusing. SLD830S−20W: Illumination
source, 50 : 50 FC/APC: 50 : 50 fibre-optic coupler, CL: Collimator lens, L:
Lens, PM−MCF: Polarization maintaining multicore fibre, Obj: Objective,
GRIN lens: Graded−index lens, P: pinhole. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
BPM−Matlab simulation of 2 point sources in a sample plane 20µm from
the GRIN lens distal end. The point sources are spatially offset by 60µm.
The simulation is set to indicate the spatial offset OCT signal collected by
the PM−MCF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.1
2D intensity profile of the propagating mode in the PM−MCF with the (x, y)
line profiles. Peak intensities of the imaged mode for increasing in−coupling
powers. All intensities given in grey scale values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
The figure shows the z-stack of A−scans from a Thorlabs BB1−E03 Mir-
ror mounted on a translation stage. The A−scans are overlayed with the
measured sensitivity roll−off. The inserts show the PM−MCF used for the
experiment (the selected core highlighted in blue) and the sample plane
for the CP−OCT measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Extracted peak intensity positions vs mirror translations. The shown A−scans
in figure 4.2 is highlighted in corresponding coloured special symbol (diamond,square,circle).
The spectral bandwidth for each A-scan is within a standard deviation (black
dashed lines) of the theoretical bandwidth (grey dashed line). The fringe
spacing (∆kF follows the expected k = π/z dependency.
. . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
A−scans of 7 layered scotch tape sample acquired through 3 different cores
in the PM−MCF. The intensity difference compared to a Nufern 780HP SMF
is within a standard deviation (dashed line). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
vi
==PAGE:9==
4.5
A−scans acquired at varying pinhole positions laterally to the fibre −coupler.
The normalized intensity shows increased SNR at depth with increasing
pinhole translation. Suppressed surface reflection with increasing pinhole
translation from a preferential collection of multiple−scattered light at depth.
The Suppressed surface reflection and preferential collection of multiple−scattered
light at depth increases the peak ratio with respect to the first peak. . . . . . 35
A.1 The definitions of depth of focus and beam waist of a Gaussian beam.[25] . 43
A.2 The system response acquired from 2.32mW at the GRIN lens distal end
facet with an integration time of a 100ms.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
A.3 The system response acquired from 2.32mW at the GRIN lens distal end
facet with an integration time of a 100ms.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
vii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Background and motivation
1
2
Common−path spatial offset optical coherence tomography
3
2.1
Common−path conventional optical coherence tomography . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Spatial offset optical coherence tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Multicore fibres for spatial offset common-Path optical coherence tomography 13
3
Experimental Design and Methods
21
3.1
Experiment 1: passive beam control and coupling efficiency . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Experiment 2: Common-path multicore fibre optical coherence tomography
22
3.3
Experiment 3: Common-path multicore fibre spatial offset optical coher-
ence tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Results
29
4.1
Individual core excitation and coupling efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Single core optical coherence tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Core-to-core variation in performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Spatial offset detection in layered sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Discussion and outlook
36
6
Conclusion
38
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
43
A.1 Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.2 Experimental Design and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
viii
==PAGE:11==
1
Background and motivation
Healthcare is important for everyone! In the 21th century, one of the major burdens on
healthcare systems worldwide is to provide quality screening, diagnosis and treatment of
cancer with minimal invasiveness. In fact, cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide
and it is expected to be the top−ranked healthcare problem for improving life expectancy
in cancer patients worldwide [1, 2, 3].
The gold standard for screening, diagnostics and grading of cancerous lesions in hollow
organs remains white light endoscopy (WLE). A white light endoscope is manipulated,
for example, through the colon or around the bladder in standard procedures such as
colonoscopy or cystoscopy. However, WLE lacks the specificity and sensitivity to detect
cancerous lesions in the early stages or to investigate the lesions at depth. This could
potentially hinder the life expectancy of the patients, as early−stage diagnosis is associ-
ated with a higher survival rate compared to diagnosis at later stages [4].
Optical imaging modalities are widely accepted as a complementary option to provide
diagnosticians and surgeons with additional information for better treatment planning or
demarcation during image−guided intervention [5, 6, 7]. Research−driven miniaturization
of laboratory−based free space optical imaging modalities opens up for clinical transla-
tion. The main optical imaging modalities applied in diagnostics or intervention are optical
coherence tomography (OCT) and confocal laser scanning endomicroscopy (CLE). In the
latter, a laser scanning unit is integrated in the distal end of a fibre−bundle and it is intro-
duced through the auxiliary channel of a white light endoscope. A fluorescent dye is in-
travenously administered and the excited dye provides real−time histological information
in−vivo. However, CLE has a limited imaging depth, effectively restricting acquisitions of
volumetric information [8, 9, 10, 11].
OCT is a non−invasive low−coherence interferometric optical imaging modality. The
contrast mechanism in OCT originates from back−scattered light due to a refractive in-
dex change between distinctive layers. In OCT, both amplitude and phase contrasts are
utilized to provide comprehensive information about the morphology and composition of
the layers. Endoscopic OCT systems are commercially available for use with WLE for
bladder cancer and for colorectal cancer (CRC) [5, 6, 7]. However, as the endoscope
is manipulated through the body, the mechanical movement introduces dispersion mis-
match and polarization scrambling between the reference path and sample path, leading
to contrast degradation in−vivo. Furthermore, tissue is highly scattering, leading to domi-
nating multiple scattering at depth. The conventional belief is that multiple scattering is the
main reason for signal attenuated at depth, resulting in loss of sensitivity and contrast [12].
Commonpath−OCT (CP−OCT) has been proven to minimize the introduced effects from
manipulating the endoscope through the body. In CP−OCT, the reference path and sam-
ple path undergo the same conformational changes leading to diminished impact on con-
trast in−vivo [13, 14]. Moreover, it has been postulated that introducing a spatial off-
set between the illumination path and collection path (SO−OCT) in conventional OCT
can improve contrast at depth by a preferential collection of the multiple scattered light.
SO−OCT has only been demonstrated using free−space optics [12]. A successful imple-
mentation of the outlined principles for CP−OCT and SO−OCT into an endoscope would
1
==PAGE:12==
require miniaturization. The entire imaging system should be smaller than the diameter
of the instrumentation channel in commercially available WLE. The degree of miniatur-
ization required calls for innovative solutions in terms of optics and fibre technology. A
possible candidate fibre is the multicore fibres (MCFs). Here, the stack−and−draw fabri-
cation process naturally introduces a spatial offset between N single −mode fibre (SMF)
cores called the core−to−core pitch Λ [15, 16, 17]. In the literature regarding endoscopic
OCT, the main choice for distal end focusing optics is graded−index lenses (GRIN lens).
Grin lenses have high refractive indices, making them suitable for providing the reference
reflection for CP−OCT. Furthermore, GRIN lens has a high numerical aperture (NA), mak-
ing them perfect for tight focusing and collection of back−scattered light[5, 18, 19, 20, 21].
For these reasons, in this work, we investigated the possibility of implementing
CP−SO−OCT in an MCF. At the time of writing, such implementation is unexplored
in literature. Therefore, the work aims to design the experimental setup for the im-
plementation of a CP−SO−OCT in an MCF. The work resulted in a proof-of-concept
implementation and it outlines the experimental workflow for the characterization
and validation of such implementation.
Milestones
This thesis work is structured in 3 consecutive experimental milestones to ensure a logical
progression towards realizing the ethos of the thesis.
1. Build a system to quantify beam control with the passive core selection at optimized
coupling efficiency.
2. Design and implement a CP−OCT system through a MCF from a layered sample.
The CP−OCT imaging geometry is implemented to mitigate dispersion mismatch
and polarization scrambling between the reference and sample paths.
3. Demonstrate that the core pitch Λ in a MCF can introduce a natural spatial offset
between the sample and collection path in an MCF−based CP−OCT.
2
==PAGE:13==
2
Common−path spatial offset optical
coherence tomography
This chapter establishes the theoretical background of the project. First, an introduction
to image formation, imaging performance and image contrast in CP−OCT is presented.
Then the concept of SO−OCT is introduced. Finally, light propagation in an MCF is de-
scribed to introduce the working principle of an MCF−-based CP−SO−OCT system.
2.1
Common−path conventional optical coherence
tomography
A CP−OCT system is an OCT system which incorporates the reference and sample path
into co−propagating paths. In literature, the CP−OCT systems published are primarily
implemented for all−fibre optic systems to reduce the spatial requirements and decrease
the effects on the system from nonhomogeneous perturbations between the sample and
reference paths respectively. The purpose of the published systems is endoscopic imple-
mentation of OCT for clinical in−vivo diagnostic and screening in biological tissue [14, 22,
13, 6]. Furthermore, when targeting clinical translation through endoscopy using all−fibre
optic OCT systems, dispersion mismatch and polarization scrambling between the ref-
erence and sample paths are easier managed due to the common−path. Polarization
mode scrambling is manageable with polarization−maintaining (PM) optical fibres. The
CP−OCT is an alternative to the established Michelson−interferometer-based OCT sys-
tems [23].
2.1.1
Image formation
Here, the image formation is described mathematically a fibre−optic spectral domain
CP−OCT system, as illustrated in figure 2.1. A poly-chromatic plane wave illuminates
the CP−OCT system expressed as a complex electric field in the frequency domain Ei.
Ei = s(k, ω)ei(kz−ωt)
(2.1)
The explicit frequency dependence is omitted for simplicity. Here, s(k, ω) is the elec-
tric field amplitude as a function of the wave number k = 2π/λ and angular frequency
ω = 2πν, which represents the spatial and temporal frequencies of each spectral com-
ponent of the field amplitude. Here it is assumed that all path lengths are in free space
for simplicity and should be scaled with the appropriate refractive indices to obtain proper
optical path distances.
The incident plane wave Ei is coupled into a fibre−coupler described as a 50/50 achro-
matic beam splitter (wavelength independent). In CP−OCT the final optical surface in the
sample path provides the reference reflection for the reference path. The mixing plane
of the sample and reference reflections is given by the back coupling to the fibre−cou-
pler highlighted by the blue dashed line in figure 2.1. The reference path electric field is
defined in equation 2.2
ER = Ei
√
2rReik2zR
(2.2)
where rR is the complex amplitude reflectivity of the reference surface given by the Fresnel
power reflectivity relationship RR = |rR|2 and zR is the distance from the reference surface
3
==PAGE:14==
to the mixing plane. In this derivation, the sample under investigation is characterized by
a depth-varying refractive index profile n(λ, z) along the optical axis. The corresponding
response function is a sum of N delta functions representing the plane discontinuities with
varying reflectivity as defined in equation 2.3.
rS(zS) =
N
X
j=1
rSjδ(zS −zSj)
(2.3)
This holds true because rS(zS) is only nonzero when zS = zSj for which δ(zS −zSj) = 1.
In general, rS(zS) for biological samples is a continuously varying refractive index profile.
Here, zSj is the discretized depth into the sample with complex amplitude reflectivity rSj.
The electric field returning from the sample to the mixing plane at z = 0 is given in equation
2.4.
ES = Ei
√
2
"
rS(zS) ⊗eik2zS

= Ei
√
2
" N
X
j=1
rSjδ(zS −zSj) ⊗eik2zs

= Ei
√
2
N
X
j=1
rSjeik2zSj (2.4)
where ⊗represents the convolution operation. The factor of 2 in equation 2.2 and 2.4
accounts for the round trip path length of the reference reflection and the individual sample
reflections respectively. The generated spectral interferogram is detected by measuring
Figure 2.1: An illustration of a CP-OCT system based on a fiber coupler with light source
S(k) and photodetector IPD(k), incident electric field Ei, sample electric field Es and
reference electric field ER. The fiber coupler is considered achromatic. The reference
plane given by the last optical surface in the sample path is highlighted by a black dotted
line. The mixing plane of the sample and reference paths is highlighted in a blue dotted
line.
the photocurrent from a linear photodetector.
IPD(k, ω) = ρ
2⟨|ES + ER|2⟩= ρ
2⟨|ES|2 + ⟨|ER|2 + ERE∗
S + E∗
SER⟩
(2.5)
Here, ρ is the photodetector’s responsivity, and the angled brackets denote the time-
averaged integration over the detector response time.
IPD(k, ω) = ρ
2

s(k, ω)
√
2
N
X
j=1
rSjei(k2zSj −ωt) + s(k, ω)
√
2
rRei(k2zR−ωt)

2
(2.6)
4
==PAGE:15==
Expanding the brackets with the squared magnitude functions in equation 2.6, considering
only time-invariant terms as the temporal frequencies ν oscillates at a frequency much
faster than the response time of the detector, yields equation 2.7
IPD(k, ω) =ρ
4[S(k)(RR + RS1 + RS2 + · · · )]
(2.7)
+ρ
4
"
S(k)
N
X
j=1
q
RRRSj
 
ei2k(zR−zSj ) + e−i2k(zR−zSj )
!#
+ρ
4
"
S(k)
N
X
j̸=q=1
q
RSjRSq
 
ei2k(zSj −zSq ) + e−i2k(zSj −zSq )
!#
Applying Euler’s identity to simplify equation 2.7 yields the real-valued cosine-dependency
on the wavenumber, which constitutes an A-scan.
IPD(k) =ρ
4[S(k)(RR + RS1 + RS2 + · · · )]
(2.8)
+ρ
4
"
S(k)
N
X
j=1
q
RRRSj[cos(2k(zR −zSj))]
#
+ρ
4
"
S(k)
N
X
j̸=q=1
q
RSjRSq[cos(2k(zSj −zSq))]
#
where RSj = |rSj|2 and RR = |rR|2 are the power reflectivity of the sample and refer-
ence, respectively. S(k) = ⟨|s(k, ω)|2⟩is the power spectral density distribution of the
light source, which for simplicity is assumed to be Gaussian distribution centered at wave
number k0 = 2π/λ0.
The first term in equation 2.8 is the photocurrent proportional to the power spectral den-
sity and the power reflectivity of the sample and reference. The second term is cross-
correlation, where constructive interference depends on the optical path length difference
between the sample reflections and the reference. The magnitude of the interference
fringes scales with a square root dependence of the power reflectivities. The final term is
the auto-correlation term resulting from self-interference between the sample reflections.
In this application of CP−OCT, the cross-correlation term is the desired signal constituting
an A−scan, as illustrated in figure 2.2.
Notably, the magnitude of the auto-correlation term is small compared to the cross-correlation
term, resulting from the more significant refractive index difference between the glass-to-
air interface. The expression for the photocurrent derived in equation 2.8 is described
axially by relating the power spectral density distribution to the coherence function γ(z)
using the inverse Fourier Transform (IFT).
S(k) =
1
∆k√πe−
  (k−k0)
∆k
2
IFT
←−→
γ(z) = e−(z)2∆k2
(2.9)
where ∆k is the bandwidth of the light source expressed in wave number. Applying equa-
tion 2.9, the Fourier-transform pair identity 1/2[(δ(z + z0) + δ(z −z0)] ↔cos(kz0) and
remembering the Fourier transform convolution property x(z) ⊗y(z) ↔X(k)Y (k) yields
5
==PAGE:16==
the axially dependent A−scan
IPD(z) =ρ
8[γ(z)[RR + RS1 + RS2 + · · · ]]
(2.10)
+ρ
4

γ(z) ⊗
N
X
j=1
q
RRRSj[δ((z ± 2(zR −RSj)))]

+ρ
8

γ(z) ⊗
N
X
j̸=q=1
q
RSjRSq[δ((z ± 2(zSj −zSq)))]

We obtain the final expression for the A−scan IPD(z) by calculating the convolution using
the shifting property of the delta function, x(z) ⊗δ(z + z0) = x(z + z0).
IPD(z) =ρ
8[γ(z)[RR + RS1 + RS2 + · · · ]]
(2.11)
+ρ
4
 N
X
j=1
q
RRRSj[γ(2(zR −zSj)) + γ(−2(zR −zSj))]

+ρ
8

N
X
j̸=q=1
q
RRRSj[γ(2(zSj −zSq)) + γ(−2(zSj −zSq))]

The derived equation 2.11 constitutes an acquired A−scan at a single position in the
transverse plane (x, y). An A−scan of the incident beam along one transverse direction
generates a cross-sectional image called a B−scan. A volumetric image or C−scan, is
obtained by acquiring consecutive B−scans. The different orientations of the acquisitions
commonly used in OCT are shown in figure 2.2.[23]
Figure 2.2: A schematic definition of the scanning orientation commonly used in OCT for
image formation. Adapted from [23].
2.1.2
Imaging performance
In OCT, the axial and transverse imaging performance is decoupled [23]. Axial resolution
∆zFWHM is defined from the full−width half maximum (FWHM) of the coherence function
determined by the light source.
γ(z) = e−(z)2  2√
ln(2)
lc
2
= e−4ln(2)
 z
lc
2
(2.12)
Where the FWHM of the coherence function is the coherence length lc:
∆zFWHM = lc = 2
p
ln(2)
∆k
= 2ln(2)
π
λ2
0
∆λ
(2.13)
6
==PAGE:17==
In equation 2.13, for shorter central wavelengths λ0 and large bandwidths ∆λ are improv-
ing the axial resolution. In spectral domain OCT (SD−OCT), this comes with a trade-off
in the form of a reduced maximum probing depth Zmax. The maximum probing depth is
a property of the spectrometer used for acquisition and it is determined by the spectral
range Λ of the spectrometer and the number of CCD pixels N capturing the acquired
spectrum.
∆zmax =
1
4ns
λ2
0
Λ N
(2.14)
Where ns is the refractive index of the sample. Utilizing shorter central wavelengths re-
quires a larger number of CCD pixels or a narrow spectral range.
In figure 2.3, the expected coherence length and maximum probing depth for literature
values is shown [24]. The parameters for the pigtail SLD (Thorlabs,SLD830S−A20W)
and the Basler spectrograph (BaySpec,spl2048 −140km) used for the experiments are
highlighted (white dashed line). The lateral resolution is determined by the sample arm
Figure 2.3: Calculated coherence lengths and maximum probing depths for typical val-
ues of illumination source parameters and spectrograph configurations. The white dotted
line represents the Thorlabs SLD830S−A20W and the BaySpec Basler spl2048 −140km
spectrograph used for the experiments
optics and λ0. In practice, the lateral resolution is the minimum separation between two
point sources resolvable within the numerical aperture (NA = nsin(θ) ≈nD/fsys) of the
sample arm optics. Assuming small numerical apertures, for which the collection angles
satisfy the small angle approximation, we consider a Gaussian beam with 1/e2 spot size
D = 2w0 before the sample arm focusing optics. The lateral resolution is defined as
∆xFWHM =
p
2ln(2)w0 =
p
2ln(2)2λ0fsys
πD
≈
p
2ln(2)
λ0
nsπNA
(2.15)
where fsys is the focal length of the sample arm optics and ns is the refractive index
of the sample.[25] Given the nature of an A−scan acquisition in SD−OCT, the depth
range at which the beam is considered to be in focus becomes an important parameter for
evaluating performance. This is called the Depth of Field (DOF). The DOF is determined
7
==PAGE:18==
by the confocal point spread function (PSF) of the focusing optics in the sample arm. We
define the DOF as the axial FWHM of the focused beam. The axial FWHM corresponds
to the distance for which the transverse FWHM is within
√
2 times the minimal spot size
w0. Assuming a Gaussian beam, the DOF corresponds to 2zR [23]
DOF = 2zR = 2πngw2
0
λ0
(2.16)
where zR is the Rayleigh length and ng is the group index of the sample under illumina-
tion. Looking at the equations 2.15-2.16, as the NA of the illumination beam is increases
the beam diameter decreases, resulting in a quadratic decrease in DOF. This trade−off
between lateral resolution and extending the DOF in OCT, requires consideration when
designing an OCT system for a specific application, whether it is a benchtop system or
an endoscope.
Figure 2.4: Calculated beam parameters for an evolving Gaussian beam based on pre-
sented equations for parameters commonly found in OCT literature. The graphs highlight
the unavoidable trade−off between achieving an extended DOF and high lateral resolu-
tion.
2.1.3
Imaging contrast
The contrast in OCT imaging is a result of the intrinsic properties of the sample and the
illumination beam−sample interactions. In literature [23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31], contrast is
primarily defined with respect to signal−to−noise ratio (SNR). The SNR can be defined
as time−averaged signal intensity from collected backscattered photon divided by the
squared variance (VAR) of the total system noise σnoise
SNR = ⟨Is⟩2
σ2
noise
(2.17)
where the right-hand side of equation 2.17 is squared to relate the time−averaged inten-
sity ⟨Is⟩to the signal amplitude ⟨Is⟩∝√As, as stated in equation 2.11. Understanding
the sources of noise leading to the noise floor of the system is important for achieving the
optimal imaging contrast for a given system and sample.
8
==PAGE:19==
In SD−OCT, the main source of noise is related to the CCD camera. In equation 2.18, the
contributions to the noise floor is shot noise, receiver noise and excess noise. The shot
noise (σshot) contribution is a consequence of the fluctuation in the photocurrent from the
Possion characteristics of the photon arrival. Shot noise is dominated by the reference
path power, which is greater than the power of the collected backscattered signal from
the sample path. Therefore, the reference path power needs to be optimized to ensure
shot-noise-limited performance.
The advantage of SD−OCT using a CCD camera with a large number of detector pixels,
is that the shot noise of the Nth detector pixel scales with the square root of the incident
power, distributing the signal power over a larger number of detector pixels preserves the
signal and after the Inverse Discrete Fourier Transform step in the signal processing, the
noise is reduced by the normalization factor 1/N.
The receiver noise (σreceiver) is the sum of the readout noise (σread) and the dark noise
(σdark) which is thermal noise (Johnson noise) generated in the CCD camera at room
temperature. Rewriting equation 2.16 in terms of the detected signal power SOCT and the
individual noise contributions yields equation 2.18 [23, 26, 29]
SNRSD =
SOCT
σ2
shot + σ2
Receiver + σ2excess
=
SOCT
σ2
shot + σ2
read + σ2
dark + σ2excess
(2.18)
Practically, the evaluation of the imaging contrast provided by an OCT system for a given
sample, in terms of SNRSD is quantified by sensitivity ΣSD, which relates important sys-
tem and sample parameters. The sensitivity is the minimum sample reflectivity (Rmin,s),
which is resolved by the OCT system in the presence of noise, SNRSD ≥1
ΣSD = SNRSD
Rmin,s
=
1
Rmin,s
(2.19)
Determining the minimal sample reflectivity resolvable by the OCT system is a practical
assignment. In most applications and especially for biomedical applications, the reference
arm reflectivity RR is much larger than the sample reflectivity Rs, Rs << Rs. Using this
approximation, the left−hand side of equation 2.18 becomes 1 and the equation can be
solved for the reference arm power. The equated reference power is optimal for ensuring
a shot−noise−limited operation which yields the highest imaging contrast achievable by
the system.
2.2
Spatial offset optical coherence tomography
The theoretical framework of OCT in turbid media (tissue)) is derived from a wave-based
model formulated with the Extended Huygens−Fresnel (EHF) principle as outlined in [32,
33]. The EHF model is justified within the paraxial approximation which is valid because
tissues exhibit small-angle forward scattering [32, 33]. Recently published work [12] ex-
pands on the EHF model framework to show that the multiple scattered light is separable
from the single scattered light (ballistic scattered light) by introducing a spatial offset be-
tween the illumination and collection paths. Introducing a spatially offset collection path
leads to discrimination of ballistic scattering with respect to multiple scattering. The out-
come is the compensation for the effective attenuation at depth by maintaining the signal
above the noise floor. In the following analysis, a review of the theory presented in [12] is
given, while not including the angular offset incorporated from [34], which is not of imme-
diate interest to the scope of this thesis work. In general, a full derivation is omitted due
9
==PAGE:20==
to the scope of the thesis but it is presented in the supplementary information to [12].
Figure 2.5: An illustration of the sample arm geometry for SO−OCT in comparison with
conventional OCT. The geometry introduces a lateral offset s0 between the illumination
and collection paths. The illustration is adapted from [12].
2.2.1
Review
Light in the sample path of a conventional Michelson interferometer−based OCT system
with a movable reference mirror (time domain) is incident on a tissue surface with a tissue
refractive index discontinuity at depth z. However, in the spectral domain, there is no loss
of generality. The EHF model expresses the electric field propagation through the system
and back−scatters from the tissue discontinuity as a monochromatic wave propagation
problem.
The considered geometry for SO−OCT as introduced in [12] is illustrated in figure 2.5.A
lens with focal length f is placed at a distance d from the tissue surface such that inci-
dent light is focused onto the tissue discontinuity. The optical path length of the reference
and the focal plane at the tissue discontinuity are matched. The bulk tissue containing
the refractive index discontinuity is described by the scattering coefficient µs, a root mean
squared (rms) scattering angle θrms and the absorption coefficient µa.
Assuming that the Gaussian field of the sample path Us and the Gaussian reference field
UR is mutually coherent in the mixing plane. The resulting mutual coherence function
Γpt describes the effects of the scattering inhomogeneities in the sample path. The an-
alytical expression for the mean square heterodyne signal current ⟨I2(z)⟩is obtained by
integrating the photodetector active area over the detector response time [32, 33, 12].
⟨I(z)2⟩= ⟨I0(z)2⟩Ψ(z, s)
(2.20)
where ⟨I0(z)2⟩= α2PRPSσb/πw2
H is the mean square heterodyne signal current in the
absence of absorption and scattering. The factor α represents the conversion of power to
current on the photodetector, α = qη/hν. Here q is the electronic charge, η is the quantum
efficiency, ν is the optical frequency and h is Planck’s constant. PR and PS are the power of
the reference path and sample paths respectively, and σb is the effective back−scattering
cross-section of the tissue discontinuity. The heterodyne efficiency factor Ψ(z, s) can be
10
==PAGE:21==
defined as the SNR reduction due to scattering effects and absorption in the tissue [32,
33, 12].
Ψ(z, s) = e−2µaz

e−2µsze
−s2
2w2
H +
4e−µsz(1 −e−µsz)
(1 + µa∆ZD)(1 + w2
SA
w2
H )
e
−s2
w2
H +w2
SA + (1 −e−µsz)2w2
H
(1 + µa∆ZD)w2
SA
e
−s2
2w2
SA

(2.21)
where spatial offset s between the illumination path and collection path as given in equa-
tion 2.21, is illustrated in figure 2.5.
The exponential term outside the brackets is the attenuation due to absorption (Beer Lam-
bert´s law). The first term in the brackets is the ballistic scattered component arising from
a single scattered light. The ballistic scattered light propagates through the tissue to the
tissue discontinuity and back to the mixing plane in straight paths. The second term is the
cross-term relating contributions from both single scattered and multiple scattered light.
The third term describes the contribution due to multiple scattered light. The expressions
for the 1/e intensity radii in the absence of absorption and scattering are given in equation
2.22. The expressions for the 1/e intensity radii in the presence of both absorption and
scattering w2
SA are given in equation 2.23.[12]
w2
H = w2
0
 A −B
f
2 +
  B
k0w0
2
(2.22)
w2
SA = (1 + µa∆ZD)−1
w2
0
 A −B
f
2 + B2
k0w0
+
  2B
k0ρ0
2(1 + µa∆ZN)

(2.23)
Here, A and B are the ABCD matrix elements describing the OCT system geometry.
An advantage of the EHF model for small-angle forward scattering is the ability to model
various OCT system conditions for multilayered heterogeneous tissue using the ABCD
matrix formalism [33]. A short introduction to the ABCD formalism is given in appendix
A.1.2. The parameters ∆ZN and ∆ZD from equation 2.22-2.23 is stated in equation 2.24-
2.25.[12]
∆ZN =
z
2n2
R
 w0
f
2 +
 1
k0w0
2 +
 2
k0ρ0
2

(2.24)
∆ZD = z
 w2
0 + ρ2
0
2

4n2
RB2
(2.25)
ρ0 is the lateral coherence length of a point source located at the tissue discontinuity
plane, observed from the mixing plane. The expression for ρ0 is stated in equation 2.26.
Depending on the focusing conditions, d has a dependency on z, i.e. dynamic focusing
d(z) = f −z/nR.
ρ0 =
r 3
µsz
λ0
πθrms
 1 + nRd
z

(2.26)
where θrms is the root mean squared scattering angle. nR is the real part of the complex
refractive index of the tissue n = nR+inI, where the imaginary part of the refractive index
depends on the absorption coefficient µa and wavevector k0, nI = µa/2k0.
In the following simulations, we consider the OCT imaging geometry as illustrated in figure
2.5 with a thin lens employing dynamic focusing d(z) = f −z/nR.[12]
11
==PAGE:22==
In figure 2.6 an adaptation of the calculations published in [12] is given. The sample
considered has ns = 1.4, µs = 10/mm, µa = 0/mm, g = 0.955 and θrms = 0.3. The
center−wavelength is λ0 = 830nm which matches the SLD source utilized in this thesis
work and the beam waist is 1.5mm which equals the diameter used in [12]. In the graph
of the individual contributions to Ψ(z, s), it is evident that the multiple scattered light is
dominating the acquired OCT signal even at relatively shallow depths (230µm) using NIR
wavelengths for illumination. Beyond this depth, the multiple scattered light yields the
main contribution to the acquired OCT signal. As shown in figure 2.6, this depth depends
on the scattering coefficient of the sample. Furthermore, varying the offset allows for
controlling the relative contribution between the single and multiple scattered light to the
acquired OCT signal. This is demonstrated in figure 2.6 as the single scattered light at
shallow depths is suppressed at increasing offsets while Ψ(z, s) converges to Ψ(z, s =
0) in the regime where multiply scattered light is dominating. As a result, an optimal
offset is determinable based on the optical system geometry and scattering properties of
the sample. Practically, this allows for OCT image formation with a variable contribution
of ballistic scattered photons on the same optical system geometry, providing tunable
contrast at depth for better sample characterization.
Figure 2.6: Calculated contributions for individual terms of the Heterodyne efficiency fac-
tor, depth at which multiple scattered light becomes dominant and heterodyne efficiency
factor and normalized contrast at varying offsets. The parameters used to describe the
system for all these calculations: λ0 = 830nm, w0 = 1.5mm, f = 36mm, n = 1.4,
µs = 10/mm, µa = 0/mm, θrms = 0.3. The angles are in units of radians and here is
assumed dynamic focusing.[12]
12
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Multicore fibres for spatial offset common-Path optical
coherence tomography
Optical fibres with high spatial degrees of freedom in the biophotonics community are
divided into two major categories,(i) multimode fibres (MMFs) and (ii) multicore fibres
(MCF). The commonality is the availability to control the propagation through the fibres
using phase conjugation techniques by employing spatial light modulators (SLMs).
• MMFs: (i) The complete control over the phase, amplitude and polarization of the
mode basis supported by the MMF. This provides the degrees of freedom needed
to enable the transfer of imaging information along an MMF without the need for
distal end optics[35, 36, 37]. This development has sparked research in ultra−thin
and flexible single−fibre endoscopes based on phase conjugation for minimally in-
vasive imaging and spectroscopy, especially within the field of neuroscience, where
a minimal imaging footprint is required for live imaging in in−vivo animal models [37,
38].
• MCFs: (ii) Another speciality fibre is the MCFs which can be used to enable high-
resolution optical imaging deep inside the body. In fact, commercially available en-
doscopes are usually designed with an optical fibre bundle (MCFs with thousands
of cores), often referred to as MCFs [15]. An MCF consisting of N SMF cores with
low inter−core coupling exhibits what is known as the ”Memory effect”. The phase
of the light injected into i’th core at the proximal end of the fibre is strongly corre-
lated with the phase of light emitting from the fibre at the distal end. Additionally, the
beam propagating in all other cores j ̸= i has no influence on the phase of the i’th
core at the distal end of the MCF. After phase calibration of each of the individual
cores in the MCF, an SLM can exert control over the emitted wavefront from the
MCF by controlling the phase of the individual beams in the cores. This leads to
the concept of ”lensless endoscopy” which has successfully been used to acquire
two-photon-excited fluorescence images. [15].
Figure 2.7: An illustration of a hexagonal MCF with graded−idex profile, adapted from
[39].
In relation to OCT imaging, MCFs have been successfully used for endoscopic OCT. Pri-
marily, OCT imaging through coherent fibre bundles used for WL endoscopy has been
demonstrated [16, 17]. A prevalent problem with MCFs is that the individual cores in
general exhibit varying optical properties due to fabrication tolerances. This leads to po-
larization scrambling and dispersion mismatch. Furthermore, the large number of cores
13
==PAGE:24==
in fibre bundles results in smaller values of Λ. The result is increased cross−talk (χT )
and decreased memory effect[15]. These effects results is a decrease of the imaging
quality as the modulation depth (MD) of the interference fringes decreases and imaging
contrast is diminished [17, 40, 16, 41, 42]. A mitigating approach for fibre−optic based
OCT system design is utilizing a CP−OCT design, where the sample beam and reference
beam are co-propagating in the imaging system. In CP−OCT, the last optical surface in
the sample path provides the reference by Fresnel reflection [14, 42]. Furthermore, MCFs
with a lower core number and larger core spacing does not exhibit large χT values. There-
fore, the do provide a potential platform for compact fibre−optic OCT systems. Examples
of such MCFs can be found in [15, 43, 44].
The prospect of combining a common−path imaging geometry with spatial offset detec-
tion published in [12] to improve contrast at depth, allows for decoupling of the offset
detection with the reference path, similar to the Mach−Zehnder interferometer−based
SO−OCT system published in [12]. This provides a unique opportunity for investigating
CP−SO−OCT for future endoscopic implementation.
In the following subsections, we describe field propagation in MCFs and investigate the
viability of MCFs for light delivery and OCT signal collection to implement a SO−OCT
into an endoscope. Finally, we combine the theory given in section 2.1 and section 2.2 to
describe the working principle of a CP−SO−OCT system based on an MCF.
2.3.1
Light propagation in multicore fibres
An MCF consists of multiple optical fibres embedded in a cladding material. The position
of each core arises from the stacking method used during the stack−and−draw fabrica-
tion process of the MCF. The periodic core pattern found in literature is primarily hexag-
onal [15]. Fabrication of aperiodic MCF has successfully been achieved and published
[44, 45]. The propagation characteristics of the MCF are dependent on the boundary
condition imposed by the individual cores, the refractive indices of the core (nc) and the
cladding (ncl). The boundary conditions depend on the refractive index profile describing
the core−to−cladding index distribution. In figure 2.7, the the common definitions used
for MCFs is introduced; the core−to−core pitch Λ and core diameter d = 2rc. Here, the
MCF has an hexagonal pattern and the refractive index profile is a graded−index profile.
A single−moded core is designed to support one fundamental spatial mode. The cut−off
for when a core becomes multi−moded is defined by the normalized frequency (V)
V = rck0NA = 2πrc
λ
q
n2c −n2
cl
(2.27)
where NA = sin(θa) is the numerical aperture, relating the refractive indices to the ac-
ceptance angle (θa) for in−coupling light to the core. rc is the radius of the core and λ0
is the incident wavelength. For a step−index profile, when V < 2.405, it supports only
spatial mode while V > 2.405, it supports more than one spatial mode and it is defined as
a multi−moded core. Assuming the core refractive index profile is a step−index profile,
the total number of modes (M) is given by equation 2.28
M = 4
π2 V 2
(2.28)
In figure 2.8, the calculated V−number and total number of supported modes in a single
MCF core with index contrast ∆= 0.0068 are presented. The parameters for the Thorlabs
SLD830S−A20W light source and the MCF used in the experiments are highlighted (white
14
==PAGE:25==
dashed line). The calculations show that the V−number at the 830nm peak wavelength
is 11.62 corresponding to 55 supported modes for a step−index core with a core radius of
9µm. The supported spatial modes can be expressed in the linear polarized mode basis
(LPl,m,p), due to the rotational symmetry of the fibre geometry and the weakly guiding
refractive index profile, ∆= (nc−ncl)/nc << 1 [25]. These assumptions hold valid for the
MCFs published in [15, 43]. The normalized fractional power (η) of the field propagating
along the MCF length in the LPl,m,p mode basis is defined as the squared norm of the
inner product integral[46],
η =
|
R R
E(x, y)E∗
l,m,p(x, y)dxdy|2
R R
|E(x, y)|2dxdy
R R
|El,m,p(x, y)|2dxdy
(2.29)
Equation 2.29 allows to study the impact of the perturbations on the reference field and
signal field during propagation along the MCF length, while the MCF undergo bending or
twisting during imaging. Bending can be considered by transforming the refractive index
distribution n′(x, y) [46],
n′(x, y) = n(x, y)

1 −n2(x, y)
x −x0
2RB

pe

exp
x −x0
RB

(2.30)
where equation 2.30 describes a bending along the x−axis. Similar expressions exist for
bending along the y−axis or simultaneous bending along both axes. Here, n(x, y) is the
refractive index distribution in the absence of bending that transforms into n′(x, y). RB is
the bending radius of curvature which is measured from the center of the fibre located at
x0. pe describes the Poisson ratio and the photo-elastic tensor components, which de-
scribe the structural impact of the induced stress on the refractive index distribution during
bending. Considering MCFs for endoscopic applications, the spatial dimensions become
an important property for controlling light propagation. Tapering the fibre profile allows to
control the spatial dimensions. The taper is determined by gradually scaling n(x, y) along
the direction of propagation. The taper is defined by the taper scaling ratio S, which is
the tapered diameter to the initial diameter of the fibre. The perturbation resulting from
the tapering is calculated by multiplying the non-tapered refractive index profile n(x, y) by
1 −(1 −S)iz∆z/Lz. Here, iz is the algorithm iteration index and Lz is the total length of
the propagation segment[46].
In [47] it was shown that tapering the MCF increased the imaging performance for lens-
less endoscopes. The tapered lensless endoscope produced near aberration-free per-
formance (Strehl ratio) close to unity. However, the tapering decreases Λ and there-
fore decreases the memory effect. The decreasing Λ results in an increasing average
core−to−core XT , from −35dB to −10dB at a taper ratio of 0.6. Noteworthy, in [47] the
MCF was used for lensless two−photon fluorescence imaging (2PF), which imposes dif-
ferent constraints on the imaging geometry compared to OCT. A taper ratio of 0.6 provides
the option to fit the OCT system into an hypodermic needle as in [27]. The CP−OCT sys-
tem allows for mitigating the increasing XT and would still provide the decoupling of the
illumination path from the collection path with a minimal spatial footprint.
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.8: The V−number and the mode total supported for a step−index fiber with index
contrast ∆= 0.0068. The parameters for the Thorlabs SLD830S−A20W and a similar MCF
as used for the experiments are highlighted (white dashed line). The MCF is a PM−MCF
with parameters published in [43, 48]. The birefringence is not taken into account in the
simulations.
Figure 2.9: The fractional modal power distribution of a single core in the PM−MCF. The
Fringe pattern is observed in the far field by the interference of the reference core with
a spatial offset core. This illustrates the working principle of the proposed MCF−based
CP−SO−OCT system.
In figure 2.9, the simulated fractional modal power distribution in a single core of an MCF
is shown. The core parameters is similar the PM−MCF published in [43, 48]. The frac-
tional modal power distribution is expressed the Lp−mode basis. The birefringence is
16
==PAGE:27==
not taken into account. The parameter values are highlighted in figure 2.8 (white dashed
line). A Gaussian field with a diameter of 4mm was focused by a spherical lens with focal
length f = 5mm onto the proximal end facet of a single core in the MCF. The MATALB
package BPM−Matlab was used to solve equation 2.29 for a 1cm segment [46]. The grid
resolution was ∆x = ∆y = 0.05µm and the number of calculations performed along the
segment was Nz = 100.
The values used for the simulations corresponds to the experimental conditions outlined
in section 3.1. The propagation along the segment is dominated by the excitation of the
fundamental mode, Lp01. Therefore, in the laboratory, one would expect to observe ex-
citation of the Lp01 mode. The distal end field was stored for usage as a future reference
field. Furthermore, in figure 2.8 a fringe pattern is observed after back−propagation of
the reference field through the segment. A similar field with 2% of the reference amplitude
was co−propagated with the reference field in the core (x0 + Λ, y0) and the focused into
a constant refractive index distribution with n = 1 over a distance of 2cm. There was
an index contrast difference between the 2 cores of ∆nc = 1.0 · 10−4. This describes
the working principle behind the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT system outlined
in this thesis.
2.3.2
Multicore fibres for common-path spatial offset optical coherence
tomography
An imaging geometry is proposed for the CP−SO−OCT based on an MCF. In the following
subsections, the changes to the imaging geometry described in section 2.2 is given. The
sensitivity for the proposed system is outlined in terms of measurable parameters.
Imaging geometry
In section 2.2, we described the theoretical framework for SO−OCT as outlined in [12].
For the EHF model as published in [12, 32, 33], the optical imaging system is described
in the paraxial approximation by the ABCD−matrix formalism. An introduction is given in
appendix A.1.2. Considering the spatial degrees of freedom in an MCF for CP−SO−OCT,
the result is a decoupling between the reference beam propagating in core (x0, y0) and
the spatially offset detected signal in the i-th core (xi, yi), where the achievable spatial
offset depends on the stacking pattern of the MCF and the core-to-core pitch Λ.
Independently of the MCF, the mixing plane for the reference core and the i-th core is
the proximal end of the MCF. Similarly to [12, 32, 33], the proposed MCF CP−SO−OCT
imaging geometry is described by a system matrix Msys from the mixing plane to the dis-
continuity plane. As a result of the imaging geometry, the lens plane does not coincide with
the mixing plane as for the imaging geometry considered in section 2.2. The new imaging
geometry is illustrated in figure 2.10. A sample is described by refractive index ns and a
discontinuity plane resulting from a change in refractive index n′
s. The discontinuity plane
at depth zs′ from the sample surface is illuminated with a beam focused by micro-optics.
The micro−optics is described by the ABCD−matrix M76. The distance d between the
micro−optics and the sample surface is described by M98. The space (spacer) between
the micro−optics and the distal end of the MCF has refractive index n54 and the length
L54. We describe this spacer by the matrix M54. The illumination beam is delivered to the
micro−optics for focusing by a single core in MCF with core refractive index nc and length
L32. Here, we describe the MCF as the matrix M32. The mixing plane of the illumination
beam and the spatially offset OCT signal is located at the plane at distance L10 from the
proximal end of the MCF. The distance L10 corresponds to the focal length of the fibre
coupling objective (fcol). The system matrix Msys for illumination beam is given as [18,
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.10: Schematic of the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT imaging geometry
with ABCD matrix descriptors. highlighted is part of the illumination beam path (red)
focused onto the discontinuity plane and part of the back−reflected reference beam path
(green).
25, 21],
Msys =
A
B
C
D

=
1
zs′
0
1

M109M98M87M76M65M54M43M32M21M10
(2.31)
where M109, M87, M65, M43 and M21 are the ABCD−matrices describing the interface
transition. In a common−path interferometry, the last optical surface acts as a refer-
ence reflector as detailed in section 2.1. The interface given by M87 is described by
the ABCD−matrix of a flat reflector. The flat reflector provides the reference reflection
given by the Fresnel power coefficient R87 = |r87|2 = |(n98 −n76)/(n98 + n76)|2. Here,
it is assumed that the illumination beam is at normal incidence on the flat reflector. To
have a high modulation depth of the interferogram, an efficient back−coupling through
the MCF of the reference reflection is needed. That is achieved when the spot size of the
back−reflection at the refractive interface M43 equals the MFD of the centre core (x0, y0),
yielding a fill factor w0/rc ≈1. The ABCD−matrix for the back−reflection MBR
sys is written
in equation 2.32,
MBR
sys =
A
B
C
D

= M87M76M65M54M43M32M21M10
(2.32)
The application of the ABCD−matrix representation of fibre−optic OCT systems to study
imaging properties is a common part of the literature [19, 21, 49, 50]. Here, by tak-
ing advantage of the EHF model satisfying the paraxial approximation, we can use the
ABCD−matrix formalism to describe the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT system
and estimate imaging performance, imaging contrast and the normalized contrast at depth
from introducing the spatial offset.
Imaging contrast
In subsection 2.1.3, imaging contrast was introduced in terms of sensitivity. This concept
can be applied without loss of generality to the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT
system. An illustration of the model for the system is shown in figure 2.11. A SLD with
average power P0 is split into two paths (the common−path and the excess path) by a
fibre−optic coupler. The fibre−optic coupler has a power splitting ratio αc.
The Fresnel reference reflectivity is RR. In the sample arm, the incident power is col-
limated and then focused onto the sample with the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT
18
==PAGE:29==
setup. The light in the sample path is effectively attenuated by the probe resulting from
coupling losses and back reflections. The coupling losses can be described by an atten-
uation factor αp. Some of the back-reflected power will be coupled back into the sample
path of the fibre−coupler.
These back−reflections are generally outside of the coherence gate of the system and
therefore represent incoherent noise in the system. The reflectivity associated with the
incoherent back−reflections is RSI. In contrast, the sample signal will result from reflec-
tions within the coherence gate. In this analysis, we only consider sample reflections as a
single reflector with coherent reflectivity RSC. The power reflected by the sample reflector
is collected by the probe and attenuated with αp before propagation to the output path.
In the output arm, the returning powers from the reference arm and the sample reflection
Figure 2.11: Schematic of the proposed MCF−based CP−SO−OCT imaging geometry
with ABCD matrix descriptors. highlighted is part of the illumination beam path (red)
focused onto the discontinuity plane and part of the back−reflected reference beam path
(green).
PR, PSI and PSC are given in equation 2.33[13, 27]
PR = P0αc(1 −αc)RR = P0γRRR
PSC = P0αc(1 −αc)γpRSC = P0γsRSC
(2.33)
PSI = P0αc(1 −αc)γpRSI
where PR is the coherent reference path power, PSC and PSi are the coherent and inco-
herent sample path powers respectively. γR and γS is the reference and source fractional
source powers, returning to the output path from a unity reflector placed at the working
distance [27, 29].
Furthermore, for simplification we defined the round−trip attenuation γp = α2
p. The advan-
tage of defining the round−trip attenuation from a practical perspective is that it is easily
quantifiable and it account for the loss of sensitivity introduced by the probe. Therefore,
γp can be used as a figure of merit for performance evaluation. Under the assumption that
PSC << PSI, the SNR stated in equation 2.18for a spectrometer-based SD-OCT system
can be written as equation 2.33 [27, 29]
SNRSD =

ηSD
hν0
2
τPRPSC

ηSD
hν0

(PR + PSI) + N
τ (σ2
read + σ2
dark) +
1+Π2
2∆νeff

ηSD
hν0
2
(P 2
R + P 2
SI)
(2.34)
19
==PAGE:30==
where ηSD is the total spectrometer efficiency, τ is the integration time, h is Planck’s
constant, ν0 the optical center frequency, ∆νeff the effective bandwidth of the illuminations
source, Π is the polarization, degree of freedom (Π = 1), N is the number of pixels. For
an optimized design where the back−reflections in the probe are sufficiently suppressed,
shot−noise−limited (SNL) operation is achievable by adjusting the reference power. In
the SNL the SNR can be expressed,
SNR(SNL)
SD
= ηSDτP0
hν0
γsRSC
(2.35)
Applying equation 2.19 yields the maximum sensitivity of the probe for a minimum sample
reflectivity (SNR(SNL)
SD
= 1).
Σ(SNL)
SD
=
1
RSC,min
= ηSDτP0
hν0
γs
(2.36)
The important consequence of equations 2.33-2.36 is that sensitivity of the probe is di-
rectly proportional to γp for a unity reflector (RSC = RR = 1) in SNL. While commer-
cially available or carefully designed laboratory OCT systems can attain close to the
SNL−operation, a system design as outlined in this section for CP−SO−OCT requires
analysis of the interplay between the noises and the design factors. From [27, 29], we
obtain the full expression for the sensitivity.
ΣSD =

ηSD
hν0
2
P 2
0 τγsγRRR

ηSD
hν0

(RR + RSI)γRP0 + N
τ (σ2
read + σ2
dark) +
1+Π2
2∆νeff

ηSD
hν0
2
(R2
R + R2
S)γ2
RP 2
0
(2.37)
Equation 2.37 is important, because it allows for evaluation of the system performance
by comparing measurements and evaluate the different noise contributions impact on the
overall performance.
20
==PAGE:31==
3
Experimental Design and Methods
This chapter will present the experimental setups to perform the outlined experiments
from chapter 1. The first section describes the setup for confirming passive beam control
by imaging the distal end facet of a PM−MCF and measuring the coupling efficiency.
The second section details the implemented setup for PM−MCF based CP−OCT and
characterizes key aspects of the setup. The final section covers the design of SO−OCT
through a PM−MCF.
3.1
Experiment 1: passive beam control and coupling
efficiency
In the literature, the control of core excitation selectivity and field propagation in multi-
core fibres (MCF) is achieved using adaptive optical components, spatial light modula-
tors (SLMs) and digital micromirror devices (DMDs) [15, 43, 44]. Adaptive optical com-
ponents provide additional degrees of freedom for controlling the field propagation in the
fibre, those components are expensive and are not readily available in our lab.
For the experiments, a polarization-maintaining multicore fibre (PM−MCF,19 cores, Λ =
47µm, core diameter 18µm, outer diameter 348µm, length 50cm) was chosen to ensure po-
larization stability between the illumination path and the reference path. The PM-MCF fi-
bre used in this work is provided by Dr. Esben Ravn Andresen at Phlam Laboratory−University
of Lille and has been used for published research [43, 48]. Furthermore, the properties of
the PM−MCF have several advantages which is ideal for the proposed thesis work. (i)
A large core diameter results in a large MFD, which simplifies the coupling of the exci-
tation light and increases the coupling efficiency while using low NA coupling objectives.
(ii) A large core-to-core pitch Λ decreases the specificity needed for passive core selec-
tion by translation of the proximal end facet with respect to the static illumination beam.
Additionally, the average core XT decreases with increasing core pitch Λ [15, 47]. Ad-
vantageously, a small XT reduces the background noise in the experiment. (iii) The
polarization-maintaining properties of the fibre resulting from the induced birefringence,
reduce the polarization scrambling and lead to overall background noise reductions. The
coupling experiments aim to deliver a single-core excited LP01 mode at the distal end
facet of the PM−MCF under passive beam control conditions by translation of the proxi-
mal fibre facet with respect to the illumination beam.
3.1.1
Setup
The experimental setup illustrated in figure 3.1 was used for coupling light into a polarization-
maintaining multicore fibre segment (PM−MCF, 19 cores, Λ = 47µm, core diameter 18µm,
outer diameter 348µm, length 50cm [43, 48]) used in this work is described in section
2.3, to image the fibre distal end and measure the coupling efficiency. A pigtail SLD
(SLD830S−A20W) was used as a light source with a center−wavelength λ0 = 830nm
and a bandwidth ∆λ = 55nm with an output power of up to 21.7mW. The output beam
from the SLD was collimated by a fixed focus collimator package (F230APC−850) yield-
ing a beam diameter of 4mm. The collimator package was mounted in a Thorlabs XY
translation cage mount (CXY1A) to control the beam position on the back aperture of the
coupling objective. A Thorlabs neutral density filter wheel (NDC−100C−4M, ND1) was
used to control the input beam power. A set of pinholes (P1,P2) was used to manage the
alignment of the beam to the coupling objective. The light is coupled into a single core
21
==PAGE:32==
at the proximal end by a microscope objective Obj1 (Leica, magnification 40x, 0.66NA,
f= 5mm). We estimate the beam diameter at the focal plane of Obj1 in equation 3.1.
2w(x,y)
0
= 4λf
πD = 4 · 830nm · 5mm
π · 4mm
= 1.3210µm
(3.1)
Where a perfect beam quality is assumed, M2 = 1 [25]. The beam waist and the modal
field diameter determine the coupling efficiency to the excited mode supported by the fibre
as described in equation 2.29. The detection arm consists of a collimation objective Obj2
(Olympus UPLFLN U Plan Fluorite, design magnification (DM) = 4x, 0.13NA, fDTL =
180mm/4x= 45mm), a tube lens TL1 (AC254-150-B-ML), neutral density filter (ND2) for
camera saturation control and a CMOS camera (Thorlabs CS165MU/M - Zelux). The
mismatch fDTL > fTL1 reduces the system magnification, in equation 3.2 we calculate
the effective objective magnification (EOM).
EOM = DM fTL1
fDTL
= 4 × 150mm
180mm = 3.33x
(3.2)
The resulting field of view (FOV) on the CMOS camera with the EOM of the detection arm
is given in equation 3.3.
FOV = 4.968mm
3.33x
× 3.726mm
3.33x
= 1491µm × 1118µm
(3.3)
The prime interest in imaging the distal end of the PM−MCF is to visualize LP01 mode
excitation with single-core coupling experimentally. The NA of Obj2 and the achieved FOV
satisfy this purpose since the outer diameter of the fibre is 348µm [43]. The CMOS camera
has a pixel size of 3.45µm along both lateral dimensions. Given the EOM calculated in
equation 3.2, the PM−MCF core diameter imaged onto the CMOS satisfies the Nyquist
criterion because 18µm · 3.33 > 2 · 3.45µm.
Figure 3.1: Experimental setup for passively coupling light into the multicore fibre for distal
end imaging and measuring coupling efficiency. SLD830S−20W: Illumination source, ND:
Neutral density filter, P: Pinhole, TL: Tube lens, Obj: Objective, PM−MCF: Polarization
maintaining multicore fibre, CMOS: CMOS camera.
3.2
Experiment 2: Common-path multicore fibre optical
coherence tomography
In the following section, a detailed description of the designed CP−OCT system based
on a PM−MCF is presented.
3.2.1
Setup
A fibre-optic CP−OCT system was designed and implemented utilizing a 50 : 50 fibre−optic
FC/APC coupler (TW830R5A2), a PM−MCF as described in section 2.3 and a single
22
==PAGE:33==
wavelength Graded−index lens (GRIN lens, GRIN2308A). A schematic of the proof-of-
concept setup is shown in figure 3.2. A pigtail SLD (SLD830S−A20W) was used as a light
source with a center−wavelength λ0 = 830nm and bandwidth ∆λ = 55nm. The maximum
output power is 21.7mW. A description of the light source can be found in appendix A.2.
The light from the SLD was coupled into the fibre-optic coupler at port 1 (input) using a
bulkhead adapter. The total insertion loss for all bulkhead adapters used in the setup was
less than < 1.2mW. The power was monitored during all experiments using a power me-
ter connected to port 3 (tap output) of the fibre-optic coupler. The output beam from port
4 (signal output) was collimated by a fixed collimator package (F230APC−850) mounted
in a Thorlabs XY translation cage mount (CXY1A). The collimated beam diameter was
4mm and the XY translation cage mount was used to control the beam position on the
back aperture of the coupling objective. A microscope objective (Obj1, Leica, magnifica-
tion 40x, 0.66NA, f = 5mm) was used for coupling into the PM−MCF. Both the PM−MCF
and the objective were mounted on coupling stages for proper control of the objective
with respect to the PM−MCF facet distance. This is important to ensure high coupling
efficiency, which results from the beam overlap with the single-mode excitation of the
LP01 core mode. Furthermore, controlling the beam position on the fibre facet allows for
core-to-core selection in a passive fashion without the need for spatial light modulators
or digital mirrors. The light is coupled into the selected single core at the proximal end of
the PM−MCF and the injected light illuminates the sample of interest placed at the focal
plane of a single wavelength graded-index lens with a focal length of fG = 1.98mm (GRIN
lens, GRIN2308A) designed for 830nm.
Figure 3.2: Experimental setup for single core common-path optical coherence tomog-
raphy using a polarization maintaining multicore fibre with graded−index optics for distal
end focusing. SLD830S−20W: Illumination source, 50 : 50 FC/APC: 50 : 50 fibre-optic
coupler, L: Collimator lens, PM−MCF: Polarization maintaining multicore fibre, Obj: Ob-
jective, GRIN lens: Graded−index lens.
The GRIN lens was mounted in a V−groove mount (Thorlabs, VH1) and placed on a 2D
manual stage (x, z) to coarsely adjust the lateral and axial position to the distal end of the
PM−MCF. The proximal facet of the GRIN lens is polished at an angle (8◦) to avoid back
reflections. The separation between the distal end facet of the PM−MCF and the proximal
facet of the GRIN lens determines the beam expansion of the excited LP01 core mode
before focusing, effectively controlling the working distance and lateral resolution of the
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.3: The beam spot at the focal plane of the GRIN lens GRIN2308A. The Gaussian
fit (red curve) of both lateral dimensions (x, y) and the estimated FWHM = 17.25µm.
The confirmation by simulation in MATLAB, using both ABCD−matrix and BPM−Matlab
to estimate the distance of 545µm between the PM−MCF and the GRIN lens.
setup as explained in section 2.3. The focal plane of the GRIN lens was imaged onto the
CMOS from section 3.1, by using an objective (Nikon Plan Fluor, 10x/0.30NA). The objec-
tive was placed on a 1D stage and images was acquired while simultaneously translation
of the objective along the propagation axis z. The tube lens used for imaging was a achro-
matic doublet lens with a focal length of 150mm (AC254 −150−B−ML). The objective is
designed for a 200mm tube lens, effectively lowering the magnification to 7.5x. Imaging of
the focal plane satisfies the Nyqvist criterion, since 17.25µm·7.5 > 2·3.45µm. In figure 3.3,
we show the imaged beam spot at the focal plane of the GRIN lens. The FWHM along both
lateral dimensions was extracted by fitting a 2D Gaussian function to the imaged beam
spot. The fitting yielded a FWHM = 17.25µm. No astigmatism is observed in the imaged
focal plane. The distance between the PM−MCF distal facet and the GRIN lens proximal
facet is estimated based on numerical simulations using ABCD−matrix propagation as de-
scribed in appendix A.1 and BPM−Matlab from [46]. The numerical simulations are done
in MATLAB and the grid resolution was ∆x = ∆y < λ0/2NA to satisfy the sampling crite-
rion for the FFT propagation part of BPM−Matlab simulations. This approach was chosen
as an alternative to a dedicated micro−optics workstation due to availability. The perfor-
mance evaluation of fibre−optic OCT systems is consistent with the literature [18, 21, 51,
50]. The approach was chosen since the lab does not have a dedicated workstation for
handling micro−optics which leaves the PM−MCF distal end free standing without fixa-
tion to the GRIN Lens. This makes it difficult to precisely measure the distance between
the PM−MCF and the mounted GRIN Lens as well as overall alignment. The xz−plane
shown in figure 3.3 is the BPM−Matlab simulation of the focusing of a LP01 mode from the
PM−MCF after propagating in a 545µm air spacer, before being focused with the GRIN
lens into a medium of refractive index n = 1 (air). The white line (−.) is the predicted focal
plane of the system by ABCD−matrix formalism and the red line (−−) is the experimen-
tally determined focal plane. The discrepancy between the numerical models is due to
small fill factor between the GRIN lens diameter of and the expanded LP01 mode [51]. In
24
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.4: The axial point spread function determined from A−scan of a mirror. The
width of the mirror reflection is 13.1µm. The expected system sensitivity for 10ms (black)
and 100ms (red) exposure time overlayed with measured sensitivity at 100ms (red dots)
at the reference powers of −29.21dB, −26.2dB and −23.98dB.
a common−path configuration, the refractive index mismatch between the GRIN lens and
the air surroundings provides the reference reflection for the common-path system. The
flat optical surface of the GRIN lens distal end is not optimized for back coupling of the
reference beam. An estimate of the reference power is found by assuming Fresnel reflec-
tion yielding a power reflectivity at normal incidence independent is Rs,p = |rs,p|2 = 0.0531
or 5.31%. 5mW of sample arm power results in a reference power PR = 265.5µW. The
considered samples were mounted on a translation stage driven by a motorized actuator
for the control of the sample position within the imaging window defined by the maximum
probing depth of the spectrometer used for acquisitions, such that the optical path dif-
ference between the sample and the reference reflections satisfy the coherence gating
requirement such that OPLS −OPLR << ∆zmax. The spectral interferogram is acquired
by a BaySpec−Basler spl2048 −140km NIR spectrograph (Basler spectrograph). Port 2
of the fibre-optic coupler is connected directly to the dedicated APC fibre-optic adapter
on the Basler spectrograph. The Basler spectrograph internally, lens with a focal length
of 100mm focuses the signal light onto the detection grating which supports a bandwidth
of ∆λ = 120nm from 780 −900nm with a center−wavelength of 840nm. The grating dis-
perses the signal light onto a dual binning 2048 pixel CMOS line camera operating at a
maximum line rate of 140kHz. The spectral resolution is 0.10nm/pixel. By direct calcula-
tion using equation 2.14 developed in subsection 2.1.2, the Basler spectrograph provides
a maximum probing depth in the air is ∆zmax = 3mm. The readout of the acquisitions
is digitized by a DAQ card controlled by a LabView application which performs the signal
processing. The axial point spread function (PSF) of the system was characterized by
placing a mirror (BB1-E03) on a 1D stage for position control. The width of the mirror
reflection in the acquired A−scan is related to the coherence length of the illumination
source and therefore the axial resolution of the system as stated in subsection 2.1.2, see
equation 2.13. In figure 3.4, we show the acquired A−scan at a sample position of 110µm
from the GRIN Lens. A Gaussian fit to the reflection peak yields an axial resolution of
25
==PAGE:36==
13.1µm. This measured value is 2.4 times larger than the expected value determined by
direct calculation in subsection 2.1.2. The literature suggests that this discrepancy is re-
lated to the spectrometer calibration yielding the wrong k−space linearization during the
signal processing. The error arises from a diminished modulation depth at the edges of
the spectrum effectively shrinking the spectral width and therefore reducing the effective
coherence length of the system which results in a larger axial resolution [52, 53]. The
collection efficiency of the system was characterized by measuring the power in the de-
tection arm captured from a Thorlabs BB1−E03 mirror as a function of depth from the
GRIN lens distal facet. The mirror was translated with respect to the GRIN lens by a
translated stage. The measurements are shown in figure 3.4. The collection efficiency
at z = 0µm determines the effective round−trip attenuation γp, assuming the mirror to be
a unitary reflector. Using equation 2.37, we can now estimate the expected efficiency of
the system as in [26, 29] and compare it with measurements. The estimations are given
in figure 3.4.
26
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Experiment 3: Common-path multicore fibre spatial
offset optical coherence tomography
Spatial offset detection of backscattered photons for OCT has only been demonstrated
using free−space optics and the results are published in [12]. The free-space optics
system published in [12] is a commercial Michelson interferometer (Telesto II) operating
at 1310nm and a laboratory-built 800nm Mach-Zehnder interferometer. In the following
section, we describe the first experimental realization of an MCF−based CP−SO−OCT
system using the same confocal detection principle as published in [12].
3.3.1
Setup
A PM−MCF based CP−SO−OCT was designed and implemented using the PM−MCF
based CP−OCT detailed in section 3.2. The spatial offset detection module is inserted af-
ter the fibre−optic coupler in the detection path. The setup is presented in 3.5. The signal
beam is collimated by a fixed focus collimator package (F230APC−850). The collimated
beam diameter is 4mm. The collimated signal beam is focused by a 100mm achromatic
doublet lens (AC254 −100−B−ML,L1) onto a pinhole (P1) with a diameter of 50µmm. L1
is placed in z translations cage mounts (Thorlabs, SM1ZA) for optimizing transmission
through the pinhole. P1 is placed in a Thorlabs precision XY translation cage mount
(Thorlabs, ST1XY−S) for precise control of the introduced spatial offset.
The emerging beam from the pinhole is captured by an achromatic doublet lens (Thorlabs,
AC254−035−B−ML,L2) placed 35mm from the pinhole. The lens L2 is placed in z transla-
tions cage mounts (SM1ZA) for precise placement of the pinhole position. An adjustable
FC/PC collimator package (Thorlabs, CFC11P−B) was used to increase the coupling effi-
ciency to the hybrid FC/PC to FC/APC SMF patch cord (Thorlabs, P5−780A−PCAPC−1)
used to connect the spatial offset detection module to the Basler spectrograph. A Thorlabs
hybrid FC/PC to FC/APC SMF patch cord was connected to the Basler spectrographs
FC/APC adapter.
Figure 3.5: Experimental setup for single core common-path spatial offset optical coher-
ence tomography using a polarization maintaining multicore fibre with graded−index op-
tics for distal end focusing. SLD830S−20W: Illumination source, 50 : 50 FC/APC: 50 : 50
fibre-optic coupler, CL: Collimator lens, L: Lens, PM−MCF: Polarization maintaining mul-
ticore fibre, Obj: Objective, GRIN lens: Graded−index lens, P: pinhole.
27
==PAGE:38==
The spatial offset between the illumination and collection paths is introduced in the sample
plane. The realized spatial offset is determined by the core pitch in the PM−MCF. Pre-
liminary simulations with BPM−Matlab suggest a relationship between the spatial offset
in the sample plane and the core pitch, as shown in figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: BPM−Matlab simulation of 2 point sources in a sample plane 20µm from the
GRIN lens distal end. The point sources are spatially offset by 60µm. The simulation is
set to indicate the spatial offset OCT signal collected by the PM−MCF.
28
==PAGE:39==
4
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained by the outlined experimental setups from chap-
ter 3. First, results to demonstrate single−mode coupling with high coupling efficiency in a
PM−MCF will be presented. Thereafter, we demonstrate CP−OCT using the excited sin-
gle core Lp01 mode on a reflective surface. In order to demonstrate the possibility of high
throughput proximal end scanning single core OCT, we investigated the core−to−core
variation of an OCT signal collected from a layered sample. Then, we compared it with
the OCT signal collected by a standard SMF used in literature for endoscopic OCT. Finally,
we investigated the potential of using the core−to−core pitch in the MCF for decoupling
the illumination path and collection path to implement the first−ever CP−SO−OCT.
4.1
Individual core excitation and coupling efficiency
In this section, we describe the results obtained from experiment 3.1. The experiment
in section 3.1 presented a system to image the excited mode profile propagating in the
PM−MCF. Single−moded propagation and high coupling efficiency are required to yield
a focused beam in the sample plane containing high power and high collection efficiency.
These are paramount for implementation of the proposed system, and therefore, the goal
of such experiment was to assess if the PM−MCF provided close to single−moded prop-
agation with high coupling efficiency.
Figure 4.1 shows the results obtained by the setup described in section 3.1. The beam
profile shows the excited Lp01 mode of a single core in the PM−MCF and a 2D Gaussian
fit which yielded 6.75µm as the 1/e2 FWHM of the excited mode. This corresponds to a
MFD of 13.5µm which is in good agreement with the theoretical value of 12.5µm calcu-
lated with BPM-Matlab and slight smaller than the published value from [43, 46, 48]. In
the publications [43, 48], a light source with a central wavelength 1064nm was chosen.
The second moment of the intensity profile scales with λ/2 and for these experiments the
central−wavelength was 830nm [25]. Therefore, a smaller MFD is expected. To ensure
that the mode propagating in the excited core is the supported Lp01 mode of the core,
images at different in−coupling P0 intensities was acquired. To aviod saturation of the
CMOS camera, the imaged power was attenuated by an ND30 filter. The peak intensity
increases linearly with in−coupling power. BPM−Matlab simulations of the evolving frac-
tional modal power distribution by solving equation 2.29 under the experimental conditions
was shown in figure 2.8. The simulation confirms the experimental result, that we should
expect an dominating Lp01 mode propagating in the fibre even with a center−wavelength
of 830nm. Finally, the coupling efficiency was measured from the SLD the distal end facet
of the PM−MCF. At the proximal end facet of the PM−MCF, the coupling efficiency was
45%. The remaining power was coupled into the PM−MCF with an efficiency of 60%
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.1: 2D intensity profile of the propagating mode in the PM−MCF with the (x, y)
line profiles. Peak intensities of the imaged mode for increasing in−coupling powers. All
intensities given in grey scale values.
4.2
Single core optical coherence tomography
In this section, we describe the results obtained from experiment 3.2. The experiment in
section 3.2 presented a CP−OCT system based on an PM−MCF. The goal of this ex-
periment was to confirm that the implemented system operated as an OCT system with
a common−path. This required clear detection of the A-scans. For this reason, a mir-
ror was used as reflective surface to provide the strongest back−reflected signal of high
amplitude, so to facilitate the detection of A−scans. Moreover, various A−scans were
acquired by increasing the distance of the mirror from the distal end of the detection op-
tics, contributing to clearly distinguish the A−scans detected from the noise floor. Such
experiment validated the detection of A−scans of the probed samples by the presented
CP−OCT system.
The designed PM−MCF CP−OCT setup outlined in section 3.2 was used to demonstrate
CP−OCT through a singular core in a PM−MCF. While coherent fibre bundle−based OCT
systems have successfully been demonstrated in the literature [22, 14, 17, 54, 40, 41].
To the author’s knowledge the presented measurements have not been reported in the
literature. In figure 4.2, the first insert is adopted from [48] and show the PM-MCF (19
cores, Λ = 47µm, core diameter 18µm, outer diameter 348µm, length 50cm) used for
the experiment. A core in PM−MCF was selected by using the imaging system outlined
in section 3.1. First the entire proximal end facet was illuminated and the core (x0, y0)
was centered on the camera. Then by passively scanning the proximal end facet with
respect to the coupling objective (Obj1) and optimizing the coupling, a single core can be
selected. In figure 4.2, the selected core for the experiment is highlighted in blue. The
second insert shows the sample plane with a Thorlabs BB1−E03 Mirror mounted in a
Thorlabs dual axis kinematic mount (KM100) to control the mirror orientation with respect
to the distal end of the PM−MCF (The picture was taken before mounting the GRIN lens).
This allows for the optimization of the SNR. The mount is placed on a translation stage
30
==PAGE:41==
as described in section 3.2. A z−stack of A−scans is acquired by translating the mirror
with respect to the GRIN lens and acquiring A−scans at each position. The z−stack ac-
quisition methodology for proving the CP−OCT operation of the system is consistent with
published fibre−optic CP−OCT systems [13, 42]. Based on the system characterization
presented in section 3.2, the beam waist was approximately 162µm in the sample plane
for all measurements. The sample arm power was 2.32mW and the integration time was
100ms. The Fresnel reflection between the GRIN lens and the air surround yields a ref-
erence power of 12.3µW. The total noise variance was 0.02dB. The presented A−scans
were corrected from background noise and parasitic system reflections by acquiring the
system response without the sample and subtracting the resulting A−scan from the data
presented. Then a 10 points moving average was applied to smoothing the signal fluc-
tuations. The peak intensity of the sample reflection from each acquired A−scan in the
z−stack was extracted and is overlayed on the A−scans presented in figure 4.2. This
measured sensitivity roll−off is 7dB over a distance of 136.4µm.
In accordance with the
Figure 4.2: The figure shows the z-stack of A−scans from a Thorlabs BB1−E03 Mirror
mounted on a translation stage. The A−scans are overlayed with the measured sensitiv-
ity roll−off. The inserts show the PM−MCF used for the experiment (the selected core
highlighted in blue) and the sample plane for the CP−OCT measurements.
presented theory from subsection 2.1.1 equation 2.11, the distance between the refer-
ence surface yielding the reference reflection and the sample surface yielding the sample
reflection determines the reflection peak position in the acquired A−scan when the optical
path length differences satisfy OPDR −OPDS << ∆zFWHM. Therefore, we expect a
linear relationship between the translated distance of the mirror and the reflection peak
position in the acquired A−scans. This relationship is shown in figure 4.3. Here, the
extracted reflection peak positions presented in figure 4.2 are plotted vs the translated
distance of the mirror. We observe that the measurements are in agreement with the
presented theory. The LabView software controlling the Basler spectrograph provides
both the spectrum and the A−scan data, an important confirmation of the working princi-
ple of the CP−OCT is to investigate the changes in fringe spacing (∆kF as a function of
translation. The fringe spacing in the k−space is related to the depth of the generating
reflector as k = π/z. It follows that for larger displacements of the mirror generating the
reflection, the smaller a fringe spacing should be observed [23, 55]. This dependency for
mean fringe spacing ∆kF vs translation is shown in figure 4.3. Here, the deviation from
the 1/z−dependency is attributed to the hysteresis in piezo−driver translating the stage
and fringe variability across the measured spectrogram due to system imperfections. The
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.3:
Extracted peak intensity positions vs mirror translations.
The shown
A−scans in figure 4.2 is highlighted in corresponding coloured special symbol
(diamond,square,circle). The spectral bandwidth for each A-scan is within a standard
deviation (black dashed lines) of the theoretical bandwidth (grey dashed line). The fringe
spacing (∆kF follows the expected k = π/z dependency.
system imperfections as relates to the fringe spacing is dependent on the bandwidth ∆λ
stability which is within a standard deviation (Black dashed line) of the theoretical band-
width (grey dashed line) as shown in figure 4.3.
4.3
Core-to-core variation in performance
In this section, we describe the results obtained from experiment 3.2, with respect to core-
to-core variation in performance. While in the previous result section we showed A-scans
measured with the implemented system, the repeatability and accuracy of the A-scans
detected by different cores remains to be investigated. For this reason, A-scans were
acquired from different cores. Firstly, we analysed if the intensity of the A-scans was in-
dependent on the selected cores. Secondly, we compared the performance of the cores
in our system to a state-of-the-art SMF, as the ones largely used in literature. These two
inquiries support consideration of repeatability, accuracy and performance compared to
a state-of-the-art SMF.
In imaging applications using MCFs as published in [15], the core-to-core pitch deter-
mines the lateral resolution and the core parameters determine the FOV. A CP−OCT
system based on a MCF has the potential to enable high throughput OCT volumetric im-
ages across the FOV, similar to [16].
This would require illumination and collection through a single core at time in a prede-
termined scanning pattern controlled at the proximal end. The successful acquisition of
a C−scan through scanning the FOV in the proposed fashion, does constraint the fab-
rication process of the MCFs. The smallest index profile variations or changing micro-
structural defect concentrations in the capillaries used for the stack and draw fabrication
process are detrimental for OCT imaging. The variations cause phase instabilities across
the FOV resulting in diminished contrast across the FOV, diminished contrast at depth
32
==PAGE:43==
and reduced sensitivity.
In figure 4.4, we show acquired A−scans from a layered sample constructed from 7 layers
of scotch tape. The A−scans were acquired with the designed system detailed in section
3.3, but without the pinhole effectively enabling PM−MCF CP−OCT. The A−scans were
acquired through 3 different cores, the centre core as highlighted in figure 4.2 and cores
spaced at ±Λ. The sample plane was placed at approximately 20µm from the GRIN lens
and the power at the sample plane was 2.26mW. The total noise variance was 0.02dB for
all measurements and the integration time was 100ms. The A−scans were corrected from
background noise and parasitic system reflections by acquiring the system response with-
out the sample and subtracting the resulting A−scan from the data presented. Then a 10
point moving average was applied to smoothing the signal fluctuations. In each A−scan,
3 well-defined peaks are visible, corresponding to the surface layer and the first 2 layers
below the surface. The average optical depth of each layer is 32.5µm represented by the
peak-to-peak distance. The benchmark for evaluating the performance of the setup is an
SMF similar to those found in literature used for designing endoscopic OCT [5, 18, 50].
Here, we used the Nufern 780HP SMF (780HP) of equal fibre length. The 780HP has
an MFD of 5 ± 0.5µm at 850nm and the NA = 0.13. For comparison, the sample plane
position, power and integration time were kept the same. The acquired A−scan with the
780HP is similarly processed with a 10 point moving average to smooth signal fluctua-
tions. The results shown in figure 4.4, reveal that the intensity of the individual cores
compared to the 780HP is within a standard deviation (dashed line). The consistent per-
formance across all utilized cores is in good agreement with the published literature which
demonstrates the availability of high-quality multicore fibres for phase−sensitive imaging
applications [15, 43, 44, 45].
Figure 4.4: A−scans of 7 layered scotch tape sample acquired through 3 different cores
in the PM−MCF. The intensity difference compared to a Nufern 780HP SMF is within a
standard deviation (dashed line).
33
==PAGE:44==
4.4
Spatial offset detection in layered sample
In this section, we describe the results obtained from experiment 3.3. This experiment
aimed at providing proof-of-concept implementation of a spatial offset common path OCT
system and consequent detection of spatial offset A−scans from a layered sample. First,
we implemented a detection module similar to the one published in recent work [12]. Then,
since the change of pinhole position in the detection path implements the selection of var-
ious offsets in the sample plane, we acquired A-scans at various pinhole positions, with
the goal of observing an increase of signal at depth in the A-scans consistent with the
spatial offset A-scan signals described in the literature [12].
In section 2.2, we outlined an OCT imaging geometry for improving contrast at depth.
This OCT modality is called SO−OCT and was first published in [12]. Here, we present
the first-ever fibre-based adaptation of this imaging geometry. A PM-MCF (19 cores,
Λ = 47µm, core diameter 18µm, outer diameter 348µm, length 50cm) was used to de-
couple the illumination path from the collection path, effectively enabling a spatial offset
between the paths equal to the core pitch Λ. A−scans from a layered sample constructed
by 7 layers of scotch tape were acquired by the setup detailed in section 3.3. The sam-
ple plane was placed at approximately 20µm from the GRIN lens and the power at the
sample plane was 2.26mW. The total noise variance was 0.02dB for all measurements
and the integration time was 100ms. The A−scans were corrected from background noise
and parasitic system reflections by acquiring the system response without the sample
and subtracting the resulting A−scan from the data presented. Then a 10 point moving
average was applied to smoothing the signal fluctuations. The A-scans are presented at
varying pinhole positions (∆x) laterally to the fibre−coupler. The pinhole was translated
in total 60µm from the zeroth position in increments of 20µm. At each position an A−scan
was acquired.
In figure 4.5, first we show the acquired A−scans. The intensity is attenuated as ex-
pected during the pinhole sweep across the beam laterally to the fibre−coupler. The
A−scans show an attenuation of the peak from the surface layer with pinhole translation.
We postulate, that this is in agreement with the outlined theory from section 2.2. Here,
we argued that the normalized contrast shows a suppression of the surface reflection at
an increasing offset. Furthermore, the normalized A−scans reveal an increasing SNR
at depth with increasing pinhole translation. This suggests that multiple scattered light
from deeper layers in the sample is being preferentially collected by the system. This
key result highlights the main point from section 2.2 with normalized contrast enhance-
ment at depth. This result is further supported by an increase in peak ratio with respect
to surface reflection peak at depth. The preferential collection of multiple−scattered light
from deeper layers increases SNR at depth while the surface reflection is discriminated,
resulting in the increased Peak ratio.
34
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.5: A−scans acquired at varying pinhole positions laterally to the fibre −coupler.
The normalized intensity shows increased SNR at depth with increasing pinhole transla-
tion. Suppressed surface reflection with increasing pinhole translation from a preferential
collection of multiple−scattered light at depth. The Suppressed surface reflection and
preferential collection of multiple−scattered light at depth increases the peak ratio with
respect to the first peak.
35
==PAGE:46==
5
Discussion and outlook
In this project, a miniaturized spatial offset OCT system based on a PM−MCF was demon-
strated using a common−path design. This ethos of the project was chosen because
research−driven miniaturization of laboratory−based optical imaging modalities for clin-
ical translation has the potential to improve in−vivo diagnostic information. In OCT, a
prevalent problem is the signal attenuation, which degrade the contrast of morphologi-
cal structures at depth. In [12], it was postulated that introducing an offset between the
illumination path and the collection path has the potential to improve contrast at depth.
However, SO−OCT has only been demonstrated using bulky free space optics. In [5,
49, 27] the state−of−art in endoscopic OCT and their clinical applications is reviewed.
Here, key practical problems related to polarization scrambling and dispersion mismatch
are highlighted. Polarization scrambling is a result of micro heterogeneity in the fibre scat-
tering the electric field during propagation and therefore changing the polarization. The
problem with polarization scrambling can be mitigated by using polarization maintaining
fibres. For this reason, the MCF used in thesis work was a polarization maintaining fibre.
Furthermore, dispersion mismatch can be minimized by designing the system such that
the signal path and reference path is co−propagating along the same optical axis and
experiencing the same dispersion induced by the system. This is achieved by using the
reflection from the last optical surface as a reference. For this reason, the reflection from
the GRIN lens was back−coupled through the system and used as the reference for OCT
acquisitions.
In section 4.2-4.3, the results acquired by the PM−MCF based CP−OCT are presented.
The results confirms that A−scans through a single core in PM−MCF can be acquired
using CP−OCT. However, the system does not demonstrate antiquated high SNR or min-
imal sensitivity roll−off replicating the performances known from the literature. The low
performance in terms of SNR and sensitivity is related to the implementation of the sys-
tem design presented in this thesis. The GRIN lens used as the distal end focusing optics
is mounted in a V−groove and the PM−MCF is free standing with a 1mm between the
PM−MCF distal end and the proximal end facet of the GRIN lens. In literature [5, 19, 21,
49, 27, 18], for OCT endoscopes, spacers between the fibre and the focusing optics are
used not only to control the beam parameters and working distance, but also to achieve
high collection efficiency. Here, the air gap between the PM−MCF and the GRIN lens
results in diminished collection efficiency leading to probe attenuation. The reason being
that the divergence of the captured signal by the GRIN lens reduces the back−coupling
efficiency to PM−MCF. Furthermore, the sensitivity is reduced to the flat distal end facet
of the GRIN lens providing the reference reflection. In [20], the authors highlighted the
need for a curved distal end surface for proper back−coupling of the reference reflection
in common−path interferometric system.
The PM−MCF used in the setup is multimode at 830nm. The results show that the domi-
nant excited Lp mode at the proximal end facet is the fundamental Lp01 mode, confirmed
by modelling. However, the back−coupled reference from the distal end facet of the
GRIN lens and the collected sample signal are multimoded. In [41], the authors analyze
the impact of multimoded fibre−bundles on the quality of OCT images and conclude that
multimode propagation of the individual fibres cores significantly degrade the performance
of the imaging system. This suggests that the low performance of the designed system
36
==PAGE:47==
in comparison can also be explained by the multimode propagation of the reference and
the collected signal in the PM−MCF.
The constant performance across all the cores considered in this thesis exhibits low
crosstalk which is consistent with literature [15, 45, 48]. However, in the present results
only 3 cores were considered due to the choice of controlling the core coupling passively.
This can be improved by implementing adaptive optics or galvo−scanners as highlighted
in [15]. The results suggests the possibility of high throughput imaging across the FOV
defined by the NA of the MCF, [16] utilizing proximal end scanning of MCF, due to the
minimal core-to-core variance. Further optimization could be obtained by using a MCF
with smaller core pitch, to enhance the lateral resolution [44, 47].
The core pitch is naturally introducing a spatial offset, when using one for core illumination
and another for collection. Furthermore, to avoid dispersion mismatch between the ref-
erence and the collected signal, a common−path design was implemented. This novel de-
sign is called Common−path spatial offset optical coherence tomography (CP−SO−OCT).
The results indicate that ballistic scattered light from the surface of a layered sample is
suppressed, while the CP−SO−OCT system registers an increase of sensitivity at depth
due to the preferential collection of multiple scattered light from deeper layers. The ob-
served results are consistent with expected theoretical simulations and experimental re-
sults presented in [12]. However, the results do highlight a difficulty using conventional
distal end optics for endoscopic OCT, as outlined in [5, 18, 21]. The spatial offset between
the illumination path and the collection path is not fully conserved during back−coupling of
the signal to the PM−MCF. This crosstalk between the illumination and the collection path
introduces further noise sources and lowers the sensitivity of the system. To compensate
for this crosstalk, specially designed distal end optics are needed, as for instance shown
in [56, 57].
Moreover, preliminary simulations aimed at investigating the relationship between the core
pitch and the spatial offset at the sample plane 3.6. This is required to validate that the sig-
nal collected through the MCF does in fact originate from an offset in the sample plane.
While this point is briefly touched upon in this work and not thoroughly investigated, if
such a relationship were confirmed, this would corroborate the working principle behind
the proposed miniaturized common-path spatial offset design. Consequently, given the
potential impact that such understanding would bring to endoscopic implementations, fur-
ther validation is required.
Therefore, these initial positive results should be viewed as a proof-of-concept of future
miniaturizations of SO−OCT using MCFs. Pushing such proof-of-concept towards im-
plementation would require modifications of the equipment here used and of the related
further validation. On the other hand, the Mach−Zehnder Interferometer published in [12]
constitutes a starting point for designing and building a system which can acquire mea-
surements to validate the indicated results from this thesis.
37
==PAGE:48==
6
Conclusion
A PM−MCF based CP−SO−OCT system was designed and assembled with the purpose
of demonstrating the working principle behind MCF−based SO−OCT. BPM−Matlab, a
MATLAB-based simulation package, was used to illustrate the working principle. To the
author’s knowledge, this is the first realization of such a system.
The distal end facet of the PM−MCF was imaged as light was coupled into a single core.
These results shows that the field propagation in the core is dominated by the fundamen-
tal core mode. BPM−Matlab simulations support the validity of the results.
A−scans of a mirror reflection were acquired using the PM−MCF based CP−OCT system
implemented during the thesis. The A−scans confirmed the CP−OCT design, demon-
strating a linear dependency between the peak position in the A−scan with respect to
the translation of the mirror. The fringe spacing of the acquired spectrogram decreased
with increasing mirror translation. This gives further merit to the results demonstrating
CP−OCT. At a fixed mirror position, the collection efficiency at depth and sensitivity at
different power levels in the reference path was characterized.
A−scans from 3 different cores were acquired and compared with a commercial SMF.
The comparison confirmed the high quality of the PM−MCF fabrication. This gives merit
to the potential for proximal end scanning acquisition of volumetric OCT images.
A spatial offset detection module was implemented to demonstrate SO−OCT through
a PM−MCF. The first initial results indicate suppression of ballistic scattered light from
the surface layer while increasing contrast at depth. This is in agreement with the theory.
Future work should focus on the optimization of the performance of our system, to levels
comparable to the state-of-the-art endoscopic OCT systems from literature. This work
constitutes proof-of-concept implementation of a common-path spatial-offset OCT sys-
tem, which could provide new and more robust endoscopic solutions. While further val-
idation would be required, this work also outlined the main framework for experimental
validation of such endoscopic modality.
38
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
F. Bray et al. “Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence
and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries”. In: CA. Cancer. J. Clin.
68.9 (Nov. 2018), pp. 394–424. DOI: 10.3322/caac.21492. URL: https://doi.org/10.
3322/caac.21492.
[2]
G. L. Smith et al. “Financial Burdens of Cancer Treatment: A Systematic Review
of Risk Factors and Outcomes”. In: J. Natl. Compr. Canc. Netw. 17.10 (Oct. 2020),
pp. 1184–1192. DOI: 10.6004/jnccn.2019.7305. URL: https://doi.org/10.6004/jnccn.
2019.7305.
[3]
R. L. Siegel, K. D. Miller, and A. Jemal. “Cancer statistics, 2018”. In: CA. Cancer.
J. Clin. 68.1 (Nov. 2018), pp. 7–30. DOI: 10.3322/caac.21442. URL: https://doi.org/
10.3322/caac.21442.
[4]
F. Kamel et al. “Colorectal Cancer Diagnosis: The Obstacles We Face in Determin-
ing a Non-Invasive Test and Current Advances in Biomarker Detection”. In: Cancers
14 (Apr. 2022). DOI: 10.3390/cancers14081889. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC9029324.
[5]
M. J. Gora et al. “Endoscopic optical coherence tomography: technologies and clin-
ical applications [Invited]”. In: Biomed Opt Express 8.5 (May 2017). DOI: 10.1364/
BOE.8.002405. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5480489/.
[6]
A. Tumilson et al. “Endoscope-tip interferometer for ultrahigh resolution frequency
domain optical coherence tomography in mouse colon”. In: Optics Express 14.4
(Mar. 2006), pp. 1878–1887. DOI: 10.1364/OE.14.001878. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1364/OE.14.001878.
[7]
W. A. Welge and J. K. Barton. “In vivo endoscopic Doppler optical coherence to-
mography imaging of the colon”. In: Lasers Surg. Med. 49.3 (Mar. 2016), pp. 249–
257. DOI: 10.1002/lsm.22578. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/lsm.22578.
[8]
A. Hoffman et al. “In vivo Endoscopic Optical Biopsy with Optical Coherence To-
mography”. In: Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 14 (July 2017), pp. 421–434. DOI:
10.1038/nrgastro.2017.46. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrgastro.2017.46.
[9]
D’Hallewin M.-A, L. Bezdetnaya, and F. Guillemin. “Fluorescence Detection of Blad-
der Cancer: A Review”. In: European Urology 42.5 (Nov. 2002), pp. 417–425. DOI:
10.1016/S0302-2838(02)00402-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0302-2838(02)
00402-5.
[10]
H. Hao et al. “Ex vivo near-infrared targeted imaging of human bladder carcinoma
by ICG-anti-CD47”. In: Sec. Genitourinary Oncology 13 (Mar. 2023). DOI: 10.3389/
fonc.2023.1083553. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1083553.
[11]
S. S. Chauhan et al. “Confocal laser endomicroscopy”. In: ASGE Technology Com-
mittee 80.6 (Oct. 2002), pp. 928–938. DOI: 10.1016/j.gie.2014.06.021. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.gie.2014.06.021.
[12]
G. R Untracht et al. “Spatially offset optical coherence tomography: Leveraging mul-
tiple scattering for high-contrast imaging at depth in turbid media”. In: Science Ad-
vances 9.27 (July 2023). DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adh5435. URL: https://www.science.
org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adh54357.
[13]
U. Sharma, N. M. Fried, and J. U. Kang. “All-fiber common-path optical coherence
tomography: sensitivity optimization and system analysis”. In: IEEE J. Sel. Top 11.4
(Aug. 2005). DOI: 10.1109/JSTQE.2005.857380. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/
JSTQE.2005.857380.
39
==PAGE:50==
[14]
J.-H. Han et al. “Common path optical coherence tomography with fibre bundle
probe”. In: Electron Lett. 45.22 (2009), pp. 1110–1112. DOI: 10.1049/el.2009.1627.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1049/el.2009.1627.
[15]
E. R. Andresen et al. “Ultrathin endoscopes based on multicore fibers and adaptive
optics: a status review and perspectives”. In: J. Biomed. Opt 21.12 (Dec. 2016).
DOI: 0.1117/1.JBO.21.12.121506. URL: https://doi.org/0.1117/1.JBO.21.12.121506.
[16]
H. D. Ford and R. P. Tatam. “Fibre imaging bundles for full-field optical coherence
tomography”. In: Meas. Sci. Technol 18.9 (Aug. 2007). DOI: 10.1088/0957-0233/
18/9/027. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/18/9/027.
[17]
L. M. Wurster et al. “Endoscopic optical coherence tomography with a flexible fiber
bundle”. In: J. Biomed. Opt 23.6 (June 2018). DOI: 10.1117/1.JBO.23.6.066001.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1117/1.JBO.23.6.066001.
[18]
K. Karnowski et al. “Superior Imaging Performance of All-Fiber Two-Focusing-Element
Microendoscopes”. In: IEEE Photonics J. 14.5 (Nov. 2022). DOI: 10.1117/1.3523374.
[19]
G. R. Untracht, K. Karnowski, and D. D. Sampson. “Imaging the small with the small:
Prospects for photonics in micro-endomicroscopy for minimally invasive cellular-
resolution bioimaging”. In: APL Photon. 6.060901 (June 2021). DOI: DOI10.1063/
5.0052258. URL: https://aip.scitation.org/doi/full/10.1063/5.0052258.
[20]
S. Park et al. “Analysis of Design and Fabrication Parameters for Lensed Opti-
cal Fibers as Pertinent Probes for Sensing and Imaging”. In: Sensors 18.12 (Dec.
2018). DOI: 10.3390/s18124150. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/12/
4150.
[21]
W. Jung et al. “Numerical Analysis of gradient index lens-based optical coherence
tomography imaging probes”. In: JBO 15.6 (Apr. 2010). DOI: 10.1117/1.3523374.
[22]
A. B. Vakhtin et al. “Common-path interferometer for frequency-domain optical co-
herence tomography”. In: Appl. Opt. 42.34 (Dec. 2003), pp. 6953–6958. DOI: 10.
1364/AO.42.006953. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.42.006953.
[23]
W. Drexler and J. G. Fujimoto. “Optical Coherence Tomography”. In: Springer Ref-
erence (2015). DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06419-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-06419-2.
[24]
P. Xi et al. “Evaluation of spectrometric parameters in spectral-domain optical coher-
ence tomography”. In: Applied Optics 50.3 (Jan. 2010). DOI: 10.1364/AO.50.000366.
URL: https://opg.optica.org/ao/abstract.cfm?uri=ao-50-3-3665.
[25]
Bahaa E. A. Salah and Malvin Carl Teich. Fundamentals of Photonics 2nd edition.
[26]
A. F. Fercher et al. “Optical coherence tomography—principles and applications”. In:
Rep. Prog. Phys. 66.2 (Jan. 2003), pp. 239–303. DOI: 10.1088/0034-4885/66/2/204.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/66/2/204.
[27]
R. A. McLaughlin, D. Lorenser, and D. D. Sampson. “Needle Probes in Optical Co-
herence Tomography”. In: Springer 2 (Nov. 2013), pp. 1065–1102. DOI: 10.1007/
978-1-4614-5176-1. URL: https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-
1-4614-5176-1_25.
[28]
L. Thrane. “Optical Coherence Tomography: Modelling and Applications”. In: (2001).
[29]
C. K. Hitzenberger R. Leitgeb and A. F. Fercher. “Performance of fourier domain vs.
time domain optical coherence tomography”. In: Optics Express 11.8 (Apr. 2003),
pp. 902–917. DOI: 10.1364/oe.11.000889. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/oe.11.
000889.
[30]
A. Agrawal et al. “Methods to assess sensitivity of optical coherence tomography
systems”. In: BOEx 8.2 (Feb. 2017), pp. 902–917. DOI: 10.1364/BOE.8.000902.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/BOE.8.000902.
40
==PAGE:51==
[31]
B. Baumann et al. “Signal averaging improves signal-to-noise in OCT images: But
which approach works best, and when?” In: BOEx 10.11 (Oct. 2019), pp. 5755–
5775. DOI: 10.1364/BOE.10.005755. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/BOE.10.005755.
[32]
L. Thrane, H. Yura, and P. E. Andersen. “Analysis of optical coherence tomography
systems based on the extended Huygens–Fresnel principle”. In: J. Opt. Soc. Am.
A 17.3 (Mar. 2000). DOI: 10.1364/josaa.17.000484. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/10708029/.
[33]
L. Thrane et al. “Extraction of optical scattering parameters and attenuation com-
pensation in optical coherence tomography images of multilayered tissue struc-
tures”. In: Optics Letters 29.14 (July 2004). DOI: 10.1364/josaa.17.000484. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10708029/.
[34]
Y. Zhao et al. “Dual-axis optical coherence tomography for deep tissue imaging”.
In: Optics Letters 42.12 (June 2017). DOI: 10.1364/OL.42.002302. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1364/OL.42.002302.
[35]
T. Cižmár and K. Dholakia. “Exploiting multimode waveguides for pure fibre-based
imaging”. In: Nat Commun. 3.1027 (Aug. 2012). DOI: 10.1038/ncomms2024. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms2024.
[36]
D. Stellinga et al. “3D imaging through a single optical fiber”. In: Proceedings: Opti-
cal and Quantum Sensing and Precision Metrology II 12016 (2022). DOI: 10.1117/
12.2616915. URL: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2616915.
[37]
H. Cao et al. “Controlling light propagation in multimode fibers for imaging, spec-
troscopy, and beyond”. In: Advances in Optics and Photonics 15.2 (2023), pp. 524–
612. DOI: 10.1364/AOP.484298. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/AOP.484298.
[38]
Y. Du et al. “Hybrid multimode - multicore fibre based holographic endoscope for
deep-tissue neurophotonics”. In: Light: Advanced Manufacturing 3.29 (2023). DOI:
10.37188/lam.2022.029. URL: https://doi.org/10.37188/lam.2022.029.
[39]
A. L. Borre. Lensless Light Sheet Generation and Dynamic Control using Multicore
Fibres.
[40]
T. Xie et al. “Fiber-optic-bundle-based optical coherence tomography”. In: Optics
Letters 30.14 (Mar. 2005). DOI: 10.1364/ol.30.001803. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1364/ol.30.001803.
[41]
M. D. Risi et al. “Analysis of multimode fiber bundles for endoscopic spectral-domain
optical coherence tomography”. In: Appl. Opt. 54.1 (Jan. 2015), pp. 101–113. DOI:
10.37188/10.1364/AO.54.000101. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.54.000101.
[42]
H. D. Ford and R. P. Tatam. “Characterization of optical fiber imaging bundles
for swept-source optical coherence tomography”. In: Appl. Opt. 50.5 (Feb. 2011),
pp. 627–640. DOI: 10.37188/10.1364/AO.54.000101. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/
AO.54.000101.
[43]
S. Sivankutty et al. “Single-shot polarimetry imaging of multicore fibre”. In: Optics
Letters 41.9 (Apr. 2016), pp. 2105–2108. DOI: 10.1364/OL.41.002105. URL: https:
//opg.optica.org/ol/abstract.cfm?uri=ol-41-9-2105.
[44]
V. Tsvirkun et al. “Widefield lensless endoscopy with a multicore fiber”. In: Opt Lett
41.20 (Oct. 2016), pp. 4771–4774. DOI: 10.1364/OL.41.004771. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1364/OL.41.004771.
[45]
S. Sivankutty et al. “Extended field-of-view in a lensless endoscope using an aperi-
odic multicore fiber”. In: Opt Lett 41.15 (Aug. 2016), pp. 3531–3534. DOI: 10.1364/
OL.41.003531. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/OL.41.003531.
[46]
Madhu Veettikazhy et al. “BPM-Matlab: an open-source optical propagation simu-
lation tool in MATLAB”. In: Opt. Express 29.8 (Apr. 2021), pp. 11819–11832. DOI:
41
==PAGE:52==
10.1364/OE.420493. URL: http://www.osapublishing.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-
29-8-11819.
[47]
F. E. Moussawi et al. “Tapered Multicore Fiber for Lensless Endoscopes”. In: ACS
Photonics 9.9 (June 2020), pp. 2547–2554. DOI: 10.1021/acsphotonics.2c00661.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.2c00661.
[48]
T. Mansuryan et al. “Spatially dispersive scheme for transmission and synthesis
of femtosecond pulses through a multicore fiber”. In: Optics Express 20.22 (Oct.
2012), pp. 24769–24777. DOI: 10.1364/OE.20.024769. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1364/OE.20.024769.
[49]
R. A. McLaughlin and D. D. Sampson. “Clinical applications of fiber-optic probes in
optical coherence tomograph”. In: Optical Fiber Technology 16 (Nov. 2010), pp. 467–
475. DOI: 10.1016/s0016-5107(00)70450-0. URL: https://opg.optica.org/ao/fulltext.
cfm?uri=ao-60-22-6385id=453567.
[50]
S. Balakrishnan and A. L. Oldenburg. “All-fiber probes for endoscopic optical coher-
ence tomography of the large airways”. In: Applied Optics 60.2 (Aug. 2021). DOI:
10.1016/s0016-5107(00)70450-0. URL: https://opg.optica.org/ao/fulltext.cfm?uri=
ao-60-22-6385id=453567.
[51]
D. Lorenser, x. Yang, and D. D. Sampson. “Accurate Modelling and Design of
Graded-Index Fiber Probes for Optical Coherence Tomography Using the Beam
Propagation Method”. In: IEEE Photonics J. 5.2 (Apr. 2013). DOI: 10.1109/JPHOT.
2013.2250939.
[52]
R. Dey et al. “Simple Characterization Scheme for Optical Coherence Tomography
Systems With Application to a Commercial and a Near-Isometric Resolution Fibre-
Based System”. In: IEEE Photonics Journal 14.1 (Dec. 2021), pp. 24769–24777.
DOI: 10.1109/JPHOT.2021.3135058. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOT.2021.
3135058.
[53]
S. Moon, Y. Qui, and Z. Chen. “Characterization of spectral-domain OCT with auto-
correlation interference response for axial resolution performance”. In: IOptics Ex-
press 26.6 (Mar. 2018), pp. 7253–7269. DOI: 10.1364/OE.26.007253. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1364/OE.26.007253.
[54]
Haruo Nakaji. “Fiber-optic-bundle-based optical coherence tomography”. In: Optical
Fiber Technology 16.6 (Dec. 2010), pp. 476–479. DOI: 10.1016/j.yofte.2010.09.008.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yofte.2010.09.008.
[55]
J. F. Bille. “High Resolution Imaging in Microscopy and Ophthalmology”. In: Springer
Reference 14.4 (Mar. 2006), pp. 1878–1887. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-16638-0. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16638-0.
[56]
S. Sivankutty et al. “Miniature 120-beam coherent combiner with 3D-printed op-
tics for multicore fiber-based endoscopy”. In: Optics Letters 46.19 (Sept. 2020),
pp. 4968–4971. DOI: 10.1364/OL.435063. URL: https://doi.org/10.1364/OL.435063.
[57]
T. Hajj et al. “Highly Focused Photonic Nanojet by Molded High Curvature Fiber
Micro-Lenses”. In: 2023 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics Europe and Eu-
ropean Quantum Electronics Conference (Sept. 2023). DOI: 10.1109/CLEO/Europe-
EQEC57999.2023.10232814.
42
==PAGE:53==
A
Appendix
A.1
Theory
A.1.1
The Gaussian Beam
The propagation of optical beams in free space or a medium of refractive index n, is
described by a complex wave with amplitude U(ρ, z) that satisfies the Helmholtz wave
equation. In the paraxial approximation considering only wave solutions with slowly vary-
ing amplitudes, the Helmholtz equation becomes
∇2
T U −i2k∂U
∂z = 0
(A.1)
Where k0 = 2π/λ0 is the wave number and λ0 is the wavelength. Here, we consider
the Gaussian beam solution to equation A.1 with complex envelope U, the direction of
propagation +z and the spatial dependence ρ =
p
x2 + y2.
U(ρ, z) = A0
q(z)e−ik0
ρ2
2q(z)
(A.2)
The amplitude and phase of the complex envelope can be separated by defining the
complex function q(z), writing the real and imaginary parts as the real functions w(z) and
R(z).
1
q(z) =
1
z + iz0
=
1
R(z) −i
λ0
πw(z)2
(A.3)
The Gaussian beam is uniquely characterized by the q-parameter q and z0 is defined as
the Rayleigh range of the Gaussian beam. w(z) and R(z) are measures of width during
propagation and the radius of wavefront curvature. Combining equation A.2 and A.3 gives
the full expression of the Gaussian beam.
U(ρ, z) = A0
w0
w(z)e
−
ρ2
w(z)2 e−ik0z−ik0
ρ2
2R(z) +iζ(z)
(A.4)
w(z) = w0
r
1 +
  z
z0
2,
R(z) = z

1 +
 z0
z
2

,
ζ(z) = tan−1  z
z0

(A.5)
Where A0 = A1/iz0 is the complex amplitude, w0 =
p
λ0z0/π is the beam waist and ζ(z)
is the Gouy phase shift the Gaussian beam acquires during propagation and describes
error from an ideal plane wave.[25]
Figure A.1: The definitions of depth of focus and beam waist of a Gaussian beam.[25]
43
==PAGE:54==
A.1.2
ABCD Transfer Matrix Propagation
Gaussian beam propagation through arbitrary optical systems in the paraxial approxima-
tion can be analyzed by representing each optical component with 2 × 2 transfer matrices
(ABCD matrices). We consider an arbitrary system described by a combination of sub-
sequent ABCD matrices M sys with matrix elements A, B, C, D.
M sys =
A
B
C
D

= Mj · · · M3M2M1
(A.6)
Along the optical axis, the Gaussian beam at any transverse input plane of jth optical
component is characterized by equation A.3, qj = z + z0j, where z is the distance of to
w0. The complex parameter at the optical component output is related to the input qj by
equation A.7.
q2 = Aqj + B
Cqj + D
(A.7)
Defining the initial input complex parameter as q1 = iz01 = iπnw2
0/λ0 = i/a for z = 0, the
impact of optical system on the beam parameters can be analyzed by combining equa-
tions A.3, A.5 and A.7. For performance analysis of applied imaging systems, we find it
necessary to define the following parameters in relation to equation A.7. The working dis-
tance (WD) is directly calculated by the negative of the real part of equation A.7, assuming
w0 is the beam waist at the focal point for z = 0 from the last component.
q2 = q(ℜ)
2
+ iq(ℑ)
2
= AC + BDa2
C2 + D2a2 + i(AD −BD)a2
C2 + D2a2
(A.8)
WD = −q(ℜ)
2
= −AC + BDa2
C2 + D2a2
(A.9)
The imaginary part of equation A.8 represents the new Rayleigh length q(ℑ)
2
= z02 which
yields the new value of the spot size (2w0). The changes in beam radius w(z) during
propagation between two adjacent optical components are subsequently calculated by
equation A.5. Finally, the distance at which the beam is focused is called depth of focus
(DOF) which is defined as DOF = 2z02.[25, 21, 18, 19]
2w0 = 2
r
z02λ0
πn ,
DOF = 2z02 = 2πnw2
0
λ0
(A.10)
A.2
Experimental Design and Methods
SLD
The superluminescent diode (SLD) used for this thesis work is a commercially available
broadband light sources, specified by Thorlabs for application in OCT Imaging system.
A characterization of of the SLD given in figure A.2. Here, the power characteristics is
measured with a standard powermeter and is in agreement with the data provided by
Thorlabs. the SLD output spectrum was measured using an Ocean Insight general pur-
pose Flame spectrometer. The spectral data was background corrected and processed
using the dedicated software. The spectral data was acquired in a free−running mode.
System Response
The system response is used to correct acquired A−scans for system imperfections by
subtraction. That requires acquisitions of the system response before each measurement.
In figure A.3, we show the system response subtracted from the presented A−scans in
this thesis.
44
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.2: The system response acquired from 2.32mW at the GRIN lens distal end facet
with an integration time of a 100ms.
Figure A.3: The system response acquired from 2.32mW at the GRIN lens distal end facet
with an integration time of a 100ms.
45
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk
