==PAGE:1==
Unmasking digital ghost ships
Comprehensive scanning, statistical analysis, and ethical disclosure of
vulnerable IoT and OT devices in Denmark and beyond
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Unmasking digital ghost ships
Comprehensive scanning, statistical analysis, and ethical disclosure of vulnerable IoT and
OT devices in Denmark and beyond
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Niels Peter Vinkel Ahle Lundsgaard
Jacob August Indahl Lundin
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cybersecurity, De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science
and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the area of Computer Science.
Niels Peter Vinkel Ahle Lundsgaard - s220474
Signature
Date
Jacob August Indahl Lundin - s220473
Signature
Date
ii
Unmasking digital ghost ships
31/12/2023
31/12/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As the world becomes more reliant on interconnected devices within the Internet of Things
(IoT) and Operational Technology (OT) realms, the pressing concern of insecure devices
emerges as a critical challenge. This thesis aims to detect and unmask digital ghost
ships dispersed throughout the Internet. A digital ghost ship is a misconfigured device
with minimal or no security or is unpatched. Throughout this thesis, an internet-wide scan
was conducted, targeting the IoT and OT protocols MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, XMPP, TR-
069, OPC UA, DDS, Modbus, BACnet, and DNP3. The internet-wide scan was aided
by utilizing the tools ZMap and ZGrab, the latter being extended with additional IoT and
OT protocol modules. The scan unveiled the exposed IoT and OT devices in the global
landscape of the Internet and constituted 20,830,366 exposed systems. Our analysis of
the results from our internet-wide scan revealed that IoT and OT devices were primarily
misconfigured due to vulnerable software versions, allowing unauthenticated access and
supporting obsolete security mechanisms. Based on the results from the analysis, an
ethical disclosure of vulnerable IoT and OT devices found in our focus area of Denmark
was subsequently carried out. We conclude that 4,436,505 devices were misconfigured,
resulting in the finding that 21% of the exposed IoT and OT systems on the Internet are
vulnerable.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to give our most sincerely thanks to
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, for his valuable guidance, expertise and insights that helped form
this thesis.
Ricardo Maria Yaben Lopezosa, PhD Student, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, for his valuable insights, our discussions and encouragement through-
out the making of this thesis.
iv
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
The Internet of Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Operational Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Internet-wide scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Literature review
13
3.1
IoT scanning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
OT/ICS scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Ethical considerations & notification campaign
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Extension of ZMap and ZGrab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Classifying misconfigured IoT and OT devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Honeypot identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Storing and visualization of the data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Comparing results with Censys and Shodan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.6
Ethical disclosure of vulnerable devices in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.7
Ethical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Implementation
33
5.1
Developing the OPC UA module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Developing the RTPS module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Developing the TR-069 module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4
Extending the MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, and XMPP modules . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Statistical analysis
41
6.1
Analysis of MQTT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Analysis of AMQP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.3
Analysis of CoAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.4
Analysis of XMPP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.5
Analysis of Modbus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.6
Analysis of BACnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.7
Analysis of TR-069 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.8
Analysis of OPC UA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.9
Analysis of RTPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
6.10 Analysis of DNP3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
7
Discussion
73
7.1
Key findings and common pitfalls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Unmasking digital ghost ships
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusion
77
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Bibliography
79
vi
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the ever-increasing need to be connected to the Internet and the growing depen-
dency on technological infrastructure, the number of internet-connected IoT and OT de-
vices is increasing proportionately. Furthermore, with the rapid growth in IoT and OT
devices comes a corresponding growth in misconfigured IoT and OT devices. A miscon-
figured device is one that either uses default configurations with little to no security, has
altered configurations resulting in minimal or no security, or is unpatched. These types of
devices are coined under the term Digital Ghost Ships.
The landscape of industrial businesses is undergoing a digital transformation, marked by
the increased interconnection of industrial networks, enabling remote control of physical
equipment and sensors. Designed initially as isolated networks, industrial systems are
now exposed due to pervasive digitalization. Consequently, traditional OT protocols such
as DNP3, Modbus, and BACnet are now often exposed on the public internet. These
protocols lack built-in security features, posing severe threats to technological infrastruc-
ture as an increasing number of them become connected to the Internet [17, 53]. The
overarching problem with misconfigured IoT and OT devices lies in their susceptibility to
exploitation. They can either be leveraged in attacks, be infected to be part of a botnet
as evidenced by the Mirai malware in 2016 [6] or used to cause catastrophic damage to
critical infrastructure as seen with Havex, Stuxnet, and NotPetya [33]. Due to the rise in
misconfigured IoT and OT devices and the success of malware such as Mirai, the inci-
dence of malware targeting these systems has experienced a 400% growth from 2022 to
2023 [99].
This thesis aims to unveil the underlying IoT and OT vulnerabilities to emphasize the
importance of correctly configuring one’s IoT and OT devices. Therefore, in this the-
sis, we conduct an active scanning for misconfigured devices using the most prominent
and important IoT and OT protocols, namely, MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, XMPP, Modbus,
BACnet, TR-069, OPC UA, RTPS and DNP3. Furthermore, we extend the scanning tool
ZGrab with additional modules to perform an extensive scan and introduce novelty. Con-
sequently, this thesis aims to discover misconfigured devices by scanning a vast number
of IoT and OT protocols, followed by ethical disclosure of found misconfigured devices
in Denmark, which, to the best of our knowledge, no paper has done before us. The
research question driving this thesis is:
How can we detect digital ghost ships dispersed throughout the Internet?
Which can be broken into a subset of research questions:
RQ1 Which protocols are most commonly used in the IoT and OT sectors?
RQ2 How can we identify misconfiguration in these protocols?
RQ3 How can we extend ZMap and ZGrab to discover these protocols?
RQ4 How can we evaluate the banner or responses from the scanning?
RQ5 How can we ethically disclose the found misconfigured devices to the relevant com-
panies in Denmark?
Throughout this thesis, we aim to answer these research questions by contributing novel
modules to ZMap and ZGrab. These additions will enable data collection from a broader
Unmasking digital ghost ships
1
==PAGE:10==
spectrum of IoT and OT devices, extending the capabilities beyond those offered by the
current release of ZGrab. Furthermore, by studying the state-of-the-art papers investigat-
ing IoT and OT protocols, their security, and use cases, we plan to gain insight into the
preeminent protocols in IoT and OT. Additionally, from the protocols’ specifications and
papers conducting internet-wide scanning as well as investigating misconfigured proto-
cols, we attain a comprehensive understanding of when a protocol is deemed to be mis-
configured. Finally, we use ZMap and ZGrab to scan for these protocols and evaluate
the banners and responses for misconfigurations. The contributions of our thesis are
summarized as follows:
• We extend ZMap and ZGrab with new modules supporting the following protocols:
TR-069, OPC UA, and RTPS. These modules allow for the banner-grabbing and
logging of responses from the target devices, storing any relevant information the
device might be responding with, which could then be analyzed in accordance with
the presumed misconfigurations.
• We conduct an internet-wide scan for ten IoT and OT protocols, namely MQTT,
AMQP, CoAP, XMPP, Modbus, BACnet, TR-069, OPC UA, RTPS, and DNP3, and
compare our results with results gathered from Shodan and Censys. Consequently,
we discover 4,436,505 misconfigured IoT and OT devices, the most frequent mis-
configurations being devices with vulnerable software versions and devices allowing
unauthenticated access.
• Utilizing our results and the analysis from the scanning, we inform companies in
Denmark about their devices and the misconfigurations we found. The companies
are informed over mail with the relevant information needed to investigate the sus-
pected misconfigured device.
The outline of this thesis is as follows: Chapter 2 will provide background knowledge
concerning IoT, OT, and internet-wide scanning. Chapter 3 reviews the existing litera-
ture within internet-wide scanning and ethical research and disclosure. In Chapter 4, we
describe our methodology of extending ZMap and ZGrab, how we conducted the internet-
wide scanning, how we stored and analyzed the received data, and our ethical considera-
tions. In Chapter 5, we show our implementation and extension of the TR-069, OPC UA,
and RTPS modules to ZGrab and touch upon our extensions to the MQTT, CoAP, AMQP,
and XMPP modules. In Chapter 6, we show the analysis of the data we gathered from
Shodan and our internet-wide scanning. In Chapter 7, we discuss our results investigat-
ing common pitfalls and look into the limitations that arose throughout the making of this
thesis. Lastly, in Chapter 8, we conclude the thesis by answering our research questions
and touching upon future work.
2
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
Each day, our lives become increasingly intertwined with the Internet, driven by the grow-
ing adoption of internet-connected devices.
In this chapter, we will explain the con-
cepts of IoT and OT. We will unravel the key features and diverse use cases that define
these realms, shedding light on the most commonly used protocols within the IoT and
OT domains. Subsequently, we will delve into internet-wide scanning, encompassing an
overview of prominent search engines for internet-connected devices and a detailed ex-
ploration of the functionality behind the powerful internet-wide scanning tools ZMap and
ZGrab.
2.1
The Internet of Things
The term ”Internet of Things” (IoT) was first coined by Kevin Ashton in 1999 to describe a
visionary concept where physical objects could be uniquely identifiable and connected to
the Internet. Initially, IoT was closely associated with radio-frequency identification (RFID)
technology, with connected objects possessing unique identifiers (UUIDs) for tracking and
data exchange [75].
Today, IoT has undergone a remarkable evolution. The term is now generally used to
describe a vast array of devices equipped with sensors, software, and computing capa-
bilities. These devices have network connectivity and can exchange data [75]. This evo-
lution has brought IoT into our everyday lives, transforming objects that were once analog
into smart, connected devices. From smart fridges that manage grocery lists to doorbells
with integrated cameras and even toothbrushes that track oral hygiene, IoT devices have
become ubiquitous.
The growth of IoT shows no signs of slowing down. As portrayed in Figure 2.1, according
to Transforma Insights, in 2023, there are estimated to be 15 billion IoT-connected devices
globally, with projections suggesting that by 2030, this number will surge to 30 billion. By
2030, IoT-connected devices are expected to outnumber non-IoT devices by a ratio of
3:1 [93].
2.1.1
IoT characteristics
IoT has some key characteristics, namely:
Interconnectivity
IoT is fundamentally based on a network of interconnected devices.
These devices are equipped with communication capabilities, enabling them to exchange
data and interact with each other over a network, which is often the Internet. Intercon-
nectivity is an important foundational capability of IoT, allowing devices to collaborate and
share information seamlessly.
Data collection and analysis
IoT devices typically have sensors that measure certain
information. This data is either processed and analyzed directly on the device or in the
cloud.
Dynamic changes
A big part of IoT devices is collecting data from their environment,
which is ever-changing. The state of the IoT devices also changes over time. Devices
can switch between connected and disconnected modes, enter sleep or awake states to
conserve power and adapt to varying network conditions. Furthermore, the number of
devices can also change over time, underlining the scalability of IoT systems. [69]
Unmasking digital ghost ships
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Estimated number of IoT connected devices globally 2021-2030. Source:
Transforma Insights [93]
Ubiquity
As already mentioned, the number of IoT devices is proliferating, and they are
even still introduced in new areas where they have not been previously present.
2.1.2
IoT architecture
Due to the immense number of different types of devices that can be classified as IoT
devices, there has yet to be a consensus on a single accepted IoT architecture. A general
IoT architecture that most researchers accept is a three-layer architecture consisting of
the following layers [41]:
Perception layer
The perception layer is the physical layer and the lowest level layer.
It comprises sensors that sense and gather information about the environment and actu-
ators that take input from the system and output it to the environment.
Network layer
The network layer processes and transmits the sensor data. It is respon-
sible for connecting to other IoT devices, network devices, and servers.
Application layer
The application layer is the topmost layer of the 3-layer IoT architec-
ture model, and it provides the user with specific application services [80]. It is the layer
that the user interacts with, providing the user with software resources. An example of an
available software resource could be in a smart home setting where a user can press a
button in an app to lock their door using a smart lock.
2.1.3
IoT protocols
As mentioned in Section 2.1.1, interconnectivity is a key characteristic of IoT. To facilitate
this interconnectivity, different IoT-specific communication protocols are used. These pro-
tocols serve as the vital communication channels that allow IoT devices to exchange data,
enabling real-time monitoring, control, and data analysis. The range of protocols used in
IoT is vast; however, some of the most popular protocols are:
MQTT Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) is a publish/subscribe applica-
tion layer communication protocol. MQTT is often used for IoT devices with limited
4
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:13==
resources since it is lightweight, has low bandwidth requirements, is open-source,
and easy to implement. MQTT operates on a server/client model, where a central
server known as the ”message broker” acts as an intermediary for message dis-
tribution. This broker receives messages from clients, which can take the form of
publications or subscriptions to specific topics. Once received, the message bro-
ker forwards these to the appropriate destination clients. Every device connected
using MQTT can be a publisher or subscriber. An example of a publisher could be
a temperature sensor that periodically measures temperature and publishes this to
a topic address. Other devices within the system can then have subscribed to this
topic address and will therefore retrieve the temperature measurements each time
the topic is updated [4].
MQTT uses TCP/IP as its underlying transport protocol. MQTT has built-in sup-
port for authentication, the primary authentication method being password-based
authentication. Authentication is, however, not enabled by default, meaning that an
MQTT server without any authentication setup would allow anyone to connect to it
as well as subscribe to any topics present on the server, which can be done using
the wildcard ”#” [5]. MQTT also supports communicating over TLS. Similar to au-
thentication, TLS is not enabled by default, and its implementation typically requires
configuration. The standard port for MQTT is 1883, and the port used for MQTT
with TLS is 8883 [4].
AMQP Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) is an application layer protocol
for message-oriented middleware. It is designed for reliability, security, provision-
ing, and interoperability. AMQP supports both request/reply and publish/subscribe
architecture. For publish/subscribe communication, the AMQP system consists of
consumers, producers, and a broker, which all participants can access. The broker
is the AMQP system’s central component, managing the whole messaging infras-
tructure. The broker utilizes exchanges, which are message routers. Exchanges
determine how messages are routed to specific queues based on routing criteria.
This is done based on a routing key included in messages and the exchange type.
Exchange types include direct, fanout, topic, etc. [59, 87]. When a client in an AMQP
system sends a message to an exchange within the broker via a publisher, it will
contain a routing key. The broker uses the routing key to determine which queue(s)
the message should be assigned to. Subscribers/consumers will then receive mes-
sages from their associated queues, which will be delivered to the end client [50].
By default, AMQP uses TCP as its underlying transport protocol. It uses TLS to
ensure integrity and confidentiality and Simple Authentication and Security Layer
(SASL) for authentication. These features are generally enabled by default [62].
CoAP Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) is an application layer communication
protocol specifically designed for constrained devices. It operates using a clien-
t/server model, in which clients send CoAP requests to the server, which in turn re-
sponds with a CoAP response to the requesting clients. CoAP uses method codes
to map responses to the requests, and it supports the message types: confirmable
message, non-confirmable message, acknowledgment message, and reset mes-
sage [7]. CoAP supports GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE, making it easy for CoAP
to interoperate with HTTP.
CoAP uses UDP as its underlying transport protocol. It supports four security modes:
NoSec, PreSharedKey, RawPublicKey, and Certificate. All modes apart from NoSec
have Datagram TLS (DTLS) enabled. The default port for CoAP is 5683, and for
Unmasking digital ghost ships
5
==PAGE:14==
DTLS-secured CoAP, the default port is 5684 [82].
XMPP Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) is an open-source com-
munication protocol renowned for its versatility across various applications. Initially
designed for instant messaging, video, and voice calls, XMPP has progressively
found application in the Internet of Things (IoT) landscape [48]. XMPP is mainly im-
plemented using a server/client architecture and uses TCP as the underlying trans-
port protocol for transporting messages between clients and servers. The data that
is exchanged in this protocol is in the form of small pieces of XML structured data,
which are called XML stanzas. XML stanzas are, in basic terms, fragments of XML
data sent over a stream. Its root element includes routing attributes, i.e., to and
from addresses, and its child elements contain a payload that is to be delivered to
the intended recipient [76].
In XMPP, the client initiates the connection process by requesting access to a server
for message exchange. Before being granted access to the XMPP network, the
client undergoes authentication, a crucial step for establishing the XML stream be-
tween the client and the server. Authentication relies on the Simple Authentication
and Security Layer (SASL) mechanism. XMPP also supports encrypted streams
using TLS; however, it is not mandatory [61].
TR-069 Technical Report 069 (TR-069) is a technical specification that defines a pro-
tocol for remote management of customer-premises equipment (CPE) designed
by Broadband Forum.
Internet service providers primarily use TR-069 to auto-
configure, update, and monitor consumers’ routers, modems, and gateways. This
allows easy and zero-touch installation of routers at the consumers with the poten-
tial price of consumers’ privacy and security since internet service providers will be
able to read and write data to any CPEs controlled by the automatic configuration
server (ACS) [37].
In TR-069, the CPE initiates a TCP session with the ACS and tries to establish a
secure connection. The CPE will then begin every session with the ACS by transmit-
ting an Inform message with a SOAP HTTP POST request. The ACS proceeds by
sending an InformResponse to the CPE. The ACS can now send remote procedure
calls to the CPE.
2.2
Operational Technology
Operational Technology (OT) refers to the computer systems that manage industrial oper-
ations. OT encompasses hardware and software designed to directly monitor and control
physical devices, processes, and events within industrial enterprises [26]. Unlike Infor-
mation Technology (IT) systems, which primarily manage digital data and information, OT
systems primarily interact with real-world processes in the physical environment. These
systems monitor and control these processes, and any errors or malfunctions could lead
to catastrophic consequences [77]. OT systems detect changes in the environment and
make changes directly in the environment. Changes are made based on monitoring in-
formation gathered from the physical environment [32]. A device that monitors the tem-
perature in an industrial environment is an example of an OT device.
A subset of OT is Industrial Control Systems (ICS). ICS is a general term that is used to de-
scribe different types of control systems. An ICS consists of devices, networks, systems,
and controls that are used for operating and automating industrial processes. Some of
the different types of ICS are Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) and Dis-
tributed Control System (DCS). SCADA systems are supervisory systems that are used
6
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:15==
to control and monitor ICS components remotely. DCS is used to control production sys-
tems within a single location. Implementations of ICS often use a combination of SCADA
and DCS [10].
OT systems are used in numerous industries, some of the most important examples being
power, pipelines, oil & gas, water treatment, defense, transportation, and traffic control.
These are important and critical sectors as our society could not function properly without
these sectors [58].
2.2.1
OT protocols
OT systems heavily rely on a range of protocols that enable seamless communication
among various devices within the OT system. These protocols are designed to meet the
unique requirements of industrial environments, emphasizing real-time data exchange,
operational reliability, and efficiency. Examples of widely-used OT protocols include [32]:
Modbus Modbus is an application layer messaging protocol originally published by Mod-
icon in 1979. It is used for client/server communication between devices that are
connected to different types of buses or networks. Modbus is currently implemented
with the following transmission protocols:
• Asynchronous Serial Transmission: Modbus supports asynchronous serial
transmission over various standards and media, including EIA/TIA-232-E, EIA-
422, EIA/TIA-485-A, fiber, radio, and more.
• TCP/IP over Ethernet: Modbus also operates over TCP/IP via Ethernet. The
default port is 502.
• Modbus-Plus: Modbus-Plus is a proprietary high-speed token passing net-
work.
Modbus functions as a request/reply protocol with services that can be specified by
function codes. In a Modbus communication exchange, the client initiates the pro-
cess by sending a request that includes a function code, determining the operation
to execute, and a data request. The server then responds with the corresponding
function code and the data response. It is always the client that initiates the com-
munication [56].
BACnet Building Automation and Control Network (BACnet) is a communication proto-
col first released in 1995 by ASHRAE. It is an object-oriented peer-to-peer protocol
and is used for managing building automation systems, enabling devices and sys-
tems to exchange data. Examples of applications within building automation include
air conditioning, ventilation, lighting, and alarm systems. Objects are used to com-
municate with the different devices and their associated functions within BACnet.
Objects have certain properties, such as their name and status, which can be re-
quested or set. The objects make it possible to receive information about a device
without having to know the internal configuration of the device [52]. Due to being
peer-to-peer based, any device within a BACnet network can request values from
any other device in the network [70].
BACnet supports several different network types used to transmit BACnet mes-
sages.
These network types are BACnet/IP, BACnet MS/TP, and BACnet over
ARCNET. BACnet/IP uses UDP/IP for transmission [9].
DNP3 Distributed Network Protocol 3 (DNP3) is a communication protocol that is used
between client stations, Remote Terminal Units (RTUs) and Intelligent Electronic
Unmasking digital ghost ships
7
==PAGE:16==
Devices (IEDs). DNP3 was originally developed by GE and made public in 1993,
whereafter its ownership was given to the DNP Users Group. DNP3 was initially de-
signed to be used in SCADA systems. Today, it is mainly used in utility applications
such as electrical and water infrastructure [57]. DNP3 is employed to transmit small
packets of data reliably, ensuring that messages arrive in a deterministic sequence.
Its suitability for industrial environments is underscored by its robustness, flexibility,
and scalability.
DNP3 messages can be sent through serial connections, TCP/IP, or UDP. Today,
most operating environments use TCP/IP for their DNP3 communication, enabling
operating within a larger geographic area. UDP is also used mainly for broadcast
messages or highly reliable LANs. DNP3 traditionally functions as a client/server
communication protocol, but it also supports other communication modes such as
peer-to-peer [57, 72].
DDS Data Distribution Service (DDS) is a middleware protocol and API standard de-
signed by the Object Management Group (OMG). It allows for integrating different
components in a system, providing low latency, reliability, and scalability [19]. DDS
utilizes the Real-Time Publish Subscribe protocol (RTPS) as the interoperability wire
protocol [64]. Furthermore, DDS is utilized in critical systems, such as autonomous
cars, railway systems, and airports [47].
The RTPS protocol uses publish-subscribe communication and was designed to
be able to run on UDP/IP. The communication revolves around a number of RTPS
participants that read and write to topics in a RTPS domain [64]. The so-called
discovery module can discover new participants. The discovery module in RTPS
allows each RTPS participant to discover other relevant participants and their end-
points [64]. Furthermore, throughout the rest of this thesis, we will refer to DDS as
RTPS.
OPC UA Open Platform Communications Unified Architectures (OPC UA) is a platform-
independent service-oriented architecture that provides the necessary infrastructure
for communication between machine to machine, machine to enterprise utilizing
TCP as its transport protocol [67]. OPC UA is a new protocol released in 2008
with security in mind; OPC UA supports session encryption, message signing, se-
quenced packets, authentication, and user control [67]. Furthermore, OPC UA is
primarily used in critical infrastructure, such as power grids, healthcare, and trans-
portation systems [38, 67].
Fundamentally, OPC UA consists of an OPC Server, an OPC Client, and PLCs.
Upon connection to the server, the client will request the server’s available end-
points. Each endpoint has a description of its security configurations; the client will
then choose a fitting endpoint based on the client’s security needs. The client will
then establish a secure channel with the server and must authenticate itself based
on the chosen endpoint configuration. Once a session has been established, the
client can read and write to nodes on the server [17, 39]. The communication be-
tween the OPC Server and PLCs is proprietary and depends on the communication
protocol chosen by the manufacturer [68].
2.2.2
Convergence of OT and IT
OT systems were traditionally isolated from the Internet and referred to as ”air-gapped.”
This isolation was achieved through highly engineered proprietary industrial-specific pro-
tocols within private/closed networks. However, a convergence between IT and OT has
8
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:17==
emerged in recent years. Several motivations drive this convergence, including adopting
AI, enabling remote operations, leveraging cloud computing, and harnessing advanced
analytics [58]. Businesses are investing in converging IT and OT systems, expecting
benefits such as increased production, real-time intelligence, and reduced operational
costs [2].
2.2.3
IIoT
Another driver of the convergence between IT and OT is the Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT) [81]. IIoT is a subset of IoT with a specific focus on industrial applications. It in-
volves connecting various devices and sensors within an industrial environment to collect
data, enable automation, and improve operational efficiency. Because it is used in an
industrial context, including mission-critical industrial environments, there are higher re-
quirements regarding safety, security, and robust communication, setting it apart from
general IoT [43].
2.3
Internet-wide scanning
Internet-wide scanning is a data collection technique that can be used to systematically
scan the entire or a portion of the internet-facing devices [63]. The scanning can be used
to probe for open ports, identify running services, perform banner grabbing, and get cer-
tificate data on an internet-facing device, thus allowing for fingerprinting a device [63].
Internet-wide scanning is typically done by security researchers, individuals, and orga-
nizations for numerous applications, such as helping reveal new kinds of vulnerabilities,
monitoring the deployment of mitigations, monitoring service availability, and tracking pro-
tocol adoption [21, 34, 63]. Internet-wide scanning is a valuable tool for conducting em-
pirically driven security research. However, even though tools such as ZMap [21] have
reduced the complexity of conducting large-scale port scans and collecting meaningful
data [22], researchers still have to go through a labor-intensive process of implementa-
tion and debugging code additions to ZMap and negotiate with their institution’s legal team
to be granted permission for performing scans [22]. To allow researchers to effortlessly
and efficiently conduct research about internet-connected devices, security protocols, and
vulnerable devices, researchers can use search engines for internet-connected devices
such as Shodan [84] and Censys [22].
Shodan and Censys build and provide databases with data obtained by periodically con-
ducting internet-wide scanning. They can both be used to discover and analyze mis-
configurations, exposed services, and vulnerabilities and operate within legal and ethical
boundaries by not attempting to exploit or compromise any devices during the collection
of data. Shodan and Censys conduct their scans in a similar fashion, and a comparison
between Shodan and Censys can be seen in Table 2.1.
2.3.1
Shodan
Shodan is a search engine for internet-connected devices that collect data by having the
Shodan crawlers crawl the entire Internet continuously around the clock and update their
database in real-time with the findings [84]. The fundamental algorithm these crawlers
use is summarized in Listing 2.1. By employing this algorithm, Shodan ensures that the
crawlers do not scan incremental network ranges. The crawling will, therefore, be com-
pletely random to ensure uniform coverage of the Internet and prevent any bias in the
data [49]. Furthermore, to negate further bias in the scanning data, Shodan has crawlers
scattered across countries such as the USA, China, Iceland, France, Taiwan, Vietnam,
Romania, and the Czech Republic [49]. This will allow Shodan to work around blocking IP
ranges, thereby ensuring any country-wide blocking will not affect the data gathering [49].
Unmasking digital ghost ships
9
==PAGE:18==
Shodan
Censys
Techniques for collecting information
SYN Scan / Banner grab
SYN Scan / Banner grab
Scan range
Horizontal scan
Horizontal scan
SYN scan tool
Unknown
ZMap
Banner grab tool
Unknown
ZGrab
Scan server
Distributed
Distributed
Scan period
Once per week
Automatically scheduled depending on ports
Table 2.1: Comparison between Censys and Shodan from [44]. Shodan and Censys use
similar techniques for scanning and collecting information; however, Shodan does not
disclose what tools they use for SYN scan and banner grabbing. Furthermore, they both
use distributed servers to conduct scanning. Shodan states on their website that they
crawl the entire Internet once per week [84] where Censys has automatically scheduled
scanning depending on the ports and services [22].
1
1. Generate a random IPv4 address
2
2. Generate a random port to test from the list of ports that Shodan
understands
3
3. Check the random IPv4 address on the random port and grab a banner
4
4. Goto 1
Listing 2.1: Shodan crawler algorithm [84]
As depicted in Table 2.1, the exact tools Shodan uses for scanning the Internet and grab-
bing information about responsive hosts are kept a secret, and it is, therefore, infeasible
to know precisely how Shodan conducts their scanning and grabbing of information.
2.3.2
Censys
Like Shodan, Censys is a search engine for internet-connected devices that continually
scans the public address space across a range of important ports and protocols, vali-
dates the data, and makes use of a pluggable scanner framework to perform application
layer handshakes and dissects these to produce structured data about each host and
protocol [22]. Censys, like Shodan, uses scan workers. The scan workers for Censys
use the algorithm depicted in Figure 2.2 for discovering live hosts and obtaining data.
More specifically, in the first step of Censys data collection, the scan worker uses ZMap
Figure 2.2: Censys protocol scanning and annotation; each worker uses ZMap to check
for live IPs and proceed to complete a protocol handshake for responsive hosts. Censys
will then proceed to extract fields of interest and store the results in a database [22]. Figure
from [22].
to perform a single packet host discovery against the IPv4 address space [22]. The sin-
gle packet host discovery can be done by TCP SYN scans, ICMP echo request scans,
and application-specific UDP scans; after that, ZMap will accept response packets. Each
host that responds to the host discovery will be forwarded to Censys’ application scanner,
ZGrab, where ZGrab will be able to perform banner grabbing and produce structured data
about each responsive host. As of the writing of this thesis, ZGrab supports application
10
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:19==
handshakes for HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, SSH, Modbus, POP3, SMTP, CWMP, Telnet, and
IMAP [22]. However, ZGrab can be extended to support numerous protocols. By con-
ducting these scans and storing the found data, Censys allows users to query devices
and networks on the Internet and allows researchers to conduct research about internet-
connected devices [22, 44].
2.3.3
ZMap
ZMap is a modular open-source network scanner made to perform internet-wide scans.
As explained in Section 2.3.2, it is used to perform single packet host discovery in the
search engine Censys [21]. ZMaps modular architecture supports TCP SYN, ICMP echo,
and UDP probes and facilitates straightforward scalability and expansion to its modules;
the architecture can be observed in Figure 2.3. ZMap is optimized for horizontally scan-
Figure 2.3: ZMap architecture; ZMap starts by generating a validation, address, and probe
scheduler followed by the generation of a packet, which is supported for multiple kinds
of probes, as aforementioned. Hereafter, the packet will undergo transmission, and the
response will be validated, interpreted, and processed [21]. Figure from [21].
ning the entire Internet. ZMap eliminates local per-connection states, which allows ZMap
to work efficiently and fast by not waiting for time outs or another connection before pro-
ceeding with the scan [21]. Furthermore, to ensure ZMap does not produce inconsis-
tent results and does not overload destination networks when probing the IPv4 address
space, ZMap address generation is designed to avoid flooding destination networks by
ordering targets according to a pseudorandom permutation of the address space instead
of scanning in numerical order, [1, 21]. Consequently, this will allow ZMap to forgo any
per-connection state since it targets random samples of the address space, and therefore,
no local states are needed; instead, ZMap will validate responses it receives by encoding
secrets into mutable fields of the probe packets [21]. When ZMap sends a probe packet,
host and scan-specific data are encoded into mutable fields; by utilizing fields that have a
recognizable effect on fields in the corresponding response packets, ZMap is able to dis-
tinguish between background traffic and valid responses to probes sent by ZMap [21]. As
aforementioned, ZMap supports TCP SYN, ICMP echo request, and application-specific
UDP scans; an example of ZMap performing a SYN scan on a target can be observed
in Figure 2.4, ZMap uses SYN scanning or half-open scanning in oppose to performing a
full TCP handshake to minimize the amount of packets that will be exchanged between
ZMap and the target [21]. However, a full TCP handshake can be established if the user
wishes to do so. To guarantee ethical and best practice and to improve the performance
of scanning with ZMap, ZMap excludes IP addresses that are IANA reserved allocations
Unmasking digital ghost ships
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) ZMap communication with a target that
has an open port.
(b) ZMap communication with a target that
has a closed port.
Figure 2.4: ZMap conducting a SYN scan on a target. Figure 2.4a shows the target
response if the port is open, and Figure 2.4b depicts the target response if the port is
closed.
and possible requests from targets that have been scanned and want to be excluded from
further scannings [21].
2.3.4
ZGrab
ZGrab is a fast and extensible application scanner that supports numerous application
handshakes as mentioned in Section 2.3.2 and also supports checks for Heartbleed,
SSLv3, and specific cipher suites [22]. ZGrab can complete a protocol-specific hand-
shake with the entire IPv4 address space in around six hours, depending on the protocol,
and can work independently, but is commonly used alongside ZMap [22]. The synergies
between ZMap and ZGrab are depicted in Figure 2.5. Once ZGrab has found a target
with the help of ZMap or other sources, it will open a TCP connection wherein data can
be written and read. ZGrab classifies this as events. Events can connect to the target,
read or write data, or initiate a TLS handshake. For example, ZGrab’s HTTP scanner is
implemented as a connection event, whereas the HTTPS scanner is implemented as a
connection event and a TLS handshake event [22]. Furthermore, ZGrab handles concur-
rent connections and, per default, outputs JSON that describes the connection, that is, if
the scan was successful and, if so, the obtained banner grab [22].
Figure 2.5: ZMap starts by scanning the entire IPv4 address space and outputs the re-
sponsive IPs to ZGrab. ZGrab will then perform application-level scanning, initiating with
establishing a TCP connection whereby data can be written and read to obtain information
about the target.
12
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:21==
3
Literature review
In this chapter, we explore prior research in the domains of IoT and OT security, the
realm of internet-wide scanning, and the imperative aspect of ethical research practices.
Our investigation is grounded in a rich landscape of existing studies that have laid the
groundwork in these crucial areas.
3.1
IoT scanning
IoT scanning is a relatively new field of research. This section will describe papers we
have identified within IoT scanning.
Srinivasa et al. [86] scanned the IPv4 address space for vulnerable IoT devices utilizing a
combination of ZMap and ZGrab and captured and analyzed the different attack vectors on
different protocols by utilizing honeypots. The authors used two ways of finding vulnerable
devices depending on the transport protocol used by the application protocol: banner-
based for TCP and response-based for UDP. The authors scanned for Telnet, MQTT,
CoAP, AMQP, XMPP, and UPnP and examined the response received from the targets
for indication of misconfigurations. An overview of the indicators the authors used for
each protocol can be observed in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2.
In conclusion, Srinivasa et
Protocol
Banner Response Indicator
Misconfiguration
Telnet
$
No auth, console access
Telnet
root@xxx:∼$
No auth, root console access
Telnet
admin@xxx:∼$
No auth, root console access
MQTT
MQTT Connection Code:0
Connection Accepted with no auth
AMQP
Version: 2.7.1
No auth
AMQP
Version: 2.8.4
No auth
XMPP
MECHANISM<PLAIN>
No encryption
XMPP
MECHANISM<ANONYMOUS>
No auth
Table 3.1: Misconfiguration indicators for TCP protocols used in the Paper [86]. Taken
from [86].
al. unveiled 1.8 million misconfigured IoT devices that were vulnerable to either being
infected with bots or could be used for a DDoS amplification attack [86]. Furthermore,
the authors deployed six honeypots: Cowrie, HosTaGe, Dionaea, ThingPot, U-Pot, and
Conpot [86]. The honeypots simulated IoT-based device profiles to gain an insight into
the attack trends and observed 200,209 attack events throughout all the honeypots [86].
Jose et al. [42] conducted internet-wide scanning targeting 530M IPv6 addresses on six
different protocols that are used within IoT (AMQP, CoAP, MQTT, OPC UA, XMPP, and
Telnet). They used ZMap and ZGrab to perform their scan, which they had extended with
custom functionality. Their findings were 36,400 IoT devices in total from their chosen
IPv6 address space. Compared to IPv4 scans, this was a 380x reduction in the amount
of IoT devices found. A noteworthy aspect of their analysis is examining certificates on
hosts with TLS enabled. The findings revealed that 57% of the identified certificates were
untrusted, 32% were self-signed, and 25% had expired.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
13
==PAGE:22==
Protocol
Banner Response Indicator
Misconfiguration
CoAP
x1C
Full access
CoAP
220
Connected session
CoAP
220-Admin
Admin access connection
CoAP
CoAP Resources
Resource disclosure
UPnP
upnp:rootdevice
USN: uuid:5a34308c-1a2c-4546
-ac5d-7663dd01dca1::upnp:rootdeviceEXT:
SERVER: Ubuntu/lucid UPnP/1.0
MiniUPnPD/1.4
LOCATION: http://192.168.0.1:16537/rootDesc.xml
Resource disclosure
Table 3.2: Misconfiguration indicators for UDP protocols used in the Paper [86]. Taken
from [86].
In their work, Tal and Oppenheim [89] analyzed the TR-069 protocol, where they found im-
plementation and configuration flaws in several ISP’s ACS deployments. They conducted
an internet-wide scan for port 7547, the port used for TR-069 devices. The scanning was
done in November 2014, and they do not specify how they conducted it. However, they
mention that they got help from the University of Michigan, which supports the fact that
they most likely used ZMap. Their scan found 46M responding hosts, which they attribute
to being TR-069 devices. Predominantly, these devices ran the embedded HTTP server
RomPager, with version 4.07 being the most prevalent (98.04%). Subsequent analysis of
RomPager 4.07 exposed several vulnerabilities, including a critical flaw related to cookies.
Exploiting this vulnerability, named ”misfortune cookie,” allowed bypassing authentication
and granting administrator privileges. Tal and Oppenheim found this was exploitable on
all the brands and models of routers they tested on.
When comparing the works mentioned above, our research direction aligns with Srini-
vasa et al. [86]. Similar to their approach, we utilize ZMap and ZGrab for internet-wide
scanning and defining misconfigured devices based on banners or responses. However,
our focus differs; while Srinivasa et al. concentrate on IoT and investigate attack trends
using honeypots, our thesis explores a broader spectrum, including the misconfiguration
of both IoT and OT protocol devices. As we also intend to scan for TR-069 devices, we
have similarities with Tal and Oppenheim [89]. However, their scanning tools and ratio-
nale for identifying all devices on port 7547 as TR-069 are unspecified, whereas we plan
to analyze grabbed banners in detail for more accurate filtering.
3.2
OT/ICS scanning
Regarding OT/ICS scanning, there has been considerable research in this area already.
In this section, we will briefly describe the findings of the OT/ICS scanning papers we
deem to be closely related to our work, starting with papers that exclusively explore tra-
ditional OT protocols, followed by papers that include modern OT protocols. An overview
of the papers and their methods and protocols scanned can be seen in Table 3.3. Mirian
et al. [53] investigated ICS devices exposed on the public internet and analyzed who
is searching for vulnerable ICS systems. They found exposed systems by choosing five
common SCADA protocols (BACnet, DNP3, Modbus, Tridium Fox, Siemens S7) that they
scanned the public IPv4 address space for using ZMap over three months. To find out
who is searching for vulnerable ICS systems, they deployed high-interaction honeypots
14
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:23==
Paper
Protocols scanned for
Tools used for scanning
Mirian et al. [53]
BACnet, DNP3, Modbus
Tridium Fox, Siemens S7
ZMap and ?
Gasser et. al [27]
BACnet
ZMap, IPv6 hitlist
Dahlmanns et al. [18]
Modbus, DNP3, IEC 104,
EtherNet/IP, Siemens S7,
Tridium Fox, AMQP, OPC UA,
MQTT, CoAP
ZMap, ZGrab
Dahlmanns et al. [17]
OPC UA
ZMap, ZGrab
Maggi et al. [47]
DDS
ZMap, Scapy
Table 3.3: Identified papers in the realm of OT/ICS scanning, the protocols they scan for,
and tools used for scanning.
and utilized a large network telescope. They deemed ICS systems vulnerable if they are
exposed on the public internet, as they have no built-in security. For all the protocols, they
could identify either the organizations they belonged to or the type of device. To success-
fully identify the protocols, it is necessary to perform a protocol handshake. However, in
their paper, Mirian et al. never clarified how they achieved this. Gasser et al. [27] had
a narrower approach, focusing exclusively on scanning the internet for BACnet devices.
They both scanned IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. Like Mirian et al., they used ZMap to scan
the IPv4 address space. For their IPv4 scanning, they used a ReadPropertyMultiple re-
quest payload, which enabled them to query BACnet devices for property values such
as vendor and model name. To generate useful IPv6 addresses to scan for, they used
their domain-resolution approach called IPv6 hitlist. The identified devices were further
scanned to evaluate their susceptibility to amplification attacks, and they found devices
that had an amplification factor of up to 120.
Dahlmanns et al. [18] investigated the security of IIoT deployments by conducting internet-
wide scanning of 10 protocols that are used within IIoT, which includes both traditional
OT protocols that can be retrofitted with security through TLS (Modbus, DNP3, IEC 104,
EtherNet/IP, Siemens S7, and Tridium Fox) as well as newer IoT protocols that have
built-in security (AMQP, OPC UA, MQTT, and CoAP). They conducted the internet-wide
scan using ZMap, and afterward, banner grabbing was done using ZGrab with custom-
made modules for the included protocols. During their analysis, they mainly focused on
how many deployments were TLS-enabled. Their findings were that the TLS adoption
rate was overall low at 6.5%, with 0.4% of traditional OT protocols that had TLS support
compared to 7.2% for the newer IoT protocols. Furthermore, 42% of the deployments
with TLS enabled had security deficits, such as missing access control or support for
deprecated cipher suites.
In another study by Dahlmanns et al. [17], they focused single-handedly on analyzing
the security of internet-facing OPC UA deployments. They achieved this by scanning the
internet for OPC UA deployments every week over six months, using ZMap and ZGrab,
the latter being extended with an OPC UA module. OPC UA was designed with security
in mind; however, it can easily be misconfigured such that it is not secure. Their findings
were that most deployed OPC UA devices (92%) had deficiencies in their configuration,
for example, missing access control or deprecated cryptographic primitives.
Turning to DDS security, Maggi et al. [47] investigated the security of DDS and its imple-
mentations. Throughout the paper, the authors thoroughly analyzed the DDS standard
Unmasking digital ghost ships
15
==PAGE:24==
and its implementation by different vendors, focusing on security vulnerabilities. During
their analysis of the implementations, the authors discovered multiple security vulnerabili-
ties in the six most common DDS implementations, namely, Core DX, Cyclone DDS, Fast-
DDS, GurumDDS, Connext DDS, and OpenDDS [47]. Furthermore, Maggi et al. [47] con-
ducted an internet-wide scan utilizing ZMap in combination with Scapy, a python packet
manipulation library [79], for creating RTPS probes. The scanning results were hundreds
of public-facing DDS services, some of them susceptible to the newly found vulnerabili-
ties. Since DDS is not designed to be deployed to public endpoints, they deemed all the
found systems misconfigured.
Regarding the different papers, our research closely aligns with the methods used by
Dahlmanns et al. [17], and Maggi et al. [47], primarily since we also chose to extend
our scanning tools ZMap and ZGrab to support the protocols DDS and OPC UA. Like
Dahlmanns et al. [17], we also utilize the Go library gopcua [78] to develop our OPC UA
module for ZGrab. Maggi et al. [47] created their RTPS packets using Scapy. However,
we made the packet in our implemented ZGrab DDS module.
3.3
Ethical considerations & notification campaign
Throughout our project, we strived to conduct our research and data collection ethically.
To achieve this, we reviewed previously released papers within our research area to learn
about best practices within ethical research.
Srinivasa et al. [86] only stored their retrieved data for three months and anonymized their
data sets before releasing them publicly. They also hosted a webpage on the IP they
scanned from, with information regarding the research and the process for opting out of
future scans. Alongside the default ZMap blocklist, they used the European blocklist the
FireHOL project provides.
Jose et al. [42] sent only one packet per destination and port to minimize impact. They
also employed a blocklist that included IP addresses belonging to Russia as a result of
the ongoing Ukraine-Russian war. Like Srinivasa et al., they also set up a webpage.
In addition to deploying a research webpage, Dahlmanns et al. [17] reduced their impact
of measurements by spreading out their scans over 24 hours. Specific to their OPC UA
scanner, they made it wait 500 ms between subsequent requests to the same server.
Furthermore, they set a maximum scanning time per server at 60 minutes and maximum
outgoing traffic at 50 MB. In their TLS investigation paper [18], Dahlmanns et al. limited
load with their MQTT scanner by setting a maximum scanning time of 30 minutes and
maximum outgoing traffic of 10 MB per host. They conducted a responsible disclosure
notification campaign in both their papers, informing affected hosts of their findings.
Gasser et al. [27] ensured ethical scanning by sending valid BACnet payloads in accor-
dance with the BACnet standard, avoiding harm to scanned entities. While not publicizing
their data, they allowed researchers to obtain it upon request. Like the other papers, they
also set up a website and utilized a blocklist. Additionally, they initiated a notification
campaign in collaboration with DFN-CERT to inform owners of affected BACnet devices.
3.4
Summary
Our survey of related work uncovered studies encompassing all the ten protocols desig-
nated for our IPv4 internet-wide scanning. Notably, Srinivasa et al. [86], despite having
a dual focus on internet-wide scanning and honeypot deployment and analysis, closely
aligns with our research objectives. A significant synergy arises from the shared empha-
sis on identifying misconfigured devices through analyzing banners and responses during
16
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:25==
connection attempts to hosts running our target protocols. Furthermore, our methodology
resonates with Dahlmanns et al. [18] as we also center our attention on both IoT and OT
protocols. However, we do not focus on the number of TLS-enabled deployments as they
do. Similarly, as mentioned previously, our work is also closely related to Dahlmanns et
al. [17] and Maggi et al. [47], as we also chose to scan for OPC UA and DDS devices,
aided by implementation of custom modules for these protocols.
We drew inspiration from several of the mentioned papers in regard to conducting ethical
research. As Srinivasa et al. [86], Jose et al. [42], Dahlmanns et al. [17, 18], we too hosted
a webpage on the IP that we conducted our scan from. The webpage included information
regarding our research and instructions for opting out of future scans. Additionally, we
implemented a blocklist, which will be detailed in the following chapter. In alignment with
Dahlmanns et al. [18], we also limited our MQTT scan. However, our limits were more
conservative, disconnecting after retrieving a maximum of 50 topics from the connected
server. The full extent of our ethical considerations will be explained in the next chapter.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:27==
4
Methodology
This section delves into the methodology for unveiling vulnerable IoT and OT devices. An
overview of the IoT and OT protocols that we chose to scan for, along with their communi-
cation form and transport method, can be seen in Table 4.1. The rest of the methodology
section is structured as follows: firstly, how the detection of a misconfigured IoT or OT
device depending on the different protocols occurred; secondly, how the data collection
was conducted. Thirdly, how the storing and visualization of the collected data transpired;
and lastly, the ethical considerations regarding the research.
Protocol
Port
Transport
Communication form
MQTT
1883
TCP
Pub/Sub
AMQP
5672
TCP
Pub/Sub
CoAP
5683
UDP
Client/Server
XMPP
5222, 5269
TCP
Client/Server
Modbus
502
TCP
Client/Server
BACnet
47808
UDP
Client/Server
TR-069
7547, 3000
TCP
Client/Server
OPC UA
4840
TCP
Client/Server
RTPS
7400, 7410, 7411, 7412
UDP
Pub/Sub
DNP3
20000
TCP
Client/Server
Table 4.1: Overview of the scanned protocols with the port we are scanning for, the trans-
port layer, and the protocols communication form.
4.1
Extension of ZMap and ZGrab
Throughout this thesis, we extended ZGrab and ZMap to support the protocols OPC UA,
TR-069, and RTPS. Furthermore, we updated and extended already existing ZGrab mod-
ules received from a fellow researcher to facilitate the scanning of additional IoT protocols,
enabling us to gain a broader picture of digital ghostships spread throughout the internet.
These additional scanners were for the protocols MQTT, CoAP, AMQP, and XMPP and
were originally developed by another researcher. An overview of the work done on the
different ZGrab modules can be seen in Table 4.2. Furthermore, we chose to utilize ZMap
and ZGrab to conduct the internet-wide scanning because the pipeline approach for con-
ducting the scanning and gathering data from devices and applications works seamlessly.
When conducting the scanning, we could start by utilizing ZMap to check for open ports
and then ZGrab to complete an application handshake. Furthermore, ZGrab already sup-
ported some of the OT and IoT protocols we wanted to scan, making the choice of utilizing
ZMap and ZGrab a simple one.
4.1.1
Developing new scanners
We developed three new scanners for ZGrab, allowing ZGrab to retrieve information about
servers running OPC UA, TR-069, and RTPS. This allowed us to scan and check for
misconfigured devices or servers spread throughout the vast internet.
Developing the OPC UA module
For the development of the OPC UA scanner, we
used ZGrabs implementation of TCP and the Go library gopcua to extend the scanner
Unmasking digital ghost ships
19
==PAGE:28==
ZGrab Module
Included in ZGrab
Extending module
Implementing from scratch
MQTT
✓
AMQP
✓
CoAP
✓
XMPP
✓
Modbus
✓
BACnet
✓
TR-069
✓
OPC UA
✓
RTPS
✓
DNP3
✓
Table 4.2: The different protocols we will be scanning for and whether we had to imple-
ment or extend them.
with OPC UA functionalities following the OPC UA documentation [66]. The scanner will
open a TCP connection at port 4840. If the connection can be established, we use the
gopcua library to ask for OPC UA endpoints; once an endpoint has been verified, the
scanner will log any information about which security policies the endpoints support. The
scanner will then try to connect to the UA server anonymously and then with a self-signed
certificate and log if any of the attempts were successful. In the implementation, it is also
possible to check if nodes in the UA server are readable or writable; however, for ethical
reasons, we did not use this feature during our scanning. By utilizing this approach, we
expected to gain knowledge about the security mechanism the OPC UA server offers and
have set in its configuration. Nonetheless, by the attempt to log in with anonymous or
certificates, we gain additional knowledge about whether the OPC UA server allows for
access and not only uses insecure security mechanisms; in Section 5.1, we delve deeper
into the implementation and how our module functions.
Developing the TR-069 module
For the development of the TR-069 scanner, we used
ZGrabs implementation of the HTTP scanner. We did a POST request with SOAP en-
coded data following the inform message from the CPE WAN Management Protocol doc-
umentation. This allowed us to check whether the server allowed unauthorized clients
to store themselves on the auto-configuration server. The implementation and how the
TR-069 module works are described in Section 5.3.
Developing the RTPS module
To develop the RTPS scanner, we used ZGrabs imple-
mentation of UDP to establish a connection; we then created an event that can generate a
unique packet depending on the RTPS vendor and IP addresses. The scanner will open
a UDP connection and then write a vendor-specific packet for discovery based on the
RTPS documentation [64]. The packet will contain information about where the discovery
server should send packets to and for how long the server should view the participant as
being alive. Utilizing this approach, we could learn about the different vendors responding
to our packet. Furthermore, we would know whether the RTPS discovery server would be
vulnerable to participating in an amplification attack. We ended up only using ZGrab to
create the RTPS packet and instead used ZMap to send the packet. The implementation
and how the RTPS module functions is described in more detail in Section 5.2.
20
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:29==
4.1.2
Testing environment
Before we started conducting our internet-wide scanning for the protocols, we had to
check if the scanner worked as intended and did not in any way contribute to any harm
to the scanned targets. The general testing environment can be observed in Figure 4.1.
When developing the extensions for ZGrab, we began by testing the scanner and probes
in our local network on docker containers, which ran the different types of available ser-
vices from vendors for OPC UA, TR-069, and RTPS. Furthermore, we used Wireshark
to observe and analyze how the server responded to the probes, to ensure our scanner
did not use more probes than necessary, and to verify that the probes did not disrupt the
server. To further test our implementation, we tested the scanners on multiple simulation
Figure 4.1: The testing environment consisted of multiple docker containers or servers
running the different protocols in our local network and simulation servers or endpoints
found on Shodan running on the internet.
servers on the internet and endpoints found with Shodan; thereby, we could test whether
our scanners could handle communication with servers sparsed on the internet and not
just locally and check our output.
Testing the OPC UA module
To test our OPC UA module, we set up an OPC UA
server on our local network, which allowed us to test and check the result of our scanner
progressively. While testing, we utilized Wireshark to ensure that the packets we sent
were correct and that we would not transmit more packets than necessary. Furthermore,
by using Wireshark this way, we could also gain insight into how the server handles our
requests and if we are interrupting the server. Once we had verified that our implementa-
tion of the OPC UA module did not overload the server and that the response we received
from the server was what we expected, we proceeded to test the module on the internet
utilizing simulation servers and endpoints found with Shodan.
Testing the TR-069 module
For testing our TR-069 module, we utilized the same ap-
proach as with our OPC UA module. We began by setting up an ACS on our local network
to test and analyze how the ACS reacted to the packets we transmitted. When conduct-
ing the test, we transmitted our packet to an ACS with no security enabled. Here, we
Unmasking digital ghost ships
21
==PAGE:30==
found that sending an inform message to an ACS with no security enabled would store
our device, which essentially opens the possibility to DoS the server by sending enormous
amounts of inform messages. We, therefore, chose not to test our scanner on the internet
since we had no idea of the potential harm it might be able to cause, as touched upon
in Section 4.7 about ethical considerations. Consequently, we chose to scan for TR-069
using an HTTP GET request as mentioned in Section 4.2.2.
Testing the RTPS module
To test our RTPS module, we set up a RTPS discovery
server by using FastDDS on our local network. We then transmitted our RTPS discovery
packet using Wireshark to capture the traffic and verify that the client and server behaved
as expected; that is, the server would only transmit packets to us for a limited amount of
time, as specified in the RTPS discovery packet. Once we knew how the RTPS discovery
server would react to our RTPS discovery packet, we chose to test it on a few endpoints
found with Shodan to test whether it also worked on the internet.
4.2
Classifying misconfigured IoT and OT devices
The detection of misconfigured IoT and OT devices is conducted by performing internet-
wide scans for ten protocols, namely, MQTT, AMQP, XMPP, CoAP, Modbus, BACnet,
DNP3, OPC UA, TR-069, and RTPS. The rationales for selecting these and how they
classify as being misconfigured are elaborated upon in their respective sections. For the
internet-wide scanning, we utilized ZMap in combination with ZGrab to obtain further data
about the responding hosts for our statistical analysis. The exact pipeline approach we
conducted throughout the scanning process is visualized in Figure 4.2. Furthermore, we
identified IoT and OT devices by performing banner-grabbing or checking the response,
depending on the transport layer protocol used by the device. When we received a re-
sponse from a device, we searched for and identified different misconfiguration indicators
based on Section 4.2. The indicators used for classifying a device as misconfigured are
summed up in Table 4.3. However, it should be noted that other factors, such as the
implementation of the protocols by different vendors, vulnerable versions of the software
running on the devices, and certificates, were also looked at when conducting the analy-
sis; see Section 6.
Figure 4.2: The pipeline approach for conducting the scanning and gathering data. ZMap
takes a list of excluded IPs and proceeds to perform the port scanning; all identified re-
sponsive hosts will be forwarded to ZGrab, which will perform an in-depth follow-up to
identify running services and gather information. The output data will then be visualized
in the ELK stack.
The scan is carried out by a server running Linux Debian 6.1.55-1 (2023-09-29) x86_64
GNU/Linux at DTU using a fixed static IP address to avoid being blocked by firewalls
detecting our scan that has otherwise agreed to our scanning, improve performance with
ZMap and for ethical considerations explained in Section 4.7. Our scanning was done
between 5 December and 22 December.
22
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:31==
Protocol
Indicator
Misconfiguration
MQTT
Connection code: 0
No Authentication
SASL PLAIN
Plain text authentication
AMQP
SASL ANONYMOUS
No Authentication
2.05 Content
No Authentication
CoAP
CoAP Resources
Resource disclosure
<mechanism>PLAIN</mechanism>
Plain text authentication
<mechanism>DIGEST-MD5</mechanism>
Weak authentication
<mechanism>CRAM-MD5</mechanism>
Weak authentication
XMPP
<mechanism>ANONYMOUS</mechanism>
No Authentication
Modbus
any
Exposed on the internet
BACnet
any
Exposed on the internet
TR069
200 OK
No Authentication
Anonymous
No Authentication
Certificate
No Authentication
Security mode: None
No Encryption and Authentication
Security mode: Sign
No Encryption
Security policy: Basic256
Weak message encryption
OPC UA
Security policy: Basic128Rsa15
Weak message encryption
RTPS
any
Exposed on the internet
DNP3
any
Exposed on the internet
Table 4.3: The indicators for each of the scanned protocols that classify a device to be
misconfigured.
4.2.1
OPC UA
OPC UA is a platform-independent standard that allows various devices and systems to
communicate with each other over a local network or the internet [39, 67]. Furthermore,
OPC UA was built from scratch with security in mind [17, 67]. However, some of the im-
plemented security mechanisms are not, per default, enabled, and it is therefore required
to actively configure the numerous security settings [17]. OPC UA was selected because
it is used extensively in OT and IoT [67]. Furthermore, OPC UA is used in critical infras-
tructure, particularly power grids, transportation systems, healthcare, and water pumping
stations [38, 67].
Classifying misconfigurations in OPC UA
We classified OPC UA as being misconfig-
ured if the UA server allowed us to access and retrieve information about the system by
authorizing ourselves as anonymous or with a self-signed certificate. Furthermore,
the configuration was classified as misconfigured if the UA server used or offered depre-
cated security policies to communicate between the client and the server. Nevertheless,
the UA server should only allow clients to read and write to nodes that they need access
to, respecting the principle of least privilege. However, the latter was not conducted for
ethical reasons, which is explained further in Section 4.7.
Scanning for OPC UA services
The OPC UA module scan investigates if it is possible
to establish a connection to the server on port 4840. If the connection was established
successfully, the banner received provides information about what security policies the
OPC UA server supports. Table 4.4 depicts the security policies OPC UA supports upon
client connection, and for communication, the received banner is then examined for secu-
rity policies considered not secure. To further check if the server will allow us client access,
Unmasking digital ghost ships
23
==PAGE:32==
Security Policy
Signature Hashing
Considered Secure
None
-
No
Basic128Rsa15
Sha-1
No
Basic256
Sha-1
No
Aes128-Sha256-RsaOaep
Sha256
Yes
Basic256Sha256
Sha256
Yes
Aes256-Sha256-RsaPss
Sha256
Yes
Table 4.4
we tried to connect to it with one of the security policies it provided with anonymous and
a self-signed certificate. After a successful connection with either anonymous or by using
a self-signed certificate, we knew we could get access to the server as a client. However,
further investigation, checking for read/write permission on different server nodes, was
neglected for ethical reasons as mentioned in Section 4.7.
4.2.2
TR-069
TR-069 is a standard for the remote management of end-user devices, known as customer
premises equipment, by the service providers [37]. It allows service providers to upload,
download, and receive data about the customer’s devices. It is used in nearly a billion
devices [37], which deemed it an excellent candidate to check for misconfigured devices
or servers using the protocol.
Classifying misconfigurations in TR-069
We classified TR-069 as being misconfig-
ured if the server allowed a user device to establish a connection and send an inform
message to the server without authentication. Furthermore, we checked the software
version the server was running to check if any known CVEs existed.
Scanning for TR-069 services
The TR-069 module scan was conducted using two dis-
tinct scanning methods. We start by scanning with our TR-069 scanner on port 7547 and
then use ZGrabs built-in HTTP scanner to scan on port 3000 to target the auto configu-
ration server to check for vulnerable software versions. Upon successfully establishing
a connection on port 7547, the received banner provided information about whether the
ACS allowed us to send an inform message without the need for authentication. We ex-
amined the received banner for 200 OK or it being an InformResponse message, which
specified that the ACS successfully handled the inform request. Consequently, this would
allow us to DoS the ACS by amplifying our inform requests. Due to ethical reasons, this
was only conducted in our local environment. Furthermore, to still scan for TR-069, we
chose to perform an HTTP get request on port 7547 and port 3000 and examined the
received banner for known TR-069 devices and the vendor and corresponding versions.
Here, we used the NIST NVD, CVE-MITRE, and CVEdetails to look up the different soft-
ware versions and correlate them with a CVE.
4.2.3
DDS
DDS is a middleware protocol and API standard based on the publish-subscribe paradigm,
providing low-latency data connectivity, extreme reliability, and a scalable architecture for
IoT and OT [19, 47]. DDS is used in critical infrastructure such as wind power plants,
air-traffic control, healthcare, autonomous vehicles, and aeronautics and space adminis-
tration [47]. Consequently, it deemed DDS to be a valuable protocol to scan for it. Fur-
thermore, as mentioned in Section 2.2.1, DDS utilizes RTPS as its wire protocol, which
24
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:33==
is, therefore, what we will be scanning for.
Classifying misconfigurations in RTPS
We classified RTPS to be misconfigured if it
had any exposed endpoints on the internet since RTPS was designed for local network
applications and should not be exposed. This is due to how RTPS can be utilized in
amplification attacks [47].
Scanning for RTPS services
The RTPS module scans ports 7400, 7410, 7411, and
7412 and is based on the DDS security paper [47]. It transmits a discovery message
according to the RTPS documentation. The discovery message holds information about
where the discovery server should respond to our request. For this thesis, we chose to
collect the received data on a port running a Python program that listens to UDP packets.
This allowed us to filter out multiple responses from the same server straightforwardly.
Because RTPS was designed for local-network only if any server responds to our discov-
ery message with an ACK message, we can classify that as being misconfigured [47].
4.2.4
MQTT
As explained in Section 2.1.3, MQTT is an application layer protocol that is used for com-
munication between IoT devices. A key reason for investigating misconfigured IoT de-
vices running this protocol is its widespread usage in IoT devices. Its low bandwidth
requirement is a key factor for its popularity, making it favorable for IoT with limited re-
sources.
Classifying misconfiguration in MQTT
We classified MQTT as being misconfigured if
it, upon a connection request, responded with MQTT Connection Code:0 in its response
banner, meaning it has no authentication. Furthermore, we looked into the different prod-
ucts and their corresponding versions to detect whether any device was running a vulner-
able version of the product.
Scanning for MQTT services
The MQTT module scans for port 1883 and uses the
Go library MQTT Paho to check if it is possible to establish a connection with the target.
If the connection establishment is successful, we will ask for any available topics, and
any response from the target will be logged, whereafter the connection will be closed.
From the banner grabbed from the target, we could gather information about the device,
products, and connection codes.
4.2.5
AMQP
As explained in Section 2.1.3, AMQP is an application layer protocol designed for reliabil-
ity, security, and interoperability. AMQP excels in multi-client environments and is used
heavily in banking, finance, defense, telecommunications, internet, and cloud computing
infrastructures [3]. This makes it a key candidate to scan for.
Classifying misconfiguration in AMQP
We classified AMQP as being misconfigured
if it allowed us to establish a connection without the need for proper authentication. In
addition, we also classify AMQP as being misconfigured if any of its implementations are
running vulnerable versions.
Scanning for AMQP services
The AMQP module scan investigates if it is possible to
establish a connection to a broker on port 5672 and transmit an AMQP protocol header
Unmasking digital ghost ships
25
==PAGE:34==
message. The received banner from the target can then be examined to find the imple-
mentation and corresponding version of the product. Furthermore, the banner can also
be examined to see which SASL security mechanisms the target supports.
4.2.6
CoAP
CoAP is an application layer communication protocol designed for constrained devices,
as mentioned in Section 2.1.3. CoAP is used widely in communicating between medical
IoT devices in the healthcare sector, information exchange between IoT devices in smart
grids, and home automation [45, 90]. Consequently, it is deemed a valuable protocol to
scan for.
Classifying misconfiguration in CoAP
We classified CoAP as being misconfigured if
it is exposed on the internet and if querying the end system for ”/.well-known/core” trig-
gered a response indicating resource disclosure, full access, or establishing a connected
session. Further described in Section 4.2.6.
Scanning for CoAP services
The CoAP module scan checks whether it is possible to
establish a UDP connection to the target and then proceeds to query the target for ”/.well-
known/core.” This will result in a response from the target that provides valuable insight
into how the device is configured, that is, if the device allows us to view the content and
if the device discloses any resources.
4.2.7
XMPP
XMPP is an open-source application layer communication protocol which, as mentioned
in Section 2.1.3, has begun to see widespread use within IoT.
Classifying misconfiguration in XMPP
We classified XMPP as misconfigured if it ei-
ther accepted an anonymous connection via the SASL ANONYMOUS mechanism or sup-
ported weak authentication mechanisms, such as DIGEST-MD5 and CRAM-MD5. Fur-
thermore, we also classified it as being misconfigured if it did not offer encryption, i.e.,
no TLS support. We made this classification based on the response banner we received
when connecting to XMPP clients and XMPP servers on their respective default ports
(5222 for clients and 5269 for servers) [76].
Scanning for XMPP services
The XMPP module scans for port 5222, the client port,
and port 5269, the server port. It transmits a stream message to the target after suc-
cessfully establishing a TCP connection and logs the received banner from the target.
The banner received can be further examined to discover which security mechanism the
client/server supports, the implementation, and version, and whether TLS is required or
not.
4.2.8
Modbus
As mentioned in Section 2.2.1, Modbus is an application layer protocol for connecting in-
dustrial electronic devices and is used in infrastructures where real-time industrial control
is essential, such as the water industry [92]. However, Modbus was developed with no
security in mind. Therefore, when used standalone, Modbus does not provide confiden-
tiality, integrity, availability, accountability, identification, or authentication.
Classifying misconfiguration in Modbus
We classified Modbus as being misconfig-
ured if it was exposed on the internet and not using any wrappers or security measures,
such as OPC UA [92]. This is because of the fact that exposed Modbus devices on the
internet are vulnerable to flooding attacks [60].
26
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:35==
Scanning for Modbus services
We used ZGrab’s built-in Modbus scanner module.
By default, the Modbus module attempts to connect to the target host on port 502. It will
then transmit a specific Modbus probe with information about unit ID, function code, MEI
type, category, and object ID. The target will respond to this packet if the service running
on the target is Modbus. No other information can be received from the banner except
information about the device running the service.
4.2.9
BACnet
BACnet is a communication protocol that, as highlighted earlier, is used in the building
automation sector. With a reported market share of over 60%, BACnet is the most used
protocol within the building automation sector [8]. Given its extensive usage within an
important sector, we deem it an essential protocol that is crucial to investigate further,
which we do by scanning for misconfigured BACnet devices.
Classifying misconfiguration in BACnet
We classified BACnet devices as being mis-
configured if they were exposed on the public internet. That is, if we, during our scanning,
found publicly facing BACnet devices, we deemed them to be misconfigured. This is be-
cause BACnet devices exposed on the internet can be used in amplification attacks [27].
Ideally, BACnet devices should be placed behind a firewall or on their separate network
only accessible by VPN, such that outside access is prohibited [27].
Scanning for BACnet services
We used ZGrab’s built-in BACnet scanner module.
The BACnet module will try to establish a UDP connection to the target on port 47808.
The scanner will then proceed to send queries to gather information about the device
running the BACnet service. The module will try to obtain the device ID, vendor number,
vendor name, firmware, software, object name, model name, location, and description of
the device.
4.2.10
DNP3
DNP3 is a communication protocol that was originally designed to operate in a closed
environment, like BACnet and Modbus [53]. In consequence, DNP3 was developed with
no built-in security. Nevertheless, although DNP3 has no security, it is still widely used to
facilitate communication between electrical substations [53].
Classifying misconfiguration in DNP3
We classified DNP3 as being misconfigured if
it was exposed on the internet. This is primarily because of the fact that DNP3 has no
security built-in and, as a consequence of being exposed on the internet, displays informa-
tion about itself. However, the vulnerabilities in DNP3 often stem from the implementation
itself, and a mediocre implementation can lead to crashing or entering an infinite loop if a
malformed packet is transmitted to the device [53].
Scanning for DNP3 services
We used ZGrab’s built-in DNP3 scanner module. The
DNP3 module scans port 20000 and tries to establish a connection to the target. The
scanner then creates a DNP3 packet that will be transmitted to the target, consequently
triggering a response, that is, the banner from the target. The banner can then be exam-
ined for source and destination address and the control code.
4.3
Honeypot identification
After using ZMap and ZGrab to identify hosts with open services on the scanned ports,
the next step was determining whether these discovered systems were actual operational
Unmasking digital ghost ships
27
==PAGE:36==
systems or potentially deployed honeypots. We initially attempted to use the Shodan
service Honeyscore [83] to assess the likelihood of a system being a honeypot.
Honeyscore offers a probability score ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 for a given IP address,
indicating the likelihood that the IP is a honeypot. In our verification process, any IP
address assigned a Honeyscore greater than 0.6 was considered a potential honeypot
and was subsequently filtered out. This step was crucial before further analysis using
ZGrab, ensuring the data collected was from actual operational systems rather than decoy
honeypots.
However, the Honeyscore service was out of service when we conducted our analysis.
Shodan still offers honeypot detection through their ”honeypot” tag, which is applied to
hosts they deem to be honeypots. We were, therefore, able to filter out hosts that were
both identified by ourselves and Shodan and where Shodan had tagged them as being
honeypots.
Other methods of identifying honeypots were more specific to the specific protocols and
were based on the content of the response banner we retrieved from the systems.
4.4
Storing and visualization of the data
After successfully conducting scans using ZMap or ZGrab, we established a robust data
management strategy. Utilizing the command-line tool gdrive [74], we systematically up-
loaded each scan result from the server to Google Drive. This dual-purpose approach
not only served to create backups, ensuring the integrity and safety of our data but also
facilitated seamless and swift access to our results for subsequent in-depth analysis.
After fetching the data from the cloud, we used the ELK stack to store and visualize our
collected data. The pipeline for the exact approach can be seen in Figure 4.3. More
specifically, after running our scan with ZGrab, ZGrab will output all results as a JSONL
file; we would then use Logstash on the file if any changes to the data were necessary,
and afterward, we used Elasticdump to import our data to Elasticsearch. Once our data
was stored in Elasticsearch, we used Kibana to visualize the data.
Figure 4.3: The pipeline approach for the filtering, storing, and displaying of our output
data. We use the ELK stack to handle our data and visualization. We begin by filtering and
adding additional metadata to our JSONL file via Logstash; we then proceed to store this
in Elasticsearch, which will then index and make our data searchable for the visualization
phase in Kibana.
28
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:37==
4.4.1
Filtering and transmitting data with Logstash and Elasticdump
The output from ZGrab was based on our code, how we chose to store the banner, and
the responses we got from the target while conducting the scanning. Therefore, we used
Logstash to add metadata about the targets, such as geolocation, if available. Once the
JSONL file was transformed with the extra metadata, we transmitted the file to Elastic-
search for indexing; this was either done by using Logstash or Elasticdump, depending
on our output file from ZGrab and if it needed any additional data.
4.4.2
Indexes, analyzes, and searching the data with Elasticsearch
When the output file had been filtered and additional meta data added to the JSONL
file, we could store the data and start our analysis. Throughout this thesis, we used
Elasticsearch for the storing and indexing of our data for the reason that Elasticsearch
allows for simple deployment, easy management, and storing large amounts of data rather
than using a traditional database primarily because of the reason described above and
the seamlessness and ease of use of the ELK stack.
4.4.3
Visualizing data with Kibana
When the data was transmitted to Elasticsearch, Elasticsearch would index it such that
it was easy for us to display the different fields from the JSONL file in Kibana. By us-
ing Kibana, we could, with ease, get a visualization of how many misconfigured devices
there were for each protocol, get a percentage of how many devices allowed for unautho-
rized access, and generate a geographic heat map to see which countries had the most
misconfigured devices.
4.4.4
Visualizing data with Seaborn
In addition to Kibana, we also utilized Seaborn to visualize our data. Seaborn is a Python
library used for data visualization and is based on matplotlib [96]. We started with exclu-
sively using Kibana for our visualizations; however, during our analysis phase, we found
out that customization of Kibana’s visualizations is slightly limited. As a result, we looked
at other data visualization tools and discovered that Seaborn fitted our needs in terms of
customization. Since Elasticsearch had indexed all of our gathered data, we could, using
Kibana, cherry-pick the data we wanted to visualize, export it as a CSV file, and feed it to
Seaborn.
4.5
Comparing results with Censys and Shodan
To compare and further verify our results, we compared the results we achieved via ZMap
and ZGrab to those that Shodan and Censys could obtain. We utilized Shodan and Cen-
sys to search for IoT and OT devices for the protocols we described in Section 4.2, namely,
MQTT, Bacnet, TR069, OPC UA, RTPS, XMPP, and DNP3, Modbus, CoAP and AMQP,
where we identified them as being misconfigured in the same way as described in Sec-
tion 4.2. Furthermore, once we obtained all the banners from the different scanned de-
vices, we could proceed with a more in-depth analysis of the banners found to examine the
banners for misconfigurations. To get information about the scanned devices, we queried
for the different protocols touched upon in Section 4.2. The exact queries we used can
be observed in Table 4.5. We retrieved our results from Censys from 20 November 2023
to 22 November 2023. For finding devices running the protocols described in Section 4.2
with Shodan, we used the same approach as Censys; however, the queries will differ. The
queries we used for finding devices with Shodan can be seen in Table 4.6. We retrieved
our results from Shodan in the period 20 November 2023 to 22 November 2023.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
29
==PAGE:38==
Protocol
Censys Query To Find Devices
MQTT
services: (service_name: MQTT)
AMQP
services: (service_name: AMQP)
CoAP
services: (service_name: COAP)
XMPP
services: (service_name: XMPP)
Modbus
services: (service_name: MODBUS)
BACnet
services: (service_name: BACNET)
TR-069
services: (service_name: CWMP)
OPC UA
services: (service_name: OPC_UA)
RTPS
N/A
DNP3
services: (service_name: DNP3)
Table 4.5: Queries for finding IoT or OT devices depending on protocol with Censys.
Protocol
Shodan Query To Find Devices
MQTT
MQTT
AMQP
AMQP
CoAP
CoAP
XMPP
http://etherx.jabber.org/streams
Modbus
port:502 Unit ID
Bacnet
port:47808 Instance ID
TR-069
tr069
OPC UA
port:4840 NodeId
RTPS
RTPS port:7400
DNP3
port:20000 source address
Table 4.6: Queries for finding IoT and OT devices running the different protocols with
Shodan.
4.6
Ethical disclosure of vulnerable devices in Denmark
The ethical disclosure of the vulnerable devices in Denmark was conducted throughout
our analysis phase and was aided by the metadata retrieved from the scanned IPs. As
mentioned in Section 4.4, we utilized Logstash to append extra metadata, such as geo-
graphical location and ASN information, to our results from ZGrab and ZMap. Using this
metadata, we could find all the vulnerable devices in Denmark and their associated ASNs.
We could retrieve the companies or internet service providers owning the IPs through the
ASN. However, most ASNs belonged to ISPs, so it was non-trivial to find out which com-
panies most of the devices belonged to.
Our method of disclosing the information we gathered from the misconfigured devices
involved grouping all the identified vulnerable devices with their geographical data, de-
scription of their vulnerabilities, and associated ASNs. Subsequently, we queried WHOIS
for information about the domain and abuse mail linked to the device’s IP. Using the abuse
mail, we contacted the relevant organizations, providing information about the vulnerable
IPs, the protocols running on the device, why we deemed the device to be misconfigured,
and suggestions on how the misconfiguration could be prevented.
30
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:39==
4.7
Ethical considerations
Throughout this thesis, we had to remember our project’s ethical aspects. This is espe-
cially important since we are scanning and developing extensions for ZGrab that enable
us to find misconfigured devices we do not own.
4.7.1
Developing the modules
When developing the modules, we had to ensure that they could not lead to any harm
done to the target servers or devices. Furthermore, we had to ensure that our scanner
did not cross any grey area, such as trying to log in on the target’s device, using more
packets than needed, and traversing the target’s device upon a successfully established
connection.
TR-069
During the development and testing of our TR-069 scanner, we encountered
multiple instances of being able to store a CPE device onto the ACS without any authen-
tication during the transmission of our inform message. The ACS would, therefore, store
information about the connected CPE that, during our testing, had to be removed man-
ually. Consequently, since we did not know how many ACS servers would permit and
acknowledge an inform message without authentication from the CPE and the possibility
of storing data onto a target server, we chose to omit our TR-069 scanner.
OPC UA
During the development of our OPC UA scanner, we had multiple ways of
establishing a connection to the UA server, such as anonymous, certificate, or user login.
We chose only to use anonymous and self-signed certificates because user login, even
with a list of default username password combinations, could be considered brute-forcing
and could enable access to a server even though it is not misconfigured. Furthermore,
brute-forcing access to a system would be viewed as an attempted attack against the
server and can not be justified with the excuse of conducting research. Additionally, when
we gained access to a server by either anonymous or self-signed certificates, we wanted
to check how much access we had by checking the read and write permissions of the
different objects on the servers. However, while conducting the testing, we found that this
approach transmits many packets, and in combination with reading data that is not ours,
we chose to omit that in our scanner.
RTPS
During the development of our RTPS scanner and testing of the scanner, we
encountered that depending on the implementation of the discovery server by specific
vendors, it might store and send packages to us infinitely; while this may be indicating a
misconfiguration, for the reason that the discovery server would at some point DOS itself.
Therefore, during the development, we ensured that the packet created had information
about the timespan our client should be viewed as being active.
4.7.2
Best practices while conducting scanning
Throughout this thesis, we followed the recommended ethical practices for conducting
scanning and being good internet citizens described in the ZMap paper [21]. In prepa-
ration for the scanning, we contacted Hetzner [35] and DTU Compute IT-Support on
13/09/2023 to request server access and permission to start scanning. DTU Compute
gave us on 30/11/2023 permission to use one of their servers for conducting the research.
Before we began the scanning, we set up a website that clearly stated the purpose and the
scope of the scan and offered a way to opt out of future scans. Furthermore, during the
correspondence with DTU Compute IT-Support, the Danish computer security incident
response team [20] was contacted to let them know about our scanning and research.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
31
==PAGE:40==
Scanning blocklist
In addition to the above considerations, before conducting our first scan, we also investi-
gated how our initial blocklist should be. ZMap does provide a default blocklist. However,
this list only includes IPs from the ”IANA IPv4 Special-Purpose Address Registry” and
”IANA Multicast Address Space Registry”. These registries contain local IPs, private IPs,
Loopback IPs, multicast addresses, etc. Since we wanted to avoid scanning IP addresses
that belong to governments, the military, and other vital sectors, we researched existing
blocklists. We found lists that contained numerous IP ranges that are reserved for these
purposes. For example, several /8 IP blocks (e.g., 6.0.0.0/8, 7.0.0.0.8, 11.0.0.0/8, …) are
assigned for the United States Department of Defense [97]. We also utilized the block-
list provided by Masscan [30], another internet-wide scanning tool similar to ZMap. This
list contained IPs of organizations that previously contacted Masscan requesting to be
excluded from future scans. Unfortunately, the lists we found were US-centric, meaning
most government and military IPs we omitted from our scan belong to the United States
only.
Additionally, we opted to exclude IPs associated with known network scanners from our
scan. This decision stems from recognizing that scanning other scanners would offer
minimal value, given our focus on identifying misconfigured IoT and OT devices. Notable
scanners we blocked include Shodan, Censys, Rapid7 Labs, Shadowserver, and others.
4.7.3
Ethical handling of the gathered data
As mentioned in Section 4.4 we upload our scan results from the server to the cloud,
namely Google Drive. To comply with GDPR, we will delete all of our data 1 month after
submitting our thesis.
32
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:41==
5
Implementation
This chapter will delve into the implementation and choices we made while developing
the different modules for ZGrab. We will start by breaking down the implementation of the
modules we made from scratch, namely the OPC UA module, the RTPS module, and the
TR-069 module. Afterwards we will explain how we updated and extended the remaining
modules which are MQTT, AMQP, CoAP and XMPP.
ZGrab is a fast, modular application layer scanner that incorporates a framework for ex-
tending the scanner with new modules. These modules will have to satisfy interfaces
specified by ZGrab in order to function. These interfaces are Scanner, ScanModule, and
ScanFlags, which are essentially responsible for dictating how ZGrab should establish a
connection to the target and what packages or information should be conversed.
5.1
Developing the OPC UA module
The development and implementation of the OPC UA module was split into three parts.
Namely, the discovery of the endpoint, followed by the agreement of cryptographic pro-
tocols, and lastly, the checking of access to the OPC UA server. For the development
of the OPC UA module, we utilized the Go package gopcua [78] for all the primary OPC
UA methods and functions. The idea behind and how the implementation works can be
seen in Figure 5.1 As observed in Figure 5.1, our implementation will try to see whether
Figure 5.1: Showcasing of how the code functions when utilizing the OPC UA module
a connection to the target host at port 4840 is possible. If the connection to the target
was possible, we knew it was indeed an OPC UA service running, and we could log it as
such. The module would then proceed to receive all endpoints from the OPC UA server
by utilizing the gopcua package. Once all the endpoints are received, the module will go
through the security policies and security modes the OPC UA server endpoints support.
Each of these security policies and security modes would then be logged, allowing for fur-
ther analysis later on. Nevertheless, it should be noted that our implementation will only
Unmasking digital ghost ships
33
==PAGE:42==
1
type Log struct {
2
IsOPCUA
bool
`json:"is_opcua"`
3
IP
string
`json:"IPAddress ,omitempty"`
4
Authentication
Authentication
`json:"Authentication ,omitempty"`
5
EncryptionProtocols EncryptionProtocols `json:"EncryptionProtocols ,omitempty
"`
6
SecurityModes
SecurityModes
`json:"SecurityModes ,omitempty"`
7
Certificate
[]byte
`json:"Certificate ,omitempty"`
8
}
9
type Authentication struct {
10
Anonymous
bool `json:"Anonymous"`
11
CertificateLogin bool `json:"CertificateLogin"`
12
}
13
type EncryptionProtocols struct {
14
None
bool `json:"None,omitempty"`
15
Basic128Rsa15
bool `json:"Basic128Rsa15 ,omitempty"`
16
Basic256
bool `json:"Basic256 ,omitempty"`
17
Basic256Sha256
bool `json:"Basic256Sha256 ,omitempty"`
18
Aes128Sha256RsaOaep bool `json:"Aes128 -Sha256 -RsaOaep ,omitempty"`
19
Aes256Sha256RsaPss
bool `json:"Aes256Sha256RsaPss ,omitempty"`
20
}
21
type SecurityModes struct {
22
None
bool `json:"None,omitempty"`
23
Sign
bool `json:"Sign,omitempty"`
24
SignAndEncrypt bool `json:"SignAndEncrypt ,omitempty"`
25
}
Listing 5.1: OPCUA log file, showing what information we grab for and store.
try to connect at the default root directory, meaning that all OPC UA servers not set at
the base URL will be filtered out, which, as a result, may change the results of how many
servers we will be able to scan for successfully. This could maybe be accommodated by
fuzzing for valid endpoints. However, this would be future work. Once we knew that a
connection had successfully been established, we had to retrieve information about the
OPC UA server and check if it allowed us to log in on the server either anonymously or
by providing a self-signed certificate. The creation of the client opts was based on- and
a modification of the crypto.go file from the gopcua github [78]. The overall idea was
to check all the security policies and algorithms supported by the server and then try to
log in using the weakest policy. This allowed us to grasp the server’s security configura-
tions by knowing which policies and security modes the server supported. Furthermore,
by attempting to log on to the server anonymously or with a self-signed certificate, we
knew whether the server was properly configured regarding authentication. The code for
what data was grabbed can be observed in Listing 5.1. The primary idea was to log all
the received information from the OPC UA server, that is, the security policies, security
modes, and the server certificate, which could then be further analyzed by the approach
mentioned in Section 4.4. Finally, the sequence diagram when conducting the internet-
wide scanning utilizing our OPC UA module can be seen in Figure 5.2. Here, it can be
observed that the communication by our client will begin with a GetEndpoints message,
essentially trying to establish a connection to the target on port 4840 and then request all
the available endpoints that the server has. We will then receive all the endpoints from
the server with different descriptions, that is, security policies and modes. We chose the
weakest endpoint and the weakest security policies and modes it offered and then pro-
ceeded to create the client accommodating for the chosen security policy and security
mode. We then proceed to try to attempt an anonymous login. If we get a response back
34
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.2: The sequence diagram of the communication between the OPC UA module
and a OPC UA server.
that a session has been created, we log that an anonymous login is possible and proceed
to try with a self-signed certificate.
5.2
Developing the RTPS module
The RTPS module was split into two parts: the creation of the RTPS discovery packet and
the scanner itself. We developed the discovery packet in accordance with the DDS/RTPS
documentation. In Figure 5.3, the structure of the RTPS discovery message can be ob-
served. For implementing the discovery packet, we utilized Wireshark to capture valid
Figure 5.3: The structure of the RTPS discovery packet
RTPS discovery messages transmitted with eProsima Fast DDS client [24]. We began by
implementing the RTPS header, whose structure can be seen in Figure 5.4. The RTPS
header identifies the packet as a RTPS packet holding information about the version, ven-
dor, and Host. Furthermore, it should be noted that when transmitting a RTPS discovery
message, if the headers vendor ID does not correspond to the same vendor ID as the
discovery server, the discovery server might discard our packet and not respond. We,
Unmasking digital ghost ships
35
==PAGE:44==
therefore, implemented a way to specify which vendor the module should scan for. Next,
Figure 5.4: The structure of the RTPS header.
we developed the INFO TS submessage, which holds information on when the packet
was transmitted, which, in our case, was when the packet was created. The structure of
the INFO TS message can be seen in Figure 5.5. Finally, we implemented the DATA sub-
Figure 5.5: The structure of the RTPS INFO TS submessage.
message, which contains all the information the discovery server will need to store us as
readers or writers. Furthermore, this submessage also contains the IP address and port
we want to receive packets on. The structure of the DATA submessage can be observed
in Figure 5.6. For the transmission of the discovery packet, we used the built-in UDP
support from ZGrab that returns a UDP connection, which we can transmit our packet
on, shown in Listing 5.7. However, when testing the module, we found that it was not
possible to receive responses from the RTPS discovery server; this is mainly because
of how the RTPS protocol works, as it will respond to the IP and port set in the DATA
sub-message. However, this would mean we would have many threads from the scanner
listening on the same port, resulting in some concurrency issues. We, therefore, created
a server in Python that listens on the specified port for UDP packets and stores and filters
out packets from the same IP and packets that do not have the RTPS Header as seen in
Figure 5.7. The sequence diagram for the scenario of scanning with the RTPS module
can be observed in Figure 5.8; here, it can be seen that the RTPS module will transmit a
discovery message to an RTPS discovery server. The discovery server will then transmit
packets to a specified collector server for either a timespan specified in the configuration
of the server or by the QoS specified in the RTPS discovery message packet.
36
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.6: The structure of the RTPS DATA submessage.
Figure 5.7: The overall idea behind the implementation of the RTPS module.
5.3
Developing the TR-069 module
The TR-069 module was split into two main components: the construction of the TR-069
inform message and the scanner. The format of the inform message is a SOAP message,
which is an XML document containing the following elements:
Envelope The envelope identifies the XML document as a SOAP message.
Header The header contains the structure "CWMPID".
Body The body contains the central part of the Inform message. Firstly, it has the de-
vice ID structure, a set of elements used to uniquely identify the customer-premises
equipment (CPE), for example, a customer router. It also contains an event struct ,
which is an array containing the set of events that caused the CWMP session to oc-
cur. The body further contains a parameter list, which is a list of key-value pairs that
reference CWMP data model objects and their current values. As an example, one
of the parameters is "InternetGatewayDevice.DeviceInfo.SoftwareVersion", which
Unmasking digital ghost ships
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.8: The sequence diagram over the RTPS module. The client will send a RTPS
discovery message to the RTPS discovery server, which will then trigger a response from
the server.
could have the value "V100R001IRQC56B017".
We developed the inform message by utilizing Wireshark to capture valid packets sent
by a TR-069 client, such as a CPE, to an ACS server, which we set up locally. We could
then utilize the values for the captured CPE inform message to construct our own. For the
transmission of the packet, we utilized the http library from Go to perform a HTTP POST
request with our SOAP message. In Figure 5.9, the overall idea of the implementation
can be observed; here, it can be seen that we, as mentioned, begin by creating a HTTP
client and constructing the SOAP message, which is then wrapped in an HTTP POST
request. Afterward, it sends the constructed inform message to the specified IP and port
using a POST request. If the targeted endpoint properly receives and processes our
inform message, it will respond with an InformResponse. The response from the ACS
server will then be logged in a JSONL file with information about the HTTP status, body,
and whether it is TR-069. Furthermore, the sequence diagram when scanning with the
Figure 5.9: The overall structure of our TR-069 module implementation.
38
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:47==
TR-069 module can be observed in Figure 5.10; here, it can be seen that the TR-069
module will transmit the inform message. Suppose the inform message is successfully
received and processed by the ACS server. In that case, the ACS server will respond
with an InformResponse message, indicating to us that no authentication was needed to
establish a connection with the ACS. As mentioned in Section 4.2.2, we consciously chose
Figure 5.10: The sequence diagram over the TR-069 module. The TR-069 client will
transmit an Inform message to the ACS and receive an InformResponse response.
not to use our TR-069 scanner outside of our local testing environment, as we modify the
ACS state by creating ourselves as objects on it. This is not ethically sound, as the owner
of the ACS, most likely an Internet Service Provider (ISP), would need to actively remove
us as clients on their ACS. Consequently, we instead chose to use ZGrab’s built-in HTTP
scanner module to try to identify devices running the TR-069 protocol.
5.4
Extending the MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, and XMPP modules
We obtained ZGrab modules for MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, and XMPP from a fellow re-
searcher and extended them and updated these modules to align with the current spec-
ifications of ZGrab’s scanner interface. Furthermore, we aimed to enhance these mod-
ules by incorporating additional functionalities, desiring to gather more information in the
scanners than the original implementations allowed. This led to our decision to extend
and customize these modules to suit our research objectives better.
MQTT
The original MQTT module tries to establish a connection to a MQTT device
to see if the device has no authentication. We extended this further and checked what
connection code the device would respond with. Furthermore, if allowed access to the
MQTT device, we would subscribe to the topics on the device to retrieve more relevant
data. This was done by first setting the client options for our MQTT module. To ensure
we did not overload the target in any way, we set a timeout at 90 seconds and did not try
to reconnect to the target. Nonetheless, we attempted to connect to the target and store
the connection code. If the connection attempt is successful, we will subscribe to $SYS/#
and # and retrieve at most 50 topics. Lastly, we will disconnect from the target.
AMQP
The original AMQP module would try to connect to an assumed AMQP device
using an empty string as credentials to resemble an anonymous login and then proceed
to log it if it were successful. We extended upon this and further implemented a way for
the module to ask for the server’s capabilities using the amqp go library [88]. In detail,
our extended AMQP module would first set the configuration of our AMQP client; here,
we chose to use plain authentication with an empty username and password to resemble
anonymous authentication, like the original module. We then connected to the target and
Unmasking digital ghost ships
39
==PAGE:48==
1
stanza := "<?xml version='1.0'?><stream:stream xmlns:stream='http://etherx.
jabber.org/streams'" + " xmlns=" + xmlns + " to='" + target.Host() + "'
version='1.0'>"
Listing 5.2: Transmitted XMPP message
requested the AMQP version and the server properties. Lastly, we would disconnect from
the target.
CoAP
The original CoAP module would query for /.well-known/core, which will trigger
a response from the target; the module would then log the response code from the target.
We extended further upon this while still keeping the main idea behind the module; we
query for /.well-known/core and log the response code and the payload from the target,
which might hold valuable information about the target we are scanning.
XMPP
The original XMPP module would create a XMPP client and attempt to establish
a connection to a presumed XMPP server with an empty username and password to
resemble an anonymous login. Instead, we chose to initiate a XMPP communication
stream with the target. This was done by establishing a TCP connection to the target
and creating a XMPP stream message with relevant information about the target and
whether we wanted to act as the XMPP client or server. The constructed message can
be seen in Listing 5.2. Here xmlns indicates whether we want to act as client or server
and target.Host() is the target’s IP or domain. Once a target running XMPP receives
this message and transmits a response, we will log the response as the XMPP banner.
40
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:49==
6
Statistical analysis
In this chapter, we will delve into our findings of misconfigured IoT and OT devices and
analyze the results we obtained. Using ZMap combined with ZGrab, we found 20,830,366
devices dispersed throughout the Internet when scanning for MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, XMPP,
Modbus, BACnet, TR-069, OPC UA, RTPS, and DNP3. The number of exposed sys-
tems for each protocol can be seen in Table 6.1. Furthermore, by utilizing Censys and
Shodan, we found 7,411,213 and 6,279,454 devices, respectively, when using the queries
described in Section 4.5. Additionally, in Table 6.2, the summary of our findings can be
observed.
Exposed systems
Protocol
Our scan
Censys
Shodan
MQTT
491,794
559,357
538,721
AMQP
650,046
260,700
174,870
CoAP
301,933
67,580
347,327
XMPP
214,956
174,750
219,006
Modbus
30,398
44,157
32,027
BACnet
34,637*
13,904
12,850
TR-069
19,103,999
6,286,976
4,942,986
OPC UA
1,707
2,898
625
DDS
199
N/A
239
DNP3
697
891
803
Total
20,830,366
7,411,213
6,279,454
Table 6.1: Number of exposed systems for each protocol found using ZMap and ZGrab.
*See comments in Section 6.6.1 regarding this result.
6.1
Analysis of MQTT
When searching for exposed MQTT devices, we found 538,721 devices with Shodan
and 559,357 with Censys. The difference in found devices between the two services is
negligible and supports that at least on the surface, they have similar scanning capabilities
regarding MQTT. The top countries with the highest percentages of MQTT devices are
South Korea (66.9%), China (12.56%), Japan (3.5%), the United States (3.22%), and
Germany (2.24%). Interestingly, a large majority of the found MQTT devices are, based
on Shodans data, located within Asia. This regional distribution suggests a noteworthy
prevalence of MQTT adoption in Asia.
Shodan has not tagged any of the found MQTT devices as being honeypots. There are
likely honeypots among the found results, which we unfortunately cannot detect. This
notion is supported by searching the data set and finding an obvious honeypot that had
honeypot included in its domain name. Visiting the site confirmed our suspicions. Most
honeypots would not be as obvious as this outlier.
When querying for vulnerable MQTT devices, we found 421,563 misconfigured devices
with Censys and 456,883 with Shodan.
Each of these devices responded with MQTT
Connection Code:0, indicating no authentication was required to connect to the device.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
41
==PAGE:50==
Protocol
Vulnerability
Our scan
Shodan
No authentication
424,961
456,883
MQTT
Vulnerable products
403,916
64,043
DNP3
Exposed on the Internet
668
611
BACnet
Exposed on the Internet
7,217
12,757
No authentication
178
543
OPC UA
Weak encryption
1,019
N/A
CoAP
Resource disclosure
151,042
346,116
Exposed on the Internet
199
239
RTPS
Disclose information
63
N/A
No authentication
34
11,193
AMQP
Vulnerable products
100,352
170,799
Modbus
Exposed on the Internet
30,398
32,027
No authentication
175,670
17,124
TR-069
Vulnerable software versions
3,535,086
77
No authentication
323
2,089
XMPP
Weak hashing algorithms
9,893
48,310
Table 6.2: Vulnerable devices found by our scan and shodans. Censys is neglected since
it was not possible to receive the banners for analysis.
Upon scrutinizing the geographical data, it became evident that a significant proportion of
vulnerable devices, namely 77.37%, were located in South Korea, according to Shodan’s
data. Even when accounting for the fact that South Korea has by far the largest amount
of MQTT devices, they still have proportionally many misconfigured devices, as 99.5% of
MQTT devices in South Korea responded with Connection Code 0. The vulnerable de-
vices can be further analyzed by subscribing to topics located on the MQTT device. On
scanned vulnerable entities, Censys reports successful subscriptions to topics. However,
Censys does not provide specific topic names, at least not within the data available on their
website and through their API. In contrast, Shodan subscribes to topics and lists several,
starting with $SYS topics. Consequently, the most common topics are all $SYS topics.
Shodan can only identify one MQTT product effectively, namely Eclipse Mosquitto [23],
the broker implementation used for 65,733 (12.2%) of the found devices. The 20 most
used Mosquitto versions, along with the number of CVEs associated with them and the
days since these versions were released, can be seen in Figure 6.1. Notably, the most
prevalent version is 1.4.8, dating back to 2016. This poses a concern as older versions
tend to have a higher number of associated vulnerabilities, as evident in both Figure 6.1
and Table 6.3, which lists the specific high-impact CVEs associated with each of the most
commonly used versions of Mosquitto. The two oldest versions, which are also the most
used, 1.4.8 and 1.4.13, have ten high-impact CVEs associated with them and, as a re-
sult, many different types of vulnerabilities. The newer versions also have vulnerabilities
but are only within Denial of Service. These findings underline the importance of ver-
sion updates to enhance security.
As previously mentioned, Shodan does not detect
other products than Mosquitto; that is, its product field is either ”MQTT” or ”Mosquitto”.
Nevertheless, by examining the listed topics, we identified other MQTT products used
by the found devices. These include ActiveMQ (3438), zigbee2mqtt (701), EMQX (585),
VerneMQ (131), Erlang MQTT Broker (77), etc.
In addition, we were also able to identify the type of devices using MQTT through the
listed topics. These included smart doorbells, microcontrollers, ethernet remote devices,
42
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.1: The top 20 most used Mosquitto versions along with the number of high-impact
CVEs. It can be observed that older versions have more CVEs.
CPE
CVE
Vulnerability
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:1.4.8
CVE-2018-12550, CVE-2018-12551,
CVE-2017-7655, CVE-2023-5632,
CVE-2021-34432, CVE-2017-7651,
CVE-2017-7652, CVE-2017-7654
Input validation, Denial of Service,
Bypass, Privilege Escalation
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:1.4.13
Same CVEs as 1.4.8
Input validation, Denial of Service,
Bypass, Privilege Escalation
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:2.0.11
CVE-2021-41039
Denial of Service
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:2.0.15
-
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:1.5.7
CVE-2023-5632, CVE-2021-34432
Denial of Service
All above versions
CVE-2023-28366, CVE-2023-3592
Denial of Service
Table 6.3: Top five most frequently used Mosquitto versions, and their associated high
impact CVEs. The older versions have many different types of vulnerabilities. Source for
CVEs: [15]
smart home platforms, 3D printers, and Teslamate, a data logger and visualizer for Tesla
cars [91], which is typically hosted locally.
6.1.1
Our scan
When we performed our own scan using our MQTT module, we found 491,794 MQTT
devices. The geographical distribution highlights concentrations in South Korea (74.09%),
China (11.2%), the United States (2.84%), and Germany (1.84%), as seen in Figure 6.2.
A comparison between the number of vulnerable MQTT devices and the total number of
devices running MQTT found by Censys, Shodan, and ourselves can be seen in Table 6.4.
By looking at the table, it can be observed that we find the largest percentage of vulnerable
devices, which are, as stated earlier, devices that allow for unauthenticated connections.
However, we find fewer total MQTT devices than both Censys and Shodan. A reasonable
part of the hosts we find is unique, meaning that Shodan does not have these IPs in their
results. In total, we found 88,128 MQTT devices that Shodan does not. As mentioned
earlier, it is devices responding with connection code 0 that allow for unauthenticated
connections. The distribution of the different connection codes that were responded with
Unmasking digital ghost ships
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.2: Geographical distribution of exposed MQTT devices.
Our scan
Censys
Shodan
All MQTT Devices found
491,794
559,357
538,721
Vulnerable
424,961
421,563
456,883
Percentage vulnerable devices
∼86.41%
∼75.37%
∼84.81%
Table 6.4: Number of devices running MQTT vs number of vulnerable devices.
when scanning the MQTT devices can be seen in Figure 6.3. Since we, like Shodan,
Figure 6.3: The different connection codes returned from the scanned MQTT devices and
the meaning of the connection codes
also subscribe to $SYS topics and # topics, we can also identify if the MQTT product
is Mosquitto and, if so, what version of Mosquitto it is running. For Mosquitto, it stores
its product name and version in the payload of the topic ”$SYS/broker/version.” Almost
all of the misconfigured MQTT devices we find have Mosquitto as their product (99.8%).
The top 5 versions in our data differ from Shodan’s, with version 1.4.13 (37,253) leading
the list. Interestingly, the commonly used Shodan version 1.4.8 is absent from our top 5.
However, our top version, 1.4.13, shares the same CVEs as the 1.4.8 version, as detailed
in Table 6.3. The remaining four versions in our top 5 include 2.0.11 (36,840), 1.6.9
(36,439), 1.5.9 (34,287), and 1.4.15 (27,373). The latter three are not present in Shodan’s
44
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:53==
top 5, and their associated CVEs can be seen in Table 6.5. All these versions have several
high-impact CVEs, mirroring the scenario for the top versions found by Shodan. Most
of the CVEs are, once again, related to Denial of Service vulnerabilities. A noteworthy
finding is that only Mosquitto versions 2.0.16 and newer have no known CVEs [15]. Our
gathered data shows that only 20,097 devices had this version or newer version. Out of all
the devices we detected running Mosquitto, this amounts to a modest 4.74% of Mosquitto
devices. We also identified two other products, HBMQTT and smopush. Consequently,
CPE
CVE
Vulnerability
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:1.6.9
CVE-2021-41039
Denial of Service
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:1.5.9
-
cpe:2.3:a:eclipse:mosquitto:1.4.15
CVE-2018-12550, CVE-2018-12551,
CVE-2017-7654, CVE-2017-7655,
Input Validation, Denial of Service,
Bypass, Privilege Escalation
All above versions
CVE-2023-28366, CVE-2023-3592,
CVE-2023-5632, CVE-2021-34432
Denial of Service
Table 6.5: Top Mosquitto versions from our own scan and their associated high-impact
CVEs. It can be seen that these versions are all susceptible to Denial of Service vulner-
abilities. Source for CVEs: [15]
we find fewer types of products than Shodan. This can be attributed to our self-imposed
limit of storing a maximum of 50 topics to prevent overloading MQTT devices. Shodan,
lacking such constraints, had considerably more topics for product analysis.
Out of the total MQTT devices we discovered (491,794), 212 were located in Denmark,
with 76 of them being misconfigured. These misconfigured devices were spread across
26 ASNs. We contacted these organizations to inform them about their misconfigured
MQTT devices.
6.1.2
Key findings
Out of the 491,794 MQTT devices identified in our scan, a staggering 86.41% (424,961
devices) were found to be misconfigured, rendering them vulnerable. While our total count
of identified devices was lower than that of Shodan and Censys, the percentage of vul-
nerable devices aligned with Shodan’s findings and exceeded Censys’s. Additionally, we
discovered 88,128 MQTT devices that Shodan did not identify. Through Shodan’s topic
data, we identified different IoT devices, such as smart doorbells, smart home platforms,
and 3D printers.
Investigating product and product versions revealed that most devices ran versions with
several vulnerabilities. As expected, older versions tend to have more vulnerabilities,
which becomes clear when looking at Figure 6.1. Notably, of all the devices we identi-
fied to be using Mosquitto in our scan, only 4.74% ran versions with no vulnerabilities.
Our analysis of product and product versions highlights the importance of disallowing
unauthenticated connections, as version grabbing was only possible upon establishing a
successful connection.
6.2
Analysis of AMQP
When scanning and identifying devices running AMQP, we found 174,870 exposed de-
vices with Shodan and 260,700 exposed devices with Censys. Most of the exposed de-
vices came from China (38.4%), followed by the United States (18.0%), Germany (8.5%),
France (4.3%), and Russia (3.7%). We examined the received banners for the indica-
tors listed in Table 4.3, that is, the presence of the security mechanisms SASL PLAIN
Unmasking digital ghost ships
45
==PAGE:54==
and SASL ANONYMOUS in the banners. Furthermore, we also looked for other rele-
vant metadata, such as the product, product version, and other security mechanisms the
SASL was configured to support. Investigating the SASL security mechanisms supported
by the conducted AMQP scan, we found 11,522 devices that returned the banner for
the SASL handshake. From the found devices, we discovered that 98.88% supported
PLAIN, 97.15% supported ANONYMOUS, 70.56% supported EXTERNAL, and 70.34%
supported MSSBCBS. All the gathered SASL handshakes were from the non-TLS en-
abled port, 5672. This might lead to the belief that the devices are misconfigured be-
cause the devices allow the passing of username and password credentials on an inse-
cure channel or for anonymous logins. However, a deeper dive into the data via Shodan
reveals that the preponderance of devices conduct a mandatory upgrade of the connec-
tion to TLS by creating a tunnel over TCP port 443. However, this mostly only applied
for devices deployed via a cloud service; filtering out cloud services, we get a rough es-
timate of 2,282 devices where 98.98% support plain authentication and 97.98% support
anonymous authentication via an insecure channel.
Analyzing all the received banners, we see that many AMQP devices reject our connec-
tion. However, we found that the majority of devices used the product RabbitMQ [73],
specifically 99.15%, with the rest mainly being Advanced Message Queue Protocol, Lav-
inMQ, and Apache Qpid with 0.73%, 0.07%, and 0.01% respectively. Figure 6.4 show-
cases the top-used RabbitMQ versions, the days elapsed since their release, and the
number of high-impact CVEs. Examining the top-used versions of the top product, Rab-
bitMQ, we found that the majority of the devices are running outdated versions of Rab-
bitMQ, resulting in the possibility of being vulnerable. Specifically, 14 of the 20 most
frequently used RabbitMQ versions, as depicted in Figure 6.4, are no longer supported.
In addition, only one version in the top 20, 3.12.8, has no known vulnerabilities. By look-
ing up the product versions using the CVE database, NIST NVD [40], we were able to
investigate the CVEs for the most frequently used versions. An overview of the top five
most used versions of RabbitMQ, the corresponding CVEs rated high, and the types of
vulnerabilities identified can be seen in Table 6.6. Our CVE analysis found that all ver-
sions before 3.12.6 are vulnerable to a DOS attack. However, this attack could only be
done by an authenticated client. Nevertheless, we found no versions vulnerable to no au-
thentication attack; the majority of the CVEs required a certain level of authentication and
the correct plugins on the device to be able to conduct.
While analyzing the results, we
CPE
CVE
Vulnerability
cpe:/a:vmware:rabbitmq:3.8.2
CVE-2020-5419, CVE-2021-22116,
CVE-2022-31008
Arbitrary code execution, Denial of Service
Deobfuscatable data
cpe:/a:vmware:rabbitmq:3.9.13
CVE-2022-31008
Deobfuscatable data
cpe:/a:vmware:rabbitmq:3.8.9
CVE-2022-31008, CVE-2021-22116,
CVE-2021-22117
Deobfuscatable data, Denial of Service
Add arbitrary plugins
cpe:/a:vmware:rabbitmq:3.6.10
CVE-2022-31008, CVE-2021-22116
Deobfuscatable data, Denial of Service
cpe:/a:vmware:rabbitmq:3.6.6
CVE-2022-31008, CVE-2021-22116
Deobfuscatable data, Denial of Service
Table 6.6: Top five most frequently used products and their versions for AMQP, showing
the CVE rated high they can be vulnerable to and the corresponding vulnerability. The
legend shows the count of devices and whether the versions are still supported.
found no certificates from Shodan’s scan on AMQP. This might be because our query did
not gather data on AMQPs (AMQP secure on TLS). Furthermore, the certificates used on
the upgraded connection were on another port and, therefore, not extracted. Throughout
the analysis of AMQP, we found no patterns or indicators in the received banners that
could lead to a conclusion on the different device types utilizing AMQP.
46
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.4: The top 20 most frequently used RabbitMQ versions from Shodan, days since
they were released, and the number of high-impact CVEs for each version.
6.2.1
Our scan
When we performed our scan using our AMQP module, we discovered 650,046 AMQP de-
vices. These devices were primarily located in the United States (70.41%), China (8.61%),
and Israel (6.08%), as depicted in Figure 6.5. However, 52.07% of the devices discovered
Figure 6.5: AMQP exposed devices dispersed throughout the world
responded with a banner stating a server error ”EOF.” This usually occurs when a guest
user tries to log into an AMQP server, where the server has only allowed localhost access.
No other information could be retrieved from these banners. Furthermore, we discover a
”frame could not be parsed” by 29.27% of devices, which is also a server error usually oc-
curring when a client tries to connect without TLS when TLS is required. Nonetheless, we
find 18.46% of the banners to indicate that the wrong username/password was provided;
this is highly likely due to the AMQP module trying to log in with empty strings to resemble
an anonymous login. Diving deeper into the results from our AMQP scan, we found 34
devices that allowed us access using empty strings as username and password. This
seems relatively low when compared to what Shodan received and might, therefore, in-
dicate that the AMQP module might not try anonymous login but actually tries to connect
Unmasking digital ghost ships
47
==PAGE:56==
with empty strings. Nonetheless, we find 120,594 AMQP devices that respond with its
capabilities; here, we find that 99.89% are utilizing RabbitMQ, while a small percentage
use LavinMQ (0.08%), Apache Qpid (0.01%) and AMQProxy (0.01%).
In Figure 6.6, the RabbitMQ versions gathered from the banners can be observed; here it
can be observed that the most prominent versions are RabbitMQ 3.8.2, RabbitMQ 3.9.13
and RabbitMQ 3.8.9, which are also backed by the results we gathered from Shodan as
evident from Figure 6.4. Furthermore, we again notice that these devices are running
product versions that are found vulnerable to several CVEs, as seen in Table 6.6. We
also discovered that 91,273 of the found AMQP devices used RabbitMQ versions prior
to 3.11.*, which are versions that are no longer supported; we also noticed that these
versions are more likely to have a severe vulnerability as seen in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Top 20 RabbitMQ versions found from our AMQP scanning, showcasing their
days since release, severity scores, and amount of devices using said version.
Investigating the data further, specifically looking at devices located in Denmark, we dis-
covered 24 AMQP devices. None of these devices allowed for remote access by anony-
mous or credential login. However, we discovered that all of these devices used Rab-
bitMQ, with the most used version being 3.8.2. Furthermore, 18 of the devices used non-
supported versions of RabbitMQ. A worrying finding was that only 2 out of the 24 AMQP
devices were running presumably secure versions, that is, versions without known vulner-
abilities. Consequently, 22 of the discovered devices ran insecure versions of RabbitMQ
and were scattered across 15 organizations. We reached out to these organizations to
inform them about our findings.
6.2.2
Key findings
Using the AMQP module from ZGrab, we uncovered a total of 650,046 devices. 81.34%
of these devices did not disclose their implementation. Nevertheless, we were able to
48
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:57==
identify 18.55% devices that utilize RabbitMQ as their product. Of this subset, 83.21%
devices were found to possess vulnerable versions that could potentially result in DoS
attacks on the device. We also noted that 75.68% of the devices were using versions of
RabbitMQ that are no longer supported (e.g., versions 3.8.2, 3.9.13, 3.8.9).
Investigating product and product versions revealed that most devices tend to run older
versions, as evident from Figure 6.4 and Figure 6.6. Notably, we discovered a clear cor-
relation between older versions having more CVEs and a higher severity score, indicating
they have a higher likelihood of being vulnerable. Nonetheless, we found that out of all
AMQP devices providing information about their product and product versions, only 1.79%
were using versions without any discovered vulnerability.
6.3
Analysis of CoAP
Scanning for devices running CoAP, we discovered 347,327 devices using Shodan and
only 67,580 with Censys. When analyzing the geographical location of the devices, we
find that the majority of CoAP devices are located in the Philippines (32.9%), followed by
Russia (24.4%), China (16.4%), Malaysia (11.2%) and Canada (4.5%). Examining the re-
sponses from the scanned CoAP devices, we found that 346,116 out of 346,327, roughly
99.93% of all devices, have resource disclosure, and 106 devices (0.03%) allow for gain-
ing full access to the server. Conducting an in-depth analysis of resource disclosure from
the responses, we find information revealing the device type. Figure 6.7 depicts the differ-
ent device types found by conducting this approach. Nevertheless, from the responses
from the devices running CoAP, we could not gather nor find any information leading
us to gain knowledge of the different implementations of CoAP and their corresponding
versions. However, it should be noted that having a device with CoAP exposed on the
public-facing Internet is in itself a misconfiguration of the protocol because of the fact that
CoAP is a UDP-based protocol and is therefore vulnerable to IP spoofing and can conse-
quently be recruited by malicious actors to perform amplification attacks [46]. During the
scanning of CoAP devices with Shodan, no certificates were extracted. This is because
most CoAP devices found with our query ran on port 5683 instead of the DTLS-secured
CoAP port 5684.
In Table 6.7, the different device types and their frequency can be observed; here, it can
be seen that we primarily found routers from Qlink and ndm and wireless sensors from
efento and xirgo. Nevertheless, the remaining devices that disclosed their resources did
not provide enough information to conclude anything about the device type or other vul-
nerabilities. However, out of 347,327 devices running CoAP, we discovered that 43.08%
are routers, and 0.37% are wireless sensors.
Device
Device type
Indicator
Amount
Qlink
Router
/qlink
60,411
NDM
Router
/ndm
89,205
Efento
Wireless sensor
/efento
1,311
Xirgo
Wireless sensor
/XirgoCommand
1
Table 6.7: The different device types found in the responses from the devices running
CoAP with Shodan.
6.3.1
Our scan
When we conducted our own scan, aided by the CoAP module we extended in ZGrab,
we found 301,933 exposed CoAP devices on the Internet. The geographical distribution
Unmasking digital ghost ships
49
==PAGE:58==
of the found CoAP devices is visualized in Figure 6.7. Examining the data, the devices
were primarily located in China (23.73%), Russia (19.69%), and the Philippines (17.67%).
In Figure 6.8, the responses received from the CoAP devices from the top countries can
Figure 6.7: Geographical distribution of exposed CoAP devices.
be seen; here, it can be observed that the primary response we receive upon scanning
is Content, meaning that the CoAP device discloses its resources. We received this re-
sponse from 151,042 devices primarily located in China and the Philippines. We did not
receive enough information from the resources to conclude any device type; however,
we found that 106,753 out of 151,042 devices that expose their resources are utilizing a
C-Implementation of CoAP called libcoap. Nonetheless, other responses from the CoAP
devices were NotFound, Unauthorized, and Changed, as observed in Figure 6.8. While
the response Changed indicates that we were able to have a direct impact on the device,
this was only the case for one device. However, as noted before, exposing a CoAP de-
vice on the Internet can lead to amplification attacks; as a result, we discovered 301,933
vulnerable CoAP devices and 64 of these devices stem from Denmark. Additionally, we
inform the organizations in Denmark about the exposed CoAP devices.
6.3.2
Key findings
Utilizing the CoAP module from ZGrab, we discovered 301,933 exposed CoAP devices
on the Internet that can be utilized in an amplification attack. Evidently, we found fewer
devices than Shodan, as they found 347,327 exposed CoAP devices. However, inves-
tigating the number of devices we found that Shodan does not, amount to 212,090; this
may be because we found a substantial amount of devices that have Shodan blocklisted.
Using Shodan’s data, we were able to determine that out of all the CoAP devices with
resource disclosure, 43.08% were routers and 0.37% were wireless sensors. When we
analyzed all the response types we gathered from our scan, an interesting finding was that
the Philippines, the country with the third most CoAP devices, had resource disclosure on
all their devices. This revelation can be seen in Figure 6.8.
6.4
Analysis of XMPP
When scanning and identifying devices running XMPP, we found 219,006 exposed de-
vices with Shodan and 174,750 with Censys. The devices were primarily located in Ger-
many (19.1%), the United States (18.7%), and France (12.0%). We examined the re-
ceived banners for the indicators described in Table 4.3, and we found 37,285 devices
with PLAIN and ANONYMOUS security mechanisms enabled, as depicted in Figure 6.9a.
Here, it can be observed that 2,088 devices allowed for anonymous authentication, where
2,087 were on the client port 5222 and only one on the server port 5269. Furthermore,
50
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.8: The responses received from CoAP devices from the top countries based on
our scan.
35,197 devices had plain authentication enabled, that is, user password login encoded
with Base64. However, this is not a misconfiguration per se if the XMPP client or server
requires TLS. To further our analysis, we filtered out all XMPP devices that required TLS;
here, we found 11,294 devices using plain authentication that did not require the use of
TLS, as seen in Figure 6.9b. Furthermore, we found a considerable amount of clients and
servers supporting DIGEST-MD5 and CRAM-MD5 on a nonsecure channel; while this is
better than anonymous and plain, it still leaves the client and/or server vulnerable and
is regarded as obsolete by the IETF. Therefore, using SCRAM on a secure channel is
recommended instead [51]. A notable finding, visible in Figure 6.9, was that even though
14.75% of all the XMPP devices were using SCRAM, they utilized SHA-1, a weak hashing
method.
Furthermore, examining the banner for iq-register, which allows for in-band registra-
tion of an account, yielded 15,119 results. Enabling iq-register on an unsecured chan-
nel allows an adversary to change the passwords of existing users and register on the
server. Therefore, the utilization of iq-register on an insecure channel is not secure
and would leave the server vulnerable to attacks [98]. Filtering out devices using TLS,
we got 10,643 devices having iq-register enabled. Upon the grabbing of the banners,
we received certificates from 15,116 devices. We analyzed the issuers of the TLS/SSL
certificates received from the devices. Table 6.8 shows the top five certificate issuers.
Here, it can be observed that the primary issuer is Empty, classifying it as self-signed,
which correlates with the amount of self-signed certificates observed in Figure 6.10. Dig-
iCert Inc. is the next most frequent issuer, which, when examined closely, indicates that it
was primarily issued to one organization. The other issuers issued to various other XMPP
servers and clients. Examining the certificates closer, we found that 1.20% used SSLv3,
2.70% used TLSv1.0, 80.10% used TLSv1.2 and 16.00% used TLSv1.3, where 38%,
73%, 27% and 19% was expired respectively, as depicted in Figure 6.10. Furthermore,
in Figure 6.10, it can be observed that 3.90% of the certificates we found supported inse-
Unmasking digital ghost ships
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) The supported security mechanisms
found in banners received by XMPP de-
vices. Total of 104,059 on port 5222 and
11,842 on port 5269.
(b) The supported security mechanisms
from the scanned devices that do not require
TLS. Total of 57,900 on port 5222 and 7,551
on port 5269.
Figure 6.9: Security mechanism supported by the different devices running XMPP with
TLS and without TLS enabled.
cure cryptographic protocols, namely, SSLv3 and TLSv1.0, which might leave the client
or server vulnerable to attacks, such as FREAK and Logjam. Taking a closer look at the
certificates via Shodan, we found three servers using a hardcoded 768-bit prime for Diffie-
Hellman that might be vulnerable to CVE-2015-4000 [55] and/or CVE-2015-0204 [54].
Issuer
Total
Empty
DigiCert Inc
Let’s Encrypt
Avaya Inc
Fonality
Other
25,687
37.80%
26.20%
6.60%
4.80%
4.80%
19.80%
Table 6.8: The top five issuers of certificates for XMPP.
When analyzing the banners, we found no identifiers nor indicators of what device types
were utilizing the XMPP protocol; however, from the analysis of the certificates, this led
us to the different companies utilizing XMPP in their solutions. We found that they often
use XMPP in their VoIP solutions utilizing devices such as laptops, desktop computers,
desktop phones, and smartphones. Nevertheless, no direct conclusion can be drawn on
the device types.
6.4.1
Our scan
Our scan found 214,956 exposed XMPP devices on the Internet, 150,604 of which were
found on port 5222 and 64,352 on port 5269. Similar to Shodan, we found that the devices
were primarily located in Germany (19.15%), the United States (18.18%), and France
(11.02%). The geographical hot spots for XMPP devices are portrayed in Figure 6.11.
Digging deeper into the gathered banners, we looked for indications that might unveil
that the XMPP devices either have no authentication, no encryption, or weak encryption.
Here, we found, on port 5222, that 4.21% of the devices had plain authentication, mean-
52
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.10: Overview of the certificates utilized by the XMPP devices found.
Figure 6.11: Location of XMPP exposed devices on the Internet.
ing username-password authentication with no encryption. However, as noted before,
this might not be a problem if the device uses TLS. Investigating this, we found that 1,553
of the devices using plain authentication did not utilize TLS. Furthermore, in investigat-
ing for no authentication, we discovered 323 devices allowing anonymous login on port
5222. Investigating port 5269, we found that no devices allow anonymous login, and 769
were utilizing plain authentication as seen in Table 6.9. Nonetheless, out of the 214,956
devices, 30,349 responded with their security mechanisms; analyzing these banners, we
discovered that almost all the devices supported security mechanisms that were either
unsecured or obsolete. The distribution of the security mechanisms and whether the de-
vice supports TLS can be observed in Figure 6.12. Here, we discovered that the majority
were using the security mechanisms DIGEST-MD5 (28.20%), CRAM-MD5 (10.67%), and
PLAIN (23.48%), which are either obsolete, difficult to implement, or have no security at
all [51]. Another commonly used security mechanism among the discovered devices is
SCRAM (10.73%), which, in XMPP, uses SHA-1 as its hashing algorithm. Despite being
considered a stronger security mechanism than DIGEST-MD5, CRAM-MD5, and PLAIN,
Unmasking digital ghost ships
53
==PAGE:62==
Port
Amount
DIGEST-MD5
CRAM-MD5
Plain
Anonymous
Use TLS
5222
150,604
7,770
3,203
6,339
323
71.24%
5269
64,352
768
28
769
0
87.89%
Table 6.9: Anonymous and weak authentication found in exposed XMPP devices.
Figure 6.12: The distribution of the security mechanisms and whether the device supports
TLS.
SCRAM with SHA-1 is insecure due to its susceptibility to collision attacks [29].
We found that 71.24% of the devices supporting DIGEST-MD5, PLAIN, and SCRAM were
also utilizing TLS, indicating that the majority of the discovered devices still encrypt the
client’s authentication. However, it is not wise to support obsolete and insecure security
mechanisms, even if it is done over an encrypted channel. A TLS-enabled connection
will prevent attacks such as man-in-the-middle. However, a server with malicious intent
would still be able to obtain the client’s password if an insecure security mechanism is
used.
Investigating the banners further, we discovered that 1,505 of the XMPP devices allowed
for iq-register; here, we found that 957 devices allowed this on an insecure channel.
As mentioned in the analysis of the results gathered from Shodan, this may lead to an
adversary being able to change the passwords of existing users or register infinite users
on the server. Furthermore, we discovered 1,689 devices using stream compression.
Stream compression is often utilized when a client or server wants to compress the data
being transmitted over the network. However, attacks such as CRIME and BREACH
allow an attacker to obtain the secret data. This is done by having the target transmit the
secret data with some data the attacker has chosen; it is then possible for the attacker
to observe how similar his data is to the secret data and can thereby guess the secret
data. Due to attacks like these, it is recommended not to use stream compression in
one’s XMPP configuration as per the documentation [36]. The discovered devices with
54
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:63==
stream compression used zlib as the data compression library.
Setting our focus on Denmark, we discovered 238 XMPP devices, of which 24 responded
with their security mechanisms. Investigating the 24 XMPP devices, we found four de-
vices using PLAIN and DIGEST-MD5 authentication on an insecure channel and one
supporting anonymous authentication. In the investigation of organizations, we found
that these devices primarily stem from three organizations. Consequently, we contact
these companies with the information we found as described in Section 4.6.
6.4.2
Key findings
Out of the 214,956 XMPP devices exposed on the Internet, we discovered 323 devices
that allowed anonymous authentication and 9,893 devices that supported PLAIN, DIGEST-
MD5, or CRAM-MD5 on an insecure channel. An interesting finding, visible in Figure 6.12,
was that all the XMPP devices using SCRAM were using SHA-1 as the hashing algorithm
instead of the recommended SHA-512. This could indicate that the identified XMPP de-
vices may not adhere to the latest documentation standards. Another key finding was that
957 devices had iq-register enabled on an insecure channel, which is, according to the
documentation, a misconfiguration [98]. Additionally, we found 1,689 XMPP devices that
supported zlib stream compression, which might deem the server or client vulnerable to
attacks such as CRIME or BREACH.
By utilizing the results we gathered from Shodan, we could postulate that the device types
were laptops, desktop computers, phones, smartphones, and printers. During the certifi-
cate analysis, we discovered that most of the devices were using self-signed or expired
certificates, as observed in Figure 6.10. Finally, we inspected the results from Shodan
and our results to see if we discovered any distinct IPs; here, we found 31,166 IPs that
were unique to our scan.
6.5
Analysis of Modbus
In our investigation of devices running Modbus, Shodan yielded 32,027 results, while Cen-
sys provided 44,157 results. The significant difference in the number of results between
the two search engines could be because our Shodan query only looks at the default port
and for devices that respond with ”Unit ID” in their response banner. Censys is more
sophisticated as we can search directly for Modbus devices with their search engine.
Searching for Modbus devices running on non-standard ports using Censys, we found
4,204 devices, which explains some of the discrepancy.
To enhance the accuracy of our findings, we utilized the Shodan tag ”honeypot” to filter
out 473 hosts flagged as honeypots by Shodan. Most excluded honeypots were easily
discernible because their product name was ”Conpot,” a well-known low-interaction ICS
honeypot [12]. The filtering of honeypots was crucial in preventing our results from being
influenced by potentially deceptive systems.
The countries with the most found Modbus devices include the United States (12.1 %),
South Korea (10.95 %), and France (8.14 %). The devices are distributed across 2020
ASes. Most ASNs belong to ISPs and Hosting providers, making it difficult to pinpoint
what kind of business has devices exposed. However, by looking up many ASNs, we did
discover a few instances of ASNs belonging to private businesses. These encompassed
diverse sectors such as energy, construction, water management, manufacturing, and
more. The top products can be seen in Figure 6.13.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.13: The top 10 identified Modbus products (Shodan).
6.5.1
Our scan
When conducting our own scan, we found 30,398 Modbus devices. While this count is
slightly lower than Shodan’s and considerably lower than Censys’ results, what sets our
findings apart is the discovery of 11,085 Modbus devices unique to our scan—devices
that eluded detection by Shodan. By utilizing the Shodan ”honeypot” tag, we could filter
184 honeypots from our results.
Looking at the overall geographical distribution of the identified devices, as portrayed in
Figure 6.14, we get the following as the top countries: the United States (16.34%), Turkey
(11.11%), and Sweden (8.92%). The identified devices were spread across 820 ASes.
Figure 6.14: Geographical distribution of exposed Modbus devices.
As was the case when analyzing the results from Shodan, most of these ASNs belong
to ISPs and Hosting providers. However, we identified several industrial businesses by
looking through the organization names. These included companies within utility, water
management, manufacturing, engineering, construction, etc.
56
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:65==
For 6,108 of the devices, we get information regarding vendor and product name. The top
vendors and their top products can be observed in Figure 6.15. Notably, we discovered
the products from ABB and Rockwell Automation Allen-Bradley were presented in the re-
sponse as integers; while this did not disclose the product, a Google search with the ven-
dor and the corresponding product integer allows for the inference of the product. When
comparing our found products with Shodan’s found products, we see that BMX P34 2020
is by far the most used product in both cases. The type of top products include processor
Figure 6.15: The top three identified Modbus vendors along with their top products.
modules, logic controllers, Ethernet TCP/IP network modules, low harmonic drives, elec-
tromechanical protection devices, compact base controllers, motor contactors, mounting
systems, and relay sockets. Evidently, the top products are mainly generic controllers.
However, by scrutinizing the different products, we found many solar monitoring devices
(362). These devices were primarily located in Hungary (55), Germany (55), and Japan
(41). The most frequently occurring solar monitoring device was Huawei Smartlogger, a
data logger used for monitoring and managing solar power systems [85]. In addition to
solar monitoring devices, we discovered devices used within the broader energy sector
(42), including wind turbine monitoring devices, heat pump devices, electric charger de-
vices, and more. Focusing on Modbus devices located within Denmark, we identified 24
instances spread across six different ASNs. We reached out by mail to the organizations
with exposed devices.
6.5.2
Key findings
We discovered 184 honeypots using Shodan’s ”honeypot” tag and filtered out the matched
IPs from our scan. After accounting for honeypots, we found 30,214 Modbus devices with
our own scan. By examining the vendors and products, we found, in addition to generic
controllers, solar monitoring devices (362) and other controllers used within the energy
Unmasking digital ghost ships
57
==PAGE:66==
sector (42). While our total count is lower than that of search engines like Shodan and
Censys, a key finding is that approximately 33% of our results are unique when compared
to Shodan’s scans. As Modbus has no built-in security, all the exposed systems, 30,214,
are vulnerable.
6.6
Analysis of BACnet
Querying for devices running BACnet, we discovered 12,757 devices using Shodan and
13,904 devices using Censys. As was the case with Modbus, the variation in results
may stem from the fact that our Shodan query specifically required the presence of an
Instance ID in the response banner. This criterion aimed to filter out non-BACnet activity
on port 47808. However, it is important to note that this stringent filter may have excluded
some legitimate BACnet devices with atypical responses. Censys fingerprinting is more
sophisticated as it can index devices that run BACnet service. Therefore, we could directly
query hosts that run BACnet with Censys.
As with Modbus, we enhanced the accuracy of our findings by utilizing the Shodan tag
”honeypot” to filter out 201 hosts flagged as honeypots by Shodan. As previously em-
phasized, this step is crucial in safeguarding our results against potential distortions in-
troduced by deceptive systems.
When looking at the location of the exposed devices, we found that over 60% of exposed
BACnet devices are located within the US. The country with the next most devices is
Canada (17.5%), followed by the United Kingdom (2.1%) and Sweden (2.1%). The de-
vices are distributed across 1282 ASes. As was the case for Modbus, most ASNs belong
to ISPs and Hosting providers, making it difficult to pinpoint what kind of business has
devices exposed. There are 153 vendors in total. The most common vendors of the
exposed systems are Tridium (21.78%), Reliable Control Systems (13.25%), and Delta
Controls (10.66%). The top 4 vendors and the products used can be seen in Figure 6.16.
The types of devices that are exposed include Webcontrollers, SCADA routers, HVAC
systems, and BACnet building controllers, with generic BACnet building automation con-
trollers being the majority of devices.
As BACnet does not have built-in security and, like Modbus, was not designed to be
connected to the public Internet, we found 12,556 misconfigured BACnet devices using
Shodan.
6.6.1
Our scan
While conducting our own scan, we found 34,637 results when sending UDP-probe with
ZMap. However, when we utilized the BACnet ZGrab module on the found IPs, it only
identified 7251 as BACnet devices. The most common reason it does not identify a device
as a BACnet device is the error: ”Not a BACnet packet,” which was the case for 22,020
out of the 34,637 BACnet devices. Rarer cases included ”Invalid BACnet packet” and
”BACnet packet too short.” As 34,637 hosts successfully responded to the UDP packet
sent by ZMap, we suspect some of these hosts that were not identified as BACnet de-
vices are false negatives. Reasons for this could be the unreliability of UDP and the lim-
itations of ZGrab’s BACnet module. Nevertheless, inspecting the 7251 BACnet devices
that responded to our request successfully, we filtered out honeypots utilizing Shodan’s
honeypot tag, which resulted in the removal of 34 BACnet hosts from our data set. An-
alyzing the results, we discovered a similar geographical distribution as Shodan, as can
be seen in Figure 6.14; the majority of exposed BACnet devices are located in the United
States (64.20%), followed by Canada (13.30%), Norway (2.50%), Sweden (2.30%). Fur-
thermore, we discovered that 0.78% of these devices are located in Denmark. We further
58
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.16: The top 4 vendors that the BACnet devices along with the top 3 products for
each vendor (Shodan)
Figure 6.17: Geographical distribution of exposed BACnet devices.
investigate the vendors of the exposed devices and find the most common vendors to be
Tridium (34.04%), Delta Controls (16.96%), Automated Logic Corporation (6.60%), and
Siemens Building Technologies (6.44%). In Figure 6.18, the top four vendors and their
corresponding device types can be observed; here, it can be seen that the exposed de-
vices by Tridium are mainly Niagara stations. Niagara stations provide the ability to view,
monitor, and control BACnet devices. Exposing them on the Internet is a security risk,
as it could allow attackers to gain access to or bring the system down [94]. Looking at
the second most used vendor, Delta Controls, we find that the device types exposed on
the Internet are eBMGR, DSM_RTR, and DSC_16E. These device types are controllers
used to control equipment that regulates heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. For
Unmasking digital ghost ships
59
==PAGE:68==
the third and fourth vendors, we again see a trend of the device types being servers for
monitoring and controlling other devices, controllers, and BACnet routers. Scrutinizing
Figure 6.18: Top four vendors and their corresponding device types of BACnet we found
during our scan.
the results from the exposed devices located within Denmark shows that the majority of
the exposed devices are located in Ålbæk (48.20%), Tønder (23.20%), Esbjerg (12.50%),
and Copenhagen (5.40%) stemming from seven different organizations (internet service
providers). Here, we also found that some devices expose their exact location; for in-
stance, we found a hotel in Skagen that utilizes BACnet for their different apartments.
Furthermore, we found the devices exposed in Denmark to primarily stem from the ven-
dors Siemens Building Technologies and Trend Control Systems Ltd, with the device type
exposed being Siemens BACnet server and IQ4E. These devices are used to control and
display HVAC systems. Nonetheless, exposing these devices on the Internet could allow
attackers to access them. As a result, we found 7,217 exposed and potentially vulnerable
BACnet devices on the Internet, 57 of which are located in Denmark. We informed the
organizations in Denmark about the misconfigured device as described in Section 7.
6.6.2
Key findings
Utilizing the BACnet module from ZGrab, we discovered 7,217 exposed BACnet devices
on the Internet that might be vulnerable to attackers gaining access or disrupting the
system. Furthermore, Shodan found 12,757 exposed devices, and Censys found 13,904.
Checking for distinct devices from our scan compared to Shodan, we found 1,239 devices
that Shodan did not find.
A worrying finding was that Tridium, the vendor of the most used product Niagara4 Station,
has stated that it is a security risk when these devices are exposed on the internet, as
they could be overtaken or brought out of service by an attack [94].
60
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:69==
6.7
Analysis of TR-069
Looking at the results we received when querying Censys and Shodan for devices run-
ning TR-069, we got a staggering 6,286,976 results with Censys and 4,942,986 results
with Shodan. As mentioned in Section 4, we classify TR-069 as being vulnerable if it
responds with ”200 OK” or ”204 No Content” in its banner since this entails that the CPE
has authenticated the request. Querying both Shodan and Censys for TR-069 devices
with the additional criterion of the presence of ”200 OK” or ”204 No Content” in its ban-
ner, we get around 402 TR-069 devices that are misconfigured this way with Censys and
around 17,124 devices with Shodan. Moreover, it should be noted that the results from
Shodan were impossible to download for further analysis since Shodan does not allow
the downloading of more than 1,000,000 results. Therefore, the rest of the analysis of
TR-069 based on Shodan’s results will be conducted on a dataset where we queried for
indicators that the devices might be misconfigured. When digging deeper into the re-
sults gathered from Shodan, we see that the majority of devices are located in the United
States (27.89%), China (22.00%), and the United Kingdom (7.45%). Furthermore, from
the 17,124 devices responding with 200 OK or 204 No Content, it can not be concluded
whether they are vulnerable in the sense that it is possible to gain access to the device;
however, it can be speculated as a possibility that the 200 OK and 204 No Content re-
sponse from the device running TR-069 indicates that it has authenticated the HTTP get
message from what it believes to be the ACS based on the Connection Request feature
from the TR-069 documentation [71]. This would then result in the CPE trying to establish
a connection to the ACS.
To minimize data poisoning, we utilized Shodan’s honeypot tag to remove any devices
classified as being a honeypot; here, Shodan found 15,721 devices as being potential
honeypots, leaving 1,373 potential misconfigured devices running TR-069. Investigating
the hosts that Shodan deemed to be honeypots for known characteristics suggested that
the honeypot being utilized was HoneyThing [65]. Delving into the data gathered from
the remaining devices, we found 81 are running Mikrotik RouterOS, solidifying that some
scanned devices are indeed routers. Further inspection of the data showed that 20 de-
vices use lighttpd, an open-source web server, while two devices use Apache httpd and
Elastic. Looking into the web servers, Shodan found that 81.20% of the devices were
TR-069 http servers, while the rest were TR-069 client TCP connection request servers;
delving deeper into the web servers shows that 98.80% were running a RouterOS router
configuration page, and the remaining devices were running a Carrier Class Wireless
Home Networking Technology page; both used to login and configure one’s router. Nev-
ertheless, while this may not be direct access to one’s router configuration, having your
router’s configuration page exposed on the Internet allowing remote administration is a
misconfiguration.
Figure 6.19 displays the RouterOS versions discovered in the data.
Here, it can be
seen that the majority of the scanned misconfigured devices that were running MikroTik
RouterOS were running version 6.48.6 and 6.49.10, with both at 28.40%, while the re-
maining devices were using 6.49.7 (19.75%), 6.45.9 (11.11%), 6.49.6 (6.17%), 6.48.3
(2.47%), 6.48.7 (1.23%), 6.49.1 (1.23%) and 7.7 (1.23%). While the newest version avail-
able of RouterOS as of the time this paper was written is 7.12.1, it seems that most of
the discovered devices are running versions of RouterOS that are neglected and not up-
dated anymore. This becomes apparent when looking at Figure 6.19, which, in addition
to displaying the number of CVEs for each of the top RouterOS versions, portrays the
days since the release of the respective versions. Notably, two versions were released
over 800 days ago. We investigated the most used versions’ CVEs by using the CVE
Unmasking digital ghost ships
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.19: The most frequent versions of RouterOS gathered from the Shodan scan,
days since they were released, and the number of high-impact CVEs for each version.
The legend shows the number of devices and whether the version is a long-term release.
database NIST NVD and found the majority of them to be vulnerable to CVEs rated criti-
cal, high, and medium, as shown in Table 6.10. Furthermore, we used the same strategy
Version
CVE
Rating
Vulnerability
7.7
CVE-2023-41570
MEDIUM
Incorrect access control mechanisms
6.49.10
CVE-2022-45315
HIGH
Execute code,
≤6.49.6
CVE-2023-30799
CVE-2022-45315
CRITICAL
HIGH
Execute code and Privilege escalation
Execute code
Table 6.10: Vulnerable RouterOS versions and their corresponding CVEs for TR-069.
to check whether any of the products the device was running, that is, the web server, was
vulnerable. In Figure 6.20, the versions of the products discovered in the data gathered
from Shodan can be observed; here, it is seen that the majority of the devices that were
discovered to be utilizing web servers are using lighttpd version 1.4.53. Looking up the
versions in NIST NVD showed that devices running lighttpd versions prior to 1.4.54 are
vulnerable to CVE-2019-11072, which may allow a remote attacker to cause a denial of
service attack or another unspecified impact via a maliciously constructed HTTP GET
request.
6.7.1
Our scan
After completing our TR-069 scan, we were faced with the substantial task of processing
the vast amount of data obtained. Utilizing ZMap, we conducted an extensive scan on
port 7547, identifying 43 million hosts with this port open. We then used ZGrab’s HTTP
module to make a GET request against the different hosts. We started by sectioning the
gathered ZGrab data by ZGrab status codes. We found that only a status of success or
application-error gave us any data. Therefore, we could filter out 24 million hosts from
our results, leaving us with 19,103,999 hosts.
By removing hosts deemed honeypots by Shodan, we could remove another 362 hosts.
62
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.20: Discovered products and their corresponding versions in devices running
TR-069
Considering the high number of hosts in our results, this is a relatively low number. How-
ever, this is a limitation due to the fact that we were only able to retrieve 1M results with
Shodan. Assuming that honeypots are evenly distributed in Shodan’s results, we would
likely be able to remove 2000 additional honeypots if we had access to all the data. Some
discovered hosts exhibited substantial data in their HTTP responses, exceeding 1 MB.
This raised suspicions, as standard routers typically do not generate such extensive HTTP
responses. Further investigation on Censys revealed that these hosts had the accompa-
nying ”truncated” field. Censys uses this field to distinguish low-quality pseudo services
from real services. According to their analysis, hosts with more than 100 services are likely
honeypots or firewalled hosts [11]. Leveraging this insight, we performed an additional
refinement, excluding 4180 hosts from our data set.
We lacked a bulletproof method to discern between TR-069 and non-TR-069 devices
on the scanned 7547 port. Specific indicators in the retrieved data, such as ”tr069 http
server,” ”HuaweiHomeGateway,” ”cwmp,” and ”CPE,” signified TR-069 devices, result-
ing in approximately 7.3 million matching hosts. However, this left out many hosts that,
with high probability, were TR-069 devices. Previous research has indicated that almost
100% of hosts with services running on port 7547 are TR-069 devices [89]. Therefore, we
included all gathered data in our analysis, resulting in 19,099,457 hosts after excluding
identified potential honeypots.
Looking at the identified hosts, we see that the countries with the most identified TR-069
devices are the United States (26.7%), South Korea (8.44%), and Brazil (7.34%) as de-
picted in Figure 6.21. The identified devices are spread across 14,304 ASNs. By looking
at the server field that we retrieved for 9,560,076 of the hosts, we can identify the software
that the server is running. The most common values for the server field can be seen in
Figure 6.22. Notably, some of the most frequent values for this field have generic names
such as ”tr069 http server”, ”TR069 client TCP connection Request server”, etc. These
Unmasking digital ghost ships
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.21: Geographical distribution of exposed TR-069 devices.
values do not tell us anything about the software running on the device but only confirm
that they are indeed TR-069 devices. The most used identifiable software is gSOAP,
followed by lighttpd, RomPager, Apache, mini_httpd, nginx, and Drcomserver. We inves-
Figure 6.22: The top 20 most frequent values of the server HTTP header response field.
tigated potential vulnerabilities in the identified software versions and found that gSOAP
has two high-impact CVEs affecting all TR-069 devices running gSOAP (3,384,252 de-
vices). These CVEs, namely CVE-2019-7659 and CVE-2017-9765, are both Denial of
Service vulnerabilities. Devil’s Ivy (CVE-2017-9765) involves triggering a stack-based
buffer overflow by sending a large XML document, leading to an application crash [16].
Regarding lighttpd, most hosts did not disclose their lighttpd version in the server field.
Nonetheless, our scan identified 4,169 devices with lighttpd versions older than 1.4.54.
As previously mentioned, versions prior to 1.4.54 are susceptible to CVE-2019-11072, a
vulnerability associated with Denial of Service. Consequently, we find 4,169 devices that
are running vulnerable versions of lighttpd.
Shifting our focus to RomPager, we discovered 146,542 devices operating on version 4.07
of RomPager. As highlighted in Section 3.1, this version is susceptible to the Misfortune
64
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:73==
Cookie vulnerability, allowing arbitrary code execution. The severity of this vulnerabil-
ity is heightened by its high impact and the ease of executing the attack, as evidenced
by the public exploit available in Metasploit [13]. This renders the vulnerability signifi-
cantly severe. It is noteworthy that Honeything, a prevalent TR-069 honeypot, employs
RomPager 4.07 as its embedded web server [65]. We acknowledge that our honeypot
detection methods may not be exhaustive, and as a result, some of these devices running
RomPager are likely honeypots.
The distribution of the retrieved response codes can be seen in Figure 6.23a. Notably,
97.97% of devices exhibit status codes 401, 404, 400, indicating a predominant practice
of disallowing unauthenticated access. However, expanding the scope of GET requests
beyond the root address might have unveiled additional misconfigurations among devices
currently returning 404. We identified 175,670 hosts with an HTTP response of ”200 OK”
or ”204 No Content.” As shown in Figure 6.23b, of the 100,359 hosts responding with 200
or 204 and providing a server header field, 89.82% had ’RG/Device 10.x’ in their server
field. Of all devices with ’RG/Device 10.x’, 98.69% responded with ”200 OK.” Further
exploration revealed that these devices correspond to RUIJIE Networks CPE routers [95].
Additionally, 84.55% of these misconfigured RUIJIE Network routers were located within
China, which is expected given that it is a Chinese company. Some of the other CPE
(a) Distribution of retrieved response status
codes from the scanned TR-069 devices.
(b) The identified system information for TR-
069 devices allowing unauthenticated re-
quests.
Figure 6.23: Figures representing response codes and server field information for devices
responding with 200 or 204.
devices we identified can be seen in Table 6.11. Evidently, we find lots of Huawei routers.
In our focused analysis of TR-069 devices within Denmark, we identified 22,264 devices
distributed across 29 ASNs. Among these, 170 devices responded with ’200 OK,’ span-
ning three ASNs. Notably, 97.6% of these misconfigured devices were identified using
gSOAP version 2.7, a version affected by the discovered CVEs for gSOAP. Furthermore,
Unmasking digital ghost ships
65
==PAGE:74==
Device
Indicator
Response header
Occurences
Huawei router
HuaweiHomeGateway
www-authenticate
2,706,574
Unknown router
IgdAuthentication
www-authenticate
1,483,513
ZTE router
cpe@zte.com
www-authenticate
274,521
Cisco router
Cisco-CcspCwmpTcpCR
server
210,220
Sercomm router
SERCOMM CPE Authentication
www-authenticate
149,787
RUIJIE Networks router
RG/Device 10.x
server
91,414
Realtek router
realtek.com
www-authenticate
30,177
Table 6.11: Identified routers, along with the indicators and the corresponding response
header where each indicator was found. Sources used for identifications: [25, 95]
all of these devices were associated with the same AS. We contacted the three organi-
zations to inform them about their misconfigured devices.
GenieACS
We also scanned GenieACS servers, a popular open-source ACS imple-
mentation [28]. GenieACS runs by default on port 3000. We, therefore, started with a
ZMap scan for hosts with this port open and afterward used the ZGrabs HTTP scanner
to retrieve information from the hosts. By searching for genieacs in our scan data, we
retrieved 1,053 results. We wanted to check how many of these found GenieACS imple-
mentations were vulnerable. We found one CVE connected to GenieACS, namely CVE-
2021-46704, which is a high-impact CVE. This vulnerability involves unauthenticated OS
command injection and affects versions 1.2.0 to 1.2.7 [14]. Analyzing the different ver-
sions from our results, we discovered 123 GenieACS servers affected by this vulnerability,
constituting 11.68% of the identified servers.
6.7.2
Key findings
Scanning the Internet for TR-069 on port 7547, we found 19,103,999 devices, with approx-
imately 4,500 identified as honeypots. Our scan for GenieACS servers on port 3000 found
1,053 ACS servers. Analyzing the software running on the devices, we found 3,535,086
devices with vulnerable software versions. Notably, the devices running RomPager 4.07
are a big security risk as they are vulnerable to the Misfortune cookie vulnerability, which
allows for arbitrary code execution. Another key takeaway from our software analysis
was that software information was only retrievable from devices that returned the server
header field in their responses.
Most devices responded with 400 error codes regarding status codes (400, 401, 404).
However, we found 175,670 that responded with 200 or 204, revealing that they allowed
unauthenticated requests. Of all the TR-069 devices allowing unauthenticated requests,
51.36% were RUIJIE Networks routers. In total, we found 3,710,756 misconfigured TR-
069 devices.
An interesting find from Shodan’s results was that 98.80% of the TR-069 devices disclos-
ing their web server allowed access to their router’s configuration page. When checking
out these pages, it appeared that authentication was still required, but this also exposed a
potential vulnerability; that is, a malicious actor could try default username and password
combinations.
6.8
Analysis of OPC UA
In our investigation of devices running OPC UA, Shodan yielded 625 results, while Cen-
sys provided 2,898 results. The difference in the results may stem from how Shodan
66
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:75==
and Censys classify a device running OPC UA. The query to find OPC UA devices with
Shodan, seen in Table 4.6, only finds devices on port 4840 with NodeId in the banner,
indicating a successful connection to the target OPC UA service. On the other hand, it is
unclear how Censys identifies OPC UA services, but investigating the banners received
from Censys indicates that Censys can identify a device running OPC UA even though
no access to the device was granted. However, this might also have been possible with
Shodan using a different query, but for finding OPC UA devices, Shodan suggests the
approach we utilized [84]. The devices discovered with Shodan were primarily located
in Germany (19.70%), the United States (13.10%), and Norway (7.50%). To minimize
data poisoning in the results, we made sure to filter out the IPs that were classified as
being honeypots by Shodan, amounting to 13.20% of the devices. In addition, Shodan
found that the majority of the OPC UA devices (73.60%) were ICS devices. The fact that
most devices were ICS devices correlates with OPC UA being a protocol used in digital
devices for industrial processes in critical infrastructure. Moreover, all the results found
with Shodan indicated that the Shodan crawler/scanner got access to the OPC UA server;
that is, it is possible to read/write to the different data nodes on the server depending on
the read/write access control set on the server. Nevertheless, Shodan found no informa-
tion about the authentication methods or encryption methods supported by the OPC UA
server. Consequently, Shodan found 543 devices running OPC UA to be misconfigured
by not utilizing any form of authentication. However, it should be noted that it is not known
whether Shodan got access to read/write to nodes on the server.
6.8.1
Our scan
When we performed our own scan using our implemented OPC UA module, we found
1,707 devices that we could fingerprint to be running OPC UA. Furthermore, we utilized
Shodan’s honeypot tag to remove potential honeypots from our own scan to avoid data
poisoning. After filtering out honeypots and devices with bad responses, we got 1,593
OPC UA devices. Out of these 1,593 devices, we pinpointed the majority to be located
in the United States (24.40%), Germany (9.30%), and China (6.70%) as depicted in Fig-
ure 6.24.
To broaden our perspective, we investigated the security policies and modes
Figure 6.24: Geographical distribution of exposed OPCUA devices.
supported by the OPC UA devices, which can be seen in Figure 6.25 and Figure 6.26.
Here, we found the majority of the devices to be supporting the None (59.6%), Basic256
(55.94%), and Basic128Rsa15 (49.44%). According to the official OPC UA documen-
tation, these three policies are all considered either insecure or deprecated. Further-
more as seen in Figure 6.27, many of these deprecated security policies are still being
used in the security modes SignAndEncrypt and Sign. In fact, they are the most used
policies. Nonetheless, the OPC UA devices that supported the secure security policies,
Unmasking digital ghost ships
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 6.25: The most frequently supported security policies
Figure 6.26: The most frequently supported security modes.
Basic256Sha256, Aes128-Sha256-RsaOaep, and Aes258Sha256RsaPss, had a pretty
even distribution in the security modes they supported. From this, we could infer that
servers that support secure security policies often offer both Sign and SignAndEncrypt to
clients upon initiating a connection. The security modes Sign and SignAndEncrypt are
secure, depending on the application. However, using Sign will be less secure than Sig-
nAndEncrypt as it will lead to no data confidentiality. Furthermore, we investigated if the
response from the OPC UA device indicated that we got access to the device; here, we
68
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.27: Frequently combined security policies and modes.
found that out of the 1,593 devices, 125 devices allowed us to access the device anony-
mously, and 53 accepted a self-signed certificate as proper authentication to get access
to the device. Nonetheless, we did not know how much access we had on the device,
that is, read and write to nodes, since this feature was left out of our scan for ethical rea-
sons. In addition, we explored if any of these devices were located in Denmark and found
three devices that all supported None as a security policy. Furthermore, one of these
devices allowed us to access it with an anonymous login. Consequently, we contacted
the relevant organizations in Denmark about our findings.
We were able to retrieve the certificates for 1232 of the discovered OPC UA devices.
99.86% of the certificates were self-signed, and 210 (17.05%) were expired. Our analy-
sis of certificate reuse across different OPC UA servers revealed that only 628 had unique
certificates. Delving deeper into the instances of certificate reuse, we identified 30 cases
where certificates were deployed on at least three different OPC UA devices. An inter-
esting finding was a certificate deployed on a staggering 211 different devices. Looking
up the metadata tied to the IPs, we discovered that all 211 devices belonged to the same
AS, a university. Another noteworthy finding was a certificate reused on 97 different de-
vices, and by examining the subject name of the certificate, we successfully identified the
associated company. This company specializes in components for the automation indus-
try, covering areas such as plant engineering, building and lighting, and the automotive
industry. The devices using this certificate were spread across 35 ASNs and 22 countries.
6.8.2
Key findings
Utilizing our OPC UA module, we discovered 1,593 OPC UA devices exposed on the Inter-
net; out of these devices, we found that 59.6% of the devices supported the None policy,
meaning they allowed for no security. Furthermore, 53.95% of the devices also supported
deprecated security policies. Additionally, we found 125 devices that allowed access with
anonymous authentication and 53 devices that accepted self-signed certificates as au-
thentication. By checking if we found any distinct IPs from Shodan, we discovered that
Unmasking digital ghost ships
69
==PAGE:78==
we found 1,393 IPs that Shodan does not. In turn, Shodan found 310 IPs that we did not.
Analyzing the certificates deployed on the OPC UA servers, we found several instances
of certificates being reused, the most extreme case being a certificate that was deployed
on 211 different OPC UA devices.
6.9
Analysis of RTPS
In our investigation of devices running RTPS, Shodan found 239 results, and Censys
could not classify any of the devices to be running RTPS. The devices were primarily
located in the United States (32.20%), China (24.70%), and Hungary (8.80%). Shodan
found none of the scanned devices to be honeypots, and no information in the banners
was found that would indicate otherwise. Nevertheless, examining the response from
the target devices, we could dissect the vendor of the RTPS implementation. Dissecting
the data, we found that 23.01% of the devices found used Eclipse Cyclone DDS as their
vendor. However, the rest of the data received was bogus and could not be dissected to
retrieve any other vendors. Even so, exposing devices using RTPS on the Internet is a
misconfiguration, and therefore, Shodan found 239 misconfigured devices, where 23.01%
of the devices were utilizing the RTPS vendor Eclipse Cyclone DDS.
6.9.1
Our scan
Conducting our own scan of RTPS on ports 7400, 7410, 7411, and 7412 utilizing our
RTPS module, we discovered 92, 63, 44, and 0 RTPS devices, respectively. In total, we
discovered 199 RTPS devices exposed on the Internet that are geographically distributed
primarily in Finland (18.10%), South Korea (15.10%), the United States (12.10%), and
Sweden (8.00%) as depicted in Figure 6.28. Looking deeper into the responses from
Figure 6.28: Geographical distribution of exposed RTPS devices.
each port, we could classify the distribution of vendors that responded to our RTPS dis-
covery message as seen in Table 6.12. Here, we found that the vendor primarily used
was OpenSplice DDS, followed by FastDDS, RTI Connext DDS, and Cyclone DDS. In-
vestigating the responses from each of these vendors, we did not find any specific version
of the product utilized. This is probably due to RTPS having minimal information in the
responses. Furthermore, in Table 6.12, we see a clear use of FastDDS primarily on ports
7400 and 7411 and RTI Connext DDS on port 7410, where OpenSplice DDS is distributed
across port 7400, 7410 and 7411. Nonetheless, diving deeper into the raw data of the
responses, we discovered that 63 out of the 140 devices utilizing the OpenSplice DDS
vendor disclosed that they used TunerService. This service provides a remote interface
for monitoring and controlling the facilities of OpenSplice. Furthermore, we discovered
70
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:79==
that these devices also leak their internal and external IP and port for the TunerService,
which can then potentially be attacked.
Examining the headers received from the responses, we noticed that none of the devices
we discovered are using the newest version of RTPS, which is 2.5 as of the time of writing
this paper. Instead, we found that 70.40% were using version 2.1, 22.60% were using
version 2.3, and 7.00% were utilizing version 2.2; while we could not find any related
vulnerabilities to these versions, there are still undiscovered bugs in them, and these
versions could, therefore later be deemed vulnerable. Nonetheless, we discovered that
66 of the 199 devices were desktops running Windows and three systems running Linux.
Furthermore, examining the logs from our collector server, we found that 167 out of the
199 found RTPS devices kept sending RTPS packets to us for at least two hours after we
transmitted our RTPS discovery packet, even though we specified in our discovery packet
that the discovery server should view us as being dead after 5 seconds. Setting our focus
Vendor
Port
Amount
RTI Connext DDS
OpenSplice DDS
Eclipse Cyclone DDS
FastDDS
7400
92
13.00%
53.30%
3.30%
30.40%
7410
63
23.80%
68.30%
3.20%
N/A
7411
44
2.30%
31.80%
N/A
65.90%
7412
0
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Table 6.12: The percentage of the discovered vendors found at each port.
on Denmark, we discovered 11 RTPS devices behind two different ISPs; here, we found
that 5 of these devices also exposed internal and external IPs. Furthermore, one of these
devices was located in Sindal, a small railway town in Denmark, which might indicate that
the RTPS device is being used in railroad infrastructure. In addition, we contacted the
relevant organizations about our findings.
6.9.2
Key findings
Utilizing the RTPS module we created for ZGrab, we discovered 199 exposed RTPS
devices on the Internet, whereas 63 leaked internal and external IPs. Of the discovered
devices, 167 kept transmitting packets to us for more than two hours. Looking at Shodan’s
results, not much information could be found; however, checking for distinct IPs, we found
199 distinct IPs, meaning that for all the IPs we found, Shodan did not. As noted before,
exposing an RTPS service to the Internet is a vulnerability since the device can be used
in an amplification attack. Furthermore, it can allow attackers to gain knowledge about
internal IPs and their functions.
6.10
Analysis of DNP3
Querying for devices utilizing DNP3, Shodan returned 803 results, while Censys returned
891 results. The devices were primarily located in the United States (39.90%), China
(9.70%), and Poland (8.80%). We filtered out devices that Shodan classified as honey-
pots to minimize data poisoning. Here, Shodan found 192 (21.55%) devices flagged as
being honeypots. However, no information from the banner indicated the type of honeypot
used. Diving further into the received data by conducting a lookup on the ASes revealed
that most IPs found belonged to ISPs, companies offering cloud services, and a few uni-
versities. However, we found no ASNs belonging to industrial companies. Therefore, it
was impossible to conclude the percentages of water and energy sectors utilizing DNP3.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
71
==PAGE:80==
Nevertheless, knowing that the DNP3 protocol is commonly used in the water and energy
sectors might indicate that these hosts hide behind ISPs or cloud services.
The banners acquired from the devices did not explicitly disclose information about the
device types. However, inference suggested that these devices are, with high probability,
used in the water or energy sector based on the nature of the DNP3 protocol and other
research [53]. Consequently, we found, using Shodan, 611 potentially misconfigured
devices that may be vulnerable.
6.10.1
Our scan
Figure 6.29: Geographical distribution of exposed DNP3 devices
When conducting our own internet-wide scanning for devices running the DNP3 protocol,
we found 697 DNP3 devices on port 20000. The devices we found were primarily located
in the United States (39.10%), China (11.10%), Poland (10.30%), and Canada (8.50%),
depicted in Figure 6.29. For further inspection of data, we took the IPs found by Shodan
that were classified as being honeypots and matched them with the IPs of our findings;
here, we found that 29 of the devices were indeed honeypots. Filtering the honeypots
out, we ended up with 668 identified DNP3 devices that were exposed on the Internet.
Nonetheless, looking at the metadata associated with the scan, we found that a high
percentage of the organizations we found were from Poland, opposite to Shodan, which
had its majority in the United States and China. In addition, we searched for vulnerable
DNP3 devices in Denmark; here, we found two exposed DNP3 devices stemming from
a Danish hosting website. However, further investigation into these indicated that they
were honeypots.
6.10.2
Key findings
Utilizing the DNP3 module from ZGrab, we discovered 668 devices running DNP3 on
the Internet, mainly located in the United States, China, and Poland; these devices are
potentially vulnerable to DOS attacks if a malformed packet is transmitted to them, which
can contribute to a critical infrastructure not operating as expected. Nevertheless, Shodan
found 611 vulnerable devices. By comparing the IPs from our scan and Shodan scans, we
found 200 distinct IPs, meaning that there are potentially 200 additional devices running
DNP3 exposed on the Internet.
72
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:81==
7
Discussion
This chapter aims to discuss the findings from our analysis of the different IoT and OT
protocols that we scanned the Internet for. In Section 7.1, we will touch upon the key
findings and common pitfalls we found while conducting the analysis, and in Section 7.2,
we delve into the limitations that arose during the making of this thesis.
7.1
Key findings and common pitfalls
The culmination of our analysis has unveiled key insights into common pitfalls and vulner-
abilities found in IoT and OT devices dispersed throughout the Internet. Throughout our
analysis, we discovered that the predominant recurring error was the lack of updating the
product running on the devices, leaving the devices potentially vulnerable to attacks from
malicious actors. This was primarily seen in devices using the protocols TR-069, MQTT,
and AMQP, where it was possible for us to grab information about the products. Further-
more, we found that a lot of the MQTT devices were utilizing product versions stemming
back from 2016, while the majority of AMQP and TR-069 were using product versions from
2019 and 2021, where multiple of these products had associated CVEs, which highlights
the importance of keeping the products running on the devices up to date.
Though not as predominant, but still heavily discovered in our analysis was the lack of se-
cure authentication and encryption methods utilized across the different protocols. While
we primarily discovered no authentication from the MQTT devices, we also saw a trend
of having no authentication enabled with XMPP, OPC UA, and AMQP. Nonetheless, for
XMPP, OPC UA, and AMQP, we discovered a trend of having weak authentication and no
encryption enabled in the configurations, which we deem a misconfiguration. For weak
authentication, we found that these devices used obsolete hashing algorithms for the
hashing of usernames and passwords when authenticating or using hashing algorithms
that would result in insecure password storage on the servers. Furthermore, we found de-
vices that disclosed their resources; this was primarily seen with devices using the MQTT
and CoAP protocols.
Lastly, we found many devices using traditional OT protocols exposed on the Internet.
While we tag the vulnerability for these devices as exposed on the Internet, it is an um-
brella term for them being vulnerable to various factors, such as denial of service and
buffer overflow, because of their nature of having no built-in security and being hard to
implement correctly.
While our findings indicate that a significant number of IoT devices are using inherently
vulnerable product versions, the predominant impact type for most of these vulnerabili-
ties is Denial of Service. This is a serious type of threat and should be treated as such.
However, it can be argued that the likelihood of it being exploited by bad actors is not high
since there is generally no direct monetary gain. As we have seen in recent years with
malware such as Mirai, attackers exploit vulnerable systems by employing them in a bot-
net to use for larger-scale DDoS attacks. Nevertheless, if an attacker can identify a range
of vulnerable IoT devices belonging to a bigger company, there could still be an incentive
to exploit Denial of Service-related vulnerabilities. Although not as prevalent, we did find
IoT devices vulnerable to remote code execution in the hundreds of thousands, allowing
for the compromising of the devices. The likelihood of this being exploited is higher since
the affected devices can be used in a botnet. Since many of these vulnerable devices
Unmasking digital ghost ships
73
==PAGE:82==
were TR-069 devices with the misfortune cookie vulnerability, the likelihood of exploita-
tion is exceptionally high because of the easy access to a publicly available Metasploit
exploit.
As acknowledged in our analysis of the search engines, Shodan and Censys provide
valuable insight into the current state of exposed IoT and OT devices on the Internet.
Throughout this thesis, we found instances where Shodan yielded different results than
our own scan and vice-versa. By augmenting Shodan results with our own, we could
gain a more complete picture of the number of devices exposed, whether the devices
are honeypots, and additional metadata, such as device types. Therefore, in pursuit of
unmasking digital ghost ships, a synergistic approach between conducting one’s own scan
and utilizing search engines for Internet-connected devices could prove advantageous.
To mitigate the predominant findings and common pitfalls discussed in this section, it
is recommended to keep the software versions up to date, which will help minimize the
number of vulnerabilities. Similarly, it is recommended not to disclose the software version
used on the device. While it can be argued that security by obscurity is a bad practice,
it would still make it harder for an attacker to exploit vulnerabilities. An additional recom-
mendation is to follow best practices provided by the documentation for the configuration
of the devices to tackle the problem of using obsolete hashing algorithms and weak en-
cryption methods. Finally, we recommend disallowing unauthenticated connections since
it allows adversaries to gain additional knowledge about a system they would not other-
wise have.
7.2
Limitations
While this thesis aimed to provide comprehensive and valuable insights into the magnitude
of digital ghost ships dispersed throughout the Internet, we encountered several limitations
when conducting our research. These limitations are listed below.
Limited access to Shodan
While Shodan provides valuable information about devices
exposed on the Internet, we encountered, while gathering data from the different IoT and
OT protocols we were investigating, that Shodan only allows one to receive 1,000,000
results. Consequently, we could only retrieve data for ∼15% of the TR-069 devices from
Shodan. This resulted in insufficient data gathered from the TR-069 protocol, preventing a
clearer understanding of the extent of exposure and the potential vulnerabilities in TR-069
devices.
Limited use case of Censys API
While Censys, like Shodan, provides valuable infor-
mation about devices on the Internet, we found the API somewhat limiting for our research.
In our attempts to retrieve data from Censys Search API, we discovered that the API did
not allow for the retrieval of the scanned device’s response banner and, in addition, only
allowed retrieval of a maximum of 25 fields. Consequently, we could not gather enough
relevant information for our in-depth analysis. Nonetheless, we still utilized Censys’ re-
sults to gain insights into the number of exposed devices, how many were vulnerable, and
potential honeypots through its truncated field.
Late access to server
Throughout this thesis, we employed a server from the Technical
University of Denmark for the internet-wide scanning. We contacted our institution at the
beginning of September, requesting access to a server to facilitate our scanning; however,
due to ethical and legal concerns, we had to wait until the end of November before getting
approved and being able to access the server. Following the acquisition of server access,
74
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:83==
an additional week was dedicated to configuring the server properly and addressing issues
related to its network interface. This meant we had a relatively short amount of time
to conduct our scanning, as scanning for all ten protocols took nearly two weeks. This
meant that we only had enough time for one complete internet-wide scan, and a more
thorough scanning of the protocols was, therefore, not possible. If we had more time,
we would have conducted weekly scans to better estimate the number of exposed and
misconfigured devices.
Developed modules
As stated in our methodology, we did not use all the features from
our developed modules for ethical reasons. As a consequence, our analysis lacked some
valuable insights. For OPC UA, our exclusions meant that we were unable to assess the
level of access granted once successfully connected to an OPC UA server. In the case
of MQTT, our restriction on subscribed topics resulted in less comprehensive information
gathered from the scanned devices. Regarding TR-069, we were unable to separate CPE
devices from ACS effectively.
Scanning limitations
As evident in our results, for six protocols that we conducted
internet-wide scans for, we found less exposed systems than either Censys or Shodan.
This was unexpected as we, during our literature review, found that most prior research
reported a higher count of exposed devices when compared to existing search engines,
primarily Shodan. There could be a multitude of reasons for our lower amount of results.
One factor could be that the blocklist we utilized was too restrictive. We consciously con-
structed a comprehensive blocklist, encompassing government and opt-out IPs, aligning
with our commitment to ethical considerations. Additionally, Censys and Shodan are
respected companies and might be allowlisted for certain company networks. Another
possible explanation is our scanning methodology involving a single IP and location. In
contrast, Censys and Shodan operate from multiple IPs distributed globally. This geo-
graphical restriction in our scanning infrastructure may account for our inability to reach
certain hosts that are accessible to globally distributed scanners. Similarly, Censys and
Shodan conduct scans periodically, and their results are, therefore, not from a single scan
but multiple over a certain period. Had we conducted weekly scans, we likely would have
gotten different results.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:85==
8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we introduced novel ways of detecting digital ghost ships on the Internet
with the goal of unmasking them to gain a comprehensive understanding of common pit-
falls in these devices. We identified the predominantly used IoT and OT protocols to be
MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, XMPP, Modbus, BACnet, TR-069, OPC UA, RTPS, and DNP3.
We used state-of-the-art research to gain insight into these protocols’ common vulnera-
bilities and pitfalls. To detect the devices dispersed throughout the Internet that utilize
these protocols, we extended and implemented new modules for the tools ZMap and
ZGrab to support the scanning of MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, XMPP, TR-069, OPC UA, and
RTPS. The banners and responses received by conducting the internet-wide scanning
could then be evaluated and analyzed using the ELK stack, where geographical informa-
tion could be added to the output of ZGrab and ZMap allowing for locating digital ghost
ships represented in Denmark and subsequently disclosing the found digital ghost ships
to the affected companies within the country.
In conclusion, our comprehensive internet-wide scan found 20,830,366 exposed devices,
of which approximately 21% (4,436,505) were misconfigured. Most misconfigurations
stemmed from vulnerable software versions, followed by allowing unauthenticated ac-
cess. The severity of the vulnerabilities varied, with some, when exploited, enabling a
complete takeover of the device.
8.1
Future work
As this thesis culminates, new avenues for future investigation arise, expanding upon
the current understanding and findings of digital ghost ships dispersed throughout the
Internet. In this section, we outline possible directions for further investigation and ad-
vancement, with the goal of improving the detection of digital ghost ships.
Extending UDP modules to check for amplification factor
During our thesis, we
found papers describing amplification attacks on DDS and BACnet. Likewise, the re-
maining UDP protocol CoAP is also susceptible to amplification attacks. Therefore, one
research direction for future work is to add functionality to the UDP module scanners that
allow for the logging of the amplification factor of the found devices. This would help iden-
tify digital ghost ships with high amplification factors and, in turn, promptly disclose the
serious vulnerability to the respective owner.
Extending modules with TLS
The IoT protocols we scanned for support TLS (DTLS
for CoAP). Usually, the TLS-enabled version of the protocol is run on another port. A
future objective is to add TLS functionality to the IoT scanner modules, such that we can
also scan the protocols’ secure port. On top of giving us more data to analyze, it would
give us an insight into TLS adoption rate across IoT protocols.
While the traditional OT protocols (Modbus, BACnet, DNP3) do not inherently support
TLS, they can be retrofitted with TLS capabilities. Another avenue for future work involves
adding TLS functionality to the respective scanner modules for these protocols. This
enhancement would offer insights into the adoption rates of TLS in traditional OT settings.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
77
==PAGE:86==
Further extending AMQP and CoAP
During our scanning with AMQP and CoAP, we
noticed that they did not behave as expected. For CoAP, this was seen in the output from
the resources, and for AMQP, we received error messages from the targets about them
not supporting plain authentication. Therefore, one direction for future work is to further
extend upon these modules, ensuring that the CoAP module outputs relevant resources
and the AMQP module uses the anonymous security mechanism instead of the plain
security mechanism.
Periodic scans
As noted in Section 7.2, we were only able to conduct our scan once.
Future work could, therefore, include scanning periodically, for example, weekly, over
a longer timeframe. This could give us valuable insights into the trend of exposed and
vulnerable devices over time and help us gauge our notification campaign’s success.
Identifying compromised digital ghost ships
Another interesting candidate for future
work is creating a framework for identifying digital ghost ships that have already been
compromised and are used in active attacks. This framework could be based on data re-
trieved from publicly available network telescopes as well as services such as GreyNoise,
which gathers and labels IPs that are scanning the Internet [31].
78
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
David Adrian et al. “Zippier ZMap: Internet-Wide Scanning at 10 Gbps”. In: 8th
USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 14). San Diego, CA: USENIX
Association, Aug. 2014. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/woot14/workshop-
program/presentation/adrian.
[2]
Nivedita Agarwal and Alexander Brem. “Strategic business transformation through
technology convergence: implications from General Electric’s industrial internet ini-
tiative”. In: International Journal of Technology Management 67.2-4 (), pp. 196–
214.
[3]
AMQP. Advance Message Queuing Protocol. Accessed: 13-11-2023. URL: https:
//www.amqp.org/.
[4]
Syaiful Andy, Budi Rahardjo, and Bagus Hanindhito. “Attack scenarios and security
analysis of MQTT communication protocol in IoT system”. In: 2017 4th International
Conference on Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Informatics (EECSI).
2017, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/EECSI.2017.8239179.
[5]
Joseph Anthraper and Jaidip Kotak. “Security, Privacy and Forensic Concern of
MQTT Protocol”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (Jan. 2019). DOI: 10 . 2139 / ssrn .
3355193.
[6]
Manos Antonakakis et al. “Understanding the Mirai Botnet”. In: 26th USENIX Secu-
rity Symposium (USENIX Security 17). Vancouver, BC: USENIX Association, Aug.
2017, pp. 1093–1110. ISBN: 978-1-931971-40-9. URL: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/usenixsecurity17/technical-sessions/presentation/antonakakis.
[7]
S Arvind and V Anantha Narayanan. “An overview of security in CoAP: attack and
analysis”. In: 2019 5th international conference on advanced computing & commu-
nication systems (ICACCS). IEEE. 2019, pp. 655–660.
[8]
BACnet. Research Study Indicates BACnet Global Market Share over 60% - BAC-
net Committee -bacnet.org. Accessed 13-11-2023. URL: https://bacnet.org/press-
releases/research-study-indicates-bacnet-global-market-share-over-60/.
[9]
BACnet International. Introduction to bacnet - ccontrols.com. URL: https://www.
ccontrols.com/pdf/BACnetIntroduction.pdf.
[10]
Deval Bhamare et al. “Cybersecurity for industrial control systems: A survey”. In:
Computers Security 89 (2020), p. 101677. ISSN: 0167-4048. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cose.2019.101677. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167404819302172.
[11]
Censys. Search 2.0 Troubleshooting QA. Accessed 22-12-2023. URL: https : / /
support.censys.io/hc/en-us/articles/4407300349588-Search-2-0-Troubleshooting-Q-A.
[12]
Conpot. CONPOT - ICS/SCADA Honeypot. Accessed 27-11-2023. URL: http://
conpot.org/.
[13]
CVEdetails. CVE-2014-9222. Accessed 31-12-2023. URL: https://www.cvedetails.
com/cve/CVE-2014-9222/.
[14]
CVEdetails. CVE-2021-46704. Accessed 24-12-2023. URL: https://www.cvedetails.
com/cve/CVE-2021-46704/.
[15]
CVEdetails. Eclipse Mosquitto : CVE security vulnerabilities, versions and detailed
reports. Accessed 20-12-2023. URL: https://www.cvedetails.com/product/45945/
Eclipse-Mosquitto.html?vendor_id=10410.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
79
==PAGE:88==
[16]
CVEdetails. Genivia Gsoap version 2.7.0: Security vulnerabilities, CVEs. Accessed
25-12-2023. URL: https://www.cvedetails.com/vulnerability-list/vendor_id-16720/
product_id-38955/version_id-587349/Genivia-Gsoap-2.7.0.html.
[17]
Markus Dahlmanns et al. “Easing the Conscience with OPC UA: An Internet-Wide
Study on Insecure Deployments”. In: Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measure-
ment Conference. IMC ’20. Virtual Event, USA: Association for Computing Machin-
ery, 2020, pp. 101–110. ISBN: 9781450381383. DOI: 10.1145/3419394.3423666.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423666.
[18]
Markus Dahlmanns et al. “Missed Opportunities: Measuring the Untapped TLS Sup-
port in the Industrial Internet of Things”. In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM on Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security. ASIA CCS ’22. Nagasaki,
Japan: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, pp. 252–266. ISBN: 9781450391405.
DOI: 10.1145/3488932.3497762. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3488932.3497762.
[19]
DDS Foundation. Accessed: 26-10-2023. URL: https://www.dds-foundation.org/
what-is-dds-3/.
[20]
DKCERT. Accessed: 31-10-2023. URL: https://www.cert.dk/.
[21]
Zakir Durumeric, Eric Wustrow, and J. Alex Halderman. “ZMap: Fast Internet-wide
Scanning and Its Security Applications”. In: 22nd USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 13). Washington, D.C.: USENIX Association, Aug. 2013, pp. 605–
620. ISBN: 978-1-931971-03-4. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity13/
technical-sessions/paper/durumeric.
[22]
Zakir Durumeric et al. “A Search Engine Backed by Internet-Wide Scanning”. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security. CCS ’15. Denver, Colorado, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2015, pp. 542–553. ISBN: 9781450338325. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 2810103 .
2813703. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2810103.2813703.
[23]
Eclipse Foundation. Eclipse Mosquitto. https://mosquitto.org/. Accessed 15-12-
2023. Dec. 2023.
[24]
eProsima. Fast DDS. Accessed 14-12-2023. URL: https://www.eprosima.com/
index.php/products-all/eprosima-fast-dds.
[25]
eQualitie. shodan_fingerprinter: Script fingerprinting systems based on shodan.io
data. Accessed 26-12-2023. URL: https://github.com/equalitie/shodan_fingerprinter/
tree/master.
[26]
Gartner. Definition of Operational Technology (OT) - gartner information technology
glossary. Accessed: 23-12-2023. URL: https://www.gartner.com/en/information-
technology/glossary/operational-technology-ot.
[27]
Oliver Gasser et al. “The Amplification Threat Posed by Publicly Reachable BACnet
Devices”. In: Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility 6 (Jan. 2017), pp. 77–104. DOI:
10.13052/jcsm2245-1439.614.
[28]
GenieACS. GenieACS. Accessed 24-12-2023. URL: https://genieacs.com/.
[29]
Google Security Blog. Announcing the first SHA1 collision. Accessed 29-12-2023.
URL: https://security.googleblog.com/2017/02/announcing-first-sha1-collision.html.
[30]
Robert David Graham. masscan: TCP Port Scanner. Accessed 11-12-2023. URL:
https://github.com/robertdavidgraham/masscan.
[31]
GreyNoise. GreyNoise is the source for understanding internet noise. Accessed
28-12-2023. URL: https://www.greynoise.io/.
[32]
Adam Hahn. “Operational Technology and Information Technology in Industrial Con-
trol Systems”. In: Cyber-security of SCADA and Other Industrial Control Systems.
Ed. by Edward J. M. Colbert and Alexander Kott. Cham: Springer International Pub-
80
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:89==
lishing, 2016, pp. 51–68. ISBN: 978-3-319-32125-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-32125-
7_4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32125-7_4.
[33]
Kevin E. Hemsley and Dr. Ronald E. Fisher. “History of Industrial Control System
Cyber Incidents”. In: (Dec. 2018). DOI: 10.2172/1505628. URL: https://www.osti.
gov/biblio/1505628.
[34]
Nadia Heninger et al. “Mining Your Ps and Qs: Detection of Widespread Weak Keys
in Network Devices”. In: 21st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 12).
Bellevue, WA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2012, pp. 205–220. ISBN: 978-931971-
95-9. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity12/technical-sessions/
presentation/heninger.
[35]
Hetzner. Dedicated Server, Cloud, Storage and Hosting. Accessed: 31-10-2023.
URL: https://www.hetzner.com/.
[36]
Joe Hildebrand. XEP-0138: Stream Compression. Accessed 24-12-2023. URL: https:
//xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0138.html.
[37]
Maximilian Hils and Rainer Böhme. Watching the Weak Link into Your Home: An
Inspection and Monitoring Toolkit for TR-069. 2020. arXiv: 2001.02564 [cs.NI].
[38]
Toshiaki Honda et al. “Development of a monitoring system for encrypted data by
OPC UA”. In: 2021 10th International Congress on Advanced Applied Informatics
(IIAI-AAI). 2021, pp. 731–736. DOI: 10.1109/IIAI-AAI53430.2021.00129.
[39]
Renjie Huang, Feng Liu, and Dongbo Pan. “Research on OPC UA security”. In:
2010 5th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications. June 2010,
pp. 1439–1444. DOI: 10.1109/ICIEA.2010.5514836.
[40]
Information Technology Laboratory. National Vulnerability Database. Accessed 26-
11-2023. URL: https://nvd.nist.gov/.
[41]
Mohammad Ali Jabraeil Jamali et al. “IoT Architecture”. In: Towards the Internet
of Things: Architectures, Security, and Applications. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2020, pp. 9–31. ISBN: 978-3-030-18468-1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-
18468-1_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18468-1_2.
[42]
Peter Jose, Said Saidi, and Oliver Gasser. “Analyzing IoT Hosts in the IPv6 Inter-
net”. In: (July 2023). URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.09918.pdf.
[43]
W.Z. Khan et al. “Industrial internet of things: Recent advances, enabling tech-
nologies and open challenges”. In: Computers Electrical Engineering 81 (2020),
p. 106522. ISSN: 0045-7906. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2019.
106522. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045790618329550.
[44]
Seungwoon Lee, Seung-Hun Shin, and Byeong-hee Roh. “Abnormal Behavior-Based
Detection of Shodan and Censys-Like Scanning”. In: 2017 Ninth International Con-
ference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN). 2017, pp. 1048–1052. DOI:
10.1109/ICUFN.2017.7993960.
[45]
Wei Li, Cheolwoo Jung, and Jongtae Park. “IoT Healthcare Communication System
for IEEE 11073 PHD and IHE PCD-01 Integration Using CoAP.” In: KSII Transac-
tions on Internet & Information Systems 12.4 (2018).
[46]
Federico Maggi, Rainer Vosseler, and Davide Quarta. The Fragility of Industrial
IoT’s Data Backbone: Security and Privacy Issues in MQTT and CoAP Protocols.
Tech. rep. Trend Micro, Inc., Dec. 4, 2018. URL: https://www.trendmicro.com/
vinfo/us/security/news/internet-of-things/mqtt-and-coap-security-and-privacy-issues-
in-iot-and-iiot-communication-protocols.
[47]
Federico Maggi et al. “A Security Analysis of the Data Distribution Service (DDS)
Protocol”. In: Trend Micro Research, Inc., Japan (2022), pp. 15–20.
[48]
Imran Malik et al. “XMPP Architecture and Security Challenges in an IoT Ecosys-
tem”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Australian Information Security Management Con-
Unmasking digital ghost ships
81
==PAGE:90==
ference. Perth, Australia: Edith Cowan University, 2018, pp. 62–73. DOI: 10.25958/
5c52735166690.
[49]
John Matherly. The Complete Guide to Shodan: Collect. Analyze. Visualize. Make
Internet Intelligence Work For You. Lean Publishing, 2016.
[50]
Ian McAteer et al. “Security Vulnerabilities and Cyber Threat Analysis of the AMQP
Protocol for the Internet of Things”. In: The Proceedings of 15th Australian Informa-
tion Security Management Conference. Ed. by Craig Valli. Perth, Western Australia:
Edith Cowan University, Dec. 2017, pp. 70–80. DOI: 10.4225/75/5a84f4a695b4c.
URL: https://ro.ecu.edu.au/ism/203.
[51]
Alexey Melnikov. Moving DIGEST-MD5 to Historic. Accessed 14-12-2023. URL:
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6331.
[52]
Hermann Merz, Thomas Hansemann, and Christof Hubner. “BACnet”. In: Building
Automation: Communication systems with EIB/KNX, LON und BACnet. Berlin, Hei-
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 185–273. ISBN: 978-3-540-88829-1.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-88829-1_5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-88829-
1_5.
[53]
Ariana Mirian et al. “An Internet-wide view of ICS devices”. In: 2016 14th Annual
Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST). 2016, pp. 96–103. DOI: 10.1109/
PST.2016.7906943.
[54]
mitre. CVE-2015-0204. Accessed 24-11-2023. URL: https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-
bin/cvename.cgi?name=cve-2015-0204.
[55]
mitre. CVE-2015-4000. Accessed 24-11-2023. URL: https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-
bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-4000.
[56]
Modbus-IDA. Modbus application protocol specification. URL: https://www.modbus.
org/docs/Modbus_Application_Protocol_V1_1b.pdf.
[57]
S. Mohagheghi, J. Stoupis, and Z. Wang. “Communication protocols and networks
for power systems-current status and future trends”. In: 2009 IEEE/PES Power Sys-
tems Conference and Exposition. 2009, pp. 1–9. DOI: 10.1109/PSCE.2009.4840174.
[58]
Glenn Murray, Michael N. Johnstone, and Craig Valli. “The convergence of IT and
OT in critical infrastructure”. In: 2017. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
54977789.
[59]
Nitin Naik. “Choice of effective messaging protocols for IoT systems: MQTT, CoAP,
AMQP and HTTP”. In: 2017 IEEE International Systems Engineering Symposium
(ISSE). 2017, pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.1109/SysEng.2017.8088251.
[60]
Roberto Nardone, Ricardo J Rodríguez, and Stefano Marrone. “Formal security as-
sessment of Modbus protocol”. In: 2016 11th International conference for internet
technology and secured transactions (ICITST). IEEE. 2016, pp. 142–147.
[61]
Lavinia Nastase. “Security in the Internet of Things: A Survey on Application Layer
Protocols”. In: 2017 21st International Conference on Control Systems and Com-
puter Science (CSCS). 2017, pp. 659–666. DOI: 10.1109/CSCS.2017.101.
[62]
Giuseppe Nebbione and Maria Carla Calzarossa. “Security of IoT Application Layer
Protocols: Challenges and Findings”. In: Future Internet 12.3 (2020). ISSN: 1999-
5903. DOI: 10.3390/fi12030055. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/12/3/55.
[63]
Jamie O’Hare, Rich Macfarlane, and Owen Lo. “Identifying Vulnerabilities Using
Internet-Wide Scanning Data”. In: 2019 IEEE 12th International Conference on
Global Security, Safety and Sustainability (ICGS3). 2019, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1109/
ICGS3.2019.8688018.
[64]
Object Management Group. The Real-time Publish-Subscribe Protocol (RTPS) DDS
Interoperability Wire Protocol Specification. Sept. 3, 2018. URL: https://www.omg.
org/spec/DDSI-RTPS/2.3/Beta1/PDF.
82
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:91==
[65]
omererdem. honeything: TR-069 Honeypot. Accessed 12-12-2023. URL: https://
github.com/omererdem/honeything.
[66]
OPC Foundation. OPC UA Online Reference. Accessed 14-12-2023. URL: https:
//reference.opcfoundation.org/.
[67]
OPC Foundation. Unified Architecture - OPC Foundation. Accessed: 23-10-2023.
URL: https://opcfoundation.org/about/opc-technologies/opc-ua/.
[68]
OPC Router. What is OPC UA? A practical introduction. Accessed 16-12-2023.
URL: https://www.opc-router.com/what-is-opc-ua/#practical.
[69]
Keyur Patel et al. Internet of Things-IOT: Definition, Characteristics, Architecture,
Enabling Technologies, Application Future Challenges. May 2016.
[70]
Matthew Peacock, Michael N. Johnstone, and Craig Valli. “An Exploration of Some
Security Issues Within the BACnet Protocol”. In: Information Systems Security and
Privacy. Ed. by Paolo Mori, Steven Furnell, and Olivier Camp. Cham: Springer In-
ternational Publishing, 2018, pp. 252–272. ISBN: 978-3-319-93354-2.
[71]
Qacafe. Connection Request Basics. Accessed 12-12-2023. URL: https://www.
qacafe.com/resources/connection-request-basics/.
[72]
Qais Saif Qassim, Musab AM Ali, and Nooritawati Md Tahir. “Security Analysis of
DNP3 Protocol in SCADA System”. In: 2023 IEEE 13th International Conference on
Control System, Computing and Engineering (ICCSCE). IEEE. 2023, pp. 314–319.
[73]
RabbitMQ. RabbitMQ: easy to use, flexible messaging and streaming. Accessed
25-11-2023. URL: https://www.rabbitmq.com/.
[74]
Petter Rasmussen. gdrive: Google Drive CLI Client. Accessed 07-12-2023. URL:
https://github.com/glotlabs/gdrive.
[75]
Karen Rose, Scott Eldridge, and Lyman Chapin. “The internet of things: An overview”.
In: The internet society (ISOC) 80 (2015), pp. 1–50.
[76]
Peter Saint-Andre. Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP): Core.
RFC 6120. Mar. 2011. DOI: 10.17487/RFC6120. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/
info/rfc6120.
[77]
Emmanouil Samanis, Joseph Gardiner, and Awais Rashid. “SoK: A Taxonomy for
Contrasting Industrial Control Systems Asset Discovery Tools”. In: Proceedings of
the 17th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. ARES ’22.
Vienna, Austria: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022. ISBN: 9781450396707.
DOI: 10.1145/3538969.3538979. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3538969.3538979.
[78]
Frank Schröder. Gopcua. Accessed 28-12-2023. URL: https://github.com/gopcua/
opcua.
[79]
secdev. scapy: Scapy: the Python-based interactive packet manipulation program
library. Accessed 18-12-2023. URL: https://github.com/secdev/scapy.
[80]
Pallavi Sethi and Smruti Sarangi. “Internet of Things: Architectures, Protocols, and
Applications”. In: Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering 2017 (Jan. 2017),
pp. 1–25. DOI: 10.1155/2017/9324035.
[81]
Rajiv Shah. Protecting critical national infrastructure in an era of IT and OT conver-
gence. Australian Strategic Policy Institute, 2019.
[82]
Zach Shelby, Klaus Hartke, and Carsten Bormann. The Constrained Application
Protocol (CoAP). RFC 7252. June 2014. DOI: 10.17487/RFC7252. URL: https://
www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7252.
[83]
Shodan. Honeypot or not? Accessed: 07-11-2023. URL: https://honeyscore.shodan.
io/.
[84]
Shodan. Shodan Search Engine. https://www.shodan.io/. Accessed: 04-10-2023.
[85]
solarclarity. Huawei Smartlogger 3000A. Accessed 30-12-2023. URL: https://solarclarity.
com/en/product/255403/huawei-smartlogger-3000a.
Unmasking digital ghost ships
83
==PAGE:92==
[86]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Open
for Hire: Attack Trends and Misconfiguration Pitfalls of IoT Devices”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference. IMC ’21. Virtual Event:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 195–215. ISBN: 9781450391290.
DOI: 10.1145/3487552.3487833. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3487552.3487833.
[87]
OASIS Standard. “Oasis advanced message queuing protocol (amqp) version 1.0”.
In: International Journal of Aerospace Engineering Hindawi www. hindawi. com
2018 (2012).
[88]
streadway. Go client for AMQP 0.9.1. Accessed 20-12-2023. URL: https://github.
com/streadway/amqp.
[89]
Shahar Tal and Lior Oppenheim. “The internet of TR-069 things: One exploit to rule
them all”. In: RSA Conference. 2015.
[90]
Muhammad Ashar Tariq et al. “Enhancements and challenges in coap—a survey”.
In: Sensors 20.21 (2020), p. 6391.
[91]
teslamate-org. teslamate: A self-hosted data logger for your Tesla. Accessed 17-
12-2023. URL: https://github.com/teslamate-org/teslamate.
[92]
Silviu-Iulian Toc and Adrian Korodi. “Modbus-OPC UA Wrapper Using Node-RED
and IoT-2040 with Application in the Water Industry”. In: 2018 IEEE 16th Interna-
tional Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY). 2018, pp. 000099–
000104. DOI: 10.1109/SISY.2018.8524749.
[93]
Transforma Insights. Current IoT Forecast Highlights - Transforma Insights. Oct.
2023. URL: https://transformainsights.com/research/forecast/highlights.
[94]
Tridium. Niagara 4 Hardening Guide. Accessed 14-12-2023. URL: https://www.
tridium.com/content/dam/tridium/en/documents/document-lists/Niagara4-Hardening-
Guide-2023.pdf.
[95]
trylinux. lift: Low-Impact Fingerprint Tool. Accessed 26-12-2023. URL: https : / /
github.com/trylinux/lift/tree/master.
[96]
Michael L. Waskom. “seaborn: statistical data visualization”. In: Journal of Open
Source Software 6.60 (2021), p. 3021. DOI: 10.21105/joss.03021. URL: https://doi.
org/10.21105/joss.03021.
[97]
Wikipedia. List of assigned /8 IPv4 address blocks. Accessed 22-12-2023. URL:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_assigned_/8_IPv4_address_blocks.
[98]
XMPP. XEP-0077: In-Band Registration. Accessed 21-11-2023. URL: https://xmpp.
org/extensions/xep-0077.html#security.
[99]
Zscaler. Zscaler ThreatLabz 2023 Enterprise IoT and OT Threat Report. Accessed
11-12-2023. URL: https://info.zscaler.com/resources-industry-reports-threatlabz-
2023-enterprise-ioT-ot-threat-report.
84
Unmasking digital ghost ships
==PAGE:93==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
