==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Analysis and simulation of the 
integration of Power-to-X into a future 
wind dominated electrical grid on the 
Faroe Islands
Author
Asger Nyholm
DTU Wind-M-0749 
January 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0749
January 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors: 
Chresten Træholt
Augusto Jonathan Riofrio Trujillo 
Tilman Weckesser
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Helma Maria Tróndheim
SEV/Færøerne
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author:
Asger Nyholm 
Title:
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power-
to-X into a future wind dominated electrical grid on 
the Faroe Islands 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Asger Nyholm (s183699)
Signature
Date
01-01-2024
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Ensuring the stability of the power system is imperative for maintaining a reliable electricity sup­
ply to consumers. This thesis addresses the evolving dynamics introduced by the increasing
share of fluctuating Converter­Interfaced Generation (CIG), particularly wind power, which chal­
lenges conventional power system stability mechanisms. The Faroese power company SEV is
aiming for 100% renewable electricity generation by 2030, which is expected to be achieved
through expansions of onshore wind power. Though the current wind power capacity is more
than the average system load, the need for sufficient system inertia and power reserves from
synchronous generators as well as lack of energy storage, limits the full utilisation of the wind
power. As a result, 35% of the potential wind power generation was curtailed during 2023.
Motivated by SEV’s goal for 2030 and the desire for improved wind power utilisation, this thesis
investigates the integration of Power­to­X (PtX) with a large­scale electrolyser in the Faroese
electrical grid. The research navigates through an exploration of electrolyser technologies, em­
phasizing the efficiency and degradation aspects relevant for flexible operation. Alkaline Elec­
trolyser (AEL) technology, chosen over Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolyser (PEMEL) due
to its maturity and cost­effectiveness, forms the basis for subsequent analyses. The higher flex­
ibility and lifetime of PEMEL is noted for later analysis.
An investigation of the Faroese power system and power system stability concepts, lay the
groundwork for creating scenarios for simulations in the grid model in DIgSILENT PowerFac­
tory. Though frequency stability is of primary interest, voltage stability and reactive power con­
siderations are noted for choosing an adequate electrolyser placement in the grid. Rotor angle
stability is presented but not used notably in the result analysis.
A dynamic AEL model is studied for a 5 MW electrolyser case in a small test grid, with assump­
tions regarding scaling, internal dynamics and operating conditions. Internal cell parameters are
calculated and the implementation of a droop control scheme for providing frequency response
is validated through various disturbance sequences. A modification to the model is made for
achieving a more realistic ramp rate based on limitations of AEL derived from literature.
A model of the main grid in the Faroe Islands undergoes initial analysis through a static load
flow simulation which shows the majority of the power coming from three major wind farms in
the south. Despite low loading of transmission lines connecting to northern loads, the expected
increase in losses as well as reactive power concerns made for to choosing the electrolyser
placement near the major wind farms.
Subsequently, dynamic simulations explore frequency disturbances in three scenarios with vary­
ing shares of wind power generation (0%, 60%, and 74%). Deviation measures such as Rate
of Change of Frequency (RoCoF), frequency nadir and steady­state frequency are used for
analysing results, which reveal more severe frequency deviations and reduced system robust­
ness with a higher share of wind power.
With a limit set by SEV of maximum 60% wind power at any given moment, the electrolyser is
sized such to compensate for an estimated lack of frequency response capability in the 74%
wind scenario. In a specified system load case, a 12 MW rating and operating point of 9.8 MW
is hypothesised to be sufficient for providing enough frequency response to allow for eliminating
15.7 MW of wind curtailment.
Two different realistic droop schemes are evaluated and compared in the simulations. Overall,
the results indicate a significant impact by limiting frequency deviations during disturbances.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
i
==PAGE:5==
Despite the unimproved low system inertia, the response can compensate for the frequency
response deficiencies to a reasonable degree.
By implementing a wind power profile, the simulation demonstrates the electrolyser’s dampen­
ing effect on continuous deviations during high wind penetration, also highlighting the impor­
tance of choosing a droop deadband based on the desired response activation occurrence.
A hypothetical case with a complementary Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) is investi­
gated to enhance the speed of the frequency response. The required power and energy rating
as well as operation scheme are estimated for achieving same speed of response as PEMEL.
Two cases of different energy capacities are evaluated.
Based on a defined long term operational scenario centered around estimated daily wind curtail­
ment, a subsequent economic analysis evaluates the feasibility of AEL and PEMEL using Net
Present Value (NPV) and Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH) calculations. With realistically
estimated price points of electricity (1.45 DKK/kWh) and hydrogen (5 €/kg), both technologies
proved infeasible. The LCoH of AEL (10.82 €/kg) was lower than for PEMEL (11.37 €/kg), de­
spite the latter having a longer lifetime. The inclusion of the BESS cases shows that an LCoH
comparable to that of PEMEL can be achieved (11.44 €/kg).
Analysing AEL alone as well as the BESS combination, a lowered electricity price and added
revenue from oxygen are determined, for yielding a positive NPV. Furthermore, ancillary service
revenue analysis suggests economic preferences based on operating points. Having an hourly
revenue of 62 DKK/MW more for downward response compared to upward response, yields a
superior feasibility with a lowered 9.8 MW operating point.
Lastly, downstream hydrogen usage for green fuel production, particularly in ammonia and
methanol, is explored. Considering the transition away from fossil fuels, the resulting annual
hydrogen production of the electrolyser is estimated to be able to replace 1.69 million liters of
diesel fuel consumption.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
ii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Chresten, Jonathan and Tilman for your
guidance and support throughout the project. Thank you also to my external supervisor Helma
Maria for your assistance in acquiring knowledge about the Faroese power system. Lastly, I
would like to give thanks to all who have provided me with helpful discussions, constructive
criticisms and motivating words in the course of my work.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
iii
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
AC Alternating Current
AEL Alkaline Electrolyser
ATC Acceleration Time Constant
AVR Automatic Voltage Regulator
BESS Battery Energy Storage System
CapEx Capital Expenditure
CIG Converter­Interfaced Generation
CRF Capital Recovery Factor
DC Direct Current
DoD Depth of Discharge
DSL DIgSILENT Simulation Language
FCR­N Frequency Containment Reserves during Normal operation
HHV Higher Heating Value
LCoH Levelised Cost of Hydrogen
LHV Lower Heating Value
NPV Net Present Value
OpEx Operational Expenditure
PEMEL Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolyser
PHS Pumped Hydro Storage
PoC Point of Connection
PSS Power System Stabiliser
PtX Power­to­X
PWM Pulse­Width Modulation
RoCoF Rate of Change of Frequency
SFB Secondary Frequency Bias
SOEC Solid Oxide Exchange Cell electrolyser
SoC State of Charge
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
iv
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Electrolyser technologies
3
2.1
Chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Efficiency and degradation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
The Faroese power system
7
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Future grid expansions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Power system stability
11
4.1
Frequency stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Rotor angle stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Voltage stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Ancillary services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Dynamic electrolyser model
15
5.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Scaling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.3
Powerfactory implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
Frequency response implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.5
DIgSILENT Simulation Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.6
Model test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Main grid model analysis
24
6.1
Synchronous generator control models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
Static load flow simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.3
Dynamic simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4
Electrolyser integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.5
Complementary battery system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Economic Analysis
47
7.1
Further analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.2
Green fuel production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8
Discussion
55
9
Conclusion
58
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
v
==PAGE:9==
Bibliography
62
Appendix
66
A
66
B
67
C
68
D
69
E
70
F
71
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
vi
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In modern society, the power system plays an essential role and maintaining its stability is cru­
cial for ensuring a reliable supply to consumers. Power system stability is a critical aspect of
electrical grid operation and one of the key factors is the balance of power generation and con­
sumption [1]. This power balance is reflected in the grid frequency, which is a result of rotating
synchronous generators. Historically, synchronous generators have maintained the frequency
by varying the generation to match the consumption. Furthermore, sudden disturbances in the
power balance are instantaneously counteracted by the inherent inertia of the rotors. However,
an ever increasing share of fluctuating Converter­Interfaced Generation (CIG) such as wind
power, is decreasing the system inertia while simultaneously increasing intermittent power im­
balances. As fossil fuel­driven synchronous generators are anticipated to be gradually phased
out, the reduction in conventional power reserves poses a further increased challenge in miti­
gating the growing severity of disturbances.
The fluctuating nature of wind power introduces another issue, which is sub­optimal utilisation of
generation capacity. This can occur in wind dominated grids without means of exporting excess
power. Thus, when the available generation is higher than the consumption, curtailment of wind
power becomes necessary. Essentially, this entails wind turbines being actively disconnected
and that the power is wasted.
1.2
Motivation
The Faroese power company SEV wants to achieve 100% renewable electricity generation by
2030 [2]. To reach this goal, the renewable generation in 2022 (226 GWh) needs to be nearly
tripled to match the expected system load of 600 GWh. Expansion of onshore wind power is
the main part of the plan for rapidly increasing the renewable generation capacity [3]. Within
the last two years the wind power generation capacity in the main grid of the Faroe Islands has
more than tripled, going from around 18 MW to 61 MW. Though this capacity is well above the
average load of around 42 MW, the decrease in power system stability associated with a high
share of wind power, has resulted in measures for limiting the share of wind power to 60% of
the total generation at any given moment. As a consequence, curtailment of wind power has
equated to 48 GWh of energy in 2023, which is 35% of the generation potential (136 GWh).
If 100% renewable generation is to be realised in the Faroe Islands, better utilisation of the
wind power capacity is highly desireble. To increase the utilisation, energy storage technolo­
gies can be used for storing the wind energy that would otherwise be curtailed. Additionally, a
higher than 60% share of wind power might be made possible by storage units through the pro­
vision of so­called frequency response [4]. Frequency response is simply the concept of varying
power generation or consumption based on the measured grid frequency, to counteract power
imbalances.
Batteries have already been implemented for frequency response in the Faroese grid [2] and
though they can provide fast response times, they are limited in terms of energy storage ca­
pacity. A technology that may be better suited is the electrolyser, which consumes and stores
electrical energy as chemical energy in hydrogen by the splitting of water molecules [5]. The
hydrogen can later be used for creating green fuels such as methanol and ammonia, which
have the possibility for replacing fossil fuels in combustion engines [6].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
1
==PAGE:11==
Thus, the transition to renewable energy can be accelerated in the Faroese offshore industry,
since electrification of large ships is highly impractical [7].
The procedure of using electrolysers for producing hydrogen and subsequently green fuels
is commonly denoted as Power­to­X (PtX), which aims to broadly describe the conversion of
electric energy P to another state of energy X [8]. The term green fuels assumes that the corre­
sponding hydrogen is produced from renewable electricity. This can be guaranteed by operating
the electrolyser such to only use wind power that would otherwise be curtailed.
Regarding frequency response, an electrolyser can provide this by acting as a variable load
in the system [5]. This entails lowering the electricity consumption at positive system power
imbalances and raising it at negative system power imbalances. In terms of grid frequency,
a positive system power imbalance yields an increase in frequency and a negative system
power imbalance yields a decrease in frequency. Since electrolysers are limited in terms of the
speed with which they vary the operating point [5], a combined response using a complementary
battery system can be considered.
Also worth mentioning as a motivating factor, is the large fish farming industry on the Faroe
Islands [9], where oxygenation of the water is necessary [10]. Since electrolysis entails the
splitting of water molecules, the resulting oxygen produced by integrated electrolysers can be
captured and used by the fish farms. This would increase the utilisation of a potential electrolyser
installation.
1.3
Problem statement
With the above motivations, this thesis aims to analyse the integration of a large­scale electrol­
yser in the main electrical grid of the Faroe Islands. The exploration of the concept of electrolysis
will precede an examination of electrolyser technologies, from which one will be selected for the
integration case. An overview of the Faroese power system is presented, as well as relevant
concepts of power system stability. Simulations will be carried out in DIgSILENT PowerFactory
using a dynamic electrolyser model in a complete model of the main Faroese transmission grid.
The simulations will be based on a determined placement, size and operation case of the elec­
trolyser, where it is controlled such to provide frequency response in a future scenario with more
wind power than currently possible in the grid. Subsequently, a case of adding Battery Energy
Storage Systems (BESS) will be analysed for yielding an improved combined response. Long
term considerations of the installations are explored and included in an economic analysis for
determining the feasibility of the integration cases.
1.4
Research questions
To clarify the purpose of the thesis, the following research questions are used as an overall
foundation of the work:
• What is the current state of electrolyser technologies and which types are relevant for
integration into the Faroese grid?
• How is the Faroese power system affected by an increased share of wind power genera­
tion?
• How should an electrolyser be sized, placed and operated for supporting power system
stability in a future wind dominated scenario with fewer synchronous generators?
• How can a complementary battery system be controlled such to create an improved fre­
quency response in combination with the electrolyser?
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
2
==PAGE:12==
• What are the long term considerations as well as economic feasibility of electrolyser inte­
gration in the Faroe Islands?
1.5
Report structure
The following three chapters will include an overview in electrolyser technologies, the Faroese
power system and power system stability concepts. This will create the foundation of under­
standing needed for the subsequent two chapters containing simulation and analysis of the
electrolyser model and grid model. After the analysis of results, the long term considerations
are investigated and the economic analysis is performed. Subsequently, the results and major
assumptions used throughout the thesis are discussed. Lastly, a conclusion is presented along
with suggestions for future work.
2
Electrolyser technologies
The electrolysis process occurs within a cell, which contains two electrodes (anode and cath­
ode) and an electrolyte separating them [5]. Combining multiple cells together creates an elec­
trolyser stack and the joining of stacks allows for a large­scale electrolyser unit. Electrolysis
requires Direct Current (DC) applied to the electrodes, which means that electrolysers need to
use converters if they are connected to the Alternating Current (AC) grid. Several electrolyser
technologies exist today, e.g. Alkaline Electrolyser (AEL), Proton Exchange Membrane Electrol­
yser (PEMEL) and Solid Oxide Exchange Cell electrolyser (SOEC). According to the European
Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO­E), AEL and PEMEL are well­proven tech­
nologies and have been used in commercial applications [5]. Both have a typical stack size of 1
MW but operational units reach 10 MW for AEL and 20 MW for PEMEL. SOECEL on the other
hand, was still at the developmental stages as of 2022, with a typical stack size of 5 kW and
operational units reaching 225 kW. For the purpose of this report, only AEL and PEMEL will be
analysed further due to their higher maturity level, industrial readiness and scalability.
2.1
Chemistry
In the cells of AEL, the electrodes are immersed in a liquid alkaline electrolyte solution and sep­
arated by a diaphragm. The diaphragm prevents mixing of the separated hydrogen and oxygen
gas, while still allowing for transportation of ions from the cathode to the anode. At the cathode,
water molecules are split into hydrogen gas and hydroxide ions that are negatively charged due
to absorption of electrons from the cathode. The hydroxide ions are then transported through
the diaphragm to the positively charged anode, where they release electrons and separate into
oxygen gas and water [5]. The right side of Figure 2.1 shows the detailed chemical reaction in
a AEL cell.
As the name suggests, the cells of PEMEL contain a proton exchange membrane which pre­
vents mixing of the hydrogen and oxygen gas, while allowing for transportation of protons from
the anode to the cathode. At the anode, water molecules are split into oxygen gas, protons and
free electrons. The protons are transported through the membrane to the cathode, where they
absorb electrons and combine to form hydrogen gas [5]. Due to the oxidative environment in
the PEMEL cells, the electrodes require catalysts made of noble metals such as iridium and
platinum, to mitigate corrosion. The left side of Figure 2.1 shows the detailed chemical reaction
in a PEMEL cell.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
3
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Visualisation of chemical reactions in AEL (left) and PEMEL (right). Taken from
ENTSO­E [5].
2.2
Efficiency and degradation
Electrolyser efficiency is a matter of definition, but can generally be divided into four categories:
Faraday, voltage, DC and system efficiency [11].
2.2.1
Faraday efficiency
Faraday efficiency is the ratio of the amount of usable hydrogen actually produced and the
theoretical maximum production under ideal conditions. It encompasses various factors, includ­
ing hydrogen diffusion losses through the electrode separation membrane, hydrogen losses in
downstream purification system as well as electrical current losses.
2.2.2
Voltage efficiency
Voltage efficiency is the efficiency of the electrochemical reaction itself. It is calculated as the
ratio of the thermoneutral voltage and the actual cell voltage. The thermoneutral voltage repre­
sents the voltage needed to split water (called the reversible voltage) as well as the heat energy
associated with changes in enthalpy during the reaction. The actual cell voltage contains the
thermoneutral voltage, but also accounts for all the catalytic and electrical losses that occur
within the cell during the electrolysis process. 100% voltage efficiency entails that the heat gen­
erated during the electrolysis, is exactly equal to heat required for the process to continue. This
is achieved when the cell voltage is exactly equal to the thermoneutral voltage.
2.2.3
DC efficiency
DC efficiency is the ratio between the chemical energy content in the usable hydrogen and the
electrical energy used in the process. The DC efficiency can be understood as the product of
Faraday and voltage efficiency. It is determined partly by the intended use of the hydrogen. If
the stored energy in the hydrogen is converted to mechanical, electrical or thermal energy, the
Lower Heating Value (LHV) is included in the calculation. If the hydrogen is solely considered a
chemical product, the Higher Heating Value (HHV) is used instead. In this report, when providing
values for electrolyser efficiency, this is referring to the DC efficiency determined by the LHV.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
4
==PAGE:14==
2.2.4
System efficiency
The above efficiencies are mostly on cell­level, but another efficiency definition is concerning
the entire electrolyser plant and the losses of its auxiliary components. These components in­
clude converters, transformers, water treatment systems, compressors, hydrogen purification
systems and cooling systems. Since the efficiency depends on the specific type of auxiliary
components, it does not depend on whether the electrolyser is AEL or PEMEL.
2.2.5
Efficiency dependencies
Since this thesis aims to investigate the dynamic operation of electrolysers, it is relevant to in­
vestigate how the efficiency of the electrochemical reaction varies with the load. Nominal load
entails a power consumption equal the size/rating of the unit, for which the given efficiency value
is specified. The terms nominal, rated and maximum power (or load) will be used interchange­
ably throughout the thesis. At nominal load, a certain current density is present in the cell, which
is directly proportional to the rate of hydrogen production. When changing the operating point,
the current density in the cell also changes. If the current density increases, the cell voltage
increases due to various overpotentials [12]. This has a negative effect on voltage efficiency.
The behaviour of the current density and voltage of the cell, can be represented as a U­I char­
acteristic shown in Figure 2.2. Here, 100% efficiency is achieved at the current density corre­
sponding to the thermoneutral voltage (1.48 V in this case). Thereafter, the cell voltage increases
linearly with the current density. The subsequent decrease in efficiency caused by the increased
cell voltage, is also visualised in this example.
Figure 2.2: Example of electrolyser U­I characteristic (blue) and the corresponding voltage effi­
ciency curve (red) [11].
Temperature also has an effect on efficiency, with the reversible voltage being lower at higher
temperatures and thus improving voltage efficiency [11]. For example, at 25◦C and 80◦C (1 bar),
the reversible voltage is 1.229 V and 1.184 V, respectively [13]. Pressure has the opposite in­
fluence, with the reversible voltage increasing with pressure. However, this only has an effect at
insignificant current densities [14]. It can be noted that the difference between the the reversible
voltage at 1 bar and 30 bar (25◦C) is 0.066 V [13], which is very small despite the large pressure
difference.
If taking the whole electrolyser system into account, one must also consider the way the operat­
ing point affects the efficiency of all auxiliary components. These components each have their
own nominal load rating and load dependent efficiency, which could have different characteris­
tics than that of the electrolyser stack. For example, even though lower load increases the DC
efficiency, the auxiliaries in the system might have a decreased efficiency in low load [11].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
5
==PAGE:15==
Thus, if the total decrease in auxiliary component efficiency outweighs the increase in DC effi­
ciency, the operating point is sub­optimal.
In conclusion, current density and temperature are two major factors when it comes to efficiency,
which is maximised at low current densities and high temperatures. Operating at lower current
densities leads to the rate of hydrogen production being decreased, which means that the elec­
trolyser capacity is sub­optimally utilised. Higher temperatures impose higher cell degradation,
which reduces the lifetime [11]. The operating point range shall also be chosen for optimising
total system efficiency, by taking the characteristics of auxiliaries into account. Characteristics
of auxiliaries will not be explored further in this thesis due to time constraints.
2.2.6
Effects of fluctuating power
If the electrolyser is to provide flexible operation in the Faroe Islands, the consequences of
which must be considered from a cell degradation perspective. Though long­term studies on
the effects on degradation are limited, some reports presented in [15] have shown that rapidly
changing operating point as well as frequent switch on/off, has a significant effect on the perfor­
mance of an electrolyser. These reports contain tests of both AEL and PEMEL regulating their
operating points based on varying solar and wind power inputs. The conclusion is that sudden
power fluctuations cause electrode degradation to accelerate significantly, due to large voltage
changes. The degradation is most prominent during frequent switching off, where a so­called
reverse current induces these large voltages changes. The results also show that PEMEL is
less susceptible to degradation, compared to AEL.
Regarding temperature and pressure, these also change with the operating point. This has been
demonstrated by experimental studies of a 250 kW AEL at the Huaneng Clean Energy Research
Institute in Beijing, China [16]. Here, increasing the current density of the cells resulted in a
higher temperature and pressure. This change will as previously explained affect the efficiency
of the electrochemical reaction. Despite electrolysers using controllers for maintaining stack
temperatures around desired setpoints, oscillations around these setpoints can often occur [17].
Dynamics regarding both temperature and pressure will not be part of the analysis in this thesis.
Thus, they will be considered constant.
2.2.7
General parameter comparison
Table 2.1 shows a comparison of relevant parameters of AEL and PEMEL. While efficiency is
almost equal for both technologies, there are clear differences between the two. Regarding op­
eration flexibility, PEMEL is better in terms of having a wider load range, a faster ramp rate and
a faster start­up/shut down time. The superior flexibility of PEMEL comes with a much higher
Capital Expenditure (CapEx) and a slightly higher Operational Expenditure (OpEx). The much
higher CapEx is mainly due to the need for the aforementioned noble metals in the electrodes,
which are not needed for AEL. The lifetimes (given in operating hours) of AEL and PEMEL are
seen to be fairly similar, with AEL having a higher expected minimum and PEMEL having higher
expected maximum. Though PEMEL operates at higher current densities which decreases volt­
age efficiency, the DC efficiency is still in the same range as AEL. This could be explained by
the lower ohmic resistance of the PEMEL cell [18], which mitigates the previously mentioned
overpotentials. The temperature and pressure ranges of both technologies do not differ signifi­
cantly.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
6
==PAGE:16==
Parameter
AEL
PEMEL
Efficiency [%]
63 ­ 70
61 ­ 70
Load range [%]
10 ­ 110
0 ­ 160
Ramp rate [%/s]
0.2 ­ 20
100
Start­up/Shut­down time [s]
60 ­ 600
1 ­ 300
Typical CapEx [€/kWe]
700
1 160
OpEx [% of CapEx]
2
2 ­ 3
Lifetime [h]
60 000 ­ 75 000
50 000 ­ 80 000
Current density [A/cm2]
0.2 ­ 0.8
1 ­ 2.3
Temperature [◦C]
70 ­ 90
50 ­ 80
Pressure [bar]
< 30
< 30
Table 2.1: Comparison of AEL and PEMEL as of 2022 [5, 19].
Due to AEL being the cheaper option in terms of CapEx and OpEx, this technology is chosen
for the future work of this thesis. On top of this, it is the most mature technology at this time [20].
Though AEL is the inferior option in terms of flexibility, it should still be able to provide value in
this aspect.
3
The Faroese power system
3.1
Overview
The power system of the Faroe Islands is operated by the local power company SEV, which
owns 98% of the installed generation capacity [2]. The system consists of seven isolated grids,
with the main grid connecting 11 of the 18 islands. The largest of the islands is Streymoy, which
is part of the main grid and where the capital Tórshavn is situated. The main grid represents
around 90% of the total demand and has a total generation capacity of 190.33 MW, including a
2.3 MW BESS. The remaining 10% of the demand comes from six other islands, each containing
their own isolated grids. The isolated island of Suðuroy is the largest of these, with the rest
of the isolated islands accounting for less than 0.2% of the total Faroese demand. Since later
simulations and subsequent analysis will be done using a model of the main grid, the six isolated
grids will not be explored in further detail.
Table 3.1 shows all power plants in the main grid and their corresponding type as well as gener­
ation and storage capacities. The storage capacities are mainly composed of water reservoirs
at the hydro power plants, with a combined storage of 11.326 GWh. The BESS installation at
Húsareyn substation contributes with 707 kWh of storage capacity, which is used for either
frequency response or to smooth out the wind power profile of the Húsahagi wind farm [2].
Figure 3.1 illustrates how the total generation capacity is divided between the power plant types
of the main grid. Fossil fuels have the biggest share, mainly due to Sundsverkið power plant,
with a capacity of 82.3 MW. With the new wind turbine installations on Streymoy (Gellingarklettur
and Flatnahagi), the capacity of wind power has reached 61.38 MW, surpassing hydro power
at 36.6 MW.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
7
==PAGE:17==
Island
Power Plant
Type
Generation (MW)
Storage (MWh)
Svínoy
Elverkið í Svínoy
Fossil (backup)
0.26
­
Borðoy
Elverkið á Strond
Fossil
3.6
­
Elverkið á Strond
Hydro
1.4
24
Eysturoy
Eiðisverkið
Hydro
21.7
5 927
Neshagi
Wind
4.5
­
Streymoy
Sundsverkið
Fossil
82.3
­
Gellingarklettur
Wind
25.2
­
Flatnahagi
Wind
18
­
Húsahagi
Wind
11.7
­
Mýrarnar
Wind
1.98
­
Fossáverkið
Hydro
6.3
2 577
Heygaverkið
Hydro
4.8
523
Mýruverkið
Hydro
2.4
2 275
Húsareyn BESS
Battery
2.3
*707
Förka
Biogas
1.5
­
Minesto
Tidal
0.2
­
Hestur
Elverkið í Hesti
Fossil (backup)
0.15
­
Nólsoy
Elverkið í Nólsoy
Fossil (backup)
0.26
­
Sandoy
Elverkið í Skopun
Fossil (backup)
1.78
­
Table 3.1: Power plants in the main grid of the Faroe Islands and their corresponding type,
generation capacity and storage capacity [2, 3]. *kWh
47%
19%
32%
2%
Fossil
Hydro
Wind
Other
Figure 3.1: Sources of power generation capacity of the main Faroese grid, with fossil fuel,
hydro power, wind power and others being represented. ”Other” includes a BESS, biogas plant
and tidal power plant.
The voltage levels of the Faroese grids range from 60 kV down to 0.4 kV. 60 kV and 20 kV
are used at the transmission level and 10 kV, 6 kV and 0.4 kV are used at the distribution level.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
8
==PAGE:18==
Today, the majority of connections are composed of cables, which also are being used for all new
connections. Overhead lines are mainly present at the older 60 kV transmission connections.
During 2020, the main grid had a recorded minimum, mean and maximum load of 26.8 MW,
42.1 MW and 61.7 MW, respectively. On average, the daily minimum load was at 04:00 and the
maximum was at 17:00 [2]. In 2022, the minimum, mean1 and maximum load was 29.3 MW,
49.7 MW and 70 MW, respectively [3].
3.2
Future grid expansions
In 2022, 52% of the annual generation came from renewable sources, with wind power contribut­
ing with 20.7% [21]. According to SEV’s vision, which aims for 100% renewable generation by
2030, the annual demand by that time will be approximately 600 GWh [2]. To reach the goal
defined by this vision, the renewable generation seen in 2022 (226 GWh) will have to almost be
tripled.
3.2.1
Hydro power
Because of the mountainous Faroese topography and high precipitation, it is possible to ex­
pand the hydro power production significantly. However, local environmental concerns have
prevented this from being realised [2].
3.2.2
Wind power
Onshore wind power is currently the main choice for the major planned expansions in genera­
tion capacity. Offshore wind power has also been discussed, but it is presently postponed until
after 2030. The reason for this being that offshore wind farms only become economically fea­
sible at very large capacities. Without unrealistically large energy storage capacity, an offshore
wind farm would simply entail too much unusable generation. If an interconnecting cable to an­
other larger grid is installed, ability to export power could bring offshore wind power back into
consideration [3].
3.2.3
Solar power
Though solar power can be used during the summer months, when wind and hydro power po­
tentials are lower, the overall solar power potential is fairly low. A capacity factor of around 8%
can be expected in Tórshavn. Comparatively, the south of Spain can reach an annual capacity
factor of above 20% [22]. The capacity factor is an indication of how much energy will be pro­
duced for a given installation. Mathematically, it is the ratio of how much energy that is actually
produced to the maximum energy that theoretically could be produced (constant full power).
For instance, a capacity factor of 8% for a 1 MW installation will yield 700.8 MWh in one year.
In comparison, the theoretical maximum would be 8 760 MWh. In contrast to the low capacity
factor for solar power, wind power on the Faroe Islands can achieve a capacity factor of up to
70% [23].
3.2.4
Energy storage
As the renewable generation is set to increase rapidly, issues will inevitably arise due to the
fluctuating nature of renewable energy sources. These issues will involve temporary power
deficits (demand > generation) as well as power surpluses (generation > demand).
1 No official mean value was obtained. Instead, the average between minimum and maximum load was calculated.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
9
==PAGE:19==
The former can in extreme cases require load shedding and the latter can require generation
curtailment, none of which are desirable. Various energy storage technologies can be consid­
ered for avoiding these issues, by storing power during surpluses and emitting power during in
deficits.
Battery storage
The relatively small BESS capacity of the Faroe Islands is being expanded, with the goal of
reaching 55 MW in the main grid. As of writing this, 12 MW is currently being installed [3].
However, present BESS technology lacks high energy densities needed for large­scale energy
storage. Therefore, the installations will most likely be used for short term power balancing in
the grid. This will be explored in more detail in Chapter 4 regarding power system stability.
The limited energy storage capacity is evident if one considers the final combined 55 MW
BESS installations having the same ratio of maximum power to energy capacity as the ex­
isting Húsareyn BESS (2.3 MW / 0.707 MWh). At 55 MW the energy capacity would thereby
correspond to 16.9 MWh, which means that the total battery capacity could supply the whole
grid for around 20 minutes at the average system load of 2022 (49.7 MW). With the expectation
of increased system load in the future, this time period will become even shorter. In terms of
power absorption, assuming 0% State of Charge (SoC), the combined BESS capacity would
be able to absorb 55 MW of ”excess” power during 18 minutes. To clarify, SoC is the ratio of
available energy capacity to maximum energy capacity. Thus, a fully charged battery has a SoC
of 100%.
Pumped hydro storage
Pumped Hydro Storage (PHS) is the concept of consuming power for pumping water up to a
higher altitude, thereby storing the electrical energy as potential energy. Later, the water can
flow down again through turbines connected to electric generators, converting the kinetic energy
to electrical energy. The efficiency of PHS is in the fairly high range of 75­85% [24] and unlike
BESS, PHS is suitable for large­scale energy storage (assuming access to large­scale water
reservoirs). In the Faroe Islands, a potential PHS installation using existing hydro power plants
on Streymoy is currently being investigated [25]. In this case, the water can be pumped from
one reservoir to another one at a higher altitude. A drawback with PHS on the Faroe Islands,
is that the capacity will vary seasonally due to the change in precipitation and thus, the amount
of water in the reservoirs. The precipitation reaches its lowest point during the summer months
[2].
Though it certainly is possible that PHS will be a part of the future Faroese power system, it will
not be explored further in this thesis.
Electrolysers
As opposed to direct storage technologies like BESS and PHS, electrolysers by themselves
(without fuel cells) are indirect storage units. This means that they can absorb power, but can
not emit it directly back to the grid. The absorbed electrical energy is stored chemically in the
hydrogen, which can be used for creating green fuels such as methanol and ammonia [6].
Thereby, the stored energy can be utilised in offshore industries. On top of this, since the Faroe
Islands has a large fish farming industry [9], the oxygen from the electrolysis can be used for
oxygenating the water in the fish farms [10]. The downstream usage of the hydrogen and oxygen
will be investigated further in the economic analysis.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
10
==PAGE:20==
If proper hydrogen storage and transport systems are in place, electrolysers have the advantage
of being able to provide large­scale energy storage in the grid year round. In terms of renewable
energy utilisation, this means that when the electricity demand is lower than the renewable
energy generation, electrolysers can use the ”excess” power for producing hydrogen. In terms
of grid stability, electrolysers have the potential to assist with balancing the grid by varying the
electricity consumption depending on the overall system power balance. This will be a analysed
further in the following chapters.
3.2.5
Preliminary summary
In order to reach the goal of 100% renewable electricity production by 2030, the Faroese power
system is mainly being expanded with onshore wind power plants [3]. In order to tackle the
issues related to the fluctuating nature of wind power, energy storage technologies are consid­
ered as a solution. In this thesis, electrolysers will be the focus point. Specifically, the analysis
will assume green hydrogen production, where the electrolysers are solely supplied by wind
power.
4
Power system stability
The main grid of the Faroe Islands is very small and the remote placement in the North Atlantic
Ocean has meant that interconnections to larger grids have not been employed. A small isolated
grid such as this, is highly susceptible to disturbances, which means that stability challenges
are far more severe than for larger power systems [2]. Generally, power system stability can be
classified by three main categories: frequency stability, rotor angle stability and voltage stability
[4].
Resonance and converter­driven stability are concepts which concern power electronic dynam­
ics and have been introduced due to the worldwide increase in Converter­Interfaced Generation
(CIG). Though electrolysers also utilise power electronics in the form of converters, these sta­
bility concepts remain outside the scope of this thesis.
4.1
Frequency stability
In an AC grid, the grid frequency can serve as a real time indicator of system stability in terms of
active power balance. The frequency is created and maintained by the rotation of synchronous
generators, which can be mathematically described by the swing equation [26] shown in Equa­
tion 4.1. Here, the rotational speed is given by the angular velocity ωm (rad/s) of the rotor, which
is directly proportional to the grid frequency.
J · d ωm
d t
= Tm −Te
(4.1)
The swing equation shows that the rate of change of ωm is dependent on the difference between
mechanical torque Tm (N·m) and electromechanical torque Te (N·m) acting on the rotor. Tm
relates to the power generation and can be equated to energy being added to the rotor. Te on
the other hand, relates to the power demand and can be equated to energy being taken out of
the rotor. Thus, if there is a mismatch between the power generation and demand, the rotor will
either accelerate (Tm > Te) or decelerate (Tm < Te), yielding a change in ωm.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
11
==PAGE:21==
Since all grid connected synchronous generators simultaneously react to power mismatches,
the resulting grid frequency is an indicator of on how the entire system is balanced. In the power
system of the Faroe Islands, the nominal frequency is 50 Hz.
Large sudden changes in power production or power demand have major affects on the system
stability, since severe deviations in frequency can cause the collapse of the system if left unmit­
igated. The reason for this is that synchronous generators are designed to operate at a specific
frequency and will disconnect from the grid at too high/low frequencies [27]. Additionally, the
swing equation also contains the combined moment of inertia J (kg·m2) of the generator and
turbine. A higher moment of inertia means that the rate of change of ωm is more damped. When
talking about system inertia, this is the combined J of all synchronous generators in the whole
system. A larger power system with many synchronous generators is said to have higher iner­
tia and thereby better able to withstand power imbalances. For instance, the normal frequency
range of the Nordic synchronous area is 49.9 ­ 50.1 Hz [28], compared to 49.5 ­ 50.5 Hz of
Faroese main grid [2]. This clearly shows that a smaller system experiences larger frequency
deviations and is therefore more sensitive to disturbances.
As mentioned, ωm of Equation 4.1 is directly proportional to the grid frequency. Thus, the rate
of change of ωm is is directly proportional to the Rate of Change of Frequency (RoCoF). For a
given disturbance, the RoCoF (given in mHz/s) is an important measure and is defined within
the first 500 ms [29]. Another important measure for a disturbance is the frequency nadir, which
is the frequency at maximum deviation. Both the RoCoF and frequency nadir are dependent
on the system inertia, but the latter is also dependent on the frequency response of the units
that are responsible for providing this to the system. The concept of frequency response will be
presented in more detail in Section 4.4.
4.2
Rotor angle stability
Rotor angle stability is the concept that concerns the synchronism of the interconnected syn­
chronous generators in a power system. Rotor angle stability is upheld when the synchronous
generators are able to maintain the equilibrium of the aforementioned opposing torques of the
rotor and restore it following a disturbance [4]. Depending on the size of the disturbance, dif­
ferent analysis methods are used. For large disturbances, transient stability analysis is used,
whereas small­signal stability analysis is used for small disturbances [30]. Both concepts in­
volve the same physical dynamics of the rotor angle, but small­signal stability also involves
eigenvalue analysis etc. This is deemed outside the scope of this thesis.
The torques of Equation 4.1, Tm and Te, are directly related the mechanical power input Pm
(MW) and electrical power output Pe (MW), respectively. Pe of a synchronous generator varies
as a sine of the rotor angle δ (internal angle by which the rotor leads the stator field, given in
degrees) [30]. Theoretically, this means that δ = 0◦corresponds to minimum power and δ = 90◦
corresponds to maximum power. However, stability concerns dictate that nominal operating
points are chosen to be below 90◦. The reason for which will become clear later in this section.
As described in Section 4.1, a sudden power disturbance in the system will cause an immediate
imbalance of torques acting on the rotor. Though the control system of the generator (governor)
may act to balance the torques by changing Pm, this action is not instantaneous. Thereby, the
initial torque imbalance will be present for a certain time period [31]. This imbalance causes
acceleration/deceleration of the rotor, leading to changes in δ and subsequently Pe. As the rotor
approaches the angle of the new balanced operating point (Pe = Pm), the inertia of the rotor
can cause it to oscillate around this point.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
12
==PAGE:22==
Depending on the inertia, damping power and severity of the disturbance, these oscillations
may be repeated many times before reaching a steady state [32].
However, reaching a steady state is not guaranteed. For the most severe disturbances (e.g.
short circuits), the oscillations could cause δ to reach beyond 90◦. In itself, this is not an issue
since the rotor still can decelerate back below 90◦. But since Pe varies as a sine there exists
one δ on either side of 90◦(symmetrically), corresponding to the same balanced operating point
[31]. If the oscillations reaches beyond the angle on the ”upper” side of 90◦(known as the critical
angle) [32], the rotor will start accelerating again. This will enhance the power imbalance even
further, eventually leading to the complete loss of synchronism and generator disconnection.
Thus, the closer the initial δ is to 90◦, the more likely the generator is to reach the critical angle.
In conclusion, rotor angle stability is a complex subject with many different aspects to consider.
In this thesis, this stability concept will not play a major part in the analysis partly. However, the
above description containing the basic underlying dynamics of the rotor angle, is still relevant
to include when introducing power system stability.
4.3
Voltage stability
In contrast to the grid frequency, which principally is the same in an entire synchronous area, the
voltage can and does vary locally between nodes. Voltage stability is the concept that involves
the ability of a power system to maintain stable voltage levels of all nodes during disturbances,
within a certain range close to the nominal values [4]. For instance, the nominal voltage range
of the Faroese transmission system is 54 ­ 72.5 kV (0.9 ­ 1.208 pu) for 60 kV and 18 ­ 24 kV
(0.9 ­ 1.2 pu) for 20 kV [33].
The voltage can essentially be maintained if the system is able to balance the reactive power
production and consumption. Reactive power, given in VAR, stems from the displacement of
the angle between voltage and current, which is caused by inductive and capacitive reactances
in the system [26]. Inductive components such as overhead transmission lines, are said to con­
sume reactive power which causes the voltage to drop. For large voltage drops, the system
needs to balance this by producing reactive power. This can be done several ways, one being
placing a capacitor bank in the sending end of the transmission line. The capacitive reactance
of the capacitor bank will then produce a fixed amount of reactive power and raise the voltage
of the node. It happens that the primary contributor to voltage instability is the power system’s
incapacity to produce sufficient amounts of reactive power [30].
Regarding voltage drops in power transmission, active power also needs to be considered.
Active power transfer affects the amount of current flowing in the line and thus, how much
reactive power is being consumed. To demonstrate the latter, Equation 4.2 shows the quadratic
relationship between the current I (A) and the reactive power Q (VAR) consumed by a reactance
X (Ω) [26]. The reactance in this example is a property of the transmission line.
Q = X · I2
(4.2)
Since the purpose of this thesis involves integration of electrolysers in the grid, this might impose
increased active power transfer for supplying the electrolysers. In that case, voltage stability
needs to be considered.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
13
==PAGE:23==
4.4
Ancillary services
In order to maintain the stability of the power system, different grid­connected technologies are
utilised for providing so­called ancillary services to the grid. In this section, two ancillary service
concepts will be described. One regarding frequency stability and the other regarding voltage
stability.
4.4.1
Frequency response
Since only synchronous machines have the inherent capability to provide inertial response to
power imbalances, the rapidly increasing share of wind power and other CIG, is decreasing
the inertia and subsequent robustness of the power system. A way to mitigate this issue, is by
utilising frequency response in other grid­connected technologies. Frequency response entails
varying the active power setpoint based on the measured grid frequency. Traditionally, this has
also been provided by the synchronous generators through control of their governors [2]. In fact,
the grid code defined by SEV [33] states that all generators above 11 kW are required to provide
some form of frequency response. With the ever decreasing share of synchronous generators
in the Faroese power system, other technologies will have to step in.
In general, frequency response can be divided into different categories based on the specific
time frame and purpose of the response. This first category is called primary frequency re­
sponse, which immediately after a disturbance will act to stop the frequency change [28]. Once
the frequency has stabilized and the RoCoF is equal to zero (typically after 20­30 seconds [4]),
the frequency needs to be restored to its nominal value. This action is performed by secondary
frequency response, by creating a controlled power imbalance in the opposite direction of the
initial disturbance. In the Faroe Islands, primary frequency response is done automatically and
secondary frequency response is done manually [3].
In the main grid of the Faroe Islands, the Húsareyn BESS is an example of a unit providing
primary frequency response for supporting the power system [2]. Since batteries can both con­
sume and produce power (charging/discharging), the Húsareyn BESS can theoretically provide
2.3 MW (rated power) for both positive and negative frequency deviations, given that the set­
point is 0 MW at nominal frequency. Frequency response for positive and negative frequency
deviations is also known as downward and upward response, respectively. The semantics are
based on the purpose of downward response being to force the frequency back down and the
purpose of upward response being to force the frequency back up.
Primary frequency response for loads like electrolysers, entails varying the power consumption
based on the measured grid frequency. In this case, an increase in frequency shall give an in­
crease in power consumption and a decrease in frequency shall give an decrease in power con­
sumption. Naturally, the response capability will thus be dependent on the power consumption
setpoint at nominal frequency. Table 4.1 shows a theoretical example of a 5 MW electrolyser and
three different scenarios of response capacity, depending on the power at nominal frequency.
For each scenario, the type of frequency response and corresponding power capacity is shown.
Note that minimum power limits are not included in this simplified example.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
14
==PAGE:24==
Power at nominal frequency
0 MW
5 MW
2.5 MW
Upward response capacity
­
5 MW
2.5 MW
Downward response capacity
5 MW
­
2.5 MW
Table 4.1: Primary frequency response type and corresponding theoretical power capacity, for
three different cases of power consumption at nominal frequency. The power rating and thereby
the maximum power of the electrolyser is 5 MW.
In conclusion, since secondary response is manual on the Faroe Islands, only primary frequency
response will be analysed in the case of electrolyser integration. Lastly, a certain operation case
such as the ones shown in Table 4.1, will be created based on technical constraints of AEL and
requirements of the grid.
4.4.2
Reactive power compensation
As described in Section 4.3, reactive power affects the voltage and capacitor banks were men­
tioned as a way to combat low voltages. High voltages on the other hand, can be mitigated
using shunt reactors which consume a fixed amount of reactive power. Other common tech­
nologies used for reactive power compensation are static VAR compensators and synchronous
condensers [34]. Synchronous generators can also regulate their reactive power, which is per­
formed by the Automatic Voltage Regulator (AVR) through controlling the excitation [2].
CIG such as wind power plants and solar power plants have the ability to provide reactive
power compensation through their converters. Since electrolysers are connected to the grid
through converters, they also have this capability in theory [5]. As the focus of this thesis lies on
frequency response through active power control, the electrolysers considered in the analysis
will be assumed to neither produce nor consume reactive power. Therefore, reactive power
compensation will not be a part of the dynamic analysis.
5
Dynamic electrolyser model
5.1
Background
A dynamic AEL model was created in a master’s thesis by Carl Nikolaj Lomholt and Nilas Møller
Klausen [35], using the DIgSILENT Simulation Language (DSL) in PowerFactory. The purpose
of creating the model was to test whether the electrolyser is able to change its operating point for
providing primary frequency response in the Nordic synchronous area. The modelling is based
on equations presented by Øystein Ulleberg in 2003 [13], which were developed to mimic the
electrical behaviour of the cells in a 26 kW electrolyser.
Equation 5.1 is used for calculating the cell voltage Ucell (V) as a function of the current Icell (A)
through the cell. The first term of the equation is the aforementioned reversible voltage which
denotes the initiation of electrolysis current, whereas the second and third term represent the
behaviour of the overpotentials as current increases. The parameters and corresponding values
used are shown Table 5.1.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
15
==PAGE:25==
Ucell(Icell) = Urev + r1 + r2 · T
A
· Icell + s · log

t1 + t2
T + t3
T 2

· Icell
A + 1

(5.1)
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Reversible voltage
Urev
1.184
V
Temperature
T
80
◦C
Cell area
A
0.25
m2
Ohmic resistance parameter
r1
8.05 × 10−5
Ω· m2
Ohmic resistance parameter
r2
−2.5 × 10−7
Ω· m2
Overvoltage coefficient
s
0.185
V
Overvoltage coefficient
t1
−0.1002
m2/A
Overvoltage coefficient
t2
8.424
◦C · m2/A
Overvoltage coefficient
t3
247.3
◦C2 · m2/A
Table 5.1: Parameters used in the AEL model [35].
In Figure 5.1, the recreated U­I characteristic of the AEL model in DSL (left plot) is compared
to that of Ulleberg [13] (red curve of right plot). The model is assuming a constant temperature
and pressure of 80◦C and 1 bar, respectively. Comparatively, Ulleberg uses the same tem­
perature but a pressure of 7 bar, which explains the curve being shifted slightly upward due
to the increased reversible voltage. Overall, the behaviour of the curves confirms the correct
implementation of Equation 5.1.
The electrolyser used by Ulleberg was stated to have a current density of 0.3 A/cm2 at rated
power, which is within the current density range for AEL presented in Table 2.1. According to
the same table, AEL limitations state a minimum load of 10%, which in this case equates to a
current density of 0.03 A/cm2. The reason for such a minimum limit can be seen in the U­I char­
acteristic where the voltage starts decreasing exponentially as the current density approaches
zero. Thus, normal operation is considered in the more linear part of the curve. It must be noted
that operating below 18% load (0.0535 A/cm2), yields a cell voltage below the thermoneutral
voltage of 1.473 V [13]. This will require heat being added externally, since the reaction is en­
dothermic. Above the thermoneutral voltage, the reaction is exothermic [36]. The assumption
will be that the temperature control systems of the electrolyser is adapted to handle operation
in the specified range.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
16
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5.1: Recreated U­I characteristic of the AEL model in DSL (left plot) at 80◦C and 1 bar,
compared to that of Ulleberg [13] (right plot, red curve) at 80◦C and 7 bar.
5.2
Scaling
When scaling the electrolyser, the current density Idens, cell (A/cm2) corresponding to nominal
load needs to be chosen. Based on what was described in Section 5.1, a nominal Idens, cell is
0.3 A/cm2. The current through the cell at this current density, can be calculated as shown in
Equation 5.2. Here, the cell area A (m2) is equal to 0.25 m2 as shown in Table 3.1.
Icell = Idens, cell · A = 0.3 A/cm2 · 0.25 m2 = 750 A
(5.2)
Inserting this current into Equation 5.1, the corresponding cell voltage can be found as shown
in Equation 5.3. This value can be confirmed by the U­I curve in Figure 5.1, which shows the
same voltage at 0.3 A/cm2.
Ucell(750 A) = 1.758 V
(5.3)
The power consumption Pcell (kW) of each cell is then calculated as shown in Equation 5.4.
Pcell = Ucell · Icell = 1.758 V · 750 A = 1.318 kW
(5.4)
Lastly, the number of cells ncells required shall be calculated for the nominal power Pelectrolyser
(MW) of the unit. As an example, using Pelectrolyser = 5 MW yields the number of cells calculated
in Equation 5.5.
ncells = Pelectrolyser
Pcell
=
5 MW
1.318 kW ≈3 792
(5.5)
A total DC voltage of approximately 6.666 kV is required if these cells are connected in series.
However, dividing the cells into parallel stacks will lower this voltage. Lower voltages may be
desired partly due to lower safety requirements and therefore needing less specialised and
expensive maintenance personnel. Dividing the cells into three equal parallel stacks will yield a
voltage of around 2.222 kV.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
17
==PAGE:27==
If the standard AC voltage of 0.69 kV is used, low order harmonics due to overmodulation can
be avoided, since the DC voltage is more than twice the AC voltage [37]. This is still the case
at minimum current density, where the stack voltage is 1.788 kV according to the equations.
One major assumption made for the model, is that the amount of cells can be scaled indefinitely
while maintaining the same behavior. This assumption requires disregarding ohmic losses be­
tween the cells, though these losses are expected to become relevant when connecting a high
number of cells in series. As seen in the calculations, scaling the model to 5 MW in yields
thousands of cells connected in series. In comparison, the 26 kW electrolyser on which the
modelling is based, has only 21 cells connected in series. The combined ohmic resistance of
the thousands of cells would cause a significant voltage drop across the stack, which in turn
would cause lower efficiency. The reasoning behind this scaling assumption was stated to be
because of empirical tests being very limited for electrolysers in the MW­scale. For the pur­
pose of this thesis, this assumption along with constant temperature and pressure, are deemed
sufficient for the purpose of this thesis as well.
5.3
Powerfactory implementation
When implementing the model in PowerFactory, the dynamics are performed by a standard
model of an AC­DC Pulse­Width Modulation (PWM) converter, with a DC voltage source pro­
viding the necessary voltage on the DC side. On the AC side, the converter is connected to a
low voltage bus, which itself connects to a standard model of a two­winding transformer. The
transformer enables the correct voltage corresponding to the Point of Connection (PoC) in the
grid. Figure 5.2 shows the diagram of the implementation in PowerFactory.
V
Figure 5.2: Diagram of the AEL implementation in PowerFactory, using a DC voltage source
(bottom), PWM converter (middle) and two­winding transformer (top) [35].
The converter is operated in PQ­control mode, which means that it can maintain a fixed active
power and reactive power setpoint [38]. Though limited reactive power is consumed by the
ancillary AC components of the electrolyser plant [5], the Q­setpoint of the converter is zero.
This corresponds to the entire plant having unity power factor. The transformer model on the
other hand, does consider some reactive power consumption due to the inductive nature of the
transformer windings.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
18
==PAGE:28==
5.4
Frequency response implementation
Frequency response is implemented in the dynamic model through so­called droop control.
Droop control is simply a proportional control scheme based on an initial operating point and
can be implemented using Equation 5.6 [35]. The following parameters are included:
• ∆P: Resulting change in power consumption.
• b∆P: Maximum possible change in power consumption.
• f0: Nominal grid frequency.
• f: Measured grid frequency.
• b∆f: Frequency deviation corresponding to the maximum change in power consumption.
∆P = b∆P · f0 −f
b∆f
(5.6)
Since PowerFactory uses generator convention for the converter model, the power output of
the electrolyser is negative, corresponding to power consumption. Thus, a negative result of
Equation 5.6 corresponds to an increase in power consumption. However, the future presented
results containing electrolyser power will use load convention.
On top of the droop characteristic, upper and lower power limits need to be defined in the model,
since Equation 5.6 does not account for this. Additionally, a frequency deadband can be added
in order to disregard for measurement noise and very small system power imbalances. Figure
5.3 shows the graphical representation of the resulting frequency response scheme. This control
scheme is symmetrical around the initial operating point, though the limits can be implemented
asymmetrically.
Figure 5.3: Graphical representation of a symmetrical frequency droop control scheme, with
added upper and lower limits as well as a deadband (red line).
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
19
==PAGE:29==
5.5
DIgSILENT Simulation Language
In DSL, the model is implemented through the use of so­called frames, which contain and link
the electrical dynamics and the control dynamics. Figure 5.4 shows a block diagram of the main
frame of the model. Block PtX Dynamics contains the electrical dynamics, with the input being
the measured current on the DC side of the converter and the outputs being the stack voltage
and corresponding power. The electrolyser power signal is fed to block f/P Characteristic, which
contains the frequency response control. Here, it is added together with the desired change in
power consumption (based on the frequency measurement) and yields the new power setpoint.
The power setpoint is then sent to block Power Control, where it is converted to a current that
is sent to the converter block PWM­Converter. This current corresponds to the d­component
in the so­called dq­domain, within which the converter is applying its control. The d­component
corresponds to active power and the q­component corresponds to reactive power (not used
here) [39]. The dq­domain allows for simplified Proportional Integral (PI) control of the sinusoidal
signals on the AC side of the converter, by transforming them into constant (or DC) signals [40].
PI control is also used in the Power Control block for minimising the error (or difference) between
the measured power and power setpoint.
Figure 5.4: Block diagram of the main frame of the dynamic AEL model [35].
In this thesis, focus will be on blocks PtX Dynamics and f/P Characteristic. Thus, they will now
be explored in more detail. When referring to signals in the block diagrams, the following font
type is used: Signal.
The internal block diagram of PtX Dynamics is shown in Appendix A, which essentially is an
exact implementation of Equation 5.1. The reversible voltage Vrev is initialised and kept as the
difference between cell voltage Vcell and the overpotential voltage V_i. The power consump­
tion P_elec is determined by multiplication of the measured current (initialised by the initial
power setpoint) and the corresponding stack voltage. The latter is equal to 1 pu at the initial
power setpoint and must be specified externally.
The internal block diagram of f/P Characteristic is shown in Appendix B, which is the imple­
mentation of the droop control scheme. The frequency deviation is determined as the difference
between nominal and measured frequency, before going through a deadband block. Only when
the deviation exceeds the deadband, is the value (in pu of nominal frequency) sent through and
multiplied with the value of maximum power change. The resulting value represents the desired
change in power which then goes through a saturation block, where the appropriate limitations
on maximum and minimum power change are applied.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
20
==PAGE:30==
Next, the change in power is added together with the initial operating point of the electrolyser
P_elec_ref, yielding the new power setpoint. Lastly, the new power setpoint is sent through a
dynamic delay block, which limits the rate of change according to the technical specifications of
AEL.
Since PowerFactory uses generator convention in the converter model, the power consumption
of the electrolyser assumes negative values. A sink block is therefore utilised for storing the
negative value of the operating point as an internal parameter. This parameter is used to initialise
P_elec_ref and the output power setpoint P_set.
5.6
Model test
To perform an test of the dynamic model control, a test grid is set up in PowerFactory (see
Appendix D). Here, the AEL model components specified in Section 5.3 are connected to a
bus, which contains an external load and a further connection to a slack bus. The slack bus
(called External Grid in PowerFactory) provides a reference for the load flow calculation, with
a specified voltage magnitude and phase angle. This reference will be used by the program to
iteratively calculate the voltage and power of each bus/node in the system. Furthermore, the
slack bus can be viewed as one big synchronous generator, which is setting the grid frequency
and acting as a balancing unit in terms of active and reactive power in the system [41]. Being a
synchronous generator, the slack bus has a given inertia, which is specified by the Acceleration
Time Constant (ATC). This constant is determining the system inertia and an increase in this
value will thereby decrease the RoCoF and limit the frequency nadir during a disturbance. The
slack bus can also provide primary frequency response, the magnitude of which is determined
by the Secondary Frequency Bias (SFB) [42]. Table 5.2 shows the general specifications of the
dynamic AEL model test grid. Regarding the frequency response parameters in DSL, the values
are specified in pu with the base of 5 MW for power and 50 Hz for frequency.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
21
==PAGE:31==
Parameter
Value
Unit
System
Nominal frequency
50
Hz
Converter
Rated DC voltage
2.222
kV
Rated AC voltage
0.69
kV
Rated power
5
MW
Transformer
Voltages
10/0.69
kV
Rated power
5.6
MVA
Electrolyser
Voltage level at PoC
10
kV
Nominal power
5
MW
Nominal current density
0.3
A/cm2
Initial power setpoint
3
MW
Minimum power
1
MW
Cell values
See Table 5.1
and Section 5.2
Frequency response
Power at nominal frequency
3
MW
Maximum possible change in power
±2
MW
Frequency deviation for maximum change in power
±100
mHz
Frequency deadband
None
Table 5.2: General specifications of the dynamic AEL model test grid.
For initialising the internal electrolyser dynamics correctly, the total electrolyser current at nom­
inal power is needed for determining the initial stack current. With three parallel stacks, the total
current is 2 250 A (three times 750 A from Equation 5.2). Additionally, the DC voltage for the
initial power setpoint is needed for determining the initial cell voltage. For this, the initial current
density must be calculated. Since the initial power of 3 MW corresponds to 0.6 pu, the initial
current density is 0.18 A/cm2. Inserting this value into Equation 5.2, followed by using Equations
5.3 and 5.5, the initial DC voltage for the three parallel stacks is calculated to 2.079 kV.
Validating the initialisation of the system, the current density of 0.18 A/cm2 should yield an
activation overvoltage of 0.46 V (according to Equation 5.1). The model achieves this value
succesfully. The initialised reversible voltage also achieves its target value. Appendix C shows
the initialised values in the DSL block diagram.
In the first simulation test, a sequence of power imbalances in the system are created through
rapidly changing the power consumption of the external load. Figure 5.5 illustrates this se­
quence, with the load steps being within ±2 MW. Thereby, the electrolyser is be able to fully
compensate for the disturbances. The slack bus is chosen to have a relatively high inertia (ATC
= 10), allowing for the electrolyser to keep up with the slower frequency deviations. Additionally,
the frequency response of the slack bus is turned off (SFB = 0), which is why the electrolyser
response is determining the shape of the frequency curve.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
22
==PAGE:32==
The result indicates that the droop characteristic has been implemented correctly, since the
power setpoints of the electrolyser correspond to the correct frequencies.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Power [MW]
49.85
49.9
49.95
50
50.05
50.1
50.15
50.2
Frequency [Hz]
PAEL
Pload
fgrid
Figure 5.5: Frequency response of the dynamic AEL model following a sequence of load dis­
turbances. PAEL (MW) is the consumption of the electrolyser, Pload (MW) is the consumption of
the external load causing the imbalances and fgrid (Hz) is the grid frequency.
The second test involves a disturbance at lower system inertia (ATC = 5), in order to achieve
a high RoCoF. Thus, the maximum ramp rate of the electrolyser can be validated. Due to the
now lower inertia of the system, frequency response is turned on for the slack bus (SFB = 15)
in order to limit the frequency nadir during the disturbance. The disturbance is created by a step
of 4 MW from an initial external load value of 20 MW.
Initially, the test shows that the aforementioned dynamic delay implemented in the model, does
not apply the correct ramp rate constraint. The ramping of the electrolyser is faster than what
is physically possible for AEL. By increasing the time constant of the delay block, a feasible
ramp rate can achieved for the first seconds after the disturbance. However, the PI­control of
the converter yields a non­linear ramping, with the ramp rate decreasing when approaching the
steady state operating point. Thereby, the increased dynamic delay results in the steady state
being reached after an unnecessarily long time.
To improve the response, the dynamic delay block in DSL is changed to a so­called ramp rate
limiter block. This block simply constraints the rate of change of power setpoint to be within a
certain linear range. Figure 5.6 shows the modified response for both a positive and negative
load disturbance. The RoCoF is 200 mHz/s and the frequency nadir is 49.82 Hz and 50.18 Hz,
respectively. The steady state frequency following both disturbances, is such that the maximum
change in power is achieved (2 MW). The time constant of the ramp rate limiter was tuned
to achieve a reasonable ramp rate of 10%/s, which for this 5 MW electrolyser corresponds to
a 2 MW change in 4 seconds. A linear ramping such as this, has previously been measured
for a MW­scale AEL electrolyser and is presented in a research article by the Institution of
Engineering and Technology (IET) [43]. Thus, the behaviour obtained in Figure 5.6 is deemed
adequate.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
23
==PAGE:33==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Power [MW]
49.8
49.85
49.9
49.95
50
50.05
Frequency [Hz]
PAEL
fgrid
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Time [s]
1
2
3
4
5
6
Power [MW]
49.95
50
50.05
50.1
50.15
50.2
Frequency [Hz]
PAEL
fgrid
(b)
Figure 5.6: Frequency response of the dynamic AEL model following a positive (a) and negative
(b) load disturbance, with a ramp rate limiter implemented for the power setpoint. PAEL (MW) is
the consumption of the electrolyser and fgrid (Hz) is the grid frequency.
It must be noted that only the ramp rate has been covered for the dynamic operation of the
electrolyser. The other limitations in terms of dynamics, are the start­up and shut­down times.
These become relevant when considering operation on a longer time scale. However, for the
purpose of this thesis the time scale of interest is in the second­range. Thereby, the electrolyser
is always assumed to be ”up and running” at steady state power for the start of the simulations.
6
Main grid model analysis
A PowerFactory model of the main grid is provided by SEV. The grid model mainly represents
the transmission system in 60 kV and 20 kV, although lower voltage levels are also present at
individual nodes. Figure 3.1 [2] shows a map of the Faroe Islands and the main grid according to
the model. This map has been modified slightly compared to the source material and updated to
include the new Skarðshjalli substation at Gellingarklettur wind farm, as well as the transmission
line between southern Streymoy and southern Eysturoy. The 20 kV transmission system is
highly aggregated in the model and therefore not as detailed as in this map.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
24
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.1: Map of the Faroe Islands and the main grid as how it is implemented in the Power­
Factory model [2]. Loads are not shown, but are connected to the various substations through
transformers. All of the 60 kV substations also contain 20 kV busbars.
Different load and generator types are used for representing a given unit in the system. All loads
are represented as ”general loads”, which maintain a predetermined active and reactive power
setpoint. Wind power plants are generally represented as ”static generators”, with only the three
wind turbines in Mýrarnar being ”asynchronous machines”. Hydro and fossil power plants are
represented as ”synchronous machines”. The BESS in Húsareyn is also represented as a ”static
generator”.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
25
==PAGE:35==
Since they are connected at the distribution level, both the biogas power plant and the tidal
energy plant are not included in the model [3]. However, their generation capacities are relatively
insignificant.
6.1
Synchronous generator control models
Since the synchronous generators are the main providers of the dynamics of the grid model
(besides the BESS), the control of these units is relevant to explore. A synchronous generator
utilises several different control systems for maintaining desirable operation. Among these sys­
tems, the two major ones are the governor and excitation system. To represent their behaviour,
models of the control systems are implemented in the grid model.
6.1.1
Governor
The job of the governor is to maintain constant rotational speed, by controlling the mechanical
torque (or power) applied to the rotor [44]. As previously covered, changes in rotational speed
occur due to sudden changes in load, leading to mismatches in electrical and mechanical torque.
By measuring the changes in rotational speed, the governor can continuously act to match the
mechanical torque with the electrical torque. It is within the governor control scheme, where
frequency response is implemented.
In the main grid model, SEV mainly make use of standard governor models from the DIgSILENT
library. When using standard models, the various internal parameters are chosen and validated
through real testing of the specific generator [3]. The hydro power generators use the model
called ”gov_HYGOV” and the fossil fuel powered generators use ”gov_DEGOV”. Only one hydro
power generator uses a model from IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers)
called ”gov_IEEE_Hydro2”.
6.1.2
Excitation system
The AVR and Power System Stabiliser (PSS) are both part of the excitation system [45]. The
AVR is responsible for adjusting the current in the field windings of the rotor, in order to maintain
a desired voltage at the terminals [46]. The PSS is responsible for controlling the torque for
dampening oscillations caused by disturbances.
In the main grid model, SEV make use of four different excitation/AVR models from IEEE: ”IEEE
AC8B”, ”IEEE ST10C”, ”IEEE ST5C” and ”IEEE ST6B”. Only one PSS model (also from IEEE)
is used and applied to one generator. It is called ”IEEE PSS2B” and is used by EI G3 hydro
generator.
6.2
Static load flow simulation
6.2.1
Simulation scenario
In order to partly determine the capability of the Faroese power system for integration of large­
scale electrolysers, the performance of the grid can be statically analysed with simulations of
specific load and generation scenarios. In this case, the performance of the grid entails how
much power is flowing through the various components (e.g. transformers and transmission
lines) compared to their power ratings, as well as if the resulting nodal voltage levels are within
the accepted ranges. This static analysis is called load flow analysis and the aim is to identify if
and where the main grid would be able to handle the increased loading of electrolyser integra­
tion. The analysis will reveal how much electrolyser capacity (in MW) can be integrated without
requiring upgrades to the grid.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
26
==PAGE:36==
To identify the loading limitations of the grid, a simulation scenario should involve high load in
the system. Since the purpose of this thesis is to examine electrolyser integration into a wind
dominated power system, it is highly relevant to perform a load flow simulation during high wind
power generation. This also makes sense from the perspective of green hydrogen production,
since the electrolysers can be assumed to only operate using renewable energy. Thus, the test
case will be one of high load and high wind power generation.
In the given model, a real load and generation scenario is already implemented, which uses
data from 28­08­2023 at 16:45. The total load is 51.72 MW and the total generation is 52.53
MW. The surplus in generation can be explained by the compensation of losses that occur in
the transformers and lines etc. The generation in this scenario is mainly fossil fuel based (64%)
from Sundsverkið power plant, followed by hydro power (19%) and wind power (17%). The
BESS neither consumes nor generates power. Furthermore, only one transmission line in this
scenario is inactive. This line is connecting the Strond power plants with Klaksvík substation at
the 20 kV level. However, they are still connected through a 60 kV line.
A new scenario is created to emulate the 70 MW load case mentioned in Section 3.1. To reach
70 MW, all individual load values from the previous scenario are evenly scaled up by a fac­
tor of approximately 1.33. This approximation is deemed sufficient as a realistic distribution of
load is maintained and individual load areas are not considered unreasonably scaled [3]. The
generation of this new scenario is chosen to have all wind farms operating at maximum active
power. Additionally, Sundsverkið power plant is set to zero and the total hydro power is de­
creased slightly. When running the load flow simulation in PowerFactory, the generation adds
up to 72.59 MW. Compared to the initial scenario, the new scenario evidently yields higher
losses, which is to be expected since more power is flowing in the system. It is noted this extra
2.59 MW is provided automatically by one of the synchronous generators of Sundsverkið power
plant.
In the end, the static scenario entails approximately 84% wind power and 16% power from
synchronous generators. In reality, SEV controls the dispatch such that at least 40% is coming
from synchronous generators. The reason for this is to have enough system inertia and power
reserves for frequency response, as well as enough capacity for providing short circuit current
during faults [3]. Thus, a maximum of 60% wind power is possible as the system stands today.
Despite the fact that the generation of the chosen static scenario is unrealistic based on the
current state of the power system, it is still deemed worthy of analysis when considering the
prospect of increased wind power utilisation. In the isolated grid on Suðuroy, the relatively large
BESS capacity has allowed for instances of 100% wind power generation [47].
6.2.2
Result analysis
For analysing the load flow result, the substations (including connected loads) and generators
can be divided into two areas as shown in Figure 6.2. The first area (Area A) considers southern
Streymoy, which partly contains the biggest load Torshavn and the three largest wind farms.
The second area (Area B) is much larger in size and covers the remaining substations and
generators, all of which are located at least 14 km away from Area A on northern Streymoy,
Eysturoy and Borðoy.
Table 6.1 shows the total load and generation in the two areas and it becomes clear that power
is flowing from Area A outward to the loads of Area B, since the latter cannot supply itself with
enough power to match the load.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
27
==PAGE:37==
Area B
Area A
Figure 6.2: Map of the of the two chosen areas used in the static analysis of the main grid. The
areas cover a set of substations (including corresponding loads) and generating units.
Area
Load (MW)
Generation (MW)
A
27.1
57.5
B
42.9
15.1
Table 6.1: Total load and generation of the static load flow simulation for the two areas shown
in Figure 6.2.
Analysing the transmission lines, none of them are experiencing overloading in this scenario.
The most heavily loaded line at 73.9% is one of the two connections between Húsahagi wind
farm and Húsareyn substation in Area A. As expected, other lines with similar loading are also
associated with the wind farms, since these are operating at maximum power. The two 60 kV
lines between Area A and B are transferring a combined power of 28.75 MW. The line to Vest­
manna substation (westernmost substation in Area B) is 23.7% loaded and the line to Runavík
substation (southernmost substation in Area B) is 66.7% loaded. Though the latter is far from
fully loaded, it is common practice to have continuous loading below 100% (derating). This is
done to reduce the degradation rate of the component and to minimize failures attributed to
extreme operating conditions [48]. If a maximum continuous loading of 80% is assumed in this
case, the loading is still acceptable for all lines.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
28
==PAGE:38==
Analysing the transformers, the case is similar to that of the transmission lines. None of them
are experiencing overloading and the most heavily loaded transformers are the ones connected
to wind farms. The most heavily loaded transformer at 98.4% is HR T4 (at Húsareyn substation
in Area A), which is responsible for connecting the Flatnahagi wind farm to the 60 kV system.
Though the loading is above the aforementioned 80% continuous maximum, the transformer
will never exceed this due to the wind farm being the only connection at the low voltage side.
Lastly, the resulting voltage at the busbars are investigated. In the 60 kV level, the lowest and
highest voltage is 0.946 pu and 1.009 pu, respectively. In the 20 kV level, the lowest and highest
voltage is 0.952 pu and 1.066 pu, respectively. These levels are in the nominal ranges as spec­
ified in Section 4.3. The voltage levels are partly maintained by tap changing transformers and
capacitor banks. One of the lower voltages can be seen in the easternmost substation called
Strond, which is located on Borðoy.
6.3
Dynamic simulation
Analysing the system through the frequency behaviour requires performing simulations in the
time domain. In PowerFactory, these are called RMS simulations.
6.3.1
Simulation scenarios
For the dynamic simulation, the ratio of wind power to synchronous generation becomes rele­
vant for analysing the frequency stability of the system. Though this ratio is representative of
how much frequency response is available, it is not completely representative of the inertia of
the system. The inertia mainly depends on how many synchronous generators are active, which
means that a scenario with one specific amount of synchronous generation can yield different
inertias depending on how many generating units are supplying the power. For example, two
identical units rated at 10 MW and generating 5 MW each, yields a higher inertia than only one
of the units generating 10 MW.
With this knowledge, three simulation scenarios are created. The first scenario entails high
inertia, with 0% wind power and 100% synchronous generation. In this case, 16 of the 18 syn­
chronous generators are active and operating at 61% power. The second scenario entails lower
inertia and represents the maximum wind power case, with 60% wind power and 40% syn­
chronous generation. In this case, eight of the 18 synchronous generators are active and oper­
ating at 41% power. Furthermore, all wind turbines are active and operating at 70% power. The
third and final scenario entails even lower inertia and represents a future scenario of improved
wind power utilisation, with 74% wind power and 26% synchronous generation. In this case,
the 60% wind power scenario is copied but with the two largest synchronous generators (SD
G4 and SD G5) taken out of service. This yields six of the 18 synchronous generators active
and operating at 41% power. All wind turbines are still active but operating at an increased 86%
power.
It must be noted that there is no particular standard stating which specific generators should
remain active during high wind power penetration [3]. Therefore, the choice of synchronous
generators for the simulation scenarios is mainly based on the general distribution of generation
capacity. The lower operating points chosen for the generators are assumed to be within the
general operating ranges, without exceeding limitations on minimum power.
The Húsareyn BESS is active and set to provide its frequency response in all three cases.
Exploring its control scheme, the frequency response entails a deadband of ±200 mHz and a
full response activation at ±400 mHz.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
29
==PAGE:39==
Within the deadband, the BESS is neither charging nor discharging. If the frequency is below
the deadband, it varies the charging rate and if the frequency is above the deadband, it varies
the discharging rate. In the model as given, the maximum discharging and charging rate are set
to 2.3 MW and 1.29 MW, respectively.
6.3.2
Simulation results
Figure 6.3 shows the grid frequencies of the three scenarios during the initialisation of the dy­
namic simulation. The initialisations contain specific load steps, each tuned for achieving 50 Hz
at the 0 second mark. It can clearly be seen that the wind dominated scenarios have a more
extreme initialisations, which also take longer before reaching a steady state.
The load steps are applied as a percentage of all loads and give a slightly different total system
load in the scenarios, since a larger step is as the wind power increases. Case in point, the
load step of the 74% scenario is 1.4 MW more than that of the 0% scenario. With the difference
being rather small, it is not expected to affect the later results significantly.
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Time [s]
49.7
49.8
49.9
50
50.1
50.2
50.3
Frequency [Hz]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
Figure 6.3: Frequency initialisation of the dynamic simulation with 0%, 60% and 74%, respec­
tively.
To investigate the fundamental differences between scenarios, a small disturbance is introduced
by increasing all loads by 1.75% (1.225 MW in total). The resulting frequency deviations are
depicted in Table 6.2 and Figure 6.4 (a) and (b). The difference in deviations are anticipated
due to variations in inertia. All three scenarios maintain stability after the disturbance.
Performing a similar simulation with decreased loads by 1.75%, the resulting values describing
the frequency deviations are illustrated in Table 6.3 and Figure 6.4 (c) and (d). These devia­
tions mirror those of the load increase, suggesting symmetry in the frequency response of the
generator governors for such small disturbances. Despite the Battery Energy Storage System
(BESS) being active, it does not respond during either of the disturbances as the frequency
deviations are within its deadband.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
30
==PAGE:40==
Wind power share (%)
RoCoF (mHz/s)
Nadir (Hz)
Steady state (Hz)
0
80
49.87
49.97
60
140
49.82
49.95
74
170
49.8
49.93
Table 6.2: Values describing the frequency deviation of a stepped 1.225 MW system load in­
crease.
Wind power share (%)
RoCoF (mHz/s)
Nadir (Hz)
Steady state (Hz)
0
80
50.13
50.03
60
140
50.18
50.04
74
170
50.2
50.06
Table 6.3: Values describing the frequency deviation of a stepped 1.225 MW system load de­
crease.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
49.75
49.8
49.85
49.9
49.95
50
50.05
Frequency [Hz]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(a)
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
Time [s]
49.9
49.92
49.94
49.96
49.98
50
50.02
Frequency [Hz]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
49.95
50
50.05
50.1
50.15
50.2
50.25
Frequency [Hz]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(c)
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
Time [s]
49.98
50
50.02
50.04
50.06
50.08
50.1
Frequency [Hz]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(d)
Figure 6.4: Resulting frequency for a 1.225 MW stepped disturbance in the system with 0%,
60% and 74% wind power, respectively. (a): Positive disturbance ­ showing frequency nadir and
steady state. (b): Positive disturbance ­ showing RoCoF. (c): Negative disturbance ­ showing
frequency nadir and steady state. (d): Negative disturbance ­ showing RoCoF.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
31
==PAGE:41==
In conclusion, high wind power and low inertia yields a power system that is more sensitive to
disturbances. However, even the lower inertia in this scenario is enough for allowing a stable
frequency response by the synchronous generators. No significant oscillations are occurring,
demonstrating that this particular disturbance does not cause rotor angle stability issues. The
maximum and minimum frequencies achieved in the simulation are within normal operation,
demonstrating the systems ability to handle a disturbance of this magnitude. After electrolyser
integration, more severe disturbances will be tested.
Lastly, it was found that a slightly more severe disturbance resulted in undamped oscillations in
the frequency. The cause is thought to be the control system of Flatnahagi wind farm, which as
the only wind farm contains frequency control. Figure 6.5 shows the power of Flatnahagi wind
farm and generator SD G5 of Sundverkið, following the a larger disturbance in the 60% wind
scenario. Here, the units appear to oscillate against each other continuously, which could explain
the frequency oscillations. To prevent this from occurring, the frequency control of Flatnahagi is
switched off. Thereby, all wind farms maintain a static power setpoint throughout the simulations.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
4.5
4.75
5
5.25
5.5
Power [MW]
0
1
2
3
4
Power [MW]
SD G4
Flatnahagi
Figure 6.5: Counteracting power control of synchronous generator SD G4 and Flatnahagi wind
farm, in the 60% wind power scenario following a large disturbance.
6.4
Electrolyser integration
6.4.1
Placement
Placing electrolysers for green hydrogen production directly at substations connecting wind
farms, is an obvious option. If the electrolyser power rating is lower than the generation capacity
of the wind farm, then it becomes possible for the electrolyser to (at times) be fully supplied by
the local wind farm. Thereby, transmission lines connecting the substation to the grid will not
experience increased loading, since the electrolyser is not requiring power from elsewhere in
the grid.
Considering existing wind farms, Gellingarklettur, Flatnahagi and Húsahagi are reasonable
choices for large­scale electrolyser integration since they have the highest generation capac­
ities. However, Húsareyn substation which both Flatnahagi and Húsahagi are connected to,
does not have room for new connections. Gellingarklettur on the other hand, is connected to
the new Skarðshjalli substation, where electrolyser integration should be possible according to
SEV [3].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
32
==PAGE:42==
Based on the static load flow analysis, the surplus of generation in Area A (see Figure 6.2 and
Table 6.1) where the three largest wind farms are located, also speaks for the placement of
electrolysers there. However, the low loading of lines in this scenario also allows for placement
in Area B. Two examples in this area are the aforementioned Vestmanna and Runavík substa­
tions, which both connect to a wind farm each. Though the wind farm at Vestmanna (Mýrarnar)
is less than half the size of the one at Runavík (Neshagi), this corresponds the smaller load at
Vestmanna. Electrolysers in the MW­scale would in these locations most likely require either
increased wind power transfer from Area A or an increase in the local wind power capacity. Dis­
regarding the latter option, Vestmanna is the better choice in this case since the corresponding
transmission line has the lowest loading. However, the increased loading will result in higher
voltage drops across the overhead line. Depending on the size of the electrolyser, it might
be necessary to implement reactive power compensation in this case. As the static simulation
showed in Strond substation, the northern part of the grid is known to suffer from voltage issues
[3]. Placing a large­scale electrolyser here would therefore certainly require reactive power con­
siderations.
For the purpose of this analysis, the placement is chosen to be at Skarðshjalli substation.
Thereby, the abundance of wind power can be utilised locally and with more freedom in terms
of sizing the electrolyser without causing voltage issues. To match the voltage level at the PoC
(20 kV), a 0.69/20 kV transformer is used, with a power rating based on the size of the electrol­
yser determined in the next section. In reality, a real transformer with the desired specifications
might not be available. In that case, a series and/or parallel connection of several transformers
can be made for reaching the correct voltage and/or power rating.
6.4.2
Sizing
In this thesis, the size or power rating of the electrolyser is determined by considering the two
goals of the integration for a power system perspective: 1) Increasing wind power utilisation by
decreasing wind power curtailment. 2) Providing power reserves through frequency response
for enabling higher ratios of wind power generation to synchronous generation.
Regarding the first goal, curtailment means disconnecting wind turbines when the potential wind
power exceeds what can be consumed by the system load. In the first 324 days of 2023 the total
potential wind power generation was 135.7 GWh, but the actual generation was 87.6 GWh [3].
This means that 48.1 GWh of wind energy was curtailed and ”wasted”. The maximum possible
curtailment power can be calculated as the difference between wind generation capacity (61.38
MW) and the minimum load, while considering the generator dispatch which limits the share of
wind power to 60%. Assuming the minimum load of 2022 (29.3 MW), the maximum curtailment
would with the aforementioned values be 43.8 MW. To completely eliminate the need for curtail­
ment, would therefore require electrolyser capacity corresponding to this power level. However,
since this critical scenario is presumed to be rather rare, an implementation of this magnitude
would in itself be a waste of capacity. Instead, one can estimate the average curtailment power
by assuming that the curtailments occurred at low load during the night (23:00­07:00). Thus, the
average curtailment power for these eight hours of each day would then be 18.56 MW. Spec­
ifying the curtailment to the 74% wind power scenario, 14% of 70 MW equal to 9.8 MW wind
power would have be curtailed and replaced with synchronous generation as the system stands
today.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
33
==PAGE:43==
Regarding the second goal, the 74% wind power scenario is used as the basis for estimating
how much extra power reserve is needed for achieving this in reality. In the small disturbance
simulation for the 60% wind power scenario, generator SD G4 and SD G5 were responsible for
providing 30% of the total power reserve. SEV currently determines the needed power reserve
based on the N­1 principle [3], which states that the system should be able to handle a loss
of the largest generating unit. In the main grid, this corresponds to one of the generators in
Sundsverkið rated at 12.428 MW. For a critical generation loss of this magnitude, generator SD
G4 and SD G5 would thereby provide 30% of 12.428 MW equal to 3.728 MW worth of upward
frequency response. Going back to the 74% wind power scenario, the fact that generator SD G4
and SD G5 are inactive therefore yields 3.728 MW less in power reserves. This should rather
easily be divided between the six remaining generators in this case. However, if the assumption
is that the generators already are at their maximum in terms of power reserve, the electrolyser
should be sized such to compensate for the deficit.
Now considering a critical load loss in the system, an outage of load Havnarlagið 1 (4.491 MW)
on Eysturoy is chosen. For a loss of this magnitude, the absence of SD G4 and SD G5 would
by the same measure yield 1.347 MW (30%) less in power reserves for downward frequency
response.
Taking the operating range of AEL into account (10%­100%), an electrolyser with a power rating
of 5.639 MW operating at the partial load 4.292 MW, should be able to sufficiently provide with
the above calculated power reserves.
A more general approach can also be made. At 60% wind power in the 70 MW load case,
synchronous generators are responsible for 40% equal to 28 MW of the total generation. Under
the assumption that all generators provide frequency response in an identical manner, covering
at most the critical loss of 12.428 MW generation means that each generator can increase its
power by 44.4%1. Similarly, covering the critical loss of 4.491 MW load means that the each
generator at most can decrease its power by approximately 16%.
At 74% wind power in the 70 MW load case, the synchronous generators are responsible for
18.2 MW. Now, it is assumed that one or more synchronous generators have been taken out
of service and the remaining generators are operating unchanged from the 60% wind scenario.
Thus, the synchronous generators can be estimated to provide 44.4% of 18.2 MW equal to 8.078
MW worth of upward response and 16% of 18.2 MW equal to 2.919 MW worth of downward
response. This results in an upward response deficit of 4.350 MW and a downward response
deficit of 1.572 MW.
Following the same procedure as before, an electrolyser with a power rating of 6.580 operating
at the partial load 5.008 MW, should thereby be able to provide the above calculated power
reserves.
It must be noted that rather than choosing an electrolyser based on the above calculations only,
one must consider the fact that the electrolyser can not compensate for the loss of inertia due
to the ramp rate limitations. Additionally, it may be assumed that it will be operated slower and
more conservatively than a synchronous generator in terms of providing frequency response.
To partly make up for these limitations, the sizing can be chosen a factor larger than what
the calculations show. Without specifying an this factor, sizing the electrolyser based on the
curtailment considerations should suffice for this.
1 For this calculation, it is assumed that the loss involves wind power generation so that the number of syn­
chronous generators remains the same after the disturbance.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
34
==PAGE:44==
The electrolyser capacity is chosen as 12 MW, which is slightly larger than the currently largest
operational stack in the world (10 MW as of 2022) [5]. With the expectation of increased scalabil­
ity in the future, 12 MW is deemed as a reasonable choice. Furthermore, this level of electrolyser
capacity could be achieved with several smaller units if needed. With an initial setpoint of 9.8
MW the electrolyser has room to decrease its power consumption by 8.6 MW and increase its
power consumption by 2.2 MW, which is more than needed for upward and downward frequency
response based on the previous calculations. To provide further reference, the response could
compensate (neglecting response delay) for more than the combined outage of Neshagi and
Mýrarnar wind farm or the loss of connection to 5700 households2.
The rated power of the electrolyser is only 47.6% of Gellingarklettur wind farm, which indicates
that it can operate mostly using local wind power (as desired). In the 74% wind power scenario,
Gellingarklettur is producing around 22 MW of power, which means that the electrolyser is fully
supplied by its local wind farm and does not require power from elsewhere in the grid.
6.4.3
Operation
The general operation scheme of the integrated electrolyser entails being operated according to
the available wind power. If for instance the electrolyser is consuming more than the available
wind power, the supply might be coming from a non­renewable source. In that case, the hy­
drogen production is no longer considered green. Even though there is enough available wind
power, the electrolyser should be operated as to not increase the total load of the system, such
that more than the minimum required fossil fuel based power generation is exceeded. This is
referring to low inertia scenarios, in which a certain number of fossil fuel based generators are
needed for keeping the system stable. By simply adding an electrolyser, the total system load
will increase and since wind power can not be increased, the synchronous generators will have
to compensate for the higher load. If this is not possible with hydro power plants, the fossil fuel
power plants will have to increase their output. Thereby, the minimum required fossil fuel based
power generation is exceeded. To avoid this, the operation is specified such that the electrolyser
in this case only uses wind power that would otherwise be curtailed.
In terms of participating in frequency response, there is currently no specific requirements for
loads as there is for generators. Following the requirements for generators (above 11 kW), fre­
quency response must be possible within the 47 ­ 52 Hz range [33]. The specific droop charac­
teristics can be adjusted depending on the unit in question. Instead of looking to generators, one
can look to the Húsareyn BESS which is the only unit currently providing frequency response
as a load (partly).
Despite the fact that an electrolyser is able to provide symmetrical frequency response, it may
not be in the interest of the owner/operator. If the main business case is the production of
hydrogen, the operating point of the electrolyser will be chosen as high as possible at any given
moment. Thus, downward frequency response will not be possible since the power consumption
can not be increased. For the purpose of this simulations of this thesis, the electrolyser will be
assumed to provide both upward and downward response symmetrically.
Two symmetrical droop characteristics will be compared for the frequency response ­ the first
one being less conservative than the second one in terms of the incidence of response activa­
tions. The less conservative droop control is specified based on the primary frequency response
in normal operation of the Nordic synchronous area.
2 Based on an average power consumption of households with an average annual energy consumption of 1600
kWh per person [49] and an average of 2.11 persons per household [50].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
35
==PAGE:45==
This response is also known as Frequency Containment Reserves during Normal operation
(FCR­N) [28] and entails that the maximum change in power is applied for a frequency deviation
of ±100 mHz. Scaling this to match the normal frequency range of the Faroe Islands, the value
for the electrolyser should be ±500 mHz. Furthermore, FCR­N requires that the response is
implemented without a deadband. However, a deadband of ±50 mHz is in this case chosen to
avoid reacting to frequency measurement noise and very small disturbances.
Compared to the Húsareyn BESS, this droop characteristic is expected to yield very frequent
response activations [3]. From the perspective of grid stability, the higher activation rate of this
electrolyser response can compensate for the more constrained ramping rate. From the per­
spective of the electrolyser this involves a higher degradation rate and lower lifetime. Therefore,
a second and more conservative characteristic is based on the BESS. It must be noted that with­
out modifications, the model does not allow for completely asymmetrical droop implementation.
This means that the maximum downward frequency regulation (2.2 MW) will be reached at a
frequency deviation of 165 mHz and 251 mHz for the first and second droop characteristic,
respectively. Thereafter, the limiter block in DSL will halt any further increase in power.
Referring to the first and less conservative droop as Droop 1 and the second and more conser­
vative droop as Droop 2, the characteristics can be visualised in Figure 6.6.
49.4
49.6
49.8
50
50.2
50.4
50.6
Frequency [Hz]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Power [MW]
Droop 1
Droop 2
Figure 6.6: Visualised droop characteristics used in later dynamic simulations.
The following operation specification is chosen for implementation in the 74% wind power sce­
nario: The electrolyser shall at nominal frequency operate at partial load corresponding to 9.8
MW, with a minimum and maximum power of 1.2 MW and 12 MW, respectively. To have a con­
sistent total system load of 70 MW, all other loads will be scaled down by 14% each to reach
60.2 MW combined.
Curtailment value update
It must be noted that the electrolyser in this case is assumed to already be included in the 70
MW load and that a 74% share of wind power is (potentially) enabled by the added frequency
response. By this assumption, the actual curtailment power that can be utilised is more than
9.8 MW: The base system load is 60.2 MW and 40% of this is initially provided by synchronous
generation. With the electrolyser activated, the load reaches 70 MW of which synchronous
generators now only have to provide 26%. Thus, the synchronous generation can be lowered
by 5.88 MW, which together with the 9.8 MW yields a total of eliminated curtailment of 15.68
MW.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
36
==PAGE:46==
6.4.4
Simulation results
The 12 MW electrolyser is now integrated into the main grid model according to the aforemen­
tioned specifications. The chosen sizing and operation case creates new internal values and
initial conditions of the model, all of which are calculated as in Section 5.2 and can be seen
in Table 6.4. Compared to the 5 MW electrolyser of the test case, the 12 MW unit will have 6
stacks in parallel and a slightly higher stack voltage at rated power. Using the same AC voltage
of 0.69 kV, low order harmonics of the converter can still be avoided. The values inserted in
the AEL model according to this table as well as the frequency response specifications of the
previous section, are shown in Appendix F.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Rated power
12
MW
Number of cells
9 102
Number of stacks
6
Number of cells in series
1 517
Total current at rated power
4 500
A
Stack voltage at rated power
2.667
kV
Cell voltage at rated power
1.758
MW
Initial power setpoint
9.8
MW
Initial stack voltage
2.592
kV
Initial cell voltage
1.708
V
Table 6.4: Parameters of the 12 MW AEL chosen for integration into the Faroese grid.
The small disturbances applied before (see Figure 6.4) will now be applied again for the 74%
wind power scenario. Since the deadband of Droop 2 will prevent response activations in this
case, only Droop 1 is used for now. Figure 6.7 shows the resulting frequency deviations as well
as the frequency response of the electrolyser. To confirm that the response is correct based
on the operation specification, the power setpoints P1 and P2 [MW] at the frequency nadirs f1
= 49.9 Hz and f2 = 50.1 Hz, can be investigated. Using Equation 5.6 with the deadband fdb
[Hz] and initial setpoint Pinit added, yields the calculations shown in Equation 6.1 and 6.2. The
calculated values correspond to the results in a satisfactory manner.
P1 = Pinit −b∆P · f0 −f1 −fdb
b∆f −fdb
= 9.8 MW −8.6 MW · 50 Hz −49.9 Hz −50 mHz
500 mHz −50 mHz
= 8.84 MW
(6.1)
P2 = Pinit −b∆P · f0 −f2 + fdb
b∆f −fdb
= 9.8 MW −8.6 MW · 50 Hz −50.1 Hz + 50 mHz
500 mHz −50 mHz
= 10.76 MW
(6.2)
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
37
==PAGE:47==
Further analysing the result shows that the electrolyser response limits the frequency nadir
of the disturbances substantially. The RoCoF is unchanged, which can be explained by the
response being delayed as a result of ramping limitation as well as the deadband. The steady
state frequency is practically unchanged, which is due to it reaching close to the edge of the
deadband. Thereby, the electrolyser does not offer much of its power reserve at steady state.
Another interesting aspect of this result is the rather sharp reversal of the change in power. Such
behaviour would entail that the electrolyser possesses very low inertia of the electrochemical
reaction itself and of the operation of ancillary components of system. Though the former may
be a reasonable assumption, the latter most likely involves some limitations of the dynamics,
that in reality would yield a smoother power curve. The flow of liquid water, hydrogen gas and
oxygen gas in the cells can be assumed to add some mechanical inertia, which creates physical
limitations of the dynamic operation. If indeed a real electrolyser can not perform the sharp
dynamic seen in the result, a dynamic delay block could be inserted and tuned for reaching a
more realistic behaviour.
The small spike in power directly following the disturbance, is thought to be caused by the near
instantaneous voltage change at the AC bus connecting the electrolyser. The voltage deviation
occurs when the program is performing the first load flow iteration after the disturbance, where
new voltages are determined at all nodes of the grid. The corresponding AC voltage deviation
is then transferred to the the DC side of the converter, yielding an increase in current and thus
also in power. The reason that the ramp rate limiter does not apply here, is that it only limits that
change in power setpoint, which is a parameter of the control system and not the actual oper­
ating point. In a real electrolyser, such a behaviour may occur under the same circumstances.
However, the rapid change in power would not be maintained due to the mechanics (e.g. water
flow) not having the same rate of change capability.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
38
==PAGE:48==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
49.75
49.8
49.85
49.9
49.95
50
50.05
Frequency [Hz]
74% wind
74% wind with AEL (Droop 1)
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
Power [MW]
AEL response (Droop 1)
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
49.95
50
50.05
50.1
50.15
50.2
50.25
Frequency [Hz]
74% wind
74% wind with AEL (Droop 1)
(c)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
Power [MW]
AEL response (Droop 1)
(d)
Figure 6.7: Simulation result of a 1.225 MW stepped disturbance in the system with 74% wind
power. (a): Resulting frequency for the positive disturbance, with and without electrolyser fre­
quency response. (b): Positive disturbance response of the electrolyser (with Droop 1). (c):
Resulting frequency for the negative disturbance, with and without electrolyser frequency re­
sponse. (d): Negative disturbance response of the electrolyser (with Droop 1).
To investigate how the system responds to a critical disturbance, a sudden loss of several wind
turbines is applied. The combined generation loss is equal to the previously defined critical loss
of one of the big generators in Sundsverkið, which is not chosen as the critical outage in this
case due to its low power operation. For comparing the critical disturbance in the 74% wind
scenario, a generation loss of equal magnitude is simulated for the 0% and 60% wind scenarios
as well. Since the dispatch of generators varies with the scenarios, different combinations of
generator outages are used to achieve same combined loss of generation in all three cases.
Figure 6.8 (a) shows the resulting frequency following the critical loss of generation in the three
scenarios. As expected, the 74% wind scenario has the lowest nadir and steady state frequency,
with the latter being outside of the normal range. Figure 6.8 (b) shows the response of the
Húsareyn BESS. In all three scenarios, the BESS reaches its full response directly after the
disturbance (2.3 MW discharging). In the 74% wind scenario, the full activation is maintained
throughout the simulation, whereas the other scenarios do not require this. The BESS can be
seen ramping down its discharge rate as the frequency returns closer to the nominal level. The
very fast response capability of the BESS becomes evident here, with the full response reached
within one second.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
39
==PAGE:49==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
47.5
48
48.5
49
49.5
50
50.5
Frequency [Hz]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Power [MW]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(b)
Figure 6.8: Simulation result a critical loss of generation in the system with 0%, 60% and 74%
wind power, respectively. (a): Resulting frequency. (b): Frequency response of the Húsareyn
BESS.
Now implementing the electrolyser with Droop 2 as well, Figure 6.9 (a) shows the resulting
frequency following the critical loss of generation in the 74% wind scenario, with and without
electrolyser frequency response for both droops. Figure 6.9 (b) shows the electrolyser response
during the disturbance. The severity of the frequency deviation in this case yields very similar
response for both droop characteristics, which results in a frequency that is practically identical.
Another interesting aspect of the result is the identical steady state response for the two droops,
which can be explained by the corresponding frequency of 49.67 Hz being almost exactly where
the two droop curves intersect (see Figure 6.6).
Continuing the analysis, the added response of the electrolyser limits the frequency nadir and
a steady state is reached faster and is now within the normal range. Due to the ramp rate of the
electrolyser, it never reaches minimum power and the steady state is around a third of nominal
power. When comparing this result to that of Figure 6.8, it can be deduced that the 74% wind
scenario with AEL response closely resembles the 60% wind scenario. Though the frequency
nadir is slightly lower, the steady state frequency is reached faster and is somewhat closer to
the nominal value in the electrolyser scenario. Thereby, the electrolyser seems to compensate
sufficiently to the absence of the power reserves from generators SD G4 and SD G5.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
47.5
48
48.5
49
49.5
50
50.5
Frequency [Hz]
74% wind
74% wind with AEL (Droop 1)
74% wind with AEL (Droop 2)
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Power [MW]
AEL response (Droop 1)
AEL response (Droop 2)
(b)
Figure 6.9: Simulation result of a critical loss of generation in the 74% wind power scenario
with and without electrolyser response, respectively. (a): Resulting frequency. (b): Frequency
response of the electrolyser with Droop 1 and 2, respectively.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
40
==PAGE:50==
The above simulations are now repeated but for a critical loss of load in the system. The biggest
load is Havnarlagið 1 (4.491 MW) on Eysturoy, which is chosen for the outage magnitude. Figure
6.10 (a) and (b) shows the resulting frequency and BESS frequency response, respectively. As
expected, the more severe frequency deviations are experienced in the scenarios with more
wind power. In all three cases, the frequency stays within normal operation. The BESS reaches
maximum charging rate in all three scenarios, but absorbs more energy from the system in the
high wind scenarios.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
49.9
50
50.1
50.2
50.3
50.4
50.5
Frequency [Hz]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Power [MW]
0% wind
60% wind
74% wind
(b)
Figure 6.10: Simulation result of a critical loss of load in the system with 0%, 60% and 74% wind
power, respectively. (a): Resulting frequency. (b): Frequency response of the Húsareyn BESS.
Once more implementing the electrolyser frequency response, Figure 6.11 (a) shows the re­
sulting frequency following the critical loss of load in the 74% wind scenario, with and without
electrolyser frequency response for both droops. The electrolyser again limits the nadir with
both droop characteristics, but Droop 2 does not change the steady state frequency since it
reaches the deadband. Droop 1 on the other hand, forces the steady state closer to the nomi­
nal frequency because of the much smaller deadband. The difference in deadband is also the
reason for the initial ramp of Droop 2 being slightly offset in time. This along with the difference
in frequency value for full response activation, can explain that only the response for Droop 1
is able to reach the full power (12 MW). Furthermore, the initial spike in electrolyser power is
very prevalent in these simulations. The upward spike is around 1 MW which is significant. This
actually could (computationally) act as inertial response, since it counteracts the disturbance
almost instantaneously. However, the RoCoF does not appear affected by this and the spike
(with subsequent oscillations) vanish within 400 ms.
It can in this case be concluded both droops provide more than enough reserve in the initial part
of this disturbance, since the frequency nadir actually is lower than even the 0% wind scenario.
Unlike for the critical loss of generation, only Droop 1 enables the electrolyser to compensate
sufficiently in steady state for the lack of power reserves from generators SD G4 and SD G5.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
41
==PAGE:51==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
49.9
50
50.1
50.2
50.3
50.4
50.5
Frequency [Hz]
74% wind
74% wind with AEL (Droop 1)
74% wind with AEL (Droop 2)
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
12.5
Power [MW]
AEL response (Droop 1)
AEL response (Droop 2)
(b)
Figure 6.11: Simulation results of a 4.491 MW critical loss of load in the 74% wind power scenario
with and without electrolyser response, respectively. (a): Resulting frequency. (b): Frequency
response of the electrolyser with Droop 1 and 2, respectively.
The next and final simulation case, involves trying to simulate how real variations in wind power
from second to second, affects the frequency of the system. This will give a real indication of
how frequent the electrolyser will provide frequency response during continuous operation and
what the effect will be. To achieve this, a wind power profile of Húsahagi wind farm is obtained
from SEV [3] and applied to the model in PowerFactory. The method used for this is called
Parameter Event, where the power setpoint of the wind farm model can be set each second of
the simulation. Since the wind power variations are only representing Húsahagi wind farm, the
variations are scaled in a way to represent variations of all wind farms. The scaling is done such
that a change equal to 1% of the initial power of Húsahagi, ends up being equal to 1% of the
total initial wind power of the system. In this way, more realistic wind power variations can be
obtained while keeping most wind farm models at static power. This requires the assumption that
all wind farms dynamically controlled identically as well as experiencing the same wind speed
profile, which is not the case in reality. Regardless, this simplification is deemed sufficient for
the analysis due to the three biggest wind farms being placed in close proximity of each other.
Figure 6.12 shows the unscaled compared to the scaled wind power profile of 60 seconds,
with the latter being applied to the Húsahagi wind farm model in PowerFactory for the 74%
wind power scenario. The right y­axis is in pu of the rated power of Húsahagi (11.7 MW), which
means that the initial power (0.86 pu) is equal to the previously simulated 74% wind power
scenario. The resulting frequency is varying within the normal range and seems to follow the
general shape of the wind power. The fact that secondary response for restoring the frequency
is manual and not standardised, means that the activation of which depends on the operator
at the time in question [3]. This simulation involves a short time period and the frequency does
not remain far from the nominal for any significant amount of time. Thus, it can reasonably be
assumed that no secondary response is activated in this scenario and the result is deemed
realistic.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
42
==PAGE:52==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
49.5
49.75
50
50.25
50.5
Frequency [Hz]
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Power [pu]
Frequency
Unscaled wind power profile (Húsahagi)
Scaled and applied wind power profile
Figure 6.12: Unscaled compared to the scaled wind power profile [3]. The latter is applied to
Húsahagi wind farm in the 74% wind scenario, yielding the shown resulting grid frequency. Right
y­axis uses 11.7 MW (Húsahagi rated power) as base.
Figure 6.13 (a) shows the resulting frequencies of the applied wind power variations, with the
electrolyser frequency response implemented. Both droop characteristics (visualised in Fig­
ure 6.6) are simulated and compared to the resulting frequency without electrolyser response.
Comparing the droop characteristics in Figure 6.13 (b), Droop 1 as expected yields much more
frequent activations due to the narrow deadband. The higher activation rate of Droop 1 is re­
flected in the frequency, which clearly is kept closer to the nominal in this case. There are no
major activations for Droop 2 and the frequency is therefore not significantly changed compared
to Figure 6.12. However, the largest deviations have been minimised slightly.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
49.5
49.75
50
50.25
50.5
Frequency [Hz]
With AEL (Droop 1)
With AEL (Droop 2)
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
7
8
9
10
11
12
Power [MW]
AEL response (Droop 1)
AEL response (Droop 2)
(b)
Figure 6.13: Frequency during 60 seconds of applied wind power variations, with electrolyser
response of from Droop 1 and 2, respectively. (a): Resulting frequency. (b): Frequency response
of the electrolyser with Droop 1 and 2, respectively.
6.4.5
Long term considerations
Assuming this simulation is indicative of the system behaviour in normal and continuous oper­
ation during high wind penetration, the choice of droop characteristic is a very important factor
to consider. From the perspective of the electrolyser, the simulations have proven that an AEL
electrolyser at least has the short term capability to help the system through various distur­
bances.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
43
==PAGE:53==
Long term capability requires considerations which the electrolyser model does not include.
The first and obvious consideration is the effect on performance and lifetime that will occur
when continuously operating the electrolyser as seen in Figure 6.13 (b). Without the need for
specific quantification of the effects, merely assuming that degradation of performance and life­
time increases along with the increase of response activation rate, leaves the clear choice of
Droop 2 over Droop 1. Another important aspect which has not been covered yet, is the fact that
AEL tests performed at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) have shown problems with
achieving desired setpoints during power variations [51]. Assuming such mismatches accumu­
late during continuous power variations, again leaves a clear choice of the more conservative
Droop 2. If Droop 1 is used, then it may more often be necessary to interrupt the frequency
response for re­calibrating the setpoint.
From the perspective of system stability, the clear choice would always be Droop 1 as this offers
more minimisation of frequency deviations caused by the wind power variations. If a compromise
is to be made between minimising electrolyser degradation and maximising system stability,
Droop 2 is thought to be an adequate choice. With this droop characteristic, the electrolyser will
have a lower activation rate but still be able to aid the system at severe disturbances.
In terms of hydrogen production, the choice between these droop characteristics is not expected
to have a major effect when only considering the difference in energy consumption. Integrating
the power curves shows that Droop 1 yielded 162.8 kWh and Droop 2 yielded 164.4 kWh.
However, since the frequency can vary unpredictably, no real conclusion can be drawn from
this difference. Much more relevant is the power setpoint corresponding to nominal frequency,
which is a highly deciding factor when it comes to the effect on long term hydrogen production.
In Section 6.4.2, the average curtailment power is estimated to 18.56 MW during eight hours
each day. Based on this, the electrolyser should in theory be able to operate at full power during
those eight hours. For a whole year (neglecting frequency response), this adds up to 35.04 GWh
of consumption. Comparatively, operating at 9.8 MW adds up to 28.62 GWh.
Further exploring the hydrogen production, the efficiency concepts covered in Section 2.2 can be
included. As stated in said section, the efficiency of ancillary components, and thereby the entire
plant, can vary with the operating point. But for the sake of simplicity, only voltage efficiency is
considered regarding the operating point of the electrolyser. At nominal power corresponding to
0.3 A/cm2, the cell voltage is know to be 1.758 V. At the chosen operating temperature of 80◦C
and pressure of 1 bar, the thermoneutral voltage is 1.473 V [13]. The voltage efficiency of the
electrolyser at nominal power can thereby be calculated to 83.8%. By further assuming a 65%
DC efficiency of the electrolyser at nominal power (according to the specifications in Table 2.1),
the Faraday efficiency can be calculated to 77.6%. The last calculation is based on the fact that
the DC efficiency is product of the voltage and Faraday efficiency.
To calculate the DC efficiency at the lowered operating point (9.8 MW), the corresponding cell
voltage of 1.709 V (see Table 6.4) is used. By the assumption that temperature and pressure
remains constant regardless of operating point and the thermoneutral voltage is unchanged, the
new voltage efficiency of the electrolyser is calculated to 86.2%. Finally, by multiplying with the
previously calculated Faraday efficiency, the new DC efficiency can be determined as 66.9%.
Thus, the estimated efficiency of the electrolyser operating at 12 MW is 65% and increases
to 66.9% when operating at 9.8 MW. Using these efficiency values, the previously calculated
annual energy consumption values can be used for estimating the annual hydrogen production
for the two operating points. At 12 MW it would yield 22.78 GWh of chemical energy stored in
hydrogen and at 9.8 MW it would yield 19.14 GWh. Thus, though the efficiency at the lower
operating point is higher, it does not compensate for the lower power consumption.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
44
==PAGE:54==
The difference in hydrogen production is expected to have an effect on the economic feasibility
of the installation, which will be quantified in a later chapter.
6.5
Complementary battery system
Through the results obtained by the simulations, the limitations of AEL in terms of ramping rate
have become evident. At the most severe disturbances the frequency reaches very low/high
values in such a short time period that the AEL is not able to provide its full reserve before the
synchronous generators have returned the frequency close to the steady state. Thereby, AEL by
itself may be better suited for longer term imbalance corrections such as secondary frequency
response. By adding a BESS to the installation and controlling it in a complementary way to
the AEL, a combined frequency response can yield an increased response speed. To have a
reference for such an implementation, the previously covered PEMEL can be used. Though
PEMEL is known to have a wider possible load range, the same range as used for the AEL
(10­100%) will be considered for the PEMEL in this analysis.
In the chosen 12 MW case, a PEMEL of this size would able change its power setpoint at
12 MW/s (100%/s, according to Table 2.1). Comparatively, the implemented 12 MW AEL can
change its setpoint at 1.2 MW/s (10%/s). This means that a PEMEL with the same frequency
response implementation as the AEL, would be able to provide 8.6 MW of upward frequency
response in 0.72 seconds. Within this time, the AEL would only have reached 0.86 MW of the
response. As seen in the dynamic simulations, a BESS like the one in Húsareyn can provide
full response within half a second. If such a BESS was to be added to the AEL installation, a
discharge rating of 7.74 MW would hereby be enough for the combined response speed of the
AEL and BESS to equal that of PEMEL. In terms of downward frequency response, a PEMEL
would provide 2.2 MW in 0.18 seconds. Within this time, the AEL would only have reached 0.22
MW of the response. Thus, a 1.98 MW charge rating of the BESS would suffice. However, the
sizing of the BESS is done based on the maximum power value.
The control scheme of the BESS must also be specified. One such scheme could entail pro­
viding the initial ramp of the frequency response followed by decreasing its response as the
AEL is reaching the desired setpoint. Figure 6.14 (a) and (b) illustrates a control sequence of
this scheme for full upward and downward response, respectively. The energy needed for the
full discharging (upward) response can be calculated (through integration of the power curve) to
7.708 kWh. Similarly, the energy needed for the full charging (downward) response is calculated
to 0.503 kWh.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
45
==PAGE:55==
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [s]
-9
-6
-3
0
3
6
9
12
Power [MW]
PEMEL
AEL
BESS
AEL + BESS
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Power [MW]
PEMEL
AEL
BESS
AEL + BESS
(b)
Figure 6.14: Control of combined AEL and BESS frequency response for achieving an initial
response ramp equal to that of PEMEL. (a): Upward frequency response. (b): Downward fre­
quency response.
The continuous provision of power response from BESS requires that the above energy levels
are available at any given moment. An SoC below 100% is therefore necessary to have space
for both discharging and charging. The initial SoC can be chosen as approximately 94%, based
on the ratio of maximum discharging to charging energy. Even if the frequency is assumed to
deviate completely symmetrically around the nominal (as opposed to in Figure 6.12), the control
scheme will cause the BESS to discharge more than it will charge. Thus, without a pause for
recharging the battery it would eventually reach a minimum SoC and lose the upward frequency
response capability. This yields a continuous operation time limit that is highly dependent on the
chosen control scheme. Under the assumption that the control scheme can not be changed, this
operation time limit can be improved by optimising the initial SoC. In this case, the initial SoC
could be chosen differently based on the expected response activations. Nonetheless, the SoC
will be kept at the previously calculated value for the purpose of continued analysis.
If the battery is to be operated in the same continuous time period as the AEL (8 hours), the
required energy capacity must be determined. For this, a ”worst case” discharging sequence can
be used. This scenario would be a constant sequence of the full upward frequency response,
repeating itself every 14.34 seconds. This would yield 2008 activations in 8 hours, which results
in a required energy for discharging of 15.48 MWh. With a SoC of 94%, the required energy
capacity of the BESS is approximately 16.5 MWh.
Basing the sizing on this critical scenario might not be economically feasible. Instead, the re­
sponse of AEL (Droop 2) in Figure 6.13 can be used as a more realistic reference. Here, one
small activation of downward frequency response and three small activations of upward fre­
quency response are seen during 60 seconds. This can be roughly approximated to 50% of
one full upward response activation in terms of energy. Thus, the BESS energy capacity can
be sized based on one full discharge activation every 2 minutes. Including the SoC, this results
in a required energy capacity of approximately 2 MWh.
When operating a BESS, the so­called C­rate becomes an important parameter. It is the ratio
of charging/discharging power to the rated energy capacity [52] and is greatly affecting the
degradation and subsequent lifetime of battery cells. Battery lifetimes are often given in cycles,
with one cycle theoretically being one full charge followed by one full discharge. The cycle life
is then defined as the number of cycles the battery can undergo, before the maximum energy
capacity has decreased by 20% [53].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
46
==PAGE:56==
Lithium­based battery technologies can as of 2021 have a cycle life of around 6 000 [54]. Re­
garding the C­rate, an experiment on lithium­based battery cells have shown that a C­rate of
2C yields a 50% decrease in cycle life compared to a C­rate of 1C. A C­rate of 3C can yield a
90% decrease.
For the two BESS sizes (16.5 MWh and 2 MWh), the maximum discharge rate yields 0.5C and
4C, respectively. It can thereby be assumed that the bigger BESS (later referred to as BESS A)
easily maintains a cycle life of 6 000 but that the smaller BESS (later referred to as BESS B)
will have a cycle life below 600. However, if one assumes most response activations being 50%
in terms of power, the average C­rate of BESS B is 2C and the cycle life increases to 3 000. In
the economic analysis of the next chapter, the cycle life will be converted to lifetime in operating
hours and subsequently years. To simplify the comparison the more realistic operation scenario
which BESS B is sized for, will be considered for BESS A as well. Thus, one cycle equals 8 hours
of continuous operation for BESS B and 66 hours for BESS A. Considering daily operation of
8 hours throughout each year, BESS A will have a lifetime of 136 years and BESS A will have
8 years. The lifetime of BESS A is especially reliant on the assumption that degradation only
occurs during usage and that no idle discharging takes place. In order to have a more realistic
number for the economic analysis, the lifetime of cells in BESS A are assumed to be equal to
that of the electrolyser.
Even if considering a much lower lifetime of BESS A, one can still argue that it is poorly utilised
with the above control scheme. Instead of only providing the initial ramp of the response, the
BESS could be controlled such that it maintains a certain level of charging/discharging through­
out the frequency deviations. In this way, the high energy capacity is more utilised and the
required electrolyser response can be minimised. This could decrease degradation and sub­
sequently increase the lifetime of the electrolyser. For instance, the BESS could completely
replace the downward frequency response of the electrolyser and thereby allowing the latter to
operate at full power. Regardless, the economic analysis will be centered around the scenario
of Figure 6.14, where both the specified upward and downward response is performed by the
electrolyser.
7
Economic Analysis
The basis of the economic analysis is to perform a simple feasibility study of the chosen elec­
trolyser integration case. The value of the installation can be presented in the Net Present Value
(NPV), which indicates the value of the investment across its entire lifespan [55]. The invest­
ment is deemed feasible for a positive value and infeasible for a negative value. The formula for
NPV can be written as seen in Equation 7.1 and is the difference between the sum of annual
net cash flow during the lifetime of the electrolyser, and the initial investment costs (CapEx).
The so­called salvage value [56] is in this case zero at the end of the lifetime, which is under
the assumption that the cost of plant deconstruction is assumed to be equal to the total price of
saleable components and materials.
NPV =
Lifetime
X
Year=1
Revenue −Cost −OpEx
(1 + Discount Rate)Year −CapEx
(7.1)
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
47
==PAGE:57==
The formula includes several parameters (besides the already mentioned CapEx), which for the
electrolyser case can be described as follows:
• Revenue: Annual revenue from sale of hydrogen. Since there is no market for ancillary
services in the Faroe Islands, there is no additional revenue from the provision of fre­
quency response. Furthermore, though oxygen is produced as well it is kept out of the
analysis for now.
• Cost: Annual cost of electricity consumption.
• OpEx: Annual cost of maintenance work and minor hardware replacement.
• Discount Rate: Factor which partly takes into account the decreased value of money over
time as well as uncertainty or risk related to the future [57]. It can also be set such to include
inflation. Since there is no defined way of choosing this factor, an estimated number will
be used.
Revenue, Cost and OpEx may vary from year to year, depending on the hydrogen and elec­
tricity markets as well as the markets related to maintenance work (e.g. labour and hardware).
However, for the purpose of simplifying the analysis, all parameters are assumed constant in
the calculation.
It is noted that lifetime is given in years for the economic calculation, but is given in operating
hours in the technical specifications of the electrolyser. Thus, the operation scenario becomes
relevant to define the lifetime (in years) based on the number of hours the electrolyser is active.
Using the previously covered scenario with 8 continuous hours of operation every day, yields
2 920 hours of operation annually. Considering an AEL lifetime of 64 240 operating hours, this
operation scenario corresponds exactly to a lifetime of 22 years.
To estimate the production cost per kg of hydrogen across the entire lifespan of the installa­
tions, a levelised cost approach can be added to the analysis [58]. Equation 7.2 shows the
formula for calculating the Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH), where Cost, OpEx and Hydro­
gen Production (in kg) again are given as annual values. Within the formula for LCoH is the
Capital Recovery Factor (CRF), which is calculated as shown in Equation 7.3. By setting the
price of hydrogen higher than the LCoH, a positive NPV is achieved.
LCoH = CapEx · CRF + Cost + OpEx
Hydrogen Production
(7.2)
CRF = Discount Rate · (1 + Discount Rate)Lifetime
 (1 + Discount Rate)Lifetime
−1
(7.3)
Firstly, it is of interest to calculate LCoH for the 12 MW AEL and 12 MW PEMEL, respectively.
Before this, some more parameters must be defined. As with AEL, the lifetime in years of PEMEL
can be determined from the lifetime in hours. In this analysis, the latter is chosen to 78 840 hours,
which is in the higher end of the range (see Table 2.1). Opposite to AEL which was chosen in
the lower end of its range, this choice is based on the aforementioned lower susceptibility of
PEMEL to degradation from variable operation. Thereby, the same operation scenario yields a
lifetime of 27 years for PEMEL. A higher lifetime is reflected in the calculations by giving a lower
CRF and LCoH as well as a higher NPV through a lower depreciation. Depreciation is the loss
of value over time and is the quotient of CapEx and lifetime [56].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
48
==PAGE:58==
Regarding efficiency, 66.9% is chosen for both AEL and PEMEL based on the calculation in
Section 6.4.5 for a lowered operating point of 9.8 MW. Thus, hydrogen production is identical
for both technologies. Since the efficiency ranges generally are similar, this is deemed reason­
able. Table 7.1 shows all technical parameters and resulting values of AEL and PEMEL for the
specified scenario.
Parameter
Value
Unit
AEL
PEMEL
Size
12
12
MW
Operating point
9.8
9.8
MW
Continuous operating time
8
8
h / day
Annual operating time
2 920
2 920
h / year
Lifetime
64 240 (22)
78 840 (27)
h (years)
Efficiency
66.9
66.9
%
Energy consumption
28 616
28 616
MWh / year
Hydrogen production*
574 898
574 898
kg / year
Table 7.1: Technical parameters and resulting energy consumption and hydrogen production of
AEL and PEMEL, respectively. *Using an energy density of 33.3 kWh/kg [59].
Proceeding to the financial aspect, the typical electrolyser CapEx and OpEx defined by ENTSO­
E will be used. The discount rate is chosen to be 5%, to consider inflation (2% on average during
the last 25 years in Denmark [60]) as well as some risk aversion associated with the investment.
Beyond calculating LCoH, a realistic price of hydrogen will be used for determining the NPV. The
price of green hydrogen can vary significantly and according to the Hydrogen Valley platform,
the most common price range in Europe is 4­6 €/kg [61]. The second most common price range
is 8­10 €/kg. For the initial calculation of NPV, a price of 5 €/kg will be used. All values in € are
converted to DKK with a factor of 7.44.
To decide on an appropriate price of electricity, the fixed price point of 1.95 DKK/kWh for house­
holds is used as reference [3]. On top of this, the discount of 0.5 DKK/kWh for green technologies
such as electric vehicles and heat pumps [62], is assumed to apply to the electrolyser as well.
Thus, the electricity price used in the economic analysis ends up at a fixed 1.45 DKK/kWh.
Table 7.2 shows the financial parameters and calculated values of annual revenue and cost.
The higher CapEx of PEMEL also yields a higher annual OpEx. Since the price of hydrogen
and electricity is the same for both technologies, the annual cost and revenue is identical. Table
7.3 shows the resulting values for CRF, LCoH and NPV. The difference in lifetime is reflected in
the CRF, which is higher for AEL. However, the LCoH is higher for PEMEL despite the longer
lifetime. The NPV of both technologies is negative, since the selling price of hydrogen is lower
than their LCoH. This resulting infeasibility was already evident in Table 7.2, where the annual
cost clearly exceeds the revenue.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
49
==PAGE:59==
Parameter
Value
Unit
AEL
PEMEL
CapEx
700
1 160
€ / kWe
OpEx
2
2
% of CapEx
Realised CapEx
62 496 000
103 564 800
DKK
Realised OpEx
56 815
76 715
DKK / year
Discount rate
5
5
% / year
Price of electricity
1.45
1.45
DKK / kWh
Price of hydrogen
5
5
€ / kg
Cost
41 493 200
41 493 200
DKK / kWh
Revenue
21 386 206
21 386 206
DKK / year
Table 7.2: Financial parameters and resulting revenue and cost for AEL and PEMEL, respec­
tively.
Parameter
Value
Unit
AEL
PEMEL
CRF
7.6
6.8
%
LCoH
10.82
11.37
€ / kg
NPV
­327 912 260
­399 115 521
DKK
Table 7.3: Resulting CRF, LCoH and NPV of AEL and PEMEL corresponding to the specifica­
tions of Table 7.1 and 7.2
Now, BESS A and BESS B will be included in the AEL calculations. The BESS is expected to
operate throughout the lifetime of the electrolyser (22 years), which means that replacement of
the battery cells may have to be performed at some point. This would only be necessary for
BESS B, with a lifetime calculated to around a third of the electrolyser. In this case, two full cell
replacements are required. Additionally, it is assumed that all other components in the BESS
have a lifetime of 22 years.
In terms of energy consumption, it is the energy required by the response activations as well as
the power usage of auxiliary components (e.g. for cooling systems). The latter can be estimated
to 0.1% (per hour) of the energy rating [63]. Thus, BESS A will have a higher annual energy
consumption than BESS B. The efficiency is assumed at 100% for both systems for the sake of
simplicity. Table 7.5 shows all technical parameters and resulting values of BESS A and BESS B
for the specified analysis scenario. As expected, the energy consumption of BESS A is slightly
higher than for BESS B.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
50
==PAGE:60==
Parameter
Value
Unit
BESS A
BESS B
Size
16.5
2
MWh
Maximum SoC
94
94
%
Cycle life
6 000
3 000
cycles
Cycle time
66
8
h / cycle
Continuous operating time
8
8
h / day
Annual operating time
2 920
2 920
h / year
Total operating time
22
22
years
Lifetime of cells
22
8
years
Total cell replacements
0
2
Energy consumption
734
692
MWh / year
Table 7.4: Technical parameters and required cell replacements along with resulting energy
consumption of BESS A and BESS B, respectively.
The CapEx, OpEx and cell replacement cost of the battery installations are based on values
from Simply Power ApS [63], a Danish company that operates large­scale BESS for providing
ancillary services. Regarding salvage value, the cells in BESS B (including replacements) will
have a lifetime of more than 22 years. Thus, a salvage value can be estimated based on the
remaining cycles and the initial value of the cells. The third generation of cells in BESS B will
only have gone through 2 250 cycles at the 22 years mark. By using a cell value of 2 000 000
DKK/MWh (used as the cell replacement cost), the remaining 750 cycles yield a salvage value
of 1 000 000 DKK1. Again, this is assuming zero salvage value of the auxiliary components.
Table 7.5 shows the financial parameters and calculated values for each battery installation
case. The realised OpEx is much higher for BESS B due to the inclusion of cell replacement
costs. The higher cost of BESS A is due to the higher electricity consumption. To calculate the
combined LCoH and NPV, the CapEx and salvage value of the BESS need to be included. In the
calculations of LCoH, the difference between BESS CapEx and salvage value is simply added
to the AEL CapEx. The annual electricity cost and OpEx of the BESS is also added to that of
the AEL.
Table 7.6 shows the resulting values for CRF, LCoH and NPV. The CRF takes the value of AEL
(due to unchanged lifetime and discount rate), whereas the LCoH and NPV are for the combined
installations. The LCoH with BESS A is higher than for BESS B despite the cell replacements of
the latter. Though both installations are highly infeasible under these conditions, the combination
of AEL and BESS B is economically comparable to PEMEL, with the latter having a 0.07 €/kg
lower in LCoH. Despite the small difference, it must still be concluded from this analysis that
PEMEL is the preferred choice, compared to AEL with a complementary BESS.
1 = 750 / 3 000 · 2 MWh · 2 000 000 DKK/MWh
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
51
==PAGE:61==
Parameter
Value
Unit
BESS A
BESS B
CapEx
5 000 000
5 000 000
DKK / MWh
Cell replacement cost
2 000 000
2 000 000
DKK / MWh
OpEx
2
2
% of CapEx
Realised CapEx
82 500 000
18 000 000
DKK
Realised cell replacement cost
0
8 000 000
DKK
Realised OpEx*
75 000
348 333
DKK / year
Salvage value**
0
1 000 000
DKK
Discount rate
5
5
% / year
Price of electricity
1.45
1.45
DKK / kWh
Cost
1 064 300
1 003 400
DKK / year
Table 7.5: Financial parameters and resulting cost for BESS A and BESS B, respectively. *In­
cluding realised cell replacement cost spread out over the lifetime. **Only accounting for value
of remaining lifetime of cells.
Parameter
Value
Unit
AEL & BESS A
AEL & BESS B
CRF (AEL)
7.6
7.6
%
LCoH
12.56
11.45
€ / kg
NPV
­425 408 869
­362 705 130
DKK
Table 7.6: Resulting LCOH and NPV of AEL with the combination of BESS A and BESS B,
respectively.
7.1
Further analysis
Similar for all cases analysed, is an extremely low NPV. To see under which conditions feasibility
is reached, the following sections will involve lowering the electricity price and including revenue
from the oxygen production, respectively. This procedure is done for AEL alone as well as the
combination with BESS B.
Additionally, ancillary service revenue will be considered for assessing the economic impact of
choosing the lower operating point of 9.8 MW, compared to 12 MW.
7.1.1
Electricity price
Due to the expected large consumption of the electrolyser, a quantity discount [3] may be ex­
pected to apply to the cost of electricity. Such a discount would have to be approximately 0.88
DKK/kWh to yield a positive NPV for AEL. The corresponding electricity price is 0.57 DKK/kWh.
Comparatively, AEL with BESS B requires a price of 0.5 DKK/kWh.
7.1.2
Oxygen revenue
Though oxygen production has not been part of the analysis, capturing and selling the oxygen
gas of the electrolysis can improve the economic feasibility of the proposed installations.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
52
==PAGE:62==
From the chemical reaction, it can be seen that one oxygen gas molecule is produced for every
two hydrogen gas molecules [5]. Thus, the molar ratio of produced oxygen to hydrogen is 1:2.
By this ratio along with the molar mass of hydrogen gas (2.016 g/mol) and oxygen gas (31.999
g/mol), 574 898 kg of produced hydrogen corresponds to 4 562 766 kg of oxygen.
By assuming all of the oxygen can be sold, a price of approximately 5.51 DKK/kg is needed
for achieving a positive NPV with AEL. Comparatively, 6.10 DKK/kg is needed with BESS B.
As for the hydrogen these values assume that the costs of added infrastructure for storage and
transport are zero. Taking these factors into account, will inevitably affect the result.
7.1.3
Operating point
As mentioned in Section 6.4.5, the 9.8 MW operating point yields a lower hydrogen production
production than the 12 MW operating point, despite the increased efficiency. Using the electricity
price needed for a positive NPV (0.57 DKK/kWh), a comparison in annual profit can made.
Executing the economic calculations for the 12 MW operating point of AEL, the annual profit is
395 573 DKK more than for the 9.8 MW operating point.
Ancillary service revenue
Since SEV owns all generators providing frequency response, there is currently no market for
ancillary services [3]. However, such a market is expected to be implemented as the Faroese
power system expands and as privately owned units may become more prevalent in the grid.
Such a market would naturally increase the incentives for variable operation of an electrolyser.
Sub­optimal operation (from a hydrogen production perspective) such as the 9.8 MW case, can
only be desireble by a privately owned AEL if the revenue from frequency response is more
than profit lost from lower hydrogen production. Specifically for the 12 MW AEL, this was found
to be 395 573 DKK annually. Assuming no upward response is provided in the 12 MW case, the
frequency response payment in the 9.8 MW case should be at least 135 DKK/h to compensate
for the lost profit.
In the aforementioned frequency service FCR­N of the Nordic power market, payment for hourly
power reserves are given in DKK/MW [28]. By the same measure, the total hourly payment of
135 DKK can be equated to around 13 DKK/MW for the electrolyser. This is based on the
combined power reserve of 8.6 MW for upward response and 2.2 MW for downward response.
If more realistically considering that the 12 MW case also provides maximum upward response,
it can decrease its power consumption by 10.8 MW. Thus, the payment for downward response
will have to be more than for upward response, if the 9.8 MW still is to be preferred. Assuming the
hourly price of upward and downward response during a year (2 920 h) is u and d (in DKK/MW),
respectively. With these variables, Equation 7.4 can be solved for d. The result shows that
the price of downward response needs to be more than 62 DKK/MW higher than for upward
response.
2 920 · (8.6 u + 2.2 d) = 395 573 + 2 920 ·
 10.8 u + 0 d

→d = u + 62
(7.4)
7.2
Green fuel production
Due to the very low boiling point of hydrogen [64], storage becomes a issue at larger scales
since very high pressures and/or very low temperatures are needed to minimise the required
volume of storage tanks.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
53
==PAGE:63==
Another option is to store the hydrogen in chemical compounds such as ammonia and methanol,
which can be produced by the Haber­Bosch process and carbon dioxide hydrogenation [65, 66],
respectively. Table 7.7 shows a comparison in boiling points at atmospheric pressure. Ammonia
has a relatively high boiling point compared to hydrogen, thus requiring much less pressurisa­
tion/refrigeration to be stored in liquid form. Methanol can be stored in liquid form without the
need for pressurisation/refrigeration. Having similar energy densities [67, 59], both ammonia
and methanol are currently major contenders of so­called green fuels for replacing fossil fuels
[6].
Boiling point at 1 atm (°C)
Hydrogen
­252.9
Ammonia
­33.4
Methanol
64.7
Table 7.7: Boiling points of hydrogen, ammonia and methanol [64].
To have a reference for the annual hydrogen production of the electrolyser shown in Table 7.1,
a subsequent production of methanol can be considered. In carbon dioxide hydrogenation, the
energy transfer from hydrogen to methanol is 51 kcal for every hydrogen gas molecule [66].
Using the molar mass of hydrogen gas (2.016 g/mol), 574 898 kg of hydrogen is calculated to
285 181 814 mol. With the specified energy transfer (converted to MWh), this equates to 16
903 MWh of methanol. With an initial energy of 19 144 MWh in the hydrogen, this yields an
efficiency of 88.3%. Taking into account the entire process starting from electrolysis, the total
efficiency of methanol production is 59%.
Diesel has a volumetric energy density of 36 MJ/l [59], which can be converted to 10 kWh/l (1
J = 1/3600 Wh). Thus, by roughly assuming that a methanol combustion engine has the same
efficiency properties as a diesel combustion engine, 16 903 MWh of methanol can replace ap­
proximately 1.69 million liters of diesel. This can be estimated as equivalent to the consumption
of generator SD G4 in Sundsverkið, operating at full power (12.428 MW) for 571 hours (assum­
ing 42% thermal efficiency [68]). For further reference, in 2022 the total consumption of diesel
for private transport in Denmark proper, was 577.31 million liters [69]. Assuming the ratio of
population between the Faroe Islands and Denmark proper (54 000 / 5 900 000), the annual
Faroese diesel consumption for private transport can be estimated to 5.28 million liters. Of this
amount, 1.69 million liters equates to 32%.
Whether it be ammonia or methanol, a demand for green fuels would translate to a demand for
hydrogen. From an economic perspective, this may incentivise installing a green fuel production
plant directly at the electrolyser. The feasibility of such an installation is dependent on the rev­
enue of the green fuel being high enough to compensate for the increase in CapEx and OpEx.
Though the costs are mainly expected to increase, the cost of storage capacity per MWh of
fuel are expected to decrease due to the aforementioned properties of ammonia and methanol,
compared to hydrogen.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
54
==PAGE:64==
8
Discussion
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the some of the methods, assumptions and results of
the thesis. The topics of discussion are presented in similar order as the corresponding chapters.
Electrolyser model
The first major assumption was the scalability of the electrolyser model. Comparing a 26 kW unit
(the basis of the model) with the chosen 12 MW unit, the dynamics will most likely be different.
Not only from an electrochemical perspective but also from the perspective of the entire plant
with auxiliary systems. However, the exact differences can only be speculative without empirical
data to compare with. Regarding the electrochemical aspect, the aforementioned ohmic losses
expected to arise in a scaled­up electrolyser may have a significant effect on the efficiency.
The assumption of identical ramping constraints for increasing and decreasing power consump­
tion, might also be different from reality. Different ramping capabilities, will affect the frequency
response and subsequently the power system.
Throughout the simulations in the main grid model, the internal electrolyser dynamics were
disregarded due to the scope of the integration primarily involved the active power participation
from a power system perspective. The necessary assumption is that the internal parameters
obtained the expected values even during the most severe disturbance simulations. To confirm
this, the behaviour of parameters such as the cell voltage and current could have been studied
during the dynamic simulations.
Stability analysis
Because of the active power being the primary focus point, frequency stability was the main
area of analysis of the dynamic simulations. Though voltage stability as a concept was covered
and taken into consideration when determining the placement of the electrolyser, it did not play a
major part in the subsequent analysis. A subsequent static simulation showed that the voltage
at the busbar connecting the electrolyser was within the normal range, which was a goal of
the chosen placement. Thus reactive power compensation was not necessary. The dynamic
behaviour of the voltage throughout the various disturbances, was not analysed in detail. Results
hereof might have uncovered short term voltage issues in need of mitigation.
Voltage deviations associated with severe disturbances, should be taken into account when
integrating a real electrolyser. For instance, prolonged low voltages (e.g. during short circuit
faults) will most likely cause the electrolyser to completely disconnect in order to avoid damage
from resulting high currents. The power system may rely on a large­scale electrolyser to inject
current in the form of reactive power from its converter, to help increase the voltage. Imple­
menting and analysing this aspect, can give a broader understanding of how a real electrolyser
should interact with the power system.
The rotor angle stability concept was not included in the analysis. This is assumed to be more
relevant for short circuit disturbances, where the rotor angle dynamics covered in Section 4.2
are expected to be very prevalent. The interconnection of many synchronous generators such
as in the main grid model, would require a different and much more detailed approach to these
dynamics [31]. Though some very small oscillations were detected in the disturbance simula­
tions in this thesis, these are assumed to be related to counteracting frequency response (as
seen in Figure 6.5) rather than related to the rotor angle dynamics.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
55
==PAGE:65==
Electrolyser sizing and operation
The electrolyser was sized such to compensate for the absence of frequency response from
two big synchronous generators. It was sized larger than what was estimated as necessary due
to the lack of inertial response. What was not considered is the reduction of short­circuit current
capacity. However, analysing this aspect was not performed due to time constraints.
The long term operation scenario was based on a general calculation of average wind curtail­
ment. By this calculation, it was assumed that 18.56 MW of wind power was curtailed for 8 hours
during every night of the year. A more accurate approach would have been to obtain and use
hourly values of curtailment for precisely determining the annual hours available for electrolyser
operation. This would lay the foundation for a more precise sizing and subsequent economic
analysis of both the electrolyser and the complementary BESS.
One can argue that the inaccuracy of the estimated curtailment has been taken somewhat into
account by assuming only 8 hours available for full power operation. Since full power opera­
tion requires at least 12 MW of curtailment, using this value instead of 18.56 MW would entail
curtailment during 12 hours a day to equal the total recorded energy of 48.1 GWh. Thus, the
chosen operation case of 8 hours is slightly more conservative.
When deciding on droop control scheme of the electrolyser frequency response, two schemes
were chosen for the simulations. The first one being based on FCR­N and the second being
based on the scheme of Húsareyn BESS. The differences in deadband of the schemes had
a significant effect on the results. However, the small difference in frequency deviation corre­
sponding to full response, did not seem to yield notable contrasts. A third scheme could have
been added in order to have more clear comparisons in this aspect as well.
The result of the implemented wind power profile was used as an indicator for how the fre­
quency evolves during high wind penetration. This was used later for sizing and operation of
the complementary BESS. An issue with this approach is that the wind power profile can not be
considered completely representative, since it only involves one particular time frame. A better
approach might be to simply obtain frequency data from SEV and analyse multiple time frames
for getting a better overview of the general frequency behaviour. For instance, if real frequency
data shows larger and more frequent deviations over time, the BESS may require a higher en­
ergy capacity. Additionally, the deadband of the electrolyser droop scheme might have to be
increased to avoid degradation associated with many response activations.
Simulation scenarios
Regarding the simulation of a critical loss of generation, the chosen scenario was a total loss
of power equal to the rating of the largest generator in the system. To reach this power, rather
arbitrary outage combinations of active generators were determined for each dispatch scenario.
However, by interpreting the N­1 criterion in a slightly different manner, a potentially more re­
alistic simulation could have been an outage of Skarðshjalli substation [3]. In this case, the
subsequent outage of Gellingarklettur wind farm would be denoted as the critical loss of gener­
ation, which in the 74% wind power scenario is equal to 22 MW. This may have given a more real
sense of the stability limits of the system. However, the comparison between dispatch scenarios
may have been more difficult due to the differences in operating points of Gellingarklettur. This
would have yielded differences in disturbance magnitude, which would complicate the compar­
ison.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
56
==PAGE:66==
Though the 74% wind scenario was well over the limit of 60%, the remaining active generators
still yielded enough inertial and frequency response for the system to remain stable, even without
the response of the electrolyser. Though the effects of the applied disturbances were clearly
amplified compared to the 60% wind scenario, the hypothesised instability from lack of power
reserves did not occur. The reason for this could be that a real generator dispatch in this scenario
would entail fewer active synchronous generators operating at higher power output. In this case,
the combined inertia of the system would be lower.
Electrolyser degradation
In terms of electrolyser performance and degradation, this was not included in a detailed manner
for the long term operation analysis. Instead, the lifetime of AEL was chosen in the lower end of
the possible range due to the expected degradation occurring from the provision of frequency re­
sponse. As mentioned in Section 2.2.6, degradation is most prominent when frequently switch­
ing off the unit. By using high resolution historical curtailment data to determine a more detailed
operation, this aspect of degradation along with the start­up and shut­down time limitations, can
be included.
Complementary battery system and lifetimes
Regarding the complementary BESS analysis, many assumptions were made. For instance, the
determined lifetime of 22 years for BESS A was a very rough estimate. The choice was made
since solely considering cycle life (as with BESS B) resulted in what was deemed an unrealistic
lifetime of 136 years. Furthermore, the cycle life only considered discharging from frequency
response and not self discharging of the cells [70]. Including the latter would most likely have
yielded a lower and more realistic value, since the cycle rate would increase.
For both the electrolyser and BESS, the lifetime of 22 years was also assumed for the auxiliary
systems and components. This choice was made mainly to obtain a more clear comparison
in the economic analysis. However, a more precise result would have been acquired if these
had been included in detail. For example, the auxiliaries needed in the electrolysers are vastly
different and more complex than in a BESS, which may result in different lifetimes.
Another assumption for the complementary BESS, was that the batteries could discharge down
to a SoC of 0%. In reality, a minimum of SoC above 0% might be used for limiting cell degrada­
tion. Depth of Discharge (DoD) [71] is often mentioned in this case, where reaching a SoC of
0% every cycle is equal to a DoD of 100%. Including this concept, the energy capacities would
simply have been increased accordingly to maintain the same possible operation scenario. This
would negatively affects the economic feasibility of the installation.
Efficiency values
In terms of the different efficiency values used for electrolysis as well as carbon dioxide hydro­
genation (methanol production), only the internal reactions were considered. In reality, plants
performing these processes will most likely have physical imperfections causing these reac­
tions to occur under sub­optimal conditions. Additionally, individual efficiencies of all auxiliary
components enabling the reactions will be added to that of the whole plant. The real efficiency
values are therefore expected to be lower than those used in the analyses. This would lower
the yield of hydrogen and green fuels, which subsequently would negatively affect the economic
feasibility.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
57
==PAGE:67==
Economic analysis and downstream usage of hydrogen
The economic analysis was simplified by assuming many fixed parameters and price points
throughout the entire lifetime of the installations. Variations in revenue from hydrogen and cost
of electricity consumption etc., are expected to vary over the course of a 22 year period. Another
major assumption was that adequate storage and transport infrastructure already is in place,
such that the hydrogen production is not limited in this aspect and that the economics are not
affected by this. Regarding the the sale of hydrogen, it would in reality also be reliant on the
demand for it. In the case of the Faroe Islands, local demand may be limited until green fuels
start replacing the fossil fuel consumption of ferries and fishing vessels.
Regarding the results of the calculations, the initially chosen price point of hydrogen and elec­
tricity yielded undoubtedly bad business cases for all installation scenarios. Though a lower
electricity price and revenue from oxygen was considered for reaching a positive NPV, an in­
crease in hydrogen price above the LCoH values might also be a plausible scenario in the
future. For instance, an increase in the demand for green fuels along with increased taxes on
fossil fuels, can allow for higher hydrogen prices.
The final section included some references for comparing the amount of hydrogen and subse­
quent methanol production with fossil fuel consumption on the Faroe Islands. A more detailed
comparison may be done in the future, based on further analysis of downstream usage of hy­
drogen. For instance, the consumption of fossil fuels in Faroese ships can be analysed, for
quantifying the amount of green fuel needed to transition completely away from fossil fuels in
the offshore sector. Thereby, the impact of the electrolyser integration on this transition can also
be quantified. A similar approach can be done with respect to the oxygen production, where the
oxygen usage in Faroese fish farms is investigated and quantified. All of this would provide
further detail to the feasibility study.
9
Conclusion
In the work of this thesis, electrolyser technologies have been explored and the important as­
pects regarding efficiency and degradation have been investigated. It was shown that varying
the operating point has an effect on efficiency and degradation of the electrolyser cells, which
needs to be considered for flexible operation. Further in the literature review, AEL was found
to be more susceptible to degradation from power fluctuations, compared to PEMEL. PEMEL
is more flexible in terms of ramp rate and load range, but being the more mature and cheaper
technology, AEL was chosen for further analysis.
The main Faroese power system was explored, with generation capacity and load data being
presented followed by the future development and expansion of the grid. Relevant power system
stability concepts of frequency, voltage and rotor angle were presented. Out of these, frequency
stability and the associated ancillary service of frequency response with active power, was de­
termined to be most relevant for the analysis. The concept of voltage stability and reactive power
also played an important part in the later placement of the electrolyser in the grid. The acquired
knowledge of the power system and its stability concerns laid the foundation of understanding
needed for the subsequent static and dynamic simulations of the main grid model.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
58
==PAGE:68==
The dynamic AEL model was initially investigated and simulated for a 5 MW case providing
frequency response in a small test grid. Necessary assumptions for using the model were stated,
one of which being that scaling the number of cells does not affect the internal dynamics and
another assumption being constant temperature and pressure regardless of operating point.
The internal parameters of the cells were calculated corresponding to the tested operation case
and the control scheme was validated by dynamically simulating small disturbances in a test
grid. A modification of the model was made for achieving a more realistic ramp rate based on
the technical limitations found in literature.
The initial analysis of the main grid entailed a static simulation of maximum wind power gen­
eration and high load. The majority of the generation came from the three biggest wind farms
located in the south of the grid and less than 50% of this power was consumed by local loads.
This resulted in power flowing through tranmssion lines to loads in the north. Despite low loading
of the transmission lines, increased losses and reactive power considerations led to a chosen
electrolyser placement in a substation very close to the southern wind farms. Subsequently,
three generation scenarios were created for the dynamic simulations, with different ratios of
wind power generation to synchronous generation. The scenarios entailed 0%, 60% and 74%
wind power, respectively. The 0% scenario represented a system with very high inertia and
abundant power reserves from synchronous generators. The 60% scenario represented the
maximum ratio possible in the system today. Lastly, the 74% scenario represented a future
scenario to potentially be enabled by electrolyser frequency response. Without the electrolyser,
dynamic simulations of each scenario were carried out, with small power disturbances during
high system load. The results demonstrated the increase in frequency deviations and therefore
decreased system robustness, in scenarios with more wind power.
Before integrating the electrolyser model into the grid model, a specific size and operation was
determined. For this, one consideration was based on the 74% scenario, which has two less
active synchronous generators compared to the 60% scenario. Thus, the combined power re­
serve of these generators was estimated, which could be used for sizing and operating the
electrolyser such to compensate for turning the two generators off.
A second consideration involved the fact that the electrolyser was desired to only operate using
wind power and thereby being able to label the hydrogen production as green. Furthermore,
an objective was to better utilise wind power and therefore minimise curtailment. In light of this,
an electrolyser consumption of 9.8 MW was found to allow for eliminating 15.7 MW of wind
curtailment in the 74% scenario.
To have room for ramping up consumption and thereby providing downward frequency re­
sponse, 12 MW was chosen as the size. Based on load range limitations of AEL (10­100%), the
electrolyser of this rating operating at 9.8 MW was thereby able to ramp up by 2.2 MW (down­
ward frequency response) and ramp down by 8.6 MW (upward frequency response). This case
also satisfied the needed power reserve that was previously estimated for the 74% scenario.
The control of the electrolyser frequency response was implemented through a so­called droop
scheme, which changes the consumption proportionally to the grid frequency. Two schemes
were chosen for the simulations. The first one being based on FCR­N and the second being
based on the scheme of Húsareyn BESS. The subsequent disturbance simulations showed
that the electrolyser response had a significant effect on limiting resulting frequency deviations.
Critical disturbances were also simulated, entailing loss of generation and loss of load, respec­
tively. The corresponding results showed that the electrolyser could compensate (in terms of
frequency nadir and steady state) for the absence of response from the aforementioned two
generators.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
59
==PAGE:69==
Since only synchronous generators can provide inertia to the system, the RoCoF remained
unchanged despite the electrolyser response. Comparing the droop control schemes, a smaller
deadband yielded a greater effect on small disturbances as well as the critical loss of load. For
a critical loss of generation, the difference in deadband did not affect the response.
A 60 second wind power profile was implemented and simulated to investigate a how the elec­
trolyser would operate during realistic and continuous frequency fluctuations during high wind
power generation. Again, the result showed a dampening effect on the deviations. A conclu­
sion was that the specific choice of deadband in the droop characteristic needs to be chosen
depending on how often or rare the response activation is desired to be. From the perspective
of power system stability, a deadband as small as possible is desired. From the perspective
of the electrolyser, a deadband as big as possible is desired for minimising degradation and
potentially accumulated power setpoint mismatches.
To increase the speed of the AEL frequency response, a hypothetical case of using a com­
plementary BESS was investigated. The sizing and operation was chosen based on reaching a
similar response speed as PEMEL, while considering battery cell degradation. Two cases of dif­
ferent energy ratings were chosen for further analysis. The first case (BESS A) involved a very
large capacity based on a worst case scenario of discharging and the second case (BESS B)
involved a much smaller capacity based on a less conservative scenario. The less conservative
scenario was established from the result of the wind power profile simulation and correspond­
ing frequency. In this case, the a full discharge activation was estimated to occur once every
2 minutes. The difference in battery sizing yielded different C­rates, which affected the lifetime
and subsequent economic analysis.
The last part of the thesis encompassed an economic analysis and feasibility comparison of
AEL and PEMEL with the 12 MW rating and 9.8 MW operation. The analysis included LCoH
and NPV across the lifetime of the installations, using a fixed market price of hydrogen and a
fixed cost of electricity. The result showed that both electrolyser technologies were infeasible
with the chosen price points. Despite the longer lifetime of PEMEL, AEL yielded a higher NPV
in this scenario. By subsequently including the BESS cases, the result showed that including
BESS A resulted in a much higher LCoH than for PEMEL. The case of BESS B showed only a
slightly higher LCoH than PEMEL.
By further considering a lower electricity price and added revenue from oxygen production, a
positive NPV could be reached. Regarding ancillary service revenue, a comparison was made
between operating at 9.8 MW and 12 MW (full power). Despite the latter being limited to upward
response, the higher operating point allows for more power capability of the response as well
as higher annual profit from hydrogen production. Thus, a calculation was made for the mini­
mum price of downward response needed for the 9.8 MW case to be economically preferred,
compared to the 12 MW case. This minimum price was found to be 62 DKK/MW more than for
upward response.
The final analysis entailed the downstream usage of the hydrogen for green fuel production.
Ammonia and methanol where discussed as the possible choices due to their properties mak­
ing them easier and therefore presumed cheaper to store. The production of methanol was
considered and a calculation was made for estimating the resulting energy content based on
the annual amount of hydrogen produced in the 9.8 MW case. The outcome was compared
to diesel fuel and different cases of consumption, in order to get a sense of the impact of the
electrolyser in the transition away from fossil fuels.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
60
==PAGE:70==
9.1
Future work
Continuing the work of this thesis, a more detailed analysis can be done regarding voltage sta­
bility and reactive power provision from the electrolyser converter. Additionally, PEMEL and the
complementary BESS can be added to the simulation scenarios for comparing the implications
of the different response characteristics.
Additionally, long term simulations using high resolution curtailment data can be performed for
investigating the required operation in terms of switching on and off the electrolyser. Further­
more, by obtaining empirical data regarding the quantification of electrolyser degradation, the
consequences of the flexible operation performed in this thesis can be determined. This may
be used for accurately deciding on a feasible droop scheme.
With the analysis of this thesis using current wind power capacity, future work can also include
potential expansions of wind power which may be relevant by the time a planned electrolyser
is installed.
The economic analysis may also be expanded such to include a potential future ancillary service
market in the Faroese power system. In this way, a realistic estimate of revenue from frequency
response can be added to the feasibility study.
Regarding the downstream usage of hydrogen, the Faroese offshore energy consumption can
be more thoroughly explored for determining the potential demand for green fuels in the future.
The same procedure may be relevant for oxygen, where the local demand can be quantified.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
61
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Samuel C. Johnson et al. “Evaluating rotational inertia as a component of grid reliabil­
ity with high penetrations of variable renewable energy”. In: Energy 180 (Aug. 2019),
pp. 258–271. ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.04.216.
[2]
Helma Maria Tróndheim. “Ensuring Supply Reliability and Grid Stability in a 100% Re­
newable Electricity Sector in the Faroe Islands”. PhD thesis. Aalborg University, 2022.
DOI: 10.54337/aau485240063. URL: https://vbn.aau.dk/en/publications/ensuring-supply-
reliability-and-grid-stability-in-a-100-renewable.
[3]
Helma Maria Tróndheim PhD (R&D at SEV). Correspondence. 2023.
[4]
Nikos Hatziargyriou et al. “Definition and Classification of Power System Stability ­ Revis­
ited & Extended”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 36.4 (July 2021), pp. 3271–
3281. ISSN: 15580679. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2020.3041774.
[5]
ENTSO­E. Potential of P2H2 technologies to provide system services. Tech. rep. 2022.
[6]
Elena C. Blanco et al. “Methanol and ammonia as emerging green fuels: Evaluation of a
new power generation paradigm”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 175
(Apr. 2023). ISSN: 18790690. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2023.113195.
[7]
IEEE Spectrum. Electric Container Ships Are Stuck on the Horizon ­ Batteries still can’t
scale up to power the world’s biggest vessels. 2019. URL: https://spectrum.ieee.org/
electric-container-ships-are-stuck-on-the-horizon.
[8]
Bæredygtighed ­ Danmarks Tekniske Universitet. Power­to­X ­ fra grøn strøm til grønne
brændstoffer. URL: https://baeredygtighed.dtu.dk/teknologi/power-to-x.
[9]
Faroese Seafood. Sustainable Aquaculture. URL: https : / / www . faroeseseafood . com /
fishery-aquaculture/sustainable-aquaculture.
[10]
Messer Group GmbH. Go Fish: Why Oxygen Needs to be Your Top Aquaculture Priority.
2017. URL: https://www.messer-us.com/blog/go-fish-why-oxygen-needs-to-be-your-
top-aquaculture-priority#:~:text=Oxygen%20levels%20typically%20are%20higher%20in%
20colder%20water,to%20support%20the%20growing%20volumes%20of%20fish%20inside..
[11]
Philipp Lettenmeier. Efficiency ­ Electrolysis. Tech. rep. 2019.
[12]
Ernesto Amores et al. “Development of an operation strategy for hydrogen production
using solar PV energy based on fluid dynamic aspects”. In: Open Engineering 7.1 (Jan.
2017), pp. 141–152. ISSN: 23915439. DOI: 10.1515/eng-2017-0020.
[13]
Øystein Ulleberg. Modeling of advanced alkaline electrolyzers: a system simulation ap­
proach. Tech. rep. 2003, pp. 21–33. URL: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhydene.
[14]
F. P. Lohmann­Richters et al. “Review—Challenges and Opportunities for Increased Cur­
rent Density in Alkaline Electrolysis by Increasing the Operating Temperature”. In: Journal
of The Electrochemical Society 168.11 (Nov. 2021), p. 114501. ISSN: 0013­4651. DOI:
10.1149/1945-7111/ac34cc.
[15]
Hirokazu Kojima et al. Influence of renewable energy power fluctuations on water elec­
trolysis for green hydrogen production. Feb. 2023. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.11.018.
[16]
Zhibo Ren et al. “Experimental studies and modeling of a 250­kW alkaline water elec­
trolyzer for hydrogen production”. In: Journal of Power Sources 544 (Oct. 2022). ISSN:
03787753. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2022.231886.
[17]
Ruomei Qi et al. “Design of the PID temperature controller for an alkaline electrolysis
system with time delays”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 48.50 (June 2023),
pp. 19008–19021. ISSN: 03603199. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.01.356.
[18]
Marcelo Carmo et al. A comprehensive review on PEM water electrolysis. Apr. 2013. DOI:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.01.151.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
62
==PAGE:72==
[19]
The International Renewable Energy Agency. Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction: Scaling
up Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5￿C Climate Goal. 2020. ISBN: 9789292602956. URL:
www.irena.org/publications.
[20]
Carlos Bernuy­Lopez. “Electrolysis technologies and LCOH: current state and prospects
for 2030”. In: Hydrogen Tech World (2023).
[21]
SEV. 2022 ­ A record year. 2023. URL: https://www.sev.fo/english/news/2022-a-record-
year.
[22]
Solargis. Global Solar Atlas. 2023. URL: https://globalsolaratlas.info/map.
[23]
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet. Global Wind Atlas. 2023. URL: https://globalwindatlas.
info/en.
[24]
Muhammad Shahzad Javed et al. Solar and wind power generation systems with pumped
hydro storage: Review and future perspectives. Apr. 2020. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.
11.157.
[25]
SEV. Projects / Pumped storage. URL: https://www.sev.fo/english/projects/pumped-
storage.
[26]
Prabha Kundur. Power System Stability and Control. 1994, pp. 128, 252, 581.
[27]
Paul M. Anderson. “Protection Against Abnormal System Frequency”. In: Power System
Protection. 1998, p. 808.
[28]
Energinet. Systemydelser til levering i Danmark ­ Udbudsbetingelser. Tech. rep. 2023.
[29]
ENTSO­E. Rate of Change of Frequency (ROCOF) withstand capability. Tech. rep. 2017.
URL: https://www.entsoe.eu/Documents/SOC%20documents/RGCE_SPD_frequency_
stability_criteria_v10.pdf.
[30]
Prabha Kundur. Power System Stability and Control. 1994, pp. 19–26.
[31]
Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Transient Stability (I/II) ­ 31750 Power System Stability and Control
­ DTU Master Level Course. 2021.
[32]
Lasantha Meegahapola, Siqi Bu, and Mingchen Gu. Power Systems Hybrid AC/DC Power
Grids: Stability and Control Aspects. Tech. rep. 2022, pp. 46–47.
[33]
SEV. Technical requirements for connection of generating units above 11 kW to the Faroese
grid. Tech. rep. 2017.
[34]
Arun Pundir and Gagan Deep Yadav. “Comparison of Different types of Compensating
Devices in Power System”. In: International Research Journal of Engineering and Tech­
nology (2016). ISSN: 2395­0072. URL: www.irjet.net.
[35]
Carl Nikolaj Lomholt and Nilas Møller Klausen. Techno­economical evaluation of the inte­
gration of electrolysers to provide dynamic frequency response in a large­scale renewable
power system. Tech. rep. 2023. URL: www.wind.dtu.dk.
[36]
Mitja Mori et al. “Integral characteristics of hydrogen production in alkaline electrolysers”.
In: Strojniski Vestnik/Journal of Mechanical Engineering 59.10 (2013), pp. 585–594. ISSN:
00392480. DOI: 10.5545/sv-jme.2012.858.
[37]
Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani. Voltage­Sourced Converters in Power Systems ­
Modeling, Control, and Applications. 2010, p. 171.
[38]
DIgSILENT. Technical Reference ­ PWM Converter. 2023.
[39]
L. Hassaine et al. Overview of power inverter topologies and control structures for grid
connected photovoltaic systems. Feb. 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2013.11.005.
[40]
Jundi Jia et al. “Study of control strategies of power electronics during faults in microgrids”.
In: Hybrid­renewable energy systems in microgrids: Integration, developments and con­
trol. Elsevier, Jan. 2018, pp. 109–146. ISBN: 9780081024942. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-
102493-5.00007-8.
[41]
L.P. Singh. “Load Flow Studies”. In: Advanced Power System Analysis and Dynamics (6th
edition). 2014, p. 163.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
63
==PAGE:73==
[42]
DIgSILENT PowerFactory. External Grid ­ Technical Reference. 2023.
[43]
Bart W. Tuinema et al. “Modelling of large­sized electrolysers for realtime simulation and
study of the possibility of frequency support by electrolysers”. In: IET Generation, Trans­
mission and Distribution 14.10 (May 2020), pp. 1985–1992. ISSN: 17518687. DOI: 10.
1049/iet-gtd.2019.1364.
[44]
Western Electricity Coordinating Council. WECC Tutorial on Speed Governors. Tech. rep.
1998.
[45]
Arman Oshnoei et al. “Data­Driven Coordinated Control of AVR and PSS in Power Sys­
tems: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Method”. In: 21st IEEE International Conference
on Environment and Electrical Engineering and 2021 5th IEEE Industrial and Commer­
cial Power System Europe, EEEIC / I and CPS Europe 2021 ­ Proceedings. Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2021. ISBN: 9781665436120. DOI: 10.1109/
EEEIC/ICPSEurope51590.2021.9584640.
[46]
Prabha Kundur. Power System Stability and Control. 1994, p. 316.
[47]
Helma Maria Trondheim and Terji Nielsen. Experiences with 100% Wind Power Genera­
tion in an Isolated Power System ­ Suðuroy, Faroe Islands. Tech. rep. 2023.
[48]
Sunpower Electronics. Derating. 2019. URL: https://www.sunpower-uk.com/glossary/
what-is-derating/.
[49]
Strømtid. Normalt elforbrug: Så meget strøm bruger en husstand i gennemsnit. 2023.
URL: https://stromtid.dk/artikler/normalt-elforbrug-saa-meget-stroem-bruger-en-husstand-
i-gennemsnit/.
[50]
Danmarks Statistik (DST). Lidt flere end to personer pr. bolig. 2020. URL: https://www.
dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=30704.
[51]
Chresten Træholt (Associate Professor at DTU Power­to­X & Storage). Correspondence.
2023.
[52]
MIT Electric Vehicle Team. A Guide to Understanding Battery Specifications. Tech. rep.
2008.
[53]
Dragonfly Energy. What Is A Battery Life Cycle? 2021. URL: https://dragonflyenergy.com/
battery-life-cycle/.
[54]
Faiza Arshad et al. Life Cycle Assessment of Lithium­ion Batteries: A Critical Review. May
2022. DOI: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2022.106164.
[55]
Corporate Finance Institute. Net Present Value (NPV). URL: https://corporatefinanceinstitute.
com/resources/valuation/net-present-value-npv/.
[56]
Investopedia. Depreciation: Definition and Types, With Calculation Examples. URL: https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/d/depreciation.asp.
[57]
Corporate Finance Institute. Discount Rate. URL: https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/
resources/valuation/discount-rate/.
[58]
Heather Cooley, Rapichan Phurisamban, and Peter Gleick. The Cost of Alternative Water
Supply and Efficiency Options in California ­ Appendix A: Levelized Cost Methodology.
Tech. rep. 2016.
[59]
The Engineering Toolbox. Fuels ­ Higher and Lower Calorific Values. URL: https://www.
engineeringtoolbox.com/fuels-higher-calorific-values-d_169.html.
[60]
Trading Economics. Danmark ­ Inflation­Rate. URL: https://da.tradingeconomics.com/
denmark/inflation-cpi.
[61]
The Hydrogen Valley. Hydrogen cost and sales prices. URL: https://h2v.eu/analysis/
statistics/financing/hydrogen-cost-and-sales-prices.
[62]
SEV. Grønir prísir. URL: https://www.sev.fo/gronar-loysnir/groenir-prisir.
[63]
Niels Hunderup (CTO of Simply Power ApS). Correspondence. 2023.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
64
==PAGE:74==
[64]
The Engineering Toolbox. Liquids and Gases ­ Boiling Points. URL: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.
com/boiling-points-fluids-gases-d_155.html.
[65]
Arif Darmawan et al. “Integrated ammonia production from the empty fruit bunch”. In:
Innovative Energy Conversion from Biomass Waste. Elsevier, Jan. 2021, pp. 149–185.
ISBN: 9780323854771. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-85477-1.00006-3.
[66]
Grazia Leonzio, Edwin Zondervan, and Pier Ugo Foscolo. “Methanol production by CO2
hydrogenation: Analysis and simulation of reactor performance”. In: International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy 44.16 (Mar. 2019), pp. 7915–7933. ISSN: 03603199. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2019.02.056.
[67]
U.S. Department of Energy. Ammonia: Bottled Sunshine. Tech. rep. URL: https://www.
energy . gov / sites / default / files / 2022 - 02 / Soloveichik % 20 - %20HFTO % 2BARPAE % 20 -
%20CSP%20for%20Ammonia%20Production.pdf#:~:text=Ammonia%20as%20energy%
20vector%20Truly%20zero-carbon%20fuel%3A%20can,kWh%2FL%2C%205.25%20kWh%
2Fkg%2017.75%25%20hydrogen%2C%20121%20kg%20H%2Fm3.
[68]
Rami Y. Dahham, Haiqiao Wei, and Jiaying Pan. Improving Thermal Efficiency of Internal
Combustion Engines: Recent Progress and Remaining Challenges. Sept. 2022. DOI: 10.
3390/en15176222.
[69]
Danmarks Statistik (DST). Diesel til vejtransport ­ Husholdninger. 2022. URL: https://
www.statistikbanken.dk/ene3h.
[70]
Haipeng Shan et al. “Investigation of self­discharge properties and a new concept of open­
circuit voltage drop rate in lithium­ion batteries”. In: Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry
26.1 (Jan. 2022), pp. 163–170. ISSN: 14330768. DOI: 10.1007/s10008-021-05049-y.
[71]
Mohammad Taghi Ameli and Ali Ameli. “Electric vehicles as means of energy storage: Par­
ticipation in ancillary services markets”. In: Energy Storage in Energy Markets: Uncertain­
ties, Modelling, Analysis and Optimization. Elsevier, Jan. 2021, p. 241. ISBN: 9780128200957.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-820095-7.00013-3.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
65
==PAGE:75==
Appendix
A
Figure A.1: DSL frame containing the electrochemical dynamics of the AEL model [35].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
66
==PAGE:76==
B
Figure B.1: DSL frame containing the frequency response control of the AEL model [35].
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
67
==PAGE:77==
C
Figure C.1: Initialised values of the internal electrical parameters of the 5 MW electrolyser, at
the 3 MW initial operating point.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
68
==PAGE:78==
D
External grid
External load
Transmission line
Figure D.1: Model of test grid used for initial simulations of the AEL model.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
69
==PAGE:79==
E
Figure E.1: Integration of the AEL into the main grid model, by connection to Skardhjalli substa­
tion which is also connecting Gellingarklettur wind farm to the grid.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
70
==PAGE:80==
F
AEL Dynamics inst
nstack
6
r1
0.0000805
r2
­0.00000025
Tstack
80
A
0.25
s
0.185
t1
­0.1002
t2
8.424
t3
247.3
ncell
9 102
Inom
4 500
Vnom
2 565
AEL f/P Characteristic inst
F_d (Droop 1 / Droop 2)
0.001 / 0.004
P_bid
0.716
F_full (Droop 1 / Droop 2)
0.009 / 0.004
Td
0
Pbid_min
­0.183
grd_down
­0.1
Pbid_max
0.716
grd_up
0.1
Table F.1: AEL parameters used for the main grid simulations and how they are inserted into
their respective ”instance” of the dynamic model in DSL.
Analysis and simulation of the integration of Power­to­X
into a future wind dominated electrical grid on the Faroe Islands
71
