==PAGE:1==
Development of an Open­Source Platform for
Compartment and Kinetic Modelling in Biore­
actors for Vaccine Production
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Development of an Open­Source Platform for Compartment and Kinetic Modelling
in Bioreactors for Vaccine Production
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Noah Bastian Christiansen
Sebastian Lund Jensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months at the Process and System En­
gineering Center, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer
Science and Engineering, M.Sc. Eng.
Sebastian Lund Jensen ­ s184209
Signature
Date
Noah Bastian Christiansen ­ s184186
Signature
Date
ii
16/01/2024
16/01/2024
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Bioprocess modelling is increasing in demand in biomanufacturing and is also considered
a crucial part in optimising future vaccine production processes. Computational fluid dy­
namics (CFD) is one of the modelling techniques that has been applied to bioreactors.
However, CFD simulations are computationally demanding and require an expert user.
To make CFD more user­friendly, compartmentalisation algorithms for bioreactors can be
used. These algorithms retain most of the detailed information on fluid flow in the bioreac­
tor present in a CFD model but yield a compartment model that is much simpler compared
to CFD and therefore faster to solve.
To keep up with the high demand for bioprocess modelling and simulation, we aim to pro­
vide an open­source platform where researchers can share their algorithms while learning
from each other. We hope that creating such a platform will open up new collaborations
and encourage discussions about different approaches to bioprocess modelling.
The platform has been developed using TypeScript with SvelteKit for the frontend, to en­
sure a typesafe and responsive design. The backend is built in Python using FastAPI as
a REST API framework. An initial compartment­based scaledown algorithm was imple­
mented in Python and published as a package on PyPI. Supabase is used as a database
and authentication provider. Furthermore, a basic postprocessing module has been de­
veloped to enable kinetic modelling of the computed compartments. Finally, integration
with CADET­Process has been established to provide a framework for kinetic modelling
of the compartmentalised bioreactor. The repositories containing the implementation can
be found in Appendix A.1.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Bioprocesmodellering er i stigende efterspørgsel inden for biofremstilling og anses også
for at være en afgørende del af optimering af fremtidige vaccineproduktionsprocesser.
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) er en af de modelleringsteknikker, der bliver anvendt
på bioreaktorer. CFD­simuleringer er dog beregningskrævende og kræver en bruger, som
er ekspert inde for området. For at gøre CFD mere brugervenligt, kan kompartmentaliser­
ingsalgoritmer til bioreaktorer bruges. Disse algoritmer bevarer de fleste af de detaljerede
oplysninger fra CFD­modellen om væskeflow i bioreaktoren, men giver en kompartment
model. Denne kompartment model er meget enklere sammenlignet med CFD­modellen
og er derfor hurtigere at opstille.
For at følge med den store efterspørgsel til bioprocesmodellering og ­simulering sigter vi
efter at levere en open­source platform, hvor forskere kan dele deres algoritmer, mens
de også lærer af hinanden. Vi håber, at udviklingen af sådan en platform vil åbne op for
nye samarbejdsmuligheder og tilskynde til diskussioner om forskellige tilgange til biopro­
cesmodellering.
Platformen er udviklet ved hjælp af TypeScript med SvelteKit til frontend for at sikre et
typesafe og responsivt design. Backenden er bygget med Python og bruger FastAPI som
REST API framework. En indledende opdelingsbaseret scaledown­algoritme er blevet
implementeret i Python og udgivet som en pakke på PyPI. Supabase bruges som en
database­ og autentificeringudbyder. Desuden er der udviklet et grundlæggende post­
processing modul for at muliggøre kinetisk modellering af de beregnede bioreaktor kom­
partmenter. Endelig er der etableret en integration med CADET­Process for at skabe
en ramme for kinetisk modellering af den kompartmentaliserede bioreaktor. Koden for
modulerne af platformen kan findes i Appendix A.1.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Krist V. Gernaey, Professor, Main supervisor
Thank you to Krist for believing in us as students and allowing two Computer Science
students to do their thesis with the Process and Systems Engineering Center. We thank
you for helping us settle into the PROSYS department and for introducing us to the world
of bioreactor modelling. We also thank you for finding the time to participate in meetings
and discussions with us despite your busy schedule.
Xiyan Li, Postdoc, Co­supervisor
We would like to thank Xiyan, for her commitment to the project and to us. You have
given a lot of your time and attention to helping us. Thank you for sharing your knowledge
and helping us to understand the domain of bioreactor modelling. It was reassuring to
know that we had you with us, coordinating meetings, and deadlines, and providing moral
support.
Elham Ramin, Researcher, Co­supervisor
A big thanks to Elham for, in collaboration with Krist, picking us up on the project. Your
knowledge and way of explaining complicated concepts in a simple manner helped us
immensely and provided us with the right tools for understanding the compartmentali­
sation model in Tannaz’s thesis. Thank you for letting us join the monthly meetings on
compartment modelling and for setting a standard for weekly meetings with us.
Johannes Schmölder, Researcher, Co­supervisor
Johannes, although you were not there from the beginning of the project, you definitely
have had a huge impact on our work. Thank you for your expertise within software en­
gineering, your knowledge about good coding practices and methodologies on a micro­
and macro­level, has been a valuable experience. Your commitment and positive attitude
towards us, the project, and the open­source community is something we highly appreci­
ate.
Johan le Nepvou de Carfort, Ph.D. student, Collaborator
Thank you Johan for allowing us to gain insight into the great work you are doing at
PROSYS. We appreciate the sessions we have had with you, in which you helped us
understand flow calculations and kinetic modelling. Your ability to convey information and
your welcoming attitude towards any questions or doubts we had is admirable. We also
want to thank you for providing us an exclusive insight into your compartmentalisation
method and the fluid simulator you coded, it helped us tremendously.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Goals
4
2.1
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Non­functional goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Non­project Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
State of the Art
5
3.1
BioSimulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
CADET­Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Background
9
4.1
Frontend frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Backend as a Service provider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
REST API Frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
Containerization and Scaling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.5
Open­source licensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.6
Bioreactor modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.7
Flows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Problem analysis
28
5.1
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2
Non­functional Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Design
41
6.1
Finding flows between compartments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Platform Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
API Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.4
System Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.5
Designing the user interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7
Implementation
57
7.1
Project structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.2
Compartment­based scaledown algorithm (CBSM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.3
Calculating flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7.4
CADET
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.5
API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
7.6
Web Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7.7
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
7.8
CI/CD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
8
Evaluation
85
8.1
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
vi
==PAGE:8==
8.2
Non­Functional Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
8.3
Non­Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
9
Conclusion
92
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Bibliography
95
A Appendix
99
A.1 Git Repositories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
A.2 Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
A.3 Framework heatmap and barchart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
A.4 Framework usage and interest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.5 Wireframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
A.6 Sidebar usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A.7 Compartmentalisation Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A.8 Domain Dictionary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The timeline for vaccine development is long at present. It requires numerous steps and
phases, which typically add up to more than a decade before a vaccine is developed.
As a result, vaccine development is often faced with significant economic costs, missed
scientific opportunities, and delayed impacts on disease containment.
Figure 1.1: The current R&D process for vaccine development [1]
Inno4Vac is an EU­funded interdisciplinary project that aims to improve the vaccine in­
dustry by speeding up vaccine research and development [1]. This is achieved using
state­of­the­art techniques and technologies in the fields of immunology, big data, artifi­
cial intelligence, 3D tissue models, bioprocess modelling, and more.
One such technique within bioprocess modelling is to analyse the bioprocesses that oc­
cur inside a bioreactor ­ an essential tool in vaccine production. This technique is often
referred to as regime analysis and involves 1) scaling down the bioreactor by splitting it
into multiple compartments, also called compartment modelling, and 2) understanding the
kinetics of the biological reactions that occur inside the bioreactor.
This project works within the Inno4Vac project frame because the overall goal of this
project is to develop an open­source platform that allows simulations of bioprocesses
inside bioreactors using compartment models and to provide a simple kinetic model to
predict the process dynamics. This initiative builds on models previously developed at
the Process and System Engineering Center (PROSYS).
One of the previous works on the topic is by Tannaz Soleiman, Ph.D., using the results of
a CFD simulation to group cells into zones/compartments based on a group of target vari­
ables[2]. However, the code for that project was originally implemented in MATLAB and
is not publicly available. Additionally, the approach relies on the use of proprietary CFD
software to find the fluid flows between compartments, further decreasing accessibility
and complicating the process.
1
==PAGE:10==
Unfortunately, only a small handful of open­source projects exist for bioprocesses mod­
elling, making it difficult for students and researchers to gain insight into the intricacies
of bioprocess engineering without access to proprietary software. BioSimulators[3] is an
example of an open­source project that attempts to provide models for bioprocesses in­
volved in a variety of systems, allowing the user to choose from a list of models to use.
However, the platform is faulty in places and does not have the ability to execute com­
partment models.
This project is primarily computer­scientific; it will focus on implementing compartment
modelling and kinetic modelling so that it can be accessed through the web. The project
will not attempt to create or modify any existing compartment or kinetic models, but will
provide an accessible platform for users to interact with, simulate, and analyse these
already established models. In essence, the focus is on developing an open­source,
flexible, and scalable architecture to create exposure for biomodeling among researchers,
students, and collaborators in the open­source community. A software domain dictionary
containing key terms used in this project can be found in Appendix A.8.
This project aims to bridge the gap between complex bioprocess modelling and a wide
audience who lack the experience to work directly with the models. In doing so, the
project aims to enable a deeper understanding and application of bioprocess models in a
research and educational context.
1.1
Thesis structure
The thesis is structured into seven chapters with sections and subsections in each chapter.
Chapter 2 states the goals of this project. This includes goals specific to the project,
non­functional goals, and non­project goals. These goals will be analysed in detail in the
Problem Analysis chapter.
Chapter 3 is called State of the Art and looks at in silico web platforms that model different
areas of bioscience and an open source modelling engine. The chapter also highlights
gaps and problems seen in these tools and uses the literature to find some good practices
that can be used for this project.
Chapter 4, background, summarises the most important technologies, techniques, and
models of today. As part of this chapter, we look at the current state of JavaScript frame­
works to gain insight into what is popular among developers. The chapter also gives an
introduction to how containers are created, managed, and scaled. Finally, to give the
reader some understanding of the field, the ideas and steps involved in the chosen com­
partmentalisation and flow model are given.
Chapter 5 is a Problem Analysis and it identifies the main problems that the project must
address to achieve the goals that have been established for the project. It does this
by decomposing the main problems into smaller sub­problems, providing an advanced
delimited scope of the project. Using the theory from the previous chapter, this chapter
proposes solutions to the identified sub­problems, which sets up the requirements for the
rest of the project.
The design chapter is Chapter 6 and explains the general software architecture of the
project. It should allow a skilled programmer to implement the design or build on the
solution. This chapter involves diagrams of the platform architecture and interfaces, as
well as a look at different interactions between system components. Unique algorithms
and data structures are also provided here to help the reader understand the finer details
of the design.
2
==PAGE:11==
The implementation chapter, denoted Chapter 7, describes the concrete components of
the system, the coding tricks used, and the deployment setup with respect to the applica­
tion and packages. Essentially, this chapter allows a skilled programmer to maintain the
software.
Chapter 8 is the evaluation chapter. Here, we document which goals have been achieved
and how those goals have been evaluated. Qualitative evaluations are provided in con­
junction with the software tests that have been performed. Provisional conclusions are
presented to give an overall summation of the results.
Chapter 9 is the final chapter. It is the conclusion; meaning that it summarises all the
results of this project. In this chapter, the goals and problems of the project are reiterated
and what has been achieved. Finally, a summary of the provisional conclusion is given,
and further conclusions are drawn from the sum of evidence. Ultimately, directions for
future work are given that identify the problems to be solved and outline the possible
evolution curve of the software.
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Goals
When developing larger software applications, many considerations must be taken into
account. The focus of this project is to unify and increase the availability of existing regime
analysis and compartmentalisation models, and our goals will reflect these success cri­
teria. Goals are divided into three categories: project goals, non­functional goals, and
non­project goals.
2.1
Project Goals
The project goals are the main goals our project should achieve.
PG­0 Implement the Compartment­Based Scaledown algorithm provided by Tannaz[2] in
Python, to make it usable as a service.
PG­1: Develop an open­source platform that makes compartment modelling accessible to
researchers and students working with regime analysis. The platform should be publicly
available to access and easily accessible.
PG­2: Provide a framework to test and compare different compartmentalisation algo­
rithms using a unified interface.
PG­3: Develop a postprocessing module that fits the defined interface of the compartmen­
talisation module. This should allow new compartmentalisation algorithms to integrate
seamlessly with the postprocessing module.
2.2
Non­functional goals
Non­functional goals are related to the usability, accessibility to performance, etc. of the
solution.
NFG­0: The project should encourage collaboration and define clear guidelines on how
to contribute to the project.
NFG­1: The platform should provide some computational capabilities to support smaller
compartmentalisation computations in the cloud.
NFG­2: Proper documentation for the API and developed packages should be written
to ensure that the parties can implement or integrate the API and packages into their
solutions.
2.3
Non­project Goals
Finally our personal goals for this project and how we can achieve new knowledge and
personal development.
NP­0: Get insight into process systems and biotechnical computing, allowing us to com­
municate better in biotechnical domains and contexts.
NP­1 Improve our skills in working with large­scale projects that rely on CI / CD and cloud
hosting for computing and deployment.
4
==PAGE:13==
3
State of the Art
In this section, we will explore current state­of­the­art open­source initiatives within the
bioscience community. As part of this project is about developing a web platform and a
modelling/simulation framework that can do compartment and kinetic modelling, we will
look at two solutions that do those things.
First, we will look at a web platform called BioSimulators which aim to make models more
accessible. Second, the focus is on a modelling framework which has simplified the pro­
cess of biomodelling for researchers, called CADET­process.
3.1
BioSimulators
There are a variety of in silico web platforms with models that could potentially accelerate
the fields of bioscience, bioengineering, and medicine. However, finding such models is
not easy, especially due to the decentralised nature of the Internet. Examples of web plat­
forms include CytoScape[4];an open­source platform that focuses on visualising complex
networks, or Aquaria[5] which provides visual summaries of protein structures. Another
similar platform would be BioModels[6], an open­source registry of more than 2500 bio­
logical models, but the models cannot be executed directly on the web, which means that
it is up to the user to install and set up the model correctly.
The general problem is that the tools do not have clear documentation and can be ob­
tained, installed, and executed in many different ways[7], further complicating the process.
Attempts have been made to simplify the process with guides such as the SBML Software
Guide[8], and container registries such as BioContainers[9]. These have addressed some
of the issues related to accessibility and usability. However, the overall problem of clear
documentation, accessibility, uniformity of installation, standardisation of user interfaces,
and seamless integration of different tools and simulations remains a major obstacle in
this field.
In the paper ”Improving collaboration by standardisation efforts in systems biology”, Dräger
and Palsson evaluated the state of protocols, mark­up languages, graphical descriptions,
and software tools in systems biology [8]. They highlight the need for standardised rep­
resentations of biological systems to better describe biological models and to facilitate
model sharing and tool interoperability. Specifically, they mention that end users should
not care about the data formats of tools and how the underlying formats should be hidden
from the user. One such way is to use the COMBINE archive format to bundle repre­
sentations and applications of the same models. In this paper, many more formats and
languages are evaluated. Moreover, they assert the importance of being able to easily re­
produce scientific findings, which can more easily be achieved by using standard formats,
accompanied by a simulation description file and a graphical representation to quickly ob­
tain an overview of a model’s structure. In doing so, researchers are easily able to run
and comprehend models, leading to higher recognition and more citations.
Building on some of the standards needs, proposed by Dräger and Palsson, Shaikh et al.
introduced BioSimulators [7] which attempts to solve these issues by providing a central
registry of simulation tools and interfaces. In its essence, BioSimulators is a collection of
tools that simulate different biomodels. The project and its tools are open source and in­
clude tools for a variety of frameworks, such as logical and kinetic frameworks, simulation
algorithms, model formats, and more[10].
5
==PAGE:14==
BioSimulators offer consistency by having set formats, ontologies, and quality controls.
More concretely, the input for all tools is a COMBINE archive which contains SED­ML
files that encode simulation setups, making it easy to reproduce and exchange simula­
tions. The SED­ML files describe the models using formats such as SBML or CellML and
algorithms are described using KiSAO. Likewise, the output is also standardised to be
HDF5 and PDF files which capture data sets and visualisations, respectively.
Figure 3.1: The workflow and components of BioSimulators[7]. The input includes many
different simulations, formats, and tables, while the output consists of a report of the re­
sults and some visualizations.
The tools on BioSimulators are provided as Docker images. As we will discuss in Section
4.4.1, Docker makes it easy to run container applications with minimal setup. All of the
images have the same command­line interface, which captures the project to run and
where its outputs are stored. This enhances the use of multiple simulators since one just
needs to change the image ids to change the simulation. Most of the containers also
contain Python APIs to provide more low­level capabilities. Because some tools require
a lot of computational resources, BioSimulators tests that all images are compatible with
a Singularity Image (SIF), allowing it to run on HPC clusters without root access. It is
also possible to install the tools’ Python APIs and command­line programs using PyPI,
Python’s official third­party software repository. Testing and validation are also a big part
of submitting a tool to BioSimulators. A test suite is set up to automatically test each
version of a tool submitted to BioSimulators, and the first version of a tool is manually
reviewed by the BioSimulators team.
The website for the project is BioSimulators.org and is made using Typescript and Angular
(see Section 4.1.2). The web application has two main functionalities. Firstly, it provides
scientists and researchers with a central catalogue of models to choose from, allowing
them to filter on the basis of many parameters. Researchers and scientists can also
upload their own models, enabling open collaboration. Second, it allows users to run
6
==PAGE:15==
some simulations on platforms runBioSimulations and BioSimulations, allowing up to 24
CPU cores and 192 GB of RAM for 20 days at a time. Simulations and visualisations of
results can be shared using these platforms, see figure 3.2 below.
Figure 3.2: A snapshot of a simulation run. Running example simulations provided on the
website results in errors when trying to generate charts. However, it is still possible to see
that there are tabs dedicated to the input, output, and visualizations.
In summary, it is important to provide a standardised way of working with tools. Further­
more, they underline that good guides are crucial, to allow the users to navigate tools and
to allow developers to know how to contribute. In other words: It should be easy for any
researcher or interested party to run simulations and replicate the results of each other.
One way to achieve this is by providing containers for tools, similar to the approaches of
BioContainers and BioSimulators. In combination, web applications such as runBioSim­
ulations and BioSimulations, are allowing users to run simulations from their websites,
allowing easy and quick ways to play around with different models, but also allowing for
visualisations and easy sharing. Web apps also make it easier to hide the data formats
from the end user, which is what Dräger and Palsson recommend to avoid confusion. De­
pending on the resource demands of the tools, it might also be necessary to use a data
format such as SIF to ensure compatibility with HPC clusters. Furthermore, to give more
low­level control to users, it seems to be advantageous to set up APIs that can commu­
nicate with the underlying models and algorithms. To ensure that the tools are properly
configured and implemented, setting up a test suite seems to be a natural step.
3.2
CADET­Process
CADET­Process[11] is an open­source framework primarily used for chromatographic pro­
cesses, but also has capabilities within compartmentalisation and kinetic modelling of
systems[12]. CADET­Process is built as a wrapper for CADET, which abstracts many of
the more complex usages for CADET. CADET­Process provides an easy­to­use object­
oriented approach to model building, resulting in easier use, as well as built­in valida­
tion of parameter values for exposed functions[12]. CADET­Process comes as a Python
package available through pip, but also relies on an instance of CADET running on the
environment.
In the context of compartment modelling, CADET­Process provides a tool for modelling
compartment­based flow systems[13]. It currently does not provide tools to build com­
partments from reactor flow data, but it does allow you to model known compartments by
volume and flow rates between connected compartments. Using the compartment flow
model, CADET­Process can then be used to simulate the kinetics of the compartment­
based system, allowing you to simulate concentration over time for each individual com­
partment, given that the user has provided a kinetic reaction model for the system.
Using the tools from CADET­Process, both simple and more complex systems can be
modelled, such as the ones shown in figure 3.3.
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.3: Complex compartment systems with both inlet and outlet flows[14].
In summary, CADET­Process provides a programmatic interface for Python to allow mod­
elling and simulation of compartment­based bioreactor systems.
8
==PAGE:17==
4
Background
This chapter introduces preliminary material that is important for understanding the tech­
nologies, methodologies, and theories used in this project. This material provides the
building blocks for creating solutions to the problems and sub­problems introduced in
Chapter (5). This chapter does not provide an in­depth or detailed analysis of the topics,
but is meant as a general overview for the reader.
This chapter will present relevant tools, frameworks and practices, such as frontend and
backend frameworks mentioned in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. We will also introduce various
REST API frameworks that could be used for the backend implementation in Section 4.3.
Three different software licenses are also examined in Section 4.5 in order to provide
the reader with a legal understanding of software development. Lastly, the chapter will
introduce the given compartmentalisation algorithm and the flow model’s workings.
4.1
Frontend frameworks
Frontend frameworks are used to build web applications. They help the developer in de­
signing the user interface and user experience of the application. They do this in multiple
ways, including offering pre­designed components, responsive design, and accessibility
features for people with disabilities. In the following, we will use the term frontend frame­
work in a broad sense, referring to what many consider frontend libraries (such as React)
as frontend frameworks as well. This is done because of convenience and because a lot
of frontend libraries have such a robust ecosystem and extensibility that the two terms
become intertwined.
This section explores the four most popular frameworks. React, Angular, Vue, and Svelte.
First, we look at how many users there are, how interested users are in learning the
framework, and how happy the user base is with the framework. Then, the features and
characteristics of the frameworks are compared to give the reader an idea of how the
frameworks align with the project goals.
4.1.1
The state of frontend frameworks
The number of frontend frameworks is increasing, making it harder to choose and com­
pare them when starting a new project. However, here are a couple of frontend frame­
works that have gained more popularity than others. Every year since 2019, a survey
has been conducted on the JavaScript ecosystem to find the status quo of frontend en­
gineering. The survey is called ”The State of JavaScript”, and it is the largest survey
that explores the latest trends in frontend engineering. The last survey was conducted
in 2022 and had 39472 respondents[15]. This subsection looks at some of the results of
that survey.
Two key factors for choosing a frontend framework for an open­source project are us­
age/popularity and interest or longevity. To get as many people on board, the chosen
framework must not be outdated or become outdated in the foreseeable future. Other­
wise, it will be hard to attract and maintain contributors. Furthermore, the number of peo­
ple who use the framework is also important because it makes it easier for developers to
find documentation and get technical support.
In figure 4.1 below, the frameworks with the highest usage percentage can be seen from
the State of JavaScript in 2022.
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 4.1: The figure shows the usage among the respondents as a percentage. Code
and data are found in Appendix A.4
From the figure, we can tell that React has consistently remained the most popular frame­
work, with Angular and Vue coming in second and third over the years. Svelte, a newer
framework from 2019, has nearly tripled its usage according to this survey and is the fourth
most popular framework.
Looking at the frameworks that the respondents want to learn paints an interesting picture
of where the future of frontend frameworks is going.
10
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4.2: The figure shows how many of the respondents want to learn a certain frame­
work percentage­wise. Svelte has, since its release, been the most sought­after learning
opportunity. Code and data are found in Appendix A.4
From the figure 4.2, it seems that Svelte is the future of frontend frameworks; it is here the
interest is highest. Naturally, the answer is affected by the frameworks the respondents
have already learnt. However, this does not change the fact that Svelte is what most of
the users want to learn. Weighing the two measured metrics in the two graphs equally,
we see that Svelte has the lowest value and thus the highest rating.
The survey also measures other metrics such as awareness and retention, awareness
being how many of the respondents have heard about the frameworks, and retention is
how many of the respondents would use the framework again. Again, Svelte scores high
in both.
4.1.2
Comparing the frameworks
So far, the differences between frameworks have not been addressed. In the following,
we will discuss these differences and how significant the differences are. We will look at
the features and performance of the frameworks.
React
React is, like all the other frameworks mentioned, an open­source library. React can be
used to develop native and web applications. It was made by Facebook (now known
as Meta) and was released in 2013. Today, it is the most popular framework and has
received contributions from about 1600 users [16]. It relies on a runtime to manage the
virtual DOM, which can be beneficial in some cases, but can also lead to inefficiencies in
others, especially if not managed properly during scaling [17].
One major key feature of React is its dependency on JSX, which is an extension for
JavaScript that can also be used to write code that resembles HTML. It is a way of com­
bining markup with logic in one file. It has its own syntax rules and behaviours that require
11
==PAGE:20==
some learning. Its readability and expressiveness are powerful tools if mastered, but be­
ginners might find the blend of markup within JavaScript confusing. Because JSX is not
Javascript or HTML, it requires transpiling to those two languages. This is typically done
using a tool like Babel, which adds an extra step for developers.
However, React remains a successful framework, and its large­scale adoptions by compa­
nies such as Facebook, Instagram, Airbnb, and Netflix have made it very popular among
developers [18]. These companies serve as a testament to the framework’s scalability
and performance. Its popularity also means a huge amount of documentation, tutorials,
written guides, and third­party tools, possibly making it easier to troubleshoot and learn.
However, the huge ecosystem might be overwhelming to newcomers because of the large
number of tools and libraries.
Angular
Angular, originally known as AngularJS, was released in 2010 by Google engineers Misko
Hevery and Adam Abrons [19]. Angular is known to have a steep learning curve. This is
because Angular enforces MVC patterns, uses RxJs, and requires the user to understand
pipelines and dependency injection [20]. Furthermore, Angular is built with Typescript,
and most of Angular’s documentation is written in TypeScript, which is why Typescript is
generally recommended for use with Angular.
Vue and React are known to have smoother learning curves because they use JSX and
pure JavaScript, respectively [17]. However, Angular is a complete framework, which
means that it provides solutions for testing, server communication, and routing, something
that React and Vue do not do without the use of third­party packages. This also means that
Angular takes up more disk space, but the space usage is negligible since applications
developed in the framework typically take up less than a megabyte.
Angular does not use virtual DOMs for DOM manipulation but directly manipulates the
DOM. However, because it is a complete framework, it needs a run­time.
To no surprise, Angular often lends itself to more complex applications due to its enforce­
ment of application structure [17]. This offers good consistency across codebases at the
expense of a steeper learning curve and less freedom. This robustness and scalability is
needed for enterprise applications, making it very popular among enterprises.
Vue
Vue was made in 2013, by Evan You, who was a Google employee [21]. Evan You made
Vue after having used Angular because he felt that Angular brought in too many extra
concepts that forced the developer to write code in a certain way. For that reason, Vue
is often considered a lightweight version of Angular, where the focus is on the view layer
(UI).
In addition to its connection to Angular, Vue was made at a time when React dominated
the frontend framework landscape and thus shares similarities with that framework, such
as the utilisation of a virtual DOM, reactive and reusable components, and a focus on
a smaller scope, letting companion libraries handle routing and state management [17].
Unlike React, Vue does not require learning JSX or ES6, which is what many React ex­
amples use. Furthermore, to get started with React, knowledge about Build Systems is
required to transpile the react code from JSX and ES6 into ES5, whereas a single script
tag is all you need to get started with Vue. For that reason, React is often said to have a
steeper learning curve than Vue.
Angular and React developers might find Vue’s smaller community and ecosystem limit­
12
==PAGE:21==
ing compared to what they are used to. For that reason, it may not provide satisfactory
flexibility and comprehensibility to those developers.
Svelte
Svelte was created by Rich Harris in 2016, making it the newest of the frameworks in­
troduced so far [22]. Whereas React and Vue use virtual DOMs, Svelte takes a different
approach. Svelte is highly efficient due to the way it avoids the use of a virtual DOM (such
as React and Vue). As Svelte is both a language and a compiler, it compiles the Svelte
files into JavaScript, HTML, and CSS. This process is key to efficiency: it creates code
that can directly manipulate the DOM, eliminating the need for a virtual DOM. In other
words, Svelte statically compiles away the framework at build time, leading to efficient
and faster applications, especially those with frequent UI changes. Therefore, applica­
tions written with Svelte have no additional overhead. When declaring state variables in
Svelte, the compiled code will automatically handle the tasks of ensuring that the user
interface is up to date. This minimises errors and simplifies the work of developers.
1
<script>
2
let a = 0, b = 0;
3
</script>
4
5
<input type="number" bind:value={a
} />
6
<input type="number" bind:value={b
} />
7
<p>{a + b}</p>
Listing 4.1: Svelte code of a component
that adds two numbers together
1
import { useState } from 'react ';
2
3
export default () => {
4
const [a, setA] = useState(0);
5
const [b, setB] = useState(0);
6
7
return (
8
<input type="number" value={a}
onChange={(e) => setA(e.
target.value)} />
9
<input type="number" value={a}
onChange={(e) => setB(e.
target.value)} />
10
<p>{parseInt(a) + parseInt(b)
}</p>
11
)
12
}
Listing 4.2: React code of a component
that adds two numbers together
Svelte’s core philosophy is to write less code [23]. This is because writing more code takes
more time, leaving less time for other tasks such as optimisations and the implementation
of new features. The philosophy is noticeable; Svelte has less boilerplate. Svelte is
known to be simple and easy to learn, and its syntax is very similar to that of HTML
and JavaScript, leaving web developers with one language less to learn. The philosophy
is visible in Svelte’s small bundle size, which in turn translates to faster loading times
because the browser has fewer things to process. This can have a significant effect on
users on mobile devices or with slower network connections.
4.2
Backend as a Service provider
Backend as a service, or BaaS, is outsourcing the backend for an application to some
cloud service [24]. Essentially, the service takes care of things such as push notifications,
database management, storage, user authentication, and even hosting. BaaS minimises
the workload of the developer, enabling them to focus on developing the frontend, while
the backend is configurable, usually from a web application. For most use cases, it makes
sense to utilise such a service to increase efficiency except for highly niche applications
where total control is needed or it is disallowed.
13
==PAGE:22==
4.2.1
AWS Amplify
AWS Amplify is an Amazon BaaS platform [25]. It is a service within Amazon Web Ser­
vices (AWS), which means that it easily integrates with Amazon’s other cloud services.
The platform supports both the GraphQL and Rest APIs for data handling. In particular,
GraphQL is used as part of its DataStore feature, which allows efficient and flexible data
management of shared and distributed data resources. It is a powerful tool for synchro­
nising data between local and cloud storage.
Like most BaaS solutions, AWS provides an authentication service with highly customis­
able UI components, making a secure and user­friendly solution easy to obtain. Amplify
also offers analytics and storage tracking user sessions, user engagement, app perfor­
mance, and more. Developers can use these insights to better steer the development of
their products.
Amplify is popular among larger enterprises that already use some of Amazon’s other
services in their tech stack. It is probably because the power of Amplify can be better
utilised by combining it with some of those other services.
Its pricing is free for the first 12 months with some limitations regarding storage, requests,
and deployment [26]. After, Amazon uses a pay­as­you­go scheme with different rates
for building and deploying, storage, etc.
4.2.2
Firebase
Firebase, originally developed by Google, is another proprietary solution [27]. The main
functionalities of which include its real­time database and Firestore.
Its Realtime database can synchronise data in real­time across all clients. This is ideal
for use cases where instant and regular data updates are needed, such as applications
where users can collaborate and communicate. Firestore is a NoSQL cloud database that
supports more advanced queries than the Realtime database, and it is also considered
more scalable due to its document collection data model.
Firebase also has an authentication system in place with a variety of sign­in options for
social media websites, giving developers a lot of options for user identity management.
Similarly to Amplify, Firebase is integrated with Google Analytics and can provide detailed
user insights to improve user experience.
Firebase use case is more focused on prototyping than AWS, due to its lack of integrations
with other web services. Furthermore, Firebase offers a lot of native features to mobile
app development, such as push notifications, which are crucial to engage with app users.
Firebase also uses a pay­as­you­go scheme with different rates for its features [28]. How­
ever, its free plan is very similar to that of Amplify, catering to low­traffic solutions.
4.2.3
Supabase
Supabase calls itself an open­source alternative to Firebase [29]. Whereas Firebase re­
lies on NoSQL, Supabase uses PostgreSQL, an open­source relational database system
for SQL, making it an optimal choice for developers who have experience with SQL.
As a competitor to Firebase, Supabase also provides real­time servers for apps that re­
quire live updates. Supabase also provides a solid authentication system that supports
magic links and OAuth.
Supabase offers a unique feature that automatically generates an API from the database
schema so that it can be accessed in the browser or as part of an API server [30]. The
14
==PAGE:23==
documentation for that API can also be automatically generated [31].
What distinguishes Supabase is its traction with the open­source community, with more
than 1000 contributors [32]. Features, fixes, and upgrades are driven by user needs and
their contributions. This in itself provides flexibility, because Supabase can be changed
to fit the needs of the users. Furthermore, it allows users to fully trust how their data is
handled because the code will be scrutinised and reviewed by a community of contributors
and followers.
Lastly, Supabase offers a pay­as­you­go service, including a flat rate [33]. A generous
free plan is also included for low­traffic solutions as with the previous services.
4.3
REST API Frameworks
An Application Programming Interface (API), is used to define how applications can inter­
act and communicate with each other. The API will typically specify what other applica­
tions can ask another application about and what data types they can use as parameters
for the requests, as well as what data types they can expect to get in return from the ap­
plications they are querying. REST APIs are a subcategory of API that conforms with the
RESTful principles.
To expose functionality as a microservice, we need to implement a REST API for our
solution. Using a microservice architecture allows us to modularize and later containerise
different parts of the solution, improving maintainability and developer experience. Given
the context of science­based computing, we will primarily look at API frameworks that
are compatible with scientific programming languages for Python. In this section, we will
compare the benefits of different API frameworks within our domain.
Django REST
Django provides a large toolkit and supports integrations with most data sources, OAuth1
and OAuth2 are also directly integrated in Django REST, which can be useful if you want
to implement your own authentication system[34]. Another benefit of Django is that it has
been around for a while, so much documentation exists and is readily available if needed.
But Django is also one of the most popular Python API frameworks and is more difficult
to start with, so if the use case is a smaller app, then this may not be the best choice[35].
Flask
The Flask is a micro­framework and much smaller than Django REST. Flask has stripped
away many of the tools that Django REST comes with out of the box, to make the frame­
work more simple and flexible. The use case for Flask is very simple applications that do
not need a database system or user connection and authentication.
FAST API
The FAST API framework is one of the most recently released API frameworks for Python
and also one of the lightweight frameworks[36]. They aimed to be lightweight like FLASK
but also to include some of the tools from Django that allow the framework to scale well
with larger applications. FAST API is built on the asynchronous functionalities of Python,
which offers high performance without much initial manual work. Since it is a new frame­
work, the community around it is significantly smaller than those of Django or Flask. Fast
API also allows one to check the type of request parameters[37].
4.4
Containerization and Scaling
Docker has made the containerisation of applications simple and allows the developer to
write application infrastructure as code. This has greatly improved the process of deploy­
15
==PAGE:24==
ing and setting up CI/CD pipelines for your application [38].
4.4.1
Docker Containers
When developing applications, you will often end up having multiple dependencies that
all set requirements for the environment in which the application is running. This means
that running applications on different computer systems can sometimes be difficult. With
Docker, we can encapsulate our applications in a container, which is an enclosed envi­
ronment that will behave the same in all environments. This makes it easier to scale up
and deploy applications. From a docker container, you can then build a docker image,
which is an executable package that contains all the applications you need to run [39].
4.4.2
Container Cluster Management
When providing services such as API, you need to be able to handle large amounts
of traffic to avoid slow response times from the API to clients. Handling API requests
asynchronously would significantly improve performance. However, managing multiple
threads can often be problematic as well as a guarantee of enough memory for each
thread. However, this can be made easier with container cluster management tools, such
as Kubernetes [40] or NGINX [41], which can act as a load balancer that distributes re­
quests to different instances of the same container. An example of such a setup could be
a single thread API deployed in multiple containers and a load balancer container receiv­
ing requests on the port where the API normally would be listening, the load balancer will
then distribute the requests to available containers. In another case where the number of
requests can vary a lot throughout the day, then you may want to have a dynamic amount
of containers running to save costs when the load is low, here Kubernetes can help with
starting and stopping containers to match the current load.
4.5
Open­source licensing
Choosing an open­source license is an important task to complete, as one of the first
things in a project’s timeline, since it sets up a clear legal framework for contributions,
usage, and distribution of the software. Doing this at the beginning of the project time­
line is ideal because it ensures that all contributors understand their rights. Additionally,
the license model itself can help attract and deter the right and wrong types of users for
the project. In some ways choosing the license model is about choosing the identity of
the project being developed, it is not merely a legal formality, it is the foundation of the
ecosystem for the project.
Although it is possible to change the licensing model, it might not be easy due to the legal
implications and the community backlash.
An example of this was in 2015 [42], when React users, a frontend library, petitioned Face­
book to relicense React after Facebook introduced a patent grant which could revoke the
licenses of users if they sued Facebook or its affiliates for patent infringement, including
if the lawsuit was about issues unrelated to React. As a result of the pressure from users
and the Apache Software Foundation, Facebook relicensed React to be licensed under
the MIT license.
For that reason, this section will provide an introduction to the most popular and relevant
licenses in the open­source space. This section will serve as a guide to choosing the
open­source model later on.
4.5.1
MIT License
The MIT license originated at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology during the late
1980s. It is a permissive license, which means that users are allowed to use, copy, modify,
16
==PAGE:25==
publish, distribute, sublicense, and sell copies of the software. This makes it easy to use
software with an MIT license in proprietary software and to combine the license with other
licenses. It is currently the most popular license model [43], and is used in many popular
open­source software projects such as Babel [44], .NET [45], and Rails [44].
The license itself is short and easy to understand. Like the other licenses we present, it
is usually included in a LICENSE.txt file. The license in full can be seen below [46]:
MIT License
Copyright (c) [year] [fullname]
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the ”Software”), to deal in
the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the
Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ”AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PUR­
POSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS
OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR
OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
The license’s only condition is that a copy of the license must be included in every copy
of substantial portions of the software. In terms of limitations, there are two that regard
liability and warranty. That is, copyright holders and authors are not liable for any claims,
damages, or liability. Disclaiming warranties and liabilities, or providing software ”as is”,
is a common practice in the majority licenses, as we shall see. These restrictions are put
in place to protect developers and contributors from legal actions, making the software
project more welcoming to contributions. Overall, this license’s permissive nature and
simplicity make it a good contender for most software projects.
4.5.2
Apache
The Apache License was originally published in 1995 [47]. Today, a newer version, called
Apache License 2.0, is what most people refer to when they refer to the Apache License. It
is currently the second most popular license [43], and is used in popular software projects
such as TensorFlow [48], Kubernetes [49] and Spring Boot [50]. Like the MIT license,
Apache is a permissive license that allows for proprietization. The most significant differ­
ence with the Apache license compared to the ones we have discussed so far is that it
explicitly grants patent rights. Namely, if a contributor owns a patent that is part of the
software, that person grants every other contributor a patent license to their work. If a
contributor sues someone, all patent licenses for that user are revoked, meaning that the
contributor who sued can no longer reproduce, prepare derivative works, publicly display,
public perform, sublicense, or distribute the work or derivative works. This condition is
added to discourage patent litigation and promote patent peace. The license, in full, is
available on Apache’s own website.
17
==PAGE:26==
The Apache License also includes something similar to a non­endorsement clause called
a trademark clause. The clause states the following [51]:
This License does not grant permission to use the trade names, trademarks,
service marks, or product names of the Licensor, except as required for rea­
sonable and customary use in describing the origin of the Work and reproduc­
ing the content of the NOTICE file.
This means that if a work includes some software with an Apache License, the authors
of that work cannot imply that their software is endorsed by the authors of the software,
whether that be trademarks or product names. The clause also mentions a NOTICE file.
The NOTICE.txt file contains copyright and license information and attribution notices. If a
NOTICE file is included as part of the distribution, then derivative works must also include
a readable copy of the notices within the file.
The license also includes an interesting clause on documenting changes. That is, if you
modify software that uses the license, you must state your modifications. This could be
done by providing clear commit messages when using GitLab or GitHub, by annotating
the code or by including a CHANGELOG or HISTORY file with the modifications.
Overall, this license is a solid license for open­source projects, especially those that wish
to protect its users from patent cases. However, the full license is lengthy and introduces
new terms, making it more complicated to read compared to the MIT license, which may
deter users.
4.5.3
GPL
GPL is a family of licenses [52]. The GNU General Public License, or GPL for short, was
released in 1989 for use in the GNU project and was developed by the Free Software
Foundation (FSF). There are multiple versions of GPL, the most recent being GPLv3.
GPLs significantly differ from all of the previously mentioned licenses because they are
copyleft licenses. A copyleft license requires that the terms of any derivative work match
the terms of the original work. This also means that GPLs are the only licenses covered
so far that prohibit proprietarization. In essence, any derivative work of GPL­licensed
software must be open and available for everyone to see, modify, or share.
Both versions v2 and v3 of the GPL are popular, and v3 addresses the legal and technical
issues that emerged since the release of v2 in 1991. Among the popular software projects
that use these licenses are Bash [53], uBlock [54] and Open Broadcaster Software (OBS)
[55].
The license itself is the longest of the licenses so far and contains a preamble, terms and
conditions, and instructions on how to apply the terms and conditions to a program [56].
However, the added text helps provide more clarity by addressing a multitude of topics
such as patents, tivoization, internationalisation, and digital rights management.
Overall, the GPLs clearly capture the spirit of open source by disallowing proprietarization
and enforcing copyleft. In many ways, this is great because it promotes an ecosystem
where sharing code is the essence and clear boundaries and limitations are set in place.
On the other hand, working with a GPL could create challenges when needing to integrate
with different, less restrictive, licenses.
4.6
Bioreactor modelling
Inside a bioreactor, cells experience different local environments as a consequence of the
chosen mixing strategy. These environments have different physical and chemical prop­
18
==PAGE:27==
erties, and these differences are especially significant in larger industrial­scale reactors
used for vaccine production. For practical reasons, it is not feasible to utilise such reac­
tors when developing a vaccine. Instead, one could create a scale­down model of the
industrial reactors by utilising the existence of different environments (also called com­
partments or zones). One such type of model is called compartment­based scale­down
design, where a smaller lab reactor for each compartment is used.
To identify and characterise each compartment in a reactor, one could use the knowledge
about the operating conditions, which includes volumes, fluid exchange/flow, tempera­
ture, oxygen concentration, etc. It is possible to obtain such information by using com­
putational fluid dynamics (CFD) to make predictions on the fluids. However, CFD can
be quite computationally expensive and slow. Instead, one could use compartment mod­
elling (CM) to reduce the cost, although this does come at the expense of lower accuracy.
This happens because a compartment model is done manually and represents the fluids
inside each compartment as homogeneous. Furthermore, accuracy is highly dependent
on the number of compartments, volume, and flow between compartments. There is a
sort of golden middle way that uses both approaches (CFD/CM). Here, the compartments
are identified using flow information from a CFD computation, providing an accurate but
simple model of a bioreactor.
In the following, we will present a brief overview of the compartmentalisation model that
will be implemented in our system. The specific implementation will be available on the
repository found in Appendix A.1
4.6.1
Using target variables
This approach was originally developed by Tannaz Tajsoleiman, a Ph.D. graduate of the
Process and Systems Engineering Centre (PROSYS) and presented in her thesis “Au­
tomating experimentation in Miniaturized Reactors” [2]. Her approach focuses on finding
three things:
1. Compartment map: Stores the locations, volumes, and average value of a target
variable p for each compartment.
2. Interface map: Stores interface information, i.e., which compartments are connected
3. Flow map: Stores the exchange flows between compartments.
In the following, a summary of her approach to generating the compartment map is given.
This is done to better understand the domain in which this project is located. Tannaz’
approach of finding interface maps and flow maps is skipped over due to the use of ANSYS
CFD Post, a proprietary third­party software which does not align with the open­source
visions of this project. Instead, an approach inspired by the work of Ph.D. student Johan
le Nepvou de Carfort is used.
Initialisation
The first step is what Tannaz calls Initialisation. Initially, one or more target variables and
their tolerances are chosen. A variable is a target variable if it has a significant influence
on the mixing process. Examples of target variables include: velocity, dissolved oxygen
concentration, or pressure.
An initial CFD simulation will provide predictions of these variables in a reference plane
that serves as a baseline. This could be done using some CFD software like ANSYS
CFX. Then the position of each CFD element and the values of the target variables at
those positions will be extracted from the result and exported to a CSV or excel file. The
19
==PAGE:28==
CFD elements also tell us something about the geometrical structure of the reactor which
could be used to optimise bioreactor design; however, this is not in the scope of this
project.
Zoning
The next step is zoning. This means that the CFD elements will be distributed into zones
depending on the values of the target variables. To do so, the CFD elements first have
to be sorted with respect to each target variable, n target variables will give us n sorted
sets. For each of these sets, zones will be created. A zone can be created if the differ­
ence between the maximum value and the minimum value of the zone’s target values is
less than some specified tolerance for the target variable. Since the position of the CFD
elements is not taken into account when creating the zones, it is possible to end up with
scattered zones, see Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: An example of how zones may be scattered across a reference plane [2]
The reference plane is split into rectangular units of size ∆X×∆Y , and the zones are fitted
accordingly so that they fully fill the units. Furthermore, to eliminate scattered zones, new
individual zones are created instead of multiregional zones (see below). Lastly, small
zones are merged with neighbouring zones because they increase computational de­
mands without having a substantial impact on the end result.
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.4: The end result after merging and elimination of zones [2]
Compartmentalisation
The next step is compartmentalisation, where the planes, aka. zone maps, for each target
variable are merged to get a 2D compartment map. New zones are created for each
rectangular unit. So far we have only considered the reference plane for each of the
target variables. The geometrical structure of the bioreactor is 3­dimensional. To return
to 3D, each zone is rotated 360◦about the central line of the bioreactor. Due to the different
geometries of the zones, the result will be stacked 3D rings for each zone.
Figure 4.5: The transition from a 2D zone to a 3D compartment. [2]
The sum of these 3D rings makes up the total 3D volume. However, bioreactors are usu­
ally not completely cylindrical and often include baffles that would affect the geometrical
structure of the compartments. To account for the baffles, Tannaz uses multiple reference
planes are used to model the bioreactor. The figure below shows how multiple planes can
be used to model the reactor.
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Shows the usage of using multiple reference planes to model the bioreactor.
[2]
When multiple reference planes are used, the fine­grained details of the bioreactor geom­
etry can be captured. At the same time, precision increases because more parts of the
bioreactor are modelled. Since there are multiple reference planes, each reference plane
is only partially rotated (and not rotated 360 degrees). The result can be seen in Figure
4.7.
Figure 4.7: A compartment made from one reference plane before accounting for the
baffle on the left and after adding multiple reference planes and accounting for the baffle
on the right [2]
A more precise compartment map has now been found, and the flows between these can
now be calculated.
4.7
Flows
This section is heavily inspired by the Eulerian flow simulator developed and provided in
Python by Johan le Nepvou de Carfort, a Ph.D. student at PROSYS. It was developed as
part of his work on real­time simulations of bioreactors.
In the context of bioreactors, the velocities and other properties of fluid elements are of­
ten known after a computational fluid (CFD) simulation. This simulation often solves the
continuity and momentum equations from Navier­Stokes [57], which describe the motion
of the fluid. However, when interpolating the CFD elements, which the previously men­
tioned compartmentalisation method does by ignoring the third dimension and looking at
a reference plane, these equations no longer hold. To satisfy the continuity equation, the
22
==PAGE:31==
velocities of the elements must be corrected so that the divergence once again becomes
zero. The continuity equation is valued as more important here because of how much
mass conservation specifically affects predicted concentrations and species transport.
The momentum equation is also more challenging to compute due to its inherent non­
linearity and the need for detailed computations of various forces that act on the fluid.
Furthermore, the flow field error is less critical due to relatively low­speed or low­turbulent
flows inside a bioreactor. For these reasons, this velocity correction is included in the
following approach for calculating flows.
In the following, we will go through calculating the flows in two­dimensional space, how­
ever, the same approach applies to three­dimensional space. In the Design chapter Sec­
tion 6.1.1 the approach will be extended to calculate flows between compartments.
Correcting the velocities and calculating flows
In fluid dynamics, a fluid motion is often described as a velocity field on a grid. The
approach of using a grid to represent the fluid is called Eulerian. Thus, the flows that we
obtain from this approach are called Eulerian flows.
In 2D, velocity is a vector ⃗v =
!u
v
"
. In 3D a third component w is often added to represent
the velocity in the third dimension. The velocities of the fluid elements inside a region of
space, such as a bioreactor, is called a velocity field and is often denoted as u which is a
function of position x and time t.
Figure 4.8: The data Tannaz after running the initial CFD simulation in the initialise step
described in section 4.6.1. Notice the velocity data, marked in bold, is part of the output
from the simulation
As part of the approach to compartmentalisation, these fluid elements are interpolated
into cells on a grid. The center of each cell then contains some information about the
fluid elements inside the cell, such as velocity, pressure, density, enthalpy, etc. Storing
these parameters inside the cell center is what is called a collocated grid [58]. Another
approach exists where one moves the velocities out on the cell faces/edges instead. This
approach is called a staggered grid [58] and is preferred for calculating flows because it
decouples pressure and velocity, which is useful for solving the Navier­Stokes equations.
It also makes it easier to carry out mass conservation implementation­wise, because the
fluxes can be directly calculated.
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.9: Visualization of how velocities are positioned in a collocated grid and stag­
gered grid [59]
The first step is then to move from a collocated grid to a staggered grid. This is a fairly
simple task, which consists of creating a new grid where each cell in the staggered grid
is centered on the collocated grid’s edge faces. The velocity at the cell face is given as
the average of the bordering cell velocities. This also means that the first and last rows
and columns will have the null vector as velocities since there are no neighbouring cells
at these positions after the collocated grid is moved.
The next step is to force incompressibility[60]. This assumption was made to simplify the
Navier­Stokes equation. On a side note, for water at 30◦C, a pressure of 10000 kg
cm2 or
about 1000 atm leads to a compression of only 4.5%[61]. Although the compressibility
of liquids commonly used in bioreactor processes varies, it is not enough to cause a
significant volume change. For that reason, it is justified to make the assumption and
simplify using incompressibility.
In fluid dynamics, the continuity equation states that the rate of mass entering a given
volume (mass flux) of a fluid is equal to the amount of mass that accumulates in the
volume plus the rate of mass exiting the volume. This can be stated as follows.
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρu) = 0
(4.1)
However, assuming an incompressible fluid, the density ρ will not change with time. This
simplifies the equation:
∇· u = 0
(4.2)
For the divergence to be zero, the sum of the partial derivatives of the components of the
velocity field must be zero.
∇· u = ∂ux
∂x + ∂uy
∂y + ∂uz
∂z = 0
(4.3)
Performing a finite difference approximation[62] gives us:
24
==PAGE:33==
∂ux
∂x ≈ux(x + ∆x) −ux(x)
∆x
= 0
(4.4)
and similarly for the two other components.
Therefore, the sum of the velocities going into a grid cell must be equal to the sum of the
velocities going out; mass is conserved.
Similarly, on the staggered grid, we can calculate the divergence by calculating the total
outflow of each cell.
Figure 4.10: Reading from left to right we see a cell with a positive divergence (outflow),
negative divergence (inflow) and zero divergence for the incompressible fluid[59].
Calculating the divergence for a cell is an easy task; however, one must be aware of the
signs, since positive ui,j and vi,j mean inflow, not outflow. For that reason, there will be a
minus sign in front of those two cell velocities. The divergence is thus given as
∇· u = ui+1,j −ui,j
xi+1,j −xi,j
+ vi,j+1 −vi,j
yi,j+1 −yi,j
(4.5)
Ensuring that the divergence is zero or at least approaches zero is done by iteratively
updating each cell’s inflow and outflow until they are equal. Essentially, the velocities of
a cell are pushed outward or inward by the same amount until the divergence becomes
zero. This can be done by considering the divergence in Figure 4.10, and how each of
the velocities should be adjusted to ensure a divergence of zero.
ui,j = ui,j + ∇· u · (xi+1,j −xi,j)
4
ui+1,j = ui+1,j −∇· u · (xi+1,j −xi,j)
4
vi,j = vi,j + ∇· u · (yi,j+1 −yi,j)
4
vi,j+1 = vi,j+1 −∇· u · (yi,j+1 −yi,j)
4
Here, the Gauss­Seidel method [63] becomes relevant. In the context of fluid dynamics,
the Gauss­Seidel iterative approach can be applied to update the velocities at each cell
25
==PAGE:34==
face, taking into account the current divergence. By iteratively updating the velocity val­
ues and using the updated values for subsequent calculations, the method refines the
velocities to reduce the divergence.
In the equations above, the division by four is because each cell usually has four velocity
components. However, if we are at the edge of the grid or there are obstacles next to a cell,
there might be velocity components that are fixed and therefore cannot be described by
the equations above. To generalise this, we introduce another variable s that denotes the
number of neighbouring cells that are not obstacles. If a cell is an obstacle, a boundary,
or an inlet, its value will be zero; otherwise, it will be one.
Figure 4.11: The cell on the left is an obstacle, and thus has a s value of 0 while the
rightmost cell has a value of 1 [59].
The aforementioned generalisation results in the following system of equations:
∇· u = ui+1,j −ui,j + vi,j+1 −vi,j
s = si+1,j + si−1,j + si,j+1 + si,j−1
ui,j = ui,j + ∇· u · (xi+1,j −xi,j) · si−1,j
s
ui+1,j = ui+1,j −∇· u · (xi+1,j −xi,j) · si+1,j
s
vi,j = vi,j + ∇· u · (yi,j+1 −yi,j) · si,j−1
s
vi,j+1 = vi,j+1 −∇· u · (yi,j+1 −yi,j) · si,j+1
s
As mentioned earlier, this can be solved using the Gauss­Seidel method. To improve the
convergence rate, an overrelaxation factor 0 < ω < 2 can be used [64].
Finally, the flow rate Q for each cell can be calculated as [65] Q = A · v where v is the
velocity obtained from the above equation system and A is the area of the cell.
We have now presented an approach for calculating the exchange flows between cells;
later, we will further develop this approach for calculating the flows for compartments.
Summary
In this chapter, we explored several of the technologies, methodologies, and theories that
are crucial for the development of solutions to different aspects of this project.
26
==PAGE:35==
Frontend frameworks such as React, Angular, Vue and Svelte, were explored based on
the ”State of Javascript” survey.
Backend as a Service (BaaS) platforms like Amplify, Firebase, and Supabase were an­
alyzed according to their unique features, catering to different needs. The chapter also
looked at REST API Frameworks such as, Django REST, Flask and FastAPI, each of
them offer distinct benefits in terms of scalability and simplicity.
Additionally, the importance of selecting an appropriate open­source license is highlighted,
comparing options such as MIT, Apache, and GPL, to help cement the project’s legal
framework. Docker’s crucial role in containerisation is emphasized, because it ensures
consistent deployment environments.
Lastly, the chapter touches on bioreactor modelling with a focus on a hybrid approach that
combines computational fluid dynamics and compartment modelling.
This background knowledge allows us to dive in to the subsequent problem analysis,
where project goals are dissected and solutions are aligned with the project’s objectives.
27
==PAGE:36==
5
Problem analysis
In this section, we analyse the project goals defined in Section 2. To achieve these goals,
some problems must be solved. These problems can be decomposed into sub­problems
that allow for a more manageable problem overview. Solutions to these sub­problems
are proposed by comparing and contrasting the solutions and how well they achieve their
goal. In addition, the chosen solutions should not only solve problems, but also avoid
creating new problems. For that reason, the solutions will be analysed in the overall
context of the project to ensure that they align with the project’s overall visions. Thereafter,
a quick reflection on how the non­functional goals can be fulfilled is given to ensure the
system’s overall efficiency, reliability, and user satisfaction. The non­project goals will not
be analysed, as they relate to the authors’ personal goals. Once problems, sub­problems,
and proposed solutions have been identified, these elements will have to be evaluated, to
ensure that the design and implementation of the solution are consistent with the findings
presented here.
5.1
Project Goals
5.1.1
PG­0
The first goal is defined as:
Implement the Compartment­Based Scaledown algorithm provided by Tan­
naz[2] in Python, to make it usable as a service.
As mentioned in Section 4.6.1 a compartment­based scaledown algorithm using target
variables has previously been developed and implemented in MATLAB. The problem with
the MATLAB implementation is that it relies on a running MATLAB engine to execute the
code. The MATLAB engine takes up multiple gigabytes of storage space, so it does not
fit a scalable solution. This means that to use the algorithm for the platform, it needs to
be converted and validated through testing.
Converting MATLAB to Python is not something that can be done automatically, since
there is no formal language specification for Matlab. Simple conversion tools exist, but
they only work for straightforward programs.
Therefore, the only viable solution will be to manually convert the algorithm from Matlab
to Python.
Automated test cases for each function need to be set up to continuously validate the
functions as they are converted from MATLAB to Python. Finally, test cases that test the
entire algorithm need to be set up. This also ensures that if the algorithm is revised in
subsequent iterations to optimise it, we can ensure that it still works as intended.
5.1.2
PG­1
Project goal 1 is defined as:
Develop an open­source platform that makes compartment modelling acces­
sible to researchers and students working with regime analysis. The platform
should be publicly available to access and easily accessible.
This goal deals with two important interconnected problems. The first problem is that of
a technical and philosophical view, while the second involves the practicalities of which
28
==PAGE:37==
technologies enable the product to be made, called a tech stack. Both of these problems
must be solved, since they are instrumental in achieving the project’s goal of making
compartment modelling accessible.
Before diving into the practicalities of developing a web application, it is essential to first
address the open­source nature of this project. Creating an open­source project is not just
about making the source code publicly available; it is about creating a collaborative and
transparent environment where the community is encouraged to participate and innovate.
This philosophy is at the core of the project and aligns extremely well with the research and
educational community, where knowledge sharing and resource sharing are essential.
Being open­source
To ensure that the platform adheres to open­source principles, the source code must be
hosted on some other platform where others can access it. GitHub is the most natural
choice due to its size and popularity. It has become the de facto standard in the open­
source industry. Because GitHub is built on Git, version control is also available.
GitLab offers the same functionality as GitHub, and more [66]. Its standout features in­
clude a more integrated CI/CD solution, which also makes it a more complete DevOps
platform. Furthermore, DTU has its own instances of GitLab with restricted access, which
suits this project well because of confidentiality concerns regarding the flow simulator de­
veloped in Python by Ph.D. student Johan le Nepvou de Carfort. That is, at the time of
this project, the source code for solving the flows was used in a paper that is under de­
velopment by Le Nepvou de Carfort. Until publication, the author has requested that the
code remain confidential, and those requests are met.
Unfortunately, this counteracts the idea of being open­source since some of the source
code has to be hidden from users. Moreover, since the approach is to be used after per­
forming the open source compartmentalisation technique by Tannaz referenced in Section
4.6.1, it will have to be separated from the compartmentalisation code. This does create
some implementation difficulties, since it still needs to use the data from the compartmen­
talisation.
Upon publication of Le Nepvou de Cartfort’s work, the source code can be made public
for others to see. In such a case, it is worth considering moving from the private GitLab
instance to GitHub, to attract and benefit the open­source community.
Developing the platform
One of the key tasks of this project is to develop a platform. Developing a platform that
allows users to perform compartment modelling for regime analysis is a novel task. In
Section 3 we explored some solutions that allowed for different types of biomodelling,
and none of those included compartment modelling. This was not on purpose; the idea
of creating a web platform that allows users to perform compartment modelling is just a
novel idea. This uniqueness is perhaps one of the key reasons why it is included in the
Inno4Vac project.
The development of the platform requires a careful selection of the technology stack,
especially the frontend framework. The choice of a frontend framework is important due
to its effect on the user experience and the developer experience. The framework must
be easy to use, robust, user­friendly, and forward­looking, ensuring its relevancy in the
open­source community now and in the future.
29
==PAGE:38==
Frontend Framework
The framework that has been chosen for this project is Svelte. As shown in Section
4.1.1, Svelte has become increasingly popular over the years and is the most sought
after framework to learn. This is important because the platform will need contributions
from other developers to succeed. To achieve that success, it must be popular not only
right now, but also in the future. Since Svelte scores high both in usage and in desirability,
it is a good choice. Svelte is also the only framework that offers an interactive tutorial that
introduces developers to all concepts related to Svelte. Documentation and instructions
are provided on the left, and an IDE is provided on the right. For developers, this is an
invaluable way to set up a tutorial, because it gives the learner hands­on experience and
immediate feedback.
Figure 5.1: Svelte’s interactive tutorial features explainer text on the left­hand side and
an IDE on the right
Another reason why Svelte is a good choice is its simplicity. Svelte features low­boilerplate
code, and less code written means that Svelte’s learning curve is gentler than that of the
other frameworks. Furthermore, Svelte avoids using any other dependencies that require
the developer to learn multiple things at once. The Svelte compiler also includes acces­
sibility warnings at compile time to correct if the developer writes inaccessible markup. A
feature like this makes it easy to adhere to design principles. Lastly, there is something
to be said about Svelte’s performance. On all benchmarks, Svelte outperforms the other
frameworks; this includes memory allocation, transfer size, and CRUD operations [67].
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.2: Heatmap of operations performed with the different frameworks. Svelte out­
performs the other frameworks with regard to all operations. Code and data is available
in the Appendix, Section A.3.
Svelte is a powerful framework on its own, but adding a framework on top of it that han­
dles routing, server­side rendering, and static site generation makes it more powerful and
provides a streamlined experience for developers. SvelteKit does all that and more, al­
lowing developers to focus on developing features while the framework manages the web
development workflows [68].
With the frontend capabilities offered by SvelteKit in mind, it is equally important to con­
sider the backend infrastructure that will support the frontend functionality. It is crucial
to choose a backend technology that ensures an efficient and cohesive full­stack devel­
opment process. In other words, the backend needs to be equally feature­rich, flexible,
and aligned with the project’s goals and principles, specifically those that regard open­
source development. This leads to the consideration of a Backend as a Service (BaaS)
that complements the SvelteKit on the frontend, ensuring a productive and coordinated
environment for the developers.
Backend as a Service
When choosing a BaaS solution for this project, Supabase has several advantages over
Firebase and Amplify. The first is that Supabase is open­source which resonates with
the principles and spirit of the project. It is not tightly coupled with other projects, which
means that the risk of vendor lock­in is greatly diminished.
The growing community around Supabase actively contributes to its development. This
communal support enhances its capabilities and enriches the ecosystem of integrations
with other open­source tools. This modular approach not only suits this project well but
31
==PAGE:40==
also provides an adaptive solution for projects with evolving project requirements.
Another benefit is its usage of PostgreSQL, which is renowned for its stability and exten­
sive support for many different complex operations. This is ideal for the project’s future
to support intricate data relationships and queries in a bioreactor modelling platform. The
usage of SQL is significant as it ensures efficient data operations for those already familiar
with SQL.
On top of that, Supabase’s support for real­time servers is essential if up­to­date data
displays are required. Combining this with scalability is a way to ensure that as demand
increases in terms of both users and data, the platform can handle it. This is a critical
feature for the future expansion of the project.
Lastly, the financial aspect of Supabase is important. With a generous free­tier plan and
a cost­effective pricing model for scale­up, it is a financially viable option for this open­
source project. Combining its affordability with its wide range of features and community­
driven development, Supabase is an optimal choice for any project that values open­
source principles, robustness, and scalability.
5.1.3
PG­2
The third project goal is defined as:
Provide a framework to test and compare different compartmentalisation al­
gorithms using a unified interface.
This goal contains multiple parts. Firstly, there is a need to develop a framework for the
platform that makes it possible to test and compare different ways of performing com­
partmentalisation. This requires technical ingenuity, but also a good understanding of the
challenges and requirements that exist with regard to compartment modelling. Secondly,
a unified interface is needed. The interface is meant to provide a centralised interaction
point and give a cohesive and intuitive experience, in a way that allows people without dif­
ferent technical abilities to use the platform. The following subsections explore these two
topics by looking at the aspects of developing a solid framework and a unified interface.
Providing a framework
Importantly, the framework should allow for different compartmentalisation algorithms to
be tested. The functionality is important because it allows users to execute different algo­
rithms and evaluate their compatibility. Flexibility and robustness are essential to ensure
a reliable and user­friendly experience and to accommodate a variety of algorithms.
Testing and comparing
To see the performance of the algorithms, some visualisations must be implemented. For
this purpose, the project will follow the recommendations of Dräger and Palsson, which
were discussed in Section 3.1. Namely, some graphical representations, i.e. plots or
charts, will be used to visualise the results along with a table containing the data. As
mentioned above, providing the data and visualisations should allow students and re­
searchers to quickly obtain an overview and reproduce and run experiments in a quick
manner. These types of visualisations also follow the structure of the BioSimulator plat­
form, which was introduced in the aforementioned section.
In turn, the visualisations and data also provide an easy way to compare the results of
algorithms on the platform. To comply with the individual needs of the users, the results
of compartmentalisation need to be exportable to allow more control over visualisations
32
==PAGE:41==
and comparisons. As the project evolves, a wider range of visualisations can be added
to the platform, providing more use­case­specific insights.
By focusing on the adaptability and usability of the platform in testing and comparing
different compartmentalisation algorithms, it becomes clear that another vital aspect of
the development of the platform is extensibility. The ability to evolve and integrate new
algorithms is crucial in a field that is constantly advancing.
Extensibility
Another aspect to consider is extensibility. The field of bioreactor modelling is constantly
evolving, so the platform and project as a whole should be constructed in a way that easily
allows new algorithms to be easily added, compared, and tested while being developed.
This requires a modular design approach to easily allow for additions, replacements, and
removals that do not affect the system as a whole. This can be done in multiple ways:
using a plugin architecture where the new algorithms can be added as plugins, or by
creating a well­defined API that enables interaction with the platform. This project will
include both types of architecture.
For Python, the term package is used instead of plugin. For uploading and installing pack­
ages, the Python Package Index (abbreviated PyPi) is most often used. It is the official
software repository for Python and is used by pip, Python’s package management sys­
tem. Another package manager is Conda Forge which is not native to Python, but instead
hosts packages from any language. However, Conda Forge involves a level of scrutiny
with a review process that includes automated reviews and peer reviews by volunteers.
This step, along with others, makes the process of getting a package on Conda Forge
more time consuming. For that reason, getting a package on Conda Forge is beyond the
scope of this project. Therefore, the architecture of the plugins in this project will include
publishing to PyPI.
As explained in Section 4.3, there are multiple REST API frameworks for Python. All
of them provide a wide range of features and support different use cases. It is crucial
that the API meets the needs of students and researchers who want to use it. To do so,
it must address several aspects. This platform should also be able to handle multiple
concurrent users, avoid using excessive computing resources, and be fast to develop.
For that purpose, FastAPI seems to be more beneficial for this project, which may need
to handle a high volume of requests and perform advanced computations. FastAPI’s
ability to execute asynchronously and handle asynchronous requests a lot more efficiently
than Flask or Django makes it a prime contender. FastAPI also utilises the Swagger
user interface to create interactive API documentation, which significantly speeds up user
adoption. The same possibilities exist for Flask and Django, but require additional tooling.
Lastly, FastAPI needs less boilerplate code, is more simple and concise, and is type­safe;
eliminating bugs and increasing development speed.
With the technical aspects in place, including testing, comparing, and extensibility, the fo­
cus now becomes user interface design. This transition marks a critical point in the project
where we go from architectural considerations to directly focusing on the user­facing ele­
ments. It is the user interface that brings the platform to life, transforming algorithms and
data into valuable insights.
Because the interface is the main interaction for users, it must be designed with care.
It should accommodate users of all levels of technical expertise. For that purpose, it
should bridge the gap between the complex data structures and algorithms used and the
users who use them. The goal is to create a simple, intuitive, accessible, and responsive
33
==PAGE:42==
design that not only presents the platform in a nice way but also makes it easy to use.
In the following, we will discuss the principles that will guide the development of this vital
aspect of the project, ensuring a good user experience.
Designing a unified interface
When it comes to designing the platform, it is crucial that the platform be built with a clean
and simple user interface to allow easy navigation of the features of the platform. This in
itself can be achieved by adhering to different principles and frameworks within the design
space.
Most of the design frameworks used today overlap in their principles. Although the princi­
ples or frameworks themselves may not share a common name, the goals of the principles
are shared.
Figure 5.3: The focus areas of Universal Design [69]. Each area is built on different
principles that ensure products and environment are usable by all without the need for
adaptation
Although some design principles such as Universal Design were originally focused on
physical spaces and products, the same principles apply to digital services. As an exam­
ple, the core focus of Universal Design is accessibility, but it also mentions the principles
of simplicity, intuitiveness, and flexibility. Those four principles are highly related to digital
services and can be found in design languages such as Google’s design language Mate­
rial Design [70] or IBM’s Carbon Design System [71]. For that reason, the design of the
unified interface should strive to follow the principles.
Simplicity is one of the principles and is seen in many different principles under names
as KISS (Keep it simple, stupid) or YAGNI (You are not gonna need it). Specifically, the
interface should be clean and uncluttered to avoid complexities that confuse users. This
involves using the same easy­on­the­eyes layout, avoiding excess of buttons and options,
and using a colour scheme that is easy on the eyes and lets the user differentiate between
different types of information: actions, confirmations, warnings, and errors.
Intuitiveness is another principle that should be achieved. It refers to the feeling of things
being natural on the platform. This includes things like whether the use of icons and
terminology is consistent across the platform, but also what the user knows from previous
experiences. In addition, the features of the platform must be organised logically, making
34
==PAGE:43==
it easy to navigate between them. In the design chapter, Section 6.5, some other familiar
designs will be highlighted and used as the basis for this platform.
Accessibility (or a11y) is a key topic to consider. Adherence to the principles of universal
design is important because humans are different and, by recognising how we are differ­
ent, solutions that favour us all can be created. Concretely, it could include utilising ARIA
(Accessible Rich Internet Applications) labels to make the content available to users with
screen readers or offering a dark mode for users who are sensitive to bright light or have
low vision.
The last design principle that we will consider is responsiveness (or flexibility). The plat­
form must function on different devices and fit various screen sizes. Luckily, this is most
often solved by using frontend frameworks, which come with a set of responsive com­
ponents to build with. Furthermore, utilising CSS frameworks such as Tailwind CSS or
Bootstrap makes the application of utility classes for different screen sizes straightforward.
5.1.4
PG­3
The fourth project goal concerns postprocessing:
Develop a postprocessing module that fits the defined interface of the com­
partmentalisation module. This should allow new compartmentalisation algo­
rithms to integrate seamlessly with the postprocessing module.
This goal is divided into three problems that are highly interrelated. The first problem is
that of interface compatability which is crucial to ensure that the postprocessing module
is compatible with the compartmentalisation interface.
The second problem relates to the creation of modularity. This must be done to ensure that
a variety of compartmentalisation algorithms can communicate with the postprocessing
module.
The last problem relates to creating seamless integration. To achieve that, we have to be
able to answer how we avoid new algorithms creating downtime and how clear guidelines
should be created to provide developers with the right tools to integrate new algorithms.
Interface compatability
Under the umbrella of ”Interface Compatibility”, we will need to divide it into two sub­
problems that steer the postprocessing module’s compatibility with the compartmentalisa­
tion algorithm. The initial sub­problem involves a look at the prerequisites for establishing
a good interface. Following this, tangible actions are provided to ensure compatibility of
the interface.
Determining specifications and constraints
Ensuring interface compatibility is at the core of this goal. For the postprocessing module
to fit the interface of the compartmentalisation algorithm, it is required that the output of
the compartmentalisation algorithm be clearly defined.
The first task at hand is thus to determine the specifications and restraints that the com­
partmentalisation algorithm imposes on the system. Although not strictly required, this
sub­problem is easier to solve after the project goal 5.1.1 has been solved. For this
problem, it is important to look at method signatures, input and output parameters, data
formats, and types. If timing and synchronisation constraints, errors, or any other proto­
col that controls the interaction of the compartmentalisation algorithm are present, these
should be examined as well.
35
==PAGE:44==
The solution will then consist of a careful analysis supplemented by writing documen­
tation to ensure full clarity of the interface. The outcome should act as a blueprint for
the development of any other modules that want to connect to the compartmentalisation
module.
After establishing the specifications and constraints of the interface compatibility, the fo­
cus naturally becomes on the practical application of these details. The postprocessing
module has to be aware of the compartmentalisation algorithm’s interface and adapt to it.
To do that, the adaptability of the postprocessing module must be considered.
Adapting to specifications
To adapt the postprocessing module to the interface, the postprocessing modules’ inputs
and outputs must be aligned to ensure the module can handle various data and control
flows. This involves mapping the specifications to the functionalities of the postprocess­
ing module. However, here it is crucial to consider the different variations of the com­
partmentalisation algorithm’s output, since the postprocessing module must handle these
seamlessly.
For this purpose, a standardised input for the postprocessing module should be estab­
lished. This can be done by using an interface adapter that translates the output from the
compartmentalisation algorithm into a format understood by the postprocessing module.
Additionally, a test suite that tests the module’s connection should be created to ensure
compliance and no deviations.
Modularity
Modularity is important as it gives us a way to maintain robustness and flexibility through
the establishment of standardised protocols to handle different output types from different
compartmentalisation algorithms.
In the following, first, the necessity of having uniform rules and procedures is established.
This is crucial to ensure future compatibility and streamline the process for the integration
of new algorithms.
Next, we discuss the variability in the outputs produced by the compartmentalisation algo­
rithms. An adaptable design algorithm must be employed to ensure that each algorithm
can seamlessly integrate into the existing system.
Defining a standard protocol
The crux of creating modularity within the postprocessing module is to define a standard
protocol, which any compartmentalisation algorithm can use to interface with the postpro­
cessing module. The protocol should be robust and flexible to handle a wide variety of
algorithms to accommodate future developments. However, it should not oversimplify or
abstract too much because it has to be specific enough to provide a consistent framework.
The task is to find functionalities, data formats, and interactions that compartmentalisation
algorithms are expected to use or produce. By enforcing the standardisation of those ele­
ments, it will be easier and more predictable to integrate new algorithms into the system.
The solution is to create a standard protocol for an API detailing the inputs, outputs,
method calls, and data formats. The API has to be well documented to ensure that devel­
opers of compartmentalisation algorithms can design their algorithms in compliance with
the postprocessing module.
Transitioning from defining the standard protocol to handling diverse outputs, we now shift
from theory to practice.
36
==PAGE:45==
Handling Different Output Types
Each compartmentalisation algorithm can generate outputs in different formats. The post­
processing module should be flexible enough to adapt to this variability without requiring
new coding for each algorithm. The most processing module generally processes the
output of the compartmentalisation algorithm correctly to provide meaningful results.
The most promising approach to solving this problem is to use a design pattern known
as an adapter/wrapper that converts the interface of one object so that another can un­
derstand it. Each new algorithm should essentially come with its own adapter that plugs
into the postprocessing module. This adapter should translate the output of the compart­
mentalisation algorithm into the standard format expected by the module. This ensures
consistency and reliability in the postprocessing module’s operation.
5.1.5
Integration
In this subsection, we explore two essential components that contribute to a cohesive
system. First, we introduce the process of allowing new algorithms to be incorporated
without interrupting service or affecting performance. Next, the need for detailed docu­
mentation and its role in empowering developers is outlined. Together, these two aspects
streamline the integration process, from initial implementation to final deployment.
Ensuring seamless integration
Part of the goal is to ensure seamless integration. Seamless is a broad term, but in
this context it is taken to mean that it does not require system downtime or performance
degradation. To achieve this, a method for integrating new compartmentalisation algo­
rithms that is transparent to end users and maintains the integrity and availability of the
system is needed.
To do so, it is vital that there are no bottlenecks or failure points when new algorithms are
added. Checking this should be done in an automated way to ensure consistency.
The solution is to create a way for new algorithms to be added as separate components
to the postprocessing module. For this, automated testing should be set up to limit the
potential for human error and integration issues. Perhaps a continuous integration/con­
tinuous deployment pipeline (CI/CD) can be used to automatically test and deploy these
algorithms.
Having established a framework for seamless integration by emphasising the need for
automated testing and deployment, we shift our focus to providing clear guidelines. This
marks a move from the technical orchestration of integration to the empowerment of de­
velopers who will implement it.
Providing clear guidelines
Developers require clear guidelines to integrate their compartmentalisation algorithms
with the postprocessing module. Why? The consequences of not having clear guidelines
lead to incoherence when integrating, increased time to market, and system errors. This
will eventually deter developers from making this happen due to the nuisance it creates.
An examination from the developer’s point of view is needed to find the information re­
quired to ensure a smooth integration. This means understanding not only the process
steps involved but also the finer technical details of each step.
The solution is to create comprehensive documentation. Part of the documentation is this
thesis, but project directories should include documentation on how developers can set
up the project and contribute to the development of new algorithms. Best practices and
37
==PAGE:46==
examples should be provided as part of the documentation to help developers understand
the integration process. Additionally, using toolkits that can generate API documentation
is beneficial for senior collaborators who want a quick look­up reference. Lastly, develop­
ers should be encouraged to look to the community for help, fostering a developer­friendly
ecosystem.
We will now briefly look at the non­functional goals, which are key components in ensuring
the project’s overall success. These goals focus on aspects beyond the basic project
goals, addressing collaboration, platform accessibility, and quality of documentation.
5.2
Non­functional Goals
5.2.1
NFG­0
The first non­functional goal is presented here:
The project should encourage collaboration and define clear guidelines on how
to contribute to the project.
As established in the analysis of PG­3, clear guidelines are critical to ensure user engage­
ment and ease of integration. There are a variety of ways to help this process.
Documentation
Before defining clear guidelines for contributing to the project, a well­written README file
should be in place that mentions the overview of the project, its purpose, and its state.
The README is typically the first thing that someone reads on the project page. Typically,
the README also includes some code snippets or examples to get the user started using
the project.
With a README file in place, we next create the contribution guidelines. The contribution
guidelines are developer­centric and include details on how to set up the development
environment, the process for submitting pull requests, i.e. integrating your changes, cod­
ing standards and guidelines, and reporting bugs or requesting features. The contribution
guide may also include a guide on how decisions are made with respect to accepting or
rejecting contributions.
Licensing
Another important aspect of the project is licensing. As discussed in Section 4.5 the
licensing chosen can both deter and attract developers, as it defines the terms under
which the code can be used, modified, and distributed. A restrictive license may limit the
project’s appeal, whereas a permissive license can encourage broader participation and
usage.
For this project and its submodules, the MIT license has been chosen. As noted earlier,
the MIT license is a permissive license and is the most popular today, making it an attrac­
tive choice for this project. It requires the least effort to integrate and is easy to understand.
Although the Apache License is similar in its legal terms, the license is too lengthy and
the inclusion of separate NOTICE files for each redistribution seems counterproductive.
Although the GPL license captures the open­source spirit, its copyleft restrictions make
it harder to integrate into other projects. In some cases, the legal complexity and risk
of ensuring compliance with GPL might deter developers from contributing to extensions
or plugins for the modules. Furthermore, businesses may avoid the project because of
the GPL’s strict non­proprietary requirement. However, as mentioned in the Background
chapter, it is possible to change the license type. By choosing the more permissive MIT
license initially makes it easier to change to other more restrictive licenses.
38
==PAGE:47==
Building on the foundation of the open­source collaboration established in this section,
it is now our turn to focus on the technical aspects of the project, particularly integrating
computational capabilities to ensure accessibility.
5.2.2
NFG­1
This second non­functional goal relates to cloud support:
The platform should provide some computational capabilities to support smaller
compartmentalisation computations in the cloud.
Part of the vision of this project is to ensure accessibility. This means that it should be
possible for anyone to use the platform without having to host the platform locally. This
is specifically important for users without a technical IT background or users with limited
resources. The way this can be done is to set up the platform and the sub­modules in the
cloud.
There are a multitude of cloud providers that offer different features. The most notable
ones include AWS, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud. Naturally, none of the cloud
providers is open­source. All cloud providers include free credits upon registration and are
used in a pay­as­you­go on­demand pricing model [72][73][74]. To ensure the longevity
of this project, funding of some sort is important, since cloud hosting is a must due to this
project’s commitment to accessibility for nondevelopers. For this project, Google Cloud
will be the cloud provider. This choice is based on Google’s general commitment to the
open­source community [75], and due to the extensive example projects they have on
GitHub that showcase different use cases of their cloud platform [76].
Next, the focus will shift from the cloud platform to another critical component of the
project. In the next section, we introduce the need for comprehensive documentation.
5.2.3
NFG­2
The third and last non­functional goal addresses an important aspect ­ ensuring well­
written documentation:
Proper documentation for the API and developed packages should be written
to ensure that the parties can implement or integrate the API and packages
into their solutions.
This goal differentiates itself from 5.2.1 because it focuses on documenting the code so
that developers can understand the functionality of concrete classes and methods. This
type of documentation is often referred to as documentation strings (docstrings) or doc­
umentation comments. This type of documentation often includes a description of what
each class or method does along with the input and output parameters.
Furthermore, there are tools that generate HTML pages of the documentation, presented
with a more user­friendly layout, allowing for hierarchical structure, cross­references, and
code highlighting. In Python, pydoc and Sphinx remain the two most popular documen­
tation generators [31].
Summary
We have now investigated the project objectives and addressed various problems and
sub­problems.
As part of that process, the solutions were ensured to align with the
project’s overarching vision of efficiency, reliability, and user satisfaction. Key aspects
also included the conversion and validation of algorithms from MATLAB to Python, the
39
==PAGE:48==
development of an open­source platform for compartment modelling accessible to re­
searchers and students, and the establishment of a framework for testing and comparing
compartmentalisation algorithms. In the transition to the design chapter, the analytical
perspective is shifted to a more creative and constructive approach. The emphasis in
the design chapter is on realising solutions identified in the analysis phase into imple­
mentable designs. This process involves detailing the overall architecture and diving into
major system components, but also smaller details, such as algorithm design.
40
==PAGE:49==
6
Design
In this chapter, we will introduce the overall architecture of the solution, as well as dive
into the major system components that have been identified as a part of the architecture.
After reading this chapter, you should have the knowledge to implement the solution.
6.1
Finding flows between compartments
In Section 4.7 an introduction is given on how to estimate flows between grid cells. How­
ever, the flows between all the cells are not interesting because they do not describe the
flows between the compartments. To find the flows between compartments, a different
approach is taken.
Figure 6.1: A simple example of the grid after compartmentalisation/zoning. The border
is marked by bold black lines. Each colour represents a different zone, and the hatched
areas denote border cells.
41
==PAGE:50==
A simple grid is shown in Figure 6.1. Assuming that compartmentalisation has been per­
formed, one can identify the borders or interface lines between the zones. The border is
found by identifying cells whose neighbour cells are not in the same zone. These cells are
interesting because they tell us about the flows in and out of the compartments, which is
the goal of this approach. All border cells have flow vectors associated with them, which
can be calculated using the approach described in Section 4.7. The direction and mag­
nitude can tell us about the flows between the border cells. With all this information, we
can design an algorithm that can give us the flow between all zones.
6.1.1
Computing flows for compartments
Go through each grid cell on the grid. Let i, j denote the position of the cell on the grid,
and fx(i, j), fy(i, j) denote the flow of the cell in the x and y directions, respectively. The
cell has a zone number zn(i, j), and there are a total of L zones. Initially, a 2d array
flow_matrix of size L × L is set to empty.
If the current cell has no neighbours in different zones, the cell is irrelevant, and the next
cell in the grid is considered. If it does have neighbours, there are four cases that could
hold:
• If the cell’s left neighbour is in a different zone zn(i, j) ̸= zn(i, j −1) and there is
a flow going from the cell to its left neighbour, i.e. fy(i, j) < 0 then there is a flow
from i, j to i, j −1 with magnitude |fy(i, j)|. The flow matrix is updated accordingly:
flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i, j −1)] = flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i, j −1)] + |fy(i, j)|
• Otherwise if the cell’s right neighbour is in a different zone zn(i, j) ̸= zn(i, j + 1)
and there is a flow going from the cell to its right neighbor, i.e. fy(i, j) > 0 then
there is a flow from i, j to i, j +1 with magnitude |fy(i, j)|.The flow matrix is updated
accordingly: flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i, j + 1)] = flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i, j +
1)] + |fy(i, j)|
• If the cell’s upper neighbour is in a different zone zn(i, j) ̸= zn(i −1, j) and there is
a flow going from the cell to its upper neighbour, i.e. fx(i, j) < 0 then there is a flow
from i, j to i −1, j with magnitude |fx(i, j)|.The flow matrix is updated accordingly:
flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i −1, j)] = flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i −1, j)] + |fx(i, j)|
• Otherwise if the cell’s lower neighbour is in a different zone zn(i, j) ̸= zn(i+1, j) and
there is a flow going from the cell to its lower neighbour, i.e. fx(i, j) > 0 then there
is a flow from i, j to i + 1, j with magnitude |fx(i, j)|.The flow matrix is updated ac­
cordingly: flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i + 1, j)] = flow_matrix[zn(i, j), zn(i + 1, j)] +
|fx(i, j)|
Once all grid cells have been checked, the flow_matrix is output.
The pseudocode for this algorithm can be found in the following.
1
function findFlowsBetweenCompartments(grid, f_x, f_y, zn, L):
2
initialize flow_matrix[L][L] = empty
3
for each cell in grid:
4
let i, j be the position of the cell
5
6
if zn(i,j) != zn(i, j-1) and f_y(i,j) < 0:
7
flow_matrix[zn(i,j), zn(i, j-1)] += |f_y(i,j)|
8
elif zn(i,j) != zn(i, j+1) and f_y(i,j) > 0:
9
flow_matrix[zn(i,j), zn(i, j+1)] += |f_y(i,j)|
10
11
if zn(i,j) != zn(i-1, j) and f_x(i,j) < 0:
12
flow_matrix[zn(i,j), zn(i-1, j)] += |f_x(i,j)|
42
==PAGE:51==
13
elif zn(i,j) != zn(i+1, j) and f_x(i,j) > 0:
14
flow_matrix[zn(i,j), zn(i+1, j)] += |f_x(i,j)|
15
16
return flow_matrix
Listing 6.1: Algorithm for identifying flow between compartments
6.2
Platform Architecture
Designing the overall architecture of the platform before implementing it is important, so
we can decide later which frameworks we will need to use when implementing it. In
Section 5.1.2 of Problem Analysis, we stated that heavy computing should not be handled
on the user’s machine. This means that computations such as compartmentalisation,
postprocessing, and kinetic modelling should be handled in the backend on a hosted
server. Functionality that does not require a lot of computing can be handled on the client
side, such as data formatting and data conversions.
Figure 6.2: Platform architecture design
Figure 6.2 shows that the user can interact with the bioreactor platform frontend interface,
where they should be able to choose between models and enter specific parameters for
the selected models. The platform should then direct the user request to the backend
services through a REST API that will handle the request.
43
==PAGE:52==
The algorithms used for the calculations will be packaged and useable in the API or directly
in a separate environment if the user wants access to the functionality without relying on
the platform and its limitations.
Finally, a database is connected to the platform, which initially contains user records and
should be responsible for authentication services. In later iterations of the platform, the
database could be expanded to contain groups and projects to allow sharing and collab­
orating on simulations.
Different languages, frameworks, and external libraries should be considered for each
component of the platform architecture.
6.3
API Specification
The REST API will act as a communication interface between the frontend accessible by
the user and the backend modules responsible for calculating compartments, postpro­
cessing, and kinetics. A mutual format of the data transferred between the REST API and
the frontend has to be defined, to enable them to communicate efficiently. The provided
functions from the modules will each have to be exposed on a unique endpoint, specified
by the REST API.
Compartment­based Scaledown (target variables approach)
As mentioned in Section 4.6.1 to calculate the compartments of a reactor using the target
variable approach, we need some information from the initial CFD simulation. From this
we need the radial and axial coordinates and the radial and axial velocities as lists of
floats. Some parameters would also need to be set, but should also have default values
to make it easier for the user to get an initial result. Taking this into account, the request
body can be built as follows:
1
{
2
"data": {
3
"X": [
4
0
5
],
6
"Y": [
7
0
8
],
9
"Vx": [
10
0
11
],
12
"Vy": [
13
0
14
]
15
},
16
"params": {
17
"number_X": 15,
18
"number_Y": 35,
19
"merge_tolerance": 19,
20
"delta_px": 0,
21
"delta_py": 0
22
}
23
}
Listing 6.2: Requst body for compartment­based scale down endpoint
After using the target variable approach, a grid with coordinates, average velocity, and
compartment identifier will be returned, as well as the volume of each compartment. A flow
44
==PAGE:53==
rate matrix will also be calculated using the postprocessing module and will be appended
to the response body.
1
{
2
"grid_info_headers": [
3
"string"
4
],
5
"grid_info": [
6
[
7
0
8
]
9
],
10
"volume_headers": [
11
"string"
12
],
13
"volume": [
14
[
15
0
16
]
17
],
18
"image": "string",
19
"flow_rate_matrix": [
20
[
21
0
22
]
23
]
24
}
Listing 6.3: Response body from compartment­based scale down endpoint
In the response, body grid, info and volume are tables of data, so the type will have to be
a 2­dimensional array with all values inside being floats. The response will have all the
necessary data that are needed both for displaying the result for the user and for a full
export of the result.
Kinetic Modelling
The kinetic model needs the volume and flow rate matrix calculated at the compartmen­
talisation step. The kinetic reaction must also be defined. The tracer should specify the
index of the compartment in which it is initially injected and the concentration of each com­
ponent of the reaction in the tracer. Table 6.1 shows the units used for each parameter
used in the request body below.
1
{
2
"modelParams": {
3
"volumes": [
4
0
5
],
6
"flow_rate_matrix": [
7
[
8
0
9
]
10
],
11
"number_of_components": 0
12
},
13
"modelTracer": {
14
"compartment_index": 1,
15
"concentration": [
16
10,
17
10
18
],
45
==PAGE:54==
19
"injection_duration": 10,
20
"flow_rate": 0.0001,
21
"start_time": 0
22
},
23
"modelKineticReaction": {
24
"reactants": [
25
0,
26
1
27
],
28
"products": [
29
-1,
30
1
31
],
32
"k_fwd": 2,
33
"k_bwd": 1
34
}
35
}
Listing 6.4: Request body for kinetic endpoint
Concentration
mM
Injection Duration
s
Flow Rate
L · s−1
Start Time
s
Table 6.1: Units of the kinetic model parameters
The kinetic model was used to calculate the flow of the tracer. The API should respond to
the client with the following three parameters, a time list used for the concentration over
time, a record of all compartments’ concentration over time where the compartment index
is used as a key, and finally, a plot of the concentrations over time.
1
{
2
"image": "string",
3
"time": [
4
0
5
],
6
"concentration": {}
7
}
Listing 6.5: Response body from kinetic endpoint
6.4
System Interaction
Diving into how the different components and actors of the systems interact with each
other, we will begin looking at the two main use cases of the platform: compartmentalisa­
tion and kinetic modelling of bioreactors. Figure 6.3 shows the possible flow of the user
after they have accessed the platform. The first choice is to decide whether they want to
calculate the compartments of the reactor or, if they already have compartment data, they
can use a kinetic model to calculate the concentration over time for each compartment.
46
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.3: Flow of actions the user can make throughout the process of compartmental­
isation and kinetic modelling.
The diagram shows that once the user has gotten the results, they should be able to go
back to the parameters and model selection stage while keeping the same data that they
previously uploaded, so they can easily test and compare the different models and param­
eter choices. The same can also be done with the kinetic computation process. Another
important feature is that the user can go directly from the results of the compartmentali­
sation process to the kinetic model selection step while carrying over the result from the
compartmentalisation, thereby avoiding the export and upload steps.
6.4.1
Compartmentalisation Scenario
To further understand how the systems interact with each other, we look at the sequence
of interactions between them for each of the two main scenarios. There are three main
participants in the compartmentalisation scenario: the user, the platform, and the backend
layer. The backend layer has been abstracted to a single participant, as we will explore
the backend architecture later.
Figure 6.4 shows how the participants interact with each other in the compartmentalisation
scenario. The diagram shows that primarily the platform interacts with the user but also
has an essential interaction with the backend, which is computationally demanding. Most
interactions between the user and the platform are quite simple, i.e., data input, selects,
and smaller actions, such as exporting data that are already stored on the platform.
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.4: Sequence diagram showing the scenario of calculating compartments of pro­
vided CFD data.
6.4.2
Kientic Modelling Scenario
The flow of the kinetic modelling scenario is almost identical to the compartmentalisation
scenario. where the primary differences are the type of data uploaded, and the endpoint
for the backend; after getting the results the only options are to go back or export the
result.
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.5: Sequence diagram showing the scenario of using the kinetic model to calculate
concentration over time for each compartment.
The similarity of the two scenarios could be used to create some reusable components
when building the platform. Reusable components make the maintenance process much
easier since only one component needs to be changed throughout the entire platform
when making changes to, for example, the upload data component.
49
==PAGE:58==
6.5
Designing the user interface
To design the user interface, we must follow the principles of simplicity, intuitiveness,
accessibility, and responsiveness outlined in the Problem Analysis Section 5.1.3. In this
section, wireframes will be drawn to sketch out the platform.
6.5.1
Logging in
Initially, the user has to log in. Although a login screen is not the most feature rich screen,
it still has to be simple, intuitive, accessible, and responsive. We believe that the following
design is a good fit for the platform:
Figure 6.6: A wireframe design of the platform login screen
We believe that this interface is sufficient. It is simple because of its minimalistic view,
making for a clean and uncluttered interface. There are no extra navigation options or
sidebars here because the user’s attention should be focused on the task in front of them,
signing in. Additionally, the login screen features standards by providing a login form
that uses email and password. There is also a logical organisation of the elements: logo
placeholder at the top, then the sign­in form, and lastly the registration option. This pattern
is also seen on many other platforms. Implementing this design with ARIA labels and CSS
frameworks will help ensure accessibility and responsive design.
50
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.7: The login screen on GitHub employs the same organization of elements as
suggested for this project.
The wireframe for the registration screen follows a similar setup and flow, and is omitted
here for brevity, but can be found in the Appendix Section A.5.
6.5.2
Compartmentalisation Step 1: Uploading data
The most important aspect of the platform is the ability to perform compartmentalisation
given data from a CFD simulation. For that purpose, a step­by­step approach is chosen
to guide the user along the way. This is done as part of our commitment to developing a
platform that can be used by all.
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.8: The first step of compartmentalisation: Uploading the data
In the center of the screen, we want to display the most important information to the
user. Initially, the user has to upload some CFD data. The user has the option to press
a button that lets the user select a file from their file system, something most users are
familiar with. The buttons are large and clearly labelled, which can benefit users with
visual impairments. To help simplify uploading the file, we think it would be nice for the
user to see what some example data could look like, helping the user understand the
format of the files. The user should also have the ability to see what they uploaded in a
table preview to ensure that it was the correct file that was uploaded. After that, the user
should have the ability to continue to the next step.
To ensure that the user is aware of the multistep process, a form of progress bar should
be added at the top of the screen, displaying all of the steps and the user’s current step.
Below the progress bar, a title should be displayed to let the user know what the current
step is about.
Another design choice is the side navigation bar. This navigation design is good because
of its widespread use on many different web platforms; see Figure 6.9 for an example. This
widespread usage means that most users are familiar with this design feature, improving
the intuitive feel of the platform. The sidebar is compatible with smaller screen sizes by
collapsing into a hamburger menu on smaller screens.
52
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.9: Outlook’s web design. The use of sidebars is very prominent. A larger version
of this image and more examples are found in the Appendix, Section A.6
Some websites also use top navigation, but the side navigation bar has proven itself to be
the most scalable, has the fastest navigation time, the best performance and is the most
preferred way of navigation [77].
At the bottom of the sidebar in figure 6.8, there is an option to switch between dark mode
and light mode. This is done to help users with visual impairments who are sensitive to
light or have trouble seeing contrasts.
6.5.3
Compartmentalisation Step 2: Selecting a model
After the user uploads their data, they will have to select the compartmentalisation model.
This should be achievable by a simple dropdown menu. Notice that the sidebar is con­
sistent across the steps, always allowing for quick navigation.
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.10: The second should use a simple dropdown menu to choose between models
and a classic question icon to provide extra information.
The dropdown menu should be intuitive since most users will have used one on other
platforms. Furthermore, most frontend frameworks provide dropdown menus that are
responsive, adjusting to various devices and orientations. The question mark icon is a
standard design pattern for providing context, and it is used here for that person.
6.5.4
Compartmentalisation Step 3: Selection of parameters
The third step is selection of parameters. This screen should focus solely on the task of
parameter selection without extraneous elements. For that purpose, the parameters are
chosen to be displayed in a grid format, making it easy to view and compare different
parameters.
54
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.11: The third step uses a grid/table structure to map the parameters in a generic
way.
For readability, units are added to the header names, and the parameters are mapped
to the correct headers using a dropdown menu. This design is simple, but works well.
The design pattern is general enough that it can be used for other compartmentalisation
models as well, allowing for a unified interface no matter the model chosen.
6.5.5
Compartmentalisation Step 4: The results
The last step is where the user will see their results. Here the user is to get a visual
representation of the results, an important feature mentioned by Dräger and Palsson 3.1.
Another important feature that was also mentioned is the ability to export the data, which
is clearly marked by the export button, see Figure 6.12.
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.12: The last step of the process
The result screen should also contain some collapsable content (accordions), to give the
users more than one way to view the output data. However, in general, the zone map
should be shown. Part of the goal for this project is also to allow for kinetic modelling,
for that it makes sense to create an option to directly navigate to the kinetic models by
pressing a button.
For navigation purposes, it should also be possible to navigate back and choose a different
mapping of the parameters. This is possible with a back button.
For conciseness, the flows for the kinetic modelling are not shown. However, we believe
that using a step­by­step progression, as shown here, is the best way to ensure simplicity
and intuitiveness, since the user will get used to that design.
Summary
In this chapter, we have outlined the solutions architecture and key components. First,
we designed an algorithm that allows us to estimate flows between compartments instead
of cells.
Next, the platform architecture was introduced, and a clear seperation between complex
computations in the backend and light weight computations on the frontend was made.
This is crucial to create an efficient system.
Furthermore, wireframes for the user interface was made, and included a multistep pro­
cess, guiding users all the way from data upload to visualization and export of the results.
This simple approach, coupled with the use of intuitive elements, showcased our commit­
ment to the design principles we introduced in the Problem Analysis chapter.
Transitioning to the implementation chapter, we dive into the details of system compo­
nents, algorithms, and data structures.
56
==PAGE:65==
7
Implementation
In this chapter, we describe the specific system components, while also going through
low­level implementation such as algorithms and data structures. We will go through the
intricacies of the implementation, providing an understanding allowing a skilled program­
mer to maintain the system. The repositories containing the implementations are found
in Appendix A.1.
7.1
Project structure
In order to ensure a project structure that has low coupling and high modularity, the project
has been divided into four repositories.
Figure 7.1: The project structure as seen on GitLab. At the top is the c18n organisation
and below it its four repositories.
This project structure has been chosen to ensure a modular and scalable implementation.
The general idea is that these repositories are developed on. If new compartmentalisation
algorithms are developed, these can be added as part of the c18n organisation. In some
cases, it might be necessary to expand the platform and create new APIs, which would
also need their own repository.
In the following, we will go over the project structure of each of the repositories. The
two platform repositories are described in the same section due to their identical project
structure.
7.1.1
Compartment­based scaledown model
The first repository bears the name ”compartment­based scaledown model” or cbsm for
short.
At the core of this repository is Tannaz’ compartmentalisation algorithm.
This
project is also deployed as a PyPi package, so developers can directly incorporate com­
partmentalisation into their code. The specifics on how the package is deployed are dis­
cussed in Section 7.8.4.
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 7.2: The directories inside the cbsm repository. Files are not shown
Within the repository, there are some files and five directories, as seen in Figure 7.2.
The files in the root directory relate to documentation and deployment and will there­
fore not be discussed here. The cbsm directory contains the source code of the Tannaz
compartmentalisation algorithm [2]; for specific implementation details of the code, see
Section 7.2.1. The examples directory contains examples of using the package. The re­
quirements folder contains files that primarily relate to the package dependencies of the
project. These dependencies are divided into different files, depending on their purpose,
e.g. test for testing dependencies and doc for documentation dependencies. The tests
folder contains the tests created for the source code. The tools folder is an additional
folder for software tools or scripts. In our case, it contains a script which generates the
files inside the requirements folder based on a toml file in the root directory.
7.1.2
Compartmentalisation platform
The following repositories include the platforms made using the SvelteKit framework. The
repository c18n platform is the platform that is hosted in the cloud; more on that in Section
7.8.3. This repository has two directories, one for the source code and another for static
resources such as images, SVG files, and some CSV files that contain example data. In
the root directory, a Dockerfile resides, along with configuration files and a README file.
The repository called c18n local platform contains a subset of the feature that the c18n
platform has. It has been made as a fork of the c18n platform repository. That is, the
connection to supabase is not established with the local platform, since authentication is
not needed locally.
7.1.3
Compartmentalisation API
The third repository is the API repository. The source code for the compartmentalisation
and kinetic modelling API is in this repository. Specifically, the source code is located
inside the app directory. The tests for the API endpoints are placed in the app folder.
The directory structure inside the app folder is fairly simple and consists of five directories.
58
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.3: The directory structure of the compartmentalisation API repository
The resources folder contains some static files that the API can use. The routers folder is
currently empty, but as the API is further developed, the routes should be put in here. For
now, the routes remain in the main.py file, located in the root folder. The schemas folder
contains information about what types of data the API can receive. These example data
are also shown as part of the API’s documentation. Because the flow corrector source
code is confidential and therefore cannot be deployed on a package index, its source
code has been placed in this repository as well. The source code for CADET and the
flow corrector can be found in the services folder. The utils folder contains utility classes
and helper functions that do not belong in the services folder. Typical examples include
classes that perform data formatting or data conversion. Lastly, as part of the commitment
to ensure robustness and seamless integration, the tests for the flow corrector and CADET
are placed inside the tests folder.
7.2
Compartment­based scaledown algorithm (CBSM)
As mentioned in the analysis section 5.1.1 the algorithm developed by Tannaz [2] must
be converted to Python to make it feasible to use in a scaleable API solution. Luckily,
there are external libraries that enable full coverage of the Matlab functionality in Python.
These will primarily be NumPy, pandas, and matplotlib. Outside those three essential
libraries, we will also need networkx for finding neighbouring zones in the grid and pytest
for running automated test cases for the implementation. Given MATLAB’s nature the
original implementation of the algorithm has not been developed with an object­orientated
approach, to make testing and comparing the converted algorithm easier, we will be using
a functional programming approach.
To better understand the MATLAB implementation, we have broken it down into smaller
functions. Having the implementation consist of smaller functions will make it easier to
59
==PAGE:68==
write unit tests testing the functionality of the components used by the algorithm.
7.2.1
Functions
The list of functions we will consider in this chapter is Compartmentalisation, Cubing,
Merge, Overlap, Splitting, Zone Reformation, Zoning, and Volume Calculation. The
Python functions can be found in the Appendix A.7 and on GitLab.
The compartmentalisation function is the main function, which will be the one that the API
calls with the parameters needed to calculate the compartments of the reactor. Other than
being the main factor in the flow, it is also responsible for doing some basic preparation
of the input data and constructing the base data structure for the solution. It calculates
three­zone maps of the bioreactor, one for each target variable and a final one using the
overlap function that combines the two previous zone maps The first function it calls is
Zoning.
Zoning
The Zoning function is used to create an initial zone map with only two zones that can
then be split into smaller zones at a later stage. It used the specified target variable to
split each cell into zone 1 or 2 based on whether the target variable is smaller than delta
p.
Zone Reformation
Zone reformation is responsible for refining the cells into smaller zones. For this, it used
the cubing and merging functions. Once the function is done, it will have calculated the
zone map for the selected target variable.
Cubing
Cubing’s first responsibility is to fit the data to the given dimensions of the zone map
using number_X and number_Y which specifies the number of cells along each axis of
the map. For each new cell within the map, it will create a coordinate range within which
the cells of the initial map should be within. The zone is then decided by the dominant
zone within the coordinate range. But we still only have zones with an identifier of 1 or 2,
so the next step is to split the zones of the same identifier that are not connected into new
unique zones, which is where Split is called.
Split
Split takes the map built by Cubing and uses delta_x and delta_y as parameters. The
delta values the maximum allowed distance between two cells in the same zone for them
to be part of the same zone. To filter connections between zones, we use the networkx
Python package to represent the cells as nodes in a graph and their connections as edges.
In this way, we can efficiently determine if two cells are connected or not.
Merge
After the zones have been divided into zones of various sizes, some zones may be very
small. Merge is responsible for merging zones that have fewer cells than the specified
merge tolerance with the largest adjacent zone. This will also include merging outliers
that are not connected to any zone. After the function has been completed, we will be
left with a zone map of size number_x × number_y with no zone smaller than the merge
tolerance.
Calculate Volume
Finally, the volume of each compartment is calculated by rotating each cell around the
y­axis and calculating the volume of the resulting 3D body. Using the radial coordinate
60
==PAGE:69==
as x and the axial coordinate of the center axis in the bioreactor as y, we can use the
following formula to calculate the volume.
Vcell = π × ∆Xcell × ∆Ycell
(7.1)
Now, the total volume of the compartment can be calculated by computing the sum of
the volume of all the rotated cells within the zone. The next step will be to compute the
flow between connected compartments, which is covered in Section 7.3. The Python and
MATLAB approach will be compared in Section 8.1.1
7.3
Calculating flows
In the previous section, we have shown how the Python implementation computes the
compartments of the bioreactor and their volumes, but before we can apply this to a kinetic
model, we need to compute the flow between each compartment. In our case, this is done
in five steps: 1) setting up the input data, 2) converting to a staggered grid, 3) correcting
the mass flows, 4) finding the flows, and 5) returning the output data. Thanks to le Nepvou
de Carfort for sharing his implementation of steps 2­4.
7.3.1
Functions
In the following, the functions that make up the flow corrector are explained in brevity.
Setup
The setup function has two input parameters. The first one is the CFD data, which needs
to be input as a DataFrame using pandas. Pandas provides a nice way to set up tabular
forms of data and provides efficient data manipulation. The second input parameter is a
dictionary that maps some predefined keys to the header names in the pandas dataframe
that match the key. The predefined keys are x_min, x_max, y_min, y_max, v_xmean,
v_ymean, zone, and the user must map these keys to the header names in the DataFrame.
By using a DataFrame and a dictionary to map the input values, it provides a unified
interface that can be used with any compartmentalisation output.
The setup function sets the data structures needed for the rest of the implementation,
including the grid, the velocities, and the zone map.
Stagger velocities
This function sets the velocities on a staggered grid. With our chosen grid representation,
this involves shifting the U velocity grid down and the V velocity grid to the right.
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) Half cells appear at the top and bot­
tom after shifting the U grid
(b) Half cells appear the left and right
after shifting the V grid
Figure 7.4: The center cell is shifted down on the U grid and to the right on the V grid
Performing this shift creates some half cells at the top and bottom of the U grid and on
the left and right of the V grid. These half cells are out of the bounds of the original
collocated grid, and the velocities here are here set to zero. However, the velocities at
the cell faces on the U grid are given as the average velocity of the two cells that share
the face. Similarly, the velocities on the V grid are also given by the average velocities of
the average velocities.
With the calculated staggered velocities, it is possible to correct them, so that the mass
is conserved for each cell.
Gauss Siedel
As we discussed in Section 4.7 the velocities have to be corrected so that the inflow is
equal to the outflow for each cell. This can be done using Gauss­Seidel and can be
performed for a certain number of iterations, and with an overrelaxation factor. Instead
62
==PAGE:71==
of or in combination with iterations, it is also possible to set a certain cutoff value so that
when the divergence reaches this cutoff, the routine will terminate.
When the routine has been executed, it becomes possible to calculate the flows.
Calculate flows
With the velocities corrected, the flows in each direction can be calculated by multiplying
the velocities by the area of each cell. The area of each cell is given as part of the input
because x_min, x_max, y_min, y_max denotes a rectangular cell.
Calculate flow matrix
The last step involves finding the flow matrix, which tells us what the flows are between the
compartments. This involves using the approach described in 6.1.1 to correctly calculate
the flows between compartments.
The flow matrix is set up as a 2d array, where each row index corresponds to the compart­
ment that is the source of the flow, and the column index corresponds to the compartment
that is the flow’s destination.
In practice, each cell is checked for a neighbour with a compartment different from itself;
if it is in a different compartment and the direction of flow is such that it goes from one
compartment to another, the flow is registered in the flow matrix.
7.4
CADET
To complete the bioreactor modelling process we need a kinetic engine to simulate the
flow of and reactions of the chemicals inside the reactor. To achieve this, we have initially
implemented CADET­Process explained in the following Section 3.2. After the installa­
tion of CADET and CADET­Process, all we need to do is create a small wrapper object
to expose the needed functionality from CADET­Process to our API. Using the documen­
tation provided by CADET­Process [13] we could set up a simple schema containing the
Pydantic models for each of the methods needed.
1
from pydantic import BaseModel , validator
2
3
class CADETModelParams(BaseModel):
4
volumes: list[float]
5
flow_rate_matrix: list[list[float]]
6
number_of_components: int
7
8
class CADETModelTracer(BaseModel):
9
compartment_index: int = 1
10
concentration: list = [10, 10]
11
injection_duration: float = 10
12
flow_rate: float = 0.1e-3
13
start_time: float = 0
14
15
class CADETModelKineticReaction(BaseModel):
16
reactants: list = [0, 1]
17
products: list = [-1, 1]
18
k_fwd: float = 2
19
k_bwd: float = 1
20
21
class CADETSimulate(BaseModel):
22
cycle_time: float = 100
23
24
class CADETResponse(BaseModel):
25
image: str
26
time: list[float]
63
==PAGE:72==
27
concentration: dict
Using the models as parameters for the wrapper functions, we can now define the CADET­
Process wrapper class as seen on the listing 7.4.
1
from CADETProcess.processModel import ComponentSystem
2
from CADETProcess.modelBuilder import CompartmentBuilder
3
from CADETProcess.processModel import MassActionLaw
4
from CADETProcess.simulator import CADET
5
6
from app.schemas.cadet_model import CADETModelParams , CADETModelTracer ,
CADETModelKineticReaction , CADETSimulate
7
8
class CADETModel:
9
def __init__(self, volumes , flow_rate_matrix , number_of_components=2):
10
self.number_of_components = number_of_components
11
self.volumes = volumes
12
self.flow_rate_matrix = flow_rate_matrix
13
self.component_system = ComponentSystem(number_of_components)
14
self.builder = CompartmentBuilder(
15
self.component_system ,
16
self.volumes ,
17
self.flow_rate_matrix
18
)
19
20
def add_tracer(self, compartment_index , concentration , injection_duration ,
flow_rate , start_time):
21
self.builder.add_tracer(
22
compartment_index , concentration , injection_duration , flow_rate ,
start_time)
23
24
def kinetic_reaction_test(self, params:CADETModelKineticReaction =
CADETModelKineticReaction()):
25
reaction_model = MassActionLaw(self.component_system)
26
reaction_model.add_reaction(
27
params.reactants , params.products ,
28
k_fwd=params.k_fwd, k_bwd=params.k_bwd
29
)
30
31
self.builder.bulk_reaction_model = reaction_model
32
33
def simulate(self, params:CADETSimulate = CADETSimulate()):
34
self.process_simulator = CADET()
35
36
self.process = self.builder.process
37
self.process.cycle_time = params.cycle_time
38
self.simulation_results = self.process_simulator.run(self.process)
Using the wrapper class, we reduce the complexity in the code handling request incoming
to the kinetic API endpoint, resulting in improved code readability. Currently, we have im­
plemented the basic features needed to use CADET­Process for kinetic modelling, but the
package also offers more features that could be implemented in the platform to increase
the number of possible use cases.
64
==PAGE:73==
7.4.1
Licensing
Because the API uses CADET and CADET projects are licensed under the GNU General
Public License, it places some restrictions on how the API can be distributed. Especially
because the API is licensed under the MIT license, as all of the other repositories are,
too.
The repositories fall under private use because they are within DTU’s GitLab and have
been made private. Under the GPL, private use does not trigger the license distribution
clauses. Essentially, it is possible to use and modify GPL­licensed software in a private
setting without the obligation to distribute or re­license them under the GPL. However, if
the project is made public, either by inviting external users or by distributing the project
using a public repository on GitHub, it counts as public use and must be licensed under
GPL. This is something to keep in mind when the project goes public. Furthermore, al­
though the API is hosted in the cloud, its URL is not distributed in any way, adhering to
the principles of private use. This does not mean that the users of the API are exempt
from GPL requirements; since they are recipients of the software, they must have access
to the source code which they do.
Now, both the local and public platforms use the API, but because the platforms and the
API are separate entities and not tightly integrated, the API can retain its MIT license.
This is referred to as ”arm’s length” according to the GNU project [78]:
(...) However, in many cases, you can distribute the GPL­covered software
alongside your proprietary system. To do this validly, you must make sure that
the free and nonfree programs communicate at arm’s length, and that they are
not combined in a way that would make them effectively a single program.
Consequently, the platform does not need to be re­licensed when publicised. This sepa­
ration ensures compliance with the GPL requirements while allowing the proprietary parts
of the MIT License. It is crucial to maintain this clear separation and to ensure that the
parts of the project that are covered by the GPL include access to the source code. In
this way, the project can benefit from the use of open­source GPL­licensed software while
maintaining the desired proprietary aspects of other components. Due to the permissive
nature of the MIT license, it is always an option to re­license to the GPL license.
7.5
API
We will now look further into the REST API we have developed. Since the algorithms
developed for compartmentalisation and kinetic analysis have been developed in Python,
we need an API capable of running Python code, which is not possible to do directly on
the platform since it is JavaScript­based. The API will be responsible for providing ser­
vices for compartmentalisation and kinetic modelling, which can be called through defined
interfaces.
We have chosen to use the lightweight REST API framework for Python, FastAPI [36].
We have made this decision given that the compartmentalisation and kinetic packages do
not require much more than just an endpoint provided by the API.
7.5.1
Endpoints
Endpoints for the API specify which URLs the API is listening to requests on; using
Pydantic and FastAPI we can also specify what type of data and data structure it ex­
pects the requests to include. An example of an endpoint could look like this: local­
host:8080/kinetics/cadet.
The general structure of the endpoints should be /[type]/[algorithm name], meaning
65
==PAGE:74==
that the algorithm provided by Tannaz [2] would be accessible on /compartmentalise/­
tannaz. As mentioned in Section 6.3 an endpoint should also be available for accessing
parameters for the algorithms and their default values. These should be specified using
the following format /[type]/[algorithm name]/params, resulting in /[type]/[algorithm
name]/params.
The endpoints would then be defined in the code using Fast API and Pydantic notation
as seen on the listing 7.1
1
@app.put("/compartmentalise/scaledown/tannaz")
2
def scaledown_tannaz(data: TannazData , params: TannazParams = TannazParams())
-> TannazResponse:
3
grid_info_headers = ["radial_min", "radial_max",
4
"axial_min", "axial_max", "zone", "count", "surface
zone", "radial velocity mean", "axial velocity
mean"]
5
volume_header = ["zone", "volume"]
6
try:
7
matplotlib.rcParams.update(matplotlib.rcParamsDefault) # reset
matplotlib params
8
(grid_info , volume, img) = CM_tannaz(X=data.X, Y=data.Y, Vx=data.Vx,
Vy=data.Vy,
9
number_X=params.number_X ,
number_Y=params.number_Y ,
10
merge_tolerance=params.
merge_tolerance ,
11
delta_px=params.delta_px ,
delta_py=params.delta_py)
12
# convert img to base64
13
img_base64 = base64.b64encode(img.getvalue()).decode()
14
flow_instance = Flow()
15
flow_result = flow_instance.solve(pd.DataFrame(grid_info , columns=["
x_min", "x_max", "y_min", "y_max", "zone", "count", "surface zone"
, "vx mean", "vy mean"]))
16
matplotlib.pyplot.close()
17
return TannazResponse(grid_info_headers=grid_info_headers ,
18
grid_info=grid_info.tolist(),
19
volume_headers=volume_header ,
20
volume=volume.tolist(),
21
image=img_base64 ,
22
flow_rate_matrix=flow_result.tolist())
23
except Exception as e:
24
print(e)
25
raise HTTPException(status_code=500, detail=str(e))
Listing 7.1: FastAPI endpoint example
Line 1 in listing 7.1 defines that the endpoint is a put request, which typically means that
some data is passed along with the request to either be saved or processed, and it also
specifies the URL for which the endpoint should be available on. The function just below
will automatically be associated with the put request defined above, and it will expect data
and an optional parameter input from the request.
It then proceeds to call the compartmentalisation algorithm and finally uses the flow cor­
rector to calculate the flow between compartments before returning the result to the re­
quester.
66
==PAGE:75==
7.5.2
Input Validation
To validate that the data contained in the request have the correct types and structure,
we use Pydantic, which provides a framework for defining models as classes and built­in
validation methods for the models. Listing 7.5.2 shows the TannazData model which is
based on the API specification in Section 6.3.
1
class TannazData(BaseModel):
2
X: list[float]
3
Y: list[float]
4
Vx: list[float]
5
Vy: list[float]
6
7
@validator('*')
8
def validate_x_content(cls, v, values, field):
9
if not all(isinstance(x, (float, int)) for x in v):
10
raise ValueError(
11
f'{field.name} must be a list of floats or integers')
12
# check all values are the same length
13
for value in values:
14
if (len(values[value]) != len(v)):
15
raise ValueError(
16
f'{field.name} with length {len(v)} does not match {value}
with length {len(values[value])}')
17
return v
The validation method uses the regular expression ”*” to specify that it should be applied
to all variables contained in the class, which are X, Y, Vx, and Vy in this example. The
validator has two checks it performs on the input data, the first check is that all elements
in the lists are either of the type float or integer. The second check is put in to ensure that
all the lists have the same length, so we know that the data set is complete.
7.6
Web Platform
This section will be used to introduce some of our implementation decisions regarding the
web platform. We will go through how we have implemented our design choices as well
as some more technical details regarding communications between the web platform and
the API.
7.6.1
Component Library & Theme
When developing web applications you often need some generic components such as
dropdowns, buttons, app bars and much more. Some of these components are readily
available in HTML but will default to the browser’s defined theme. Component libraries
provide such components bundled together with often improved functionality, as well as
a customisable theme.
We have chosen to use Skeleton [79] as our component library and theme generator, as
it supports SvelteKit and is also a lightweight component library. Using Skeleton, we can
ensure that we achieve a unified design within our web application. We also encourage
future development of this project to use Skeleton and follow the set design guidelines
from the theme.
7.6.2
Supabase
The database used to store user information is hosted on Supabase and consists of a
single table with the user’s fullname, username, and avatar. This table also has an iden­
tifier, which points to Supabase’s authentication schema, that is automatically generated
67
==PAGE:76==
when setting up the project on Supabase. The implementation of authenticating users are
handled by Supabase’s authentication system, which exposes some common functional­
ities such as logging in, registering, etc. The authentication system is used on the web
platform to allow users to log in, log out, recover passwords, and register an account.
7.6.3
Features
The two main features of the platform are the compartmentalisation feature and the kinetic
modelling feature. The flow of each feature is pretty identical as shown in figure 6.3 in
section 6.4.
Data Mapping
The first problem we need to address is mapping columns to the variables needed for the
algorithms. Since our only restriction is that the user uploads an Excel file with headers
in the first row, we do not know in which order these rows will be set. The order of rows
may also vary depending on which software or method has been used to compute the
CFD data. Instead of forcing the user to use an exact format for the uploaded data, we
decided to create a table where the user can manually map their columns to the specific
algorithm variables. The mapping table can be seen in the lower half of the figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6: Paramater input for compartmentalisation and input column table
The solution has been to put a dropdown in each column where the options are the vari­
ables for the data needed by the algorithm. Listing 7.2 shows the logic of how the drop­
downs have been added to the table. The dropdown has been made a custom svelte
component to include the logic of how the mapping is saved.
1
...
2
<thead>
3
<tr class="sticky bg-surface -900 top-0">
4
{#each headers as header}
5
<th class="px-4 py-2 text-center outline outline -1">
6
<p class="mb-2 truncate text-white">{header}</p>
68
==PAGE:77==
7
{#if showDropdown}
8
<ParamDropdown {header} bind:selectedParams/>
9
{/if}
10
</th>
11
{/each}
12
</tr>
13
</thead>
14
...
Listing 7.2: Code snippet of table header with mapping
Additional logic has also been implemented to guarantee that each data variable used for
the algorithm has a unique relationship with one of the columns in the table. We do this
to ensure that if the user selects the same variable twice for different columns, only the
most recent selection will be saved. Saving the selected parameters as a record allows
us to implement this logic using a simple lookup approach.
1
...
2
export let selectedParams: Record<string, string >;
3
...
4
export const handleChange = () => {
5
// remove old header
6
for (const key in selectedParams) {
7
if (selectedParams[key] === header) {
8
delete selectedParams[key];
9
}
10
}
11
// add new header if not undefined
12
if (selectedParam !== "Undefined") {
13
selectedParams[selectedParam] = header;
14
}
15
}
16
...
Listing 7.3: Code snippet of logic behind unique mapping
The handleChange function in the listing 7.3 is bound to the dropdown component and
is triggered any time a change occurs in that component. It first checks if a key is already
bound to the header associated with the dropdown and deletes the relation if it exists. If
the selected parameter is not undefined, it maps the selected parameter to the associated
header.
The process button will be disabled until all the required variables have been assigned to
a header in the table.
Model Parameters
Figure 7.6 also shows that the user can input model­specific parameters at the top of the
figure. These are the parameters fetched from the API after the user has selected the
model. The platform fetches the names, default values, and a small help text for each
parameter.
We have made a custom Svelte component for this feature called ModelParamSelector,
which fetched the parameters and uses Svelte’s for each block to display all the parameter
inputs. The help text for each parameter is shown in a popup when hovering the question
mark next to the input field.
1
...
2
async function fetchParamsForModel(model: string) {
69
==PAGE:78==
3
switch (model) {
4
case 'tannaz ':
5
try {
6
await fetch(env.PUBLIC_API_URL + `/compartmentalise/scaledown/
tannaz/params`, {
7
method: 'GET',
8
headers: {
9
'Content -Type ': 'application/json'
10
}
11
}).
12
then(res => res.json() as Promise <unknown >)
13
.then(data => {
14
if (typeof data === 'object ' && data !== null) {
15
paramList = [];
16
for (const key in data) {
17
if (key !== 'help' && Object.prototype.
hasOwnProperty.call(data, key)) {
18
const value = (data as Record<string, unknown
>)[key];
19
paramList.push({key: key, value: value as
string});
20
}
21
}
22
helpDict = JSON.parse((data as Record<string, unknown
>)['help '] as string) as Record<string, string >;
23
} else {
24
throw new Error('Invalid response ');
25
}
26
});
27
} catch (e) {
28
console.log(e)
29
alert('Error fetching params ');
30
}
31
break;
32
default:
33
break;
34
}
35
}
36
...
Listing 7.4: Fetching model specific parameters
The method for obtaining the parameters for the selected model is shown in the listing
7.4. As we mentioned in section 7.5 each model will have its endpoint the function should
include a case for each of the available models. If a new model were added, such as
grid­based scaledown, a new case named grid could be added.
After fetching the parameter data from the API it is mapped into TypeScript data structures
that we can use for building the frontend elements.
1
...
2
<div class="grid grid-cols -4">
3
{#each paramList as param}
4
<label class="label mr-2 mb-2 text-sm">
5
<div class="flex gap-2">
6
<span>{param.key}</span>
7
<HelpWithPopUp helpText={helpDict[param.key]} target={param.key} /
>
8
</div>
9
<input class="input" type="number" bind:value={param.value} />
10
</label>
70
==PAGE:79==
11
{/each}
12
</div>
13
...
Listing 7.5: Label, help and input elements
Navigation from compartmentalisation to kinetics
Another important feature is to proceed with kinetic modelling after complete compart­
mentalisation of the CFD data while keeping the results cached so the user avoids the
process of exporting the result and then importing the flow rate matrix and volumes in the
first steps of kinetic modelling.
Figure 7.7: Navigation from compartmentalisation result directly to kinetic modelling
Pressing ”Process to kinetics” will take the user directly to step 2 of the kinetic process,
where the kinetic model can be selected. To transfer data from page to page, we use a
state management framework provided by SvelteKit called store, which is a shared state
that can be read and written from different sources.
The store is implemented in a TypeScript file called store.ts located on the kinetic route.
It consists of three writable constants. Specifying the variables using writable creates the
interface that allows other sources to write values to them.
1
import { writable } from 'svelte/store ';
2
3
export const flow_rate_matrix = writable <Array<Array<number >>>();
71
==PAGE:80==
4
export const volumes = writable <number[]>([]);
5
export const currentstep = writable <number >(0);
Listing 7.6: Kinetic store for shared variables
We can then import the store on the compartmentalisation page and write the values of the
result to the shared store. The function navigateToKinetics shown on listing 7.7 maps the
result of the compartmentalisation to the required format specified by the kinetics store.
After updating the store with the result values, we can set the current step of the kinetic
process to 1, which means that we skip the upload step. Finally, we use goto to navigate
to the kinetics page.
1
import { flow_rate_matrix , volumes , currentstep } from '../kinetics/store.js';
2
...
3
function navigateToKinetics() {
4
if (resultItem) {
5
let temp_flow_rate_matrix: number[][] = [];
6
for (let i = 0; i < resultItem.flow_rate_matrix[0].length; i++) {
7
temp_flow_rate_matrix.push(resultItem.flow_rate_matrix.map((row) =
> Number(row[i])));
8
}
9
$flow_rate_matrix = temp_flow_rate_matrix;
10
$volumes = resultItem.volume.map((row) => Number(row[1]));
11
$currentstep = 1;
12
goto('/kinetics ');
13
}
14
}
Listing 7.7: Writing results to the shared store
The three highlighted features have been chosen because they show how simple features
can improve the user experience on the platform, by automating tasks that would be
tedious and often repeated in frequent use cases.
7.7
Testing
As part of good practices, unit tests and integration tests have been implemented in Pytest
to test the various components of the system.
7.7.1
Testing CBSM
When implementing a complex algorithm that consists of multiple sub­functions it is impor­
tant to have set up tests, that will catch if a function has unexpected behaviour or output. It
is helpful to set up tests that are simple enough that the expected output can be deducted
easily; this will show any fundamental errors that could be in the implementation.
Listing 7.8 shows one of the test cases for the split method. In this case, we have three
center points of three cells; let us call the points A, B, and C which are all in zone 1. The
delta values are 1. The definition of split in section 7.2.1 states that if a point is more than
the delta distance away in the corresponding direction it should be split into a new zone.
A = (1, 1)
B = (1.5, 1.5)
C = (3, 3)
72
==PAGE:81==
From the three points it is easily deductible that point C has a distance greater than the
delta values in either of their corresponding directions to the nearest cell of the same
zone. This means that after running the split, we should expect the three points to have
the following zones:
A = 1
B = 1
C = 2
1
def test_split():
2
center_info = np.array([[1.0, 1.0, 1.0],
3
[1.5, 1.5, 1.0],
4
[3.0, 3.0, 1.0]])
5
delta_x = 1.0
6
delta_y = 1.0
7
split_result = split(center_info , delta_x , delta_y)
8
9
assert split_result[:, 2].tolist() == [1.0, 1.0, 2.0]
Listing 7.8: Split test case
Test cases like these have been very useful in understanding how the functions should
work and also in confirming that our implementations behave as we expect them to.
7.7.2
Testing Flow
As part of this project’s commitment to ensure seamless integration, test cases for the
mass corrector have been put in place.
Because flow calculations can be complicated, especially on larger grids, the test case
setup featured smaller grids with a size of 3 × 3. This allowed for easier debugging and
also provided better insight into the exact functionality of the functions. In the case of
flows, the five functions were tested, and the 27 tests were passed.
An example of such a test case can be seen in the following:
1
def test_down_flow(self):
2
rows, cols = 3, 3
3
nodeX = np.array([0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0])
4
nodeY = np.array([0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0])
5
gU = np.ones((rows + 1, cols))
6
gV = np.zeros((rows, cols + 1))
7
8
flow_instance = Flow()
9
flow_instance.nX = rows
10
flow_instance.nY = cols
11
flow_instance.nodeX = nodeX
12
flow_instance.nodeY = nodeY
13
flow_instance.gU = gU
14
flow_instance.gV = gV
15
16
expectedFx = np.ones((rows + 1, cols))
17
expectedFy = np.zeros((rows, cols + 1))
18
flow_instance.calculate_2d_flow()
19
20
actualFx , actualFy = flow_instance.Fx, flow_instance.Fy
21
22
assert np.array_equal(expectedFx , actualFx)
23
assert np.array_equal(expectedFy , actualFy)
73
==PAGE:82==
As the code suggests, this function tests a case where the flow is down. Initially, a grid
of size 3x3 is set up, which means there are 4 nodes (or cell faces) in each direction. As
can be seen, each cell is 1×1, and the U velocity field is initialised with ones that indicate
a downward flow. Clearly, this means that the expected flow in the x direction should be
one for each cell and zero for the y direction. Equating the expected output with the actual
output confirms this and confirms the case. This test case showed one direction, but there
are seven other test cases exploring the different directions.
Most of the functions tested follow this straightforward approach of initialising variables
and checking that the output equals the expected output. However, for testing Gauss­
Seidel, the same methodology cannot be used, due to its approximate nature. However,
this function also had to be tested, due to its crucial nature in ensuring mass conservation.
Testing Gauss­Seidel
Testing the Gauss­Seidel method used in the flow approximations presented in Section
4.7 is not straightforward because Gauss­Seidel is an approximation. In fact, convergence
is only guaranteed if the matrix is strictly diagonally, dominant or symmetric, and positive
definite [63].
However, testing is necessary to ensure that the implementation is correct and that the
underlying ideas behind the approach are correct. There are multiple ways to test the
method, but some of the most direct ones are testing the rate of convergence and testing
that the error of the solution becomes small enough.
Testing that the error becomes small enough can be done in multiple ways. If an analytical
solution to the system of equations is known, the exact or true error ek is given as:
ek = x∗−xk
(7.2)
Where x∗is the analytical solution and xk is the approximate solution at iteration k.
However, more often than not the analytical solution is not known (or does not exist), and it
is always a good idea to check that the implementation works in cases where no analytical
solution exists. There are multiple ways to do this. One such way involves computing the
residual error to proxy the true error. The residual error is typically given as
rk = b −Axk
(7.3)
As we have already established, the divergence ∇u should be zero to satisfy the flow
incompressibility condition. Therefore, the b vector should be zero. However, A is not
easily computable because it does not appear explicitly in the implemented method used
to adjust the velocities. Instead, the effect A has can be observed by updating the veloc­
ities.
This does not mean that one cannot compute a residual; it will just not be in a traditional
sense. In our approach, the velocity fields are adjusted to reduce the divergence to zero.
This means that our divergence is essentially a residual. It is the divergence that gives
us a measure of how well the incompressibility condition is met at every point on the grid.
The divergence gives us a quantifiable error, and we can therefore test that the divergence
approaches zero and that the final value ends up being close to zero in order to test the
implementation.
74
==PAGE:83==
Since the divergence is calculated on a per­cell basis, the divergence for each cell and for
each iteration must be saved. To check whether the divergence approaches zero, we can
compute the L2 norm of the matrix of cell divergences for each iteration. Let Ak denote
the k­th iteration of a matrix A with dimensions m × n. The L2 norm is given by:
||Ak||2 =
#
$
$
%
m
&
i=1
n
&
j=1
(ak
ij)2
(7.4)
Solving this flow for a simple 10 × 10 grid with random velocities and plotting the norm as
function iterations gives us a graph that looks like this:
Figure 7.8: The divergence norm as a function of the iterations. In this figure, a 10x10
grid instantiated with random uniformly distributed initial velocities between [−10; 10] m/s
was used. A 1000 iterations was run and a relaxation factor of ω = 1.6 was used.
Clearly, the divergence seems to be zero long before iteration 1000. To ensure that the
divergence becomes zero consistently, multiple iterations can be run with different initial
velocities. Solving for n = 20 grids provides reassurance:
Figure 7.9: Running the method with 20 different grids of size 10 × 10 and with random
uniformly distributed velocities
75
==PAGE:84==
Again, it looks like the implemented Gauss­Seidel method appears to push the diver­
gences towards zero.
As part of the unit tests implemented for the Gauss­Seidel method, these characteristics
are the ones we are testing for. For the implementation of the unit tests, the priority was
to choose a smaller problem that was easily verifiable by hand, as we did for the other
functions. Test cases in which the velocities vectors point upward, downward, left, and
right were created with a simple 3 × 3 grid. The number of iterations was set to k = 10000
with a relaxation factor of ω = 1.6. It is then checked that the error does not increase
every n = 10 iteration and that the final divergence is close to zero ||Ak||2 < 1 · 10−8 in all
the test cases. Depending on the grid structure, the grid elements and the parameters of
the Gauss­Seidel method, these values will change.
There are also more indirect methods to test that the error decreases, such as testing the
order of convergence decreases. Similarly, it is also possible to test that the velocity field
converges to a steady state.
7.7.3
API Integration Test
The API acts as the central node of the system, importing compartmentalisation, flow, and
kinetic packages and making their functionality available to the platform. It is therefore
beneficial to perform a large­scale integration test on the API, where we input data in the
format specified for each endpoint and verify that we get the correct result back from the
API. Unlike the unit test, we are now focused on a more total picture of the system and
will now also be creating test cases using full CFD data.
The following test case goes through the entire system, calling both the compartmen­
talisation endpoint and the kinetic endpoint, thereby reaching the compartmentalisation,
flow, and kinetic functions.
1
def test_scaledown_and_kinetic():
2
filename = "app/resources/2_A310_60_BM_160rpm_FlowStats_003.xlsx"
3
# Read CFD data
4
data = pd.read_excel(filename)
5
CFD_data = data.values
6
# Extract data
7
# start at 5 to avoid the header
8
X = CFD_data[5:, 9].tolist()
9
Y = CFD_data[5:, 1].tolist()
10
Vx = CFD_data[5:, 7].tolist()
11
Vy = CFD_data[5:, 6].tolist()
12
13
response = client.put(
14
"/compartmentalise/scaledown/tannaz",
15
json = {
16
'data' : TannazData(X=X, Y=Y, Vx=Vx, Vy=Vy).dict(),
17
'params' : TannazParams(number_X=15, number_Y=35, merge_tolerance
=19, delta_px=0, delta_py=0).dict()
18
}
19
20
)
21
assert response.status_code == 200
22
23
cadet_response = client.put(
24
"/kinetics/cadet",
25
json = {
26
'modelParams' : CADETModelParams(volumes=np.array(response.json()[
'volume'])[:, 1].tolist(), flow_rate_matrix=np.array(response.
json()['flow_rate_matrix']).tolist(), number_of_components=2).
76
==PAGE:85==
dict(),
27
'modelTracer' : CADETModelTracer(compartment_index=4,
concentration=[10, 10], injection_duration=10, flow_rate=0.1e
-3, start_time=0).dict(),
28
'modelKineticReaction' : CADETModelKineticReaction(reactants=[0,
1], products=[-1,1], k_fwd=2, k_bwd=1).dict()
29
}
30
)
31
assert cadet_response.status_code == 200
32
assert cadet_response.json()['image'] != None
33
assert len(cadet_response.json()['time']) > 0
34
assert len(cadet_response.json()['concentration'].keys()) > 0
Listing 7.9: Integration test on API
In the test case shown on the listing 7.9 we use a full CFD data set and extract the needed
columns into lists that can be passed to the API using the data input parameter. The first
step is calling the endpoint for compartmentalisation and asserting that the status code
of the response is successful (200). If the compartmentalisation response is successful,
we proceed to send a request to the CADET kinetic model endpoint using the result from
the compartmentalisation response. Finally, we assert that the kinetic response is also
successful and that the result is not null.
7.8
CI/CD
Setting up a continuous integration and continuous delivery pipeline is a crucial part of
larger projects with the goal of deploying them to a production server, but can also be
useful to ensure code quality and completeness of smaller projects. Unfortunately, strict
network policies imposed by our GitLab host Gbar, which manages a GitLab enterprise
instance for usage within DTU, have restricted usage of GitLab’s capabilities for setting
up automated CI/CD pipeline. Unfortunately, this results in a lot of the steps in the pipeline
needing to be triggered manually.
Figure 7.10 shows the overall steps of our CI/CD pipeline, and as mentioned, most of
these steps need to be handled manually.
Figure 7.10: Basic CI/CD pipeline for building, testing, and deploying.
In the following section, we will explain further how each step of the pipeline has been
implemented.
7.8.1
Docker Setup
In order to make the platform and the API project easier to deploy, we have chosen to use
Docker to build images of these two projects. The compartmentalisation package does
not need to be converted into an image since it is distributed on PyPI. Let us take a look
at how we can build the images.
The Dockerfile for the API repository is defined as follows. It uses an image that contains
Python and the Conda framework, which allows us to install the CADET Engine using
77
==PAGE:86==
Conda. After having installed CADET, we can then install the rest of the packages using
the Python package manager pip. The required packages for the repository have been
defined in the requirements.txt file, and if new packages are added in the future, they
should also be listed in that file. After the packages have been installed we run pytest to
test all the defined use cases for the API and if they all pass, the API is started on port
8080 of the machine it is running on.
1
FROM continuumio/miniconda3
2
WORKDIR /code
3
# Copy the environment.yml file into the Docker container
4
COPY ./environment.yml .
5
# Use the conda env create command to create a new Conda environment from
the environment.yml file
6
RUN conda env create -f environment.yml
7
# Activate the environment
8
SHELL ["conda", "run", "-n", "env", "/bin/bash", "-c"]
9
COPY ./requirements.txt /code/requirements.txt
10
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir --upgrade -r /code/requirements.txt
11
COPY ./app /code/app
12
RUN pytest --disable -warnings
13
# Make sure the environment is activated when running the application
14
ENTRYPOINT ["conda", "run", "--no-capture -output", "-n", "env"]
15
CMD ["uvicorn", "app.main:app", "--host", "0.0.0.0", "--port", "8080", "--
proxy-headers"]
Listing 7.10: Dockerfile for API
The Dockerfile for the platform is more simple as we do not rely on packages provided by
different package managers. The Dockerfile is constructed using a general node struc­
ture. The base image used for this Dockerfile is Node, which provides the tools needed
for building JS/TS web applications. The package manager used here is npm which is
one of the most used package managers for Javascript­based web applications.
1
FROM node:18 AS build
2
3
WORKDIR /app
4
COPY . .
5
RUN npm install
6
RUN npm run build
7
8
FROM node:18 AS deploy-node
9
10
WORKDIR /app
11
RUN rm -rf ./*
12
COPY --from=build /app/package.json .
13
COPY --from=build /app/build .
14
RUN npm install --omit=dev
15
16
CMD ["node", "index.js"]
Listing 7.11: Dockerfile for platform
To run the Dockerfiles, we currently use docker­compose, which gives greater control
when running a multiple docker container environment. Before deploying the solution
to Google Cloud, we used NGINX mentioned in Section 4.4.2 for cluster management,
but scalable functionality is also built into Google Cloud which makes NGINX redundant.
We have chosen to still use docker­compose to make further development easier, even
though it is now a single­container application.
78
==PAGE:87==
The container image can be built using the docker­compose while in the root directory as
seen on 7.8.1. Here we call ”docker­compsoe up” which tells the Docker engine to start
the Docker image located in the current directory. The ”­d” flag is set to run the docker
image in detached mode, meaning that the output and logs will not be shown in the current
console, but rather in the Docker client. Finally, we use the ”–build” to specify that before
starting the Docker image it should build a new version of the image using the code in the
current repository. The command executes the Dockerfile and if it succeeds, the Docker
image will be available on the chosen port afterward.
1
docker-compose up -d --build
By using Docker, we now have a controlled environment that we can use locally for de­
velopment purposes but also is identical to the environment deployed to Google Cloud.
7.8.2
Automated Testing
To ensure that the functionality of the API and the developed packages behave as ex­
pected, we have set up automated testing for the projects, which include unit tests to
verify smaller parts of the system, and integration tests to verify that different components
work together as we expect them. Since our backend is developed exclusively in Python,
we are using the pytest framework for the unit tests and for the integration tests, we use
a combination of Pydantic, FastAPI, and Pytest. Ideally, these tests are run on GitLab’s
runners whenever a new push is made to the repository, but because glab restricts any
outgoing traffic from the virtual machines hosting the Gitlab runners, we are not able to
install any packages or fetch default docker images, so until the project is moved to an­
other host such as GitHub or the official GitLab host, it is not possible to setup testing as
part of the CI/CD pipeline.
As a workaround for this, we have included Pytest in our Dockerfile, which means that a
Docker will only complete the build if all tests pass. Using this workaround, we indirectly
ensure that if a test fails, then the image cannot be deployed.
7.8.3
Deployment to Google Cloud
Due to the limitations imposed by glab on the shared GitLab runners, it is currently not
possible to set up an automatic pipeline for deployment, since they are not allowed to
communicate with any service outside of DTU’s network. This means that the build and
deployment have to be done manually on the Google Cloud platform. Luckily, once the
triggers and services are set, it is only a few clicks. We use two of the tools provided by
Google Cloud which are triggers and services. The triggers are responsible for pulling
the code from the specified repository and building a docker image that can be deployed
at a later stage. The building process is defined by a Dockerfile located at the root of the
repository.
Setup
Initially, a Google Cloud project is created which will contain references to the GitLab
repositories, the builder, and the runners.
Step one is to link the repositories to the Google Cloud project, which is done from the
repositories page in Google Cloud Build. Currently, our repositories are hosted on git­
lab.gbar.dtu.dk which is a self­managed GitLab host; this needs to be specified when
setting up the host connection. A personal access token should also be generated for
Google Cloud Build to allow it to pull from the repository. Once the host connection is
79
==PAGE:88==
made, the repository can be selected from the dropdown found when clicking ”link repos­
itory”.
Now that the repositories have been linked, a build trigger can be set up for the repository.
We recommend running triggers on the EU­West­1 region as that is one of the few regions
within Europe that has the capabilities of building Docker images, most of the other regions
are mainly used for hosting. The trigger can be configured to use either Google Cloud’s
syntax for building or a Dockerfile; in our case, we use Dockerfiles for building the image.
Setting up the service in Google Cloud Run is the last step and requires a bit more configu­
ration. Select the image built by the trigger and pay attention to the container port selected
for the service; this needs to match the specified port in the Dockerfile. Autoscaling can
be set up to handle multiple requests more efficiently like NGINX; we recommend setting
the maximum number of instances to 5 to reduce cost until we have more active users.
Running a trigger
To build the image on Google Cloud, navigate ”Triggers” using the Cloud Console for the
”Bioreactor” project, where you will find a table showing all available triggers for the project
and a run button. Figure 7.11 shows the trigger table.
Figure 7.11: Google Cloud trigger Ttble
Once a trigger has been selected, a new window will open where the branch from which
the image should be built can be selected, see figure 7.12. In our case, this will typically
be the branch ”main”. Once you have confirmed that the right branch has been chosen,
you can then run the trigger. If the build completes without errors, it can be deployed from
the Google Cloud Service tool.
Figure 7.12: Google Cloud trigger run config
Deploying a new service revision
To deploy a new version of a service, head to Google Cloud Run, which can also be found
in the Google Cloud Console for the project. The Cloud Run table shows the available ser­
80
==PAGE:89==
vices that can be deployed. Currently, we have set up two services compartmentalisation­
api and platform­image; these two services can be accessed through public URLs. To
deploy a new revision for a service, navigate to the service overview by clicking the name
of the service.
Figure 7.13: Google Cloud Run overview of created services
Once in the overview for the selected service, press ”Edit & Deploy New Revision” which
will take you to a new page where the new container for the revision can be selected. The
containers for the API will be located under the name of the host > group > project; from
there the newest container image should be picked. Finally, check to see if the chosen
port on Google Cloud matches the port from the Dockerfile, before pressing deploy at the
bottom.
Figure 7.14: Google Cloud compartmentalisation­api service overview
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure 7.15: Google Cloud compartmentalisation­api service selecting new container im­
age to deploy
After the deployment has been completed, the new version of the platform or API will be
live at the link shown at the top of the overview page. These links are static and will not
change on new revisions; they can also be changed to a custom domain if available. The
platform can be accessed here1 and the API can be accessed here2
7.8.4
Deploying to PyPI
As mentioned earlier, Tannaz’ compartmentalisation approach [2] has been deployed as
a package on Python’s package index PyPi. When the approach is made available in
a package, developers and collaborators can use it by importing the package into their
code. The package is configured by a toml file, which is needed to specify which build
system will do the packaging. The toml file also specifies the project metadata and the
configuration options for the tools used in the project. The build system for the cbsm
package is setuptools, and is specified at the top of the toml file. As part of the project
metadata, we have specified that a Python version of 3.9 or higher is needed, because
that is what we have used. Similarly, the project has been tested on Windows 10/11
and Mac OSX, so these are officially supported operating systems. Furthermore, some
essential libraries are needed, like numpy, matplotlib, pandas, and networkx. These li­
braries will be included when users install the package and are some of the most popular
Python packages. We have also set up some optional dependencies for development,
documentation, and testing.
In the following, the steps for 1) building and deploying the package and 2) installing and
using the package are presented. Building and deploying requires using multiple tools,
all of which are well­documented, but not in this thesis. For that reason, it is always a
good idea to consult the specific tools’ documentation, as the following sections address
the general workflow.
For developers: Building and deploying the package
Before building and publishing the package, the __version__ attribute has to be updated
inside the cbsm directory’s init.py file. This is done manually, but can easily be automat­
ically implemented using an automated versioning tool such as bumpver. The versioning
scheme used for the package is semantic versioning.
1Platform link: https://platform­image­pfwhpn5qeq­ew.a.run.app
2API link: https://compartmentalisation­api­pfwhpn5qeq­ew.a.run.app/docs
82
==PAGE:91==
After updating the version, the package needs to be built using the build tool.
1
pip install build
This allows us to build the package using the tool.
1
python -m build
As a consequence of running this, a dist folder is created with a source distribution and
a built distribution. The package can now be installed locally, running:
1
python -m pip install -e .
This makes it possible to test the package. If the package works as expected, it should
be uploaded to PyPI. This requires creating an account and an API key on their website.
After performing those steps, the package can be published using twine.
1
pip install twine
Running a check on the files created inside the dist folder is recommended:
1
twine check dist/*
If everything checks out, the package can be published to PyPI by running the following
command:
1
twine upload dist/*
At the time of writing, one has to enter __token__ as username and enter the provided
API key hereafter. This will result in the package being uploaded to PyPI, and can now
be installed and imported.
For users: Installation and import
First, the package has to be installed. This is achieved by running the pip install com­
mand in the terminal:
1
pip install cbsm
With the package installed, the compartmentalise method can be imported:
1
from cbsm.compartmentalisation import compartmentalise
Now, the compartmentalise function can be invoked by referencing it in the code.
The package is configured by a toml file, which is needed to specify which build system
will do the packaging. The toml file also specifies the project’s metadata and the tools.
83
==PAGE:92==
Summary
Critical system components have been specified in a detailed manner that provide valu­
able information about the implementation of the platform.
We have specified each module of the platform so if new features need to be added or
bugs fixed, it should be clear where to look. A simple guide to deploying new revisions
of the API and platform has been made, which takes the developer through each step of
the process.
84
==PAGE:93==
8
Evaluation
In this chapter, we will go through our previously defined goals and evaluate whether our
solution has achieved these goals. We will go through some of the results from the test
cases, but we will also take a broader perspective on the results.
8.1
Project Goals
In the following, we will look at how our solution fulfills the four project goals of the project.
8.1.1
PG­0
Implementing the algorithm developed by Tannaz [2] has been one of the most time­
consuming tasks of this project. We have tried different approaches including the use of AI
tools, but none of the approaches could handle the scale of the MATLAB implementation.
This resulted in us deciding to use some extra time on the conversion and do it manually.
The usage of smaller test cases not only helped us understand each function better, but
also allowed us to test the functions individually and on a smaller scale. However, verifying
that the functions behave as expected is not enough to validate our Python implementation
of the algorithm, since there may be differences in the tools we have used for different
computations compared to the MATLAB implementation. An example of that could be
that when finding connected zones we use graph theory, but the MATLAB implementation
uses an approach of a sweeping filter checking points within a radius of the current point.
These two different approaches could result in deviations in the final result.
Comparison
Comparing the final result of compartmentalisation using the same CFD data and pa­
rameters of the two implementations should let us know if the result produced by our
implementation is within an acceptable similarity to the result from the Matlab implemen­
tation. We have used the CFD data set 2_A310_60_BM_160rpm_FlowStats_003.xlsx1
to compare the results.
1https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/inno4vac/compartmentalisation­api/­/blob/main/app/resources/
85
==PAGE:94==
(a) Radial Velocity
(b) Axial Velocity
(c) Overlap
Figure 8.1: Zones derived using Tannaz MATLAB implementation [2]
The results from using the MATLAB implementation can be seen in figure 8.1. It shows
three plots, one for each target variable and a final overlapped zone map. The MATLAB
implementation produces 10 unique zones after the overlap.
Figure 8.2: Zones derived using Python implementation of CBSM
Looking at the figure 8.2, which is the result produced by the Python implementation, we
see a close resemblance to the MATLAB result. The most significant difference is that
the Python implementation has a new zone, which is zone 7 in Figure 8.2, this zone does
not appear in Figure 8.1. The new zone is a result of the overlap method, of Tannaz [2]
implementation expanding some zones during overlap; this can also be seen in the top
right corner of the overlap plots, where the red zone 10 in figure 8.1 is expanded down,
even though it does not overlap that section of cells originally.
86
==PAGE:95==
Overall, the zones identified using the Python implementation are very similar to the MAT­
LAB implementation.
Although there are minor variations, the zone part provides an
overview within an acceptable deviation.
8.1.2
PG­1 ­ Open­source platform
This project has been implemented as an open­source project on DTU’s GitLab, due to
the confidential nature of the flow corrector. The collaborative and open­source nature
was emphasised throughout the project by selecting other open­source technologies such
as SvelteKit, Supabase, FastAPI Skeleton, CADET, and more. In general, we tried to
minimise the use of proprietary solutions and managed to do so with the exception of the
cloud platform hosted by Google Cloud, but there are no open­source cloud services. In
addition, the project tries to encourage community participation and provides extensive
documentation for developers who want to contribute. However, to fully succeed with
accessibility and attract developers who want to maintain and contribute to the project,
publicity for the project must be generated. This can be achieved through collaborations
with other projects but also by presenting findings and methodologies at conferences and
seminars, as well as showcasing the work at events and symposiums.
Contributions towards making the platform more accessible to students and researchers
were also implemented, specifically through the user interface, which follows a simple
step­by­step approach with documentation along the way. A Python package and an API
were also provided, allowing for easy use of the platform’s functionalities. The package
allows users to run, modify, and analyse models without deep knowledge of the under­
lying code, effectively lowering the barrier for students and researchers who are more
familiar with Python. The API offers a way to access the platform’s functionalities in a
language­agnostic way but also provides a stepping stone for accessing future features
of the platform.
8.1.3
PG­2 ­ Unified interface
Part of the commitment to this project was to provide a framework for users to test and
compare algorithms using a unified interface. This was done through several means.
Testing and comparison can be achieved directly through the features offered on the
platform. First, the platform allows visualisations by displaying plots of zone maps and
displaying tables with the flows between compartments and volumes. Furthermore, the
results of compartmentalisation and kinetic modelling are exportable, allowing users to
have more control over visualisations and comparisons. Exporting is important because
it allows users to perform further analysis or share their findings.
However, to ensure a robust framework, extensibility must be considered. In the problem
analysis, the solution proposal was to take a modular design approach, requiring that we
build a well­defined API that enables interaction with the platform using FastAPI. However,
for Python developers, a package was also created in PyPI. Both of these requirements
are met, since Tannaz’s compartmentalisation algorithm [2] is available as a package that
can be installed according to 7.8.4 and maintained according to 7.8.4. Naturally, all of the
documentation is also available in the package repository.
Focusing on user­facing elements is an important part of the project. In our project, we
focus on four principles when designing and implementing the platform: simplicity, intu­
itiveness, accessibility, and responsiveness. As part of this process, we designed a simple
interface, setting up the compartmentalisation and kinetic processes as step­by­step wiz­
ards, enabling anyone to understand the processes. Combining this with well­known web
elements and focusing the user’s attention on the center of the screen, allowed a smooth
87
==PAGE:96==
user experience. The addition of help texts and example data showcased the project’s
vision of providing a simple and intuitive design.
Accessibility was partially achieved. Providing high­contrast colour themes with Skeleton
and using clear, large, and descriptive web elements with ARIA labels allows some users
to obtain a more optimal experience, but to increase accessibility, more steps must be
taken. This is a whole topic in itself and would include a deep dive into current standards
and guidelines, and even setting up case studies that can better identify the shortcomings
of the platform. Responsiveness was guaranteed through the use of Skeleton, which is
based on Tailwind CSS, allowing devices of different screen sizes to use the platform
without compromising the user experience.
(a) Dark mode login page
(b) Light mode login page
Figure 8.3: The two figures display the different contrasts that the light and dark mode
webpages possess.
8.1.4
PG­3 ­ Postprocessing module
This project goal focused on developing a postprocessing module that would fit the com­
partmentalisation module in away that would allow new algorithms to seamlessly integrate
with the module.
We believe that we have achieved this through our implementation of the postprocessing
module. That is, the flow corrector has been set up to take a DataFrame and a dictionary
as input, where the dictionary maps the header names of the DataFrame to some given
keys. The given keys were based off the information given from Tannaz’ compartmentali­
sation method [2], and thus share names with the table headers from the method’s output
data. This way of accepting input is standardised, which allows for easy integration with
other compartmentalisation algorithms. The implementation was supplemented by writing
docstrings to ensure developers have full clarity of the interface. For algorithms whose
data output do not exactly match the required input format of the DataFrame, adapters will
have to be written to ensure that each column that needs to exist, does exist. With regard
to the data formats, all of the input parameters are assumed to be floating numbers, ex­
cept for the zone numbers, which must be integers. This is specified in the documentation
of the flow corrector’s solve method.
88
==PAGE:97==
By basing the input of the flow corrector on Tannaz’ compartmentalization [2], we are able
to easily set up a test suite to check if we have adapted to the specifications. End­to­
end tests or integration tests were created inside the API repository to ensure that the
output data from Tannaz’ compartmentalisation approach [2] were processed in the flow
corrector. Additionally, 27 unit tests were created for the flow corrector to ensure that
the logic inside it worked as expected. Due to restrictions on the GitLab runners, we are
unable to set up the testing as part of a CI/CD pipeline, but this is definitely something
that is desired if the runners get updated or the project is hosted on something other than
the current GitLab instance.
Lastly, part of ensuring seamless integration is to provide the documentation necessary
to do so. As we mention in Section 5.1.5, no documentation or poor documentation can
deter potential contributors. The created documentation included docstrings for in­code
documentation, API documentation generated by Swagger UI, README files, and CON­
TRIBUTING files. We believe that this documentation should allow developers to provide
meaningful contributions.
8.2
Non­Functional Goals
The non­functional goals play an equally important role when it comes to providing a
satisfactory product. For that reason, these are evaluated in the following.
8.2.1
NFG­0 ­ Encourage collaboration and contributions
One of the non­functional goals of this project was to encourage collaboration and define
clear contribution guidelines. We believe that this goal has been achieved. To stream­
line the collaboration process, we developed clear guidelines for contributions in the
CONTRIBUTING.md files. These guidelines explained how contributors should submit
their work, propose changes, provide feedback, and request new features. Furthermore,
README files were created that introduce each of the repositories of the project.
In terms of licensing, the open­source MIT license was adopted to ensure that the work
remains open and accessible. We hope that it provides contributors with a clear under­
standing of their rights and responsibilities. Assuming that this project is never to be pro­
prietary, we recommend relicensing the project to GPL. The reasoning is legal, but also
because GPL aligns with the open­source spirit, forcing distributed derivative works that
use a GPL­licensed dependency to open­source their product and publish under GPL. It is
our belief that proprietarization kills the collaborative and open nature of projects, limiting
the diversity of ideas and innovation that you get from a large base of contributors.
However, such a decision should be taken with caution because as soon as contributors
contribute under the GPL license, you cannot later re­license their code without each
contributor’s permission.
8.2.2
NFG­1 ­ Cloud Support
We have managed to host the developed API in the cloud using Google Cloud Run and
Google Cloud Build as mentioned in Section 7.8.3. The API service is currently set to
scale with demand, with up to five concurrent instances of the API running to handle high
traffic. This is where Goole Cloud provides great value, as the maximum instance limit
easily can be covered or increased based on needs.
The process of setting up the Google Cloud Project was not difficult, but we were limited by
network restrictions set by Gbar, which allowed any external network traffic from GitLab.
The restrictions resulted in the process of updating the hosted version being unable to
89
==PAGE:98==
be fully automated. An issue was raised with Gbar, but there are currently no plans to
change their external network policy.
The application API can be queried using the following URL: https://compartmentalisation­
api­pfwhpn5qeq­ew.a.run.app/
Documentation for the API can be found at: https://compartmentalisation­api­pfwhpn5qeq­
ew.a.run.app/docs
8.2.3
NFG­2 ­ Documentation
The documentation for our API has been defined using the OpenAPI JSON standard.
We use SwaggerUI to show the documentation in an intuitive user interface for the user.
SwaggerUI allows the user to see all open endpoints and their parameters, request bod­
ies, and responses.
Figure 8.4: OpenAPI generated documentation shown in SwaggerUI
Docstrings have been written for the CBSM package and the API, but have not yet been
compiled to a Spinx project. This means that to access the documentation, the developer
will have to look into the relevant classes, where the docstring will be available.
Looking at the goal, we can conclude that the current level of documentation is sufficient
for the scale of the project at this time.
8.3
Non­Project Goals
We will now turn our attention to the evaluation of the non­project goals. These, unlike the
project and non­functional goals, are evaluated with regard to our personal development.
8.3.1
NP­0 ­ PROSYS insights
During our work with compartmentalisation and converting algorithms from one language
to another, we have been thrown into the deep end of compartmentalisation and biore­
90
==PAGE:99==
actor simulation. Fortunately, we have had great resources around us in the form of
supervisors, co­students and access to relevant papers. Since we have started, we can
see a significant change in our capabilities of understanding and participating in material
regarding process systems. We are nowhere near experts, but we like to think that if we
were to get the opportunity to work on a biotechnical software project, we would have a
small headstart now.
8.3.2
NP­1 ­ CI/CD
During this project, we have been through the full cycle of idea generation, prototyping,
development, testing and deployment, which has been a great experience to see a project
go from an idea to being a functional deployed platform. Along the journey, we have
gained valuable new knowledge about tools used for CI/CD such as Docker, Docker­
Compose, GitLab runners, PyPI and more. Unfortunately, we were not able to set up an
automated CI/CD pipeline because of our choice to use the Gbar revision of GitLab. If we
had known from the start that their external network restrictions were so strict, we would
have chosen another Git provider.
Given the limitations on Gbar we have found other ways to include automated testing,
but it is not the optimal implementation of a CI/CD pipeline, so while our skills with the
mentioned tools have improved, we would have liked to be able to set up a complete
CI/CD pipeline.
91
==PAGE:100==
9
Conclusion
The goal of the project was to take algorithms used for simulation of bioreactors, which
are typically not easily accessible, and provide a platform where they can be showcased,
tested, and compared. Our first task was to convert the compartmentalisation algorithm
developed by Tannaz [2] from MATLAB to Python.
After the conversion, an open­source platform should be developed where the algorithms
and models can be used for computations on uploaded CFD data. The platform should
allow researchers with some programming skills to integrate their algorithms into the plat­
form and collaborate on building a strong foundation of different approaches. Finally, a
postprocessing module should be built to allow the platform to be used as a stand­alone
simulator for bioreactors.
Implementing the compartmentalisation algorithm in Python proved difficult due to the lack
of a formal language specification. However, by implementing test cases to test each step
of the compartmentalisation method, we succeeded in validating the implementation and
set a standard for future implementations of compartmentalisation algorithms, providing
access to the functionalities through an API and a Python package.
A postprocessing module was also developed to fit the interface of the output data from the
compartmentalisation. The module takes input from the implemented compartmentalisa­
tion algorithm by providing a common interface, which allows other compartmentalisation
algorithms to use the flow corrector.
Although the project is not publicly available yet, an ecosystem on GitLab is already set
up in a way that allows effective open­source development of the project. To follow the
open­soruce paradigm we have prioritised choosing open­source technologies for our
tech stack. Extenstive documentation has been written to allow fellow developers to con­
tribute to the project.
Equally important as creating a developer­centric project structure was catering to the
end users of our platform. For the platform, the priority was to develop a user­friendly de­
sign that adheres to core design principles such as simplicity, intuitiveness, accessibility,
and responsiveness. Concretely, these principles were ensured by using well­known web
elements, providing step­by­step guides for the models, and providing clear­cut layouts,
colour themes, and labels. These factors, combined with good visualisations, data tables,
and data export methods, gives the user complete control over their experience.
The Python implementation of the compartmentalisation algorithm was validated using
unit tests with expected results that could easily be deduced. We also carried out a com­
parative analysis of the final compartments computed by the MATLAB and Python imple­
mentations on the same CFD data. Furthermore, multiple unit tests were implemented
for each routine inside the postprocessing module, to ensure its correctness, and a qual­
itative analysis established that its interface allows for seamless integration with other
compartmentalisation algorithms. End­to­end tests were also performed to ensure that
the entire platform workflow works as intended.
In evaluating the user interface, we focused on a qualitative analysis of the website focus­
ing on its adherence to the design principles: simplicity, intuitiveness, accessibility, and
responsiveness. The assessment involved examining how the interface streamlined the
process of compartmentalisation and kinetic modelling through a step­by­step approach.
We also reviewed the visual elements of the interface, such as the use of high­contrast
colour themes and large, descriptive web elements with Aria labels. Although these fea­
92
==PAGE:101==
tures provide an optimal experience for some, we recognise the need for further improve­
ments to fully meet accessibility standards.
During this project, we have learnt that algorithms developed without a unified interface in
mind can be challenging to adapt to a web platform. Requirements such as programming
language and input and output structures drastically vary within the subject of compart­
ment modelling and bioreactor simulation. Hopefully having the opportunity to share your
algorithms on an open­source platform can provide some motivation to aim for an imple­
mentation that enables integrations and potential future collaboration.
9.1
Future work
During our work on this project, we have had many ideas of potential features that could
improve the platform. We have also encountered problems that we could not solve within
the timeframe, so a lot of future work within this project is possible.
9.1.1
CI/CD
When proceeding with this project alternatives to gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk should be considered.
There are two main problems with using the Gbar revision.
The first problem is that you need to have a DTU account to access gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk,
which results in the loss of potential contributors to the project, if they are not directly
associated with DTU. Guest accounts can be created by contacting the Glab support
team, but a true open­source structure would be preferred where potential collaborators
do not need guest invitations.
The second problem is the strict network policy set by Gbar. The shared GitLab runners
which can be used to automatically run test, build, and deploy scripts are not allowed any
external network communication. This leaves us with two options, either we provide the
runners on a server we own and can control, or run the scripts locally. Given our time
plan, unfortunately we had no time to set up a personal server or manage the server after
finishing. The only option left is then to run the scripts locally, which adds complexity and
longer processing time to the developer.
If the decision to switch Git provider is made, we recommend keeping these two factors
in mind when choosing.
9.1.2
Adding models
The platform intends to make new models within compartmentalisation more accessible
to students, researchers and other groups that could find compartmentalisation interest­
ing. Currently, only one compartmentalisation model has been implemented. Ideally, we
would want to implement more models to support use cases such as comparing different
model approaches for educational purposes. We believe that the next logical step for
that platform would be to increase the number of available models. Such models could
be provided by either internal or external researchers, as our goal is to share knowledge
within the field of compartmentalisation and simulation of bioreactors.
9.1.3
Project Collaborations
The platform could be improved with social and collaborative features, such as creating
teams and sharing your results. To implement such features, the platform and database
would need to be extended. Some form of save capabilities should also be implemented
so users can save the compartments they have computed, this would mean saving the
uploaded data, selected parameters and results.
93
==PAGE:102==
Ideally, these objects are saved in the Supabase database connected to the platform.
Once they are stored in a database, implementing a collaboration functionality is possible
since we now have a cross­user shared space.
We hope that implementing collaboration between users can be a catalyst for starting
conversations about the available models and hopefully lead to pushing the borders of
the compartmentalisation domain.
9.1.4
Educational technology
An important feature of a platform is making sure the user knows what to do once they
access the platform. Currently, only a basic explanation is available to the user once they
log in. Developing educational material in various media forms, such as written guides
and short videos showcasing the platform’s features, could be a good start to increasing
the initial user experience.
The next step after developing basic guides could be to create an interactive guide when
you first visit the platform. This should ideally take the user through the features of the
platform while also providing basic knowledge about compartmentalisation and bioreactor
simulation.
Ensuring that users get a good initial experience will be the key to ensuring user adoption
of the platform.
9.1.5
Integrations
During our project, we worked closely with Johannes Schmölder to integrate CADET and
CADET­Process with our platform and API. The integration with CADET­Process could
still be extended as the package has many features to offer.
Other organisations and researchers are also developing exciting solutions within the
bioreactor simulation domain. It could be interesting to look for such tools for new in­
tegrations to also attract more users from their user pools.
9.1.6
Model Comparison
After new models have been implemented in the platform a comparison feature could be
developed. It should allow the user to see side­by­side views and maybe event high­
lights of the major differences between the models. The comparison feature should help
researchers understand how different models and parameters affect the resulting com­
partments. It could also be interesting to include performance metrics such as time spent
on the computation and resource usage. These could be beneficial factors when deciding
which model suits your needs the best.
94
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[1]
Why is Inno4Vac needed? | Inno4Vac. URL: https://www.inno4vac.eu/why- is-
inno4vac-needed.
[2]
Tannaz Tajsoleiman. Automating Experimentation in Miniaturized Reactors. 2018.
URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/automating-experimentation-in-miniaturized-
reactors.
[3]
runBioSimulations. URL: https://run.biosimulations.org/runs/new.
[4]
David Otasek et al. “Cytoscape Automation: Empowering workflow­based network
analysis”. In: Genome Biology 20.1 (Sept. 2019). ISSN: 1474760X. DOI: 10.1186/
S13059-019-1758-4.
[5]
Aquaria: Simplifying insight from protein structures. URL: https://aquaria.ws/.
[6]
BioModels. URL: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/.
[7]
Bilal Shaikh et al. “BioSimulators: a central registry of simulation engines and ser­
vices for recommending specific tools”. In: (2022). URL: https://docs.biosimulations.
org..
[8]
Andreas Dräger and Bernhard Palsson. “Improving collaboration by standardiza­
tion efforts in systems biology”. In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology
2.DEC (Dec. 2014), p. 117313. ISSN: 22964185. DOI: 10.3389/FBIOE.2014.00061/
BIBTEX.
[9]
Felipe Da Veiga Leprevost et al. “BioContainers: An open­source and community­
driven framework for software standardization”. In: Bioinformatics 33.16 (Aug. 2017),
pp. 2580–2582. ISSN: 14602059. DOI: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTX192.
[10]
Bilal Shaikh et al. “RunBioSimulations: An extensible web application that simulates
a wide range of computational modeling frameworks, algorithms, and formats”. In:
Nucleic Acids Research 49.W1 (July 2021), W597–W602. ISSN: 13624962. DOI:
10.1093/NAR/GKAB411.
[11]
Johannes Schmölder and Malte Kaspereit. “A modular framework for the modelling
and optimization of advanced chromatographic processes”. In: Processes 8.1 (Jan.
2020). ISSN: 22279717. DOI: 10.3390/PR8010065.
[12]
GitHub ­ fau­advanced­separations/CADET­Process: A Framework for Modelling
and Optimizing Advanced Chromatographic Processes. URL: https://github.com/
fau-advanced-separations/CADET-Process/tree/master.
[13]
CADET — CADET. URL: https://cadet.github.io/master/index.html.
[14]
CADET­Process/docs/source/user_guide/tools/figures/compartment_complex.png at
master ∙fau­advanced­separations/CADET­Process ∙GitHub. URL: https://github.
com/fau- advanced- separations/CADET- Process/blob/master/docs/source/user_
guide/tools/figures/compartment_complex.png.
[15]
State of JavaScript 2022: Front­end Frameworks. URL: https://2022.stateofjs.com/
en-US/libraries/front-end-frameworks/.
[16]
GitHub ­ facebook/react: The library for web and native user interfaces. URL: https:
//github.com/facebook/react.
[17]
Angular vs. React vs. Vue.js: A Comprehensive Comparison. URL: https://relevant.
software/blog/angular-vs-react-vs-vue-js-choosing-a-javascript-framework-for-your-
project/.
[18]
Showcase ∙React Native. URL: https://reactnative.dev/showcase.
95
==PAGE:104==
[19]
The History of Angular. The past, present, and future of… | by Dave Gavigan | The
Startup Lab | Medium. URL: https://medium.com/the-startup-lab-blog/the-history-
of-angular-3e36f7e828c7.
[20]
An overview of Angular. In this article, we are going to have a… | by Mátyás Lancelot
Bors | Medium. URL: https : / / medium . com / @mlbors / an - overview - of - angular -
3ccd2950648e.
[21]
All You Need to Know About VueJS | Flexiple. URL: https://flexiple.com/vue/deep-
dive.
[22]
Frameworks without the framework: why didn’t we think of this sooner? URL: https:
//svelte.dev/blog/frameworks-without-the-framework.
[23]
Write less code. URL: https://svelte.dev/blog/write-less-code.
[24]
What is BaaS? | Backend­as­a­Service vs. serverless | Cloudflare. URL: https://
www.cloudflare.com/learning/serverless/glossary/backend-as-a-service-baas/.
[25]
Amplify Documentation ­ AWS Amplify Documentation. URL: https://docs.amplify.
aws/.
[26]
AWS Amplify Pricing | Front­End Web & Mobile | Amazon Web Services. URL:
https://aws.amazon.com/amplify/pricing/?nc=sn&loc=4.
[27]
What is Firebase? The complete story, abridged. | by Doug Stevenson | Firebase
Developers | Medium. URL: https : / / medium . com / firebase - developers / what - is -
firebase-the-complete-story-abridged-bcc730c5f2c0.
[28]
Firebase Pricing. URL: https://firebase.google.com/pricing.
[29]
Modern Web Architecture Without a Backend — Using “Supabase” | by Yiming
Cao | Better Programming. URL: https : / / betterprogramming . pub / modern - web -
architecture-without-a-backend-using-supabase-ec49165b6cc5.
[30]
REST API | Supabase Docs. URL: https://supabase.com/docs/guides/api.
[31]
Auto­generated documentation | Supabase Docs. URL: https://supabase.com/docs/
guides/api/rest/auto-generated-docs.
[32]
supabase/supabase: The open source Firebase alternative. URL: https://github.
com/supabase/supabase.
[33]
Pricing & fees | Supabase. URL: https://supabase.com/pricing.
[34]
Home ­ Django REST framework. URL: https://www.django-rest-framework.org/.
[35]
How to Choose a Python API Framework | Linode Docs. URL: https://www.linode.
com/docs/guides/how-to-choose-python-api-framework/.
[36]
FastAPI. URL: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/.
[37]
Python Types Intro ­ FastAPI. URL: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/python- types/
#classes-as-types.
[38]
Why Docker | Docker. URL: https://www.docker.com/why-docker/.
[39]
What is a Container? | Docker. URL: https://www.docker.com/resources/what-
container/.
[40]
Overview | Kubernetes. URL: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/.
[41]
Advanced Load Balancer, Web Server, & Reverse Proxy ­ NGINX. URL: https://
www.nginx.com/.
[42]
React Users Petition Facebook to Re­license React.js after Apache Software Foun­
dation Bans BSD+Patents License in Dependencies – WP Tavern. URL: https://
wptavern.com/react- users- petition- facebook- to- re- license- react- js- after- apache-
software-foundation-bans-bsdpatents-license-in-dependencies.
[43]
Top Open Source Licenses and Legal Risk | Synopsys Blog. URL: https://www.
synopsys.com/blogs/software- security/top- open- source- licenses.html#:~:text=
Unsurprisingly%2C%20given%20its%20,likely%20find%20the%20MIT%20license.
96
==PAGE:105==
[44]
babel/LICENSE at master ∙babel/babel. URL: https://github.com/babel/babel/
blob/master/LICENSE.
[45]
runtime/LICENSE.TXT at main ∙dotnet/runtime. URL: https://github.com/dotnet/
runtime/blob/main/LICENSE.TXT.
[46]
The MIT License – Open Source Initiative. URL: https://opensource.org/license/mit/.
[47]
Apache 2.0 License ­ Open Licenses: Creative Commons and other options for
sharing your work ­ Guides at University of Pittsburgh. URL: https://pitt.libguides.
com/openlicensing/apache2.
[48]
tensorflow/LICENSE at master ∙tensorflow/tensorflow. URL: https://github.com/
tensorflow/tensorflow/blob/master/LICENSE.
[49]
kubernetes/LICENSE at master ∙kubernetes/kubernetes. URL: https://github.com/
kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/LICENSE.
[50]
spring­boot/LICENSE.txt at main ∙spring­projects/spring­boot. URL: https://github.
com/spring-projects/spring-boot/blob/main/LICENSE.txt.
[51]
Apache License, Version 2.0. URL: https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.
[52]
GNU Licenses ­ Open Licenses: Creative Commons and other options for sharing
your work ­ Guides at University of Pittsburgh. URL: https://pitt.libguides.com/
openlicensing/GNU-GPL.
[53]
COPYING ­ bash.git ­ bash. URL: https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/bash.git/tree/
COPYING.
[54]
uBlock/LICENSE.txt at master ∙gorhill/uBlock. URL: https://github.com/gorhill/
uBlock/blob/master/LICENSE.txt.
[55]
obs­studio/COPYING at master ∙obsproject/obs­studio. URL: https://github.com/
obsproject/obs-studio/blob/master/COPYING.
[56]
The GNU General Public License v3.0 ­ GNU Project ­ Free Software Foundation.
URL: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html#license-text.
[57]
Navier­Stokes Equations. URL: https://www.grc.nasa.gov/www/k-12/airplane/
nseqs.html.
[58]
Staggered grid – CFD­Wiki, the free CFD reference. URL: https://www.cfd-online.
com/Wiki/Staggered_grid.
[59]
Matthias Müller. “How to write an Eulerian Fluid Simulator”. In: (). URL: www.matthiasmueller.
info/tenMinutePhysics.
[60]
Incompressible flow – CFD­Wiki, the free CFD reference. URL: https://www.cfd-
online.com/Wiki/Incompressible_flow.
[61]
Between the Wires: An interview with Vue.js creator Evan You | by Vivian Cromwell
| We’ve moved to freeCodeCamp.org/news | Medium. URL: https://medium.com/
free- code- camp/between- the- wires- an- interview- with- vue- js- creator- evan- you-
e383cbf57cc4.
[62]
Finite Difference Approximating Derivatives — Python Numerical Methods. URL:
https : / / pythonnumericalmethods . berkeley . edu / notebooks / chapter20 . 02 - Finite -
Difference-Approximating-Derivatives.html.
[63]
Gauss­Seidel Method – from Wolfram MathWorld. URL: https://mathworld.wolfram.
com/Gauss-SeidelMethod.html.
[64]
Gauss–Seidel method ­ Wikipedia. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gauss%E2%
80%93Seidel_method.
[65]
12.1: Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity ­ Physics LibreTexts. URL: https://phys.
libretexts.org/Bookshelves/College_Physics/College_Physics_1e_(OpenStax)/12%
3A_Fluid_Dynamics_and_Its_Biological_and_Medical_Applications/12.01%3A_
Flow_Rate_and_Its_Relation_to_Velocity.
[66]
Why GitLab? | GitLab. URL: https://about.gitlab.com/why-gitlab/.
97
==PAGE:106==
[67]
Interactive Results. URL: https://krausest.github.io/js-framework-benchmark/2023/
table_chrome_120.0.6099.62.html.
[68]
Introduction • Docs • SvelteKit. URL: https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/introduction.
[69]
Universal Design in Education: Principles and Applications | DO­IT. URL: https:
//www.washington.edu/doit/universal-design-education-principles-and-applications.
[70]
Material Design. URL: https://m3.material.io/.
[71]
Carbon Design System. URL: https://carbondesignsystem.com/.
[72]
Pricing Overview—How Azure Pricing Works | Microsoft Azure. URL: https://azure.
microsoft.com/en-us/pricing/#product-pricing.
[73]
Pricing Overview. URL: https://cloud.google.com/pricing/.
[74]
Amazon EC2 – Secure and resizable compute capacity – AWS. URL: https://aws.
amazon.com/ec2/pricing/.
[75]
Google Open Source. URL: https://opensource.google/.
[76]
Google Cloud Platform. URL: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform.
[77]
Top vs side navigation: Which one is better for your product? | by Taras Bakusevych
| UX Collective. URL: https://uxdesign.cc/top-navigation-vs-side-navigation-wich-
one-is-better-24aa5d835643.
[78]
Frequently Asked Questions about the GNU Licenses ­ GNU Project ­ Free Software
Foundation. URL: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html.
[79]
Skeleton — UI Toolkit for Svelte + Tailwind. URL: https://www.skeleton.dev/.
98
==PAGE:107==
A
Appendix
A.1
Git Repositories
As of the 16th of January 2024 the repositories for this project can be found on the fol­
lowing links:
• https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/inno4vac/compartment­based­scaledown­model
• https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/inno4vac/compartmentalisation­api
• https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/inno4vac/compartmentalisation­platform
While hosted on gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk a DTU account is required to access the listed reposi­
tories.
A.2
Project plan
A.3
Framework heatmap and barchart
1
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
2
import seaborn as sns
3
import pandas as pd
4
import numpy as np
5
#data from https://krausest.github.io/js-framework -benchmark/2023/
table_chrome_120.0.6099.62.html
6
# Data extracted from the images provided by the user
7
# Update the data by removing the 'react-classes -v18.2.0' framework
8
updated_memory_data = {
99
==PAGE:108==
9
'Framework': ['svelte -classic -v5.0.0-next.8', 'vue-v3.3.6', 'angular -cf-
v17.0.2', 'react-hooks-v18.2.0'],
10
'Ready Memory (MB)': [0.5, 0.7, 1.4, 1.0],
11
'Run Memory 1k (MB)': [2.7, 3.7, 4.7, 4.4],
12
'Run Memory 10k (MB)': [19.6, 28.2, 29.7, 32.2],
13
'Geometric Mean': [1.47, 2.04, 3.00, 2.75]
14
}
15
16
updated_duration_data = {
17
'Framework': ['svelte -classic -v5.0.0-next.8', 'vue-v3.3.6', 'angular -cf-
v17.0.2', 'react-hooks-v18.2.0'],
18
'Create 1k rows (ms)': [39.3, 44.4, 45.0, 45.6],
19
'Update 1k rows (ms)': [18.3, 21.7, 19.3, 23.3],
20
'Select row (ms)': [4.0, 4.9, 4.6, 6.1],
21
'Swap rows (ms)': [22.2, 23.2, 22.5, 181.3],
22
'Remove row (ms)': [16.8, 20.8, 18.1, 19.3],
23
'Create many rows (ms)': [395.7, 464.7, 472.6, 631.7]
24
}
25
26
# Convert the updated dictionaries to a Pandas DataFrame
27
updated_memory_df = pd.DataFrame(updated_memory_data)
28
updated_duration_df = pd.DataFrame(updated_duration_data)
29
30
# Create a bar chart for Updated Memory Allocation
31
plt.figure(figsize=(14, 8))
32
sns.barplot(data=updated_memory_df.melt(id_vars='Framework'), x='variable', y=
'value', hue='Framework')
33
plt.title('Updated Memory Allocation Comparison')
34
plt.ylabel('Memory in MB')
35
plt.xlabel('Metrics')
36
plt.xticks(rotation=45)
37
plt.legend(title='Framework')
38
plt.tight_layout()
39
plt.show()
40
41
# Updated Heatmap for Operation Duration
42
# We will transpose the dataframe for better visualization in the heatmap
43
updated_duration_df_transposed = updated_duration_df.set_index('Framework').T
44
45
plt.figure(figsize=(14, 8))
46
sns.heatmap(updated_duration_df_transposed , annot=True, fmt=".1f", linewidths
=.5, cmap='viridis')
47
plt.title('Updated Operation Duration Heatmap')
48
plt.ylabel('Operation')
49
plt.xlabel('Framework')
50
plt.xticks(rotation=45)
51
plt.yticks(rotation=0)
52
plt.show()
A.4
Framework usage and interest
1
import pandas as pd
2
import numpy as np
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
5
# Data for Interest Over Time
6
years = np.array([2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022])
7
svelte_interest = np.array([0, 0, 0, 66.6, 66.1, 68.1, 69.8])
8
react_interest = np.array([75.4, 71.3, 67.5, 60.9, 58.2, 48.4, 47.2])
9
vue_interest = np.array([51.2, 70.4, 69.6, 64.3, 62.5, 50, 50.7])
100
==PAGE:109==
10
angular_interest = np.array([50.4, 36.3, 24.6, 23.1, 20.8, 16.3, 20.4])
11
12
# Data for Usage Over Time
13
react_usage = np.array([52.7, 62, 71.6, 80.3, 80.1, 80, 81.8])
14
vue_usage = np.array([10.1, 21.6, 31.7, 46.5, 49, 51.2, 46.2])
15
angular_usage = np.array([20, 28.5, 57.8, 57.8, 55.9, 54, 48.8])
16
svelte_usage = np.array([0, 0, 0, 7.8, 14.6, 19.9, 21.2])
17
18
19
# Helper function to plot each line with circles and text
20
def plot_framework(ax, year_data , framework_data , color, label):
21
# We ignore NaNs for plotting text and circles
22
valid_years = year_data[~np.isnan(framework_data)]
23
valid_data = framework_data[~np.isnan(framework_data)]
24
25
# Interpolating the points for a smooth curve
26
line = np.linspace(min(year_data), max(year_data), 300)
27
interpolated_data = np.interp(line, valid_years , valid_data)
28
29
ax.plot(line, interpolated_data , label=label, color=color)
30
ax.plot(valid_years , valid_data , "o", color=color, markersize=20, alpha
=0.5)
31
32
33
# Plotting Interest Over Time
34
fig_interest , ax_interest = plt.subplots(figsize=(14, 7))
35
plot_framework(ax_interest , years, svelte_interest , "blue", "Svelte")
36
plot_framework(ax_interest , years, react_interest , "green", "React")
37
plot_framework(ax_interest , years, vue_interest , "red", "Vue")
38
plot_framework(ax_interest , years, angular_interest , "purple", "Angular")
39
40
# Setting Interest Over Time plot parameters
41
ax_interest.set_xlim(years[0] - 0.5, years[-1] + 0.5)
42
ax_interest.set_ylim(0, 100)
43
ax_interest.set_xticks(years)
44
ax_interest.set_yticks(np.arange(0, 110, 10))
45
ax_interest.set_xlabel("Year", fontsize=14)
46
ax_interest.set_ylabel("Interest (%)", fontsize=14)
47
ax_interest.set_title("Interest Over Time in Frontend Frameworks", fontsize
=16)
48
ax_interest.grid(True)
49
ax_interest.legend()
50
51
# Plotting Usage Over Time
52
fig_usage , ax_usage = plt.subplots(figsize=(14, 7))
53
plot_framework(ax_usage , years, svelte_usage , "blue", "Svelte")
54
plot_framework(ax_usage , years, react_usage , "green", "React")
55
plot_framework(ax_usage , years, vue_usage , "red", "Vue")
56
plot_framework(ax_usage , years, angular_usage , "purple", "Angular")
57
58
# Setting Usage Over Time plot parameters
59
ax_usage.set_xlim(years[0] - 0.5, years[-1] + 0.5)
60
ax_usage.set_ylim(0, 100)
61
ax_usage.set_xticks(years)
62
ax_usage.set_yticks(np.arange(0, 110, 10))
63
ax_usage.set_xlabel("Year", fontsize=14)
64
ax_usage.set_ylabel("Usage (%)", fontsize=14)
65
ax_usage.set_title("Usage Over Time in Frontend Frameworks", fontsize=16)
66
ax_usage.grid(True)
67
ax_usage.legend()
68
69
# Displaying both plots
101
==PAGE:110==
70
plt.tight_layout()
71
plt.show()
A.5
Wireframes
Figure A.1: Register page wireframe
102
==PAGE:111==
A.6
Sidebar usage
Figure A.2: Sidebar as seen on Outlook
103
==PAGE:112==
Figure A.3: Sidebar as seen on Youtube
104
==PAGE:113==
Figure A.4: Sidebar as seen on GitHub
105
==PAGE:114==
A.7
Compartmentalisation Implementation
A.7.1
Main Method
1
def compartmentalisation(X, Y, Vx, Vy, number_X=15, number_Y=35,
merge_tolerance=19, delta_px=0, delta_py=0):
2
# Set negative values to zero
3
X = np.array(X)
4
Y = np.array(Y)
5
Vx = np.array(Vx)
6
Vy = np.array(Vy)
7
index = np.where(X <= 0)
8
for i in index:
9
X = np.delete(X, i)
10
Y = np.delete(Y, i)
11
Vy = np.delete(Vy, i)
12
Vx = np.delete(Vx, i)
13
14
# Find max and min values of R and Y
15
Max_X = np.max(X)
16
Max_Y = np.max(Y)
17
Min_X = np.min(X)
18
Min_Y = np.min(Y)
19
20
# 1. Initialization
21
delta_X = (Max_X - Min_X) / number_X
22
delta_Y = (Max_Y - Min_Y) / number_Y
23
24
# Target variables
25
par = np.column_stack((Vx, Vy))
26
27
# Acceptable homogeneity tolerance range within a compartment
28
delta_p = [delta_px , delta_py]
29
Z = np.zeros((X.shape[0], 1))
30
grid_info = np.zeros((X.shape[0], 6, par.shape[1]))
31
32
resultArray = []
33
plotter = Plotter(num_plots=3)
34
35
for i in range(2):
36
zone_map = zoning(X, Y, Z, par[:, i], delta_p[i])
37
grid_info = zone_reformation(
38
zone_map , delta_X , delta_Y , number_X , number_Y , i, merge_tolerance
)
39
volume = calculate_volume(grid_info)
40
result = Result(zone_map , grid_info , volume)
41
result.sortGridInfo()
42
resultArray.append(result)
43
plotter.add_plot(result.grid_info , title=("Radial Velocity" if i == 0
else "Axial Velocity"))
44
45
grid_info = overlap(resultArray[0].grid_info , resultArray[1].grid_info ,
46
delta_X , delta_Y , merge_tolerance)
47
plotter.add_plot(grid_info , title="Overlap")
48
49
volume = calculate_volume(grid_info)
50
51
# save plot as image
52
img = io.BytesIO()
53
plt.savefig(img, format="png", bbox_inches="tight")
54
img.seek(0)
55
56
return (grid_info , volume , img)
106
==PAGE:115==
A.7.2
Zoning
1
import numpy as np
2
3
def zoning(X, Y, Z, target, delta_p):
4
CFD = np.column_stack((X, Y, Z, target))
5
sort_index = np.lexsort((CFD[:, 2], CFD[:, 1], CFD[:, 0], CFD[:, 3]))
6
CFD_sorted = CFD[sort_index]
7
8
zone_map = np.zeros((CFD_sorted.shape[0], 5))
9
zone_map[:, :4] = CFD_sorted[:, :4]
10
11
# Classifying
12
for j in range(0, X.shape[0]):
13
if zone_map[j, 3] < delta_p:
14
zone_map[j, 4] = 1
15
else:
16
zone_map[j, 4] = 2
17
18
return zone_map
A.7.3
Zone Reformation
1
import numpy as np
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
4
from cbsm.cubing2 import cubing2
5
from cbsm.merge import merge
6
7
8
def zone_reformation(zone_map , delta_X , delta_Y , number_X , number_Y , i=0,
merge_tolerance=19):
9
grid_info = cubing2(zone_map , delta_X , delta_Y , number_X , number_Y)
10
# sort grid info by zone
11
grid_info = np.array(grid_info)
12
sort_index = np.lexsort(
13
(grid_info[:, 3], grid_info[:, 2], grid_info[:, 1], grid_info[:, 0],
grid_info[:, 4]))
14
grid_info = grid_info[sort_index]
15
16
# merge compartments
17
grid_info = merge(grid_info , merge_tolerance , delta_X , delta_Y)
18
sort_index = np.lexsort(
19
(grid_info[:, 3], grid_info[:, 2], grid_info[:, 1], grid_info[:, 0],
grid_info[:, 4]))
20
grid_info = grid_info[sort_index]
21
return grid_info
A.7.4
Cubing
1
import numpy as np
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
4
from cbsm.splitting import split
5
107
==PAGE:116==
6
7
def cubing2(zone_map , delta_X , delta_Y , number_X , number_Y):
8
9
min_x = np.min(zone_map[:, 0])
10
min_y = np.min(zone_map[:, 1])
11
12
# associate the sub-compartments to their grids
13
grid_info = []
14
mean_info = []
15
for i in range(number_X):
16
x_min = min_x + i * delta_X
17
x_max = x_min + delta_X
18
input_x_row_min = np.where(
19
zone_map[:, 0] > x_min - 0.000001 * delta_X)[0]
20
input_x_row_max = np.where(
21
zone_map[:, 0] < x_max + 0.000001 * delta_X)[0]
22
indicator_X = np.intersect1d(input_x_row_min , input_x_row_max)
23
for j in range(number_Y):
24
y_min = min_y + j * delta_Y
25
y_max = y_min + delta_Y
26
input_y_row_min = np.where(
27
zone_map[:, 1] > y_min - 0.000001 * delta_Y)[0]
28
input_y_row_max = np.where(
29
zone_map[:, 1] < y_max + 0.000001 * delta_Y)[0]
30
indicator_Y = np.intersect1d(input_y_row_min , input_y_row_max)
31
indicator = np.intersect1d(indicator_X , indicator_Y)
32
input = zone_map[indicator , :]
33
row_size_input = input[:, 0].shape[0]
34
if row_size_input > 1:
35
k_in = 1
36
while input[k_in, 4] == input[k_in - 1, 4]:
37
k_in = k_in + 1
38
if k_in == row_size_input:
39
break
40
# find dominant zone
41
counter_old = k_in
42
counter_new = 1
43
zone_in = input[0, 4]
44
if k_in < row_size_input:
45
for k in range(k_in, row_size_input):
46
counter_new = 0
47
while input[k, 4] == input[k-1, 4]:
48
k += 1
49
counter_new += 1
50
if k == row_size_input:
51
break
52
if counter_new > counter_old:
53
zone_in = input[k-1, 4]
54
counter_old = counter_new
55
zone_map[indicator , 4] = zone_in
56
grid_info.append([x_min, x_max, y_min, y_max,
57
zone_in , 0])
58
mean_info.append(np.mean(input[:, 3]))
59
grid_info = np.array(grid_info , dtype=float)
60
sort_index = np.lexsort(
61
(grid_info[:, 3], grid_info[:, 2], grid_info[:, 1], grid_info[:, 0],
grid_info[:, 4]))
62
grid_info = grid_info[sort_index]
63
zone_order = np.min(grid_info[:, 4])
64
# start zone number from 1
65
grid_info[:, 4] = grid_info[:, 4] - (zone_order - 1)
66
108
==PAGE:117==
67
# split zones at non continues interfaces
68
zero_index = np.where(grid_info[:, 4] == 0)[0]
69
grid_info = np.delete(grid_info , zero_index , 1)
70
71
72
x_center = np.divide(np.add(grid_info[:, 0], grid_info[:, 1]), 2)
73
y_center = np.divide(np.add(grid_info[:, 2], grid_info[:, 3]), 2)
74
info = np.column_stack((x_center , y_center , grid_info[:, 4]))
75
#put grid_info[:, 4]
76
center_info = split(info, delta_X , delta_Y)
77
grid_info[:, 0] = center_info[:, 0] - delta_X / 2
78
grid_info[:, 1] = center_info[:, 0] + delta_X / 2
79
grid_info[:, 2] = center_info[:, 1] - delta_Y / 2
80
grid_info[:, 3] = center_info[:, 1] + delta_Y / 2
81
grid_info[:, 4] = center_info[:, 2]
82
grid_info[:, 5] = center_info[:, 3]
83
grid_info = np.column_stack((grid_info , center_info[:, 4], mean_info))
84
85
return grid_info
A.7.5
Split
1
import numpy as np
2
import networkx as nx
3
4
def split(center_info , delta_x , delta_y):
5
6
zone_data = center_info
7
zone_data = np.column_stack((zone_data , np.zeros(zone_data.shape[0]), np.
zeros(zone_data.shape[0])))
8
9
G = nx.Graph()
10
11
for row in zone_data:
12
x, y, zone, _, _ = row
13
G.add_node((x, y), zone=zone)
14
15
def add_edges(graph, zone_data , delta_x , delta_y):
16
rows, cols = zone_data.shape[0], zone_data.shape[1]
17
for i in range(rows):
18
x1, y1, _, _, _= zone_data[i]
19
for j in range(i + 1, rows):
20
x2, y2, _, _, _ = zone_data[j]
21
if within_delta((x1, y1), (x2, y2), delta_x , delta_y) and
zone_data[i,2] == zone_data[j,2]:
22
graph.add_edge((x1, y1), (x2, y2))
23
24
add_edges(G, zone_data , delta_x , delta_y)
25
26
connected_components = list(nx.connected_components(G))
27
28
# Assign unique zone numbers to disconnected components
29
unique_zone_number = 1
30
for component in connected_components:
31
for node in component:
32
x, y = node
33
zone_data[(zone_data[:, 0] == x) & (zone_data[:, 1] == y), 2] =
unique_zone_number
34
# set count of connected nodes in zone
35
zone_data[(zone_data[:, 0] == x) & (zone_data[:, 1] == y), 3] =
len(component)
109
==PAGE:118==
36
unique_zone_number += 1
37
38
zone_data = surface_count(zone_data , delta_x , delta_y)
39
40
return zone_data
41
42
def within_delta(coord1, coord2, delta_x , delta_y):
43
x1, y1 = coord1
44
x2, y2 = coord2
45
# 1.1 magic number from tannaz method
46
return abs(x1 - x2) < 1.1 * delta_x and abs(y1 - y2) < 1.1 * delta_y
47
48
def surface_count(zone_data , delta_x , delta_y):
49
for i, row in enumerate(zone_data):
50
neighbours = []
51
for j, row2 in enumerate(zone_data):
52
if i != j:
53
if within_delta(row[0:2], row2[0:2], delta_x , delta_y) & (row
[2] != row2[2]):
54
neighbours.append(row2)
55
zone_count = {}
56
for n in neighbours:
57
if n[2] in zone_count:
58
zone_count[n[2]] += 1
59
else:
60
zone_count[n[2]] = 1
61
62
max_zone_count = 0
63
max_zone = 0
64
for key, value in zone_count.items():
65
if value > max_zone_count:
66
max_zone_count = value
67
max_zone = key
68
zone_data[i, 4] = max_zone
69
70
#find most common zone for each zone
71
zone_list = np.unique(zone_data[:, 2])
72
for zone in zone_list:
73
zone_index = np.where(zone_data[:, 2] == zone)
74
count = np.bincount(zone_data[zone_index , 4][0].astype(int))
75
max_count = 0
76
max_i = 0
77
for i, num in enumerate(count):
78
if num > max_count and i != 0:
79
max_count = num
80
max_i = i
81
zone_data[zone_index , 4] = max_i
82
83
return zone_data
A.7.6
Merge
1
import numpy as np
2
import networkx as nx
3
4
from cbsm.splitting import surface_count , within_delta
5
6
7
def merge(grid_info , merge_tolerance , delta_x , delta_y):
8
110
==PAGE:119==
9
merge_list = np.where(grid_info[:, 5] < merge_tolerance)
10
11
# merge zones smaller zones
12
for i in merge_list[0]:
13
prev_zone_count = grid_info[i, 5]
14
grid_info[i, 4] = grid_info[i, 6]
15
index = np.where(grid_info[:, 4] == grid_info[i, 4])
16
grid_info[index, 5] = prev_zone_count + 1
17
18
# merge disconnected compartments
19
for idx, compartment in enumerate(grid_info):
20
neighbour_zone_counts = {}
21
neighbour_zone_counts[compartment[4]] = 1
22
for n in grid_info:
23
if within_delta(((compartment[0] + compartment[1]) / 2, (
compartment[2] + compartment[3]) / 2),
24
((n[0] + n[1]) / 2, (n[2] + n[3])/2), delta_x ,
delta_y):
25
if n[4] in neighbour_zone_counts.keys():
26
neighbour_zone_counts[n[4]] += 1
27
else:
28
neighbour_zone_counts[n[4]] = 1
29
30
# find max zone
31
max_zone_count = neighbour_zone_counts[compartment[4]]
32
max_zone = compartment[4]
33
for key, value in neighbour_zone_counts.items():
34
if value > max_zone_count:
35
max_zone_count = value
36
max_zone = key
37
38
if compartment[4] != max_zone:
39
index = np.where(grid_info[:, 4] == max_zone)
40
grid_info[index, 5] += 1
41
index2 = np.where(grid_info[:, 4] == compartment[4])
42
grid_info[index2, 5] -= 1
43
44
zone_count = grid_info[index[0], 5][0]
45
grid_info[idx, 4] = max_zone
46
grid_info[idx, 5] = zone_count
47
48
# update zone numbers to start at 1
49
zone_list = np.unique(grid_info[:, 4])
50
grid_info_copy = grid_info.copy()
51
for i, zone in enumerate(zone_list):
52
grid_info[(grid_info_copy[:, 4] == zone), 4] = i + 1
53
54
# update surface zone count
55
new_surface = surface_count(np.column_stack((np.zeros(grid_info.shape[0]),
56
np.zeros(grid_info.shape[0]),
57
grid_info[:, 4], grid_info[:,
5],
58
grid_info[:, 6])), delta_x ,
delta_y)
59
grid_info[:, 6] = new_surface[:, 4]
60
61
return grid_info
A.7.7
Calculate Volume
111
==PAGE:120==
1
import numpy as np
2
3
def calculate_volume(grid_info):
4
5
zones = np.unique(grid_info[:, 4])
6
7
dx = grid_info[:, 1]**2 - grid_info[:, 0]**2
8
dy = grid_info[:, 3] - grid_info[:, 2]
9
10
volumes = np.pi * dx * dy
11
12
volume = np.zeros((zones.shape[0], 2))
13
for i, zone in enumerate(zones):
14
volume[i, 0] = zone
15
volume[i, 1] = np.sum(volumes[grid_info[:, 4] == zone])
16
17
return volume
112
==PAGE:121==
A.8
Domain Dictionary
The following dictionary has been written using AI­tools and revised by us.
• Accordion: A UI component that expands to reveal hidden information when clicked,
often used to organize content.
• Adapter: An adapter, in software, is a structural design pattern that acts as a bridge
between two incompatible interfaces or classes, enabling them to work together by
providing a wrapper that translates one interface into another.
• Angular: A front­end framework by Google for building dynamic web applications
using TypeScript.
• Apache License: A permissive free software license written by the Apache Soft­
ware Foundation that allows users to use the software for any purpose, to distribute
it, to modify it, and to distribute modified versions.
• ARIA (Accessible Rich Internet Applications): A set of attributes that make web
content more accessible to people with disabilities.
• AWS (Amazon Web Services): A subsidiary of Amazon providing on­demand cloud
computing platforms and APIs to individuals, companies, and governments.
• AWS Amplify: A development platform for building secure, scalable mobile and
web applications powered by AWS.
• Backend: The part of a computer system or application that is not directly accessed
by the user, typically responsible for storing and manipulating data.
• Backend as a Service (BaaS): A cloud service model that provides developers with
a way to connect their web and mobile applications to a cloud backend via APIs and
cloud­based SDKs.
• Boilerplate: Standardized pieces of code that can be reused in multiple programs
or applications, often used to save time and avoid redundancy.
• Boolean: A data type with two possible values, often represented as true/false or
1/0, used in computer programming and logic.
• BPMN (Business Process Model and Notation): A graphical representation for
specifying business processes in a business process model.
• Build (python package): A tool in Python for building (compiling and packaging)
software packages from source code.
• Built Distribution: In Python, a package format containing all the files necessary
to install a module, often a wheel or an egg.
• Bumpver: A tool for versioning software by updating version numbers in various
files following a predefined pattern.
• c18n: An abbreviation for compartmentalisation, 18 denotes the number of letters
between the first and last letter in the word compartmentalisation.
• CADET: A Conda package that includes fast and accurate solvers for chromatog­
raphy, filtration, crystallization, and fermentation models.
• CADET­Process: A specialized software package designed to enhance the us­
ability and functionality of the CADET core simulator, simplifying the modeling of
113
==PAGE:122==
complex biochemical processes by providing an object­oriented model builder and
tools for parameter validation, simulation setup, and performance evaluation.
• cbsm: A python package implementation of Tannaz’ compartmentalisation algo­
rithm, the name is an abbreviation of compartment based scaledown model.
• CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics): A branch of fluid mechanics that uses nu­
merical analysis and algorithms to solve and analyze problems involving fluid flows.
• CM (Compartment Modelling): A modelling technique which involves splitting up a
bioreactor into multiple compartments, also called compartment modelling. Usually,
compartments are split up according to bioprocess variables.
• Cohesion: In software engineering, the degree to which the elements of a module
belong together, often used as a measure of the internal strength of a module.
• Conda: Conda is an open­source, cross­platform, language­agnostic package man­
ager and environment management system
• Conda Forge: An open­source community­led collection of recipes, build infras­
tructure, and distributions for the conda package manager.
• Continuous Deployment / Continuous Integration (CI/CD): A method in software
development where code changes are automatically tested and deployed.
• CONTRIBUTING file: A document in a software project that provides guidelines on
how to contribute to the project.
• Coupling: In software engineering, the degree of interdependence between soft­
ware modules; a measure of how closely connected different modules are.
• CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete): The four basic functions of persistent stor­
age in software applications.
• CSS (Cascading Style Sheets): A stylesheet language used for describing the
presentation of a document written in HTML or XML.
• Database: An organized collection of data, generally stored and accessed electron­
ically from a computer system.
• DevOps: DevOps is a methodology that combines development and operations to
streamline software delivery, emphasizing automation and collaboration for faster
and more efficient releases.
• Dist Folder: In web development, a directory where the final, production­ready files
of the web application are placed after the build process.
• Django: A high­level Python web framework that encourages rapid development
and clean, pragmatic design.
• Docker: A set of platform­as­a­service products that use OS­level virtualization to
deliver software in packages called containers.
• Dockerfile: A text document that contains all the commands a user could call on
the command line to assemble an image in Docker.
• Docstring: In programming, a string literal specified in source code that is used to
document a specific segment of code.
114
==PAGE:123==
• DOM (Document Object Model): A cross­platform and language­independent in­
terface that treats an XML or HTML document as a tree structure.
• EC2 (Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud): A web service from Amazon Web Ser­
vices (AWS) providing resizable compute capacity in the cloud, designed to make
web­scale cloud computing easier.
• Endpoint: In networking, a specific point at the end of a communication channel
where data can be sent and received.
• ES6 (ECMAScript 6): The sixth edition of the ECMAScript standard, a major en­
hancement to the JavaScript language, adding features like classes and modules.
• FastAPI: A modern, fast (high­performance), web framework for building APIs with
Python, based on standard Python type hints.
• Firebase: A platform developed by Google for creating mobile and web applications,
offering services like authentication, databases, analytics, and more.
• Flask: A lightweight WSGI web application framework in Python, designed to make
getting started quick and easy, with the ability to scale up to complex applications.
• Float: A data type in computer programming that represents real numbers with
fractional parts, allowing for the representation of numbers that cannot be precisely
expressed as integers.
• Fork: In software engineering, creating a copy of a repository or project to start
independent development on it, diverging from the original project.
• Formal Language Specification: A set of rules and standards that formally defines
a programming language or protocol.
• Front­end Framework: A software framework that aids in the development of the
client­side (user interface) part of a web application or website.
• Frontend: The part of a website or application that is visible to the user, typically
involving the user interface and user experience aspects.
• Full Stack: Refers to a developer or development approach that encompasses both
frontend and backend aspects of software development.
• Functional Programming: A programming paradigm where programs are con­
structed by applying and composing functions, emphasizing the use of immutable
data and pure functions.
• Gauss­Siedel: A numerical method used for solving linear equations, particularly
useful in large systems encountered in engineering and physics.
• GitHub: A web­based version control and collaboration platform for software devel­
opers, primarily used for code sharing and management using Git.
• GitLab: A web­based DevOps lifecycle tool that provides a Git repository manager
providing wiki, issue­tracking, and CI/CD pipeline features.
• GNU: A Unix­like operating system and collection of free software, available under
the GNU General Public License.
• GNU GPL (GNU General Public License): A widely used free software license that
guarantees end users the freedom to run, study, share, and modify the software.
115
==PAGE:124==
• Google Cloud: A suite of cloud computing services that runs on the same infrastruc­
ture that Google uses internally for its end­user products, such as Google Search
and YouTube.
• HTML (Hypertext Markup Language): The standard markup language for docu­
ments designed to be displayed in a web browser.
• IDE: Integrated Development Environment, a software suite that combines tools for
coding, debugging, and testing in a unified interface.
• integer: A whole number without any decimal or fractional part.
• Interface: An interface in software defines a set of methods and functions that a
class or component must implement. It serves as a contract or blueprint for how
objects should interact with each other, allowing different parts of a program to work
together seamlessly while promoting code modularity and flexibility.
• Integration Test: A testing phase where individual software modules are combined
and tested as a group to ensure they work together.
• JavaScript (JS): A high­level programming language commonly used for web de­
velopment.
• JSON: JavaScript Object Notation, a lightweight data­interchange format.
• JSX: JavaScript XML, a syntax extension for JavaScript recommended for use with
React.
• markdown (md): A lightweight markup language used for formatting plain text.
• matplotlib: A plotting library for creating static, animated, and interactive visualiza­
tions in Python.
• Microsoft Azure: A cloud computing platform provided by Microsoft.
• MIT License: A permissive open­source license widely used for software.
• Modularity: The concept of designing software as a collection of independently
replaceable and upgradeable modules.
• MVC: Model­View­Controller, a software architectural pattern for organizing code in
a modular way.
• NFG: No Further Grammar, often used in documentation to indicate that no addi­
tional grammar rules apply.
• NoSQL: A type of database management system that does not use the traditional
SQL relational database model.
• NOTICE file: A file included in open­source projects to provide information about
the project and its licensing.
• numpy: A library for the Python programming language, adding support for large,
multi­dimensional arrays and matrices.
• object­orientated programming: A programming paradigm based on the concept
of ”objects,” which can contain data and code to manipulate the data.
• pandas: A data manipulation and analysis library for the Python programming lan­
guage.
116
==PAGE:125==
• Permissive license: A type of open­source license that allows for more flexibility
in how the software can be used.
• PG: PostgreSQL, a powerful, open­source object­relational database system.
• pip: A package installer for Python.
• Pipeline: A sequence of data processing steps.
• Platform: The underlying hardware or software on which an application runs.
• Postgres: PostgreSQL, a powerful, open­source object­relational database sys­
tem.
• private use: The use of software within a specific organization or individual, not
intended for public distribution.
• public use: The use of software that is publicly available and can be accessed by
anyone.
• pydoc: A documentation generation tool for Python code.
• PyPI: Python Package Index, a repository of software packages for the Python pro­
gramming language.
• README file: A file containing information about a software project, typically found
in the project’s root directory.
• React: A JavaScript library for building user interfaces.
• Repository: A location where version­controlled source code is stored.
• REST API: Representational State Transfer Application Programming Interface, a
set of rules for building web services.
• RESTful: Conforming to the principles of Representational State Transfer.
• Routing: The process of determining the path a network message should take.
• Runner: A program or script responsible for executing tasks or tests.
• RxJs: Reactive Extensions for JavaScript, a library for reactive programming using
Observables.
• Sequence diagram: A type of interaction diagram that shows how processes op­
erate with one another.
• Skeleton: A UI Toolkit for building reactive interfaces quickly using Svelte and Tail­
wind
• Source distribution: A distribution of software that includes the source code.
• Sphinx: A documentation generator for Python projects.
• SQL: Structured Query Language, a domain­specific language for managing and
manipulating relational databases.
• string: A sequence of characters.
• Supabase: An open­source alternative to Firebase, providing a backend­as­a­service
platform.
• Svelte: A JavaScript framework for building user interfaces.
117
==PAGE:126==
• SvelteKit: A framework for building web applications with Svelte.
• SVGs: Scalable Vector Graphics, an XML­based vector image format.
• Swagger UI: A tool for API documentation that generates interactive documentation
from OpenAPI Specification.
• Tailwind: Tailwind is a CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) framework with predefined
classes that you allows you to build an design web pages in a responsive way
• Tech stack: The combination of programming languages, frameworks, and tools
used in a software project.
• toml: Tom’s Obvious Minimal Language, a data serialization language.
• twine: A utility for publishing Python packages on the Python Package Index (PyPI).
• TypeScript (TS): A superset of JavaScript that adds static typing.
• Unit Test: A type of testing
• vendor lock in: A situation where a user is dependent on a particular vendor’s
products and cannot easily switch to another vendor without substantial cost or in­
convenience.
• Virtual DOM: A programming concept where an in­memory representation of the
real DOM is maintained for efficient updates and rendering in web applications.
• Virtual Machine: A software emulation of a physical computer that enables running
multiple operating systems on a single physical machine.
• Vue: Vue.js, a progressive JavaScript framework for building user interfaces.
• Wireframe: A visual representation of a web page or application’s layout, showing
the basic structure and elements without detailed design or content.
118
==PAGE:127==
119
==PAGE:128==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
