==PAGE:1==
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical
transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
Master Thesis Вӯ January 2024
Edith MГёnsted and Therese Haugsted
Supervised by Klaus Mosthaf and Annika FjordbГёge
Technical Unversity of Denmark
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Edith MГёnsted and Therese Haugsted
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
PFOA transport extracted from COMSOL Multiphysics
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering,
BygnВӯ
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months in 2023 and 2024 at DTU Sustain, the DepartВӯ
ment of Environmental and Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
It accounts for 30 ECTS, as part of the degree Master of Science in Environmental Engineering,
MSc Eng.
We would like to thank our supervisors Klaus Mosthaf and Annika Sidelmann FjordbГёge for the
excellent guidance, help and advice we have received throughout this thesis. Furthermore, we
would like to thank Anders G. Christensen from NIRAS, for providing data for the case study.
Edith MГёnsted Вӯ s174529
Signature
Date
Therese Haugsted Вӯ s184089
Signature
Date
ii
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Groundwater contamination with PerВӯ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) is an increasing
concern, as they are toxic and persistent chemicals. In recent years, the EU and the Danish
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have sharpened the limit values for PFAS. Modelling
PFAS transport and retention is therefore a necessity for investigating groundwater contaminaВӯ
tion and quantifying risks. PFAS models developed for Danish soil types are lacking in literature.
In this thesis, a literature review of model approaches on PFAS transport in soils was performed
and a vertical flow and transport model for PFAS in Danish soils was developed in COMSOL
Multiphysics. The literature review showed that airВӯwater interface adsorption and solid phase
sorption are the two most significant transport processes for PFAS. Due to the importance of
airВӯwater interfacial adsorption, the saturation in the unsaturated zone is essential to the model.
This was implemented using the van Genuchten equation and the Mualem equation for hyВӯ
draulic conductivity. The flow in the unsaturated zone was modelled using RichardвҖҷs equation,
an extended version of DarcyвҖҷs law. The transport model was developed for Perfluoroalkyl
acids (PFAA), not considering precursors or polymers, and included the processes: diffusion,
dispersion, solid phase sorption and airВӯwater interface adsorption. Excluding precursors, the
literature review showed environmental degradation to be rare and was therefore not included
in the model. Solid phase sorption was assumed to occur by hydrophobic interactions and set
up as a function of the organic carbon in the soil, with a linear isotherm. The airВӯwater interface
adsorption was implemented as a function of median grain diameter and saturation presented
by Brusseau (2023). Simulations were performed for three PFAS: Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid
(PFOS), Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and Perfluorpentanoic acid (PFPeA), chosen due to
different chain lengths and/or functional groups. The model was developed for three homoВӯ
geneous geological scenarios, representative of typical Danish soil types, consisting of clayey
till or sandy till, with a top meter of gravel or mull. The simulations showed faster transport for
sandy tills than clayey tills. Both sorption processes for shortВӯchain PFAS were a small retention
factor in all geologies except in mull. Retention by airВӯwater interface adsorption was the largest
retention factor for long chain PFAS in sandy till, gravel and in clayey till. For mull, solid phase
sorption was the main retention factor. The sensitivity analysis showed the importance of satuВӯ
ration controlling parameters such as the van Genuchten parameter рқ‘ӣand the hydraulic head,
proving the importance of determining the saturation curve for the transport. The model was
furthermore applied to a specific case study from a firefighting drill site in Denmark, and comВӯ
pared with measured concentrations from two boreholes at the site. This was simulated with
homogeneous geological layers according to the borelogs. Infiltration rate, fraction of organic
carbon and input concentration were fitted, as no data was available from the site. Different
methods for рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өestimation were investigated and showed the best fit with a regression from
Ying Lyu et al. (2022) or measured рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues. The tendency was that available рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өare likely
underestimating the airВӯwater interfacial adsorption. The infiltration rate largely influences the
transport and is therefore a uncertainty of the model. Furthermore, great uncertainties are asВӯ
sociated with рқҗҫрқ‘ , рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җand рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өdue to the big ranges of measured and estimated values in the
literature. The model fitted the pattern of contamination with long chained PFAS well. However,
too little retention of the shortВӯchained PFPeA was observed. This could likely be improved by
the inclusion of solid sorption by electrostatic interactions. It is suggested that the model could
be improved by accounting for heterogeneous layers or by obtaining geological parameters
from the specific case. It is overall concluded that the model offers a good prediction of PFAS
transport for Danish soil types clayey till, sandy till, gravel and mull, within the current knowlВӯ
edge of distribution coefficients. More investigations on parameter uncertainties could improve
the modelвҖҷs robustness.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
iii
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Parameters
рқӣј
van Genuchten parameter
рқӣјрқҗҝ
Longitudinal dynamic dispersivity
рқӣјрқ‘Ү
Transverse dynamic dispersivity
О“
Surface excess of compound at the interface
рқңҮрқ‘Ө
Dynamic viscosity of water
рқңҷ
Porosity
рқң“
Capillary pressure
рқңҢрқ‘Ҹ
Bulk density
рқңҢрқ‘ 
Particle density of soil
рқңҢрқ‘Ө
Density of water
рқңҸ
Tortuosity
рқңғ
Water content
рқңғрқ‘ҹ
Residual water content
рқңғрқ‘ 
Saturated water content
рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
Air water interfacial area
рқ‘җ
Concentration of compound in water phase
рқҗ¶рқ‘ӣ
Number of carbon atoms in fluorinated chain
рқ‘җрқ‘ 
Concentration of sorbed compound
рқ‘җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
Concentration of adsorbed compound in airВӯwater interface
рқҗ·
Hydrodynamic dispersion coefficient
рқҗ·рқ‘‘
Diffusion coefficent
рқҗ·рқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“
Effective diffusion coefficient
рқ‘‘рқ‘”
Grain diameter
рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ
Fraction of organic carbon
в„Һрқ‘қ
Pressure head
рқҗјрқ‘ҹ
Infiltration rate
рқҗҫ
Hydraulic conductivity
рқҗҫрқ‘‘
SoilВӯwater distribution coefficient
рқҗҫрқ‘“
Freundlich distribution coefficient
рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
AirВӯwater interface distribution coefficient.
iv
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:6==
рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ
Organic carbonВӯwater partition coefficient
рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘Ө
OctanolВӯwater partition coefficient
рқҗҫрқ‘ҹ
Relative hydraulic conductivity
рқҗҫрқ‘ 
Saturated hydraulic conductivity
рқ‘ҡ
van Genuchten parameter
рқ‘ӣ
van Genuchten parameter
рқ‘ғрқ‘Һ
Pressure in air phase
рқ‘ғрқ‘Ө
Pressure in water phase
рқ‘һ
Darcy flux
рқ‘ҹ
Pore radius
рқ‘Ҷрқ‘’
Effective saturation
рқ‘Ҷрқ‘қ
Storage
рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө
Water saturation
рқ‘Ј
Average seepage velocity
рқ‘Ҡ
Source/sink
рқ‘§
Elevation
f
Fluidity
g
Gravitational constant
H/h
Hydraulic Head
Abbreviations
AFFF Aqueous film forming foam
DEPA/EPA (Danish) Environmental Protection Agency
ECHA European Chemicals Agency
GRUMO The national groundwater monitoring
NAPL NonВӯaqeous phase liquids
PFAA Perfluoroalkyl acids
PFAS PerВӯ and polyfluoroalkyl substances
PFBA Perfluorobutanoic acid
PFCA Perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids
PFOA Perfluorooctanoic acid
PFOS Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid
PFPeA Perfluorpentanoic acid
PFSA Perfluoroalkane sulfonic acids
POP
Persistant Organic Pollutant
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background knowledge on PFAS
3
2.1
PFAS classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
PFAS types relevant for groundwater contamination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Transport of PFAS
11
3.1
Flow in the saturated and unsaturated zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Transport processes for PFAS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Overview of selected literature on PFAS transport models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Model setup and approach
23
4.1
Flow model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Transport model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Geology and geological parameters in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Generic geological setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Case study setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results
37
5.1
Transport in generic geological settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Impact of selected parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Case study application and model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
57
6.1
Main assumptions applied in the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
The unsaturated zone and geological parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Sorption processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.4
Model performance and future improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Conclusion
64
Bibliography
66
A Appendix
71
A.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2 MethodВӯGeology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3 MethodВӯGeological parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.4 MethodВӯData from case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.5 MethodВӯCase study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.6 ResultsВӯGeneric setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.7 ResultsВӯCase study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
vi
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the emergence and use of PerВӯ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) have
ignited global concern. PFAS typically consist of a fluorinated chain and a functional group,
which primarily determine their properties and are the basis for their classification (VMR, 2022).
Due to the chemically persistent properties of the carbonВӯfluorine bonds, PFAS are almost nonВӯ
degradable under normal environmental conditions and constitute a risk to the environment
and human health (Xueyan Lyu et al., 2022). PFAS, known for their resistance to heat, water,
and grease, have become an integral component of industrial and everyday products since the
1960s. PFAS have been used in fire extinguishing foam at fire drill sites and as a key component
in the paint, varnish, and glue industries. Furthermore, it has been used in the carpet and textile
industry (VMR, 2022). In multiple industries and in some firefighting foams, longВӯchain PFAS
are replaced with the more mobile, shorterВӯchain PFAS (DEPA, 2015b). Therefore, the current
concern of shortВӯchain PFAS might increase in the future.
PFAS show adverse health effects in terms of cancer, immune dysfunction, and liver and kidney
diseases to mention a few (Zhang et al., 2022). Furthermore, coherence between PFAS expoВӯ
sure and effects on fetuses among vaccine resistance has been found (VMR, 2022Нҫ Xueyan Lyu
et al., 2022). The EU and the Danish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), have sharpened
the criteria for PFAS in the environment and drinking water due to the concern about the effects
of PFAS. The Danish EPA introduced new and stricter limit values for PFAS in 2021, with a
limit of 2 рқ‘ӣрқ‘”
рқҗҝin drinking water and groundwater, for a sum of 4 PFAS of highest concern (VMR,
2022), see Appendix A.1.1. The Danish EPA has identified 22 PFAS relevant for groundwater
and drinking water contamination, all nonВӯpolymers, for which a limit of 0.1 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝfor the sum, has
been set, see Appendix A.1.1. These 22 PFAS all belong to the group of Perfluoroalkyl acids
(PFAA) and PFAA precursors (VMR, 2022). The Danish EPA has in collaboration with other
countries, in 2023, submitted a restriction proposal for limiting production, use and marketing
of PFAS in the EU (European Chemicals Agency, 2023a)
In Denmark, drinking water is based almost entirely on groundwater and undergoes very limited
treatment (Voutchkova et al., 2021). The Danish water resources are therefore vulnerable to
PFAS pollution that may reach aquifers. PFAS have in the last decade been detected in Danish
groundwater above the criteria set by Danish EPA 1, at thousands of sites (DEPA, 2015a, 2016aНҫ
VMR, 2022). Most commonly known and investigated, is pollution at firefighting drill sites with
firefighting foam containing Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) and Perfluorooctanoic acid
(PFOA) (ITRC, 2022). Many cases of environmental contamination with firefighting foam led
to a proposal in 2022 for an EUВӯwide ban on all PFAS in firefighting foam, from ECHA the
European Chemicals Agency (2023b). PFOS and PFOA are longВӯchain PFAS and are among
the four PFAS of highest concern for drinking water set by the Danish EPA (VMR, 2022). Even
though PFOS was banned in 2011 and PFOA has been phased out from 2020 in Denmark
(VMR, 2022), they still constitute a threat years after the outphasing, due to slow transport
through the soil and lack of degradation (VMR, 2022Нҫ Zhang et al., 2022). Shorter chained
PFAS, such as Perfluorobutanoic acid (PFBA) and Perfluoropentanoic acid (PFPeA) have also
been found in groundwater above limit values at investigated sites (Albers et al., 2023). Besides
firefighting drill sites, PFAS is emitted to the environment from industrial waste and wastewater
(DEPA, 2016b).
The transport of PFAS through the soil affects how quickly the PFAS contamination will reach
1MiljГёstyrelsen
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
1
==PAGE:9==
the groundwater. Modelling of the transport processes of PFAS in the subsurface is therefore
useful to investigate and evaluate groundwater contamination and processes, quantify risks,
and to estimate where further investigation and potential remediation should take place. This is
an increasing area of interest, where different modelling approaches are researched (Brusseau,
2019aНҫ Guo et al., 2020Нҫ Raschke et al., 2022Нҫ Silva et al., 2020). Models for PFAS transport
in the subsurface and groundwater have been developed by Brusseau (2020) and Guo et al.
(2020) among others. They found that the airВӯwater interface adsorption is one of the main
processes impacting the retention of long chain PFAS (Brusseau, 2020) since PFAS contains
a hydrophobic and hydrophilic side. Due to this, part of the PFAS stays in the unsaturated
zone where the airВӯwater interface adsorption occurs. Modelling the unsaturated zone with the
implementation of airВӯwater interface adsorption is therefore crucial to determine the transport
of PFAS. Conventional transport models without interface adsorption are therefore likely to be
insufficient in describing the transport of most PFAS compounds in the subsurface. Both chain
length, functional groups, and soil type greatly affect PFAS adsorption capabilities to soil, and
therefore the retention of the compound (VMR, 2022). Modelling for clayey till and sandy till
settings has not been found during literature research. This study therefore aims to create a
generically applicable model for PFAS transport in clayey till and sandy till settings in Denmark,
leading to the following objective.
1.1
Objective
The objective of this thesis is to develop a vertical transport model, and to use it to investigate key
parameters and the impact of sorption processes on the retention and distribution of three PFAS
in typical Danish soil, through the unsaturated and saturated zone. The model is developed
based on current PFAS transport models and the model results are compared with available
soil profiles. This is achieved by accomplishing the following:
вҖў Review current available transport models used to describe PFAS transport in soils. DeВӯ
termine important parameters and processes for describing PFAS transport, and identify
used methods for implementing them, from the literature review.
вҖў Investigate the impact of different PFAS characteristics such as chain length on the transВӯ
port of the compound, by selecting three PFAS with different characteristics. A generic
model is developed and applied for vertical flow and transport in simple geological settings,
including clayey till settings and sandy till settings, for the three selected compounds.
вҖў Evaluate the impact of the key parameters and processes on PFAS retention, by performВӯ
ing a local sensitivity analysis of different parameter variations, for the developed generic
model.
вҖў Investigate the PFAS distribution in detailed soil profiles from an available PFASВӯcontaminated
site in Denmark. Compare model results with the available soil profiles and explore posВӯ
sible improvements of the model for a better fit.
2
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:10==
2
Background knowledge on PFAS
In this thesis, a PFAS transport model is developed for modelling and predicting groundwater
contamination. To understand PFAS contamination of groundwater and the relevance thereof,
basic background knowledge of PFAS chemistry, use and impact is essential. In this chapter
relevant information on PFAS will be presented, along with the characteristics of the three PFAS
selected for the model.
2.1
PFAS classification
PFAS compounds cover a large group of compounds with different structures and properties.
They can behave differently in the environment, and some PFAS types are more relevant for
groundwater contamination than others. In this section an overview of the different types and
characteristics will be given, along with the definition of PFAS.
2.1.1
Definition of PFAS
PFAS is an abbreviation for PerВӯ and polyfluoroalkyl substances. These substances are orВӯ
ganic compounds, that are fluorinated. All the hydrogen atoms in one or more methyl (CH3) or
methylene groups (CH2) have been replaced with fluorine (becoming CF3,CF2) (OECD, 2021).
Perfluorinated (fully fluorinated) methyl and methylene groups are saturated, which means that
the carbon atom has only single bonds. A fully fluorinated double bounded carbon is unsatuВӯ
rated and not considered a PFAS (see Figure 2.1c).(OECD, 2021)
(a) PFOS Вӯ a perfluoroalkyl.
(b) 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate Вӯ a polyfluoroalkyl.
(c) CAS. No. 685Вӯ63Вӯ2
Figure 2.1: Three examples of chemical structures. (a) is a perfluoroalkyl (b) is a polyfluoroalkyl.
The fluor atoms around the fully fluorinated methylene/methyl groups are red, the atoms in the
functional group are green (c) is not a PFAS since the double bounded carbon atoms are not
fully fluorinated saturated methylene/methyl groups. Adapted and obtained from (Deeb et al.,
2018Нҫ VMR, 2022)
Perfluoroalkyl substances are defined by all methyl/methylene groups being fully fluorinated,
see Figure 2.1a. Polyfluoroalkyl substances contain at least one fluorinated methyl/methylene
groups. They can consist of more fluorinated methyl/methylene groups, but they differ from
perfluoroalkyl substances by containing at least one nonВӯfluorinated or partly nonВӯfluorinated
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
3
==PAGE:11==
carbon atom (see Figure 2.1b). The carbon atom attached to a functional group is not covered
by this definition and is also present in perfluoroalkyl substances (see Figure 2.1a) (VMR, 2022).
Often PFAS are categorized as long or shortВӯchain PFAS. The number of carbon atoms defining
a longВӯchain PFAS depends on the PFAS group. According to Buck et al. (2011), any PFAS
with 7 or more perfluorinated carbon atoms is considered a longВӯchain PFAS. The Organisation
for Economic CoВӯoperation and Development (OECD) defines furthermore that perfluoroalkane
sulfonates are longВӯchain if the chain of fluorinated carbons is 6 atoms or more (Buck et al.,
2011).
2.1.2
Types of PFAS
PFAS are synthetic chemicals that were invented in 1938 (VMR, 2022). They have been manВӯ
ufactured since the 1950s, by electrochemical fluorination or telemorization (Buck et al., 2011).
Now more than 4700 different substances within the PFAS category are registered with a CAS
number, and it is estimated that more than 12000 PFAS substances exist. The different PFAS
can be grouped into 42 families and subfamilies (VMR, 2022). PFAS are commonly divided into
polymers and nonВӯpolymers and can be divided into three main types, see Figure 2.2. PFAA
and their precursors are nonВӯpolymers.
Figure 2.2: Overview of PFAS types, based on (Buck et al., 2011Нҫ VMR, 2022). Key subВӯ
categories for this project are included.
Perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAA)
PFAA are one of the most common types of PFAS along with the precursors persulfonamides
(VMR, 2022). PFAA are both produced directly, but can also be formed by degradation of
PFAA precursors (see elaboration in PFAA Precursors). PFAA can be divided into subВӯfamilies
based on their functional group. These subfamilies of PFAA include Perfluoroalkyl carboxylic
acids (PFCA), Perfluoroalkane sulfonic acids (PFSA), and others. PFCA and PFSA are large
groups with commonly used and investigated PFAS, and the majority of the 22 PFAS identified
as main concern by the Danish EPA, belong to these groups (see Table A.1 Appendix A.1.1).
The modelled PFAS in this thesis, all belong to these groups, and they are therefore in focus in
Figure 2.2. For more information on PFAA subВӯfamilies see (OECD, 2021).
PFAA precursors
Precursors are PFAS that can be transformed into persistent PFAS, called terminal PFAS (ITRC,
2022). Usually, they are transformed into PFAA. The transformation to PFAA compounds can be
a result of both abiotic and biotic degradation (VMR, 2022). When precursors are transformed
it is the fluorinated chain that usually is a part of the newly formed compound (VMR, 2022).
The commonly known PFOS and PFOA are examples of possible degradation products from
4
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:12==
precursors, alongside being produced directly. Due to model simplicity, this thesis will refrain
from considering the precursors and the source of PFAA from precursor degradation.
Polymers
Polymers are longВӯchain compounds with many repeating units. The large chain lengths cause
the compounds to have very different properties than nonВӯpolymers, and the distinction is thereВӯ
fore important (Buck et al., 2011). A commonly known polymer is Teflon. Some types of polyВӯ
mer PFAS have fluor groups bound directly on the polymer carbon chain. These are very stable
polymers. Other polymer PFAS have fluorinated side chains, which are much less stable and
can transform to PFAA (VMR, 2022). PFAS polymers are especially used for membranes and
coatings (VMR, 2022). Polymers will not be investigated further in this report as they are less
relevant for groundwater contamination (Xueyan Lyu et al., 2022).
2.2
PFAS types relevant for groundwater contamination
The Danish EPA has selected 22 PFAS that are causing the highest concern for groundwater
contamination in Denmark (VMR, 2022). As mentioned before these are all PFAA and precurВӯ
sors (VMR, 2022). The 22 selected PFAS can be seen in Table A.1 in Appendix A.1.1. The
sources of PFAS contamination in the Danish environment are elaborated on below.
2.2.1
PFAS use and impacts on the environment
PFAS have been, and still is, used in a wide variety of applications. It was introduced in prodВӯ
ucts especially through the 1960s and up till the 1990s (VMR, 2022). The registration of PFAS
use was created in 1979, but PFAS have been used before and the early registered amounts
could be misleading (VMR, 2022). PFAS is not manufactured in Denmark, but PFASВӯcontaining
products have been widely used in Denmark with the highest registered use of PFAS in 2003,
with 230 tons (VMR, 2022). Multiple types of PFAS are often used in one product/application
at the same time (DEPA, 2016a). The lipophilic chain makes the substances useful for grease
and stain repelling (Buck et al., 2011). The hydrophobic properties of the fluorinated chain make
them useful for waterВӯrepellent material (Zhang et al., 2022). In Figure 2.3, some key sources
of PFAS contamination in Denmark are shown. Surfactant PFAS has traditionally been used for
firefighting foam (also known as Aqueous FilmВӯForming Foam Вӯ AFFF) and for different types
of coatings (Buck et al., 2011). PFAS has furthermore been used for hydraulic oil for airplanes,
in agriculture, impregnation, and paint and paper among others (DEPA, 2016a). Direct emisВӯ
sion pathways of PFAS to the environment are among others firefighting drills, galvanization
processes, and from hydraulic oils for airplanes, which are spilled or derived directly to the enviВӯ
ronment (DEPA, 2016b). PFAS is also found in wastewater, which is in some countries spread
on agricultural land, and from there PFAS can seep down to the groundwater. It can also leak
from landfills or industrial sites. From most industrial uses, PFAS spillage is an indirect source
from the process of handling the waste from production and products (DEPA, 2016b). PFAS
can also spread due to atmospheric deposition. However, this is mostly a major contributor in
remote places (Arctic and Antarctic regions) (Xueyan Lyu et al., 2022) and are therefore not
considered in this thesis.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.3: Selected sources of PFAS contamination relevant for groundwater pollution.
PFOS was in 2009 defined as a Persistent Organic Pollutant (POP) and was included in the
international Stockholm convention. The use thereof has therefore been heavily regulated by
the EU since 2009 (VMR, 2022). PFOA has since 2020 been banned under the POPs regulaВӯ
tion, where PFOAВӯcontaining products cannot be produced, marketed, or sold in the EU (VMR,
2022). The use of PFOS in firefighting foam was phased out in the EU in 2006 and after 2011
all use of PFOS in firefighting foam was prohibited in EU (VMR, 2022). The use of PFOA in
firefighting foam is allowed for some exceptions until 2025, but not for educational purposes
and all firefighting foam from drill sites had to be collected and contained after use from 2020.
In relation to the outphasing of PFOS and PFOAВӯbased firefighting foam, also known as вҖқlegacy
foamsвҖқ, many manufacturers transitioned to shortВӯchain PFASВӯbased foams ITRC (2022). AcВӯ
cording to VMR (2022) most fire extinguishing foam produced today is PFAS free. As mentioned
in the introduction, the EU is currently debating a proposal for a complete ban of PFASВӯbased
firefighting foams (European Chemicals Agency, 2023b).
In 2000 the first messages of PFAS (specifically PFOS) toxicity reached the Danish government.
Research has determined that PFAS can lead to various health issues, including immune disВӯ
eases, fertility issues, kidney diseases, and cancer (Fenton et al., 2021). Furthermore, PFAS
can affect the placenta and the fetuses, by reducing their response to vaccines later in life (VMR,
2022Нҫ Ying Lyu et al., 2022). PFAS bind to proteins and accumulate in human and animal bodВӯ
ies. They are identified in crucial parts such as the blood, liver, and kidney (VMR, 2022). PFOA
and PFOS have especially been shown to accumulate in these parts (VMR, 2022). Studies indiВӯ
cate that longВӯchain PFAS might be more toxic than shortВӯchain PFAS, and similarly that sulfonic
acids (PFSA), might be more toxic than carboxylic acids (PFCA). However, these conclusions
could also be due to the lack of studies on health effects from shortВӯchain PFAS (DEPA, 2015b).
The halfВӯlife for sulfonic acids is longer than for carboxylic acids, shorter for branched isomers
than for straight chained PFAS, and shorter in women than men (VMR, 2022). The halfВӯlife in
humans for PFOA is 3.8 years and 5.4 years for PFOS (VMR, 2022). The halfВӯlife increases as
the carbon chain length increases (VMR, 2022).
To protect the health of the public and the environment, the Danish EPA has set up limit values
for PFAS in the environment. Here included are the limit values for drinking water, groundwater,
and soil, since these are most relevant for groundwater contamination.
6
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.1: Danish environmental limit values for PFAS in drinking water, groundwater, and soil.
Table adapted from (VMR, 2022). The four, 12, and 22 PFAS can be seen in Table A.1 in
Appendix A.1.1.
Unit
Sum of 4 PFAS
Sum of 12 PFAS
Sum of 22 PFAS
Drinking water
Ојg/l
0.002
0.1
Groundwater
Ојg/l
0.002
0.1
Soil
mg/kg DW
0.01
0.4
PFAS has been found in both groundwater and drinking water to exceed the limit values for
both the sum of 4 and 12 PFAS (therefore also the 22) in multiple locations in Denmark, during
the national groundwater monitoring, GRUMO 2017Вӯ2021 (Albers et al., 2023). In Figure 2.4,
locations with measured PFAS concentrations in the groundwater are seen. Red indicates
measurements above the limit values, and blue indicates detected PFAS under the limit values.
As can be seen on the map, PFAS contamination occurs all over Denmark.
Figure 2.4:
PFAS occurence in groundwater from the national groundwater monitoring,
GRUMO 2017Вӯ2021. Red indicates values over either the limitvalue for the sum of 4 PFAS
or 12 PFAS. Blue indicates measured values under the limitvalues. Grey shows measurements
below the detection limit. Figure is obtained from Albers et al. (2023).
2.2.2
Selected types of PFAS
Three different PFAS compounds were selected for modelling: Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA),
Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), and Perfluorpentanoic acid (PFPeA). They were selected
to represent PFAS with different functional groups and chain length. PFOA and PFPeA are
PFCA compounds and have a carboxylic acid as their functional group (see Figures 2.5a and 2.5c).
PFOS is a PFSA, containing a sulfonic acid as the functional group (see Figure 2.5b). The
structures for the selected compounds can be seen in Figure 2.5, along with key properties in
Table 2.2. PFOA and PFOS were also chosen based on the amount of available data from
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
7
==PAGE:15==
articles and studies and based on the primary concern regarding these two compounds. Both
PFOA and PFOS are included in the group of the four main PFAS with a stricter limit value in the
Danish groundwater specified by the Danish EPA (VMR, 2022). Both PFOA and PFOS have
a 8Вӯcarbon atom chain and are considered longВӯchain PFAS. However, PFOA has only 7 fully
fluorinated carbon atoms where PFOS has 8. To include shortВӯchain PFAS the third compound
was selected to be the 4Вӯcarbon atom chain PFPeA, see Figure 2.5c (VMR, 2022). FurtherВӯ
more, the available data from the case study, where many depthВӯspecific measurements of this
compound were available, supported the choice of PFPeA.
(a) Structure of PFOA (PFCA)
(b) Structure of PFOS (PFSA)
(c) Structure of PFPeA (PFCA)
Figure 2.5: The three selected PFAS compounds. Note the differences in chain length, fully
fluorinated carbon atoms and functional groups.
2.2.3
Properties of PFAA relevant for transport modelling
PFAS can be used for a variety of different applications. This is in many cases due to their
varying properties throughout the structure. The fluorinated chain has different properties from
the functional groups (Buck et al., 2011Нҫ VMR, 2022). The fluorinated chain is hydrophobic
and lipophilic. In many cases, the functional groups are hydrophilic and/or lipophobic. The hyВӯ
drophobic/hydrophilic property makes some PFAS great surfactants (Buck et al., 2011). SurfacВӯ
tants reduce the tension of the surface of a liquid or the tension between two different phases
(Buck et al., 2011). Due to the hydrophobic/hydrophilic and lipophobic/lipophilic properties,
PFAS tends to accumulate at interfaces such as water/air and water/NonВӯaquous phase liquids
(NAPL), where the functional group will be in the water phase and the fluorinated chain in the air
phase or NAPL phase (VMR, 2022). This is illustrated in Figure 2.6. Studies indicate that PFAA
can be significantly adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface (Brusseau, 2019a, 2023Нҫ ITRC, 2022).
In cases where NAPLs are present in the soil/groundwater, NAPLВӯwater interface adsorption
could be a contributing retention factor (ITRC, 2022). However, compared to airВӯwater interface
adsorption, NAPLВӯwater interface adsorption is expected to be much lower in the environment
(ITRC, 2022).
8
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: Overview of the hydrophobic/hydrophilic and lipophobic/lipophilic properties of the
different parts of PFAS and how they distribute in different interfaces
PFAS donвҖҷt form free phases such as NAPLs commonly seen at contaminated sites with oil or
chlorinated solvents VMR, 2022. PFAA are usually in anionic form in the environment, as most
of them have low Pka compared to most environmental pH (ITRC, 2022Нҫ VMR, 2022). The
Danish EPA does not estimate evaporation to have a significant effect on concentrations due
to them not being very volatile (low HenryвҖҷs law constant) (VMR, 2022). As seen in Table 2.2,
the longВӯchain PFOS has a considerably lower vapour pressure than the shortВӯchain PFPeA.
The carbonВӯfluoride bond, present in the PFAS compound, is considered one of the strongest
in organic chemistry (Zhang et al., 2022). This bond makes them thermally stable and able to
withstand high temperatures without degradation (ITRC, 2022Нҫ Zhang et al., 2022). Because
of the high thermal and chemical stability (Zhang et al., 2022), most environmental degradation
does not possess enough energy to break this bond (DEPA, 2015a). Perfluoroalkyl compounds
are resistant to biodegradation, direct photolysis, atmospheric photooxidation, and hydrolysis
(DEPA, 2015a). Very long halfВӯlives (50Вӯ90 years) have been reported for PFAA biodegradation
(ITRC, 2022Нҫ Washington & Jenkins, 2015). Only a few studies report microbial degradation
of PFAS under aerobic or anaerobic conditions (Zhang et al., 2022). Most literature suggests
that the biodegradation is determined by the bacterial and fungal diversity in the soil matrix,
but there are still many unknowns for the understanding of biodegradation of PFAS (Zhang et
al., 2022). Still, PFAA (especially PFOS and PFOA) are reported to be strongly resistant to
biotransformation (ITRC, 2022Нҫ Zhang et al., 2022). Degradation is therefore not considered to
be a significant process for the transport modelling in this report.
Due to the properties of the fluorinated chain, the length of the chain impacts both the transport
and the properties of the overall PFAS compound (Nguyen et al., 2020). The longer the chain
is, the less mobile PFAS is in the environment as it sorbs more to the soil (VMR, 2022). FurВӯ
thermore, shortВӯchain PFAS are generally more soluble in water than longВӯchain PFAS (DEPA,
2015b) as can be seen from the water solubility in Table 2.2. LongВӯchain PFAS are also exВӯ
pected to be more bioaccumulative than shorterВӯchained PFAS (Buck et al., 2011). The funcВӯ
tional group has an impact on the transport. PFSA bioconcentrates and bioaccumulates more
than PFCA of the same length (Buck et al., 2011). PFSA adsorb more and are therefore less
mobile than PFCA (VMR, 2022). The effect of the functional group on the sorption to soil is
however expected to be less significant than the chain length (VMR, 2022).
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
9
==PAGE:17==
Table 2.2: Overview of parameters for the three selected PFAS. For vapor pressure and water
solubility, values from VMR (2022) are presented along with ranges retrieved from ITRCвҖҷs table.
The rest of the values are from VMR (2022).
Property
Unit
PFOS
PFOA
PFPeA
Cas number
1763Вӯ23Вӯ1
335Вӯ67Вӯ1
2706Вӯ90Вӯ3
Molecular weight
g/mol
538
414.1
264.1
Vapor Pressure
Pa
6.8
54
1350
[0.32; 6.8]
[0.03; 1720]
[1.1; 1349]
Water solubility
g/L
0.57
9.5
112.6
[3 вӢ…10вҲ’6; 1.1 вӢ…103]
[1 вӢ…10вҲ’5; 1.2 вӢ…103]
[0.61; 490]
Log рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘Ө
Вӯ
6.43
5.3
3.43
10
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:18==
3
Transport of PFAS
PFAS are emitted to the environment from the different sources mentioned in Section 2.2.1.
Once PFAS are spilled, they can leach down through the soil, with the water infiltrating the soil.
The transport of PFAS throughout the subsurface is delayed by different processes in the layers.
A conceptual figure of PFAS transport in the subsurface is seen in Figure 3.1. The transport
of PFAS and the different processes affecting the transport will be described in the following
chapter.
Figure 3.1: Conceptual figure of PFAS transport in the subsurface. Arrows indicate the streamВӯ
lines through the unsaturated and saturated zone. The model only contains vertical flow entailВӯ
ing no horizontal transport. The PFAS is indicated with red and is for illustration purposes, not
a specific concentration distribution.
To model the transport of PFAS, it is essential to evaluate the flow throughout the aquifer. As
the contaminant moves with the water flow (see Section 3.2.1), the flow path throughout the
profile affects the transport of contaminants.
3.1
Flow in the saturated and unsaturated zone
The flow path in both the unsaturated and saturated zone is dependent on the pores. The
pores in the soil vary in size and shape which affects the flow velocity. The flow velocity also
varies within a poreВӯspace (Hillel, 2003). Therefore the flow in a soil column is usually estimated
by modeling an overall average flow in the medium (Hillel, 2003). Flow through a medium in
3Вӯdimensions can be described by DarcyвҖҷs law (Nazaroff & AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001):
рқ‘һ= вҲ’рқҗҫвҲҮв„Һ
(3.1)
where q is the Darcy flux, sometimes given as U, K is the hydraulic conductivity and h is the
hydraulic head. The hydraulic head is given by the sum of the pressure head (в„Һрқ‘қ) and the
elevation (z). вҲҮis the del operater вҺӣ
вҺң
вҺң
вҺқ
рқң•
рқң•рқ‘Ҙ
рқң•
рқң•рқ‘Ұ
рқң•
рқң•рқ‘§
вҺһ
вҺҹ
вҺҹ
вҺ 
.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
11
==PAGE:19==
3.1.1
Capillary pressure
To understand the distribution of water and air in pore spaces, the forces within the pore space
are important. This can be described by capillary pressure. The pore space between the differВӯ
ent soil particles is a complicated network and varies greatly in size and shape. As a simplifiВӯ
cation, the pore space can be viewed as capillaries or small tubes (Yang, 2016). As illustrated
in Figure 3.2, the water height inside a tube is higher than the surrounding liquid. This height
difference is a result of capillary forces. The pressure of the air above the interface is higher
than the pressure in the water. Capillary pressure is this difference between pressures at the
interface and can be described by (Yang, 2016):
рқң“= рқ‘ғрқ‘ҺвҲ’рқ‘ғрқ‘Ө= рқңҢрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқ‘”вӢ…в„Һ
(3.2)
Where рқ‘ғрқ‘Һis the pressure in the air phase, рқ‘ғрқ‘Өis the pressure of the water phase, рқңҢрқ‘Өis the
density of water, рқ‘”is the gravitational constant, and в„Һis the height of the water in the tube. By
introducing the force relation to the height, an equation for the capillary pressure related to the
pore radius can be written as (Yang, 2016):
рқң“= 2 вӢ…рқңҺвӢ…рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ (рқңғ)
рқ‘ҹ
(3.3)
Where рқңҺis the surface tension of water and рқ‘ҹis the radius of the capillary or tube. Note that
рқңғhere denotes the contact angle and not the water content as elsewhere. The different paВӯ
rameters are illustrated in Figure 3.2a. For further derivation of these equations refer to (Yang,
2016).
(a) Capillary pressure in a tube with key paВӯ
rameters for calculation
(b) Capillary pressure in tubes with different
radii.
Figure 3.2: Illustrations for capillary pressure. Taken from (Badawy & Ganat, 2022).
3.1.2
Water retention
The amount of water retained in the soil in the unsaturated zone is directly related to the capillary
pressure. The water saturation over the depth in the unsaturated zone is given by the soil water
retention curve, which relates water content (рқңғ) and capillary pressure (рқң“). A conceptual figure
of the retention curve can be seen in Figure 3.3.
12
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: Soil water retention curve, showing the relation between capillary pressure (рқң“) and
water content (рқңғ). Effective saturation is included as well. Modified from (Gilding, 1991).
The minimum water content in the unsaturated zone is given by the residual water content (рқңғрқ‘ҹ).
A small amount of water (residual water content Вӯ рқңғрқ‘ҹ) is always present in the pores as seen
on Figure 3.3 the dotted line, at this point, the effective saturation is 0. When the maximum
water content is present, effective saturation is 1, and residual water content is equal to the
saturated water content (рқңғрқ‘ ). Effective saturation therefore is a scale between 0 and 1 showing
the amount of water in the unsaturated zone.
The effective saturation (рқ‘Ҷрқ‘’) and the water content(рқңғ) is according to Mualem (1976) related by:
рқ‘Ҷрқ‘’= рқңғвҲ’рқңғрқ‘ҹ
рқңғрқ‘ вҲ’рқңғрқ‘ҹ
(3.4)
where рқңғрқ‘ is the saturated water content and рқңғрқ‘ҹis the residual water content.
In the saturated zone, the entire pore space is filled with water resulting in рқңғрқ‘ = рқңҷ. The porosity
and effective porosity are assumed to be the same since measured values of porosity usually
is only measurable in the effective area. The shape of the water retention curve is greatly
dependent on the soil properties (Yang, 2016). Figure 3.3 is a conceptual figure, and the curve
might be slightly sharper or smoother depending on the soil characteristics.
3.1.3
The van Genuchten equation
The saturation curve is often parameterized using the van Genuchten equation (Bear, 2018Нҫ
Carsel & Parrish, 1988Нҫ Guo et al., 2020Нҫ Sallwey et al., 2018). The van Genuchten equation is
given by:
рқңғ(рқң“) =
вҺ§
{
вҺЁ
{
вҺ©
рқңғрқ‘ҹ+
рқңғрқ‘ вҲ’рқңғрқ‘ҹ
(1 + (рқӣјвӢ…рқң“)рқ‘ӣ)
1вҲ’1/рқ‘ӣ
рқң“вүҘ0
рқңғрқ‘ 
рқң“< 0
(3.5)
(van Genuchten, 1980). The van Genuchten parameters are given by рқӣјand n. For simplification
(1 вҲ’1/рқ‘ӣ) can be noted as a third parameter m ((Bear, 2018Нҫ van Genuchten, 1980)).
Using Equation (3.4), the van Genuchten equation (3.5) can also be expressed for the effective
saturation as:
рқ‘Ҷрқ‘’=
1
(1 + (рқӣјвӢ…рқң“)рқ‘ӣ)
рқ‘ҡ
(3.6)
The derivation of Equation (3.6), can be found in van Genuchten (1980).
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
13
==PAGE:21==
3.1.4
Hydraulic conductivity (MualemвҖҷs equation)
The hydraulic conductivity рқҗҫ, seen in DarcyвҖҷs law (Equation (3.1)), scales the flux of water to the
hydraulic gradient (Hillel, 2003). To distinguish between the conductivity in the saturated and
unsaturated zone, рқҗҫwill from this point on be noted as рқҗҫрқ‘ for the saturated zone. The hydraulic
conductivity depends on the mediumвҖҷs structure and type and is usually larger in more porous
materials (Hillel, 2003). Hydraulic conductivity is largely dependent on the soilвҖҷs pore geometry
such as porosity and tortuosity, but is also affected by the fluidвҖҷs density and viscosity (Hillel,
2003).
The hydraulic conductivity in the saturated zone can be described by (Hillel, 2003Нҫ Nazaroff &
AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001):
рқҗҫрқ‘ = рқ‘ҳвӢ…f
(3.7)
where рқ‘ҳis the intrinsic permeability, f is the fluidity given by: рқ‘“= рқңҢрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқ‘”
рқңҮрқ‘Ө
, and рқңҮрқ‘Өis the dynamic
viscosity of water (Hillel, 2003). The hydraulic conductivity can be measured experimentally
in the lab, sometimes with core samples, but can also be measured in the field with multiple
different methods, or estimated by different equations (Hillel, 2003)
In the unsaturated zone, the hydraulic conductivity can be multiple orders of magnitude lower
than in the saturated zone. When some of the pores contain air, the conductivity decreases
considerably (Hillel, 2003). When the soil drains, the larger pores are emptied first. These pores
are the most conductive, and this therefore also significantly reduces the hydraulic conductivity
in the unsaturated zone (Hillel, 2003). A conceptual figure of the relation between the water
content and the hydraulic conductivity can be seen in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Typical hydraulic conductivity (K) in the unsaturated zone as a function of water
content (рқңғ). Retrieved from (Gilding, 1991).
The hydraulic conductivity in the unsaturated zone can be estimated based on the soilВӯwater
retention curve. Mualem (1976), proposed a model for hydraulic conductivity in the unsaturated
zone, which is often used for the unsaturated zone, together with the van Genuchten equation
(Bear, 2018Нҫ Guo et al., 2020Нҫ van Genuchten, 1980). The Mualem equation is given by:
рқҗҫрқ‘ҹ= рқ‘Ҷ1/2
рқ‘’
(вҲ«
рқңғ
0
1
рқң“рқ‘‘рқңғ/ вҲ«
рқңғрқ‘ рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў
0
1
рқң“рқ‘‘рқңғ)
2
(3.8)
(Mualem, 1976). рқҗҫрқ‘ҹis the relative conductivity.
14
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:22==
The hydraulic conductivity in the unsaturated zone is given by the product of relative conductivity
(рқҗҫрқ‘ҹ) and the saturated conductivity рқҗҫрқ‘ :
рқҗҫ(рқңғ) = рқҗҫрқ‘ҹвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘ 
(3.9)
This equation is adapted from (Mualem, 1976). Combining the Mualem equation (3.8) with the
van Genuchten equation (3.6) and Equation (3.9) yields (Bear, 2018):
рқҗҫ(рқңғ) = рқҗҫрқ‘ вӢ…рқ‘Ҷ1/2
рқ‘’
(1 вҲ’(1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҷ1/рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘’
)рқ‘ҡ)
2
(3.10)
3.1.5
Flow equation in the unsaturated zone (Richards equation)
Richards equation is widely used as a model for the flow of water in unsaturated homogeneous
soils (Gilding, 1991). It is based on DarcyвҖҷs Law, see Equation (3.1) (Gilding, 1991), and the
continuity principle which is given by (Hillel, 2003):
рқң•рқңғ
рқң•рқ‘Ў= вҲ’вҲҮвӢ…рқ‘һ
(3.11)
RichardвҖҷs equation describes the change of water content over the change in time, and therefore
the flow. For a 3Вӯdimensional porous medium, it can be written as follows:
рқң•рқңғ
рқң•рқ‘Ў+ рқ‘Ҷрқ‘’вӢ…рқ‘Ҷрқ‘қвӢ…(вҲ’рқң•рқң“
рқң•рқ‘Ў) вҲ’вҲҮвӢ…(рқҗҫ(рқңғ) вӢ…вҲҮ(в„Һ+ рқ‘§)) = рқ‘Ҡ
(3.12)
(Fetter, 2001Нҫ Hillel, 2003). рқҗҫ(рқңғ) is here the hydraulic conductivity as a function of the water
content and рқ‘Ҷрқ‘қis storage due to compressibility.
3.2
Transport processes for PFAS
As mentioned previously, the transport and distribution of PFAS through the subsurface deВӯ
pends on different processes. This is modelled through a transport equation, which includes
the different retention processes. The transport equation applied in the model is given by:
рқң•(рқңғвӢ…рқ‘җ)
рқң•рқ‘Ў
+ рқңҢрқ‘ҸвӢ…рқң•рқ‘җрқ‘ 
рқң•рқ‘Ў+ рқң•рқ‘җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
рқң•рқ‘Ў
= вҲ’вҲҮвӢ…(рқңғвӢ…рқ‘җвӢ…вғ—рқ‘Ј) + вҲҮвӢ…(рқңғвӢ…
вғ—рқҗ·вӢ…вҲҮрқ‘җ)
(3.13)
(Guo et al., 2020). Where рқ‘җis the concentration in the water, рқ‘җрқ‘ is the concentration sorbed
to solid, рқ‘җрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis the concentration adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface,
вғ—рқ‘Јis the average seepage
velocity,
вғ—рқҗ·is the hydrodynamic dispersion and рқңҢрқ‘Ҹis the bulk density.
This transport equation builds on the flow equation from Section 3.1 and describes the change
in storage of PFAS, with the processes diffusion, dispersion and sorption included. The relevant
concepts for PFAS transport and these processes will be explained in this section.
3.2.1
Advection, Diffusion and Dispersion
When water flows through an aquifer, contaminants can be transported with the water. This
process is called advection, or convection (Fetter, 2008Нҫ Nazaroff & AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001).
Therefore the mass flux of a compound is dependent on the Dracy flux (рқ‘һ), which can be given
as: рқ‘һ= рқңғвӢ…рқ‘Ј(Gilding, 1991). Here рқңғis the water content and рқ‘Јis the average seepage velocity.
This equation can be used to simplify the flow equation component in the transport equation, by
expressing it as a function of the average seepage velocity рқ‘Ј. Multiplying the darcy flux (рқ‘һ) with
the concentration of PFAS in the water (рқ‘җ), equals the mass flux known as the advective flux
(Fetter, 2008) and results in the term вҲҮвӢ…(рқңғвӢ…рқ‘җвӢ…рқ‘Ј) in the transport equation (see Equation (3.13)).
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
15
==PAGE:23==
Diffusion
Diffusion is the movement of dissolved substances from an area with a higher substance conВӯ
centration to an area with a lower substance concentration. Larger differences in concentration
lead to higher rates of transport (Fetter, 2008). The movement of molecules is called molecВӯ
ular diffusion. The diffusion is dependent on the properties of the diffusing substances, the
substance/material through which it is diffusing (e.g. air), and environmental conditions (e.g.
temperature) and can be described by FickвҖҷs second law (Fetter, 2008). Due to longer pathВӯ
ways around mineral grains, the diffusion is slower in porous media than regular diffusion in
water. To account for this the diffusion is noted as the effective diffusion, given by the diffuВӯ
sion coefficient (рқҗ·рқ‘‘) multiplied by the tortuosity (рқңҸ), рқҗ·рқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“= рқҗ·рқ‘‘вӢ…рқңҸ. The diffusion coefficient рқҗ·рқ‘‘
has the units [ рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ2
рқ‘ ] (Fetter, 2008). The tortuosity can be calculated by the Millington and Quirk
equation given by :
рқңҸ= рқңғ7/3
рқңғрқ‘ 
2
(3.14)
(Bear, 2018Нҫ Guo et al., 2020Нҫ Millington & Quirk, 1961).
Dispersion
Mechanical dispersion describes the phenomenon of variation in the velocity in a porous medium,
due to water having to flow around the sediment grains. It occurs due to three reasons which
are illustrated in Figure 3.5. The mechanical dispersion is given by:
рқҗ·рқ‘–рқ‘—= [рқӣјрқ‘Ўрқӣҝрқ‘–рқ‘—| вғ—рқ‘Ј| + (рқӣјрқҗҝвҲ’рқӣјрқ‘Ү)рқ‘Јрқ‘–рқ‘Јрқ‘—
| вғ—рқ‘Ј| ]
(3.15)
(Bear, 2018), where рқӣҝрқ‘–рқ‘—= 1 for рқ‘–= рқ‘—, and рқӣҝрқ‘–рқ‘—= 0 for рқ‘–= рқ‘—, рқӣјрқҗҝis the longitudinal dynamic
dispersivity and рқӣјрқ‘Үis the transverse dynamic dispersivity.
In groundwater, the process of molecular diffusion and mechanical dispersion cannot be sepaВӯ
rated. They are combined and defined in the parameter рқҗ·called the hydrodynamic dispersion
coefficient given by рқҗ·= рқҗ·рқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“+рқҗ·рқ‘–рқ‘—(Appelo, 2005Нҫ Fetter, 2008). The hydrodynamic dispersion
is the term вҲҮвӢ…(рқңғвӢ…
вғ—рқҗ·вӢ…вҲҮрқ‘җ) in the transport equation reference Equation (3.13).
Figure 3.5: Factors causing mechanical dispersion. Adapted from (Fetter, 2008). (1) fluid
travels faster in the centre of the pore space between the particles, than near the edges (2)
particles can travel different distances, depending on the path, when moving through a porous
media (3) pores have different sizes where there is more or less space that the fluid can move
faster or slower.
16
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:24==
3.2.2
SolidВӯphase sorption
The term sorption covers the sum of the processes adsorption and absorption (Nazaroff &
AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001). Adsorption is the collection of a compound at an interface (Nazaroff
& AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001). Absorption on the other hand is when the compound is absorbed into
the material (distributed in the material to some degree) (Nazaroff & AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001) SorpВӯ
tion is therefore material dependent. In environmental applications, it is often hard to distinguish
the two processes and the overall term sorption is therefore applied (Nazaroff & AlvarezВӯCohen,
2001). In this section sorption to solid material will be discussed. Adsorption at the airВӯwater
interface is covered in Section 3.2.3.
The partitioning of a sorbed contaminant between fluid and solid phase can be described by
different isotherms (Nazaroff & AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001). The simplest form of isotherm is the
linear isotherm, where the sorbed mass is a linear function of the concentration in the water.
Given by:
рқ‘җрқ‘ = рқҗҫрқ‘‘вӢ…рқ‘җ
(3.16)
(Nazaroff & AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001). Where рқ‘җрқ‘ is the concentration of the sorbed phase and рқҗҫрқ‘‘
is the distribution coefficient. Different factors can result in sorption not being linear, including,
but not limited to, material heterogeneity and different interactions between the contaminant
particles (Higgins & Luthy, 2006). The nonВӯlinear sorption can be described by the Freundlich
isotherm given by:
рқ‘җрқ‘ = рқҗҫрқ‘“(рқ‘җ)рқ‘ӣ
(3.17)
(Higgins & Luthy, 2006). Where рқҗҫрқ‘“is the Freundlich sorption distribution coefficient. Note that
n is a factor of nonВӯlinearity and not the van Genuchten parameter as used elsewhere in this
report.
Wang et al. (2021), found that the sorption and desorption are nonВӯlinear and rateВӯlimited. CoВӯ
herently, Wei et al. (2017) fitted Freundlich and linear isotherms for six different soils and found
that the nonВӯlinear isotherm fit much better. The sorption approaches a linear pattern at small
concentrations, as seen in Wang et al. (2021). Therefore in the model, a linear sorption isotherm
is assumed and applied. According to ITRC (2022) sorption of PFAS occurs mainly by electroВӯ
static interactions or to organic matter by hydrophobic interactions. These two types of sorption
are illustrated in Figure 3.6. Wang et al. (2021), found that sorption to inorganic components
of the soil is occurring, but that sorption to organic carbon is the main factor. This aligns with
Higgins and Luthy (2006) who found that organic carbon sorption is dominant, for materials with
organic carbon content in the range 0.56% to 9.66%. While the organicВӯcarbonВӯbased sorption
is often dominating, electrostatic interactions can be a considerable contributing factor and not
including it, can lead to underestimation of the sorption (ITRC, 2022). The fraction of organicВӯ
carbonВӯbased adsorption depends on the soil type along with its clay and sand content. Sorption
to organic carbon is mainly occurring by hydrophobic interactions (ITRC, 2022Нҫ Xueyan Lyu et
al., 2022). Hydrophobic interactions occur between two hydrophobic constituents, in this case,
the organic carbon and the hydrophobic tail of the PFAS (see Figure 3.6). Sorption to organic
carbon content can be described by (Wang et al., 2021):
рқҗҫрқ‘‘= рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җвӢ…рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ
(3.18)
Where рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җis the fraction of organic carbon in the soil and рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җis the adsorption coefficient to
organic carbon.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.6: Conceptual figure showing the two main sorption processes of PFAS, hydrophoВӯ
bic interaction and electrostatic attraction. Both processes occur in both the unsaturated and
saturated zone.
The organic carbonВӯbased sorption is dependent on the PFAS properties. As mentioned preВӯ
viously, sorption increases with increasing chain length. Furthermore PFSA sorbs more than
PFCA, the factor of functional group is however less deciding than chain length (ITRC, 2022Нҫ
Xueyan Lyu et al., 2022). Studies are indicating that hydrophobic interactions are not sufficient
to describe the transport of shorter chained PFAS (Xueyan Lyu et al., 2022). PFAS can also sorb
by electrostatic attraction as a result of the charge at the head of the functional group, see FigВӯ
ure 3.6 (ITRC, 2022). Anionic PFAS will by electrostatic attraction sorb to positively charged soil
and be repelled by negatively charged soil (ITRC, 2022Нҫ Xueyan Lyu et al., 2022). Electrostatic
attractions are pH dependent, where decreasing pH can result in increasing sorption of anionic
PFAS (ITRC, 2022). Furthermore, the presence of divalent cations, such as рқҗ¶рқ‘Һ2+ can increase
the electrostatic attractions, and thereby the adsorption, between the material and the anionic
PFAS, since the repulsion from the negatively charged ions on the soil is reduced (Xueyan Lyu
et al., 2022). It is suggested that hydrogen bonding may occur between the sulfonate group and
the mineral surface of hematite and between the sulfonate and the oxide surface or hydroxyl
group (Wei et al., 2017). There are some discussions about the interactions and impact of hyВӯ
drogen bonding and PFAS (Wei et al., 2017) with some suggesting it to be insignificant (Deng
et al., 2012).
The sorbed mass is multiplied by the bulk density, in the transport equation, so the units are
uniform. The bulk density (рқңҢрқ‘Ҹ) for a porous material can be calculated by:
рқңҢрқ‘Ҹ= (1 вҲ’рқңҷ) вӢ…рқңҢрқ‘ 
(3.19)
(Nazaroff & AlvarezВӯCohen, 2001). Where рқңҢрқ‘ is the particle density of the soil.
The sorption term is in the transport equation (Equation (3.13)) as the term: рқңҢрқ‘ҸвӢ…рқң•рқ‘җрқ‘ 
рқң•рқ‘Ў
3.2.3
AirВӯwater interface adsorption
As formerly mentioned airВӯwater interface adsorption plays a significant role in the transport of
PFAS. Brusseau (2019a), found that airВӯwater interface adsorption accounted for a significant
retention in both sand and soil. AirВӯwater interfacial adsorption occurs due to the hydrophobic
properties of the fluorinated chain, and the often hydrophilic properties of the functional group.
18
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:26==
This causes the PFAS to lie in the interface, with one вҖқendвҖқ in each phase (VMR, 2022). This is
illustrated in Figure 3.7. This process naturally only occurs in the unsaturated zone, as there is
no air phase in the saturated zone.
Figure 3.7: Conceptual figure showing airВӯwater interface adsorption of PFAS. The functional
group stays in the water phase, and the fluorinated chain in the air phase. This process only
occurs in the unsaturated zone.
The interfacial adsorption process has shown to be nonВӯlinear adsorption, where the adsorption
coefficient рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өdepends on the concentration (Lyu et al., 2018). Longer chained PFAS adsorb
more in the interface than shorter chained PFAS (Ying Lyu et al., 2022). For longВӯchained PFCA,
interfacial adsorption was found by Ying Lyu et al. (2022), to be the main source of retention,
whereas the retention of shortВӯchained PFCA was dominated by solidВӯphase adsorption.
The adsorption at the airВӯwater interface can be described by (Brusseau, 2019aНҫ Guo et al.,
2020):
рқ‘җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө= рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқ‘җ
(3.20)
where рқ‘җрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis the concentration of adsorbed compound at the airВӯwater interface, per volume
water. рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis the airВӯwater interfacial area in [рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ2/рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ3] and рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis the airВӯwater interfacial
adsorption coefficient in [рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ3/рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ2].
The airВӯwater interface adsorption is in the transport equation included as the term рқң•рқ‘җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
рқң•рқ‘Ў. The
product рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқ‘җ, equals the surface excess noted by О“ (Brusseau, 2019a). The airВӯwater interfaВӯ
cial area (рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө) depends on the soil type properties, including capillary pressure, saturation and
the history of the soil saturation (Guo et al., 2020). рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Өhas been estimated by multiple different
approaches throughout the literature(Brusseau, 2023). It is often approximated based on soil
properties but can also be estimated experimentally. The airВӯwater interfacial area рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Өcan be
calculated as a linear inverse function of the water saturation рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө, dependent on grain diameter.
Grain diameter is measurable by a sieve analysis, making it an easily applicable estimation of
рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor specific sites (Brusseau, 2019a, 2023). This method is applied in the model and is given
by:
рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө= (вҲ’2.85 вӢ…рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө+ 3.6) вӢ…((1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө) вӢ…3.9 вӢ…рқ‘‘вҲ’1.2
рқ‘”
)
(3.21)
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
19
==PAGE:27==
where рқ‘‘рқ‘”is the median grain diameter [рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ] and рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Өis the water saturation calculated by:
рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө= рқңғ
рқңҷ(Brusseau, 2023Нҫ Guo et al., 2020).
The airВӯwater interfacial adsorption coefficient, рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө, is substance and concentrationВӯdependent
(Lyu et al., 2018). As mentioned formerly it is dependent on the chain length of the PFAS (Lyu
et al., 2018). рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis an uncertain parameter and is therefore not reported in the ITRC database
(ITRC, 2022). рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis difficult to estimate for low concentrations (Lyu et al., 2018). Different
approaches can estimate it. In some papers, it is measured experimentally from the retention
time (Lyu et al., 2018). In multiple articles it is mentioned as measurable from surface tension,
using the Gibbs equation (Guo et al., 2020Нҫ Lyu et al., 2018).
From Lyu et al. (2018), at рқ‘җ= 1 рқ‘ҡрқ‘”
рқҗҝthe рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨВӯcarbon chain length regression function is given for
PFAS by:
log рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө= 0.56 вӢ…рқҗ¶рқ‘ӣвҲ’7.5
(3.22)
Where рқҗ¶рқ‘ӣis the number of fluorinated carbon atoms. This regression is developed for carboxylic
acids, but they note that it describes PFOS well.
For PFCAвҖҷs, at рқ‘җ= 1 рқ‘ҡрқ‘”
рқҗҝthe рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨВӯcarbon chain length regression function is given for by (Ying
Lyu et al., 2022):
log рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө= 0.46 вӢ…рқҗ¶рқ‘ӣвҲ’5.8
(3.23)
20
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Overview of selected literature on PFAS transport models
In this section, a short overview of the available transport models for PFAS, based on a literature
review will be presented. Methods and equations that have been implemented in our model
have been presented in Section 3.1.
Brusseau (2018), Вӯ Assessing the potential contributions of additional retention proВӯ
cesses to PFAS retardation in the subsurface. A multiВӯprocess retention model was used to
evaluate sources of retardation for PFAS transport. The results showed that the airВӯwater interВӯ
face adsorption was a primary source for the retention both for PFOS and PFOA. This showed
the necessity of implementing airВӯwater interphase in the model. Furthermore, they find NAPL
adsorption to be a significant retention factor. The equation for the aqueous transport with airВӯ
water interfaceВӯbased sorption is presented: рқ‘…= 1 + рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө/рқңғрқ‘Ө, an essential equation for
implementation of the airВӯwater interphase in the model. In this thesis, NAPL interface adsorpВӯ
tion was not taken into account.
Lyu et al. (2018), Вӯ Adsorption of PFOA at the AirВӯWater Interface during Transport in UnВӯ
saturated Porous Media. A miscibleВӯdisplacement experiment was conducted with PFOA to
determine the contribution of the airВӯwater interface to the adsorption. Lyu et al. (2018) preВӯ
sented experimental data in which рқҗ¶рқ‘Өwas a test variable. This showed the nonВӯlinear depenВӯ
dency between рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues and the рқҗ¶рқ‘Ө. It was concluded that airВӯwater interface adsorption
was a significant factor for the retention. The equation for the interfacial area was presented
as: рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө= (1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө) вӢ…рқҗҙрқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ. The study also investigated the correlation between the airВӯwater
adsorption coefficient and carbon number. A plot of the regression curve was presented with
the regression presented in Equation (3.22). Besides the regression curve the plot showed a
data point for a PFOS рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue which was found well represented by the regression. Even
though the regression was based on PFCA, it was argued that the рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өregression was appliВӯ
cable for all PFAS. The plotted рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨВӯregression did, however, show a slight underestimation of
the PFOS рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue.
Brusseau (2019a), Вӯ Comprehensive Retention Model for PFAS Transport in Subsurface
Systems. Presents a comprehensive compartment model for PFAS retention, including proВӯ
cesses they find relevant for transport in source zones, hereunder the airВӯwater interface adВӯ
sorption. They present methods for estimating and determining distribution variables, which
were used to gain an overview of parameter estimation and helped to decide methods for apВӯ
plication.
Guo et al. (2020), Вӯ A Mathematical Model for the Release, Transport, and Retention of
PerВӯ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in the Vadose Zone. They developed a mathВӯ
ematical model for transient variably saturated flow coupled with the transport processes of
PFAS in the unsaturated zone. The mathematical formulation accounted for the transient variВӯ
ably saturated flow, dispersive and advective transport, nonВӯlinear solidВӯphase sorption, and
airВӯwater interfacial sorption. The рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Өwas estimated by fitting a saturationВӯdependent function
to measurements from different column experiments. It was concluded that the airВӯwater interВӯ
face had a strong impact on the retention and migration of PFAS. They found that it took several
decades for PFOS to reach the groundwater. For the vadose zone, it was estimated that 70%
were retained in the airВӯwater interface and almost 30% sorbed to the soil, with only 1Вӯ2% in
the aqueous phase. This article gave an overview of important processes and how to matheВӯ
matically include them in a transport model. Specifically, it presented a common approach to
model the flow in the unsaturated zone. The mathematical examination layed the ground for a
successful implementation in Comsol Multiphysics.
Silva et al. (2020), Вӯ A modified Hydrus model for simulating PFAS transport in the vadose
zone. Silva et al. (2020) modified a HYDRUS unsaturated flow and transport model to simulate
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
21
==PAGE:29==
the effects on PFAS retention in the unsaturated soil including airВӯwater interface adsorption. It
was here concluded that the airВӯwater interface adsorption is not always the dominant source
of retention and that solid phase sorption can be of great importance. This model simulated the
dynamics of the airВӯwater interface adsorption from changes in soil moisture.
Wei et al. (2017), Вӯ Sorption kinetics, isotherms and mechanisms of PFOS on soils with difВӯ
ferent physicochemical properties PFOS sorption and desorption onto soil was investigated.
The study showed that sorption equilibrium was reached after 48 hours. It was documented
that PFOS isotherm sorption could be described by the Freundlich model for six different soil
types. The article plotted the equilibrium concentration against the amount of PFOS sorbed
which followed the Freundlich isotherm. However, for low concentrations (< 100 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ) the corВӯ
relation approximates a linear pattern, supporting the use of a linear sorption isotherm for low
concentrations.
Ying Lyu et al. (2022), Вӯ AirВӯwater interfacial adsorption of C4ВӯC10 perfluorocarboxylic
acids during transport in unsaturated porous media.The impact of the carbon chain length
on the adsorption to the airВӯwater interface was investigated.
A linear correlation between
рқ‘ҷрқ‘ңрқ‘”(рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө) and the number of fluorinated carbon numbers was presented. This regression showed
an increase with 0.46 pr. fluorinated carbon atom. The correlation was found for a concenВӯ
tration of 1 рқ‘ҡрқ‘”
рқҗҝ, which is high for groundwater limit values.
From this article the regression
рқ‘ҷрқ‘ңрқ‘”(рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө) = 0.46 вӢ…рқҗ¶рқ‘ӣвҲ’5.8 was implemented in the model.
Brusseau (2023), Вӯ Determining airВӯwater interfacial areas for the retention and transport
of PFAS and other interfacially active solutes in unsaturated porous media. Brusseau
(2023) aimed to determine the methods that most representatively measured and estimated
the airВӯwater interfacial area, focusing especially on PFAS retention. Three new methods were
developed and compared with three existing methods using independent data sets to test PFAS
retention and transport. They concluded that the existing methods produced airВӯwater interfaВӯ
cial areas which resulted in insufficient recreation of measured PFAS data. However, the new
methods produced interfacial areas that they concluded to result in accurate PFAS retention reВӯ
sults. The updated equation for the interfacial area was presented. The first method is given by:
рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө= (0.83(1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө)2 + 0.16(1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө))вӢ…(761вӢ…рқ‘ҷрқ‘ңрқ‘”рқ‘Ғрқҗөрқ‘Ҷрқ‘ҶрқҗҙвҲ’2025). They conclude this method is
based on relatively ideal media and should be further developed. Another method they present
is an equation for applying a scaling factor to thermodynamicВӯdetermined values. They note
that: вҖқ...there is inherent uncertainty in its applicability beyond sands and sandy soilsвҖқ(Brusseau,
2023). The third method is developed for cases where data is less available and is based on
Lyu et al. (2018), developed to account for the nonВӯlinearity between the interfacial area and
saturation. It is given by: рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө= (вҲ’2.85 вӢ…рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө+ 3.6) вӢ…((1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ө) вӢ…3.9 вӢ…рқ‘‘вҲ’1.2
рқ‘”
). From the conclusions
in this article, it was decided to apply this equation.
22
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:30==
4
Model setup and approach
In this thesis, a model for PFAS transport is developed. This can predict the transport towards
groundwater and the potential concentrations in the groundwater. The model is developed as a
2Вӯdimensional vertical transport model, including the aforementioned retention processes. The
model is set up for the Danish soil types clayey till and sandy till. Firstly a generic model setup
will be presented and then a case study will be presented.
The model for PFAS transport was developed as two models used together, a flow and a transВӯ
port model. They were set up as a 2D model in COMSOL Multiphysics version 6.2. COMSOL
Multiphysics uses the finite element method to solve the transport equations (partial differential
equations) presented in Section 3.2. The direct linear system solver was used for both the flow
and transport models, as a timeВӯdependent solver. The mesh was refined depending on geВӯ
ology, which will be elaborated on further in Sections 4.4.2 and 4.5.3. The Parametric Sweep
feature in the studies was used in order to change the different parameters, to investigate their
impact on the flow and/or transport.
4.1
Flow model setup
The flow model was set up as a timeВӯdependent 2Вӯdimensional model, using RichardвҖҷs Equation
interface in COMSOL. The model was set up with only vertical flow, to model the saturation
distribution and the flow in the unsaturated zone.
Figure 4.1: Boundary conditions
applied in the flow model.
To establish the saturation curve, the hydraulic head was
reduced from max to the desired level over one year. The
initial condition in the model was therefore a fully saturated
column with a hydraulic head equal to the length of the doВӯ
main. An interpolation function between the two heads was
applied as a Dirichlet boundary condition, в„Һ= в„Һ(рқ‘Ў), at the
bottom boundary (see Figure 4.1). As only vertical flow was
modeled, a Neuman boundary condition,
вғ—рқ‘ӣвӢ…
вғ—рқ‘һ= 0, was imВӯ
plemented on both sides, resulting in no flow across these
boundaries (see Figure 4.1).
вғ—рқ‘ӣis an outward pointing normal
to the boundary. A fixed flux boundary condition,
вғ—рқ‘ӣвӢ…
вғ—рқ‘һ= рқҗј,
was applied at the top of the model domain, with a fixed flow
equal to the infiltration rate I.
The flow model simulation was run until a steady state was reached (till the saturation and
hydraulic head gradient were constant with time). The results from the last time step in the
flow model were used as an input for the transport model. The RichardвҖҷs Equation Interface
(see Equation (3.12)), was used to model the flow in the unsaturated porous media and the
saturated zone. This reduces to DarcyвҖҷs law seen in Equation (3.1) when the media is saturated.
The combined van Genuchten and Mualem equation (see Equation (3.10)) was used for the
hydraulic conductivity and the saturation curve. In Table 4.1 the used parameters for the flow
model are presented. Values that are geology dependent, or have been varied for sites are
presented in Section 4.4 or Section 4.5.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
23
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.1: Parameters and methods for parameter estimation in the flow model, applied to all
geologies. *L is the length of the domain in meters. The equation for longitudinal dispersivity
has also been used by Guo et al. (2020).** source: Nazaroff and AlvarezВӯCohen (2001)
Description
Parameter
Unit
Value
Source
Transv. dispersivity
рқӣјрқ‘Ү
рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ
1
Long. dispersivity
рқӣјрқҗҝ
рқ‘ҡ
0.83 вӢ…((рқ‘ҷрқ‘ңрқ‘”10(рқҗҝ))2.414)вҲ—
Xu and Eckstein (1995)
Tortuosity
рқңҸ
рқҗёрқ‘һрқ‘ўрқ‘Һрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ңрқ‘ӣ(3.14)
Diffusion coef.
рқҗ·рқ‘‘
рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ2/рқ‘ 
5.4 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Guo et al. (2020)
Particle density
рқңҢрқ‘ 
рқ‘”/рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ3
2.65
**
Bulk density
рқңҢрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘”/рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ3
рқҗёрқ‘һрқ‘ўрқ‘Һрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ңрқ‘ӣ(3.19)
**
4.2
Transport model setup
The PFAS transport model was set up as a 2Вӯdimensional model in COMSOL using the TransВӯ
port of Diluted Species Interface, with the flow of the steady state solution from the flow model.
The transport model was set up for PFOS, PFOA and PFPeA.
Figure 4.2: Boundary conВӯ
ditions applied in the transВӯ
port model.
The solute transport model was simulated in the timespan 1960
till 2040. An initial concentration of рқ‘җ= 0 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝwas applied in the enВӯ
tire domain. The model was set up with no flux boundary condiВӯ
tions, вҲ’вғ—рқ‘ӣвӢ…вғ—рқ‘һ= 0, applied at the sides, as there is only vertical flow
and transport, see Figure 4.2. q is the total flux of contaminant
here. An outflow,
вғ—рқ‘ӣвӢ…(вҲ’вғ—рқҗ·вҲҮрқ‘җ) = 0, of the contaminant at the botВӯ
tom was applied. A timeВӯdependent Dirichlet boundary condition
was applied at the top boundary, with a concentrationВӯdependent
on an input function рқ‘җ= рқ‘җ(рқ‘Ў). The input function for the three difВӯ
ferent compounds was set up as a function of time. The relative
input can be seen in Figure 4.3. The historical use/ban of the
compound controlled the different compoundвҖҷs inputs. PFPeA is
currently still being used but in the model, a ban in 2024 was
assumed, due to the proposal on banning PFAS in firefighting
foams (see Section 2.2.1). A phaseВӯin of one year was assumed. The phaseВӯout period of
PFOS and PFOA was set to follow the Danish legislation (see Section 2.2.1), for PFPeA a
phaseВӯout period of one year was assumed. For the case study, an input function based on
the historical use of firefighting foam at the site was applied, this can be seen in Figure A.3 in
Appendix A.5.1. For the transport model strict time stepping for the plotted years and the years
with change in the input function was implemented. For the remaining years and in the flow
model a maximum time step of 3 years was used.
24
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3: Relative mass input in the transport model of the three different PFAS compounds
over time.
The transport was modelled with the processes dispersion and sorption (airВӯwater interface
and solidВӯphase), the transport equation for the model can be seen in Equation (3.13). Since a
steadyВӯstate solution from the flow is used, the water content (рқңғ) is constant and not a derivative
of time. Dispersion was included by the equation given in Section 3.2.1. |рқ‘Ј| was calculated by:
|рқ‘Ј| = вҲҡрқ‘Ј2рқ‘Ҙ+ рқ‘Ј2рқ‘Ұ+ рқ‘’рқ‘қрқ‘ 2, eps is a very small value applied in COMSOL for avoiding divisions by
zero. The effective diffusion was included as рқҗ·рқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“= рқҗ·рқ‘‘вӢ…рқңҸ. The Millington and Quirk diffusivity
model (see Equation (3.14)) was applied.
Linear equilibrium sorption was applied for solid phase sorption, see Equations (3.16) and (3.18),
with the parameters for the three PFAS compounds seen in Table 4.2. рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues were availВӯ
able for specific soil types, but since none had similar parameters to the soil types used in this
model, average values were used.
Table 4.2: рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues applied for the solidВӯphase sorption, average values from VMR (2022)
based on Nguyen et al. (2020). Presented are also the ranges for рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җfound for soil in ITRC
(2022) (recalculated from log(рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ) to рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ).
Unit
PFOS
PFOA
PFPeA
рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ
[L/kg]
889
166
56
рқ‘…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣрқ‘”рқ‘’
[L/kg]
[251Нҫ199562]
[1Нҫ1621]
[5Нҫ389]
AirВӯwater interface adsorption was applied by Equations (3.20) and (3.21). Different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨВӯvalues
were investigated. In Table 4.3 the calculated values from the regressions from Section 3.2.3
are presented, along with found values from litterature.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
25
==PAGE:33==
Table 4.3: Estimated рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨВӯ values for the three compounds. The 2018 PFAS regression is
calculated based on Equation (3.22). The 2022 PFCA regression is calculated based on EquaВӯ
tion (3.23). For comparison measured values from (Lyu et al., 2018) are included for PFOA. A
measured value for PFOS is included, found in Brusseau (2019b) and originally from Shinoda
et al. (1972).
Method
Concentration
рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨPFOS
рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨPFOA
рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨPFPeA
[mg/L]
[cm]
[cm]
[cm]
2018 Regression
1
9.5 вӢ…10вҲ’4
2.6 вӢ…10вҲ’4
5.5 вӢ…10вҲ’6
2022 Regression
1
7.59 вӢ…10вҲ’3
2.6 вӢ…10вҲ’3
1.1 вӢ…10вҲ’4
2019b Brusseau
Вӯ
2.30 вӢ…10вҲ’3
RВӯbased measured
1
Вӯ
2.1 вӢ…10вҲ’3
Вӯ
RВӯbased measured
1 вӢ…10вҲ’3
Вӯ
4 вӢ…10вҲ’3
Вӯ
The flow and transport model was developed with geological parameters representative for
Danish geological settings.
4.3
Geology and geological parameters in Denmark
To develop a model representative for relevant Danish conditions, the values for the geologiВӯ
cal parameters have to correspond with typical Danish geologies. In this section background
information on geological layers in Denmark will be covered along with typical hydrogeological
parmeters.
The top geological layers in Denmark have mostly been created from deposits from the CretaВӯ
ceous, Tertiary, or Quaternary periods. The glaciers covering Denmark in the Quaternary period
along with its meltwater from them, have especially formed the surface geology (Gravesen &
Kelstrup, 2001). From the glacial movement, tills were created. Most common in Denmark is
the lodgement till 1 which was created from the bottom of the glacier (Galsgaard, 2012). Tills
are very mixed sediments and can vary greatly in their content, depending on what other layВӯ
ers the glacier has moved over and where in the glacierвҖҷs path the till is placed (Galsgaard,
2012). The mixed Danish tills usually consist mainly of sand (GEUS, 2016). The clay content
of Danish till varies in different sources, with some sources indicating a typical clay content of
5Вӯ20% in Danish tills (Galsgaard, 2012), others up to 25% (JГёrgensen et al., 2005) and some
sources 35% (GEUS, 2016). According to Galsgaard (2012) the distinction between sandy till
and clayey till is at 12 to 15% of clay content in the till. Most sources indicate <12% clay as the
limit for it being classified as sandy till (GEUS, 2016Нҫ JГёrgensen et al., 2005). Clayey till tends
to fracture and therefore often has a permeability similar to silty sand (Galsgaard, 2012).
In Figure 4.4, surface geological layers (approximately in one m bgs.) in Denmark are illustrated
(GEUS, 2023). Most of Zealand and Funen are covered by glacial layers such as tills. The
glacial layers extend to some parts of Jutland which is also covered by proglacial meltwater
layers. As can be seen on the map, the east part of Denmark (east Jutland, Funen, Zealand
and Bornholm) are covered with clayey till (brown). Sandy till and downВӯwash sandy deposits
are mainly seen in the western and northern part of Jutland (orange and purple). Therefore,
sandy till and clayey till are the main geological layers in focus in this thesis.
1In Danish lodgement till is bundglidesmorГҰne
26
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.4: Surface geology in Denmark (in oneВӯmeter depth). Adapted from GEUS, 2023
The topsoil varies greatly around Denmark, both in type and thickness. Many industrial sites
or inhabited/constructed areas have gravel and/or different types of fill near the surface as the
base below tiles and pavement. Gravel is rock particles above 2 mm, but in many construction
uses it can be mixed with sand (Heinberg & Schacke, 2015). In fields or areas covered by grass,
often mull is the topsoil (Gravesen & Kelstrup, 2001). This is a sandy and/or clayey soil type,
formed by the degradation of leaves in the mineral soil (Gravesen & Kelstrup, 2001Нҫ Petersen
et al., 2007). The content of organic carbon in mull tends to decrease with the depth (Petersen
et al., 2007).
Fraction of organic carbon, porosity, hydraulic conductivity and infiltration rate are hydrogeoВӯ
logical parameters, which impact the flow and transport of contaminants. Ranges for effective
porosity (рқңҷ) and saturated hydraulic conductivities (рқҗҫрқ‘ ) for some selected Danish geologies can
be seen in Table 4.4. The fraction of organic carbon varies greatly in different geologies, and no
literature has been found with an overview of the ranges of these. The hydraulic conductivity
can vary within the same geological layer, as it depends on sediment content and the number
of fractures in the geological layer (MiljГёstyrelsen, 2016). Surface near clayey till has been
found to have conductivities in the range [10вҲ’5; 10вҲ’4] рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ , where deeper layers of clayey till have
a reported range of [10вҲ’8; 10вҲ’7] рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ (MiljГёstyrelsen, 2016).
Table 4.4: Porosity (рқңҷ) and Hydraulic conductivity (рқҗҫрқ‘ ) i selected Danish geologies, obtained
from MiljГёstyrelsen (2016).
Parameter
Unit
Clayey till
Sandy till
Gravel
Sand and gravel
рқңҷ
[вҲ’]
[0.1; 0.3]
[0.25; 0.4]
[0.2; 0.35]
[0.15; 0.35]
рқҗҫрқ‘ 
[рқ‘ҡ/рқ‘ ]
[10вҲ’11 Нҫ10вҲ’4]
[10вҲ’7 Нҫ10вҲ’4]
[10вҲ’5 Нҫ10вҲ’3]
Вӯ
The infiltration rate varies greatly around Denmark as can be seen in Figure A.1, where esВӯ
timated infiltration rates based on DK modellen are presented. DK modellen, also known as
the National Hydrological Model, is a national water resource model developed by GEUS, pubВӯ
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
27
==PAGE:35==
licly available (GEUS, n.d.). Generally higher infiltration rates are observed in areas with more
sandy aquifers, than in areas with clayey till aquifers. This tendency can be seen when comВӯ
paring Figure 4.4, with Figure A.1 in Appendix A.2. It is seen that the infiltration rates around
Denmark range from below 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹto over 500 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ.
4.4
Generic geological setup
In order to test the effect of the different transport processes and parameters in different geВӯ
ologies and for different compounds, the flow and transport models were developed with three
simple geological formations representative for Danish soil types. The three scenarios are:
Scenario A (clayey till with a top meter of mull), Scenario B (sandy till with a top meter of gravel)
and Scenario C (clayey till with a top meter of gravel). The different model setups can be seen
in Figure 4.5. The simulation was performed over a depth of 15 meters. The transient flow
model was run with a decreasing hydraulic head from 0 m bgs. to 5 m bgs. until steady state
was reached. The solution with the water table in 5 m bgs. was then used as an input to the
transport model.
Figure 4.5: Different model setups of generic geological models. Scenario A consisting of
clayey till with a top meter of mull, Scenario B with sand and a top meter of gravel and Scenario
C with clayey till and a top meter of gravel. The water table at 5m bgs. is marked with a dashed
line.
4.4.1
Geological Parameters
As mentioned previously, tills can vary greatly around Denmark. For the generic geological
setup, average values were researched so the model would be representative. However, due
to a lack of data, parameters were estimated in some cases from specific sites. An overview of
the applied parameters and sources can be seen in Table 4.5.
The median grain diameter (рқ‘‘рқ‘”) for clayey till and sandy till was found by averaging the results
from sieve test analyses. For the clayey till, sieve analyses from two sites near Ringsted in
Denmark were used, see Table A.2 in Appendix A.3. For the clayey till, data from depths, 6 m
bgs., 11 m bgs. and 14 m bgs. from BГёgedevej were used, as they were evaluated to have
the most fitting clay content. From Slimmingevej sieve tests on samples from 1Вӯ2 m bgs. and
7Вӯ7.5 m bgs. were used for clayey till. Data was available from two different sites with sandy
till, see Table A.3 in Appendix A.3. For the generic geological setup sieve test analyses from
MarbГҰk were used, as this is a location with a sandy aquifer. For mull, particle size distributions
from Hansen (1976) were used, based on 12 different sites around Denmark, see Table A.4 in
Appendix A.3. The different grain diameters and a more inВӯdepth description of the method can
28
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:36==
be found in Appendix A.3. For gravel, grain size distribution analyses were not available. An
estimate of 2mm was used, as it is expected that it is often mixed with sand, reducing the grain
diameter.
The content of organic carbon was estimated from field data from the formerly mentioned sites,
for clayey till and sandy till see Tables A.5 and A.6 in Appendix A.3. The organic carbon content
in surface soils can vary greatly from site to site, especially uncertain if it contains fill materials.
Within a reasonable range, a higher estimate of рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җfor mull and a lower for gravel were impleВӯ
mented, to encompass the variations and to investigate the impact on the retention of PFAS.
The organic carbon in gravel is expected to be low and was set to the measured value from
sand. To investigate a highly organic soil, mull was modelled with a fraction of organic carВӯ
bon at 2%. The site investigations from Hansen (1976), where the other mull parameters were
found, did not have any organic carbon measurements.
Porosities for mull were calculated based on the sites from Hansen (1976), see Table A.4 in
Appendix A.3. For the remaining geologies, estimates based on MiljГёstyrelsen (2016), were
used. Residual saturation (рқңғрқ‘ҹ), and the van Genuchten parameters рқӣјand рқ‘ӣ, were found from
Carsel and Parrish (1988). The soil types in Carsel and Parrish (1988), are not from Denmark
and the geological names are therefore not necessarily directly comparable. Therefore, clay
content, sand content and hydraulic conductivities were compared with known parameters for
Danish soils to find the most fitting soil types from Carsel and Parrish (1988). The parameters
for the selected soil types can be found in Table A.7 in Appendix A.3. For clayey till the geoglogy
called вҖқSandy clay loamвҖқ in Carsel and Parrish (1988) was selected, for mull the вҖқSandy loamвҖқ in
Carsel and Parrish (1988) was selected and for sandy till вҖқLoamy sandвҖқ from Carsel and Parrish
(1988) was chosen. Gravel was set to have the same parameters as sand.
The Infiltration rate was in clayey till, Scenario A and C, set to 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. In sandy till, Scenario
B, a higher infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹwas applied. The saturated hydraulic conductivity (рқҗҫрқ‘ ) for
mull was calculated based on the sites from Hansen (1976), see Table A.4 in Appendix A.3.
For the remaining geologies estimates based on MiljГёstyrelsen (2016), were used. For clayey
till the hydraulic conductivity was expected to be around 10вҲ’8 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ (MiljГёstyrelsen, 2016Нҫ Nielsen
et al., 2023), based on field studies and literature. This, however, was not sufficient to reach
the desired lowering of the groundwater table to 5 m bgs, within a reasonable range of infilВӯ
tration rates. Therefore, the hydraulic conductivity was selected, based on evaluating different
combinations of conductivities and infiltration rates, to see which rates made the head drop to 5
m bgs. achievable, within a reasonable range based on MiljГёstyrelsen (2016). Some selected
tested hydraulic conductivities in the clayey till and infiltration rates can be seen in Figure 4.6a.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
29
==PAGE:37==
(a) Saturation curves computed with different
infiltration rates and hydraulic conductivity in
the clayey till.
(b) Zoomed in saturation curves for different
hydraulic conductivities in clayey till and infilВӯ
tration rates.
Figure 4.6: Saturation curves in clayey till and mull (top meter). Hydraulic conductivity in the
gravel is kept constant. The desired hydraulic head is illustrated with the dashed line. Marked
with a black square in figure a is the area seen in figure b.
As seen in Figure 4.6a, the desired headВӯdrop to 5 m bgs. cannot be reached with a hydraulic
conductivity in clayey till of 1 вӢ…10вҲ’7 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ , or less (blue graphs) with an infiltration rate at 80 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹor
above. In Figure 4.6b, a zoomedВӯin version of the graph can be seen. Looking at the purple,
green and red curves it is seen that the distance to 5 m bgs. is less than 15 cm, and the
parameters resulting in these curves, were deemed adequate to lower the groundwater table
to 5 m bgs. The infiltration rate was expected to be 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ
or above for most clayey tills.
Therefore an infiltration rate of 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹand a conductivity of 3 вӢ…10вҲ’7 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ was chosen to model the
generic results.
Table 4.5: Parameters used in the model for different geologies. Letters indicate sources for
the parameters. [рқ‘Һ]: Data from sites. [рқ‘Ҹ]: Estimated. [рқ‘җ]: Hansen (1976). [рқ‘‘]: MiljГёstyrelsen
(2016). [рқ‘’]: Estimated by parametric sweep. [рқ‘“]: Carsel and Parrish (1988)
Material
рқ‘‘рқ‘”
рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ
рқңҷ
рқҗҫрқ‘ 
рқӣј
рқ‘ӣ
рқңғрқ‘ҹ
[рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ]
[%]
[вҲ’]
[ рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ ]
[рқ‘җрқ‘ҡвҲ’1]
[вҲ’]
[вҲ’]
Sandy till
0.18[рқ‘Һ]
0.04[рқ‘Һ]
0.3[рқ‘‘]
1 вӢ…10вҲ’4[рқ‘‘]
0.124[рқ‘“]
2.28[рқ‘“]
0.057[рқ‘“]
Clayey till
0.03[рқ‘Һ]
0.17[рқ‘Һ]
0.25[рқ‘‘]
[рқ‘’]
0.059[рқ‘“]
1.48[рқ‘“]
1[рқ‘“]
Gravel
2[рқ‘Ҹ]
0.04[рқ‘Һ]
0.27[рқ‘‘]
1 вӢ…10вҲ’4[рқ‘‘]
0.124[рқ‘“]
2.28[рқ‘“]
0.057[рқ‘“]
Mull
0.1[рқ‘җ]
2[рқ‘Ҹ]
0.41[рқ‘җ]
9 вӢ…10вҲ’6[рқ‘җ]
0.075[рқ‘“]
1.89[рқ‘“]
0.065[рқ‘“]
30
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:38==
4.4.2
Mesh
The mesh was created as an unstructured triangular mesh over the domain. Since only vertical
flow and transport were modelled, a much coarser mesh in the xВӯdirection was applied than
in the yВӯdirection. In some cases the mesh coarseness was manually defined, in others, the
predefined settings calibrated for fluid dynamics were used. The mesh was refined for the
different scenarios since abnormalities were observed when running with the same mesh. The
mesh was further refined in the transitions between geological layers. For Scenario A, B and C
the applied mesh can be seen in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: The meshes applied for the generic setups.
4.4.3
Sensitivity analysis
A local sensitivity analysis for the parameters in the model was performed. Each parameter
was varied with Вұ10%, results were produced using the parametric sweep function in COMSOL.
Further data treatment was handled in Python and Microsoft Excel. Three different sensitivity
analyses were performed, change in depth in 2023 and change in arrival time at 2 and 5 m bgs.
Since not all compounds in all geologies arrive at the 2 or 5 meters mark within the modelled
timeВӯframe the analysis was only made for the ones arriving at the defined depths. Similarly,
some compounds had in 2023 already reached the bottom of the domain, making it not possible
to investigate the change in depth of the 10% of the input concentration in 2023. An overview
of the sensitivity analysis can be seen in Table 4.6. Note that Scenario C only has been inВӯ
vestigated for PFOS, since PFOS does not reach the clayey till in Scenario A and therefore
investigations for clayey till has to be performed in Scenario C.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
31
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.6: Overview of performed sensitivity analyses. X indicates it has been included.
Compound
Geology
Arrival time
2m bgs.
Arrival time
5m bgs.
Depth in 2023
PFOS
Scenario A
X
Scenario B
X
X
Scenario C
X
X
PFOA
Scenario A
X
X
Scenario B
X
X
PFPeA
Scenario A
X
X
Scenario B
X
For the change in depths in 2023 of 10% max concentration, a sensitivity index was calculated
by:
рқ‘Ҷрқҗј=
О”рқ‘Ұрқ‘–
рқ‘Ұрқ‘–
О”рқң”рқ‘–
рқң”рқ‘–
(4.1)
where y is the impacted parameter, in this case the depth of the 10% concentration in a specific
year 2023. рқң”is a varied parameter..
For the change in arrival time, SIВӯvalues were not calculated as a yearly variation seemed more
easily comprehensible.
4.5
Case study setup
To evaluate the modelвҖҷs performance in a more complicated geological setting and to compare
the model trend with measured data, a case study was investigated.
The location of the selected case will be kept anonymous in this thesis. It is a site where
firefighting drills have taken place, since 1969, with known PFAS containing firefighting foam.
More information on what type of foam and its historical use was not available, but it is known
that the site was at least still in use till 2015. The report from the investigation performed in
2021, gives no mention of whether the site is no longer or still in use. The site is located in
Zealand, Denmark and is known to have clayey till, sandy till, meltwater sand and meltwater
gravel. The primary groundwater aquifer consists of limestone.
The site was investigated for contamination in 2016, where PFAS was found in the surface of
the primary aquifer. Since then yearly monitoring of PFAS contamination in the primary aquifer
has been performed through three boreholes. The site has also been investigated for oil conВӯ
tamination. Data from both are not included in the scope of this thesis. In 2021 supplementary
investigations of PFAS contamination were performed by NIRAS. The data on the vertical disВӯ
tribution of soil contamination from this study is used in this thesis.
As part of the investigation in 2021, two boreholes at the firefighting drill site were made. Soil
and water samples were measured and reported along with borelogs with descriptions of geoВӯ
logical layers. Borelogs can be seen in Appendix A.4.2, and measured soil data can be seen in
Appendix A.4.1. The two boreholes showed detectable PFAS concentrations with the highest
concentrations of PFOS at 27 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”at 3 m bgs., which is above the limit value for soil at 10 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”for
the sum of 4 PFAS seen in Table 2.1. Niras found that concentrations in the groundwater were
higher than anticipated from the concentrations in soil, and hypothesized that this could be due
to a potentially leaking tank on the site and not necessarily from the direct emission from fireВӯ
fighting foam. Therefore, only concentrations from the soil measurements will be used in this
32
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:40==
thesis, and measurements in water will not be further discussed. The concentrations in the soil
from the two boreholes can be seen in Figure 4.8. The boreholes are distinguished as B1 and
B2. B1 is located in the centre of the firefighting drill site, and B2 in the edge of it. B1 was drilled
to 9.5 m bgs. and B2 to 14 m bgs. The limestone was for B2 reached in 9.5 meters as seen in
Appendix A.4.2. B1 was only drilled to 9.5 m bgs. due to a large rock.
(a) B1
(b) B2
Figure 4.8: Measured concentrations of PFOS, PFOA and PFPeA in the soil at the case study
in the two boreholes B1 and B2. Note that PFOS is plotted on a separate axis.
The water table at the site is at 14 m bgs. so the soil from the two boreholes was unsaturated.
The report does, however, mention former investigations finding secondary groundwater in 3Вӯ4
m bgs. Porewater was seen in B2 at 4Вӯ6 m bgs. but the filter proved to be dry. The clayey till in
the model does generally have a higher saturation, but otherwise this additional water content
has not been included.
4.5.1
Setup and geological parameters
The flow and transport model was applied, with some adjustments to fit the case study. In
Figure 4.9, the geology at the site (a) can be seen along with the COMSOL setup (b). As
illustrated, the COMSOL setup deviates a bit from the geological setup. The modelled domain
is marked with blue in Figure 4.9, and is only from 0 to 9 m bgs. This is due to limestone
not being in the scope of this thesis, and limestone occurs in 9.5 m bgs. for both boreholes.
The modelled domain is what will be presented in the results and compared with the measured
values. Since the hydraulic head is located at 14 m. bgs. it was necessary to increase the
geometry in COMSOL to obtain an appropriate hydraulic head gradient throughout the first 9
meters. Geological parameters from sandy till were applied in the meters from 9 to 14 m bgs.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
33
==PAGE:41==
for computational purposes as seen in Figure 4.9, but will not be further presented. The head
drop function was applied, dropping the hydraulic head from 0 to 14 m bgs. and ran till steady
state. The solution was then used as an input to the transport model.
(a) Geology
(b) Model setup
Figure 4.9: a: Geology in B1 and B2 at the case study. b: Model setup in comsol, marked with
blue is the domain of interest, that will be investigated in this thesis. To model the hydraulic
gradient, with the marked water table at 14 m bgs. a 14 m geology is implemented in Comsol,
with sand in the extra 5 meters outside of the modelled domain.
The geological parameters were varied throughout the domain (see Figure 4.9) in accordance
with the descriptions from the borelogs seen in Appendix A.4.2. For the geological layersНҫ
clayey till, gravel and gravel fill, the parameters from the generic setup seen in Table 4.5 were
used. In the sandy till layers, the parameters seen below in Table 4.7 were applied instead of
the parameters from the generic setup. This was done because the geology in the case study
contains layers of clayey till. Because of the layers of clayey till, the sandy layers are expected
to have a higher organic carbon content than a purely sandy aquifer as modelled in the generic
setup. The values seen in Table 4.7 are obtained from a site where clayey till is also present
and are therefore more suitable for this case study.
Table 4.7: Parameters used in the model for sand for the case study. Letters indicate sources
for the parameters. [рқ‘Һ]: Data from site BГёgedevej. [рқ‘Ҹ]: MiljГёstyrelsen (2016), same as in generic
setup. [рқ‘җ]: Carsel and Parrish (1988)
Material
рқ‘‘рқ‘”
рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ
рқңҷ
рқҗҫрқ‘ 
рқӣј
рқ‘ӣ
рқңғрқ‘ҹ
[рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ]
[%]
[вҲ’]
[ рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ ]
[рқ‘җрқ‘ҡвҲ’1]
[вҲ’]
[вҲ’]
Sandy till
0.2[рқ‘Һ]
0.19[рқ‘Һ]
0.3[рқ‘Ҹ]
1 вӢ…10вҲ’4[рқ‘Ҹ]
0.124[рқ‘җ]
2.28[рқ‘җ]
0.057[рқ‘җ]
34
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:42==
The infiltration rate for the case study was found from DK Modellen (GEUS, n.d.). The infiltration
rate was estimated to be between 200 and 300 mm/yr at the case study site. DK Modellen
estimates the infiltration to different geological layers in the subsurface. For the case study
the infiltration rate was estimated in the same range for all layers, and a specific layer was
therefore not selected. The effect of different infiltration rates on the modelled concentrations,
was investigated within the given range of 200Вӯ300 mm/yr, the results from which can be seen
in Appendix A.7.1 in order to find the most fitting rate for the data.
4.5.2
Input concentration
Since no input concentration is known from the case study, the input concentrations were
adapted for the best possible fit. The results of these can be seen in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: Fitted input concentrations for B1 and B2 in the case study
Unit
PFOS
PFOA
PFPeA
B1
[ рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ]
25
5
5
B2
[ рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ]
12.5
1.5
5
B1 was further fitted with a higher OC content in gravel fill. This will be covered in Section 5.3.
After the adapted organic content, the originally fitted input concentration was no longer suitable.
In Table 4.9, new fitted input concentrations are therefore presented.
Table 4.9: New input concentrations after fitted parameters for B1
Unit
PFOS
PFOA
PFPeA
B1
[ рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ]
5
2
1.5
The measured concentrations in the soil from the case study are given as total concentrations
per mass dryВӯweigth soil. To compare the model results with the measured data the total conВӯ
taminant concentration was calculated. This can be seen in Appendix A.5.2.
4.5.3
Mesh
The mesh for the case study was set up, like for the generic results, with a triangular mesh, but
with different refinements. For the case study, it was necessary to develop different meshes
for the flow and transport model, as the solver struggled to find a solution with too fine a mesh
for the flow model. When investigating different infiltration rates, the mesh for the flow model
had to be increased to a much coarser size, see Figure A.4 in Appendix A.5.3, in order for the
solver to be able to find a solution. The mesh was refined in all transitions between the different
geological layers.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.10: Mesh for the flow and transport model applied for the case study.
36
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:44==
5
Results
In the following section the results from the generic setup simulation, parameter investigation
and the application to the case study will be presented. The COMSOL simulation of the transВӯ
port results in the concentration of the modelled compound in the different phases over time.
Below in Figure 5.1, the modelled transport of the PFOA concentration in the water, at difВӯ
ferent timesteps in Scenario B (sandy till with a top meter of gravel) is illustrated. As can be
seen, the contamination enters the domain as a constant input in the beginning, slowly transВӯ
porting through the soil column with the years. When the input of contaminant stops after the
outВӯphasing, uncontaminated water enters the system as seen in Figure 5.1c.
(a) 1970
(b) 2000
(c) 2040.
Figure 5.1: Concentration of PFOA in Scenario B (sandy till and gravel), over time. Plotted is
the concentration in the water. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹand
a рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on Ying Lyu et al. (2022) (see Table 4.3)
As can be seen in Figure 5.1, the applied mesh, has resulted in a uniform transport without sudВӯ
den variations. Furthermore, the contaminant is constant horizontally, as there is no horizontal
flow. Since the contaminant is constant in the horizontal direction, the contamination over the
depth will further on only be plotted for a vertical line in the domain.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
37
==PAGE:45==
5.1
Transport in generic geological settings
The presented results for the generic setup are shown below. The model results are generВӯ
ated with the hydrogeological parameters as seen in Section 4.4 and with compoundВӯspecific
variables from Section 4.2.
5.1.1
Vertical distribution of PFOA
The results for the model simulation with PFOA are presented in Figures 5.2 and 5.3. Indicated
is the geological layers and the water table. They depict the concentration in рқңҮрқ‘”per рқҗҝwater,
across three phases: the sorption to the soil, the concentration in the water, and the sorption in
the airВӯwater interface. The рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor PFOA was calculated based on the PFCA regression from
Ying Lyu et al. (2022), see Table 4.3.
(a) Sorbed to solid.
(b) Adsorbed in aВӯw interface.
(c) Concentration in water.
Figure 5.2: Concentration of PFOA in Scenario A (clayey till and mull). The concentration
sorbed to solid, adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface and in the water is presented for 5 years:
1960, 1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 100mm/yr
and рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022). Note that the concentrations on
the axes are varying.
Figure 5.2 presents the simulated data of the concentration across the depth in Scenario A, a
clayey till geology with mull in the first meter. The concentration of PFOA sorbed to solids is
seen in Figure 5.2a. The solid sorption in the mull is much higher compared to the clayey till,
with up to 500 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝsorbed in the mull and approximately 20 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝin the top layers of the clayey
till. The mull has a higher airВӯwater interface adsorption than clayey till, due to a lower saturaВӯ
tion, (see Section 5.2.2 for elaboration on parameter impact on saturation). For mull, the solid
sorption is the main factor of retention, due to the high рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ. For clayey till, it is however the airВӯ
water interface. The concentration in the water follows an anticipated transport, with maximum
concentrations equal to the initial input of 100 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝand gradually decreasing with depth due to the
sorptive processes. PFOA has not reached the bottom of the domain after 2040 for Scenario
A, and reaches the groundwater table at 5 m bgs. after year 2000.
38
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:46==
(a) Sorbed to solid.
(b) Adsorbed in aВӯw interface.
(c) Concentration in water.
Figure 5.3: Concentration of PFOA in Scenario B (sandy till and gravel). The concentration
sorbed to solid, adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface and in the water is presented for 5 years:
1960, 1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ
and рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022). Note that the concentrations on
the axes are varying.
Figure 5.3 depicts the simulated data of the concentration across the depth in Scenario B, a
sandy geology with gravel in the upper meter. Figure 5.3a represents the concentration of
PFOA sorbed to solids, which as expected decreases with the decrease in concentration in
water over time (seen in Figure 5.3c). In the unsaturated zone, the sorption to soil decreases
faster than in the saturated zone. This is due to the airВӯwater interface adding to the decrease
of concentration in the water. In the saturated zone where the airВӯwater interface adsorption is
absent, a less sudden decrease in concentration over the depth is observed. The solid sorption
in sand (around 10Вӯ15 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ, see Figure 5.3a) is slightly lower than the solid sorption in clayey till
(around 20Вӯ30 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ, reference Figure 5.2a), due to the difference in the рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ(see Table 4.5). From
Figure 5.3b it is seen that the airВӯwater interface is the principal contributor to the retention,
with an adsorbed PFOA concentration exceeding 200 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ. The airВӯwater interface adsorption is
higher for sand compared to clayey till (refer to Figure 5.2b). An increased water content in
clayey till, diminishes the airВӯwater interface area and therefore adsorption. The concentration
in the water (Figure 5.3c) shows a faster transport for Scenario B than Scenario A, due to the
lower infiltration rate and a increased solidВӯphase sorption in Scenario A. PFOA reaches the
bottom of the domain after 1980.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
39
==PAGE:47==
5.1.2
Vertical distribution of PFOS
The results for the model simulation with PFOS are presented in Figure 5.4 (Scenario A) and
Figure 5.5 (Scenario B). The рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor PFOS was calculated based on the PFCA regression
from Ying Lyu et al. (2022), see Table 4.3. Note that PFOS has an earlier phaseВӯout than PFOA
following historical use, see Figure 4.3 for the inputs of the different compounds.
(a) Sorbed to solid.
(b) Adsorbed in aВӯw interface.
(c) Concentration in water.
Figure 5.4: Concentration of PFOS in Scenario A (clayey till and mull). The concentration
sorbed to solid, adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface and in the water is presented for 5 years:
1960, 1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ
and a рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022). Note that the concentrations
on the axes are varying.
The PFOS distribution in the three phases in Scenario A with clayey till and mull, is presented
in Figure 5.4. Similar patterns are seen for the solid sorption of PFOS and PFOA (reference
Figure 5.2a) however, a larger amount of PFOS is sorbed due to the higher рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җfor PFOS (see
Table 4.2). The high рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җfor mull results in PFOS not being transported much further than the
first meter. The airВӯwater interface adsorption is lower than the solid sorption, however, it is still
a significant retention factor with 1000 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝsorbed in year 2000. For Scenario A, a lower infiltraВӯ
tion rate is used than for Scenario B increasing the amount sorbed in the airВӯwater interface
compared to sand and gravel in Scenario B 5.5.
40
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:48==
(a) Sorbed to solid.
(b) Adsorbed in aВӯw interface.
(c) Concentration in water.
Figure 5.5: Concentration of PFOS in Scenario B (sandy till and gravel). The concentration
sorbed to solid, adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface and in the water is presented for 5 years:
1960, 1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ
and a рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022)
In Figure 5.5 the concentration for the PFOS distribution in the three phases for Scenario B is
illustrated. As expected, the transport is considerably faster than in Scenario A, due to a lower
solidВӯphase sorption. The solid sorption for PFOS, as depicted in Figure 5.5a, surpasses that of
PFOA, due to the higher рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ(see Table 4.2) resulting in a maximum solid sorption approximately
five times greater. PFOS shows a slower transport than PFOA, this is due to the higher рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
value for PFOS (reference Table 4.3), which results in a higher airВӯwater interface sorption. Up
to 600 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝPFOS is sorbed in the top meter of the sand, which is around 3 times higher than what
is simulated for PFOA (reference Figure 5.3b). PFOS transport with the water is slower than
PFOA, with the concentration in water reaching the water table in 5 m bgs. after the year 2000,
and not reaching the bottom of the domain (see Figure 5.5c).
Since most of PFOS is sorbed in the mull in Scenario B, Scenario C is simulated to get a better
understanding of the transport of PFOS in the clayey till. The results of this can be seen in
Figure 5.6.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
41
==PAGE:49==
(a) Sorbed to solid
(b) Adsorbed in aВӯw interface
(c) Concentration in water
Figure 5.6: Concentration of PFOS in Scenario C (clayey till and gravel). The concentration
sorbed to solid, adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface and the water is presented for 5 years: 1960,
1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹand
рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022). Note that the concentrations on the
axes are varying.
In Figure 5.6a, the concentration of PFOS sorbed in Scenario C, a clayey till geology with a
top meter of gravel. It is seen that there is more solid sorbed PFOS in the clayey till than in the
sand (see Figure 5.5a) due to a higher рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ. The airВӯwater interface see Figure 5.6b has a smaller
amount of PFOS sorbed than what is seen for sand (see Figure 5.5b) as would be expected due
to the lower water content and higher grain diameter in sand. The transport of PFOS is slower
in Scenario C than Scenario B (sandy till) due to the lower infiltration rate. It is noticeable when
comparing with Scenario A that less PFOS is sorbed in the airВӯwater interface in Scenario C.
The two cases are modelled with the same infiltration rates, but a much higher grain diameter
is applied for gravel. This could be the reason for the decreased airВӯwater interface adoption.
To investigate the impact of the geological parameters in clayey till and sand, without the differВӯ
ence in infiltration rate, the model was run for Scenario B and C with the same infiltration rate
at 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. The results of this can be seen in Figure 5.7. In Figure 5.7a, PFOS contamination in
Scenario B (sand and gravel) modelled with the adapted infiltration rate is seen. Figure 5.6c, is
included as Figure 5.7b, for easier comparison. No alterations to this figure have been made.
42
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:50==
(a) Scenario B, рқҗјрқ‘ҹ= 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ
(b) Scenario C
Figure 5.7: Concentration of PFOS in the water. a: Scenario B (sandy till and gravel) adapted
with an infiltration rate of рқҗјрқ‘ҹ= 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. b: Scenario C (clayey till and gravel). The concentration
is presented for 5 years: 1960, 1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an
infiltration rate of 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹand рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on Ying Lyu et al. (2022).
As can be seen when comparing the two figures in Figure 5.7, the transport is faster in sand,
than in clayey till, even when the infiltration rate is the same. Since the airВӯwater interface
adsorption is higher in sandy till than clayey till (refer to Figures 5.5b and 5.6b), this cannot be
the reason for the slower transport in clayey till. The increased solidВӯphase sorption is most
likely the reason for the difference.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
43
==PAGE:51==
5.1.3
Vertical distribution of PFPeA
Results for the generic simulation for PFPeA in Scenario A (Figure 5.8) and for Scenario B
(Figure 5.9) are presented below.
(a) Sorbed to solid.
(b) Adsorbed in aВӯw interface.
(c) Concentration in water.
Figure 5.8: Concentration of PFPeA in Scenario A (clayey till and mull). The concentration
sorbed to solid, adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface and in the water is presented for 5 years:
1960, 1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 100 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ
and рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022). Note that the concentrations on
the axes are varying.
PFPeA, as the only short chain compound, has considerably lower рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө(reference Table 4.3)
and рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ(reference Table 4.2), than PFOS and PFOA. This results in an overall faster transport
in all of the geological layers, see Figures 5.8 and 5.9. PFPeA has as expected the lowest solid
sorption (see Figure 5.8a) compared to PFOA (Figure 5.2a) and PFOS (Figure 5.4a). PFOA
sorbs twice as much in the mull, where PFOS sorbs close to 15 times more than PFPeA. In
clayey till almost the same amount is adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface as in the solid phase
(around 15 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ), as opposed to PFOS and PFOA where the airВӯwater interface adsorption is
highest, for example as seen in Scenario C Figure 5.6. This shows that for shortВӯchain PFAS,
the airВӯwater interface has less of an impact. The PFPeA in the water phase is illustrated in
Figure 5.8. Due to the lower sorption the concentration in the water is higher than what is seen
for PFOA and PFOS for Scenario A.
44
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:52==
(a) Sorbed to solid.
(b) Adsorbed in aВӯw interface.
(c) Concentration in water .
Figure 5.9: Concentration of PFPeA in Scenario B (sandy till and gravel). The concentration
sorbed to solid, adsorbed in the airВӯwater interface and in the water is presented for 5 years:
1960, 1980, 2000, 2020 and 2040. The results are modelled with an infiltration rate of 200mm/yr
and рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022). Note that the concentrations on
the axes are varying.
PFPeA in Scenario B results in the fastest transport, as would be expected, see Figure 5.9.
This results in a decreased sorption compared to PFOS and PFOA, as seen in Figures 5.9a
and 5.9b. The solid sorption is below 5 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝand the adsorption in the airВӯwater interface reaches
10 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ. Looking at Figure 5.9c, the concentration in the water is, for the unsaturated zone, at the
maximum of 100 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ, from 1980 an forward. This results in airВӯwater interface concentrations
that are completely similar for the years 1980, 2000 and 2020 (see Figure 5.9b). In year 2020,
the concentration at the bottom of the domain is the same as the input concentration in the
water, see Figure 5.9c.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
45
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Impact of selected parameters
5.2.1
Sensitivity Analysis
In the following section, the main results from the sensitivity analysis are presented. Selected
graphs are presented here, refer to Appendix A.6.1 for the remaining results.
In Figure 5.10, the results of the performed sensitivity analysis for PFOS, on the depth of 10%
max concentration in 2023 can be seen. Plotted in Figure 5.10a is the sensitivity analysis for
Scenario A. Clayey till parameters and hydraulic head are not included, since PFOS does not
travel further than one meter, in this scenario (see Figure 5.4). In Scenario A it is noticeable, that
рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җhas a higher impact than рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө. Looking at Scenario B and C (see Figures 5.10b and 5.10c),
it is noticeable that рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өhas a higher impact than рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ, as opposed to Scenario A. This is due
to the increased solidВӯphase sorption in mull. Furthermore, the parameters in the top meter,
gravel, are not of importance for the transport of PFOS, with SI values around zero. This is
opposed to Scenario A where the sensitivity analysis shows that the upper meter is important
for the transport.
In Scenario C (see Figure 5.10c), it is seen that different geological parameters for clayey till
impact the transport of PFOS. The van Genuchten parameter n, in both Scenario A and Scenario
C, is seen to have a significantly higher impact on the transport than any of the other parameters.
This shows that the water content has higher importance for clayey till than sandy geologies
(Scenario B, see Figure 5.10b), which is supported by the higher sensitivity of рқҗҫрқ‘ for the clayey
till scenarios. рқ‘ӣis nonlinear (red and blue are not the same height), especially in clayey till, and
it is seen that an increase in рқ‘ӣhas less of an impact on the model results than a decrease.
(a) Scenario A (Clayey till and Mull).
46
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:54==
(b) Scenario B (Sand and Gravel).
(c) Scenario C (Clayey till and Gravel).
Figure 5.10: Sensitivity index for the impact of a 10% change of selected parameters on the
depth reached by a concentration of 10% of the input PFOS concentration in 2023, for the three
scenarios. s indicates the parameters for sandy till, g indicates for gravel, c for clayey till, and
m for mull.
Figure 5.11, shows the impact of the parameter variation on the reached depth of PFOA in 2023
in Scenario A. The 10% of the input concentration of PFOA has in 2020 reached approximately
3Вӯ4 meters (see Figure 5.2c). Comparing to PFOS (Figure 5.10a), PFOA travels further into
the clayey till and therefore the impact of both clayey till and mull is registered by the sensitivity
analysis in Figure 5.11. It is seen that most of the parameters from the top meter mull have
almost as large an impact on the transport as the parameters from the clayey till. It is also seen
that the impact of n for clayey till is higher for PFOA than PFOS (see fig. 5.10c).
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.11: Sensitivity index for a 10% change of selected parameters affect on the depth of
10% of max PFOA concentration in 2023 in Scenario A (Clayey till and Mull). c indicates the
parameters for clayey till and m for mull.
Figure 5.12 shows the change in arrival time of PFOA at 5 m bgs. in Scenario B. Note that
the yВӯaxis shows the change in years and not the SI values as beforehand. When looking at
the arrival at 5m for PFOA, Figure 5.12, it is seen that a 10% variation in the hydraulic head,
results in approximately 4 years change in the arrival time at 5m. In the former presented
analyses, the hydraulic head change shows no impact on PFOS transport (see Figure 5.10).
This is attributed to PFOS not reaching the water table at 5 m bgs. If the model for PFOS were
to be run for a longer time frame, the impact of the hydraulic head would most likely be seen
as well. Especially since it is shown from Figure 5.10 that n, a saturation related parameter, is
impactful for the transport of PFOS. PFOA in Figure 5.12 shows a nonlinearity (blue and red) for
the hydraulic head. The shown nonВӯlinearity might be misleading due to the fact that the arrival
time is measured at the water table, which is being varied in the analysis. A sensitivity analysis
at a depth lower than the water table, is necessary to be able to conclude on the linearity of the
impact of hydraulic head on the transport.
48
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.12: Change in arrival time [yr] of 10% input concentration at 5m bgs. for PFOA in
Scenario B (sand and gravel ). s indicates parameters for sandy till and g indicates for gravel.
A sensitivity analysis for PFPeA was also performed, however the highest change in arrival
time for all the parameter changes was one year. Since data is extracted from a random time in
the year, comparison between parameterвҖҷs impact on PFPeA could be misleading. The overall
trend, can however be concluded on. The maximum arrival time of 1 year for PFPeA (see
Appendix A.6.1), is shorter than the change in arrival time of up to 4 years for PFOA in Scenario
B (refer to Figure 5.12). It can therefore be concluded that the shortВӯchain PFPeA is much less
impacted by parameter variation than longВӯchain PFOA in sandy till. Looking at appendix A.6.1,
a similar tendency is seen for clayey till when comparing PFOA and PFPeA arrival in 2 m bgs.
in Scenario A.
Overall, from all the sensitivity analyses, it was seen that the van Genuchten parameter рқӣјseems
not to impact the retention noticeably when comparing all the analyses. The van Genuchten
parameter рқ‘ӣshows the highest impact. Furthermore hydraulic head is also significant.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
49
==PAGE:57==
5.2.2
Investigation of the impact of рқҗҫрқ‘ and n on the transport
To better understand the impact of n and рқҗҫрқ‘ , breakthrough curves for PFOA at 5 m bgs., variВӯ
ations of the two parameters are presented in Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14 for sand and clayey
till.
(a) Different рқҗҫрқ‘ values: 1 вӢ…10вҲ’5 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ , 1 вӢ…10вҲ’4 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ ,
1 вӢ…10вҲ’3 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ .
(b) Different n values: 1.89, 2.28, 2.68
Figure 5.13: Breakthrough curves for PFOA in Scenario B (sand and gravel), simulated with
different рқҗҫрқ‘ and рқ‘ӣvalues applied for both the sand and gravel.
The breakthrough curves for PFOA with different n and рқҗҫрқ‘ values are illustrated in Figure 5.13,
simulated with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. Three values for each parameter are shown, with
the value from the generic simulations, and a value above and below, based on the ranges
presented in Table 4.4. As seen for both graphs, lower conductivity and lower рқ‘ӣshow faster
transport. This trend for рқҗҫрқ‘ could seem counterintuitive but is due to the mechanism of the
airВӯwater interfacial adsorption. A lower рқҗҫрқ‘ results in higher effective saturation, which results
in less airВӯwater interface adsorption and thereby a faster transport. The same is seen for
clayey till, see Figure 5.14. For the selected low value of рқҗҫрқ‘ in clayey till, the solver struggled
to calculate a solution, with the combined infiltration rate. The shown results in Figure 5.13a
(the blue graph) for this рқҗҫрқ‘ value, are therefore not representative. The high рқҗҫрқ‘ (green graph),
results in a slow transport where PFOA barely reaches the 5 m bgs. Therefore the breakthrough
curve at 5 m bgs., shows no increase in comparison with the regular рқҗҫрқ‘ . See Appendix A.6
Figure A.5, where the breakthrough curve for PFOA for the high рқҗҫрқ‘ , on a separate axis is seen.
The рқ‘ӣbreakthrough curves show the same both for sand and clayey till with the lowest value
resulting in the fastest transport. This is as expected due to lower n resulting in higher water
content entailing slower transport.
50
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:58==
(a) Different рқҗҫрқ‘ values. рқҗөрқ‘ҷрқ‘ўрқ‘’) рқҗҫрқ‘ ,рқ‘ҡ:1 вӢ…10вҲ’6 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ ,
рқҗҫрқ‘ ,рқ‘җ: 1 вӢ…10вҲ’11 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ . рқ‘…рқ‘’рқ‘‘) рқҗҫрқ‘ ,рқ‘ҡ: 9 вӢ…10вҲ’6 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ ,
рқҗҫрқ‘ ,рқ‘җ: 3 вӢ…10вҲ’7 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ . рқҗәрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘’рқ‘ӣ) рқҗҫрқ‘ ,рқ‘ҡ: 1 вӢ…10вҲ’4 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ ,
рқҗҫрқ‘ ,рқ‘җ: 1 вӢ…10вҲ’4 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ 
(b) Different n values. рқҗөрқ‘ҷрқ‘ўрқ‘’) рқ‘ӣрқ‘ҡвҲ¶1.48, рқ‘ӣрқ‘җвҲ¶1.23.
рқ‘…рқ‘’рқ‘‘) рқ‘ӣрқ‘ҡвҲ¶1.89, рқ‘ӣрқ‘җвҲ¶1.48. рқҗәрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘’рқ‘ӣ) рқ‘ӣрқ‘ҡвҲ¶2.68, рқ‘ӣрқ‘җрқ‘ҷвҲ¶
1.89;
Figure 5.14: Breakthrough curves for PFOA in Scenario C (mull and clayey till), simulated with
. рқ‘ҡindicates parameters for mull and рқ‘җfor clayey till.
5.3
Case study application and model performance
In the following section, the results from applying the model to the case study, presented in
Section 4.5, will be shown. First results from simply applying the model will be shown, using the
geological parameters presented in Section 4.5, and different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues from Table 4.3 are
investigated. Afterwards, a better fit is investigated, with different parameters. It is important to
note that since the concentration input is unknown, the input concentrations have been fitted for
comparison with the data. The model results can therefore not be used to conclude how well
the model captures measured concentrations. It will instead be used to compare how well the
model captures the pattern in the measured concentrations over the depth.
5.3.1
Effective saturation
As seen earlier, saturation plays a pivotal role in the transport of PFAS, as the moisture content
within the soil significantly influences the airВӯwater interface. The effective saturation profiles
of B1 and B2 in the presented case study are depicted in Figure 5.15. It is observed that
the clayey till exhibits higher saturation levels compared to the sand, consistent with previous
results. Note that the entire spatial domain as intended remains unsaturated, as indicated by
the effective saturation values being below 1 throughout the domain.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
51
==PAGE:59==
(a) B1
(b) B2
Figure 5.15: Modelled effective saturation for B1 and B2 at the case study. Modelled with an
infiltration rate of 200 mm/yr
At the interfaces from a high conducting less saturated layer (sand or gravel) to a lower conВӯ
ducting more saturated layer (clayey till), a rounded curve is seen with a slow increase. For an
example, see 3Вӯ3.5 m bgs. in Figure 5.15a. This is due to both capillary forces вҖқpulling upвҖқ the
water into the sandy layers, and due to the conductivity in the layer below, being lower. As the
conductivity is lower in the clayey till the water will build up slightly above the interface since it
is less easily transported through the clayey till. A similar curving decrease in the bottom of the
clayey till layer above sand or gravel can be seen, for example at 7.5Вӯ8 m bgs. in Figure 5.15b.
This is due to the bottom of the clayey till draining faster, as the conductivity in the layer below
is higher and the water flows easier. Capillary forces are working oppositely to this, retaining
more water in the clayey till, as it is вҖқpullingвҖқ the water up. The small decrease in saturation seen
around 9 meters in B1 (See Figure 5.15a), can be attributed to the fact that sand was applied
below 9 meters to capture the head gradient as mentioned in Section 4.5.1.
5.3.2
Vertical distribution of PFOS
In Figure 5.16 the modelled PFOS concentrations for different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өregressions for B1 and B2
are plotted along with measured data. Looking at B1 ( Figure 5.16a) it is clear that the retention
of PFOS is underestimated for the gravel fill layer when compared with the measured values.
The modelled concentration peaks in the clayey till layer at 3.5 meters, where the measured
concentration peaks in approximately 1 m bgs. The underestimation could be due to both the
underestimation of solid phase sorption and airВӯwater interfacial adsorption in the gravel fill
layer. When looking at B2 (Figure 5.16b), it is seen that the modelled resultвҖҷs deviation from
the pattern of the measured data is much smaller. Since the same рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җand рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues are
applied for the two boreholes, it can be concluded that the underestimated retention in B1 is
due to geological parameters specific to the gravel fill, which is not present in B2. The content of
organic carbon in the fill in B1 could be much larger than the applied value of sand, which would
increase the solid phase sorption and therefore retention of PFOS. In the borelog, a content of
вҖқslaggerвҖқ is mentioned as part of the fill. Slagger is a residual product from the incineration of
52
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:60==
trash. Under an obtained product information sheet for slagge gravel, a typical organic carbon
content of 0.5% is given (AFATEK, 2022). It is therefore likely that the organic carbon content
has initially been underestimated in this layer. Furthermore, the airВӯwater interface adsorption
could be underestimated due to an overestimation of grain size diameter, which would result in
too low PFAS retention. Additionally, the applied n and рқҗҫрқ‘ from sand, could be too low resulting
in an overestimation of water content and therefore an underestimation of airВӯwater interfacial
adsorption in the fill.
(a) B1
(b) B2
Figure 5.16: Total concentration of PFOS modelled with regressionВӯbased and measured рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
in 2021, along with the measured values from the case study, B1 and B2. Concentrations are
modelled with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. Note that the concentration on the axes varies.
Since the deviation between modelled and measured concentrations is so large in B1, and the
deviation is most likely due to geological parameters, B2 is deemed best for evaluating the difВӯ
ferent рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өestimates. Looking at Figure 5.16b, the 2022 Regression seen in purple, (also used
for the generic results), fits the pattern of the measured data best. The other two рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues
underestimate the retention of PFOS. The difference between the modelled concentrations with
the different estimates is small within the first meters, but significant at the front of the plume.
The 2018 Regression modelled concentrations decrease to zero at approximately 6 m bgs.
where the 2022 Regression already decreases to this at approximately 3.5 m bgs. for B2. The
bestВӯfitting Regression (2022) captures the pattern of the first and second measurements well
but overestimates the deeper samples, showing that modelled concentrations do not decrease
abruptly enough. This indicates that either the dispersion is too high or the retention is too
small. The retention could be underestimated both due to geological parameters or distribution
coefficients for airВӯwater interface or solid phase sorption.
5.3.3
Vertical distribution of PFOA
The modelled PFOA concentrations seen in Figure 5.17, show a similar pattern as for PFOS
with too little retention in the gravel fill in B1. Looking at the different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өestimates in B2 (see
Figure 5.17b), it is seen that the 2022 Regression and the RВӯbased measured рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue capture
the pattern of the measured concentrations in the soil from 0Вӯ6 m bgs. much better than the
2018 Regression, with the RВӯbased measured рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue fitting the best of the two. The pattern
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
53
==PAGE:61==
of the second increase in measured concentration in the lower depths (see 7 and 9 m bgs.) is
however better captured by the 2018 Regression. Looking at the measured concentrations in
the soil (see the blue measured Figure 5.17b) peaks are seen at 2 m bgs. and 7 m bgs. For the
model to fit these peaks the constant input of contaminant has to be altered to a varying input
or different geological parameters in lower layers have to be applied. Increased retention would
increase the first peak and not the second and decreased retention would move the first peak
down.
(a) B1
(b) B2
Figure 5.17: Total concentration of PFOA modelled with the two regressionВӯbased and the
measured рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өin 2021, along with the measured values from the case study B1 and B2. ConВӯ
centrations are modelled with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. Note that concentrations on axes
are different.
5.3.4
Vertical distribution of PFPeA
The concentration of PFPeA in 2021 in B1 and B2 for the two different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өregressions can be
seen in Figure 5.18, along with the measured concentrations. It is seen when comparing the
measured and modelled values that the model does not capture the pattern of the concentraВӯ
tions from the measured data. The concentrations in the top meters are underestimated and
the concentrations in the lower depths are overestimated. Since PFPeA is shortВӯchained, the
sorption to solid phase and airВӯwater interface is modelled to be very low (see Section 5.1.3). As
seen in the generic results, most of PFPeA is dissolved in the water phase. The contamination
profiles for the case study are therefore mostly dependent on the water content in the different
layers (compare with Figure 5.15). In order to capture the decrease of PFPeA over the depth,
more retention of PFPeA has to be included. Whether it is solid phase or interfacial adsorption
that should be increased cannot be directly concluded from the graphs. The boreholes in the
case study are unsaturated in the entire domain, making it hard to distinguish which of the two
retention processes is the ground for the deviation. The pattern of lower concentrations in the
first half meter with a peak in 1 m bgs. could probably be captured by adjusting the input conВӯ
centration or input period. In the model simulations, PFPeA is outphased from 2024, after the
plotted period 2021. Looking at the data it seems that PFPeA could be phased out before 2021
at the case site, with the low concentration in the top.
54
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:62==
(a) B1
(b) B2
Figure 5.18: Total concentration of PFPeA modelled with the two regressionВӯbased рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өin
2021, along with the measured values from the case study B1 and B2. The concentrations are
modelled with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ.
For PFPeA the different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өregressions result in very similar contamination profiles over the
depth and do not significantly impact the transport. This is because most of the PFPeA is
present in the water phase. As рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues are not linear with the concentration, higher рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
values could have a significant impact on the transport and potentially improve the fit of the
model.
5.3.5
Fittet model simulations
To investigate a better fit of the model, some of the parameters are adjusted for B1, as this
is the borehole with the largest deviations between model results and measured values. In
Figures 5.19 and 5.20, the results of the improved fit are shown. Due to the adjustments, new
input concentrations are fitted for B1, as presented earlier in Section 4.5, Table 4.9.
As earlier suggested for the simulations for B1, the applied рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җfor gravel fill is likely too low.
The model is therefore simulated for 4 different рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues in the range from the original value
at 0.0004, up to 0.02 (the value of mull), see Appendix A.7 Figure A.11. In Figure 5.19 the best
fitting version, with an рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җof 0.009, is presented. The рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis based on the 2022 Regression,
as this was seen in B2 to give the best fit. As seen in Figure 5.19b the fitted model follows
the trend of the measured values much better for PFOS and PFOA with this adjustment. For
Figure 5.19a the trend of the modelled PFOA contamination fits the decreasing pattern from 2
to 7 m bgs. much better than the original simulation (see Section 5.3.3). However, the pattern
of increasing concentration in the top layers in Figure 5.19a is still far from the trend in the
measured concentrations in the upper meter. This could be due to the input function being
constant.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
55
==PAGE:63==
(a) Fittet B1Вӯ PFOA
(b) Fittet B1 Вӯ PFOS
Figure 5.19: The fitted model simulations of the concentrations of PFOA and PFOS in B1. The
concentrations are modelled with an рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җof 0.009 for gravel fill, an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ, and
a рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 Regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022).
The modelled PFPeA concentration with the increased рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җcan be seen in Figure 5.20, but does
not show a significant improvement in comparison with Figure A.12b. As presented earlier,
it is suspected that the retention due to sorption processes for PFPeA is underestimated. To
investigate if the model results will show a more fitting trend with a different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue or рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ,
the model is simulated within the range of uncertainty for рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ(see Table 4.2) and varied values
of рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө. The result is presented in Appendix A.7 Figure A.12a and Figure A.12b, a better fit for
the trend of the modelled concentration was not achieved with a change of рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җor рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө. This
indicates that solely increasing the sorption is not sufficient for a better model fit for PFPeA.
Further possible improvements will be explored in the discussion.
Figure 5.20: PFPeA simulated for B1 with a рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җof 0.009. The concentrations are modelled with
an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹand a рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өbased on the 2022 Regression (Ying Lyu et al., 2022).
56
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:64==
6
Discussion
From the model results, a general tendency in PFAS transport indicates chain length being a
largely deciding factor, with considerably lower retention and consequently faster transport of the
shortВӯchain PFPeA than the longВӯchain PFOS. The effect of the functional group is not directly
distinguishable from the effect of the chain length. The 7 fluorinated carbon chain carboxylic acid
(PFCA), PFOA, shows a considerably faster transport than the 8Вӯchain sulfonic acid (PFSA),
PFOS, in accordance with literature reporting larger рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor PFSAs than PFCAs (Brusseau,
2019bНҫ Ying Lyu et al., 2022). PFOA and PFPeA both reach the bottom of the domain (9m) in
the sandy till scenario, where PFOS sorbs in the upper layers. PFOS has the highest distribution
coefficients for both types of sorption (рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җand рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө), and therefore sorbs most to both the soil
and airВӯwater interface.
Geological parameters are shown to impact the transport of PFAS. Generally, slower transport
is observed in clayey till than in sandy till. While the airВӯwater interface adsorption is shown
to be a significant retention factor for longВӯchain PFAS in clayey till, sandy till and mull. Solid
phase sorption is the dominating retention factor in clayey till and mull. In sandy till airВӯwater inВӯ
terface adsorption is dominating and in gravel, the two factors of retention are in similar ranges.
Both long and shortВӯchain PFAS exhibit substantial sorption in mull. LongВӯchain PFAS also
shows substantial sorption in geologies characterized by elevated рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ, such as clayey till. ConВӯ
sequently, particularly longВӯchain PFAS accumulates in the upper meters in mull, clayey till or
gravel fill geologies. ShortВӯchain PFAS will accumulate in surface meters if the рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җis high, as
seen in mull. Knowledge of the content of the surface near layer at a PFASВӯcontaminated area
is therefore essential, for transport modelling and prediction. The dimensions of the unsatuВӯ
rated zone play a central role in PFAS retention, with significance in both clayey till and sandy
geologies where the airВӯwater interface adsorption governs a substantial portion of the sorption
for longВӯchain PFAS. The airВӯwater interface adsorption is considerably higher in the sandy till
than in clayey till, most likely due to lower water content, as Guo et al. (2020) also found. The
unsaturated zone seems to have less of an impact on shortВӯchain PFAS. Due to low airВӯwater
interface adsorption by shortВӯchain PFAS, most geological parameters prove through sensitivity
analysis to have a low impact on the retention of the shortВӯchain PFPeA.
6.1
Main assumptions applied in the model
The transport model for PFAS was set up as a vertical 2D model. Groundwater flow can often
also occur horizontally in sandy aquifers, and this has not been included in the model. Including
the horizontal transport could reduce the amount of PFAS travelling to lower depths in the aquifer
and impact the PFAS transport pattern. For the investigated case study, the entire modelled
domain was unsaturated, and it is therefore unlikely that much horizontal transport occurs, the
assumption of no horizontal flow is therefore justifiable.
The transport model developed does not include degradation of PFAS, as this is unlikely to
occur in most natural environments (DEPA, 2015a). PFAS precursors were not included for
simplification but as precursors degrade to PFAS compounds, they could potentially explain the
second peak of PFOA, seen at B2 in the case study. The second peak in concentration seen
at 7 and 9 m bgs. could be due to the degradation of potential precursors from the firefighting
foam. It is also likely that the second peak for PFOA is due to an uneven input, geological
heterogeneities or solid phase sorption being impacted by other factors. This will be discussed
later on in Sections 6.2 and 6.3.1.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
57
==PAGE:65==
PFAS is, besides solidВӯphase sorption and airВӯwater interface adsorption, known to sorb to
fluidВӯfluid interfaces between oil and water (Brusseau, 2019b). This has not been included in
the study. However, the applied case study is from performed investigations, known to have
contamination with oil. It could therefore be an added source of retention at the site, resulting
in larger deviations between model results and measured concentrations. No smell of oil or
mentions of free phase oil are present in the bore logs, see Appendix A.4.2, and it is therefore
estimated not to be a very large factor for retention. For sites with very large oil or other NAPL
contamination, it would however be important to include this adsorption as well.
The model was developed on a yearly basis, assuming a constant infiltration rate, hydraulic
gradient and water content in the unsaturated zone. In reality, varying infiltration rates are
likely affecting the water content which impacts the permeability and retention of PFAS in the
unsaturated zone. The model only takes the PFAS infiltrating the soil into account and does not
model surface runoff or uptake of PFAS. For application of the model to case studies with future
pollution sources, it is therefore necessary to estimate how much of the PFAS that actually
infiltrates to the ground, in order to get accurate model results.
6.2
The unsaturated zone and geological parameters
The residual saturation, porosity and saturated hydraulic conductivity control the possible water
content and are therefore important for the saturation curve. Since PFAS travels in the waВӯ
ter, the effective saturation directly impacts the transport. Excluding the impact of the retention
factors, an increased effective saturation results in a higher relative permeability and therefore
more transport. The applied porosities in this model were obtained from MiljГёstyrelsen (2016)
and Hansen (1976) and can be seen in Table 6.1. The porosities in Carsel and Parrish (1988)
vary within the range [0.36Нҫ 0.45] overall (excluding the geology вҖқsiltвҖқ). Compared with the valВӯ
ues from Carsel and Parrish (1988), the estimated porosities are lower for most of the geological
layers. This could indicate that the residual saturations, which were estimated based on Carsel
and Parrish (1988) might be inaccurate. The porosity for clayey till was backed up by observaВӯ
tions at other sites, indicating that it is a realistic estimate. Looking at the hydraulic conductivities
in Table 6.1, it is noticeable that the hydraulic conductivity for clayey till has a very large range.
The conductivity in clayey till depends largely on the amount of fractures. MiljГёstyrelsen (2016),
recommends using a value of 10вҲ’6 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ , but observed values from other site studies indicated a
lower conductivity, which was the reason for the selected value. Comparing the two ranges for
gravel and sand indicates that gravel likely has a higher conductivity than sand. The conductivity
for gravel, which is especially important for the case study where multiple meters of gravel are
present, could therefore be underestimated. For the gravel fill, in B1 in the case study, different
fill elements could also be affecting the conductivity.
Table 6.1: Porosity (рқңҷ) and Hydraulic conductivity (рқҗҫрқ‘ ) applied in this model. *: Range from
MiljГёstyrelsen (2016).**: Parameters from the selected geological layers from Carsel and ParВӯ
rish (1988), where [рқ‘Һ]: Sandy clay loam [рқ‘Ҹ]: Loamy sand [рқ‘җ]: Sandy loam
Parameter
Unit
Clayey till
Sandy till
Gravel
Mull
Porosity
[вҲ’]
Applied
0.25
0.3
0.27
0.41
(рқңҷ)
DEPA*
[0.1; 0.3]
[0.25; 0.4]
[0.2; 0.35]
Вӯ
Carsel & Parish**
0.39[рқ‘Һ]
0.41[рқ‘Ҹ]
0.41[рқ‘Ҹ]
0.41[рқ‘җ]
Hydraulic
[рқ‘ҡ/рқ‘ ]
Applied
1 вӢ…10вҲ’7
10вҲ’4
10вҲ’4
9 вӢ…10вҲ’6
conductivity
DEPA*
[10вҲ’11 Нҫ10вҲ’4]
[10вҲ’7 Нҫ10вҲ’4]
[10вҲ’5 Нҫ10вҲ’3]
Вӯ
(рқҗҫрқ‘ )
Carsel & Parish**
3.6 вӢ…10вҲ’6[рқ‘Һ]
4.1 вӢ…10вҲ’5[рқ‘Ҹ]
4.1 вӢ…10вҲ’5[рқ‘Ҹ]
1.2 вӢ…10вҲ’5[рқ‘җ]
58
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:66==
The sensitivity analysis showed the importance of the van Genuchten parameter рқ‘ӣ, with one of
the largest SI values. When looking at a saturation curve plotted relative to the effective saturaВӯ
tion (see Appendix A.6.3 Figure A.7) рқ‘ӣincreases or decreases the overall effective saturation
in the unsaturated zone. In this thesis рқ‘ӣwas based on values from Carsel and Parrish (1988).
However, as mentioned before, there are significant differences in conductivity and porosity
values when comparing geologies from Carsel and Parrish (1988) and MiljГёstyrelsen (2016),
indicating that Carsel and Parrish (1988), might not be suitable for estimation of рқ‘ӣfor Danish
geological settings. For future application and improvement of the model, it is recommended to
investigate saturation curves for typical Danish soils and fit the van Genuchten parameters.
The sensitivity analysis did not show a high impact of the saturated conductivity рқҗҫрқ‘ . The sensiВӯ
tivity analysis compares 10% changes in the input parameters. When comparing the ranges in
Table 6.1, the ranges of uncertainty for saturated conductivity are multiple orders larger than the
uncertainty for porosity. Variations within this very large range of рқҗҫрқ‘ could therefore impact the
model significantly even though the sensitivity analysis does not directly show this. From the
breakthrough curves, see Section 5.2.2, it can be seen that a lower рқҗҫрқ‘ results in a faster transВӯ
port. This can be counterintuitive as the transport in the very highly conductive sand is faster
than in the lowВӯconducting clayey till, and higher conductivities usually are associated with more
permeable soils and faster transport. In Figure A.6 in Appendix A.6.3, it can be seen that lower
saturated conductivity results in higher saturation. This results in a lower airВӯwater interface
adsorption, which is the reason for the pattern seen in the breakthrough curves Section 5.2.2.
The hydraulic head (рқҗ») influences the size of the unsaturated zone and therefore also the space
in which airВӯwater interfacial adsorption occurs. Some of the sensitivity analyses did not prove
рқҗ»to be a deciding parameter, but this is due to the contaminant not having reached the water
table in 2023, where the analysis was performed. Looking at Figure 5.12, it is seen that for
PFOA, where the contaminant has reached the water table in 2023, the hydraulic head has one
of the largest impacts on the arrival time. Therefore, it can be concluded that the size of the
unsaturated zone is very important for the transport. Overall, looking at the literature and the
modeling results, because airВӯwater interface adsorption is such a significant retention factor for
PFAS, it is essential to model the unsaturated zone for PFAS transport. Since shorterВӯchained
PFAS are little retained by the airВӯwater interface adsorption (See Figures 5.8b and 5.9b), the
unsaturated zone and the related parameters to the saturation, are less important than for longВӯ
chained PFAS.
The model was set up with an assumption of homogenous geological layers, both assuming
homogeneity throughout a layer and that multiple layers of the same soil type have the same
parameters. Geological heterogenities will therefore be a factor for uncertainties (Guo et al.,
2020Нҫ MiljГёstyrelsen, 2016). From the borelogs from the case study, see Appendix A.4.2, the
description within the same layer varies implying heterogeneic layers, with different sand and
gravel content. Since the fraction of organic carbon can be a result of degraded plant material,
this is likely to also vary with the depth. Another example is grain sizes, which can vary in
different layers depending on the adjoining layerвҖҷs composition. Hydraulic conductivities are
also known to vary with depth and especially for clayey till higher conductivities are seen in the
near surface layers (MiljГёstyrelsen, 2016).
Besides the effective saturation, airВӯwater interfacial adsorption is also set up as a function of
grain diameter. A larger grain diameter results in lower adsorption. As seen in the sensitivity
analysis (see Figure 5.12), grain diameter plays an important role in the PFAS retention. Grain
diameter for sand and clayey till was estimated based on two other sites. As the median grain
diameter can vary greatly with the sand content in the clayey till, and sand also varies in size,
more general values for the generic case would be preferable. For clayey till, PFOS showed to
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
59
==PAGE:67==
be much less impacted by the grain diameter than the рқ‘ӣparameter. The standard deviation for
the grain diameter for clayey till is 0.02рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ. As the estimated grain diameter is 0.028рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡthis
is a very large deviation, and the uncertainty of the parameter could affect the transport results
significantly. For mull, the deviation is 0.04рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡfor a median grain diameter of 0.1рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ, and could
therefore also have a significant impact. The deviation for porosity for mull is relatively low at
0.02. This deviation is not expected to be a large cause of uncertainty as the porosity in mull,
when looking at the sensitivity analysis, does not impact the transport much. The saturated
hydraulic conductivity value for mull has a deviation of 5.9 вӢ…10вҲ’6 рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ . The mull values were calВӯ
culated from specific sites, where more detailed descriptions of the type of mull are available.
For the generic setups, an average value was used, but for application to cases, the uncertainty
could potentially be decreased by only using values from similar types of mull.
The second van Genuchten parameter рқӣј, did not show to have a significant impact on the PFAS
transport in the sensitivity analysis. Therefore, estimates based on Carsel and Parrish (1988)
are deemed adequate for the transport modelling. The fraction of organic carbon in the soil
determines the solidВӯphase sorption. As with the grain diameter, it was for the sand and clayey
till estimated based on measurements from sites. As the рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җand the solid phase sorption is
quite low, the fraction of organic carbon showed a very small SI value for the sand and gravel
layers. This is the case even for the longer chained PFAS, PFOS, which is known to sorb more
(it has a higher distribution coefficient рқҗҫрқ‘‘). The рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җwas also based on measurements from two
other sites. However, the fraction of organic carbon can vary depending on the location, which
is especially the case for mull making the рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җan uncertainty for this geology. It is seen that the
рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ, can play an important role in larger layers of gravel, as seen in the case study, where an
underestimation of рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ, from the gravel fill in B1 causes a significant underestimation of the PFAS
retention. It was found that the slagger in the gravel most likely causes higher organic carbon
content, and when comparing with product information sheets from sellers (AFATEK, 2022), this
suspicion was proved. In top meters the рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җcan differ within large ranges, as fill often found
in top meters can contain many different components. In clayey till and especially in mull, the
solid phase sorption is higher and the fraction of organic carbon plays a more significant role
in the sensitivity of the model. When investigating areas with high mull content with a high рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җ,
estimating the solid phase sorption of PFAS is essential.
6.3
Sorption processes
6.3.1
Solid phase sorption
The solid phase sorption is in this model applied as a linear sorption isotherm, dependent on the
organic carbon content. It is a simplification assuming that sorption only occurs by hydrophobic
interactions, since it is known from literature that PFAS also sorbs by electrostatic attractions.
Xueyan Lyu et al. (2022) mentions that especially shorterВӯchained PFAS are not well described
by this simplifaction. This could be an explanation for the large deviation between model results
and measured data, that is seen for PFPeA. Including sorption by electrostatic interactions in
the model, could result in increased sorption in other layers than with the current asumption,
and might improve the model results.
PFAS have been shown to follow a nonВӯlinear sorption isotherm and can be fitted well by the
Freundlich isotherm (Wei et al., 2017). This is not included in this thesis. Wei et al. (2017),
performed the sorption experiments with concentrations in a range of 0 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝto approximately
900 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝ. The curve of the nonВӯlinear isotherm approaches linear when looking at lower concenВӯ
trations. The Danish groundwater quality limit is at 0.1 рқңҮрқ‘”
рқҗҝfor the sum of 22 PFAS. Even if this
limit is grossly passed it is much lower than the concentrations showing the pattern from the
nonВӯlinearity from Wei et al. (2017). For soil and groundwater contamination it was therefore
deemed adequate with a linear sorption isotherm. For cases with very high concentrations, a
60
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:68==
Freundlich isotherm is recommended, as the linear could be insufficient.
As mentioned previously, solid phase sorption occurring by hydrophobic interactions is depenВӯ
dent on chain length, with longer chained PFAS sorbing more (VMR, 2022). Nguyen et al.
(2020) found that PFAS compounds with 3Вӯ5 chained carbon length had similar distribution coВӯ
efficients.The applied рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues were taken as average values from Nguyen et al. (2020) from
VMR (2022), as 889 рқҗҝ
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”, 166 рқҗҝ
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”, and 56 рқҗҝ
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”, for PFOS, PFOA and PFPeA, relatively. When looking
at ITRC, a very large range of рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җis reported. рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues are for PFOS, PFOA and PFPeA
reported to [251; 199562] рқҗҝ
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”, [1; 1621] рқҗҝ
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”and [5; 389] рқҗҝ
рқ‘ҳрқ‘”relatively (ITRC, 2022). Sorption of PFAS
is also affected by soil properties, including pH. However, Nguyen et al. (2020) found that soil
properties are affecting shortВӯchain PFAS less than longВӯchain PFAS. This soil dependency can
potentially explain the large ranges that are seen. The applied рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues seem to result in a
reasonable fit for the case study, and varying the рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues did not seem to improve the fit
when looking at PFPeA. The range of рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җis greater than the variance in any of the applied
geological parameters (except рқҗҫрқ‘ ) and is by far the uncertainty that could impact the transport
the most. As the uncertainty in рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues is a general trend, it is not specific to this model, and
the model still offers an improved prediction of PFAS transport, as it includes the unsaturated
zone.
6.3.2
Air water interface adsorption
The distribution coefficients for the airВӯwater interface рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өare, like the distribution coefficients
for the solid phase sorption (рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ), associated with uncertainties. For this reason, investigating
different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues have been a primary focus in the model development and improvement.
Not many рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues are reported in the literature and ITRC (2022) do not report them due to
uncertainties. Some literature proposes estimating the рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues based on surface tension
using the Gibbs equation (Brusseau, 2019aНҫ Guo et al., 2020Нҫ Lyu et al., 2018), but low availabilВӯ
ity of data did not make this possible without large assumptions. Furthermore Lyu et al. (2018)
argues that surface tension data is hard to estimate for lower concentrations. This is naturally
also an uncertainty impacting chainВӯlength рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өregressions that are based on these.
Different regressions were investigated, as these can be applied more broadly for other PFASВӯ
contaminated sites, where measured data is not available, and they are conveniently solely a
function of the chain length. The regression proposed by Lyu et al. (2018), here mentioned
as the 2018 Regression, was developed on PFCAs but proposed to also fit PFSAs well, alВӯ
though it shows to underestimate the рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor PFOS. The 2022 Regression from Ying Lyu et al.
(2022), was similarly developed by fitting on PFCAs, and is proposed as an improved estimaВӯ
tion for PFCAs. As it is known that PFSAs sorb more than PFCAs (Brusseau, 2019b) and the
2022 Regression estimates higher values than the 2018, it seems likely to also be an improved
regression for PFOS, compared to the 2018 Regression. When looking at the case study, FigВӯ
ures 5.16 and 5.17, it was also seen that the 2022 Regression fitted measured data better for
PFOS and PFOA. While the 2022 Regression is an improved regression and a good starting
point for estimating рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues, it is still likely to underestimate the рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө, especially for PFSAs
as it is based on PFCAs.
Lyu et al. (2018), calculates the measured рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues and fit their regression based on lab
experiments. These lab experiments have been performed in saturated and unsaturated media.
From the difference in retention between the two experiments, the retention due to airВӯwater
interface adsorption was found. The рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues were from this found by calculating the airВӯ
water interfacial area for the solid. For these calculations, the airВӯwater interface function from
Lyu et al. (2018) was applied. As mentioned in the overview of different approaches, Brusseau
(2023) later showed that this equation is not adequate for estimating рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө. The fitted regressions
and measured values reported by Lyu et al. (2018) and Ying Lyu et al. (2022) are not updated
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
61
==PAGE:69==
with this improved function and are therefore, looking at the conclusion from Brusseau (2023),
underestimating the рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues.
The рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues are concentrationВӯdependent, with increasing рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor lower concentrations.
The applied regressions are created for higher concentrations (1 рқ‘ҡрқ‘”
рқҗҝ) than what is typically
present in groundwater and soil contamination. The 2018 Regression from Lyu et al. (2018)
estimates рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor 1 рқ‘ҡрқ‘”
рқҗҝ, but the coefficient doubles at 0.001 рқ‘ҡрқ‘”
рқҗҝ. The applied regressions are
therefore likely to all underestimate the airВӯwater interfacial adsorption. When comparing calВӯ
culated рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalues based on measured data presented in Brusseau (2019b), the measured
values are for a target concentration of 0.1 рқ‘ҡрқ‘”
рқҗҝ. The measured рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor PFOS is similar to the
2022 regression рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue, supporting the use of the PFCA based regression for PFSAs. OverВӯ
all it is estimated that the used regression functions are likely leading to an underestimation of
airВӯwater interfacial adsorption.
6.4
Model performance and future improvements
It is seen in the case study application, that the general fit for B2 is better than for B1. The
fit for B1 is affected by the underestimated рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җfor the gravel fill which is only present in the
B1 geology (see Section 5.3). As seen for the fitted results PFOA and PFOS have better fits
after the рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җhas been increased. For the best fit a рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җvalue of 0.9% was applied. AFATEK
(2022), reports 0.5% in their slagge grus product, indicating that an increased рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җis adjustifiable.
The fitted organic carbon content is higher than the reported. It could be that there are other
sources of organic carbon at the site. Alternatively, it can also be that the actual organic carbon
is not as high as fitted, and that other sources of uncertainty, as discussed before, result in
a deviation between modelled and measured values. This is likely to be the case, as some
deviation between modelled and measured values are also seen at B2. The large improvement
of fitting a higher рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җemphasizes the importance of the geological parameters for the upper
meters when modelling PFAS transportation.
The model is not able to capture the two peaks in concentrations over the depth, seen for PFOA
and PFPeA (see Figures 5.17b and 5.18a), without adjusting the input function. Furthermore,
the fit for the PFPeA measured concentrations is far from ideal. For the input of contaminant,
a phase in and out period was included, but besides this, a constant input was assumed. The
results from the case study strongly suggest that an adjusted input function, based on more
detailed information on the historical use of PFAS at the site, could improve the model results
and capture the changes throughout the depths better. However, in situation where this inforВӯ
mation is hard to come by, a constant input function can be a solution. Abnormalities are seen
at the border between some of the different geological layers (see 6.75 m bgs and 7.5 m bgs.
in Section 5.3.3), especially in lower layers at the interfaces between clayey till and sandy till.
The concentration in the different phases was investigated, and it was found that the abnorВӯ
malities were only seen for the airВӯwater interface adsorbed concentration. As the рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue
is constant throughout the domain, the abnormalities are associated with the calculation of the
airВӯwater interfacial area (рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө). It seems that the solver struggles to solve this at the interfaces
where there are large sudden changes in parameters. Since the рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Өis saturationВӯdependent, it
was investigated if the saturation is the reason for these abnormalities. Looking at the effective
saturation (Figure 5.15a ), no clear abnormalities at the interface between geological layers are
seen, and this is therefore unlikely to be the cause. An increased refinement of the mesh was
investigated but did not seem to resolve the issue, it is, however, the most likely explanation for
the variations.
A large challenge of the model application is that often the input concentration is not known from
contaminated sites. If more precise knowledge is known on input concentrations and usage,
the input function can easily be adapted. The model can also be applied for future predictions
62
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:70==
of PFAS contamination. Examples could include new installations or construction projects. If
the PFAS concentration emitted from these kinds of projects is known, the model can easily be
applied to estimate when and how much PFAS would reach the groundwater.
The model has not been developed for limestone in this project, but this could be added if key
geological parameters are known. The largest challenge for limestone parameters is uncerВӯ
tainty related to distribution coefficients, van Genuchten parameters and it being a dual porosity
media.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
63
==PAGE:71==
7
Conclusion
The model and transport equation developed in this thesis uses concepts presented by Brusseau
(2023) and Guo et al. (2020). The model successfully simulates the vertical transport of PFAS
through the unsaturated and saturated zone. Key parameters impacting PFAS transport were
found by a performed sensitivity analysis. The distribution of PFAS in the different phases (airВӯ
water interface, sorbed to solid and dissolved in water) and geologies was investigated and
evaluated. It was found that the transport was slowest in Scenario A, clayey till with a top meter
of mull. Scenario B, sandy till with a top meter of gravel showed the fastest transport. The
impact of the sorption to the solid and sorption to the airВӯwater interface was evaluated. The
evaluation and the main findings of this project are:
вҖў The literature presents different approaches to model the transport of PFAS. The imporВӯ
tance of an integrated airВӯwater interface for a PFAS model is clearly stated in literature
making it a necessity in a PFAS transport model. The рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өfor the airВӯwater interface adВӯ
sorption and рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җfor the solid sorption are key parameters when creating a fulfilling transВӯ
port model. Establishing the saturation curve in the unsaturated zone, with van Genuchten
parameters and the airВӯwater interfacial area is essential to model the airВӯwater interface
adsorption. Different methods for estimating the airВӯwater interfacial area were researched
and an equation from Brusseau (2023), was selected since it is based on easily measurВӯ
able geological parameters, is versatile for different soil types and showed to perform well.
Dispersion is an important processes for advective transport and is therefore a relevant
part of the model. Degradation and evaporation occur in such a small degree that these
processes are neglected in most transport models as well.
вҖў Chain length showed to be largely deciding for the transport of PFAS, as expected. Longer
chain PFAS undergo both more solidВӯphase and airВӯwater interfacial adsorption, resulting
in more retention and slower transport. Large uncertainties are associated with the distriВӯ
bution coefficients, but a significant difference is seen between even an 8 and 7Вӯchained
PFAS (PFOS and PFOA), indicating functional group might also play a role. Literature
indicates that carboxylic acids adsorb less than sulfonic acids at the airВӯwater interface.
This effect is underestimated in the model as most found methods for estimating airВӯwater
interface distribution coefficients were based on PFCA (Lyu et al., 2018Нҫ Ying Lyu et al.,
2022). The chain length is especially important in geologies with high organic carbon,
where more sorption occurs or geologies where much airВӯwater interfacial adsorption ocВӯ
curs (small grain diameter and low water content). The effect of the chain length is of
significant importance for the geological layersНҫ mull, gravel fill, sandy till and clayey till.
вҖў The generic model setups showed that large amounts of PFAS will sorb to the airВӯwater
interface for clayey till and sand. More will adsorb in sand than clayey till, but the sorption
is a significant retention factor for both. For mull, the solid phase sorption is dominating
the transport. For clayey till solidВӯphase sorption is a larger retention factor than airВӯwater
interface adsorption, but they are both significant. The transport patterns in the differВӯ
ent geological layers presented the importance of knowing the geological structure of the
modelled domain. The infiltration rate showed to be largely affecting the transport time. It
varies greatly around Denmark and is therefore important to know for site investigations.
The sensitivity analysis showed that the model is most sensitive to saturationВӯdeciding paВӯ
rameters such as the van Genuchten parameter n, hydraulic head (рқҗ») and grain diameter
(рқ‘‘рқ‘”), showing the large importance of the unsaturated zone and the airВӯwater interface
adsorption on the PFAS transport. The shorter chain PFAS, PFPeA, showed to be much
64
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:72==
less retained by the sorption processes and was therefore also not as sensitive to these
parameters. Both the fraction of organic carbon and distribution coefficients have a sigВӯ
nificant impact on the transport. The uncertainty related to the distribution coefficients
for both types of sorption is much larger than any other uncertainties in this model since
reported values vary greatly. Better estimates for the distribution coefficients would thereВӯ
fore improve the model significantly.
вҖў The case study proved a seemingly good fit for PFOS and PFOA in the gravel, but a large
underestimation of retention in boreholes with fill. Adapting organic carbon content was
sufficient to improve this. Furthermore, the concentration pattern in the upper meters of
the clayey till was captured well. The pattern of measured contaminants in deeper depths
was not captured properly, indicating the assumption of similar geological layers having
the same parameters inaccurate. Adapting this could result in a better fit. The model
furthermore showed a tendency to underestimate the retention of PFAS. This is most likely
due to an underestimation of airВӯwater interface adsorption, with the available рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨВӯvalues.
Model results for PFPeA were found to not fit the pattern of the measured concentrations
well and the sorption processes were therefore likely underestimated. The solid phase
sorption was included as a function of organic carbon, which the literature notes is not an
adequate approach for shorterВӯchain PFAS. It is therefore concluded that other sorption
processes such as electrostatic attractions are necessary to include in the modelling of
shortВӯchain PFAS. The model showed some abnormalities in the interface between some
geological layers, associated with the equation for airВӯwater interfacial area.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
65
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
AFATEK. (2022). Produktblad for slaggegrus. Retrieved, from https://afatek.dk/slaggegrus/
produktblad-slaggegrus
Albers, C. N., Hansen, B., Johnsen, A. R., Kazmierczak, J., Mortensen, M. H., & andLars TroldВӯ
borg, I. M. (2023). Grundvand. status og udvikling 1989вҖ“2021. www.grundvandsovervaagning.
dk
Appelo, C. (2005). Geochemistry, groundwater and pollution (2nd). Appelo Postma.
Badawy, A. M., & Ganat, T. A. A. O. (2022). Rock properties and reservoir engineering: A pracВӯ
tical view. Springer International Publishing. http://www.springer.com/series/15095
Bear, J. (2018). Theory and applications of transport in porous media modeling phenomena
of flow and transport in porous media (J. Bear, Ed.Нҫ 31st ed.). Springer. http://www.
springer.com/series/6612
Brusseau, M. L. (2018). Assessing the potential contributions of additional retention processes
to PFAS retardation in the subsurface. Science of the Total Environment, 613Вӯ614, 176вҖ“
185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.065
Brusseau, M. L. (2019a). Comprehensive retention model for PFAS transport in subsurface
systems. Water reserch, 148, 41вҖ“50.
Brusseau, M. L. (2019b). The influence of molecular structure on the adsorption of PFAS to
fluidВӯfluid interfaces: Using QSPR to predict interfacial adsorption coefficients. Water
Research, 152, 148вҖ“158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.12.057
Brusseau, M. L. (2020). Simulating PFAS transport influenced by rateВӯlimited multiВӯprocess reВӯ
tention. Water Research, 168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115179
Brusseau, M. L. (2023). Determining airВӯwater interfacial areas for the retention and transport
of pfas and other iterfacially active solutes in unsaturated porous media. Science of the
Total Environment, 884.
Buck, R. C., Franklin, J., Berger, U., Conder, J. M., Cousins, I. T., Voogt, P. D., Jensen, A. A.,
Kannan, K., Mabury, S. A., & van Leeuwen, S. P. (2011). Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluВӯ
oroalkyl substances in the environment: Terminology, classification, and origins. InteВӯ
grated Environmental Assessment and Management, 7, 513вҖ“541. https://doi.org/10.
1002/ieam.258
Carsel, R. F., & Parrish, R. S. (1988). Developing joint probability distributions of soil water
retention characteristics. Waer Resources Research, 24.
Deeb, R., Field, J., Hawley, E., & Higgins, C. (2018). Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl SubВӯ
stances (PFASs). Retrieved, from https://www.enviro.wiki/index.php?title=Perfluoroalkyl_
and_Polyfluoroalkyl_Substances_%28PFASs%29
Deng, S., Zhang, Q., Nie, Y., Wei, H., Wang, B., Huang, J., Yu, G., & Xing, B. (2012). Sorption
mechanisms of perfluorinated compounds on carbon nanotubes. Environmental PolluВӯ
tion, 168, 138вҖ“144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2012.03.048
DEPA. (2015a). Perfluoroalkylated substances: PFOA, PFOS and PFOSA : evaluation of health
hazards and proposal of a health based quality criterion for drinking water, soil and
ground water (P. B. Larsen & E. Giovalle, Eds.). Danish enviromental protection agency
(MiljГёstyrelsen).
DEPA. (2015b). ShortВӯchain Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) (J. KjГёlholt, A. A. Jensen, & M.
Warming, Eds.). Danish enviromental protection agency (MiljГёstyrelsen).
DEPA. (2016a). Spredning og sammensГҰtning i grundvand ved PFASВӯforureninger. Danish
enviromental protection agency (MiljГёstyrelsen).
66
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:74==
DEPA. (2016b). Spredning og sammensГҰtning i grundvand ved pfasВӯforureninger litteraturstudie
(J. A. Falkenberg, A. G. Christensen, & M. Filipovic, Eds.). Danish enviromental protecВӯ
tion agency (MiljГёstyrelsen).
European Chemicals Agency. (2023a). Annex XV Resriction Report. Proposal For A Restriction.
PerВӯ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs). https://echa.europa.eu/da/registry-of-
restriction-intentions/-/dislist/details/0b0236e18663449b
European Chemicals Agency. (2023b). Annex XV Resriction Report. Proposal For A Restriction.
PerВӯ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in firefighting foams. https://echa.europa.
eu/da/registry-of-restriction-intentions/-/dislist/details/0b0236e1856e8ce6
Fenton, S. E., Ducatman, A., Boobis, A., DeWitt, J. C., Lau, C., Ng, C., Smith, J. S., & Roberts,
S. M. (2021). PerВӯ and polyfluoroalkyl substance toxicity and human health review: CurВӯ
rent state of knowledge and strategies for informing future research. https://doi.org/10.
1002/etc.4890
Fetter, C. (2001). Applied hydrogology (4th). Prentice Hall.
Fetter, C. (2008). Contaminant hydrogeology (2nd). Waveland Press Inc.
Galsgaard, J. (2012). IndfГёring i sedimentgeologi. Dansk Geoteknisk Forening,
GEUS. (n.d.). Om den nationale hydrologiske model (dkВӯmodellen)s. Retrieved, from https :
//vandmodel.dk/om-den-nationale-hydrologiske-model-dk-modellen
GEUS. (2016). JordprГёver fra grundvandsboringer GeoВӯvejledning 1, 6.4 Aflejringer fra KvartГҰrВӯ
tiden. Retrieved, from http://www.geovejledning.dk/gv1/index.php/vejledningen/6-
typiske-kendetegn-for-danske-bjergarter-og-aflejringer/6-4-aflejringer-fra-kvartaertiden/
GEUS. (2023). Download Jordartskort, GEUS. Retrieved, from https://www.geus.dk/produkter-
ydelser-og-faciliteter/data-og-kort/danske-kort/download-jordartskort
Gilding, B. (1991). Qualitative mathematical analysis of the richards equation. Transport in
Porous Media, 6, 651вҖ“666.
Gravesen, P., & Kelstrup, N. (2001). GrundlГҰggende geologi og grundvand. https://www2.mst.
dk/udgiv/publikationer/2001/87-7944-818-6/html/kap02.htm
Guo, B., Zeng, J., & Brusseau, M. L. (2020). A Mathematical Model for the Release, Transport,
and Retention of PerВӯ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in the Vadose Zone. Water
Resources Research, 56. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019WR026667
Hansen, L. (1976). Jordtyper ved statens forsГёgsstationer. Statens ForsГёgsvirksomhed I PlantekulВӯ
tur.
Heinberg, C., & Schacke, I. (2015). Grus i Den Store Danske. Retrieved, from https://denstoredanske.
lex.dk/grus
Higgins, C. P., & Luthy, R. G. (2006). Sorption of perfluorinated surfactants on sediments. EnВӯ
vironmental Science Technology.
Hillel, D. (2003). Introduction to environmental soil physics. Academic Press. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123486554500009
ITRC. (2022). PFAS Technical and Regulatory Guidance Document and Fact Sheets. Retrieved,
from https://pfas-1.itrcweb.org/
JГёrgensen, F., Auken, E., & Vest, C. A. (2005). Strukturel SГҘrbarhedskortlaegningВӯvurdering af
lertykkelse i boringer.
Lyu, Y., Brusseau, M. L., Chen, W., Yan, N., Fu, X., & Lin, X. (2018). Adsorption of PFOA at
the AirВӯWater Interface during Transport in Unsaturated Porous Media. Environmental
Science and Technology, 52, 7745вҖ“7753. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02348
MiljГёstyrelsen. (2016). Metode til at estimere lertykkelse under jordforureninger, der er kortlagt
pГҘ v1 og v2. MiljГё og FГёdevareminesteriet.
Millington, R., & Quirk, J. (1961). Permeability of porous solids. Transactions of the Faraday
Society, 57(8). https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9615701200
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
67
==PAGE:75==
Mualem, Y. (1976). A new model for predicting the hydraulic conductivity of unsaturated porous
media. Water Resources Research, 12, 513вҖ“522. https://doi.org/10.1029/WR012i003p00513
Nazaroff, W. W., & AlvarezВӯCohen, L. (2001). Environmental engineering science.
Nguyen, T. M. H., BrГӨunig, J., Thompson, K., Thompson, J., Kabiri, S., Navarro, D. A., Kookana,
R. S., Grimison, C., Barnes, C. M., Higgins, C. P., McLaughlin, M. J., & Mueller, J. F.
(2020). Influences of Chemical Properties, Soil Properties, and Solution pH on SoilВӯ
Water Partitioning Coefficients of PerВӯ And Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs). EnviВӯ
ronmental Science and Technology, 54, 15883вҖ“15892. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.
0c05705
Nielsen, A. K., Mosthaf, K., Tsitonaki, K., FjordbГёge, A. S., Roost, S., & Poul L. Bjerg, D. S.
(2023). Udvikling af en bedre konceptuel forstГҘelse af pesticidernes transport under
kildeomrГҘder erfaringer fra pesticidpunktkildeundersГёgelser. MiljГёministeriet MiljГёstyrelsen.
OECD. (2021). Reconciling Terminology of the Universe of PerВӯ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances:
Recommendations and Practical Guidance (61). www.oecd.org/chemicalsafety/
Petersen, H., Vejre, H., & Callesen, I. (2007). Jordbunden in naturen i danmark. Retrieved, from
https://naturenidanmark.lex.dk/Jordbunden
Raschke, A., Nejadhashemi, A. P., Rafiei, V., Fernandez, N., Shabani, A., & Li, S.ВӯG. (2022).
Opportunities and challenges of integrated largeВӯscale pfas modeling: A case study for
pfas modeling at a watershed scale. Journal of Environmental Engineering, 148. https:
//doi.org/10.1061/(asce)ee.1943-7870.0002034
Sallwey, J., Glass, J., & Stefan, C. (2018). Utilizing unsaturated soil zone models for assessing
managed aquifer recharge. Sustainable Water Resources Management, 4, 383вҖ“397.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40899-018-0214-z
Shinoda, K., Hato, M., & Hayashi, T. (1972). The Physicochemical Properties of Aqueous SoВӯ
tions of Fluorinated Surfactants. The journal of physical chemistry, 76(6), 176вҖ“1. https:
//doi.org/10.1021/j100650a021
Silva, J. A. K., Е imЕҜnek, J., & McCray, J. E. (2020). A modified hydrus model for simulating
pfas transport in the vadose zone. Water (Switzerland), 12. https://doi.org/10.3390/
w12102758
van Genuchten, M. T. (1980). A closedВӯform equation for predicting the hydraulic conductivity
of unsaturated soils. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 44(5), 892вҖ“898.
VMR. (2022). HГҘndbog om undersГёgelse og afvaerge af forurening med PFASВӯforbindelser.
Regionernes Videncenter for MiljГё og Ressourcer.
Voutchkova, D., Schullehner, J., Skaarup, C., Wodschow, K., ErsbГёll, A., & Hansen, B. (2021).
Estimating pesticides in public drinking water at the household level in denmark. GeoВӯ
logical Survey of Denmark and Greenland Bulletin, 47. https://doi.org/10.34194/GEUSB.
V47.6090
Wang, Y., Khan, N., Huang, D., Carroll, K. C., & Brusseau, M. L. (2021). Transport of pfos in
aquifer sediment: Transport behavior and a distributedВӯsorption model. Science of the
Total Environment, 779.
Washington, J. W., & Jenkins, T. M. (2015). Abiotic hydrolysis of fluorotelomerВӯbased polymers
as a source of perfluorocarboxylates at the global scale. Environmental Science and
Technology, 49(24), 14129вҖ“14135. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b03686
Wei, C., Song, X., Wang, Q., & Hu, Z. (2017). Sorption kinetics, isotherms and mechanisms
of PFOS on soils with different physicochemical properties. Ecotoxicology and EnvironВӯ
mental Safety, 142, 40вҖ“50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2017.03.040
Xu, M., & Eckstein, Y. (1995). Use of weighted leastВӯsquares method in evaluation of the relaВӯ
tionship between dispersivity and field scale. Groundwater, 33(6), 905вҖ“908. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6584.1995.tb00035.x
68
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:76==
Xueyan Lyu, Xiao, F., Shen, C., Chen, J., Park, C. M., Sun, Y., Flury, M., & Wang, D. (2022).
PerВӯ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in Subsurface Environments: Occurrence,
Fate, Transport, and Research Prospect. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021RG000765
Yang, S. (2016). Fundamentals of petrophysics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-662-53529-5_9
Ying Lyu, Wang, B., Du, X., Guo, B., & Brusseau, M. L. (2022). AirВӯwater interfacial adsorption of
c4Вӯc10 perfluorocarboxylic acids during transport in unsaturated porous media. Science
of the Total Environment, 831. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154905
Zhang, Z., Sarkar, D., Biswas, J. K., & Datta, R. (2022). Biodegradation of perВӯ and polyfluoВӯ
roalkyl substances (PFAS): A review. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2021.126223
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
69
==PAGE:77==
70
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:78==
A
Appendix
A.1
Background
A.1.1
Overview of PFAS compounds within groundwater and soil criteria
Table A.1: The 22 PFAS, which the environmental ministry has set limit values for
in soil and groundwater. The 12 PFAS that are included in the drinking water criteria
has been marked with X. Marked with red are the four values with stricter limitvalues, adapted
from VMR, 2022.
Chemical Acronym
Formula
Chain length (n)
12 PFAS*
PFBA
C3F7вҖўCOOH
3
X
PFPeA
C4F9вҖўCOOH
4
X
PFHxA
C5F11вҖўCOOH
5
X
PFCA
PFHpA
C6F13вҖўCOOH
6
X
PFOA
C7F15вҖўCOOH
7
X
PFNA
C8F17вҖўCOOH
8
X
PFDA
C9F19вҖўCOOH
9
X
PFUnDA
C10F21вҖўCOOH
10
PFDoDA
C11F23вҖўCOOH
11
PFTrDA
C12F25вҖўCOOH
12
PFBS
C4F9вҖўSO3H
4
X
PFPeS
C5F11вҖўSO3H
5
PFSA
PFHxS
C6F13вҖўSO3H
6
X
PFHpS
C7F15вҖўSO3H
7
PFOS
C8F17вҖўSO3H
8
X
PFNS
C9F19вҖўSO3H
9
PFDS
C10F21вҖўSO3H
10
PFUnS
C11F23вҖўSO3H
11
PFDoS
C12F25вҖўSO3H
12
PFTrS
C13F27вҖўSO3H
13
Precursors
PFOSA (FOSA)
C8F17вҖўSO2вҖўNH2
8
X
6:2 FTS (6:2 FTSA)
C6F13вҖўC2H4вҖўSO3H
6
X
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
71
==PAGE:79==
A.2
MethodВӯGeology
Figure A.1: Infiltration rates to the groundwater layer Ks1 in Denmark. Extracted from DK
modelled on 05/01/2023: (GEUS, n.d.).
A.3
MethodВӯGeological parameters
Median grain diameter were found from sieve test analysis, using the tool HydrogeosieveXl
2.3.9 developed by J.F. Devlin. Values for clayey till can be seen in Table A.2. For sand values
can be seen in Table A.3. For sandy layers in the clayey till BГёgedevej parameters have been
applied, as this sample is taken from similar geology, MarbГҰk parameters are included for cases
with sand aquifers.
72
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:80==
Table A.2: Data for analysis of grain size distribution of clayey till at different depth at two sites.
Median (рқ‘‘рқ‘”) grain diameter is presented along with clay content.
Location
Depth
рқ‘‘рқ‘”
Clay content
[m]
[mm]
[%]
Slimmingevej
1Вӯ2
0.01
14.39
Slimmingevej
7Вӯ7.5
0.01
13.99
BГёgedevej
6
0.06
10.12
BГёgedevej
11
0.02
17.9
BГёgedevej
14
0.02
17.01
Average
Вӯ
0.03
14.68
Std. dev.
Вӯ
0.02
Table A.3: Data for analysis of grain size distribution of sand at different at two different sites.
Median (рқ‘‘рқ‘”),10% and 60% grain diameter are presented. The BГёgedevej parameters are apВӯ
plicable for sandy layers within the clayey till and the MarbГҰk parameters for Sand aquifers.
Location
Depth
рқ‘‘рқ‘”
Clay content
[m]
[mm]
[%]
BГёgedevej
5
0.20
3.21
MarbГҰk
24
0.18
0.06
Grain size distributions from (Hansen, 1976), were used for calculating the grain diameter for
mull (also with HydrogeosieveXl). An average of samples from multiple sites with mull was used
also for porosity and hydraulic conductivity. Sites вҖқJyndevadвҖқ and вҖқAarslevвҖқ were excluded,
since their measurements were deemed outliers from the rest of the dataset. the values can be
seen in Table A.4.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
73
==PAGE:81==
Table A.4: Parameters for mull retrieved from (Hansen, 1976), for different sites around DenВӯ
mark. Including grain diameter рқ‘‘рқ‘”, porosity рқңҷ, hydraulic conductivity рқҗҫрқ‘ , along with calculated
averages. a: Shortening for Claymixed. b: Only one value available from Гҳdum, with no specВӯ
ification of which field it is from. The value is here presented in the first site and only included
once in the calculated average.
Site
Depth
Description
рқ‘‘рқ‘”
рқңҷ
рқҗҫрқ‘ 
[cm.b.g.l.]
[mm]
[Вӯ]
[m/s]
StudsgГҘrd
0 вҲ’22
Sandmull
0.20
46.3
1.3 вӢ…10вҲ’5
Tylstrup
0 вҲ’28
Sandmull
0.11
44.1
1.9 вӢ…10вҲ’5
Borris
0 вҲ’40
CM.рқ‘ҺSandmull
0.15
42.0
1.4 вӢ…10вҲ’5
Askov
0 вҲ’23
Claymull
0.13
39.9
9 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Tystofte
0 вҲ’60
Claymull
0.10
43.8
5 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Roskilde
0 вҲ’27
Claymull
0.05
42.8
1.2 вӢ…10вҲ’5
Гҳdum B10
0 вҲ’40
Claymull
0.08
43.6рқ‘Ҹ
1.7 вӢ…10вҲ’5рқ‘Ҹ
Гҳdum A8
0 вҲ’40
Claymull
0.07
вҲ’рқ‘Ҹ
вҲ’рқ‘Ҹ
BlangstedgГҘrd
0 вҲ’30
Claymull
0.14
37.9
5 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Silstrup
0 вҲ’40
Claymull
0.07
38.5
4 вӢ…10вҲ’6
RГёnhave
0 вҲ’23
Claymull
0.06
37.4
1 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Flakkebjerg
0 вҲ’28
Claymull
0.07
39.1
2 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Average
0.10
41.4
9.2 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Standard deviation
0.042
2.8
5.9 вӢ…10вҲ’6
Below the calculations for the fraction of organic carbon, are seen for clayey till and sand along
with the components of the soil, from two different sites. Calculated average which is used in
this thesis has been included.
Table A.5: Fraction of organic carbon and composition of different clayey tills
Location
Depth
Clay
Silt
Sand
рқ‘“рқ‘Ӯрқҗ¶
Unit
[m]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
BГёgedevej
6
10.1
39.2
50.7
0.25
BГёgedevej
11
17.9
40.5
41.6
0.10
BГёgedevej
14
17.0
40.0
43.0
0.15
Average
15.0
39.9
45.1
0.2
Table A.6: Fraction of organic carbon and composition of sand from different sites. MarbГҰk
data is applicable for sandy aquifers and BГёgedevej for sandy layers in claytills
Location
Depth
Clay
Silt
Sand
рқ‘“рқ‘Ӯрқҗ¶
Unit
[m]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
BГёgedevej
5.5
3.2
11.4
85.4
0.19
MarbГҰk
24
0.06
2.80
97.14
<0.04
Below key parameters from Carsel and Parrish (1988), which have been used in the selection
of soil types for parameter estimaiton, are shown.
74
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:82==
Table A.7: Descriptive parameters for the used geologies from Carsel and Parrish (1988).
Note that hydraulic conductivity and porosity has not been used in the model but are included
for comparison.
Type
Sand
Clay
рқҗҫрқ‘ 
рқңҷ
рқңғрқ‘ҹ
рқӣј
n
Unit
m/s
рқ‘җрқ‘ҡвҲ’1
Loamy sand
80.9
6.4
4.1EВӯ05
0.41
0.057
0.124
2.28
Sandy Clay Loam
54.3
27.4
3.6EВӯ06
0.39
0.1
0.059
1.48
Sandy Loam
63.4
11.1
1.2EВӯ05
0.41
0.065
0.075
1.89
A.4
MethodВӯData from case study
A.4.1
Measured soil concentrations from case study
Below the measured PFAS concentrations in the soil from the case study for B1 and B2 are
seen.
Figure A.2: Measured PFAS concentrations in soil from the case study. Adapted with an upВӯ
dated value in red, by comparison with the lab analysis report.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
75
==PAGE:83==
A.4.2
Borelogs
B1
76
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
==PAGE:86==
B2
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
79
==PAGE:87==
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
A.5
MethodВӯCase study
A.5.1
Input function for case study
Figure A.3: Input function for PFOA, PFPeA and PFOS applied for the case study
A.5.2
Mass calculation for case study
The total contaminant concentration for the system is given by:
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ў= рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘–рқ‘ҹ+ рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ө+ рқ‘ҡрқ‘ рқ‘ңрқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҹ+ рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвҲ’рқ‘ рқ‘ңрқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҹ
(A.1)
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘–рқ‘ҹ= 0 as it is assumed that the PFAS does not evaporate into the airВӯfilled poreВӯspace.
Since, рқңғрқ‘Ө= рқ‘Ҷрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқңҷthe mass in the waterВӯfilled pore space is given by:
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ө= рқ‘җрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқ‘үрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘ЎвӢ…рқңғрқ‘Ө
(A.2)
The mass sorbed to the airВӯwater interface is given by:
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвҲ’рқ‘ рқ‘ңрқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҹ= рқ‘җрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқҗҙрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқ‘үрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘ЎвӢ…рқңғрқ‘Ө
(A.3)
And the sorbed mass is given by:
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ рқ‘ңрқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҹ= рқ‘җрқ‘ӨвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘‘вӢ…рқңҢрқ‘ҸвӢ…рқ‘үрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ў
(A.4)
The concentration per dry weight soil is then given by:
рқ‘җрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ў= рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ў
рқ‘Җрқ‘ рқ‘ңрқ‘–рқ‘ҷ
=
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ў
рқңҢрқ‘ҸвӢ…рқ‘үрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ў
(A.5)
The total volume can be calculated by:
рқ‘үрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ў= рқҗҝвӢ…рқ‘ҠвӢ…рқ‘‘рқ‘§
(A.6)
рқ‘‘рқ‘§is the thickness set to 1m
82
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:90==
A.5.3
Mesh for flow modelВӯcase study infiltration rates
The mesh used in the flow model for investigating the infiltration rates was applied with a maxiВӯ
mum element size of 2m for PFOS and PFOA and 1.5m for PFPeA. A maximum element growth
rate of 1.4 was applied for all cases.
Figure A.4: Mesh applied in the flow model for the case study when investigating different
infiltration rates.
A.6
ResultsВӯGeneric setup
A.6.1
Sensitivity analysis
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
83
==PAGE:91==
Compound
Type
Unit
Variation
K_c
poro_c
d_c
foc_c
n_c
alpha_c
theta_r_c
Koc
Kaw
"-10%"
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.459
0.188
"+10%"
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.437
0.202
"-10%"
0.003
0.533
0.533
0.003
2.646
0.264
0.531
0.269
0.537
"+10%"
0.264
0.531
0.533
0.264
1.336
0.000
0.270
0.531
0.533
"-10%"
1
1
1
0
5
0
1
2
2
"+10%"
1
1
1
0
3
0
1
2
2
"-10%"
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
"+10%"
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
"-10%"
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
"+10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
Compound
Type
Unit
Variation
K_s
poro_s
d_s
foc_s
n_s
alpha_s
theta_r_s
Koc
Kaw
"-10%"
0.042
1.128
1.191
0.038
0.443
0.042
0.298
0.038
0.961
"+10%"
0.022
0.851
1.003
0.016
0.298
0.022
0.323
0.016
0.851
"-10%"
0
1
2
0
1
0
1
1
2
"+10%"
0
1
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
"-10%"
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
"+10%"
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
"-10%"
0
1
4
0
2
0
2
0
3
"+10%"
0
2
3
1
2
0
1
1
3
"-10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"+10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Compound
Type
Unit
Variation
K_c
poro_c
d_c
foc_c
n_c
alpha_c
theta_r_c
Koc
Kaw
"-10%"
0.048
0.348
0.455
0.048
1.798
0.000
0.455
0.048
0.348
"+10%"
0.298
0.313
0.348
0.298
1.071
0.000
0.348
0.298
0.455
"-10%"
1
3
3
1
10
0
2
2
3
"+10%"
1
2
3
1
9
0
3
1
2
Scenario A- Clayey till and mull
Arrival  time 
2m
О”yr
Arrival  time 
2m
О”yr
PFOA
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
Scenario B- Sandy till and gravel
PFOS
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
О”yr
PFOA
О”yr
Arrival  time 
2m
Arrival  time 
5m
О”yr
PFPeA
Arrival  time 
2m
О”yr
PFOS
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
Scenario C - Clayey till and gravel
Arrival  time 
5m
О”yr
PFPeA
PFOS
Arrival  time 
2m
О”yr
Arrival  time 
5m
==PAGE:92==
Compound
Type
Unit
Variation
K_s_m
poro_m
d_m
foc_m
n_m
alpha_m
Theta_r_m
H
"-10%"
0.078
0.116
0.235
0.459
0.914
0.078
0.202 -
"+10%"
0.067
0.116
0.188
0.437
0.598
0.030
0.188 -
"-10%"
0.000
0.000
0.264
0.269
0.536
0.003
0.264
0
"+10%"
0.000
0.000
0.003
0.264
0.533
0.264
0.003
0
"-10%"
0
0
1
1
4
1
1
0
"+10%"
0
0
1
1
3
0
1
0
"-10%"
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
"+10%"
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
"-10%"
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
"+10%"
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
Compound
Type
Unit
Variation
K_s_g
poro_g
d_g
foc_g
n_g
alpha_g
Theta_r_g
H
"-10%"
0.000
0.000
0.009
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000 -
"+10%"
0.000
0.005
0.038
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001 -
"-10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"+10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"-10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"+10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"-10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
"+10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
"-10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"+10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
Compound
Type
Unit
Variation
K_s_g
poro_g
d_g
foc_g
n_g
alpha_g
Theta_r_g
H
"-10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"+10%"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
"-10%"
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
"+10%"
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
Scenario A- Clayey till and mull
Scenario B- Sandy till and gravel
Scenario C - Clayey till and gravel
PFOS
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
PFOA
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
Arrival  time 2m О”yr
PFPeA
Arrival  time 
2m
О”yr
Arrival  time 
5m
О”yr
PFOS
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
Arrival  time 
2m
О”yr
О”yr
Arrival  time 
5m
О”yr
PFPeA
Arrival  time 
5m
О”yr
PFOA
Arrival  time 
2m
О”Depth 10% 
2023
SI
Arrival  time 
2m
О”yr
PFOS
==PAGE:93==
A.6.2
Breakthrough curves
Figure A.5: Breakthrough curves for PFOA in mull and clayey till, with different values for
рқҗҫрқ‘ .Low: mull:1eВӯ6 clayey till:1eВӯ11Нҫ Regular: mull: 9eВӯ6 clayey till: 3eВӯ7
A.6.3
Saturation deciding parameters
Figure A.6: Results simulated with different saturated coductivities рқҗҫрқ‘ , in Scenario B sandy till
and gravel
86
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.7: Results simulated with different рқ‘ӣvalues for Scenario B, sandy till and gravel
A.7
ResultsВӯCase study
A.7.1
Infiltration rates
Figure A.8: Total modelled concentration of PFOS for different infiltration rates along with the
measured values. Note that the yВӯaxis shows the domain size and is the inverse of m bgs and
that the bottom 5 meters are not within the modelled domain.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
87
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.9: Total modelled concentration of PFOA for different infiltration rates along with the
measured values. Note that the yВӯaxis shows the domain size and is the inverse of m bgs and
that the bottom 5 meters are not within the modelled domain.
Figure A.10: Total modelled concentration of PFPeA for different infiltration rates along with
the measured values.ote that the yВӯaxis shows the domain size and is the inverse of m bgs and
that the bottom 5 meters are not within the modelled domain.
88
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
==PAGE:96==
A.7.2
Fitting for B1
Figure A.11: Sweep for B1 PFOS for 4 рқ‘“рқ‘ңрқ‘җvalues, in 2021. All concentrations are given in
ug/kg. Modelled with an infiltration rate of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. Note that the yВӯaxis shows the domain size
and is the inverse of m bgs and that the bottom 5 meters are not within the modelled domain.
(a) Fittet B1Вӯ PFPeA with sweep of different рқҗҫрқ‘ңрқ‘җ
values. Modelled with the 2022ВӯRegression based
value рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Өvalue of 1.1 вӢ…10вҲ’4.
(b) Fittet B1 Вӯ PFPeA with sweep of different рқҗҫрқ‘Һрқ‘Ө
values.
Figure A.12: Sweep with different distribution coefficients for B1 for PFPeA in 2021. All conВӯ
centrations are given in ug/kg. Dots indicate measured values. Modelled with an infiltration rate
of 200 рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ҹ. Note that the yВӯaxis shows the domain size and is the inverse of m bgs and that the
bottom 5 meters are not within the modelled domain.
ModelВӯbased investigations of vertical transport and distribution of PFAS in soils
89
==PAGE:97==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
