==PAGE:1==
     
 
 
 
Quantitative effects of organ-on-
a-chip technologies on stem cell 
models 
A literature review-based thesis project 
Virginia Chondromatidou 
DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET 
DECEMBER 2023 – DEPARTMENT OF ADVANCED MATERIALS 
& HEALTHCARE ENGINEERING 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
Abstract 
 
Stem Cells (SCs) show great ability to differentiate into any tissue, making them 
attractive candidates for biological investigations. The rise of organ-on-a-chip 
technology in the past century has introduced a novel way to make in vitro cell cultures 
that more closely resemble their in vivo environments, both structurally and 
functionally. Pharmaceutical companies have shown interest in organ-on-chip (OOC) 
in vitro models as effective methods for testing existing drugs and generating new 
ones. The current thesis project is a literature-based analysis and discussion of stem 
cell formation and differentiation based on the most prominent organ-on-chip OoC 
platforms such as liver, vasculature, heart, skin and blood-brain barrier. This study 
also summarizes the benefits and limitations of the adult, embryonic and iPSCs in 
OoCs systems. 
 
 
Aim 
 
A literature-based review for organ on-a-chip models involving human derived stem 
cells for Ooc in vitro models. The thesis is focused on describing the features of the 
different stem cell formations, mapping the benefits and limitations of 3D cultures and 
stem cell differentiation as well as giving examples of the most prominent OoC 
platforms. 
 
Keywords 
Organ on a chip, stem cell cultures, human iPSCs, 3D model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
Contents 
 
Abstract ...................................................................................................................... 1 
Aim ............................................................................................................................. 1 
Keywords ................................................................................................................... 1 
1. Introduction .......................................................................................................... 3 
1.1 Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) and Adult Stem Cells (ASCs) ............. 3 
1.2 Organ-on-a-chip (OoC) systems ....................................................................... 4 
1.3 Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) - an example of cardiac differentiation . 5 
2. Benefits and limitations of Stem Cells (SCs) ....................................................... 6 
2.1 Adult Stem Cells (ASCs) ................................................................................... 7 
2.2 Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) .......................................................................... 7 
2.3 iPSCs ................................................................................................................ 8 
2.4 Stem cell differentiation ..................................................................................... 8 
2.5 OoCs models and SCs...................................................................................... 9 
3. Discussion ......................................................................................................... 10 
3.1 Stem-Cell based on OoCs .............................................................................. 10 
3.2 Human derived Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs) and iPSCs differentiation in 
OoCs ..................................................................................................................... 10 
3.3 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Brain-on-chip ....................................................... 11 
3.4 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Liver-on-Chip ...................................................... 12 
3.5 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Vasculature-on-Chip ........................................... 14 
3.6 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Heart-on-Chip ..................................................... 15 
3.7 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Blood–Brain Barrier-on-Chip ............................... 16 
3.8 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Skin-on-Chip ....................................................... 18 
3.9 iPCs ‐derived 3D cultures for cardiac regeneration ......................................... 19 
3.10 Limitations of SCs in OoCs ........................................................................... 20 
4. References ........................................................................................................ 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1 Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) and Adult Stem 
Cells (ASCs) 
 
Personalized medicine is now a major focus in drug development to enhance 
outcomes and the cost efficiency for new and existing drugs. In general, drug safety 
and efficacy have been the main factors to evaluate the drug effectiveness [1]. 
Personalized medicine is not based on the ‘one drug fits all’ approach, considering 
individual differences in medication responses, with the goal of creating treatment 
applications targeting each patient as an individual [1]. Additionally, drug testing 
platforms specifically applicable for patients and diseases, which are based on recent 
advances in organoids, stem cell, and organ-on-a-chip (OoC) technologies, could be 
very beneficial, especially for ex vivo prediction and adjustment of drug dosing [2]. 
 
Personalized drug testing platforms could be developed by using cells and tissues 
derived from patients, which would allow for direct evaluation of drug effectiveness [2]. 
Stem cell technologies, such as culture of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and 
adult stem cells (ASCs), offer a solid foundation for such platforms [3]. Shinya 
Yamanaka [3,4] in 2006, discovered that four specific genes could induce adult 
somatic cells to become iPSCs. Following this discovery, Yu et al. [5] employed a 
different set of genes to convert human skin cells into pluripotent stem cells in 2007, 
and implemented protocols using three-dimensional (3D) culturing methods for the 
differentiation of iPSCs, for instance, hepatocytes [6,7].  
 
iPSCs are considered to be the most flexible stem cell type for OoC studies as they 
can be derived by genetic reprogramming of accessible adult tissue cells Kim, J. et al. 
(2020) [8]. Moreover, one of the benefits of iPSCs is their ability to preserve their tissue 
origin epigenetic memory, which makes it easier for researchers to study the effects 
of environmental factors that can cause epigenetic changes [8]. This could be very 
useful for developing complex cultures, for instance, by combining endothelial and 
intestinal cells with the same genetic background to replicate a gut-on-a-chip or 
different OoC platforms [8]. Thus, iPSCs models have shown great potential for 
personalized drug testing, specifically models such as type one diabetes, 
schizophrenia, Parkinson’s disease etc.[9, 10]. However, the epigenetic background 
of iPSCs can be rigorously reprogrammed, making them therefore to have a ‘more 
embryological’ phenotype compared to a ‘more mature phenotype’ like for instance of 
the ASC-derived tissues [11,12]. 
 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
Apart from iPSCs, significant advances have also been achieved in culture, and 
utilization of ASCs located in the human body and they can reproduce and differentiate 
to restore dead or damaged tissue cells [13].They inhabit specific organs or tissues 
where a high cell turnover is needed, at these locations, ASCs multiply and 
differentiate into various cell types to preserve both functional and structural integrity 
[13].. Moreover, in contrast to iPSCs, ASCs do not need extensive genetic 
reprogramming, which is lengthy and has a low success rate [13]. One benefit of both 
iPSCs and ASCs is their ability to differentiate into many tissues that can be 
maintained as organoids and can be easily expanded or harvested, or be frozen 
indefinitely providing an unlimited source of the same cells [11,12].  
 
1.2 Organ-on-a-chip (OoC) systems 
 
Organoids have a structural organization, that is, akin to their tissue-of-origin, but the 
big cellular diversity within organs is not fully reproduced, while vascularity is absent 
or inadequate, and the immune component is typically missing [13]. The lack of 
immune cells from organoids’ is still a big gap in studies of pathophysiological 
processes that are immune-driven [14]. Additionally, organoids model a single organ, 
while drug testing platforms for safety and efficacy need the interdependence of 
multiple organ systems [14]. For this reason, recent advances in stem cell culturing 
and microfluidics enable the creation of microphysiological OoC systems that can 
replicate human physiology in vitro [15]. OoCs usually merge a biological component 
comprising either primary cells or a cell line, or an organoid, that represents the organ 
of interest, with a microfluidic component mimicking blood flow [16].  
 
OoC models have generally cell systems cultured in 3D, with more enhanced cell 
structures, viability and differentiation than classic in vitro organ systems, due to 
suitable levels of shear stress via microfluidic flows [17]. The flow mimics the blood 
flow to investigate the drug delivery efficiency in the both in the targeted organ and the 
effects of the drug to organs located away from the initial exposure area [17]. The 
integration of patient derived cells, several cell types, perfusion and shear stress in a 
3D scaffold, enables to successfully stimulate the tumor microenvironment and allows 
the analysis of biological transport in various in vitro organ models [18].  
 
It is known that OoC systems are good at mimicking the cell microenvironment by 
using mechanical fluctuation, inducing shear stress and stimulating heartbeat or 
breathing motion [19]. During the last decade, there are several organ models that 
have been used during the recent years for OoC simulations, such as liver, heart, skin, 
bone-based organ systems etc. with the purpose of personalized testing of drug safety 
and drug efficacy [20]. For the same reason, several OoC disease-based models have 
also been generated such as primary liver cells for cancer research [21]. 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
Aside from drug testing applications, OoC models have been applied to study drug 
absorption, distribution, excretion and drug metabolism [17]. For instance, there are 
multiple blood–brain barrier OoC models that have been established to study the 
delivery of drugs through the blood–brain barrier, which is still a challenge for brain 
targeting drugs [17,18]. These models are based on an endothelial cells barrier and 
can include different vascular and brain chambers to study the interaction with other 
brain cells e.g astrocytes, pericytes etc.[22]. OoC models requires a multidisciplinary 
knowledge of (stem) cell biology, microfluidics, system electronics and designs and 
that may be a challenge in terms of method standardization for culture conditions 
(shear stress, mechanical stress, scaffold materials etc.) and system complexity [23]. 
 
1.3 Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) - an example of 
cardiac differentiation 
 
In 2007 Takahashi et.al [4] and his research group described the iPSCs, opening the 
door to several new therapeutic avenues in regenerative medicine. By introducing the 
transcription factors Sox2, Oct3/4, Klf4, and c-Myc into human somatic cells known as 
fibroblasts, they were able to reprogram them into multipotent stem cells, creating a 
new source of human stem cells that avoided the ethical issues related to the 
embryonic stem cells [4].  
 
iPSCs have several benefits over other types of stem cells. Some of them include their 
ability to easily differentiate into any somatic cell type by manipulating the culture 
conditions while using different media in vitro, or they can expand indefinitely while 
retaining their pluripotency, generating potentially in large quantities of cells for 
therapeutic purposes [5]. This can be especially useful for cardiac regenerative 
treatments, as the cardiac tissue consists of various cell types (e.g endothelial cells, 
mural cells, fibroblasts, iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (CMs) etc.) [24]. iPSCs can also 
overcome the immunogenic challenges, as they can be derived directly from the 
patients for personalized treatment [25]. Moreover, iPSCs cell banks that offer “ready-
to-use” HLA-type matched allogeneic cells for patients could enhance the 
effectiveness and the applicability of the stem cell treatments [25]. 
 
In 2007 Takahashi et al. [4] in their protocol also described the first differentiation of 
CMs directly from iPSCs. The differentiation protocols are mainly based on the 
principles of cardiac development in vivo and involve either embryoid body formation 
or monolayer culture approaches. There are also several protocols that describe the 
CM differentiation stage, while use of small molecules to inhibit the Wnt signaling has 
been proven to enhance the differentiation efficiency [26]. Additionally, substances like 
collagen or gelatin in combination with the environmental changes have also been 
proven to enhance the CM specification [26].  
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
 
According to Mazzola et al, iPSC-derived CMs exhibit the main features of CMs in 
vivo, such as expression of expected markers like ion channels, or cardiac-based 
calcium transients [24]. In contrast, these cultures display properties of CMs in the 
generated heart rather than of mature cells while the cells shown to be smaller in size 
[27], while after transplantation, it can be challenging for functional integration with the 
adult human CMs and may result in arrhythmias [27]. So far, there is no published 
information from recent clinical trials related to hiPSCs extracted from healthy human 
donors and been directly injected into the myocardium [13]. On the other hand, there 
are some animal studies which apply CMs derived by different sources, and animal 
based models that describe that the cells’ inoculation is more effective when the cells 
are not injected directly into the myocardium [28]. 
 
 
2. Benefits and limitations of Stem Cells (SCs)  
 
OOC technology is an emerging alternative to current preclinical models that can 
potentially integrate patient-specific cell models, 3D tissue culture, microfluidics, and 
high-throughput analysis methods to create a powerful tool for disease modeling, drug 
screening, and toxicity testing [29].  
 
OOC generally refers to any device that incorporates cells into a microfluidic system 
with an engineered architecture that tries to mimic some or all aspects of the native 
tissue structure [29]. According to this definition, all OOCs consist of a microfluidic chip 
with cultured cells or tissue and either a pump-driven or pumpless delivery of culture 
media or other nutrient sources, and some include 3D cell culture techniques [29].  
 
Many OOCs also include co-culture to examine interactions among different cell types 
within an organ [30]. As explained in [29], this principle can be expanded to the 
combination of multiple different OOCs into one body-on-a-chip (BOC) device. This 
device provides a physical representation of physiologically-based pharmacokinetic 
models that can be integrated with computational pharmacokinetic and systems 
biology models to generate a better understanding of drug metabolism, bioavailability, 
and distribution in human systems [31, 32]. 
 
The adoption and application of BOC and OOC technologies are currently constrained 
by the technical knowledge needed for device design and cell culture, as well as the 
poor integration with existing high-throughput screening methods [29]. However, 
based on Horvath et al. 2016, OOC research has grown considerably in the past few 
years and ongoing research in both industry and academia has the possibility to 
enhance the adoption of these technologies in drug discovery [33]. 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
 
A stem cell is defined as any cell that can self-renew and has the capability to 
differentiate into one or more specialized cell types and, the most prevalent types of 
stem cells used in biological research are ESCs, iPSCs, and ASCs [29]. These cells 
can be converted into a range of terminally-differentiated adult cell types, which can 
then be utilized for disease modeling or toxicity testing [34]. Several studies have 
already confirmed the suitability of stem cells to drug testing and disease modeling as 
an alternative or supplementary preclinical model, showing patient-specific drug 
reactions and reproducing clinical manifestations that were not detected in other 
preclinical models [35,36]. According to (Wnorowski et al. 2018) [29], stem cell 
technologies also enable investigation of diseases and drug effects in a more diverse 
population than for cell lines or animals. More specifically, stem cell technology and 
differentiation techniques have witnessed significant improvements in recent years, 
and despite some challenges to full implementation, stem cells will likely be broadly 
applicable to OOC models in the near future [29]. 
 
2.1 Adult Stem Cells (ASCs)  
 
As explained by Wnorowski et al. 2018 [29], human ASCs, the most prevalent of which 
are MSCs, are multipotent stem cells obtained from adult tissues. MSCs are usually 
obtained from either the bone marrow or adipose tissue, making them a favorable 
option because they are relatively simple to obtain from tissue biopsies [37]. They are 
multipotent stem cells, implying that they can only differentiate into a restricted number 
of cell types [29].  
 
MSCs are most frequently differentiated into mesodermal cells of bone, muscle, 
cartilage, and fat lineages [29]. Besides being isolated from multiple different source 
tissues, MSCs are isolated and cultured with a varied range of protocols, resulting in 
heterogeneous phenotypes in populations of MSCs varying from lab to lab and even 
from batch to batch [38]. Due to both their restricted differentiation capability and the 
absence of consistent derivation protocols and defined biological responses, MSCs 
are less suitable to OOC models than their pluripotent counterparts [29]. 
 
2.2 Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs)  
 
As stated by Wnorowski et al. 2018 [29], human ESCs originate from either the 
blastocyst or the inner cell mass of embryos. Their source determines whether they 
are totipotent or pluripotent cells, both of which can give rise to any kind of adult human 
cell from any of the three germ layers [39]. Various laboratories around the world have 
established an estimated 200 to 300 different ESC lines, but in contrast to MSCs, 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
comparative studies of these lines have shown comparable levels of pluripotency and 
surface marker gene expression among the different lines [40].  
 
Even though ESCs possess an unlimited differentiation potential and a more uniform 
phenotype than MSCs, the fact that human ESCs require human embryos for their 
derivation makes their use ethically contentious, which has consequently led to 
enhanced regulation of their use in research [29]. Because of the ethical controversy 
surrounding ESCs and the technical challenges producing large numbers of 
genetically diverse cell lines, it is more difficult to apply human ESCs than alternatives 
to precision medicine for disease modeling and therapeutic drug assessments [29]. 
 
2.3 iPSCs 
 
iPSCs, like ESCs, are pluripotent and can give rise to cell types from all three germ 
layers [41]. Human iPSCs were first obtained in 2007 by introducing four specific 
factors (Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, and c-Myc) into human adult fibroblast cells [42]. 
According to Churkoet al. 2017 [43], various transfection methods and adult somatic 
cell types such as skin fibroblasts, adipose stromal cells, and blood samples can now 
be used to generate iPSCs. iPSCs avoid the ethical issues associated with ESCs 
because they are derived from adult tissue rather than embryonic tissue.  
 
ESCs and iPSCs from the same genetic background have no notable differences in 
gene expression levels, surface marker expression, or morphology [44,45]. Besides 
avoiding ethical dilemmas, another benefit of iPSCs over ESCs is that they can be 
obtained from donors with known disease phenotypes, whose cells can then be 
utilized in disease models and drug tests that are specific to the patient [29]. 
 
2.4 Stem cell differentiation  
 
Using a chemically defined medium, cardiomyocytes can be obtained from iPSCs and 
ESCs for the assessment of drug response and cardiotoxicity by means of 
transcriptome profiling and functional analyses [35,46]. As indicated by Wnorowski et 
al. 2018 [29] predictive response of patient-specific iPSCs, such as those from patients 
with established cardiac disorders, to cardiotoxic drugs like tyrosine kinase inhibitors, 
doxorubicin, troglitazone, nicorandil, and cisapride has been demonstrated.  
 
Methods to generate hepatocyte-like cells from iPSCs have been applied in studies of 
patient-specific hepatotoxicity and drug-induced liver injury [47,48]. These cell types 
are also pertinent in disease modeling and mechanism studies, including for 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
neurological diseases such as schizophrenia [49,50] and Alzheimer’s [51] and 
cardiovascular diseases such as familial dilated cardiomyopathy [52].  
 
By integrating iPSC- and ESC-derived cells into OOCs, researchers can leverage the 
unique ability to create a wide range of cell types along with the potential to create 
high-throughput systems that have a complete 3D cell microenvironment as well as 
the ability to provide multiple stimuli and assess multiple functional readouts [29]. 
 
2.5 OoCs models and SCs  
 
Stem cells have a clear potential to be integrated into OOC devices, but this is not a 
common practice yet [29]. The most frequently used types of cell in OOC devices so 
far are primary cells and tissue biopsies and cell lines, while stem cell sources are 
used only sporadically [53,54]. OOC models for various organs, such as the liver and 
the placenta, have incorporated cell lines [55,56]. They have also been employed to 
examine organ interactions in multi-organ chip systems, which include combinations 
of the lung, liver, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, skin, bone marrow, and adipose tissue 
[57,58].  
 
Each of these sources has its own benefits, but they also have limitations compared 
to stem cells [29]. Tissue biopsies and primary cells are both obtained directly from 
adult tissue, and therefore they can offer more reliable information on the biological 
characteristics of mature tissue [54]. Based on Wnorowski et al. 2018 [29], dissociated 
cells can be arranged into a 3D structure, but current techniques often do not have the 
organ-specific structures and matrix components that are present in tissue biopsies. 
A particular drawback of tissue-based devices is that tissue samples usually do not 
last more than 48 h in ex vivo culture, which limits their capacity to be studied for a 
long time [54].  
 
In contrast to the clear benefits of using primary cells, biopsies, and cell lines, stem 
cell-based cultures have advantages in that they are often more accessible, more 
durable in culture, and more versatile in differentiation [29]. Stem cells have the 
potential to reproduce multiple organ-like structures with the same genetic 
background, which is helpful in disease modeling and drug testing for genetic 
diseases, hHowever, there are challenges to current stem cell technologies that will 
have to be overcome before they can be widely used for OOC models for all organ 
types [29]. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
3. Discussion 
 
3.1 Stem-Cell based on OoCs  
 
Microfluidic technology allows OOCs to control primary factors such as cellular 
positioning (cell patterning), [59,60] shear stress and fluid flow, [61,62] mechanical 
forces, [63] and cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions in a biomimetic microenvironment 
[64,65]. Cell source selection is a crucial step in developing OOC platforms [66]. Unlike 
mature human cells (e.g., primary cells and cell lines) that are not capable of 
differentiation, the progenitor and stem cells (SCs) can differentiate [67]. 
 
SCs have also demonstrated the ability to differentiate into two or more types of cells, 
[68] indicating that SCs are the most appropriate sources of cells for developing the 
next-generation OOC platforms. Furthermore, reprogramed patient-derived SCs—
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)—solved some of the pressing challenges of 
SCs, offering new opportunities in OOCs for human on-chip and “clinical-trial-on-chip” 
perspective [68,69]. 
 
The integration of hydrogel biomaterials into microfluidic systems enabled the 
manipulation of factors that influence the fate of SCs in a 3D matrix [70]. Hydrogel-
supported microfluidics also allowed the provision of controlled matrix properties, the 
creation of desired gradients of external stimuli to hydrogel biomaterials, and the 
improved investigation of cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions [71]. These advances 
led researchers to consider developing complex microtissue models based on SCs 
[72,73]. This was facilitated by the successful differentiation of hiPSCs and 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which were cultured in 3D microfluidics, into 
functional cardiac and hepatic cells. In contrast, conventional 2D and 3D culture 
techniques are bulky and unable to simulate many essential physiological conditions 
and environmental factors [74]. 
 
3.2 Human derived Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs) and iPSCs 
differentiation in OoCs 
 
Human organs-on-chips, which use microscale engineering technologies to mimic the 
organ microenvironment, provide a unique chance to study human physiology 
pathophysiology [75]. Previously mentioned studies, shown the successful use of OoC 
systems based on human-derived iPSCs and AScs. Human embryonic stem cells 
(hESCs) and iPSCs cultured in vitro, have the ability to generate any fetal and adult 
cell types [76]. 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
 
Developing direct OoCs models from hPSCs could overcome the scarce availability of 
human primary cells [77]. Moreover, hPSC-derived cells exhibit intrinsic and 
unforeseen levels of emergent self-organization for producing highly organized tissues 
and structures [78]. Recent studies on mice using microfluidic systems emphasize the 
importance of precise regulation of the soluble microenvironment, in terms of 
endogenous and exogenous extrinsic factors, to preserve pluripotency and self-
renewal [79,80]. 
 
Giobbe et al. 2015 [76], have shown hESC culture on a chip, generating cell culture 
conditions to enhance pluripotency maintenance and self-renewal, and germ layer 
specification. The authors proposed that periodic medium delivery with stage-
dependent 
frequency 
was 
a 
suitable 
technique 
for 
modulating 
soluble 
microenvironments and for controlling stem cell niche specification in vitro [76]. It was 
also evident that low perfusion frequencies permitted endogenous factors to 
accumulate within the channel, while high frequencies facilitated a sustained supply 
of exogenous factors but resulted in continuous washout of endogenous secreted 
factors [76]. The authors found that discontinuous periodic medium delivery, in 
contrast to continuous microfluidic flow perfusion, produced homogeneity along the 
channels, cell density and pluripotency marker expression for both hiPSCs and 
hESCs. The study concluded that high accumulation of extrinsic endogenous factors 
stimulates ectoderm differentiation while suppressing meso-endoderm specification 
[76].  
 
The study also concluded that perfusion frequency is an additional factor that can 
improve germ layer specification, even when specific differentiation protocols are 
applied [76]. The authors then tested whether their strategy of controlled perfusion 
frequency could be used to achieve functional differentiation of cells of interest on 
chips by using derive hepatocytes on chips from hESCs and hiPSCs. They observed 
robust differentiation of eight hiPSC lines obtained by different methods using the 
microfluidic strategy they defined [76]. 
 
3.3 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Brain-on-chip 
 
The goal of OOCs is to mimic human physiology and to be effective for drug 
development and disease research [29]. The human brain tissue is very complex and 
difficult to model using animal models or conventional cell culture systems [84]. 
Although these methods have revealed some aspects of its physiology and biological 
processes, they are not sufficient to create realistic human brain tissue models [81]. 
 
Neural tissue engineering aims to create new systems that can provide a suitable 
microenvironment for neural stem cells (NSCs) to differentiate and proliferate in a 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
biomimetic manner and to discover therapies for brain disorders [84]. “Brain-on-chip” 
devices are based on combinatorial approaches and have shown a great potential for 
elucidating the mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases and drug-induced toxicity 
to neural cells.[82,83,85]. 
 
Axon guidance and extension are crucial for understanding brain development. Shi 
[86] incorporated embryonic SCs into a compartmentalized microfluidic platform with 
surface-micropatterned proteins to generate functional neurons and neural circuits. 
They investigated how the fibroblast growth factor receptor signaling influences the 
direction or extension of embryonic SC-derived neurons. Shin et al. [87] induced 
mESCs to become neurons within a compartmentalized microfluidic device. 
 
3.4 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Liver-on-Chip  
 
Bioengineering and microfluidic technologies have attracted interests due to the 
increasing demands for new liver therapies and models for drug testing [88,89]. 
Human liver physiology is not well replicated by preclinical and clinical studies for liver 
drug toxicities, which are also slow and expensive.[90,91]. Therefore, human liver 
tissue models can offer a better estimation of drug effects on absorption, distribution, 
metabolism, excretion, and toxicity and SCs have a great potential to be used within 
microfluidics to create liver-on-chips [81].  
 
Lee et al. 2012 [92] created a 3D microtissue by co-culturing human adipose-derived 
SCs and primary human hepatocytes in microarray wells and produced human 
hepatocyte spheroids with uniform size, shape, high viability, and enhanced functions. 
They showed that SCs facilitated the formation of a fast and compact microtissue with 
higher hepatocyte viability than spheroids of human hepatocytes alone, which is very 
advantageous to overcome the low viability limitation of primary human hepatocytes 
[92] Hepatocyte differentiation from various SC sources in 2D and 3D structures has 
been explored [93].  
 
Ju et al. 2008 [94] studied the differentiation of MSCs into hepatic cells on-chip. They 
compared the SC differentiation between the on-chip and on-plate cultures. The 
results revealed that the differentiated cells in both groups expressed hepatocyte-
specific markers, but cells cultured on plates had lower positive signals than those 
cultured on microplatforms, suggesting a correlation between the differentiation 
capacity of MSCs and the perfused hepatic differentiation medium [94].  
 
Furthermore, Giobbe et al. 2015 [76] obtained directly functional hepatocyte-like cells 
from human PSCs, differentiated through a reliable microfluidic-based process. They 
observed that within microfluidics, human PSCs differentiated more effectively into the 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
hepatic lineages (hepatocyte- and cholangiocyte-like cells) with higher hepatic marker 
expression and shorter differentiation time than conventional cell cultures [76].  
 
In addition, the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of human albumin (ALB) 
secretion for hESC-derived hepatocyte-like cells indicated a higher secretion under 
the optimized media perfusion conditions than the static conditions [76]. The 
measurement of cytochrome P450-3A (CYP-3A) and ALB positive cells differentiated 
under both static and microfluidic conditions also showed a higher proportion of CYP-
3A and ALB positive cells within microfluidics [76]. This platform provided a suitable 
microenvironment to regulate the human PSC’s fate toward hepatic development and 
further development of functional mature liver-on-chip, [76,95] as evidenced by the 
screening of acetaminophen toxicity on hESC-derived hepatic cells. A significantly 
higher toxicity of acetaminophen was detected in microchannels under the flow 
condition compared to the static condition. 
 
Hepatocyte-like cells derived from SCs cultured on-chip are still difficult to obtain [81]. 
Furthermore, the liver function depends on the vascular perfusion, which complicates 
the use of SCs in liver-on-a-chip systems [88,96]. The therapeutic applications of SCs 
for liver-on-a-chip systems require a better comprehension of microenvironmental 
effects [97] Hence, the SC-based microfluidic platforms have been employed to 
reproduce the in vivo like microenvironment of the liver tissue [98]. 
  
Flaim et al 2005 [99] examined the effect of microenvironmental factors on the 
differentiation of embryonic stem cell (ESCs) to hepatocytes using an ECM microarray 
patterned with different combinations of ECM molecules such as fibronectin, laminin, 
collagen type I, collagen type III, and collagen type IV. They compared the function of 
primary rat hepatocytes and hepatogenic differentiation of mESCs in response to 
different combinations of ECM substrates [99]. 
 
Giobbe et al. 2015 [76] applied their microfluidic approach to investigate the 
differentiation of both human ESCs and iPSCs toward hepatic fate under frequency-
controlled medium delivery, which affected the colony size, cell density, and 
expression of pluripotency markers [76,95]. A robust differentiation of iPSC-derived 
hepatocytes in microfluidics is essential to meet the functional and genomic stability 
requirements as well as the scalability [76].  
 
Recently, microfluidic systems reconstructed iPSC-based liver on-chip models and 
integrated them to other tissues [100,101]. Hepatocyte-like cells derived from iPSCs, 
which have the potential of differentiation into different functional cells, [102,103] 
overcome the cell source limitations of SC-based multiorgans on-chip platforms. For 
example, the microphysiological HeLiVa platform interconnected iPSC-based 
vascular, liver, and cardiac microtissues to model the complexity and diversity of 
physiological responses to drugs under the in vivo like conditions [101]. The HeLiVa 
platform consisted of individual chambers with internal designs for different 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
microtissues interconnected via microfluidic channels [101]. The iPSC-derived 
hepatocyte-like cells showed a high potential to model infectious diseases such as 
hepatitis C infection [101]. 
 
3.5 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Vasculature-on-Chip 
 
Endothelial Cells (ECs) are required for the blood supply to form the lining of blood 
vessels, depending on the type of tissue as they modify their arrangement and 
numbers to expand and remodel the network of blood vessels and to enable the tissue 
growth, repair, and protection [104]. The physiology of endothelial cells is influenced 
by important factors such as the fluid-induced shear stress, the cyclic stretch, and all 
changes in the blood composition or its flow [105]. They are essential regulators of all 
these changes in the vascular system and thus it is important to enhance our 
understanding of endothelial cells physiology.[104,106]. 
 
Lowenthal et. al. 2016 [107] mentions that the vasculature-on-chip devices have many 
potential applications such as drug delivery, organ system modeling, and HT 
screening in response to microenvironmental cues and drug candidates. Vascular 
tissue engineering and SC therapeutics have enabled step-by-step progress in 
vascular regeneration [108]. Various SC technologies, such as pluripotent cells and 
multipotent SCs, have emerged as potential sources of vascular precursors [81]. SC 
technology offers three main approaches for generating vascular cells: direct 
differentiation, reprogramming, and transdifferentiation of SCs [107].  
 
Moreover, 
studies 
have 
employed 
biomaterial-based 
platforms, 
such 
as 
micropatterned surfaces [108] and electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds [107,110,111] to 
enhance vascular differentiation and cellular responses. 
 
Vascular tissue engineering often relies on multipotent SCs, which are more abundant 
than pluripotent ones since MSCs can differentiate into vascular cells under various 
conditions [112,113,114]. For example, Khan et al. 2011 [112] created a vascular 
tissue structure by randomly packing mesenchymal stromal cells and endothelial cells 
in a microfluidic device where they observed that the MSCs expressed smooth muscle 
cells markers and migrated towards the EC layer, indicating that the MSC-embedded 
module could enhance the functionality of the vascular network.  
 
Carrion et al. 2010 [113] regulated the perivascular SC niches in a 3D microfluidic 
device and achieved the formation of a mature vasculature with the help of a mimetic 
microenvironment by performing cultures of endothelial cells in patterned fibrin 
hydrogels along with fibroblasts and bone-marrow-derived MSCs, and performed 
vasculogenesis. They [113] also evaluated the role of α6β1 integrin receptor in the 
perivascular interactions between MSCs and capillaries, and proposed a novel method 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
for the modulation of adult SCs. In a similar microfluidic setting, Jeon et al. 2014 [114] 
investigated the influence of angiopoietin Ang-1, TGF-β1, and vascular endothelial 
growth factor on the differentiation of bone-marrow-derived hMSCs.  
 
Zhou and Niklason 2012 [115] reproduced the main biomechanical features of the 
vascular system, by applying cyclic stretching to MSCs; however, they suggested that 
the strain field applied to microchannels should be further optimized to improve the 
effect of mechanical stimulations on endothelial cell functions. 
 
One other study from Vunjak-Novakovic et al. 2013 [101] designed a multiorgan-on-
chip platform using human pluripotent SCs to generate liver and cardiac microtissues, 
which were functionally connected through an engineered vasculature-on-chip. Their 
goal was to create modular multitissue systems by incorporating vasculature for further 
investigations. In general, these SC-based vascular models have simulated different 
aspects of vascular pathophysiology and are being used for testing the effectiveness 
of therapeutics on modulating the vasculature microenvironment [81]. 
 
3.6 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Heart-on-Chip  
 
The heart, which forms first during fetal development, is also the leading cause of 
death worldwide [116]. Developing new therapies for heart diseases is difficult and 
OOC systems could be a successful solution for simulating cardiovascular diseases, 
if they can reproduce the key functions of the heart, such as its multicellular 
microarchitecture and environmental dynamics [116]. However, one major challenge 
of OOCs is the development of biomimetic heart-on-a-chips, which require complex 
replication of the human myocardial structure [117]. 
 
In Geraili et al. 2018 [81] it is mentioned that various types of stem cells, such as 
umbilical cord blood (UCB), iPSCs, ESCs, adult BM-derived cells, resident cardiac 
stem cells, endothelial progenitor cells, and mesenchymal cells, have been used to 
evaluate the potential of SC-based regeneration of injured myocardium. Mathur et al. 
2015 [118] developed a cardiac microphysiological system (MPS) and used hiPSC-
derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) to study cardiotoxicity and the response of 
cardiac cells to various model drugs. In their study the hiPSC-CMs successfully formed 
a 3D multilayer cardiac tissue with uniform beating ability, where the cells aligned 
uniaxially and the analysis of beating velocity revealed that the long axis of MPSs was 
aligned with the beating direction [118].  
 
Marsano et al. 2016 [119] developed a heart-on-a-chip platform to mimic the native 
mechanical microenvironment of the heart and to generate mature microengineered 
cardiac tissues using both neonatal rat and hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. In another 
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
study by Wan et al. 2011 [120], 2D and 3D microfluidic systems were developed to 
differentiate mESCs into cardiomyocytes (CMs) where their design enabled 
simultaneous comparison of the outcomes under different growth conditions, 
especially to examine the effect of cyclic stretch on cardiomyogenic differentiation.  
 
Pavesi et al. [121] used a three-layered microfluidics with a combination of electrical, 
mechanical, and biochemical stimuli to induce the differentiation of hBM-MSCs into 
cardiomyocytes, and their platform was able to modulate the orientation of cytoskeletal 
fibers and the level of gene expression depending on the combination of mechanical, 
electrical, and biochemical stimuli [121,122]. 
 
Heart-on-chips have also been used to simulate heart diseases. For instance, the 
cardiomyopathy of Barth syndrome was modeled in vitro by incorporating iPSCs and 
MTFs into microfluidics [123] where their model showed that the contractile weakness 
of cardiomyocytes for Barth syndrome resulted from the mutation in tafazzin-encoding 
genes which helped the development of new therapeutics. 
 
According to Geraili et al. 2018 [81], future SC-based heart-on-chip platforms should 
utilize the potential of cardiogenic SC sources, especially iPSCs, and focus on 
important aspects of the heart tissue function, such as the interactions between SC-
derived ECs and cardiomyocyte cells, the role of ESCs and iPSCs cocultured with 
endothelial vessel networks on the function of human cardiac tissue, and the synthesis 
of 3D muscle heart tissues consisting of cardiomyocytes, embryonic fibroblasts and 
ECs.  
 
As explained by Geraili et al. [81], new co-culture methods should be implemented to 
determine the contribution of fibroblasts, ECs, and smooth muscle cells to the 
maturation of CMs and engineering of functional cardiac tissues, as well as new 
characterization techniques compatible with microfluidic systems should be integrated 
to measure in real-time parameters such as the mature contractile properties and 
efficient electrical conductance where the integration of biosensors to the heart-on-a-
chip can enable long-term monitoring of SC functions and help to advance CM 
maturation. 
 
3.7 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Blood–Brain Barrier-on-Chip  
 
Blood–Brain Barrier (BBB) is a distinctive property of the blood vessels that belong to 
the neurovascular unit in the central nervous system and its main role is to isolate the 
brain from the blood, protect the brain from harmful substances in the blood, and 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
maintain the brain’s equilibrium [81]. Neurodegenerative diseases can result from the 
damage in the specialized ECs that constitute the BBB as mentioned in [124].  
 
Scientists have tried to create BBB-on-chip models to simulate the in vivo BBB 
function, [125] however, most of these BBB models are not realistic, as they fail to 
reproduce some essential aspects of the BBB function and its interaction with the brain 
[126]. The incorporation of various technologies to the BBB-on-chip can improve the 
performance of the BBB models [81] these technologies comprise, among others, 3D 
hydrogels with embedded SCs, regulated combinatory signals to control the 
differentiation of SCs, fully adjustable and perfusable vascular chamber, brain tissue 
chamber for the molecular exchange, electronic systems to monitor the barrier function 
in real time, and biosensors to detect the biological, physical, and chemical changes 
of the microenvironment. 
 
Human multipotent or pluripotent SCs have enhanced the functionality of in vitro BBB–
brain models, but only a few studies have employed SCs for the fabrication of BBB-
on-chip systems [81]. In Brown et al. 2015 [22] they developed a BBB-on-chip that 
consisted of two microchannels separated by a thin porous membrane, allowing the 
independent perfusion in both chambers. Primary human-derived microvascular ECs 
were cultured in the vascular chamber, while pericytes, hiPSC-derived neurons, and 
astrocytes within the collagen I matrix were seeded in the brain chamber where the 
microfluidic system supplied the shear forces required for the barrier formation, as well 
as the paracrine factors needed for the long-term and reliable differentiation of the 
BBB [22] .  
 
The device in Brown et al. 2015 [22] can also be also used to examine the effect of 
drugs on BBB permeability and neuronal activities. The recent advances in SC 
technologies such as iPSCs have opened up opportunities to design and construct 
diseased models of the BBB, but more research in human stem-based BBB models is 
necessary to model neurodegenerative disorders and evaluate the effectiveness of 
drug candidates [126]. 
 
The development of SC-based BBB-on-chip systems is still in its early stages and the 
human BBB during the developmental stage emerges from the multicellular 
interactions among different cell types, including immature ECs, pericytes, NPCs, and 
neuronal cells [81]. The progress in stem cell research and co-culturing [126] 
techniques should be integrated into future microfluidic-based BBB systems to 
enhance our comprehension of the BBB development and function, to understand how 
different cell types participate in the BBB induction, and to reveal the differentiation 
mechanism of NPCs to mature neurons and astrocytes. In addition, the protocols for 
differentiation of hPSCs to ECs with reliable BBB characteristics should be established 
to enable the study of the BBB development for future modeling of the interaction of 
brain cells and the BBB [126]. 
 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
3.8 Stem Cells (SCs) based on Skin-on-Chip  
 
The realistic reproduction of the skin tissue is crucial, as it is the human body’s largest 
tissue and the first barrier exposed to cosmetics and therapeutics [81]. Skin grafts 
have been applied in severe burns and wound healing as mentioned in [67] However, 
there is a demand for new sets of engineered skin tissues to model skin-related 
diseases and to test the penetration and toxicity of a large set of drugs and cosmetics 
where one potential approach is to use the power of biomimetic skin-on-a-chip 
platforms for performing HT assays to examine various aspects of drug development 
and disease modeling [127].  
 
Skin tissues have also been integrated in several multiorgan platforms with the aim of 
investigating the cross-talk and metabolic activities of the skin tissue with other tissues 
in the body such as the liver and kidney [127]. While microfluidic devices have 
enhanced the function of engineered skin tissue models, several challenges need to 
be solved and finding easily available and reliable cell sources that are also cost 
effective is a challenge for the further advancement of skin tissue models [81]. SCs 
are promising candidates as they can differentiate into many cell types.[92] The 
development of iPSCs has increased the potential of skin tissues to model skin 
diseases in vitro [128]. Also iPSC-derived fibroblasts and keratinocytes cultured within 
collagen scaffolds were fabricated on-chip [129,130]. In these studies the collagen 
was seeded with fibroblasts and shaped around the hydrogel and when the hydrogel 
dissolved, a dermal compartment consisting of an open microchannel was created. 
Finally, iPSC-derived endothelial cells were injected into the microchannel to form a 
vascular-like barrier. The model was used to evaluate the interactions of drug 
candidates with the SC-based skin model [129,130].  
 
In another model, a vascularized SC-based skin model was fabricated and connected 
to a neural network system to study the cross-talk of the skin tissue with the sensory 
nerves via brain–skin neuroendocrine pathways [131] To model this interaction, 
peripheral neurons from iPSC-derived neural SCs and Schwann cells were 
differentiated and incorporated into the skin model and Langerhans cells and hair 
follicles were also included in the model using iPSC cells [129,132] 
 
The therapeutic application of SCs for skin repair is improved by the inclusion of 
biomaterials that provide enhanced cell–matrix and cell–cell communications [81]. 
Collagen-based dermal equivalents were used as the scaffold to investigate the 
efficacy of using MSCs for skin equivalents tissue engineering [133]. When the two 
dermal equivalents were cocultured with keratinocytes, only the MSCs embedded in 
the collagen scaffold improved the function of dermal–epidermal [133]. The results 
showed that the proliferation, ECM deposition, and paracrine activity in a biomaterial-
based scaffold need to be truly considered for directing the SC differentiation [133].  
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
In addition, another 3D microfluidic device was developed to characterize perivascular 
SC niches in vitro [134]. Through α6β1 integrin and laminin-based interactions, MSCs 
cocultured with ECs within fibrin hydrogels induced angiogenesis within the 
microfluidic network. Fibrin-based gels were used to explore the interaction of hASCs 
and ECs in the skin tissue culture and to manipulate ASCs’ differentiation. The 
incorporation of 3D scaffolds was shown to be essential for regulation of the ASCs 
niche in the absence of exogenous GFs [134,135]. 
 
In summary, despite the use of various stem cells to enhance skin equivalent models, 
we are not aware of any SC-based skin-on-chip that replicated the entire skin 
functionality and, considering the significance of the skin and the new features of SCs, 
there is a large potential in this underexplored field [134,135,81]. The integration of 
tissue engineering methods into microfluidic devices can be considerably 
advantageous to create more physiologically realistic skin models [134]. 
 
3.9 iPCs ‐derived 3D cultures for cardiac regeneration 
 
Ong et al. 2017 [136] reported that three-dimensional (3D) culture systems have 
gained popularity in recent years as they aim to close the gap between the monolayer 
cultures and the tissue and to reproduce more physiological conditions. 3D cultures 
provide a suitable microenvironment that enables optimal cell proliferation, 
differentiation, and function, and that facilitates the generation of tissue-like structures 
in vitro [136,137]. The cells in this environment receive and transmit signals that 
support the formation of tissue-like architecture with minimal interference, as indicated 
by [137].  
 
In recent years, spheroids that mimic cardiac tissue functionality have been developed 
from hiPSCs or from hiPSC-derived CMs, as demonstrated by [138]. Nguyen et al. 
2014 [139] showed that “cardiospheres” enhanced CMs’ differentiation from human 
iPSCs. CMs differentiating in 2D cultures were highly heterogeneous populations with 
only 10–40% CMs; however, when converted into spheroid cultures, the percentage 
of CMs increased to 80–100%, as reported by them.  
 
There are various strategies that can improve the maturation of the differentiated 
cardiac tissues. For instance, a previous study [140,141] revealed that early hiPSC-
derived CMs exposed to electromechanical conditioning, i.e., stretching and electrical 
stimulation mimicking increased intensity training, attained more mature phenotype. 
These cultures [140,141] exhibited adult-tissue-like properties, such as gene 
expression profiles, organization of sarcomeres, and electromechanical properties 
and response to pharmacological agents.  
 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
A similar approach has been also applied directly to hiPSC-CM spheroids, as 
described by [142], where preformed spheroids were subjected to cyclic uniaxial 
mechanical stretching and electrical simulation for 7 days. The resulting cultures [142] 
displayed multiple maturation markers, such as enhanced expression of key proteins 
like gap junction and contractile machinery proteins and ultrastructure and alignment 
of fibrils.  
 
Adult heart consists of not only CMs that account for 70–80% of the volume of the 
tissue but also fibroblast and endothelial cells that actually represent a larger number 
of cells, as stated by [143]. For example, [144] presented spheroid models composed 
of iPSC-derived CMs, fibroblasts, and primary endothelial cells reflecting the ratios of 
these cell types in vivo. Their study implies that spheroids resemble important aspects 
of the human heart morphology, such as microvascular network formation and 
biochemistry and pharmacological response.  
 
Another recent co-culture study of hiPSC-derived CMs with primary cardiac fibroblasts 
verified improved tissue-like characteristics of the cardiac spheroids, as shown by 
[145]. 
 
3.10 Limitations of SCs in OoCs  
 
The variability in efficiency and robustness of differentiation protocols is one of the 
major challenges to the application of stem cells since the differentiation of stem cells 
into specific, mature cell phenotypes is also restricted [29]. For instance, the heart 
consists of a combination of cardiomyocytes, cardiac fibroblasts, and endothelial cells 
[29]. There are well-established differentiation protocols for cardiomyocytes and 
endothelial cells, but not for cardiac fibroblasts although some studies have managed 
to generate fibroblast-like cells that mimic the morphology of cardiac fibroblasts [36].  
 
However, the absence of specific cell type markers for cardiac fibroblasts, apart from 
myofibroblast and mesenchymal genes that are shared by all fibroblast cell lineages, 
makes it hard to assess the efficiency of differentiation protocols [29]. Even in cells 
that have clear markers, such as cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells, the 
differentiation methods used by different research groups vary, including the small 
molecules that are used to trigger differentiation and the environment in which the cells 
are cultured according to [29]. 
 
A key challenge is to achieve a mature adult phenotype in the cells that have 
differentiated into the desired cell type, so that they resemble the adult organ which, 
at the same time, poses a difficulty for incorporating these cells into an OOC model 
[41]. However, various research groups are developing ways to promote the 
maturation of cardiomyocytes, such as applying electrical or mechanical forces, 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
restricting their geometry, increasing the expression of microRNAs related to 
maturation, adding growth hormone, and extending the culture duration [146,147]. 
 
Some studies have also demonstrated that 3D cardiac tissues can attain advanced 
maturation by applying electrical stimulation to tissues composed of early stage iPSC-
cardiomyocytes [140] and that altering the afterload on cardiac tissues can enhance 
maturation or trigger a pathological condition [148]. Another issue, besides the relative 
immaturity of most iPSC-cardiomyocytes, is the separation of specific cell subtypes 
[29]. It is unclear which subtypes should be integrated into OOC models and in what 
ratios, even after differentiation into distinct subtypes [29]. 
 
The heterogeneity of neural subtypes in ESC- and iPSC-derived neuronal cells is 
another challenge, as existing protocols for specific subtypes have sometimes shown 
low efficiency [29]. Likewise, stem cell-derived hepatocytes are often immature, 
expressing more fetal than adult markers and having lower metabolic activity than 
primary cultures []. These cells are similar to the cardiomyocytes derived from iPSCs 
and ESCs, which also lack a mature phenotype (Wnorowski et al. 2018 [149]. 
 
A further limitation of stem cell-derived cells in OOCs is the absence of native 3D tissue 
structure, as opposed to tissue biopsies that have the native extracellular matrix and 
stem cell-based cultures that usually rely on 2D culture conditions in their derivation 
protocols [29]. To address this issue, some laboratories have created microtissues 
that contain iPSC-derived cells and an extracellular matrix [29].  
 
For example, some heart OOC models use microtissues that enhance the relevance 
and maturation of iPSC- and ESC-derived cardiomyocytes by providing a 3D scaffold 
[150]. However, this is not a common practice yet, and the parameters of these models 
need to be optimized to fully represent human physiology [29]. 
 
Another aspect to consider for using stem cells in OOCs is whether differentiation will 
take place on or off the chip. On-chip differentiation would allow precise control of the 
cell microenvironment and culture conditions, including the chemical, electrical, and 
mechanical cues for differentiation, while measuring various functional outputs at the 
same time [81,151]. For instance, Yoshimitsu et al. optimized the surface coating and 
media flow rate for expanding human iPSCs in a microfluidic chip. They showed that 
the iPSCs differentiated into extra-embryonic trophoblast lineage cells and responded 
to anti-tumor drugs as expected in the microfluidic chip [151].  
 
Giobbe et al. 2015 [76] studied the effect of perfusion frequency on iPSCs and ESCs, 
and found that it influenced the pluripotency gene expression and the homogeneous 
differentiation of the cells into ectodermal, mesodermal, and endodermal lineages in 
differentiation media. They also achieved successful differentiation into functional 
cardiomyocytes with about 65% efficiency, and on-chip differentiation of eight human 
iPSC lines into hepatocyte-like cells [72].  
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
 
These studies demonstrate the potential of microfluidics for stem cell culture and 
differentiation. However, they also highlight some of the design challenges for 
microfluidic OOC systems, especially for multi-organ devices or single OOCs with 
more than one cell type. The device design will become much more complex due to 
the different flow rates, scaffolding, culture time, and biophysical and chemical stimuli 
needed for differentiating different cell types, making it difficult to adopt the technology 
widely [29].  
 
A possible solution would be to culture individual OOCs and combine them into a multi-
organ system after all the components have differentiated, as proposed by Loskill et 
al. in their μOrgano chip design [152]. However, this design would still face the 
problems of synchronizing the differentiation of the multiple components and 
connecting the organs in a feasible way and it would also not solve the issues of 
deriving multiple cell types for a single organ model and optimizing the cell culture 
media to support the survival of all cells when the organs are connected [29].  
 
It also does not tackle the problems of how to obtain multiple cell types for a single 
organ model and how to adjust the cell culture media to support the survival of all cells 
once the organs are connected [29]. Moreover, a question that is relevant for all OOC 
models, especially for those based on stem cells, is if we are interested in modeling 
the general population, which cells do we use? Regardless of the use of primary cells 
or stem cells, there is a natural variability in genotype among patients, which can 
potentially lead to significant differences in phenotype, such as in drug metabolism 
and response [152]. Drug testing for effectiveness can use cells derived from patients 
as a model, but finding representative cell sources for toxicity testing will be more 
difficult and may need the use of population-based genomics and computational 
modeling [153].  
 
Disease modeling and mechanism studies using OOC models will also have to include 
cells from various patients to show consistency in mechanism across patients with 
different genetic backgrounds [29]. The derivation of iPSC from blood or skin samples 
can last from weeks to months, and differentiation protocols often take several more 
weeks while the conventional differentiation protocols also generally produce a small 
number of cells, especially for quiescent cell types such as cardiomyocytes 
[29,152,153].  
 
These factors reduce the feasibility of commercial production of stem cells and their 
derivatives and make it hard for research groups unfamiliar with stem cell technology 
to start using it [29,152,153]. Therefore, research groups that want to use stem cells 
in OOC development should be ready for the slower progress rate that comes with 
their use. Despite these obstacles, the integration of stem cells into OOC devices is 
not unfeasible, and will eventually result in increased usefulness of these devices as 
clinical models [29,152,153]. 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
4. References 
 
1. Gibson, W. M. (1971). Can personalized medicine survive?. Canadian Family Physician, 17(8), 
29. 
2. Langreth, R., & Waldholz, M. (1999). New era of personalized medicine: targeting drugs for 
each unique genetic profile. The oncologist, 4(5), 426-427. 
3. Takahashi, K., & Yamanaka, S. (2006). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse 
embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. cell, 126(4), 663-676. 
4. Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M., Narita, M., Ichisaka, T., Tomoda, K., & Yamanaka, S. 
(2007). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. cell, 
131(5), 861-872. 
5. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S (2013) Induced pluripotent stem cells 
in medicine and biology. Development 140:2457. https ://doi. 
org/10.1242/dev.09255 1 
6. Yu, J., Vodyanik, M. A., Smuga-Otto, K., Antosiewicz-Bourget, J., Frane, J. L., Tian, S., ... & 
Thomson, J. A. (2007). Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells. 
science, 318(5858), 1917-1920. 
7. Ardalani, H., Sengupta, S., Harms, V., Vickerman, V., Thomson, J. A., & Murphy, W. L. (2019). 
3-D culture and endothelial cells improve maturity of human pluripotent stem cell-derived 
hepatocytes. Acta biomaterialia, 95, 371-381. 
8. Kim, K., Doi, A., Wen, B., Ng, K., Zhao, R., Cahan, P., ... & Daley, G. Q. (2010). Epigenetic 
memory in induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature, 467(7313), 285-290. 
9. Abadie, V., Kim, S. M., Lejeune, T., Palanski, B. A., Ernest, J. D., Tastet, O., ... & Jabri, B. 
(2020). IL-15, gluten and HLA-DQ8 drive tissue destruction in coeliac disease. Nature, 
578(7796), 600-604. 
10. Qu, G., Wang, S., Zhou, Z., Jiang, D., Liao, A., & Luo, J. (2022). Comparing mouse and human 
tissue-resident γδ T cells. Frontiers in Immunology, 13, 891687. 
11. Finkbeiner, S. R., Hill, D. R., Altheim, C. H., Dedhia, P. H., Taylor, M. J., Tsai, Y. H., ... & 
Spence, J. R. (2015). Transcriptome-wide analysis reveals hallmarks of human intestine 
development and maturation in vitro and in vivo. Stem cell reports, 4(6), 1140-1155. 
12. Polo, J. M., Anderssen, E., Walsh, R. M., Schwarz, B. A., Nefzger, C. M., Lim, S. M., ... & 
Hochedlinger, K. (2012). A molecular roadmap of reprogramming somatic cells into iPS cells. 
Cell, 151(7), 1617-1632. 
13. van Berlo, D., Nguyen, V. V., Gkouzioti, V., Leineweber, K., Verhaar, M. C., & van Balkom, B. 
W. (2021). Stem cells, organoids, and organ-on-a-chip models for personalized in vitro drug 
testing. Current Opinion in Toxicology, 28, 7-14. 
14. Liu, L., Yu, L., Li, Z., Li, W., & Huang, W. (2021). Patient-derived organoid (PDO) platforms to 
facilitate clinical decision making. Journal of translational medicine, 19(1), 1-9. 
15. Uetrecht, J., & Naisbitt, D. J. (2013). Idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions: current concepts. 
Pharmacological reviews, 65(2), 779-808. 
16. Barker, N., Huch, M., Kujala, P., van de Wetering, M., Snippert, H. J., van Es, J. H., ... & Clevers, 
H. (2010). Lgr5+ ve stem cells drive self-renewal in the stomach and build long-lived gastric 
units in vitro. Cell stem cell, 6(1), 25-36. 
17. Gioeli, D., Snow, C. J., Simmers, M. B., Hoang, S. A., Figler, R. A., Allende, J. A., ... & Wamhoff, 
B. R. (2019). Development of a multicellular pancreatic tumor microenvironment system using 
patient-derived tumor cells. Lab on a Chip, 19(7), 1193-1204. 
18. Roller, D. G., Hoang, S. A., Rawls, K. D., Owen, K. A., Simmers, M. B., Figler, R. A., ... & Gioeli, 
D. (2021). Validation of a multicellular tumor microenvironment system for modeling patient 
tumor biology and drug response. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 5535. 
19. Gaio, N., Van Meer, B., Quirós Solano, W., Bergers, L., Van de Stolpe, A., Mummery, C., ... & 
Dekker, R. (2016). Cytostretch, an organ-on-chip platform. Micromachines, 7(7), 120. 
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
20. Wu, Q., Liu, J., Wang, X., Feng, L., Wu, J., Zhu, X., ... & Gong, X. (2020). Organ-on-a-chip: 
Recent breakthroughs and future prospects. Biomedical engineering online, 19, 1-19. 
21. Lu, S., Cuzzucoli, F., Jiang, J., Liang, L. G., Wang, Y., Kong, M., ... & Wang, S. (2018). 
Development of a biomimetic liver tumor-on-a-chip model based on decellularized liver matrix 
for toxicity testing. Lab on a Chip, 18(22), 3379-3392. 
22. Brown, J. A., Pensabene, V., Markov, D. A., Allwardt, V., Neely, M. D., Shi, M., ... & Wikswo, J. 
P. (2015). Recreating blood-brain barrier physiology and structure on chip: A novel 
neurovascular microfluidic bioreactor. Biomicrofluidics, 9(5). 
23. Bauer, S., Wennberg Huldt, C., Kanebratt, K. P., Durieux, I., Gunne, D., Andersson, S., ... & 
Andersson, T. B. (2017). Functional coupling of human pancreatic islets and liver spheroids on-
a-chip: Towards a novel human ex vivo type 2 diabetes model. Scientific reports, 7(1), 14620. 
24. Mazzola M, Di Pasquale E (2020) Toward cardiac regeneration: combination of pluripotent stem 
cell-based therapies and bioengineering strategies. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 8:455. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe .2020.00455 
25. Wiegand C, Banerjee I (2019) Recent advances in the applications of iPSC technology. Curr 
Opin Biotechnol 60:250–258. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbi o.2019.05.011 
26. Fujita J, Tohyama S, Kishino Y, Okada M, Morita Y (2019) Concise review: genetic and 
epigenetic regulation of cardiac differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cells 
37:992–1002. https ://doi.org/10.1002/stem.3027 
27. Park M, Yoon YS (2018) Cardiac regeneration with human pluripotent stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes. Korean Circ J 48:974–988. https ://doi.org/10.4070/kcj.2018.0312 
28. Sekine H, Shimizu T, Dobashi I, Matsuura K, Hagiwara N, Takahashi M, Kobayashi E, Yamato 
M, Okano T (2011) Cardiac cell sheet transplantation improves damaged heart function via 
superior cell survival in comparison with dissociated cell injection. Tissue Eng Part A 17:2973–
2980. https ://doi.org/10.1089/ten.tea.2010.0659 
29. Wnorowski, A., Yang, H., & Wu, J. C. (2019). Progress, obstacles, and limitations in the use of 
stem cells in organ-on-a-chip models. Advanced drug delivery reviews, 140, 3-11. 
30. Guo, X., Gonzalez, M., Stancescu, M., Vandenburgh, H. H., & Hickman, J. J. (2011). 
Neuromuscular junction formation between human stem cell-derived motoneurons and human 
skeletal muscle in a defined system. Biomaterials, 32(36), 9602-9611. 
31. Sung, J. H., Esch, M. B., & Shuler, M. L. (2010). Integration of in silico and in vitro platforms for 
pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic modeling. Expert opinion on drug metabolism & 
toxicology, 6(9), 1063-1081. 
32. Cosgrove, B. D., Griffith, L. G., & Lauffenburger, D. A. (2008). Fusing tissue engineering and 
systems biology toward fulfilling their promise. Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering, 1, 33-
41. 
33. Horvath, P., Aulner, N., Bickle, M., Davies, A. M., Nery, E. D., Ebner, D., ... & Carragher, N. O. 
(2016). Screening out irrelevant cell-based models of disease. Nature reviews Drug discovery, 
15(11), 751-769. 
34. Csöbönyeiová, M., Polák, Š., & Danišovič, L. U. (2016). Toxicity testing and drug screening 
using iPSC-derived hepatocytes, cardiomyocytes, and neural cells. Canadian journal of 
physiology and pharmacology, 94(7), 687-694. 
35. Matsa, E., Burridge, P. W., Yu, K. H., Ahrens, J. H., Termglinchan, V., Wu, H., ... & Wu, J. C. 
(2016). Transcriptome profiling of patient-specific human iPSC-cardiomyocytes predicts 
individual drug safety and efficacy responses in vitro. Cell stem cell, 19(3), 311-325. 
36. Sharma, A., Burridge, P. W., McKeithan, W. L., Serrano, R., Shukla, P., Sayed, N., ... & Wu, J. 
C. (2017). High-throughput screening of tyrosine kinase inhibitor cardiotoxicity with human 
induced pluripotent stem cells. Science translational medicine, 9(377), eaaf2584. 
37. Pittenger, M. F., Mackay, A. M., Beck, S. C., Jaiswal, R. K., Douglas, R., Mosca, J. D., ... & 
Marshak, D. R. (1999). Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells. science, 
284(5411), 143-147. 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
38. Wagner, W., & Ho, A. D. (2007). Mesenchymal stem cell preparations—comparing apples and 
oranges. Stem cell reviews, 3, 239-248. 
39. Thomson, J. A., Itskovitz-Eldor, J., Shapiro, S. S., Waknitz, M. A., Swiergiel, J. J., Marshall, V. 
S., & Jones, J. M. (1998). Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts. science, 
282(5391), 1145-1147. 
40. Coordination of data collection and analysis Gokhale Paul J 5, Coordination of material 
distribution and sample collection Healy Lyn E 1, & scientific management of the ISCI project 
was provided by a steering committee comprising Andrews Peter W 5 Benvenisty Nissim 9 
Mallon Barbara S 11 Mckay Ronald DG 11 Pera Martin F 35 36 Rossant Janet 39 Semb Henrik 
41 Stacey Glyn N 1. (2007). Characterization of human embryonic stem cell lines by the 
International Stem Cell Initiative. Nature biotechnology, 25(7), 803-816. 
41. Scott, C. W., Peters, M. F., & Dragan, Y. P. (2013). Human induced pluripotent stem cells and 
their use in drug discovery for toxicity testing. Toxicology letters, 219(1), 49-58. 
42. Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M., Narita, M., Ichisaka, T., Tomoda, K., & Yamanaka, S. 
(2007). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. cell, 
131(5), 861-872. 
43. Churko, J. M., Lee, J., Ameen, M., Gu, M., Venkatasubramanian, M., Diecke, S., ... & Wu, J. C. 
(2017). Transcriptomic and epigenomic differences in human induced pluripotent stem cells 
generated from six reprogramming methods. Nature biomedical engineering, 1(10), 826-837. 
44. Zhao, M. T., Chen, H., Liu, Q., Shao, N. Y., Sayed, N., Wo, H. T., ... & Wu, J. C. (2017). 
Molecular and functional resemblance of differentiated cells derived from isogenic human 
iPSCs and SCNT-derived ESCs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(52), 
E11111-E11120. 
45. Narsinh, K. H., Plews, J., & Wu, J. C. (2011). Comparison of human induced pluripotent and 
embryonic stem cells: fraternal or identical twins?. Molecular Therapy, 19(4), 635-638. 
46. Burridge, P. W., Matsa, E., Shukla, P., Lin, Z. C., Churko, J. M., Ebert, A. D., ... & Wu, J. C. 
(2014). Chemically defined generation of human cardiomyocytes. Nature methods, 11(8), 855-
860. 
47. Choudhury, Y., Toh, Y. C., Xing, J., Qu, Y., Poh, J., Li, H., ... & Tan, M. H. (2017). Patient-
specific hepatocyte-like cells derived from induced pluripotent stem cells model pazopanib-
mediated hepatotoxicity. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 41238. 
48. Ware, B. R., Berger, D. R., & Khetani, S. R. (2015). Prediction of drug-induced liver injury in 
micropatterned co-cultures containing iPSC-derived human hepatocytes. Toxicological 
sciences, 145(2), 252-262. 
49. Brennand, K. J., Simone, A., Jou, J., Gelboin-Burkhart, C., Tran, N., Sangar, S., ... & Gage, F. 
H. (2011). Modelling schizophrenia using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature, 
473(7346), 221-225. 
50. Sarkar, A., Mei, A., Paquola, A. C., Stern, S., Bardy, C., Klug, J. R., ... & Gage, F. H. (2018). 
Efficient generation of CA3 neurons from human pluripotent stem cells enables modeling of 
hippocampal connectivity in vitro. Cell stem cell, 22(5), 684-697. 
51. Kondo, T., Asai, M., Tsukita, K., Kutoku, Y., Ohsawa, Y., Sunada, Y., ... & Inoue, H. (2013). 
Modeling Alzheimer’s disease with iPSCs reveals stress phenotypes associated with 
intracellular Aβ and differential drug responsiveness. Cell stem cell, 12(4), 487-496. 
52. Sun, N., Yazawa, M., Liu, J., Han, L., Sanchez-Freire, V., Abilez, O. J., ... & Wu, J. C. (2012). 
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells as a model for familial dilated cardiomyopathy. 
Science translational medicine, 4(130), 130ra47-130ra47. 
53. Hughes, D. J., Kostrzewski, T., & Sceats, E. L. (2017). Opportunities and challenges in the 
wider adoption of liver and interconnected microphysiological systems. Experimental Biology 
and Medicine, 242(16), 1593-1604. 
54. Luni, C., Serena, E., & Elvassore, N. (2014). Human-on-chip for therapy development and 
fundamental science. Current opinion in biotechnology, 25, 45-50. 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
55. Bavli, D., Prill, S., Ezra, E., Levy, G., Cohen, M., Vinken, M., ... & Nahmias, Y. (2016). Real-
time monitoring of metabolic function in liver-on-chip microdevices tracks the dynamics of 
mitochondrial dysfunction. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(16), E2231-
E2240. 
56. Lee, J. S., Romero, R., Han, Y. M., Kim, H. C., Kim, C. J., Hong, J. S., & Huh, D. (2016). 
Placenta-on-a-chip: a novel platform to study the biology of the human placenta. The Journal 
of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal Medicine, 29(7), 1046-1054. 
57. Zhang, C., Zhao, Z., Rahim, N. A. A., van Noort, D., & Yu, H. (2009). Towards a human-on-
chip: culturing multiple cell types on a chip with compartmentalized microenvironments. Lab on 
a Chip, 9(22), 3185-3192. 
58. Miller, P. G., & Shuler, M. L. (2016). Design and demonstration of a pumpless 14 compartment 
microphysiological system. Biotechnology and bioengineering, 113(10), 2213-2227. 
59. Chiu, D. T., Jeon, N. L., Huang, S., Kane, R. S., Wargo, C. J., Choi, I. S., ... & Whitesides, G. 
M. (2000). Patterned deposition of cells and proteins onto surfaces by using three-dimensional 
microfluidic systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 97(6), 2408-2413. 
60. Kane, B. J., Zinner, M. J., Yarmush, M. L., & Toner, M. (2006). Liver-specific functional studies 
in a microfluidic array of primary mammalian hepatocytes. Analytical chemistry, 78(13), 4291-
4298. 
61. Radisic, M., Deen, W., Langer, R., & Vunjak-Novakovic, G. (2005). Mathematical model of 
oxygen distribution in engineered cardiac tissue with parallel channel array perfused with 
culture medium containing oxygen carriers. American Journal of Physiology-Heart and 
Circulatory Physiology, 288(3), H1278-H1289. 
62. Xiao, R. R., Zeng, W. J., Li, Y. T., Zou, W., Wang, L., Pei, X. F., ... & Huang, W. H. (2013). 
Simultaneous generation of gradients with gradually changed slope in a microfluidic device for 
quantifying axon response. Analytical chemistry, 85(16), 7842-7850. 
63. Kim, H. J., Huh, D., Hamilton, G., & Ingber, D. E. (2012). Human gut-on-a-chip inhabited by 
microbial flora that experiences intestinal peristalsis-like motions and flow. Lab on a Chip, 
12(12), 2165-2174. 
64. Bhatia, S. N., & Ingber, D. E. (2014). Microfluidic organs-on-chips. Nature biotechnology, 32(8), 
760-772. 
65. Huh, D., Hamilton, G. A., & Ingber, D. E. (2011). From 3D cell culture to organs-on-chips. 
Trends in cell biology, 21(12), 745-754. 
66. Neužil, P., Giselbrecht, S., Länge, K., Huang, T. J., & Manz, A. (2012). Revisiting lab-on-a-chip 
technology for drug discovery. Nature reviews Drug discovery, 11(8), 620-632. 
67. Polak, J. M., & Bishop, A. E. (2006). Stem cells and tissue engineering: past, present, and 
future. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1068(1), 352-366. 
68. van de Stolpe, A., & den Toonder, J. (2013). Workshop meeting report Organs-on-Chips: 
human disease models. Lab on a chip, 13(18), 3449-3470. 
69. Markowicz-Piasecka, M., M Huttunen, K., Mateusiak, L., Mikiciuk-Olasik, E., & Sikora, J. (2017). 
Is metformin a perfect drug? Updates in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Current 
pharmaceutical design, 23(17), 2532-2550. 
70. Yuan, D., & Xu, B. (2016). Heterotypic supramolecular hydrogels. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry B, 4(34), 5638-5649. 
71. Lee, K. H., Lee, K. H., Lee, J., Choi, H., Lee, D., Park, Y., & Lee, S. H. (2014). Integration of 
microfluidic chip with biomimetic hydrogel for 3D controlling and monitoring of cell alignment 
and migration. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A, 102(4), 1164-1172. 
72. Giobbe, G. G., Michielin, F., Luni, C., Giulitti, S., Martewicz, S., Dupont, S., ... & Elvassore, N. 
(2015). Functional differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells on a chip. Nature methods, 
12(7), 637-640. 
73. Ong, S. M., Zhang, C., Toh, Y. C., Kim, S. H., Foo, H. L., Tan, C. H., ... & Yu, H. (2008). A gel-
free 3D microfluidic cell culture system. Biomaterials, 29(22), 3237-3244. 
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
74. van Noort, D., Ong, S. M., Zhang, C., Zhang, S., Arooz, T., & Yu, H. (2009). Stem cells in 
microfluidics. Biotechnology progress, 25(1), 52-60. 
75. Huh, D., Torisawa, Y. S., Hamilton, G. A., Kim, H. J., & Ingber, D. E. (2012). Microengineered 
physiological biomimicry: organs-on-chips. Lab on a Chip, 12(12), 2156-2164. 
76. Giobbe, G. G., Michielin, F., Luni, C., Giulitti, S., Martewicz, S., Dupont, S., ... & Elvassore, N. 
(2015). Functional differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells on a chip. Nature methods, 
12(7), 637-640. 
77. Sasai, Y. (2013). Cytosystems dynamics in self-organization of tissue architecture. Nature, 
493(7432), 318-326. 
78. Eiraku, M., Takata, N., Ishibashi, H., Kawada, M., Sakakura, E., Okuda, S., ... & Sasai, Y. 
(2011). Self-organizing optic-cup morphogenesis in three-dimensional culture. Nature, 
472(7341), 51-56. 
79. Przybyla, L. M., & Voldman, J. (2012). Attenuation of extrinsic signaling reveals the importance 
of matrix remodeling on maintenance of embryonic stem cell self-renewal. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 109(3), 835-840. 
80. Moledina, F., Clarke, G., Oskooei, A., Onishi, K., Günther, A., & Zandstra, P. W. (2012). 
Predictive microfluidic control of regulatory ligand trajectories in individual pluripotent cells. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(9), 3264-3269. 
81. Geraili, A., Jafari, P., Hassani, M. S., Araghi, B. H., Mohammadi, M. H., Ghafari, A. M., ... & 
Sanati‐Nezhad, A. (2018). Controlling differentiation of stem cells for developing personalized 
organ‐on‐chip platforms. Advanced healthcare materials, 7(2), 1700426. 
82. Pamies, D., Hartung, T., & Hogberg, H. T. (2014). Biological and medical applications of a brain-
on-a-chip. Experimental biology and medicine, 239(9), 1096-1107. 
83. Park, J., Lee, B. K., Jeong, G. S., Hyun, J. K., Lee, C. J., & Lee, S. H. (2015). Three-dimensional 
brain-on-a-chip with an interstitial level of flow and its application as an in vitro model of 
Alzheimer's disease. Lab on a Chip, 15(1), 141-150. 
84. Tang, Y., & Bernaudin, M. (2007). Brain on a chip: a method to detect novel neuroprotective 
candidate targets. Neuroprotection Methods and Protocols, 153-166. 
85. Wheeler, B. C. (2008, August). Building a brain on a chip. In 2008 30th Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (pp. 1604-1606). IEEE. 
86. Shi, P., Nedelec, S., Wichterle, H., & Kam, L. C. (2010). Combined microfluidics/protein 
patterning platform for pharmacological interrogation of axon pathfinding. Lab on a Chip, 10(8), 
1005-1010. 
87. Shin, H. S., Kim, H. J., Min, S. K., Kim, S. H., Lee, B. M., & Jeon, N. L. (2010). Compartmental 
culture of embryonic stem cell-derived neurons in microfluidic devices for use in axonal biology. 
Biotechnology letters, 32, 1063-1070. 
88. Griffith, L. G., Wells, A., & Stolz, D. B. (2014). Engineering liver. Hepatology, 60(4), 1426-1434. 
89. Baccarani, U., Sanna, A., Cariani, A., Sainz-Barriga, M., Adani, G. L., Zambito, A. M., ... & 
Donini, A. (2003). Isolation of human hepatocytes from livers rejected for liver transplantation 
on a national basis: results of a 2-year experience. Liver Transplantation, 9(5), 506-512. 
90. DiMasi, J. A., Hansen, R. W., & Grabowski, H. G. (2003). The price of innovation: new estimates 
of drug development costs. Journal of health economics, 22(2), 151-185. 
91. Wu, M. H., Huang, S. B., & Lee, G. B. (2010). Microfluidic cell culture systems for drug research. 
Lab on a Chip, 10(8), 939-956. 
92. No, D. Y., Lee, S. A., Choi, Y. Y., Park, D., Jang, J. Y., Kim, D. S., & Lee, S. H. (2012). 
Functional 3D human primary hepatocyte spheroids made by co-culturing hepatocytes from 
partial hepatectomy specimens and human adipose-derived stem cells. PloS one, 7(12), 
e50723. 
93. Lucendo-Villarin, B., Rashidi, H., Cameron, K., & Hay, D. C. (2016). Pluripotent stem cell 
derived hepatocytes: using materials to define cellular differentiation and tissue engineering. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry B, 4(20), 3433-3442. 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
94. Ju, X., Li, D., Gao, N., Shi, Q., & Hou, H. (2008). Hepatogenic differentiation of mesenchymal 
stem cells using microfluidic chips. Biotechnology Journal: Healthcare Nutrition Technology, 
3(3), 383-391. 
95. Giobbe, G. G., Michielin, F., Elvassore, N., & Floreani, A. (2013). Differentiation Of Human 
Pluripotent Stem Cells Into Hepatic Cells And Development Of A Liver Tissue On A Chip. In 
EASL International Liver Congress 2013 (Vol. 58, pp. S14-S14). ELSEVIER SCIENCE BV, PO 
BOX 211, 1000 AE AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS. 
96. Ho, C. T., Lin, R. Z., Chen, R. J., Chin, C. K., Gong, S. E., Chang, H. Y., ... & Liu, C. H. (2013). 
Liver-cell patterning lab chip: mimicking the morphology of liver lobule tissue. Lab on a Chip, 
13(18), 3578-3587. 
97. Engler, A. J., Sen, S., Sweeney, H. L., & Discher, D. E. (2006). Matrix elasticity directs stem 
cell lineage specification. Cell, 126(4), 677-689. 
98. Park, D., Lim, J., Park, J. Y., & Lee, S. H. (2015). Concise review: stem cell microenvironment 
on a chip: current technologies for tissue engineering and stem cell biology. Stem cells 
translational medicine, 4(11), 1352-1368. 
99. Flaim, C. J., Chien, S., & Bhatia, S. N. (2005). An extracellular matrix microarray for probing 
cellular differentiation. Nature methods, 2(2), 119-125. 
100. 
Schwartz, R. E., Trehan, K., Andrus, L., Sheahan, T. P., Ploss, A., Duncan, S. A., ... & 
Bhatia, S. N. (2012). Modeling hepatitis C virus infection using human induced pluripotent stem 
cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(7), 2544-2548. 
101. 
Vunjak-Novakovic, G., Bhatia, S., Chen, C., & Hirschi, K. (2013). HeLiVa platform: 
integrated heart-liver-vascular systems for drug testing in human health and disease. Stem cell 
research & therapy, 4(1), 1-6. 
102. 
Mathur, A., Loskill, P., Hong, S., Lee, J. Y., Marcus, S. G., Dumont, L., ... & Healy, K. 
E. (2013). Human induced pluripotent stem cell-based microphysiological tissue models of 
myocardium and liver for drug development. Stem cell research & therapy, 4, 1-5. 
103. 
Berger, D. R., Ware, B. R., Davidson, M. D., Allsup, S. R., & Khetani, S. R. (2015). 
Enhancing the functional maturity of induced pluripotent stem cell–derived human hepatocytes 
by controlled presentation of cell–cell interactions in vitro. Hepatology, 61(4), 1370-1381. 
104. 
Alberts, B. (2017). Molecular biology of the cell. Garland science. 
105. 
Jiang, B., Zheng, W., Zhang, W., & Jiang, X. (2014). Organs on microfluidic chips: A 
mini review. Science China Chemistry, 57, 356-364. 
106. 
Michiels, C. (2003). Endothelial cell functions. Journal of cellular physiology, 196(3), 
430-443. 
107. 
Lowenthal, J., & Gerecht, S. (2016). Stem cell-derived vasculature: A potent and 
multidimensional technology for basic research, disease modeling, and tissue engineering. 
Biochemical and biophysical research communications, 473(3), 733-742. 
108. 
Huang, N. F., & Li, S. (2008). Mesenchymal stem cells for vascular regeneration. 
109. 
Chaudhury, H., Raborn, E., Goldie, L. C., & Hirschi, K. K. (2011). Stem cell-derived 
vascular endothelial cells and their potential application in regenerative medicine. Cells Tissues 
Organs, 195(1-2), 41-47. 
110. 
Li, J., Wu, M., Chu, J., Sochol, R., & Patel, S. (2014). Engineering micropatterned 
surfaces to modulate the function of vascular stem cells. Biochemical and Biophysical Research 
Communications, 444(4), 562-567. 
111. 
 Dash, B. C., Jiang, Z., Suh, C., & Qyang, Y. (2015). Induced pluripotent stem cell-
derived vascular smooth muscle cells: methods and application. Biochemical Journal, 465(2), 
185-194. 
112. 
Khan, O. F., Chamberlain, M. D., & Sefton, M. V. (2012). Toward an in vitro vasculature: 
differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells within an endothelial cell-seeded modular 
construct in a microfluidic flow chamber. Tissue Engineering Part A, 18(7-8), 744-756. 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
113. 
Carrion, B., Huang, C. P., Ghajar, C. M., Kachgal, S., Kniazeva, E., Jeon, N. L., & 
Putnam, A. J. (2010). Recreating the perivascular niche ex vivo using a microfluidic approach. 
Biotechnology and bioengineering, 107(6), 1020-1028. 
114. 
Jeon, J. S., Bersini, S., Whisler, J. A., Chen, M. B., Dubini, G., Charest, J. L., ... & 
Kamm, R. D. (2014). Generation of 3D functional microvascular networks with human 
mesenchymal stem cells in microfluidic systems. Integrative Biology, 6(5), 555-563. 
115. 
Zhou, J., & Niklason, L. E. (2012). Microfluidic artificial “vessels” for dynamic 
mechanical stimulation of mesenchymal stem cells. Integrative Biology, 4(12), 1487-1497. 
116. 
Ribas, J., Sadeghi, H., Manbachi, A., Leijten, J., Brinegar, K., Zhang, Y. S., ... & 
Khademhosseini, A. (2016). Cardiovascular organ-on-a-chip platforms for drug discovery and 
development. Applied In Vitro Toxicology, 2(2), 82-96. 
117. 
Wang, Z., Samanipour, R., Koo, K. I., & Kim, K. (2015). Organ-on-a-chip platforms for 
drug delivery and cell characterization: A review. Sens. Mater, 27(6), 487-506. 
118. 
Mathur, A., Loskill, P., Shao, K., Huebsch, N., Hong, S., Marcus, S. G., ... & Healy, K. 
E. (2015). Human iPSC-based cardiac microphysiological system for drug screening 
applications. Scientific reports, 5(1), 8883. 
119. 
Marsano, A., Conficconi, C., Lemme, M., Occhetta, P., Gaudiello, E., Votta, E., ... & 
Rasponi, M. (2016). Beating heart on a chip: a novel microfluidic platform to generate functional 
3D cardiac microtissues. Lab on a Chip, 16(3), 599-610. 
120. 
Wan, C. R., Chung, S., & Kamm, R. D. (2011). Differentiation of embryonic stem cells 
into cardiomyocytes in a compliant microfluidic system. Annals of biomedical engineering, 39, 
1840-1847. 
121. 
Pavesi, A., Adriani, G., Rasponi, M., Zervantonakis, I. K., Fiore, G. B., & Kamm, R. D. 
(2015). Controlled electromechanical cell stimulation on-a-chip. Sci Rep 5: 11800. 
122. 
Tandon, N., Marsano, A., Maidhof, R., Numata, K., Montouri-Sorrentino, C., 
Cannizzaro, C., ... & Vunjak-Novakovic, G. (2010). Surface-patterned electrode bioreactor for 
electrical stimulation. Lab on a Chip, 10(6), 692-700. 
123. 
Wang, G., McCain, M. L., Yang, L., He, A., Pasqualini, F. S., Agarwal, A., ... & Pu, W. 
T. (2014). Modeling the mitochondrial cardiomyopathy of Barth syndrome with induced 
pluripotent stem cell and heart-on-chip technologies. Nature medicine, 20(6), 616-623. 
124. 
van Der Helm, M. W., Van Der Meer, A. D., Eijkel, J. C., van den Berg, A., & Segerink, 
L. I. (2016). Microfluidic organ-on-chip technology for blood-brain barrier research. Tissue 
barriers, 4(1), e1142493. 
125. 
Wang, J. D., Khafagy, E. S., Khanafer, K., Takayama, S., & ElSayed, M. E. (2016). 
Organization of endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes into a 3D microfluidic in vitro model 
of the blood–brain Barrier. Molecular pharmaceutics, 13(3), 895-906. 
126. 
Aday, S., Cecchelli, R., Hallier-Vanuxeem, D. T. D. I. F., Dehouck, M. P., & Ferreira, L. 
(2016). Stem cell-based human blood–brain barrier models for drug discovery and delivery. 
Trends in biotechnology, 34(5), 382-393. 
127. 
Maschmeyer, I., Lorenz, A., Ramme, A., Hasenberg, T., Schimek, K., Hübner, J., ... & 
Marx, U. (2015). A microfluidic four-organ-chip for interconnected long-term co-culture of 
human intestine, liver, skin and kidney equivalents. Toxicology Letters, 2(238), S176. 
128. 
Grskovic, M., Javaherian, A., Strulovici, B., & Daley, G. Q. (2011). Induced pluripotent 
stem cells—opportunities for disease modelling and drug discovery. Nature reviews Drug 
discovery, 10(12), 915-929. 
129. 
Guo, Z., Higgins, C. A., Gillette, B. M., Itoh, M., Umegaki, N., Gledhill, K., ... & 
Christiano, A. M. (2013). Building a microphysiological skin model from induced pluripotent 
stem cells. Stem cell research & therapy, 4(1), 1-7. 
130. 
Levenberg, S., Ferreira, L. S., Chen-Konak, L., Kraehenbuehl, T. P., & Langer, R. 
(2010). Isolation, differentiation and characterization of vascular cells derived from human 
embryonic stem cells. Nature protocols, 5(6), 1115-1126. 
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
131. 
Ohta, S., Imaizumi, Y., Akamatsu, W., Okano, H., & Kawakami, Y. (2013). Generation 
of human melanocytes from induced pluripotent stem cells. Skin Stem Cells: Methods and 
Protocols, 193-215. 
132. 
Bechetoille, N., Dezutter-Dambuyant, C., Damour, O., André, V., Orly, I., & Perrier, E. 
(2007). Effects of solar ultraviolet radiation on engineered human skin equivalent containing 
both Langerhans cells and dermal dendritic cells. Tissue engineering, 13(11), 2667-2679. 
133. 
Schneider, R. K., Anraths, J., Kramann, R., Bornemann, J., Bovi, M., Knüchel, R., & 
Neuss, S. (2010). The role of biomaterials in the direction of mesenchymal stem cell properties 
and extracellular matrix remodelling in dermal tissue engineering. Biomaterials, 31(31), 7948-
7959. 
134. 
Yang, Y. I., Kim, H. I., Choi, M. Y., Son, S. H., Seo, M. J., Seo, J. Y., ... & Shelby, J. 
(2010). Ex vivo organ culture of adipose tissue for in situ mobilization of adipose‐derived stem 
cells and defining the stem cell niche. Journal of cellular physiology, 224(3), 807-816. 
135. 
Natesan, S., Zhang, G., Baer, D. G., Walters, T. J., Christy, R. J., & Suggs, L. J. (2011). 
A bilayer construct controls adipose-derived stem cell differentiation into endothelial cells and 
pericytes without growth factor stimulation. Tissue Engineering Part A, 17(7-8), 941-953. 
136. 
Ong, C. S., Fukunishi, T., Zhang, H., Huang, C. Y., Nashed, A., Blazeski, A., ... & 
Hibino, N. (2017). Biomaterial-free three-dimensional bioprinting of cardiac tissue using human 
induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes. Scientific reports, 7(1), 4566. 
137. 
Knight, E., & Przyborski, S. (2015). Advances in 3D cell culture technologies enabling 
tissue‐like structures to be created in vitro. Journal of anatomy, 227(6), 746-756. 
138. 
Beauchamp, P., Moritz, W., Kelm, J. M., Ullrich, N. D., Agarkova, I., Anson, B. D., ... & 
Zuppinger, C. (2015). Development and characterization of a scaffold-free 3D spheroid model 
of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived human cardiomyocytes. Tissue Engineering Part C: 
Methods, 21(8), 852-861. 
139. 
Nguyen, D. C., Hookway, T. A., Wu, Q., Jha, R., Preininger, M. K., Chen, X., ... & Xu, 
C. (2014). Microscale generation of cardiospheres promotes robust enrichment of 
cardiomyocytes derived from human pluripotent stem cells. Stem cell reports, 3(2), 260-268. 
140. 
Ronaldson-Bouchard, K., Ma, S. P., Yeager, K., Chen, T., Song, L., Sirabella, D., ... & 
Vunjak-Novakovic, G. (2018). Advanced maturation of human cardiac tissue grown from 
pluripotent stem cells. Nature, 556(7700), 239-243. 
141. 
Ronaldson-Bouchard, K., Yeager, K., Teles, D., Chen, T., Ma, S., Song, L., ... & Vunjak-
Novakovic, G. (2019). Engineering of human cardiac muscle electromechanically matured to 
an adult-like phenotype. Nature protocols, 14(10), 2781-2817. 
142. 
LaBarge, W., Mattappally, S., Kannappan, R., Fast, V. G., Pretorius, D., Berry, J. L., & 
Zhang, J. (2019). Maturation of three-dimensional, hiPSC-derived cardiomyocyte spheroids 
utilizing cyclic, uniaxial stretch and electrical stimulation. PLoS One, 14(7), e0219442. 
143. 
Zhou, P., & Pu, W. T. (2016). Recounting cardiac cellular composition. Circulation 
research, 118(3), 368-370. 
144. 
Polonchuk, L., Chabria, M., Badi, L., Hoflack, J. C., Figtree, G., Davies, M. J., & Gentile, 
C. (2017). Cardiac spheroids as promising in vitro models to study the human heart 
microenvironment. Scientific reports, 7(1), 7005. 
145. 
Beauchamp, P., Jackson, C. B., Ozhathil, L. C., Agarkova, I., Galindo, C. L., Sawyer, 
D. B., ... & Zuppinger, C. (2020). 3D co-culture of hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes with cardiac 
fibroblasts improves tissue-like features of cardiac spheroids. Frontiers in molecular 
biosciences, 7, 14. 
146. 
Kuppusamy, K. T., Jones, D. C., Sperber, H., Madan, A., Fischer, K. A., Rodriguez, M. 
L., ... & Ruohola-Baker, H. (2015). Let-7 family of microRNA is required for maturation and 
adult-like metabolism in stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 112(21), E2785-E2794. 
147. 
Yang, X., Rodriguez, M., Pabon, L., Fischer, K. A., Reinecke, H., Regnier, M., ... & 
Murry, C. E. (2014). Tri-iodo-l-thyronine promotes the maturation of human cardiomyocytes-
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
derived from induced pluripotent stem cells. Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology, 72, 
296-304. 
148. 
Leonard, A., Bertero, A., Powers, J. D., Beussman, K. M., Bhandari, S., Regnier, M., 
... & Sniadecki, N. J. (2018). Afterload promotes maturation of human induced pluripotent stem 
cell derived cardiomyocytes in engineered heart tissues. Journal of molecular and cellular 
cardiology, 118, 147-158. 
149. 
Schwartz, R. E., Fleming, H. E., Khetani, S. R., & Bhatia, S. N. (2014). Pluripotent stem 
cell-derived hepatocyte-like cells. Biotechnology advances, 32(2), 504-513. 
150. 
Zhang, Y. S., Arneri, A., Bersini, S., Shin, S. R., Zhu, K., Goli-Malekabadi, Z., ... & 
Khademhosseini, A. (2016). Bioprinting 3D microfibrous scaffolds for engineering 
endothelialized myocardium and heart-on-a-chip. Biomaterials, 110, 45-59. 
151. 
Yoshimitsu, R., Hattori, K., Sugiura, S., Kondo, Y., Yamada, R., Tachikawa, S., ... & 
Kanamori, T. (2014). Microfluidic perfusion culture of human induced pluripotent stem cells 
under fully defined culture conditions. Biotechnology and bioengineering, 111(5), 937-947. 
152. 
Loskill, P., Marcus, S. G., Mathur, A., Reese, W. M., & Healy, K. E. (2015). μOrgano: 
A Lego®-like plug & play system for modular multi-organ-chips. PLoS One, 10(10), e0139587. 
153. 
Tsamandouras, N., Kostrzewski, T., Stokes, C. L., Griffith, L. G., Hughes, D. J., & Cirit, 
M. (2017). Quantitative assessment of population variability in hepatic drug metabolism using 
a perfused three-dimensional human liver microphysiological system. Journal of Pharmacology 
and Experimental Therapeutics, 360(1), 95-105. 
 
 
 
