==PAGE:1==
Opportunities for producing sustainable
aviation fuel to support the European energy
transition
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management, and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European en­
ergy transition
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Daniel Moctezuma­Baker
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Pascal Meier, 2019
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management, and Economics, Produk­
tionstorvet, 424, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Technology, Manage­
ment and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfilment for
the degree of Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. Sustainable Energy ­ Energy
System Analysis
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of renewable energy,
electrical engineering, operations research and optimization.
Daniel Moctezuma­Baker ­ s212670
Signature
Date
ii
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my thesis supervisor, Rasmus Bo Bramstoft
Pedersen, for his guidance and assistance throughout the development of this thesis, and
to Theis Madsen, for his help and his patience answering all the many questions I had with
the model along the way. I want to thank my thesis co­supervisor, Alexander Reumert,
for his support and many words of encouragement. And for the help provided to get me
accepted into DTU, I offer my thanks to Sabbir Sidat.
For her endless support and patience during the development of this thesis, I want to thank
my lovely wife Sarah. You are the best. I also send my gratitude to my dear friend Antons
Osadcijs for his friendship throughout my entire studies. Thanks also go to Casper Wayne
Salh and Théodore Le Nalinec for their efforts in creating the scripts used to prepare the
demand data and create the imagery contained in this work.
This work was inspired from all the travel I have done in my life so far. Knowing that I
have traveled by plane many times since I was very young, I am aware that my carbon
footprint is significantly large. Having this burden with me has inspired me to look towards
sustainable aviation in the many ways and forms that it may present itself in a carbon­
negative future. I can only hope that this future comes sooner than later.
Monday 15 January 2024 Kongens Lynby, Copenhagen, Denmark
Daniel Moctezuma­Baker, MSc Sustainable Energy ­ Energy System Analysis, DTU
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
An investigation in the future price of sustainable aviation fuels (SAF) as the aviation indus­
try gears towards a net­zero future past 2050 was carried out by means of the Balmorel
linear programming based system energy analysis tool. Different scenarios of differing
rates of SAF development and adoption were simulated based on legislation SAF blend­
ing obligations set by the European Union, Norway, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom
as well as some possible theoretical development cases. The SAF prices that the scenar­
ios produced were optimistic given the modelling parameters used, leading to an average
of 9.78 €(2015)/GJ (12.40 €(2023)/GJ) by 2050 if SAF development were to follow leg­
islation. Scenarios involving faster ramp ups of SAF development earlier in time would
lead to higher levels of CO2 abatement, but at higher SAF prices. Scenarios requesting a
slower development of SAF over time would lead to lower SAF prices, but with much less
carbon dioxide abatement. The calculations carried out by the Balmorel energy system
model were optimal and without optimization errors given the conditions set. Suggestions
on how to improve the model results are offered, specifically in readjusting the temporal
settings for the simulation, since a secondary investigation is warranted.
iv
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Basis for the aviation sector decarbonization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Sustainable aviation fuels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Status of the European aviation sector post­pandemic . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Perspectives from international agencies and organizations regarding sus­
tainable aviation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Actions of the European Union towards sustainable aviation . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Considerations for sustainable aviation fuels in extra­EU countries . . . . . 14
3
Methodology and Modelling
21
3.1
The Balmorel Energy System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
OptiFlow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
SAF Development Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
Modelling assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Modelling Results
31
4.1
SAF fuel price comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Fuel manufacturing pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.3
Sensitivity Analysis ­ Effect of Biomass Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Discussion
49
5.1
Scenario Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Countries of note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.3
Fuel costs considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.4
Emissions reductions from SAF consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.5
Opportunities for SAF development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.6
Recommendations and improvement suggestions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6
Conclusions
63
Bibliography
64
A Appendix 1 ­ SAF Blend Obligation Legislation Scenario Fuel Price
69
B Appendix 2 ­ 2050 Blend Spread Scenario Fuel Price
70
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
v
==PAGE:8==
C Appendix 3 ­ Late Sprint Scenario Fuel Price
72
D Appendix 4 ­ SAF Technology Diffusion Curve Fuel Price
73
E
Appendix 5 ­ SAF Blend Obligation Legislation Scenario ­ Total SAF Manu­
factured
74
F
Appendix 6 ­ SAF Blend Obligation Legislation Scenario ­ Average electricity
prices by country
75
G Appendix 7 ­ Road fuel demands by country 2020­2050, full demand in TWh 76
H Appendix 8 ­ Maritime fuel demands by country 2020­2050, full demand in
TWh
77
I
Appendix 9 ­ Biojet and E­jet manufacturing in the SAF Blend Obligation Leg­
islation Scenario
78
J
Appendix 10 ­ Biojet and E­jet manufacturing in the 2050 SAF Blend Spread
Scenarios
82
K Appendix 11 ­ Biojet and E­jet manufacturing in the Late Sprint Scenario
86
L
Appendix 12 ­ Biojet and E­jet manufacturing in the Technology Diffusion
Scenario
90
vi
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
A major focus on the green transition is on the conversion of the standard fossil­fuel based
energy generation fleets of the past and current centuries to cleaner forms, particularly
with renewable energy. While that in itself has its merits, there are other aspects of the
green transition that are deserving of focus, particularly in the aviation sector.
The whole world in its many complex markets depends on the transport of goods and
people by air, but for a very long time there was little development in the decarbonization
of this specific sector. At most, jet engine efficiencies improved and airframes became
more weight efficient which reduced the carbon intensity of transport activities. But it
is after all considered in some ways a hard­to­decarbonize sector. This because of the
many different forms of air transport beyond passenger, different fuel requirements from
airport to airport, and a very wide range of appetites for investments on new untested
technologies and fuel types in a very cost­sensitive and risk­averse industry. Overall,
changing the source of fuel in aviation could have a significant impacts on the cost of
flying.
As consumers are becoming more environmentally aware of their decisions, governments
around the world are also implementing roadmaps for the development of sustainable avi­
ation fuel towards 2050 and beyond. Europe is in particular a leading region in the world
where development of SAF will take a focused priority in decarbonizing society as a whole.
The European Union has developed its own plans for decarbonizing the aviation industry,
as well as most non­EU countries within the European continent. Overall, the expecta­
tion is that the development of SAF will have significant implications in how the aviation
industry prices its flights, since it is quite expected that the price of developing these sus­
tainable fuels will be much higher than what airliners currently pay for conventional, fossil
fuel derived, jet fuel.
This thesis focuses on the development of SAF throughout a specific set of countries
in Europe, by means of simulating the energy system of Europe with the Balmorel En­
ergy System Model and the Optiflow add­on. Simulating how the development of SAF is
molded by legislation or by theoretical roadmaps will present insights into which regions
of Europe will face higher prices of SAF as well as what are the implications surrounding
those results. As well, understanding how much each SAF development scenario abates
carbon dioxide emissions will be investigated.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Basis for the aviation sector decarbonization
Upon the signing of the Paris Agreement in 2015, a series of important objectives have
been set in place to accelerate the decarbonization of society in order to avoid a temper­
ature increase of 2˚C of the planet’s atmosphere [1]. Crucially, the Agreement itself does
not specifically describe how to take on the emissions reduction tasks, but it does call
for a collective effort with common agreement for transparency and support. Ultimately,
there is an emphasis on the sense of urgency to take on the climate crisis by attacking all
sectors of society.
While the green transition is much more visibly evident by means of the decarbonization
of the power sector, such as by installing towering wind farms or very large solar parks,
there are different sectors of our modern societies that will be much harder to decarbonize,
and which will also be less obvious to the general public. The Paris Agreement makes it
quite obvious that the climate challenge will require a concentrated focus on these harder
to decarbonize sectors through all the necessary accounting, support, and compliance
frameworks that are called upon by the articles in the agreement. The transport sector in
particular is one of those harder to decarbonize sectors which society depends on critically
for practically all day­to­day functions.
Even more specifically, the aviation sector is amongst the hardest to decarbonize. Air
transport worldwide accounts for more than 2% of global CO2 emissions, and while it
does not sound like a lot it still a significant contributor to climate change [2]. While avia­
tion technology has improved by means of turbine efficiency and lighter aircraft, it is not
feasible to replace existing airplane fleets with electric airplanes based on battery or fuel­
cell technology and still meet passenger and cargo aviation demand. Battery technology
is unfortunately not energy dense enough compared to liquid fuels at the time of writing,
so the current focus on bringing the aviation industry towards net zero is by implementing
alternatives to the manufacturing of the jet fuel from non­fossil origin [3].
The aviation sector is very well known as a very risk­averse and sensitive industry. Both
fuel prices and broader economic conditions have had significant impact on the sector,
but most noticeably and more relevant to this thesis is the future forecast of aviation fuel
demand in the future. It is therefore important to have a look at the impact of the recent
Covid­19 pandemic on the sector, and how it reflects in future aviation demand forecasts.
This thesis will be focusing on the decarbonization of the aviation sector of the EU member
states plus the UK, Norway, and Switzerland, by means of the Balmorel Energy System
Model and the OptiFlow add­on. Different scenarios where the rate of development and
adoption of SAF across the continent will be simulated, and the impacts on the fuel price
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
3
==PAGE:12==
and other outcomes of the studies will be analyzed, and any particular opportunities for
the production of sustainable aviation fuels that can be derived from this analysis will be
highlighted.
2.2
Sustainable aviation fuels
Decarbonizing the aviation sector is in many ways an international challenge, but it de­
pends on regional and sub­regional participation from many different agents to manu­
facture and supply SAF. The main target with sustainable aviation fuels is to render the
consumption of the fuel to be considered net­zero for the purpose of carbon­equivalent
emissions accounting. In the sense that it is not creating new carbon from fossil fuel
sources, but rather being carbon that already exists in the broader ecosystem and that
was captured from the air or from biogenic sources. Therefore the carbon balance goes
to zero or very close to zero, with no new carbon added effectively. While this does not
mean that the emissions from aircraft are carbon­free, it does mean that the total amount
of carbon in the environment is unchanged. This factor is important when it comes at
looking at the carbon balance sheet, but it is also worth considering that this is not an
emissions­free fuel replacement. Unfortunately, because of how energy dense jet fuels
are, and how long and expensive the development of new power trains for aircraft is,
changing the sourcing of the jet fuel is the best alternative that we have for now.
There are several SAF manufacturing pathways where the source of carbon can be of
different origins, be it from biomass or directly captured from the air. This means that the
end refined fuel not only has a different greenhouse effect weight on it but also a different
terminology that is exclusive of that type of fuel. For this thesis, it is important to clarify
the terminology behind different types of alternative fuels relevant to aviation.
2.2.1
Typology of sustainable aviation fuels
Because of the multiple pathways for the manufacturing of SAF, the terminology for the
end product differs. The sourcing of carbon and hydrogen, as well as the chemical pro­
cesses used to manufacture the fuel, defines the GHG potential of the fuel in terms of
its life cycle costs to the broader environment. Because of that, only certain fuels can
pass as purely sustainable fuels for aviation purposes, despite the fact that the end fuel
product is very close to the jet fuel that is currently produced from fossil fuels. Note that
the terminology may be very similar, which is often a cause of confusion.
• Electrofuels
The umbrella term that describes any chemical compound that is fabricated by the
conversion of energy in the form of electricity by means of electrolysis of hydrogen
and a carbon­based source. The intention with manufacturing electrofuels is that the
energy source is of sustainable origin, effectively rendering the combustion of the
electrofuel carbon­neutral or near to carbon neutrality depending on the processes
and energy used in the manufacturing of the electrofuel, however this environmental
framework is not strictly obligatory. [4]
4
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:13==
• Power­to­X (PtX) fuels
This broad category of fuels refers to any synthetic fuels made from electrolytic hy­
drogen and other chemical feedstocks, without a specific environmental framework
much like electrofuels, which is synonymous with PtX. The X in PtX refers to any
fuel that can be manufactured with the energy content coming from electricity, and
can be in the form of hydrogen, methane, ammonia, dimethyl ether, etc [5]. PtX
can also appear written as PtL (short for Power­to­Liquid) or PtG (Power­to­Gas) to
emphasize the physical state of the fuel.
• Renewable Fuels of Non­Biological Origin (RNFBO)
RNFBO’s are a specific fuel typology mandated by the RED II directive. They are
defined in Article 2 as ”fuels which are used in the transport sector other than biofuels
or biogas, the energy content of which is derived from renewable sources other than
biomass”[6]. The main distinction being that the energy that was used to generate
the fuels is of renewable origin with the exception of biomass. This category of fuels
exists for the purpose of avoiding double­dipping with regards to emissions reporting
and offsetting, but also to distinguish other biofuels which were generated using a
mix of energy sources.
• Biojet fuel
Biojet fuels refer to the manufacturing of jet­ready biofuel with the main source of
energy derived from processed biomass sources. It is different from RNFBO’s be­
cause the energy content of the fuel can be of biological origin. It still however does
not include food­crop based biomass, nor solid or liquid wastes as the source of
carbon [3].
• E­jet fuel
As opposed to biojet fuels, e­jet fuels are of ”synthetic” origin which derive their
primary source of energy via electrolytic hydrogen, and effectively from electricity.
In this category, the carbon can be obtained directly from the air via direct air capture
(DAC) technologies. [3]
• E­biofuel
As the name suggests, these are fuels that use a combination of biomass and elec­
trolytic hydrogen as the energy source. This often requires the conversion of precur­
sor chemicals such as methanol from gasification, Fischer­Tropsch hydrocarbons,
and other fuels prepared from processes using electrolytic hydrogen [2].
• Recycled carbon fuels
These fuels are manufactured from non­renewable waste streams, in either liq­
uid or solid form, or waste gas from industrial processes which may also be non­
renewable. Fuels derived from non­biogenic CO2 however are not considered re­
cycled carbon fuels. [6]
An important note to make is that there are various types of jet fuels known as Jet A, Jet
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
5
==PAGE:14==
A­1, and Jet B. These are fuels that are based on kerosene and are used on all types
of aircraft. While Jet A is used mostly in the US, Jet A­1 is used elsewhere. Jet B has
better cold temperature performance so it is used only in colder regions in lesser amounts
[7]. Since the chemical properties between all those types of jet fuel are very similar, the
distinction is not taken into consideration for the purpose of this paper. SAF however, as
a full replacement of conventional jet fuel, has to be follow the same chemical properties
as jet fuel, in order to be compatible with jet engines. In particular, when being blended
with conventional jet fuel, it has to meet a variety of certification standards, such as ASTM
D1655­22 Standard Specification for Aviation Turbine Fuels [8] [9]. For the purpose of the
study, it is assumed that the SAF in the analysis is identical to standard jet fuel. However,
the chemical contents of SAF do differ because of their different manufacturing compared
to fossil based jet fuel. SAF is comparatively a much cleaner fuel because of reduced
amounts of sulphur in the fuel, leading to much lesser SOX emissions and soot formation
[10]. SAF has been tested to prove better performance in colder environments, and overall
better efficiencies, with the downside that NOx emissions are possibly higher [2]. This
means that in the adoption of SAF there are extra environmental benefits, not just from
the differences made in carbon emission accounting.
2.2.2
Manufacturing pathways for jet­engine­ready fuel
The refining of SAF comes from several chemical processes which are briefly explored in
this subsection in order to obtain a better understanding of the manufacturing of this type
of fuel. Figure 2.1 shows the wide variety of manufacturing pathways available.
Figure 2.1: The many possible pathways for the manufacturing of SAF [3]
The chemical processes involved in the making of SAF and its precursor chemicals are
quite well understood and while some technology advancements are required to bring the
final costs down [3], there is a definite potential for these materials and manufacturing
6
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:15==
procedures to enable non­centralized SAF refining.
Some fuel manufacturing pathways shown in figure 2.1 involve chemical processes that
are particularly relevant in this study, and will be explained briefly [2] [3]:
• Thermal gasification involves the thermal breakdown of material at high heat, in
this case biomass, to remove all water and break longer carbon­carbon chains in
order to produce a mixture of carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide.
• Water gas shift reaction is the process of converting carbon dioxide and hydrogen
to create synthesis gas (syngas), a useful precursor chemical.
• Electrolysis involves the electrochemical separation of water into its chemical com­
ponents: oxygen and hydrogen. Electrolysers are used for this process.
• Fischer­Tropsch is a chemical reaction where water and syngas are reacted with
a metal catalyst to create long chain hydrocarbons identical with jet fuel kerosene,
for example. These are usually called Fischer­Tropsch chemicals [11]
• Carbon capture is the process of absorbing carbon dioxide from air or from indus­
trial flue gases. Carbon collected from this method is used in the manufacturing of
synthetic fuels or in combination with other chemical processes to make SAF.
2.3
Status of the European aviation sector post­pandemic
The Covid­19 pandemic brought the aviation sector to a near­complete standstill in 2020
up until approximately the end of 2022, causing severe shock waves in the industry that
are still felt to date. Airports and airlines were forced to limit their operations significantly
as a result of government interventions to reduce the spread of the novel coronavirus.
International flights going to and exiting the EU saw a decline close to surpassing 50%
of 2019’s total flight numbers [12], with intra­EU flights also seeing significant reductions,
varying from country to country. Since each national government set their own rules
regarding covid passport tracking and isolation rules, the reopening of society and a so­
called ’return of normality’ was not consistent and uneven across Europe, therefore also
an uneven spread of effects in the intra and extra EU flights. The aviation sector has then
been on a path to recovery with a significant degree of uncertainty of how much the sector
will grow to towards 2050 [13] [14].
Now in 2023 at the time of writing, despite the fact that practically all countries having
had dropped travel restrictions and quarantine rules, the aviation industry is perceived
to have recovered to levels below the 2019 numbers [14]. A few reasons as to why is
has partly recovered are from a combination of a reasonably significant changed travel
behaviors from passengers, one of them being the increase in tele­working and a greater
environmental awareness regarding air travel. There are also likely lingering effects from
supply chain issues that plagued most of the world economies in by 2022, and which still
have an effect to today.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Forecast scenarios for the aviation sector in Europe towards 2050, excluding
small light aircraft [15]
The European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation (Eurocontrol) predicts that
aviation demand will increase 1.2% year by year, as the aviation industry returns to a pre­
pandemic status and allows for demand to increase. By 2050, there will be up to 16 million
flights in Europe, which is 44% more flights than in 2019. Eurocontrol foresees possible
scenarios for the growth of aviation demand, with a possible range from as low as 13.2
million flights up to 19.6 million for 2050, and is shown in figure 2.2 as per their 2050
Outlook report [15]. Eurocontrol specifies that its forecasts are Instrument Flight Rule
(IFR) Movements, which means that its analysis concerns aircraft that is technologically
capable of being operated entirely from cockpit instrumentation data. This excludes very
small light aircraft from their forecasts.
In order to assist with policy making towards the future in spite of the uncertainties, the
European Union has put forward Reference Scenarios to set a baseline of activities in the
transport and energy sectors across the continent [12]. This reference scenario will be
used to perform scenario analysis in the later parts of this paper, and is explained with
more detail in the Methodology Chapter. The aviation sector as considered by the EU
2020 Reference Scenario is expected to see a growing industry with diminishing increases
in the demand for fuel. This is possible with improved efficiencies in jet turbine technology
as well as improvements on airframes that lead to decreased fuel burn. It also includes
the impact from the EU Emissions Trading Schemes (EU ETS) [12] that allowed for flights
to be offset by means of the ETS mechanism.
As per figure 2.3, there is an expected increase in passenger activity in most transport
8
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Passenger activity by transport mode, as forecast in the 2020 Reference
Scenario [12]
modes towards the future, which is unlikely to decrease unless another economy­stopping
circumstance falls upon the EU again, or if the population decreases its growth consider­
ably. Despite the forecast higher passenger travel numbers, it is expected that the energy
requirements for transport is going to decrease as a result of a range of factors. These
include but are not limited to improved system efficiency from higher CO2 emission stan­
dards as well as the effect from fuel prices in the future.
Naturally, we can assume that these reference scenarios take into account the possibility
that there will be no major industry­defining circumstances like the 2009 Global Reces­
sion or the Covid­19 pandemic, as well as any price shocks on jet fuel as a result of
unfavorable international market conditions. As shown in figure 2.4, the expected energy
demand in the aviation sector is in absolute amount not expected to increase because of
efficiency enhancements despite the greater number of passengers and therefore more
aircraft movements in the European Union. At the same time, from the electrification of
airport services as well as the generation of aviation fuel via power­to­x, the total energy
demand in the aviation sector might remain constant, with the main difference being that
the energy used to power the aircraft will come from electricity stored via electrofuel man­
ufacturing rather than from fossil fuel distillation and processing. This is only a good sign
for the aviation industry as a whole in terms of being able to justify its activities into the
future by being able to convert to sustainable aviation fuel and reach a net­zero status in
doing so. However the perspectives on how this may happen are rather varied, as we will
explore in the following sections.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.4: Total energy demand as well as energy demand share for different transport
modes in Europe towards 2050 [12].
2.4
Perspectives from international agencies and
organizations regarding sustainable aviation
The world’s leading aviation sector organizations are the International Civil Aviation Or­
ganization (ICAO) and the International Air Transport Association (IATA). The ICAO and
IATA have independently commanded targets on decarbonizing the industry, and while
they have a mutual partnership they are not competitors since they focus on different as­
pects of the aviation sector world wide. With the ICAO being a United Nations body, and
the IATA as a trade association representing airliners, it means that there are common
motivations towards achieving a net­zero sector in 2050.
Being a part of the United Nations, the ICAO it follows the targets set by the Paris Agree­
ment in order to achieve an emissions reduction with the purpose of limiting the rise of
atmospheric temperature to 1.5 C. The ICAO in its 41st assembly has set a non­obligatory
target to its member states via the UN the long term aspirational goal of achieving net­
zero by 2050 [16], without much indication as to what the intermediary years should look
like. Fortunately there is a focus on direct emissions reduction rather than using emis­
sions offsetting, which is a less effective way of avoiding emissions. The ICAO shares
the perspective that aviation passenger numbers will be well on recovery compared to
2019 by 2025 and will be increasing well into the future, despite uncertainties in achieving
net­zero on time [17].
In 2016 the ICAO put forward the Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for Interna­
tional Aviation (CORSIA) [18], which has been part of EU ETS until 2024. CORSIA is a
market based scheme implemented for the aviation market to be able to determine the
10
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:19==
degree of offsetting that can be done by using blends of SAF in aircraft. Airlines that use
CORSIA agree to also monitor and offset 80% of their emissions above a 2020 emis­
sions baseline. It serves the purpose as well as being a standardized tool to track carbon
emissions properly, which is of great importance for emissions trading schemes world­
wide, in particular the EU ETS. Because the European Union has flights originating from
overseas, it is difficult to track the fuel type and quality that is carried by those flights and
therefore tracking carbon emissions from abroad is complicated. For this, CORSIA serves
to facilitate the carbon accounting when it comes to increasing levels of SAF blending in
international aviation and to encourage its adoption. [19]
In response to the Paris Agreement, the IATA put forward a resolution in 2021 to declare
the Association’s members agreement to limit net aviation emissions from 2020 and re­
duce net emissions by 50% by 2050 in reference to 2005 emissions levels [20]. Since
IATA represents airlines, the net zero emissions target binds these companies to try to
find more efficient aircraft as well as to aim to increase the level of SAF. At the same time,
the resolution asks for governments to provide policies and incentives for manufacturing
of SAF with the aim of increasing cost­competency of the new fuel alternative, without the
use of carbon taxes. Overall, the message is that airlines also have a responsibility for
active participation in leading the industry towards a net zero status.
The IATA notes that 1.8 Gt of CO2 emissions can be mitigated by 2050, through which
SAF can account for 65% of the reductions, with 13% derived from electric aircraft [21].
IATA supports the use of CORSIA as an important tool in the carbon accounting of the
decarbonization of the industry. IATA has put out the specific milestone that in 2050, 449
billion liters of SAF will need to be produced in order to reach neutrality, meeting 65% of
the reduction target [22]. At the same time, IATA strongly recommends that governments
should implement subsidies, tax reliefs or exemptions in the manufacturing of SAF as well
as its surrounding supply chain, and specifies that mandates should be implemented to
encourage the adoption of SAF, considering that prices of SAF at the start of manufac­
turing will be high and that for the sake of the industry these prices should be subsidized
[23].
With the participation of the two major international aviation industry bodies, the IATA and
ICAO, on the same page, we should in theory be able to see improvements from airline
companies as well as airports and governments to put a stronger emphasis on decar­
bonizing the aviation industry as a whole. However the IATA and the ICAO themselves
are limited in their reach, so the European Union has been developing policies and frame­
works to address this desire to take the aviation industry towards net zero.
2.5
Actions of the European Union towards sustainable
aviation
The European Parliament developed what is commonly known as the Renewable Energy
Directive (RED) in 2009 [24], inspired by the Kyoto Agreement which was the leading
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
11
==PAGE:20==
environmental emissions­reducing policy at the time, to set the legal framework by which
the EU Member States would collectively increase the region’s proportion of renewable
green energy across all sectors of the continent’s economy. The original RED framework
had placed at the time quite ambitious targets to increase the amount of clean energy,
aiming for 20% of electricity final consumption to come from renewable energy by 2020,
with a framework to welcome any future target changes as technology improves and con­
sumption behaviors evolve.
In 2018, the Renewable Energy Directive was recast [6] in order to update the original
framework with new clarified objectives as a result of previous amendments, and also in
response to changes to the industry overall and the signing of the Paris Agreement in
2015. For clarity’s sake, and to distinguish from the previous version of the directive, the
recast form is known as RED II. In its recast form, RED II updates the 2030 target up
to 32% of the gross final energy consumption coming from renewable energy sources,
which aims to reach all aspects of the European economy. The EU Member States are
free to develop their own plans and set targets for SAF development but they are bound
by RED II to follow the directive’s SAF targets ultimately. With respect to the transport
sector, Article 25 in the Directive sets a target of at least 14% of final consumption of
energy of the sector to come from renewable energy.
While the RED II framework had a very comprehensive aim at many different sectors
of the economy, transport obtained particular attention due to the complexities involved
in improving such a hard to decarbonize sector. With regards to aviation however, the
European Parliament and Council approached the topic of sustainable aviation fuels as
part of their Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy, which was a focused response on
behalf of the transport sector as a result of the European Green Deal [25] from 2019,
which came into force in 2020. Namely, the European Green Deal aimed to achieve net
zero greenhouse emissions by 2050, decoupling economy from resource consumption,
and ensuring collective involvement from Member States in achieving these goals [25] ­
in short: leaving no one behind. The Green Deal played a significant role in shaping EU
legislation during the first years of the Covid­19 pandemic, and has since evolved into a
set of more ambitious targets to reach a carbon­neutral economy faster.
Under the optics of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2021, the European Parliament
convened to put together a legislation package for the Green Deal to increase energy au­
tonomy for the continent as well as to fast­track the deployment of more green energy in
the economy. This legislation package became known as Fit For 55 [26], a collection on
proposed updates for existing legislation within the scope of the European Green Deal.
More specifically, the effort for Fit for 55 aims to satisfy the aims of the EU of achiev­
ing 55% of emission reductions by 2030 [26], and in a way make up for any changes in
progress along the way in terms of reaching the EU’s goals. For example, a proposal in
2021 was put forward to update the European Union regulations to push forward the de­
ployment of alternative fuels [27], and open up an alternative fuels market for the different
12
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:21==
transport modes that are targeted by the European Green Deal. With regards to aviation,
the proposal calls for alternative fuels for airplanes because any actual zero­emission avi­
ation technology would take too long to come to the market in time and to encourage the
main energy supply of stationary aircraft at airports to be electricity rather than jet fuel in
their auxiliary power units [27]. All that was required then was for the market to catch up
to the targets and for the aviation industry to step onto the proverbial plate to modify how
it produces and consumes its fuel.
Despite the clear go­ahead from the European Commission for SAF manufacturing to
commence as soon as possible, there were and still are concerns about an uneven playing
field in up and coming sustainable aviation fuel market. These concerns were voiced in a
2021 proposal in the European Commission [28] of the realistic possibility of different fuel
prices across the continent and the airlines taking on refuelling strategies in order to save
money. One example of those strategies is ’fuel tankering’, where an aircraft takes more
fuel from one airport than it really needs to perform a single trip in order to avoid having
to pay for more expensive fuel at the destination airport. This means that the aircraft
will be much heavier and will lead to a higher fuel consumption and higher emissions.
This strategy is considered anti­competitive behavior and will very likely happen with the
introduction of more expensive SAF in the market. This behaviour would de­incentivize
airports that had higher SAF prices from supplying the fuel due to low demand, while
airports with lower SAF prices could be dealing with over­demand and lack of supply,
ultimately ending with a very uneven market that would see a subpar uptake of SAF across
the continent.
Following the 2021 proposal [28], the Fit for 55 package obtained a renewed version of
the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Ensuring a Level Playing
Field for Sustainable Air Transport [19], to align the legislation within the framework of the
Green Deal and encourage a better adoption of sustainable fuels in the sector. The legis­
lation would then receive the name ReFuelEU. This legislation update from October 2023
clarified fuel blending percentages over the next decades in order to reach a 70% SAF
requirement for 2050 [19]. More specifically, the regulation indicates a share of drop­in
SAF towards 2050 as shown in table 2.1, which also includes the stipulations for minimum
share of synthetic jet fuel that should be manufactured.
The legislation prohibits, unless required by a Notice to All Air Missions (NOTAM), the
practice of fuel tankering in order to ensure a level playing field across European airports
and also ensure that the environmental targets can be reached. NOTAMs are notifications
broadcast by air traffic controllers to flying aircraft that may include safety information re­
garding air traffic control operations. NOTAMs can, for example, be used to inform airline
operators that an airport’s fuel quality is compromised and that therefore fuel tankering
can be allowed in order to ensure flights from going ahead.
The ReFuelEU Aviation 2023 legislation [19] requires that all aircraft operators report to
the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EUASA) every year their purchases of SAF
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.1: Mandated minimum SAF share used in European airports as per the ReFuelEU
legislation [19], including minimum shares of synthetic fuels towards 2050.
Year
Drop­in SAF Minimum
Share in Aviation Fuel
Synthetic fuel
Minimum Share in SAF
2025
2%
­
2030­2031
6%
1.2% average, 0.7% minimum
2032­2033
6%
2% average, 1.2% minimum
2033­2034
6%
2% minimum
2035
20%
5%
2040
34%
10%
2045
42%
15%
2050
70%
35
as well as general fuel uplift from European Union airports and to justify any tankering
that took place. The legislation also introduces the use of a label to indicate the amount
of SAF in jet fuel that is consumed, much like how is used in gasoline.
The RefuelEU Aviation enters into force from January 2024. Individual EU Member States
have the freedom to select their national SAF percentages, as long as the minimum SAF
blending requirements are met. In the meantime, EU Member States would be using the
EU ETS to keep track of their emissions reductions, and combined with CORSIA to align
emissions reporting as well as ensure the purchase and sell of carbon certificates.
2.6
Considerations for sustainable aviation fuels in extra­EU
countries
This section discusses the legislation implemented or announced by Norway, Switzerland,
and the United Kingdom, with regards to their targets to achieve a greater adoption of
sustainable aviation fuels. Other non­EU countries of continental Europe are not included
in the focus of this thesis due not being part of the set of Balmorel countries at the time of
writing.
2.6.1
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
While the departure of the United Kingdom from the European Union was of political na­
ture, it does have its implications with regards to how its national aviation sector has
decided to act upon the goal of achieving decarbonization. Because the UK is no longer
an EU State, it does not have the same obligation to follow the RED II Directive nor any
legislation enacted by the European Union. However the government has been able to
enact its own plans with regards to renewable fuels and more specifically with sustainable
aviation fuels in order to keep up with global trends of decarbonizing the aviation industry.
The overall expectation with regards to the consumption of aviation fuel in the future is
that demand will peak by 2030, then decrease as a result of improved fuel efficiencies,
electric aircraft, and improved airport efficiencies [29].
The UK Government has put forward a series of targets to encourage the development
14
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Forecast total aviation fuel demand towards 2050, including SAF and conven­
tional aviation fuel [29]
and use of alternative fuels in the transport sector. One of these efforts was the release of
the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) [30], which sets the rules for the clas­
sification of renewable fuels, sourcing criteria, and fuel use reporting for the purpose of
replacing fuels that are currently used in internal combustion engines. Since the Obli­
gation was first released in 2012, it has seen many updates to reflect changes in the
development of new alternative fuel sources in the UK [31].
A consultation regarding the placement of drop­in SAF targets in the form of a Sustainable
Aviation Fuel Mandate was carried out in July 2021 [32]. The results of the consultation
confirmed the setting of an initial mandate of 10% drop­in SAF for the year 2030, and
that a mandate for SAF should be independent of the RTFO in order to center focus
on the development of the fuel at a faster pace. Additionally, there is broad awareness
that double­dipping in terms of credits or any subsidy involving national or international
schemes (in particular with CORSIA) should be avoided as much as possible to prevent
market distortions and non­competitive behavior by fuel providers and consumers.
Following this consultation, in July the following year, the Jet Zero Strategy [33] was re­
leased by the Department for Transport in order to open discussion for the decarboniza­
tion of the aviation sector by exploring possible CO2 reduction scenarios including SAF,
electric aviation, fuel efficiency improvements, and airport efficiency improvement as the
main source of decarbonization. Separately from the EU targets, the Jet Zero Strategy’s
purpose is to declare the actors that are capable in decarbonizing the sector by 2050, with
the interim goal of having the domestic aviation sector reaching decarbonization by 2040
(keeping in mind that the domestic aviation sector contributed to only 3.6% of emissions
of all UK airport movements in 2019 [33]), also while having airport operations in England
set to reach carbon neutrality by 2040. The Jet Zero Strategy on its own however is not
legislation on SAF manufacturing and its adoption in the sector.
In terms of the aimed decrease of emissions in the UK aviation industry, what the Jet Zero
Strategy aims in its ”High Ambition” scenario to 2050 is the emissions levels as per table
2.2 by means of a range of possible CO2 reduction activities shown in figure 2.6.
The first target that the Deparment of Transport has put forward as a result of a second
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
15
==PAGE:24==
Table 2.2: Emission level target for the aviation sector in the UK [33]
Year
Sector emission target (MtCO2e)
2030
35.4
2040
24.8
2050
19.3
Figure 2.6: High ambition scenario for the reduction of CO2 in the aviation sector towards
2050 [33].
consultation is a 10% SAF blending level by 2030, followed by an increase depending
on the level of ambition that the government decides to select for a 2050 SAF target.
However, even at this ”High Ambition” level set by the Jet Zero Strategy, SAF would be
expected to account for 50% of aviation fuel demand by 2050, which will contribute 9
MtCO2e in savings while leaving 19 MtCO2e residual emissions in the aviation sector
[34]. As shown in figure 2.7, the level that is considered ”High Ambition” is the Option 2
Medium curve, compared to the higher Option 3 curve which aims for a 100% SAF blend
in aviation fuel by 2050.
In contrast to this, the respondents from the 2021 consultation believed that a scenario
where SAF supply would see very fast development by 2025 and reach high blending
percentages by 2050 as close to 75% would be quite feasible and ultimately desired as
a goal if it were to be put forward by the government [32], with the hope that a ”SAF
Breakthrough” will occur and reduce SAF manufacturing costs. That said, as there is an
expected increase in jet turbine efficiency of close to 2% per year at its most, as well
as new zero­emission technology such as electric aircraft that are likely to be adopted in
greater numbers, there is an expected overall reduction in the demand of jet fuel in total.
Interestingly, the Government response from the consultations do not set a defined line
16
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.7: Potential SAF Blending Obligation Pathways considered by the UK Govern­
ment
whether aircraft operators shall be required to uptake a minimum of blended fuel from
UK airports or be forced to align with EU legislation by banning tankering entirely. The
Department expects that the practice would be less attractive by the time EU policy on SAF
becomes obligatory as well as the UK’s [34]. At the time of writing, the Government has
yet defined the legislation on this problematic practice. In the year 2024, the Department
for Transport is expected to put forward a SAF blending mandate that will set down the
path for which SAF manufacturers and airports will be able to focus their efforts. By 1
January 2025, the UK SAF mandate will then become enforced by law. [32] [34]. The
UK has also removed itself from the EU ETS, and instead developed its own emissions
trading system to keep track of emissions from flights originating from the UK to the EU,
and is called UK ETS [35]. There are however concerns that carbon leakage is likely to
occur because of the UK’s separation from EU ETS [36].
2.6.2
Switzerland
While not part of the EU nor the European Economic Area (EEA), yet being a member
of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), the government of Switzerland has im­
plemented its own policies with respect to a net zero economy in general. The Federal
Council in its 2021 long­term Climate Strategy aims to have the air traffic in Switzerland
achieve net­zero CO2 emissions as well as non­CO2 emissions reduced as much as
possible [37]. Within the strategy, there is an aim to encourage the production and use
of biogenic and/or synthetic SAF in the country, despite the fact that the country currently
lacks the required biomass resources but makes up for it with the research and techno­
logical ability.
The Federal Office of Civil Aviation (FOCA, or BAZL in Swiss German) does expect that
electric­powered and hydrogen aviation technology will eventually start to replace some
aircraft, but it still expects that kerosene type fuels to continue powering the majority of
aircraft in the foreseeable future [38]. FOCA expects that renewable energy will play
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
17
==PAGE:26==
an integral part in the manufacturing of SAF, but does consider the limitation in terms of
biomass as the exclusive feedstock for SAF.
At this point in time, the Confederation has yet to establish specific targets for a SAF
blending obligation in the same manner as the EU or the United Kingdom, but it is possible
that it will follow the progress of its European neighbors in this regard in order to remain
competitive. In the meantime, national airline operators such as Swiss have committed to
increase intake in SAF, however most attention is also centered on increasing the energy
efficiency of airports and its operations [39]. Switzerland is therefore expected to follow
similarly to the path of its EU neighbors in terms of the development and adoption of SAF.
As of 2022, legislation is now in place to encourage the adoption of sustainable fuels
for road demand as well as for aviation [40], in particular to allow the aviation sector to
develop and consume SAF in a way similar to it’s EU neighbors and to provide a subsidy
to the alternative fuels. It is expected that by 2050, 11.8 million tonnes of CO2 would be
offset as a result of SAF, electric aviation, and airport operations efficiency improvements,
as well as from other offsetting practices [41].
2.6.3
Norway
Norway, being a part of the broader EEA but not an EU member state, has set its own
path to be a front runner in sustainable transport and aim to remain competent with the
European aviation sector [42]. In 2020, Norway became one of the first countries to imple­
ment a mandate for SAF, whereby a blending of 0.5 percent became enforced at the start
of that year [43] [44] with the initial focus on only using waste and municipal residue (as
opposed to crop­based biomass) as the biomass source. The mandate is not enforceable
for military aircraft. The Government would then revisit to discuss the mandate target on
a biannual basis in order to increase the target as technology improves over time. For
2023, the SAF mandate was elevated to 1.25 percent, and 2024 could see the mandate
become 2 percent [45].
The overall aim by Norway’s aviation operators and airports is that by 2050 that the avia­
tion sector will reach a ”fossil­zero” status [46], in alignment with the Paris Agreement. It
is well understood by the industrial members of the aviation sector that domestic sector
is an essential service to the public due to the country’s mountainous geography which
makes travel by road or rail a rather unattractive option. A forecast of the country’s avi­
ation sector emissions by 2050 and the different ways it can be addressed is shown in
figure 2.8.
While there are options regarding the decarbonization of the industry, the government has
in the meantime implemented a passenger tax for domestic flights, as well as a national
carbon tax specific to target fuel used in domestic flights [42]. From the perspective of
airport and aircraft operators, the sector’s expected share of SAF in terms of contributing
to lead both international and domestic towards net­zero will require the integration of
several sources of decarbonization. More specifically, there is an expectation that aircraft
turbine efficiency improvements as well as the introduction of electric and hydrogen small
18
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.8: Sectorial forecast by Avinor of national aviation CO2­e emissions towards
2050 with the implementation of a variety of emissions­reducing practices [46].
passenger aircraft will be great contributors to reducing aviation fuel demand [46]. Norway
does also comply with EU ETS and CORSIA for carbon emission tracking and buying and
selling of emission units[42].
The government then decided to set a SAF blending target of 30% by 2030 based on
the outcome of the consultation, with the expectation that domestic aviation, which con­
tributes to a smaller proportion of the country’s sector emissions, will reach net­zero first.
This effectively sets the country to reach a high level of SAF blend by 2050. Initial man­
ufacturing of biojet was derived from slaughterhouse waste from other countries to meet
the rising demand of SAF, while domestic manufacturing was ramping up to meet the set
targets [43]. The hope is that domestic aviation will begin to be served by short range
electric emission­free passenger aircraft at some point in the future as well[46].
here are concerns however whether Norway can remain price competitive compared to
EU countries due to the step­up in SAF blending targets in 2025 [47]. This has effects
regarding fuel tankering practices with EU flights coming into Norway. The expectation
is that it will still happen until SAF prices match across the continent. It is well known
that commercial aircraft coming from outside of Norway already tanker up before flying to
Norwegian airports because of the higher jet fuel prices in those destinations [45], so it is
expected to keep happening regardless. It is expected that carbon leakage will happen
unless it is tracked and addressed properly by those aircraft operators.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:29==
3
Methodology and Modelling
With the understanding that there is a desire to lead the aviation sector to a better en­
vironmental status by 2050 and beyond, it is then useful to simulate how this future can
become a reality. Because demand for SAF will be very different between countries within
the same region or continent, it is in many ways beneficial to foresee the interaction of the
future energy system with the hopes that a low fuel cost, high utility scenario is feasible.
Therefore, an analysis will be carried out using an integrated energy system model called
Balmorel. An introduction of the Balmorel model will be presented first, with a description
of the base model, and several demand­based scenarios in order to discover interactions
between the continent’s energy and fuel networks and growing national demands for SAF
into the future.
3.1
The Balmorel Energy System Model
As a partial equilibrium energy system optimization model, Balmorel is used to analyse
multi­sector interaction in the generation, transmission, and consumption of energy in ei­
ther the form of electricity, fuels, and heat. As an open­source software written in the
General Algebraic Modelling System (GAMS) programming language, it has been up­
graded and enhanced since its first release in 2001. Balmorel has the benefit of having
had many add­ons that have the ability to modify or extend the range of analysis and
serve specific modelling requirements. It has the flexibility of being able to simulate differ­
ent spans of time as requested by the user and with varying degrees of time resolution.
Being an energy­focused model, it has quite a detailed database of current and future en­
ergy systems, in particular with variable renewable energy generation that will dominate
the electricity market and have a very dynamic effect on energy prices.
The Balmorel model has a select number of countries in the European continent that
have been added over time as more data was added to include a catalog of associated
generating units, energy demand, and investments that are used in the calculation of the
end system state. For reference, this collection of countries will be referred to ”Balmorel
countries” in this paper, and are shown in the map in figure 3.1. Note that while the
Balmorel Energy System Model is capable of performing scenario optimization for a total
of 36 countries in continental Europea at this point in time, the Optiflow model that is
described in section 3.2 only analyses 28 countries which covers the current state of the
European Union plus three non .
From the Balmorel country map shown in figure 3.1, it is easy to see that the Member
States of the European Union are included in the Balmorel model plus a few extras. How­
ever there are some countries that are not included, such as the majority of the Balkan
states like Serbia, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, North
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.1: Map of Europe highlighting the Balmorel countries in blue.
Macedonia, and Kosovo; as well as other European nations like Ukraine, Moldova, Be­
larus, and Iceland. Microstates and small nations with the exception of Luxembourg are
not featured in the simulation. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
despite no longer being an EU Member State, is a Balmorel country since it has been
integrated in previous versions of Balmorel for many years. Switzerland and Norway, de­
spite not being EU Member States but members in the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) area are accounted for in Balmorel as well. Due to not being featured in Optiflow,
Cyprus and Malta are not included as part of the Balmorel countries for the purpose of
this study.
Since the model is optimization based, it couples and simulates different aspects of the en­
ergy system along with capital investments and energy prices to find and optimal scenario
where high utility and low energy costs can be obtained. The model system analyses and
solves an objective function to sum all investments over the time span of the simulating
study as well as operating costs of the European energy system.
3.2
OptiFlow
OptiFlow is an add­on featuring a partial equilibrium model that can be integrated with
Balmorel to model fuel production in the Balmorel countries. A critical part of OptiFlow is
that it models identified biomass and waste resources that can be processed to manu­
facture fuels in order to meet specific fuel demands, such as road­based fuels, maritime
fuels, and aviation fuels which are of interest to this thesis. Because there are various
processing pathways that are available to generate the same fuel type, OptiFlow has the
22
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:31==
ability of simulating fuel manufacturing processes along with the broader energy networks
of the Balmorel countries. In order to determine how much fuel can be generated, Bal­
morel takes into account to the availability of the feedstocks as described by previous
work on the add­on and Balmorel itself, taking in exogenous demands while taking into
account how resources are distributed geographically and taking into consideration trans­
port costs and technology characteristics. Therefore, OptiFlow can be used to analyse
future fuel scenarios, in similar fashion to previous work done by Pedersen, et al [48],
along with Lester et al [49]. In particular, since aviation fuel generated synthetically is
chemically identical with petroleum derived jet fuel, having OptiFlow be able to simulate
fuel manufacturing from different processes depending on geographically specific feed­
stock availability and pricing makes for a very appealing case of discovering which are
the lowest prices that can be achieved in each Balmorel country.
Figure 3.2: Fuel generation pathways via the OptiFlow add­on with the function of serving
four types of demand, along with the consumption and/or generation of electricity, heat,
and hydrogen.
The Balmorel Energy System Model can be run to perform scenario simulations of the
development of renewable energy generation and the manufacturing of electrofuels in
many different ways and be tailored to perform in such a way that certain targets are
met. While it may be possible to focus the attention to the amount of CO2 avoided much
like what was carried out by Blanco and collaborators [50] or Victoria and collaborators
[51], where the attention was carried out on how to reach a specific CO2 emission decline
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
23
==PAGE:32==
target by 2050 with their own system optimization models, the focus of this thesis will be in
the targeted adoption of sustainable aviation fuel as a factor of proportion of total aviation
fuel demand, as a drop­in SAF percentage that grows over time. The different ways in
which this concept will be explored is explained ahead.
Balmorel will center the fuel manufacturing intro three broad categories, as defined in [49]:
• Biofuels where biomass feedstocks are the main source of energy.
• E­fuels where the source of energy comes from electrolytic hydrogen, whose energy
content is derived from electricity. Direct air capture CO2 contributes to this category.
• Bio­e­fuels or E­biofuels which combines biomass feedstocks as well as elec­
trolytic hydrogen as the energy source, which requires extra chemical manufacturing
including thermal gasification, methanol reforming. Direct air capture CO2 can also
contribute to this fuel category.
3.3
SAF Development Scenarios
In order to simulate the growth of SAF manufacturing and demand across Europe over
time, multiple scenarios will be tested in the Balmorel Energy System Model. With the use
of the Optiflow add­on, the demand for aviation fuels can be manually adjusted to align
to regulation or to other levels in order to simulate different plausible scenarios. Using
the European Union’s 2020 Reference Scenario [12], as well as demands established by
previous work on Balmorel [49] [48], a basis for aviation fuel demand can be created from
which drop­in blends of SAF development and adoption can be modelled. Since there
are different ways in which the integration of SAF into the aviation industry could happen
in the future, four types of development scenarios are explored, and are described as
follows.
3.3.1
Base Scenario ­ SAF Blending Obligations Legislation Targets
The base scenario will be inspired by the specifications of the ReFuelEU plan by the
European Commission and with the respective SAF blending targets of the other Balmorel
countries in this study. Simulating this scenario in Balmorel will yield significant insights
regarding the impacts of the SAF blending legislation within a cost optimization framework.
The development of SAF in the Balmorel countries will be simulated as per legislation and
expected behaviors as follows:
• EU Member States will follow SAF development as prescribed by the European
Union ReFuelEU legislation.
• The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland will follow the High
Ambition scenario as set in their Jet Zero Strategy, reaching a 50% blending ratio
by 2050.
• Switzerland, due to not having specific drop­in SAF blend targets at the time of writ­
ing, will be set to follow the similar trends as its EU neighbors and remain competitive
24
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.3: Scenario containing the SAF Blending Obligations percentages for the in­
volved Balmorel Countries in this study.
but not reach the same blending percentage in 2050.
• Norway is set to reach 30% SAF by 2030 as per [INSERT LEGISLATION REFER­
ENCE], which would reasonably set it on path to a 100% SAF level by 2050.
3.3.2
2050 SAF Blend Spread
Because the development and use of SAF in the continent is hard to predict towards
2050, a spread of plausible 2050 scenarios are simulated where the end SAF percentage
blend in the simulation will be of a final 2050 SAF blend range from 50% up to 100%.
This will allow for a different range of comparisons to be made, such as the total amount
of SAF that is manufactured, which can be translated to an amount of CO2 emissions
that are avoided. Since the overall shape of the curve is somewhat exponential, this
can be compared to most of the SAF blending obligations that are being enacted by the
Balmorel countries.The range of 2050 SAF blending scenarios are graphically described
in the following figure:
3.3.3
Late Sprint Scenario
An unfortunate possible future is simulated in the Late Sprint Scenario, where SAF devel­
opment and use is very low and late from the perspective of legislation. The simulation
will apply to all countries, featuring a slowly increasing SAF demand that will see a very
fast, rather abrupt, rise in aviation demand later in time than expected. While this is rather
unlikely considering the fact that the chemistry behind jet fuel manufacturing is well under­
stood and there is a clear need for this fuel, testing this scenario to observe price dynamics
in the Balmorel countries could yield findings worth discussing.
The scenario can be described by means of the following figure:
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.4: Scenario containing a range of 2050 SAF blend range from 50% to 100%
sub­scenarios
Figure 3.5: Scenario containing a plausible late­sprint development in SAF.
3.3.4
SAF Technology Diffusion Curve
It is possible that infrastructure and logistics for the development and consumption of SAF
will improve over time and then reach an efficiency that will allow for broader adoption.
This technology diffusion curve, otherwise known as an S­curve because of its shape, is
commonly associated with technology maturation curves, in the sense that improvements
on a technology will feature a slow start, a fast improvement from better understanding
and technological advances, and a slower adoption towards a specific final target toward
the end. With regards to SAF development, this diffusion curve is applicable in the sense
that the fuel technology will have a slow start due to high capital costs and a small market.
Over time, the market will become larger as manufacturing efficiency improves and a fast
and steady rate of adoption is achieved. Over time, the uptake until eventually meet all
26
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.6: Scenario for a technology diffusion curve, otherwise known as an S­Curve
major markets with the exception of harder to reach portions of the sector. This remaining
gap can represent remote airports or smaller civil aviation airports that reach compliance
later in time compared to mainstream airports with much bigger passenger demand and
better connection to logistics services.
3.4
Modelling assumptions
The Balmorel Energy System Model does have a lot of flexibility in the sense that it can
be tailored to simulate specific scenarios, however there are some assumptions that are
included in the model that define the outcome from the simulations. Where otherwise indi­
cated, these assumptions are conserved across all the scenario types that were described
in section 3.3.
The aviation fuel demands are presented in table 3.1. Only the Balmorel countries as
described in section 3.1 are used in the analysis. The Balmorel model simulations were
operated under the following parameters:
1. Prices shown in model results are Euros in the year 2015. Where necessary, con­
versions will be applied to compare current prices to 2015 prices and vice versa.
2. Simulations are run on the years 2020 to 2050, with 5 year intervals.
3. Seasons are S01, S18, S35.
4. Time periods, within the seasons, are T001, T010, T019.
5. Interest rate is set at 4% for all countries, and used in Balmorel’s investment model.
No time aggregation technique was used in the selection of simulation timing. A principal
assumption for these scenarios is the perfect competition from all participants in fuel de­
velopment and consumption, with no market distortions caused by impeding legislation,
natural disasters, pandemics, or wars. Aircraft operators are expected not to tanker fuel
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
27
==PAGE:36==
between flight destinations, which would in real life skew emissions accounting as well as
impact the proper adoption of SAF. Forecasting the future can therefore be only so pre­
cise until market conditions stray beyond the expected normal. Therefore the results from
the scenario runs are optimistic in their outlook, assuming as well no major interference
in the growth of the energy system towards an ideal low­carbon future.
Table 3.1: Aviation fuel demand for the Balmorel countries from 2025 to 2050 in TWh
Country
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
AUSTRIA
9.12
9.45
9.83
10.27
10.45
10.61
BELGIUM
18.72
18.69
19.41
19.91
19.89
19.31
BULGARIA
3.16
3.42
3.56
3.50
3.53
3.61
CROATIA
2.06
2.14
2.24
2.32
2.37
2.40
CZECH REPUBLIC
4.65
5.00
5.25
5.47
5.64
5.78
DENMARK
12.51
13.83
13.24
13.05
12.99
12.97
ESTONIA
0.70
0.77
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.86
FINLAND
8.23
7.98
7.93
8.11
8.22
8.34
FRANCE
84.34
80.77
79.18
80.20
81.44
81.59
GERMANY
119.86
123.19
123.63
123.71
124.81
126.42
GREECE
14.98
15.79
17.50
18.37
19.21
20.05
HUNGARY
2.71
3.05
3.29
3.37
3.46
3.60
IRELAND
11.14
11.29
11.73
12.08
12.80
13.68
ITALY
52.92
54.52
58.13
62.10
63.26
63.61
LATVIA
1.58
1.49
1.48
1.50
1.50
1.48
LITHUANIA
1.24
1.23
1.18
1.21
1.21
1.22
LUXEMBOURG
6.33
6.51
6.54
6.55
6.52
6.46
NETHERLANDS
47.37
49.64
48.52
48.37
48.32
48.57
NORWAY
6.25
6.92
6.62
6.52
6.50
6.48
POLAND
9.98
11.74
11.69
11.78
11.96
11.93
PORTUGAL
15.73
16.98
17.84
17.79
18.03
18.07
ROMANIA
4.73
5.11
5.65
5.86
5.95
6.08
SLOVAKIA
0.47
0.50
0.51
0.52
0.54
0.55
SLOVENIA
0.30
0.31
0.33
0.34
0.35
0.36
SPAIN
82.52
81.23
82.30
84.37
86.21
88.32
SWEDEN
11.50
12.10
11.91
12.35
12.47
12.46
SWITZERLAND
4.56
4.73
4.92
5.13
5.23
5.30
UNITED KINGDOM
147.67
151.36
142.54
134.13
124.08
114.44
Demands from road and maritime fuel demands are shown in appendices 7 and 8 re­
spectively. Since the demand on the sustainable forms of maritime and road fuel is also
expected to increase over time, they are multiplied by a linear scale in order to reach a
sustainable maritime fuel supply of a third of the total 2050 maritime fuel demand and a
sustainable road fuel supply of 10% of the total 2050 road fuel demand. Blending or sup­
ply quotas for maritime and road fuels were not investigated and therefore not included in
this work. Aviation demand is set to behave in different manners as described in section
3.3 in terms of increasing proportions of SAF supply in jet fuel blends.
For practically all countries there was no demand for the manufacturing of sustainable
28
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:37==
aviation fuels in the year 2020 in part due to the very low supply as well as the effects
from the Covid­19 pandemic that had drastic effects on flight numbers. Therefore table
3.1 only shows total aviation fuel demand for years 2025 to 2050. The simulation results
are presented on a five year basis, to make comparisons easier. All other demands such
as maritime and road­based fuel demands are left as­is in the original model as derived
from the work from , following the EU 2020 Reference Scenario as the modelling basis.
This was done so as to reflect the fact that in reality all these different modes of transport
will represent a competing demand for resources, particularly with biomass being a limited
resource. Proverbially speaking, SAF will not be developed in a vacuum in the context of
the broader European energy system. Therefore the price of SAF that is simulated within
Balmorel captures the effect of fuel manufacturing demand for other transport modes, as
opposed to simulating only the aviation demand on its own. Different regimes to describe
different SAF blending rates and their increase over time are described in section 3.3, and
will apply to the
Resource and process prices across the several options for fuel manufacturing pathways
relies upon the following assumptions as prescribed by [48]:
Figure 3.7: Fuel costs assumptions used in Balmorel
When used by optimization in Balmorel, the feedstocks used in the manufacturing of SAF
should lead to the lowest prices, which should lead to the highest utility for the purposes
of finding an optimal solution.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:39==
4
Modelling Results
4.1
SAF fuel price comparison
To simplify the visualization of the price curves, the countries featuring the overall maxi­
mum and minimum prices are marked and some price curves from certain countries are
highlighted to demonstrate specific price change patterns that other countries demon­
strate. All other country price curves reside within the light blue area shown in the graphs
in order to simplify viewing. Some countries have repeat patterns across all scenarios,
whereas others vary quite significantly. Further details on these price patterns on some
countries that standout are discussed in more detail in the discussion section. A dashed
price curve is also included to indicate the average price per year for all Balmorel coun­
tries. Full results of the individual scenarios are shown in appendices. It is also important
to have the geographical context of these price changes, so a map showing price devel­
opment over time for each scenario has been prepared.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
31
==PAGE:40==
4.1.1
SAF Blending Obligation Legislation Scenario
The price curve for the Balmorel countries as a result of implementing national and EU
legislation SAF blending targets is shown in the following figure.
Figure 4.1: SAF Price Curve for certain countries as per legislation targets
Figure 4.2: SAF price per country over time in the SAF blending obligation legislation
scenario ­ map form (€/GJ)
32
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:41==
4.1.2
2050 SAF Blend Spread
To compare both scenarios, the 50% scenario is shown first, followed by the 100% sce­
nario.
Figure 4.3: SAF Price Curve for certain countries towards a 50% SAF blend by 2050
Figure 4.4: SAF price per country over time in the 50% 2050 Blend Scenario scenario,
map form (€/GJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: SAF Price Curve for certain countries towards a 100% SAF blend by 2050
Figure 4.6: SAF price per country over time in the 100% 2050 Blend Scenario scenario,
map form (€/GJ)
34
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:43==
4.1.3
Late Sprint Scenario
The late sprint scenario has the following price patterns:
Figure 4.7: Price curve for a sample of countries in a late SAF development scenario
Figure 4.8: SAF price per country over time in the Late Sprint scenario ­ map form (€/GJ).
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
35
==PAGE:44==
4.1.4
SAF Technology Diffusion Curve
Figure 4.9: Price curve for a sample of countries in a scenario following a technology
diffusion curve
Figure 4.10: SAF price per country over time in the technology diffusion scenario ­ map
form (€/GJ)
36
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:45==
4.1.5
SAF fuel price comparison metrics
There are several metrics that we can use to compare the fuel price across time for each
scenario, allowing to have a better picture of how different the scenarios are and which
are better across several statistical parameters.
Figure 4.11: Yearly average price curves of each scenario
Table 4.1: Average fuel price per year for each SAF development scenario (€/GJ)
Year
SAF Blending
Obligations
2050 50%
target
2050 100%
Target
Late Sprint
Technology
Diffusion
2025
20.44
20.44
20.44
20.44
20.44
2030
17.69
17.42
17.42
17.13
18.61
2035
16.11
14.77
16.12
14.42
17.90
2040
14.05
13.23
14.10
12.18
15.30
2045
11.60
11.23
12.03
10.93
12.66
2050
9.90
9.51
10.29
10.29
10.27
Standard deviation of the average prices are also shown in the following table. Comparing
the standard deviation gives a picture of how broadly apart the fuel prices are spread apart
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
37
==PAGE:46==
across the Balmorel countries every year.
Table 4.2: Standard deviation of yearly average price for each SAF development scenario
(€/GJ)
Year
SAF Blending
Obligations
2050 50%
target
2050 100%
Target
Late Sprint
Technology
Diffusion
2025
1.29
1.29
1.29
1.29
1.29
2030
2.99
2.66
2.66
2.32
3.39
2035
2.97
2.48
2.99
2.21
3.22
2040
2.53
2.28
2.55
2.01
2.33
2045
2.14
2.19
2.10
2.04
1.98
2050
1.74
1.83
1.60
1.60
1.58
Figure 4.12: Average price change waterfall graph for the SAF Blend Obligation Legisla­
tion scenario
Figure 4.13: Average price change waterfall graph for the 2050 50% SAF scenario
38
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.14: Average price change waterfall graph for the 2050 100% SAF scenario
Figure 4.15: Average price change waterfall graph for the Late Sprint scenario
Figure 4.16: Average price change waterfall graph for the Technology Diffusion scenario
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
39
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Fuel manufacturing pathways
4.2.1
SAF Obligation Legislation Scenario
Figure 4.17: 2025 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway (PJ/year) in the SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation Scenario
Figure 4.18: 2030 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway (PJ/year) in the SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation Scenario
40
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.19: 2040 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway (PJ/year) in the SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation Scenario
Figure 4.20: 2050 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway (PJ/year) in the SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation Scenario
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
41
==PAGE:50==
4.2.2
2050 SAF Blend Spread Scenario
While the two scenarios have very similar blend requirements in the early stages in the
optimization, it is past 2040 when the differences become distinct.
Figure 4.21: 2040 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway in the 100% blend scenario (PJ/year))
Figure 4.22: 2050 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway in the 100% blend scenario (PJ/year)
A noticeable difference is the presence of CO2 derived activities in the 50% scenario.
42
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.23: 2040 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway in the 50% blend scenario (PJ/year))
Figure 4.24: 2050 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway in the 50% blend scenario (PJ/year))
Ireland is home to this activity exclusively, but in the 100% scenario only Switzerland
presents very small amounts of CO2 usage, too small to compare against all the other
fuel pathways.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
43
==PAGE:52==
4.2.3
Late Sprint Scenario
Figure 4.25: 2025 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Late Sprint Scenario (PJ/year))
Figure 4.26: 2030 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Late Sprint Scenario (PJ/year))
44
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.27: 2040 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Late Sprint Scenario (PJ/year))
Figure 4.28: 2050 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Late Sprint Scenario (PJ/year))
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
45
==PAGE:54==
4.2.4
SAF Technology Diffusion Scenario
Figure 4.29: 2025 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ/year))
Figure 4.30: 2030 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ/year))
46
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.31: 2040 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ/year))
Figure 4.32: 2050 Fuel Manufacturing Pathway for the Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ/year))
4.3
Sensitivity Analysis ­ Effect of Biomass Availability
A modifier on the biomass availability of each country was used for the purpose of a
sensitivity analysis. A scenario analysis was run to include the SAF Blending Obligation
Legislation scenario energy demands with all other conditions and settings as originally
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
47
==PAGE:56==
set. The modifier implemented multiplies the biomass feedstock availability within Optiflow
with a 50% increase.
The sensitivity analysis did not demonstrate a significant effect on the price of SAF in the
model. The results show that the price of SAF cannot necessarily be attributed initially to
biomass reaching an availability maximum and forcing the manufacturing of hydrogen at
early stages of analysis timeframe. The pricing comparison is shown in table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Price comparison between the SAF Blend Obligation Legislation scenario and
the Sensitivity Analysis Scenario, €/GJ
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
Legislation Scenario
20.58
18.02
16.51
14.16
11.68
9.78
Sensitivity Scenario
20.37
17.52
15.98
13.92
11.48
9.72
Difference (%)
­1%
­3%
­3%
­2%
­2%
­1%
The results of this sensitivity analysis warrant a second investigation on whether the pa­
rameters from which the temporal analysis was based on have an impact in demonstrating
an effect by increasing the biomass availability.
48
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion
5.1
Scenario Analysis
The results expose the different ways in which SAF development changes across the
continent throughout the decades as a result of the rate at which SAF is set to be deployed.
This has an impact on the final price of SAF, that is unique per country, but is very much
tied to the price of electricity and the limitations on biomass availability at the very start
of the simulations. At a glance it is noticeable at a glance that fuel prices become quite
low towards 2050, indicating that the simulation configurations do not detect higher price
segments of time that would influence higher costs of SAF. Figures 4.1, 4.3, 4.5, 4.7, and
4.9 show the spread of average prices over the simulated timeframe, with an average
dashed line placed to demonstrate the breadth of fuel prices across the continent. Certain
countries that show a distinct price pattern are highlighted. The full price graphs are shown
in Appendices 1 to 4 for reference. Maps accompany these price graphs in figures 4.2,
4.4, 4.6, 4.8, 4.10, where the color strength of the country indicates how close it is to the
maximum price of the scenario.
The simulations as determined by the modelling parameters, discussed in the Methodol­
ogy section, represent the SAF price outcomes from night operations, where the price of
electricity will be lower generally and some renewable energy can be in a higher propor­
tion in the electricity grid mix assuming that any battery storage is used for that purpose.
Therefore, the results indicate to the lowest price scenarios possible. Given that Balmorel
as an optimization model aims to achieve the lowest cost, highest utility outcome, these
prices are consistent with the energy system model functioning correctly.
Overall, countries that have most international flights originating from their airports out­
bound to extra­EU countries present the best business case, at least in theory, of where
a strong PtX industry should be constructed in order to satisfy the SAF demand. These
countries are mostly situated towards western Europe. Amounts of SAF generated in the
Legislation scenario are shown in Appendix 5.
Looking first at the average price per scenario in section 4.1.5, there are noticeable dif­
ferences that arise from the timing of the kick­off of rapid increases in SAF adoption. This
timing depends on when the price of electricity is low enough for e­jet to then take a more
dominating role in SAF manufacturing overall, see Appendix 6 for a display of the average
yearly prices of electricity of the Balmorel countries. With reference to figure 4.11, which
shows the average price per year in each scenario, the biggest difference is between the
Technology Diffusion scenario and the Late Sprint scenario. The Technology Diffusion
commands for a faster adoption rate between 2030 and 2040 compared to other scenar­
ios, and therefore attains the highest SAF price overall. The Late Sprint scenario is quite
the opposite, by taking a much slower increase in SAF adoption, and only ramping up
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
49
==PAGE:58==
past 2040. By that time, the electricity prices would be on average low enough that man­
ufacturing e­jet in the many pathways it is generated can be done to ensure good price
competition compared to regular petroleum based jet fuel. At its largest, the difference
between the Technology Diffusion scenario and the Late Sprint is a 24.13% wide gap, a
price difference of 3.48 €/GJ (0.12 €/liter).
Despite the different scenarios tested, the difference in average prices, as well as the dif­
ference between the maximum and minimum values, is not significant. Table 4.1 shows
the average price for each scenario by year, and they are not significantly different from
each other. Table 4.2 shows the standard deviation for each year’s range of prices, with
the only outlier of significance being the Technology Diffusion scenario. Maximizing at a
standard deviation of 3.39 €/GJ in year 2030, the Technology Diffusion scenario demon­
strates that the price perfomance from each country was quite different from the average,
as evident in figure 4.1. The results are encouraging in showing that prices can drop
despite the increase of manufacturing demand from all the different aspects, as evident
in figures 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.15, and 4.16. Whether these prices fall within the ranges
expected, will be discussed further below.
When it comes to the SAF Blending Obligations Legislation scenario, it takes what seems
to be a good middle of the road path, where price differences are not as abrupt and
do not change with a rate too significantly different year­by­year compared to the faster
Technology Diffusion curve, as per 4.11. It in fact shares a very similar price curve with
the 2050 SAF Spread scenarios, with the main difference being that by the year 2050 the
end SAF blend mix is different and therefore the end SAF price is also different. Because
the Legislation scenario has a SAF development curve close to an exponential curve
much like the 2050 SAF Spread curves, the result is that average SAF prices are on
the lower end most of the time because the SAF development seems to coincide with a
drop in electricity prices across the continent, as per Appendix 6. Therefore it gets to a
point where manufacturing more e­jet fuels makes more economic sense when biomass
is already being competitively consumed across three fuel manufacturing processes. This
limited biogenic CO2 resource as well as the prohibitive costs for DAC CO2 reduces the
options for the lowest fuel cost possible. For some countries, the demand for maritime
fuel is very large and therefore manufacturing of SAF takes less priority potentially, such
as with Portugal and the Netherlands.
At the start of the optimization as shown in figure 5.1, biojet dominates the manufacturing
of SAF, with the exception of the manufacturing of maritime fuels. In 2025, Portugal is the
only country where e­jet is manufactured, as the biomass availability seems mostly taken
by the large maritime demand that the country experiences, as discussed in section 5.5.
Appendix 9 contains additional graphs demonstrating the manufacturing of biojet and e­
jet over time per country for the Legislation scenario, with Appendix 10 for the 2050 SAF
Blend Spreads scenarios, Appendix 11 for the Late Sprint scenario, and Appendix 12 for
the Technology Diffusion Scenario. The pattern of e­jet dominating biojet manufacturing
50
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.1: Amount of biojet and e­jet manufactured in 2025 in the SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation scenario
is quite consistent across all scenarios, with the exception of the Technology Diffusion
scenario showing
Figure 5.2: Amount of biojet and e­jet manufactured in 2050 in the SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation scenario
This trend remains the same for some countries, where biojet manufacturing is adequate
enough to satisfy SAF demand towards 2050, as evident in figure 5.2. Countries like
Slovakia, Slovenia, Austria, Hungary, and Czech Republic, to name a few, experience
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
51
==PAGE:60==
below average SAF prices as a result of focusing their manufacturing on biojet. At the
same time, most of these countries do not have much demand in terms of maritime fuels,
so their manufacturing focus can be centered on the rising aviation and road fuel demand
and keep prices low. By 2050 we see DAC CO2 come into the manufacturing mix, see
4.20. Here, Ireland is utilizing 1.205 PJ worth of CO2 to synthesize e­methanol in order
to generate twice more e­jet than biojet.
It is worth mentioning that there in many of the manufacturing pathways shown in section
4.2 of this paper where processes are very small, and are indicated by a MINUSCULE
label. These processes are very small compared to the PJ scale used in the figures.
While the presence of these very small processes, sometimes in the scale of a few kJ
worth of energy, could be in theory be ignored, they are a result of the mathematical
modelling behind Balmorel as a linear programming based optimization model. These
small processes that generate very small amounts of energy would represent very large
investments, in particular with DAC, which would not make sense economically speaking.
However, the linear programming in the model found that in order to fill the proverbial
missing spaces of e­jet manufacturing that DAC would be a good fit. These odd outliers
in the pathway manufacturing graphs could be removed if Balmorel were run in robust
optimization, which could in theory deal with the uncertainty of being able to select the
right manufacturing pathways to satisfy demand. Due to time constraints this option was
not investigated.
A particular case that is interesting here the case of Germany, which is the country that
produces the most SAF by 2050. Amounts of SAF manufactured in the Legislation sce­
nario are graphically shown in Appendix 5. By the year 2050, the volumes of e­jet man­
ufacturing more than double biojet numbers, but the price of SAF decreases over time.
Figure 5.3: Manufacturing of biojet and e­jet in Germany 2025 to 2050
The increase in manufacturing of e­jet fuels towards 2050 times well with average elec­
tricity prices in the country decreasing as shown in figure 5.4. This has the result of SAF
fuels decreasing overall as well.
52
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.4: Price comparison of average electricity prices and average SAF prices from
2025 to 2050 for Germany
The 2050 SAF Blend Spread scenarios show a reasonable but not significant price dif­
ference, but the 2050 100% Scenario did consistently achieve slightly higher prices. By
2050, the 100% blend scenario shows an average price only 7.59% higher compared the
50% blend scenario.
Figure 5.5: Average SAF price percent difference of the 2050 50% Blend scenario com­
pared to the 2050 100% Blend scenario
As evident in figure 5.5, the average price difference year to year is not that significantly
large for taking preference between either scenario based on the price alone. Naturally,
there is a difference in terms of the SAF generated between the two scenarios, where by
2050 the 100% Blend scenario calls for 2.5004 EJ (692.4 TWh, 56433.4 ktons) of fuel and
the 50% Blend scenario calls for 1.2502 EJ (347.3 TWh, 28221.2 ktons) of fuel. There
are however differing amounts of biojet and e­jet fuel manufactured when comparing the
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.6: Differences in manufacturing of biojet and e­jet of the 2050 100% scenario
compared to the 2050 50% scenario
scenarios.
Looking at figure 5.6, the differences in manufacturing biojet and e­jet are significant when
comparing the two scenarios. The 100% scenario commands higher amounts of SAF
towards 2050, and the optimizer in trying to find the lowest cost scenario finds that e­jet
can be produced in much higher amounts compared to biojet as electricity prices drop. But
the price difference between the two scenarios by 2050 is only 7.59%, even though the
100% scenario produces 1189 PJ (26839.7 kton) of e­jet more than the 50% scenario.
This shows that the energy system as a whole can optimize itself to produce fuel at a
better cost per quantity value when demands are higher, even if all other conditions in
the broader energy system have the same initial conditions. While economies of scale
are not captured within Balmorel, one would hope that in real life conditions it would be
the case that the 50% scenario would lead to lower prices do to lower demand overall
compared to the 100% SAF blend scenario.
The Late Sprint scenario shows a wide range of SAF prices, as evident in figure 4.7, but
not as volatile as the Technology Diffusion scenario as per figure 4.9. The timing in which
the ramp up of SAF development is commanded makes a difference in terms of how fast
the prices change over time, and for some countries like the United Kingdom it changes
the dynamic of the SAF price change over time. For countries like the Netherlands it
makes little difference. But the overall trend is distinct, with volatile price changes hap­
pening sooner with the Technology Diffusion scenario, whereas it happens much later in
the Late Sprint scenario. At the same time, when comparing the average prices in table
4.1 it is evident the price differences are unique between these two scenarios in terms of
how the prices progress over time. Despite that, ultimately the actual prices themselves
are not as high as expected. SAF prices are discussed in more detail below.
54
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:63==
5.2
Countries of note
The United Kingdom demonstrates having above­average SAF prices across all scenar­
ios, as well as a variety of price responses according to the scenario implemented. This
is noticeable in figures 4.1, 4.3, 4.5, 4.7, 4.9. In the SAF Blend Obligation Legislation
scenario, the UK is marked to reach a 50% SAF blend ratio, but regardless of the level of
blend ratio by 2050, the prices end very close to each other as evident in figure 5.7. Like in
other cases, the Technology Diffusion curve proved to offer the highest prices compared
to other scenarios. The Late Sprint scenario also proved to present the lowest costs.
Figure 5.7: SAF Price for the United Kingdom across the different scenarios
Figure 5.8: Comparison of electricity prices and SAF prices in the United Kingdom, SAF
Obligation Legislation Scenario
A significant deviance in the expected trends is noticeable with the United Kingdom, in
particular since the average price of electricity is expected to rise towards 2050 as op­
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
55
==PAGE:64==
posed to the majority of other Balmorel countries. While the price of SAF is expected to
be coupled with the price of electricity for the country of origin, the United Kingdom shows
a completely different trend because the price of SAF seems disconnected from the price
of electricity, as in figure 5.8. An explanation as to what is happening is that vast amount
of hydrogen imports that the UK is doing, importing over 174 TWh worth of hydrogen from
Ireland. A map in figure 5.9 shows the countries which import the most hydrogen in year
2050.
Figure 5.9: Hydrogen imports in year 2050, SAF Obligation Legislation Scenario, including
intra­regional imports, TWh
Norway has taken the challenge of achieving a 10% SAF blend mix by 2030, a much
higher rate compared to the other European countries. Because of that, the rate at which
SAF becomes adopted to the aviation fuel system is much higher, and therefore it would
be expected that the national price of SAF is high. This assumption is correct and can be
seen very evidently by the effect of changing the rate of SAF adoption, when comparing
where the price points for Norway are in figures 4.1, 4.5, 4.3, 4.7 (Norway follows a similar
price curve pattern to Denmark in the graph, albeit at a bit higher in price), and 4.9. What
makes Norway a good competitor in the manufacturing of SAF is their access to lower
electricity prices due to it sourced mainly from hydro. In terms of SAF blending, their very
ambitious target of achieving 10% blended SAF by 2030 leads them ahead of the rest of
the EU.
56
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:65==
In all scenarios, Portugal is seen consistently achieving the highest SAF prices at year
2025, as evident in figures 4.1, 4.3, 4.5, 4.7, 4.9. Portugal sets the highest price in all
scenarios, even above the Netherlands. The demands for maritime fuel and aviation fuels
are quite high from the start, as shown in the fuel manufacturing pathways in figure 5.10.
Hydrogen is used mainly to create e­maritime fuel via methanol synthesis, meanwhile the
aviation fuel demand is mostly served by biojet fuels. While the prices do drop they are
consistently above average as evident in the previous price figures mentioned, but do
follow the trend of other countries in dropping over time.
Figure 5.10: Sankey diagram of the manufacturing pathways of SAF for Portugal in the
year 2025.
5.3
Fuel costs considerations
The aviation sector is particularly sensitive to price changes in a lot of the markets that it
relies on, so naturally a concern is that the price of SAF is too high compared to currently
supplied petroleum­sourced jet fuel. Understandably, it would be unfair for European
airports to be forced to take in more expensive fuel that airliners would not want to put
into their planes.
The European Parliament and Council could in theory by their external and associated
agencies attempt to control disruptive price signals of SAF by means of enacting fuel
blending policies. This involves enforcing a specific percentage of fuel provided by air­
ports to be from sustainable origin, and increase this percentage over time. This which
translates almost directly to maintaining the status­quo with regards to seat prices. Af­
ter all, low cost carriers (LCC’s), for example RyanAir and EasyJet, rely on predictable
and stable market conditions in order to be able to justify passenger plane routes, even
if it requires fuel tankering. Under a completely transparent market where the European
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
57
==PAGE:66==
Commission may not have decided on subsidies, the price of SAF would be very high, ren­
dering itself as a non­starter in the entry to market against petroleum­sourced kerosene.
The SAF prices shown from the multiple scenario simulations indicate a very favorable
outlook for the price of SAF towards 2050, as can be noticed from table 4.1. While this
is encouraging and optimistic, these values are below the expected ranges. Keeping in
mind the parameters set into the modelling runs, Balmorel has some limitations in the
way that resources are shared between countries that may not reflect how the future may
be. Electricity is exchanged via transmission lines, and hydrogen will get exported via
pipelines, but biomass sits exclusively to its nation of origin. Exporting raw biomass is
an expensive and very inefficient venture, but processed biomass as either compressed
pellets or in a gasified form offer more energy dense options for transport. As it stands,
Balmorel limits the consumption of biomass to only happen at a national level without
offering the option to share excess biomass resources to neighboring countries. As such,
costs from distribution are not included in the final price of the SAF. The model itself also
may be too optimistic in terms of the economic outlooks, having a 4% interest rate as the
base level for all investments. But the more crucial aspect is that the modelling timeframe
set in the parameters in the Methodology section is likely causing the prices to be below
the expected amounts. This warrants an extra investigation.
With regards to conventional fuel prices, Khalifa et al [52] refer to a 13.68 EUR/GJ equiva­
lent price for Jet A fuel in 2022, equating to approximately 10.78 EUR/GJ in 2015’s money.
Chaiaramonti et al [53] cite an approximate price of 600USD/toe (2021), equating to ap­
proximately 13.2 EUR/GJ (2015). Dahal et al [3] produce an average jet fuel price of 18
USD/GJ (2021), which is approximately 16 EUR/GJ (2015). Pedersen et al [49] cite 19
EUR/GJ (2015). Eurocontrol releases regular updates on the status of the European avi­
ation industry , and shows in a 23 January 2023 release [54] a historical high from 2022
at 428 USDcents/gallon (29.46 EUR/GJ), which translates to 24.50 EUR/GJ (2015). At
its lowest in 2022, jet fuel was being sold from the refinery at 233 USDcents/gallon (15.35
EUR/GJ), which translates to 12.9 EUR/GJ (2015). The ReFuelEU legislation points out
that SAF derived via the synthetic pathway could have production costs, and therefore
fuel costs, ranging between three to six times higher than the current market price for
fossil fuel based jet fuel [19]. Dahal et al [3] show that expected prices for SAF, depend­
ing on the manufacturing pathway taken, can get as high as 167 USD/GJ (2021) (152.50
EUR/GJ) on average for HEFA­based biojet, or as low as 58 USD/GJ (52.9 EUR/GJ) for
Fischer­Tropsch based biojet. As is evident, while the prices for jet fuel have been his­
torically very wide because of historical disturbances to the petroleum market, prices for
SAF can be even more extreme in their prices differences.
When comparing to the results achieved in the scenarios, as shown in section 4, in partic­
ular table 4.1 and accompanying price charts in appendices 1 to 4, it is very easy to notice
the discrepancy in the prices shown. Despite the fact that prices do start higher than an
average conventional jet fuel price of 17.12 EUR/GJ from the preceding paragraph, such
58
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:67==
being the case in year 2025 for all scenarios where the average price for SAF is higher
than 20 EUR/GJ, the resulting SAF prices in 2050 are too low, too optimistic. Having SAF
prices as low as 6.9 EUR/GJ in the case of Czech Republic in the Legislation scenarios
does make sense due to the low aviation demand compared to its neighbors as well as
sufficient biomass feedstocks to manufacture biojet exclusively by 2050. But it is too far
below the conventional jet fuel price to be realistic. This is considering the fact that the
levelized cost of manufacturing of fuel assumptions shown in figure 3.7 that Optiflow uses
is evidently higher than the average conventional jet fuel price. Dahal et al [3] show a
very wide range of SAF prices that reach much higher levels than what the scenarios
produced. There is likely a discrepancy caused by the modelling timeframes set in the
modelling parameters covered in the Methodology section, which computes the cost of
fuel manufacturing in terms of when investments for manufacturing capacity are made in
time of when demand rises occur, that is causing the fuel price from being significantly
lower than expected. This warrants a secondary investigation into the parameters set and
how different the pricing is as a result of the necessary adjustments.
5.4
Emissions reductions from SAF consumption
The manufacturing of SAF serves the function of bringing the operation of jetfuel based
airframes towards a net­zero balance for the purpose of carbon emission reporting. A
ratio of 3.16 kg of CO2 per kg of jet fuel [55] is used, which equates to 7.28E7 kgCO2/PJ
of fuel.
Table 5.1: Amount of SAF produced per scenario, 2025 to 2050, and equivalent CO2
abatement.
Scenario
SAF Produced
Tons of CO2­e abated
SAF Obligation
4208
3.06E+08
2050 50% Blend
3085
2.24E+08
2050 100% Blend
5567
4.05E+08
Late Sprint
4001
5.86E+08
Technology Diffusion
8057
2.91E+08
Evidently, the scenario that generates the largest amount of emissions abatement is the
Technology Diffusion scenario, but it does result in the higher SAF prices due to the sooner
ramp up of SAF compared to other scenarios. The least performing scenario was the
2050 50% SAF blend ratio, which results in only 2.24E8 emissions saved. The SAF
Blend Obligation scenario resulted in middle­of­the ground emissions abatement over
time compared to other scenarios. The Late Sprint values are estimated due to a file
error in processing the results, but are reasonable comparing the approximated emissions
abated.
5.5
Opportunities for SAF development
From the research carried out, it is evident that certain regions in Europe will see a very
large demand and a required manufacturing response when it comes to SAF. These re­
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
59
==PAGE:68==
gions or specific countries would be parts of Europe where investors in the field of PtX to
initiate projects, and also where the EU Parliament will have to keep in mind the higher
SAF prices if they do intend on attempting to put price controls on the commodity. Airlines
in particular would find that very important if they want to commit to allowing their aircraft
to refuel in European airports and reach the desired profit margins.
In no specific order, these areas could see the greatest potential for investment in SAF
development:
• Benelux countries ­ facing the highest SAF costs due to the very large maritime fuel
demand (with the exception of Luxembourg) as well as limited biomass feedstock
supply, airports here are very likely to try their hardest to get the best value SAF
they can.
• Germany ­ generating the most amount of SAF because of its many large airports,
Germany could well see SAF integrating into its broader industrial and energy sys­
tem and achieve very reasonable SAF prices as a result.
• United Kingdom ­ as a very well connected country, demand for SAF here is only
going to increase as the blend percentages increase beyond 2050.
• Spain ­ for the very large solar potential, Spain can become a SAF and clean hy­
drogen manufacturing powerhouse with low electricity prices.
• Ireland ­ for the benefit of the good wind energy resource, the country can be a
hotspot for hydrogen manufacturing and export to other countries, just like the UK.
It would be important to keep in mind that , despite all the effort that is taken to decar­
bonize the sector, these sustainable aviation fuels are not emissions­free fuels. They are
definitely cleaner fuels in the sense that there are practically no sulphur nor other chem­
ical impurities that lead to other dangerous combustion products [10]. They are entire
chemical analogues to petroleum­sourced kerosene, with the benefit that jet turbines do
not have to modified to accept the sustainable fuel option. So while having SAF in the
supply chain means that we do not have a need to source the fuel from petroleum, mean­
ing that we can use existing carbon in the broader environment to make the fuel, it is still
emitting carbon­based emissions upon combustion. The airplanes that use SAF will still
emit carbon into the atmosphere, and this will still contribute to climate change. The big
difference is that by manufacturing the SAF, the carbon that was in the atmosphere can
be locked in liquid form, and have zero effect to climate change while they are enclosed
in containers, away from an ignition source. It would be possible to manufacture larger
quantities of SAF than is demanded in order render the aviation industry at a constant
carbon­negative position, but there are possible market price implications on performing
such actions. Ultimately, to keep the level playing field for all airports and airliners across
the continent, it would require a regulated balancing act between fuel manufacturing and
consumption, as well as support from governments to keep those price levels reason­
able during the start of broader SAF adoption. But at the end of the day, those airplanes
60
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:69==
would still be contributing to global warming, regardless of whether it is new or old carbon.
Only if hydrogen­based or battery powered aircraft become viable compared to liquid fuel
counterparts would this make a difference.
5.6
Recommendations and improvement suggestions
The simulations that were run by Balmorel for this work, given the parameters discussed
in the Methodology section, analyse a small portion of activity at night, when prices are
considered to be at their lowest and wind activity is usually at its highest. More importantly,
the simulation time span should be modified to verify modelling outputs. Because of this
time period selection, the resulting SAF prices are very low and too optimistic for what
is considered expected. In order to address this, and other issues with the modelling
analysis, there are several suggestions for an improvement of results:
• Increase the time periods analysed in the system to cover more times of the day,
which will have the effect of increasing simulation times drastically.
• Increase the seasons used in a year in Balmorel to analyse other parts of the year
since the passage of seasons can affect overall prices.
• Modify the start year of the simulations. This warrants reattempting the scenarios
under new temporal settings.
• Where possible, include more countries than those present in the current scope
of Optiflow. Countries such as those contained in the Balkan region as well as
the island nations of Malta and Cyprus can hold a different perspective on SAF
manufacturing, price dynamics, as well as interactions with other countries in terms
of electricity and hydrogen flows it.
• Where possible, expand Optiflow to increase the variety of SAF manufacturing path­
ways to include alternative options such as hydroprocessed esters and fatty acids
(HEFA) processing, and recycled carbon fuels.
The model, as an optimization based system, will try to find the lowest cost scenarios
that will lead to the satisfaction of demand according to the available sourcing of elec­
tricity, biomass, and hydrogen resources. But there are limitations that are set within the
model that make the countries act as self­contained generators of their own electrofuels,
meaning that the countries will be entirely responsible of their own SAF generation and
consumption by trying to find the most affordable methods possible. It is important to note
that while electricity and hydrogen can be distributed across the continent because of ex­
isting transmission infrastructure and planned hydrogen pipelines, the same cannot be
said about biomass or other sources of carbon. The countries are not offered the option
in the model to share processed biomass, in the form of wood pellets for example, to other
countries with a higher biomass demand. This causes a significant bottleneck in trying to
produce the lowest cost SAF because the demand would overwhelm biomass availability.
Balmorel will command to e­jet to start being manufacturing and if the system is still not
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
61
==PAGE:70==
able to reach demand it will yet again go to the next available option, which is direct air
capture. Direct air capture has the benefit of being an essentially infinite pool of carbon,
but since the technology is coupled to electricity prices it would also require lower elec­
tricity prices to balance the costs of production and make the end product economically
feasible for the aviation sector [49].
62
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:71==
6
Conclusions
The Balmorel Energy System Model was run in conjunction with the Optiflow add­on to
simulate different scenarios for the development of sustainable aviation fuel in Europe
towards 2050. To answer the thesis topic, Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation
fuel to support the European energy transition, there are several highlights that can be
pointed out as a result of the investigation carried out.
The first takeaway is that the end price of SAF, through its various forms of manufacturing,
results in noticeably lower prices than expected because of the time periods used in all
the modelling runs. The results that Balmorel produces point towards favorable electricity
prices for countries which allows them to be net exporters of hydrogen. This contributes
to prices of SAF to drop over time, particularly for countries that experience prices of
electricity rising towards 2050. Some landlocked countries like Austria and Slovakia, as
well as some Baltic countries, are capable of supplying their own SAF demand entirely by
means of biojet, which results in significantly lower than average prices.
Secondly, the manner in which SAF is produced over time by means of the different SAF
blend scenarios tested, does not result in a significant price difference between the sce­
narios. There are some price differences as a result of the timing of ramp­up periods
of SAF manufacturing, but these are not significantly large. However, depending on the
scenario implemented, some countries experienced different price patterns. The overall
trend was that the SAF prices decline to quite cost­competitive levels compared to con­
ventional jet fuel by 2050, assuming no major energy market issues. Naturally, scenarios
which demanded more fuel to be manufactured earlier also resulted in higher amounts of
carbon dioxide abated, like the Technology Diffusion scenario. Further research into how
the background parameters set in Balmorel affect the price of SAF is warranted.
With the competition of alternative fuels commanding increasing levels of manufactur­
ing and demand from biomass stocks, it is clear that the timing in which the ramp up of
SAF manufacturing also impacts the end price of SAF. Countries with higher demands of
fuel manufacturing for road and maritime purposes also experience higher prices of SAF
throughout all time stages. The main driver ultimately is the amount of flights, and hence
the amount of fuel demand, from the individual countries that sets the SAF price level.
Well connected countries to overseas destinations, such as the UK, Germany, Ireland,
and the Benelux region, see the most number of flights with also larger long­distance
aircraft that need more fuel. At the same time, countries that have limited biomass avail­
ability such as Portugal or the Netherlands, see themselves forced to rely significantly on
e­jet. Other countries like the UK and France see increased imports of cheaper hydrogen
to counteract the effect of higher local electricity prices compared to their neighbors.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
63
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations UNFCC, Paris Agreement, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://unfccc.
int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.
pdf.
[2]
A. Yousuf and C. Gonzalez­Fernandez, Sustainable alternatives for aviation fuels.
Elsevier, 2022, pp. 1–269. DOI: 10.1016/C2020-0-00528-1.
[3]
K. Dahal, S. Brynolf, C. Xisto, J. Hansson, M. Grahn, T. Grönstedt, and M. Lehtveer,
Techno­economic review of alternative fuels and propulsion systems for the aviation
sector, Nov. 2021. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2021.111564.
[4]
I. Ridjan, “Integrated electrofuels and renewable energy systems,” Aalborg Univer­
sity Department of Sustainability and Planning Sustainable Energy Planning Re­
search Group, Tech. Rep., 2015. [Online]. Available: https : / / vbn . aau . dk / en /
publications/integrated-electrofuels-and-renewable-energy-systems.
[5]
J. Burre, D. Bongartz, L. Brée, K. Roh, and A. Mitsos, Power­to­X: Between Elec­
tricity Storage, e­Production, and Demand Side Management, Jan. 2020. DOI: 10.
1002/cite.201900102.
[6]
European Parliament and Council, Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Par­
liament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of
energy from renewable sources (recast), 2018. [Online]. Available: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2018.328.01.0082.01.ENG.
[7]
Chevron Products Company, Aviation Fuels ­ Technical Review, 2007. [Online].
Available: https : / / www . chevron . com/ - /media / chevron / operations / documents /
aviation-tech-review.pdf.
[8]
ASTM International, ASTM D1655­22a ­ Standard Specification for Aviation Turbine
Fuels, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.astm.org/d1655-22a.html.
[9]
International Air Transport Association, IATA Guidance Material for Sustainable Avi­
ation Fuel Management 2nd Edition. 2015, ISBN: 9789292527747. [Online]. Avail­
able: https : / / www . iata . org / contentassets / d13875e9ed784f75bac90f000760e998 /
iata20guidance20material20for20saf.pdf.
[10]
A. J. Beyersdorf, M. T. Timko, L. D. Ziemba, D. Bulzan, E. Corporan, S. C. Herndon,
R. Howard, R. Miake­Lye, K. L. Thornhill, E. Winstead, C. Wey, Z. Yu, and B. E.
Anderson, “Reductions in aircraft particulate emissions due to the use of Fischer­
Tropsch fuels,” Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 11–23, Jan.
2014, ISSN: 16807316. DOI: 10.5194/acp-14-11-2014.
[11]
M. González­Castaño, B. Dorneanu, and H. Arellano­García, The reverse water
gas shift reaction: A process systems engineering perspective, Jun. 2021. DOI:
10.1039/d0re00478b.
64
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:73==
[12]
European Commission, “EU Reference Scenario 2020,” Brussels, 2021, [Online].
Available: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/96c2ca82-e85e-
11eb-93a8-01aa75ed71a1/language-en/format-PDF/source-219903975.
[13]
S. Gössling, A. Humpe, F. Fichert, and F. Creutzig, “COVID­19 and pathways to low­
carbon air transport until 2050,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 16, no. 3, Mar.
2021, ISSN: 17489326. DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/abe90b.
[14]
S. Franz, M. Rottoli, and C. Bertram, “The wide range of possible aviation demand
futures after the COVID­19 pandemic,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 17,
no. 6, 2022, ISSN: 17489326. DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/ac65a4.
[15]
EUROCONTROL, “Aviation Outlook 2050,” Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.eurocontrol.int/publication/eurocontrol-aviation-outlook-2050.
[16]
International Civil Aviation Organization, “Report of the high­level meeting on the
feasibility of a long­term aspirational goal for international aviation CO2 emissions
reductions,” Tech. Rep., 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.icao.int/Meetings/
HLM-LTAG/Documents/DOC.10178.EN.PDF.
[17]
——, “Vision 2050: Aligning Aviation With the Paris Agreement,” 2022.
[18]
——, “An Airline Handbook on CORSIA,” Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available:
https : / / www . iata . org / contentassets / fb745460050c48089597a3ef1b9fe7a8 / corsia -
handbook.pdf.
[19]
European Parliament and Council, Regulation of the European Parliament and of
the Council on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air transport (ReFuelEU
Aviation), 2023. [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=consil:PE_29_2023_REV_1.
[20]
International Air Transport Association, Resolution on the industry’s commitment to
reach net zero carbon emissions by 2050, Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https :
/ / www . iata . org / contentassets / dcd25da635cd4c3697b5d0d8ae32e159 / iata - agm -
resolution-on-net-zero-carbon-emissions.pdf.
[21]
——, Net­Zero Carbon Emissions by 2050, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.
iata.org/en/pressroom/pressroom-archive/2021-releases/2021-10-04-03/.
[22]
——, Net zero 2050: sustainable aviation fuels, 2023. [Online]. Available: www.iata.
org/flynetzero.
[23]
International Air Transport Authority, SAF Deployment, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.iata.org/contentassets/d13875e9ed784f75bac90f000760e998/saf-policy-
2023.pdf.
[24]
European Parliament and Council, Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parlia­
ment and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from
renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC
and 2003/30/EC, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:32009L0028.
[25]
European Commission, The European Green Deal, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52019DC0640.
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
65
==PAGE:74==
[26]
European Council, Fit for 55, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.consilium.
europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal/fit-for-55-the-eu-plan-for-a-green-transition/.
[27]
Council for the European Union, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parlia­
ment and of the Council on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure, and
repealing Directive 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, May
2022. [Online]. Available: https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-9111-
2022-INIT/x/pdf.
[28]
European Commission, Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air transport, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/mobilitystrategy_en.
[29]
UK Sustainable Aviation, “Roadmap for the development of the UK SAF industry,”
Tech. Rep., Apr. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sustainableaviation.co.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Sustainable-Aviation-SAF-Roadmap-Final.pdf.
[30]
UK Department of Transport, Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation, 2012. [Online].
Available: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/renewable-transport-fuels-obligation.
[31]
——, “Targeting net zero – Next steps for the Renewable Transport Fuels Obliga­
tion,” Tech. Rep., 2021. [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1109223/targeting-net-
zero-rtfo.pdf.
[32]
——, “Sustainable aviation fuels mandate ­ Summary of consultation responses and
government response,” Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available: http://www.gov.uk/
government/organisations/department-for-transport.
[33]
——, Jet Zero Strategy, 2022. [Online]. Available: www.gov.uk/government/organisations/
department-for-transport.
[34]
——, “Pathway to net zero aviation: Developing the UK sustainable aviation fuel
mandate,” Tech. Rep., 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/
consultations/pathway-to-net-zero-aviation-developing-the-uk-sustainable-aviation-
fuel-mandate.
[35]
UK Government, Developing the UK Emissions Trading Scheme: Main Response,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/649eb7aa06179b000c3f7608/
uk-emissions-trading-scheme-consultation-government-response.pdf.
[36]
UK Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, Addressing carbon leakage risk
to support decarbonisation ­ Summary of consultation responses and government
response, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/
657c7fbd95bf65000d7190cb/2023_Government_Response_- _Addressing_Carbon_
Leakage_Risk.pdf.
[37]
Swiss Federal Council, “Langfristige Klimastrategie der Schweiz,” Tech. Rep., 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://swissmetro- ng.org/wp- content/uploads/Lanfristige-
Klimastrategie-der-Schweiz.pdf.
[38]
Federal Office of Civil Aviation, “Report by FOCA on fostering the development
and uptake of sustainable aviation fuels ­ Executive Summary,” Tech. Rep., 2022.
66
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:75==
[Online]. Available: https://www.bazl.admin.ch/dam/bazl/en/dokumente/Politik/
Umwelt/bericht_saf.pdf.download.pdf/bericht_saf.pdf.
[39]
——, “ICAO Action Plan on CO2 Emission Reduction of Switzerland,” Tech. Rep.,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.icao.int/environmental- protection/Lists/
States_Action_Plans/Attachments/108/ICAO%20State%20Action%20Plan%20on%
20CO2%20emission%20reduction%20of%20Switzerland%20Update%20June%202021.
pdf.
[40]
Swiss Confederation, Botschaft zur Revision des CO2­Gesetzes für die Zeit nach
2024, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.fedlex.admin.ch/eli/fga/2022/2651/de.
[41]
E. Federal Department of Environment Transport and Communications, Revision
des CO 2­Gesetzes, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.newsd.admin.ch/newsd/
message/attachments/69699.pdf.
[42]
Nordic Council of Ministers, Nordic Sustainable Aviation, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https : / / nordicelectrofuel . no / wp - content / uploads / 2021 / 05 / Nordic - Council - of -
Ministers-Nordic-Sustainable-Aviation-DEC-2020.pdf.
[43]
Norwegian Environment Agency, Biodrivstoff, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
www.miljodirektoratet.no/ansvarsomrader/klima/transport/biodrivstoff/.
[44]
Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment, “Norway’s Climate Action Plan
for 2021­2030,” Tech. Rep., 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.regjeringen.no/
contentassets/a78ecf5ad2344fa5ae4a394412ef8975/en-gb/pdfs/stm202020210013000engpdfs.
pdf.
[45]
Norwegian Environment Agency, “Økt omsetningskrav til avansert biodrivstoff i luft­
fart ­ Konsekvensutredning Rapport,” Tech. Rep., 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//hoering.miljodirektoratet.no/LastNedVedlegg/23345.
[46]
Avinor, “Aviation in Norway ­ Sustainability and social benefit,” Tech. Rep., 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://avinor.no/globalassets/_konsern/miljo-lokal/miljorapporter/
aviation-in-norway-sustainability-and-social-benefit-2020.pdf.
[47]
Norwegian Environment Agency, Forslag til økt omsetningskrav for avansert bio­
drivstoff til luftfart (produktforskriften kapittel 3), 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
www.miljodirektoratet.no/hoeringer/2023/januar-2023/forslag-til-okt-omsetningskrav-
for-avansert-biodrivstoff-til-luftfart-produktforskriften-kapittel-3/.
[48]
R. B. Pedersen, A. Pizarro­Alonso, I. G. Jensen, H. Ravn, and M. Münster, “Mod­
elling of renewable gas and renewable liquid fuels in future integrated energy sys­
tems,” Applied Energy, vol. 268, Jun. 2020, ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j .
apenergy.2020.114869.
[49]
M. S. Lester, R. Bramstoft, and M. Münster, “Analysis on Electrofuels in Future En­
ergy Systems: A 2050 Case Study,” Energy, vol. 199, May 2020, ISSN: 03605442.
DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2020.117408.
[50]
H. Blanco, W. Nijs, J. Ruf, and A. Faaij, “Potential for hydrogen and Power­to­
Liquid in a low­carbon EU energy system using cost optimization,” Applied Energy,
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
67
==PAGE:76==
vol. 232, pp. 617–639, Dec. 2018, ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.
09.216.
[51]
M. Victoria, E. Zeyen, and T. Brown, “Speed of technological transformations re­
quired in Europe to achieve different climate goals,” Joule, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1066–
1086, May 2022, ISSN: 25424351. DOI: 10.1016/j.joule.2022.04.016.
[52]
R. Khalifa, M. Alherbawi, A. Elomri, and T. Al­Ansari, “Optimization of Biofuel and
Kerosene Fuel Blends to Support Sustainable Aviation,” in Computer Aided Chem­
ical Engineering, vol. 51, Elsevier B.V., Jan. 2022, pp. 85–90. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
0-323-95879-0.50015-1.
[53]
D. Chiaramonti, G. Talluri, G. Vourliotakis, L. Testa, M. Prussi, and N. Scarlat, “Can
lower carbon aviation fuels (Lcaf) really complement sustainable aviation fuel (saf)
towards eu aviation decarbonization?” Energies, vol. 14, no. 19, Oct. 2021, ISSN:
19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en14196430.
[54]
EUROCONTROL, European Aviation Overview 26 January 2023, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.eurocontrol.int/sites/default/files/2023- 01/eurocontrol-
european-aviation-overview-20230126.pdf.
[55]
——, “The economics of aviation decarbonisation towards the 2030 Green Deal
milestone,” ISSN: 2022­2030. [Online]. Available: https://www.eurocontrol.int/sites/
default/files/2022-05/eurocontrol-objective-skygreen-2022-2030-report-20220523.pdf.
68
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:77==
A
Appendix 1 ­ SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation Scenario Fuel Price
Figure A.1: SAF Blend Obligation Legislation Scenario price curve for all countries
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
69
==PAGE:78==
B
Appendix 2 ­ 2050 Blend Spread
Scenario Fuel Price
Figure B.1: Price curve for all countries towards a 50% SAF blend by 2050
70
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:79==
Figure B.2: Price curve for all countries towards a 100% SAF blend by 2050
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
71
==PAGE:80==
C
Appendix 3 ­ Late Sprint Scenario Fuel
Price
Figure C.1: Price curve for all countries in a late sprint SAF development scenario
72
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:81==
D
Appendix 4 ­ SAF Technology Diffusion
Curve Fuel Price
Figure D.1: Price curve for all countries in a technology diffusion curve scenario
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
73
==PAGE:82==
E
Appendix 5 ­ SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation Scenario ­ Total SAF
Manufactured
Figure E.1: Amount of SAF manufactured over time in the SAF Blend Obligation Legisla­
tion Scenario
74
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:83==
F
Appendix 6 ­ SAF Blend Obligation
Legislation Scenario ­ Average
electricity prices by country
Figure F.1: Average electricity prices per country, as per the SAF Blend Obligation Leg­
islation scenario
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
75
==PAGE:84==
G
Appendix 7 ­ Road fuel demands by
country 2020­2050, full demand in TWh
Table G.1: Road fuel demands in total amounts, from 2020 to 2050 [12], TWh
Road Demand
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
Austria
30.92
34.03
35.55
35.65
35.37
35.35
35.62
Belgium
40.39
41.56
38.21
34.41
33.14
33.39
34.33
Bulgaria
6.88
7.11
7.55
7.22
6.8
6.96
7.73
Switzerland
15.46
17.01
17.78
17.82
17.68
17.68
17.81
Czech Republic
21.96
20.13
20.92
21.02
21.12
20.11
20.24
Germany
121.87
121.91
123.38
114.07
109.91
107.99
109.58
Denmark
11.38
11.13
10.5
9.77
9.22
9.25
9.44
Estonia
1.38
1.5
1.54
1.52
1.54
1.52
1.52
Greece
11.27
11.71
10.96
10.71
10.3
10.19
10.3
Spain
80.63
78.2
74.89
70.28
67.95
69.15
71.96
Finland
9.82
8.79
8.06
7.47
6.87
6.64
6.58
France
104.71
103.9
98.64
90.72
86.23
85.91
87.07
Croatia
5.02
5.75
6.38
6.2
6.22
6.16
6.21
Hungary
17.8
19.29
20.13
20.16
20.19
20.2
20.62
Ireland
12.03
12.83
13.46
13.08
13.57
14.13
15.09
Italia
26.8
37.13
37.73
38.72
39.89
40.56
41.42
Lithuania
1.45
2.16
2.33
2.37
2.44
2.45
2.43
Luxembourg
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
Latvia
3.63
3.84
3.24
3.17
3.15
3.1
3.02
Netherlands
24.47
24.22
22.91
20.7
19.57
19.64
20.07
Norway
5.69
5.56
5.25
4.89
4.61
4.63
4.72
Poland
98.33
99.29
96.59
99.01
101.92
102.42
103.24
Portugal
7.29
7.3
6.46
6.12
5.8
5.73
5.77
Romania
12.55
15.77
16.93
16.62
16.8
17.01
17.34
Sweden
23.76
24.04
22.42
20.18
19.28
18.96
19.15
Slovenia
3.79
4.45
4.53
4.45
4.39
4.37
4.42
Slovakia
10.54
10.42
10.14
9.85
9.65
9.41
9.34
United Kingdom
85.31
85.34
86.37
79.85
76.93
75.59
76.71
76
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:85==
H
Appendix 8 ­ Maritime fuel demands by
country 2020­2050, full demand in TWh
Table H.1: Maritime fuel demands in total amounts, from 2020 to 2050 [12], TWh
Maritime Demand
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
Austria
0.24
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.32
0.32
0.32
Belgium
64.13
93.85
93.57
97.15
101.62
107.38
112.14
Bulgaria
1.06
1.44
1.6
1.77
1.88
2.05
2.14
Switzerland
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.16
0.16
0.16
Czech Republic
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.07
Germany
23.14
33.24
35.82
38.09
40.72
43.28
45.58
Denmark
7.34
11.2
12.12
13.04
14.27
15.49
16.8
Estonia
2.69
4.15
4.34
4.55
4.76
4.85
4.88
Greece
21.93
31.72
31.97
32.95
34.42
35.67
36.61
Spain
63.56
89.06
91.58
95.06
99.06
103.4
107.84
Finland
3.8
5.16
5.2
5.43
5.64
5.81
5.93
France
18.78
25.9
26.56
27.03
27.7
28.29
28.65
Croatia
0.47
0.55
0.59
0.61
0.66
0.7
0.71
Hungary
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
Ireland
1.88
2.93
3.35
3.55
3.74
3.84
3.87
Italia
65.39
67.37
68.06
67.89
66.46
65.68
66.37
Lithuania
5.98
6.54
6.83
6.72
6.46
6.47
6.67
Luxembourg
6.45
7.26
7.45
6.86
6.61
6.63
6.88
Latvia
2.25
3.26
3.47
3.7
3.94
4.16
4.23
Netherlands
102.12
146.04
153.21
158.27
167.63
178.77
191
Norway
3.67
5.6
6.06
6.52
7.13
7.74
8.4
Poland
2.19
3.37
3.84
4.28
4.61
4.95
5.11
Portugal
7.22
10.16
10.13
10.35
10.59
10.91
11.18
Romania
0.69
0.99
1.15
1.25
1.35
1.41
1.45
Sweden
20.6
30.22
32.09
34.46
37.16
39.49
41.7
Slovenia
1.27
1.95
2.01
2.07
2.1
2.12
2.13
Slovakia
0.09
0.09
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
United Kingdom
16.2
23.27
25.08
26.66
28.5
30.29
31.91
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
77
==PAGE:86==
I
Appendix 9 ­ Biojet and E­jet
manufacturing in the SAF Blend
Obligation Legislation Scenario
Figure I.1: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2025, SAF Obligation Legislation Sce­
nario (PJ)
78
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:87==
Figure I.2: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2030, SAF Obligation Legislation Sce­
nario (PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure I.3: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2040, SAF Obligation Legislation Sce­
nario (PJ)
80
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:89==
Figure I.4: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2040, SAF Obligation Legislation Sce­
nario (PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
81
==PAGE:90==
J
Appendix 10 ­ Biojet and E­jet
manufacturing in the 2050 SAF Blend
Spread Scenarios
Figure J.1: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2040, 2050 SAF Blend 50% Scenario
(PJ)
82
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:91==
Figure J.2: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2050, 2050 SAF Blend 50% Scenario
(PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure J.3: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2040, 2050 SAF Blend 100% Scenario
(PJ)
84
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:93==
Figure J.4: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2050, 2050 SAF Blend 100% Scenario
(PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
85
==PAGE:94==
K
Appendix 11 ­ Biojet and E­jet
manufacturing in the Late Sprint
Scenario
Figure K.1: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2025, Late Sprint Scenario (PJ)
86
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:95==
Figure K.2: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2030, Late Sprint Scenario (PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure K.3: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2040, Late Sprint Scenario (PJ)
88
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:97==
Figure K.4: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2050, Late Sprint Scenario (PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
89
==PAGE:98==
L
Appendix 12 ­ Biojet and E­jet
manufacturing in the Technology
Diffusion Scenario
Figure L.1: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2025, Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ)
90
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:99==
Figure L.2: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2030, Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure L.3: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2040, Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ)
92
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
==PAGE:101==
Figure L.4: Biojet and E­jet Manufacturing in year 2050, Technology Diffusion Scenario
(PJ)
Opportunities for producing sustainable aviation fuel to support the European energy transition
93
==PAGE:102==
The aviation sector is coming to yet another defining moment ­ how will the future shape the sector if
it is to face decarbonization like all other forms of transportation but with no cost­effective technology
to power its aircraft at net­zero emissions? Will the airlines capitulate on the occasion or surrender
entirely to electric airframes? Fortunately the alternative to using fossil fuels to make jet fuel is to use
power­to­x technologies to effectively convert and store green renewable electricity into electrofuels
that are chemically identical to their fossil based counterparts in jet engines. In this thesis a study
is presented on the use of the optimization based Balmorel Energy System Model to discover the
opportunities that can present themselves in the future energy system to target the European Union’s
goals for a decarbonized aviation sector towards 2050.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Produktionstorvet, 424
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
