==PAGE:1==
Interactive 3D Visualization of Dynamic Condition Response
Graphs in Business Process Management
Simon James Jensen (s153643)
Advisors: Hugo-Andr´es L´opez-Acosta & Andrea Burattin
December 2023
1
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
This thesis presents a study of the effectiveness of a novel educational tool designed to facilitate the learning
of business process models through an interactive 3D open world environment. Developed in Unity, this tool
follows a design science research methodology, incorporating insights from digital games, learning theories
and cognitive load management. The focus is on how users within a selected test cohort, interact with,
understand and retain the process information relevant to their domain, as presented with DCR Graphs
semantics, rendered in an immersive 3D game environment environment.
The study is based on interdisciplinary research that includes principles from user experience (UX) design,
game research, and business process modeling, aiming to ensure the artifact’s relevance in an educational
context, while also reducing the user’s cognitive load when engaging with complex process models.
The tool’s effectiveness and user-friendliness are assessed through qualitative methods, supplemented by
usability metrics. This evaluation involves validation testing using think-aloud protocol and semi-structured
interview methods providing insight into the thoughts and motivations of the user when engaging with the
artifact.
Results from this study indicate a positive correlation between the use of the tool and the ability of users to
understand business process models, but fails to provide any statistical significant proof of retention. The
study does however indicate that the immersive and interactive nature of the 3D environment appears to
enhance user engagement and facilitate the learning process.
The study concludes that there is basis for further development of a tool to parse and present DCR graphs
as interactive open world experiences and provides the source code for further academic development.
2
==PAGE:3==
2
Introduction
2.1
Background
In the area of business process modeling notation, dynamic, and often human-knowledge intensive processes,
can be represented by the declarative language known as Dynamic Condition Response (DCR) Graphs.
While DCRG abstracts away the complexities of the process, its symbolic language still presents the novice
user with a learning curve, and complex processes might lead to accidental complexity.
While humans are inherently curious and will seek out new information, an abundance of new information
may trigger avoidance behavior (Litman, 2005), which could lead to an adverse learning experience for novice
users of DCR graph, or even lead them to abandoning the learning endeavor entirely.
Oblinger (2004) argues that computer simulation games have many attributes that are associated with
how people learn and have been successfully applied in several learning environments and that computer
simulation games can also display many of the principles found in good pedagogy. Dalgarno and Lee (2010)
argue that well-designed 3-D virtual learning environments can enable learning tasks that are not possible
or not as effective in 2-D environments. Both these articles also argue for the need to root digital learning
environment in solid pedagogical practices. Furthermore, studies have shown that even lesser degrees of
immersion in virtual environments, especially open world simulations, can have a positive effect on student
learning (Dede, 2009).
The purpose of this thesis is to explore the effects teaching new processes to DCR graph novices through
the medium of a 3D open world game environment.
2.1.1
What is DCR Graphs?
In the following section the basic behavior of the DCR Graph will be outlined.
The declarative notation language is defined, not by a rule set which governs how the process is allowed to
flow, but rather a set of behavioral restrictions, or rules. If the process keeps within the restrictions defined,
any run of the process is deemed acceptable, making the language suitable for dynamic, knowledge-intensive
processes.
A DCR Graph consists of a set of activities and the rules binding them together.
The rule define the
restrictions, which govern the behavior of the activities. There is no lower or upper bound to how often an
event may happen, so long as these restrictions are abided by.
In the current implementation of DCR Graph, rules are defined by a combination of colors, directed arrows
and symbols. A simple process, which illustrates the behaviors outlined above can be as follows:
The graph behaves thus:
At the start of the process the activities meditate, wash dishes, buy dishwasher and go shopping can be
executed freely, as often as desired and in any order. This is because they at this point are not bound by any
active rules. Make sandwich cannot be executed, since it is currently excluded, and eat sandwich cannot be
executed, since it is constrained by an unmet condition (the make sandwich activity has yet to execute, i.e.,
the sandwich has not been made yet). Executing the Go Shopping activity will include the Make sandwich
activity (indicated by the green includes-rule). Make sandwich can now be executed whenever the user
wishes. If it is executed it will fulfill the condition-rule it places on the Eat Sandwich, enabling this activity
for executing. If Eat Sandwich is executed at any point after it was enabled, the process will require a
response (the blue response-rule) from the Wash Dishes activity. Until Wash Dishes is executed it is in the
”pending” state. This state has two effects. 1) The process is in an undesirable state called ”unaccepting”.
2) The Meditate activity cannot be executed due to the purple milestone-rule placed upon it by the Wash
Dishes activity. Narrative-wise the meaning of these rules can be interpreted as ”you can’t have dirty dishes
lying around, so you have to wash them at some point and until you do, you cannot meditate, probably
because you shakras are out of order.” The solution is simple: Executing Wash Dishes, will remove the
pending state from the activity, making the process accepting and allowing for meditation. But there is
another way: If at any point during the process the Buy Dishwasher activity is executed, it will exclude the
3
==PAGE:4==
Figure 1: DCR Solutions (2023) https://dcrsolutions.net (accessed 8 September 2023)
Wash Dishes activity from the process, removing any influences its state might have on the accepting state
of the process and any activities it constrains. If this is the case, Wash Dishes cannot be placed in a pending
state, it cannot exercise any rules on Meditate, allowing this activity to be executed at the user’s leisure,
and Wash Dishes itself can no longer execute. Narrative-wise, ”the purchase of a dishwasher will forever free
you of the burden of having to wash up after making your sandwiches, freeing you up to meditate whenever
the mood strikes you.”
2.1.2
Digital Games and Learning
Dalgarno Lee (2010), Kiili (2005), Erhel Jamet (2013), and others have written on the potential for digital
games in education, due to their ability to capture and engage the learner. Furthermore, games allow the
learner to receive performance feedback tailored to the individual, something critical in learning, according
to Shute (2008). Finally, games allow an environment where the learner can play around and make mistakes
without the fear of real world repercussions, which might increase the motivation of the learner to explore
and learn (Ziv, Ben-David Ziv (2005)).
However, the learning potential of a game is only as good as the learning principles that they are based on.
Kirschner, Sweller Clark (2006) warn against constructivism and leaving learners to discover things on their
own with minimal guidance, and so any implementation of a digital learning game should be grounded in
the science of human cognition and multimedia learning, as well as be integrated into an overall teaching
strategy.
2.1.3
Cognitive Load Theory
According to Sweller, et. al. (1998) the human working memory has a limited capacity when processing new
information and can be categorized into three types:
• The intrinsic load, which relates to the inherent complexity of the material being learned.
• The extraneous load, which is indirectly related- or unrelated information, as well as distractions and
duplicate information.
• The germane load, which is the mental resources used to construct and automate our mental schemas
of the information being learned (i.e., the DCR graph of our mind).
According to CLT, the intrinsic load cannot readily be reduced, since it represents the knowledge be-
ing imparted.
However, extraneous cognitive load should be minimized, while germane loads should be
4
==PAGE:5==
optimized. Doing this will aid the learners in processing and integrating new information without being
overwhelmed.
While DCR graph aids in this by presenting processes as a meta-model, it may create new extraneous cogni-
tive load through the complexities of its own semantic symbols and the inherent complexity of the processes
being modelled.
5
==PAGE:6==
3
Research Design
3.1
Research Considerations
Having considered the background for the research question, this section will be concerned with the research
question itself, defining the scope and potential implications of the research.
Despite its less than intuitive notation, an experienced user of DCR graph would be quite comfortable in
navigating even a complex business process rendered in classical DCR graph notation and would likely have
little to no use for a game based DCR graph tool.
Likewise, a person with experience in their field will have no use for a game based DCR graph tool since it
can teach them little not already covered by their knowledge domain.
A potential user would then have to be a person new to the knowledge domain (or possibly an experienced
person needing to upskill) with no experience in DCR graph.
The aim of the research would be to render a business process, using DCR graph semantics, in a 3D open
world and explore how the research population engages with it. To that end, an artifact, following be best
practices for the presentation of game design, multimedia elements, in-game feedback, and digital learning
in general will be developed. The outcome of the research will give new insight into user comprehension of
business processes when rendered using this novel approach and lay the groundwork for future explanatory
and comparative research endeavors.
3.2
Research question
Given these considerations, the research question is:
How does a 3D open world game affect a user’s interaction with and understanding of a process
modelled using DCR graph behavior?
• [RQ1] How well will a novice user of DCR Graph navigate a graph if it is visualized as elements in an
3D open world game?
• [RQ2] How well will a novice user of DCR Graph understand and retain the information presented in
such a game?
3.3
Research scope
• Technical feasibility and fidelity: The thesis will not go into any considerations on how the artifact
might be optimized technically, nor compare platforms (e.g., mobile devices, VR systems, consoles,
etc.).
• Demographic impact: The demographics of users will be bound to have an impact on their com-
prehension of the artifact. Thus the research will be limited to the population specified in previous
sections.
• Comparative research: With the exception of the classic 2D DCR representation, the research will not
endeavor to compare the efficacies of the artefact’s impact on usability and learnability as compared
to other DCR graph artefacts.
• Market viability: There will be no research into the commercial or educational market viability of the
artefact.
• Gamification: The artefact will not implement any form of gamification elements, e.g., challenges,
rewards, multi-player or social media features.
• Long-term impact: Due to the time-sensitive nature of the thesis, the research will only concern itself
with the users’ immediate comprehension. Thus, it will not delve into examining long-term learnability
and effectiveness.
6
==PAGE:7==
3.4
Research Method
Since this thesis centers around the development of an artifact, which allows the user to explore and compre-
hend a process modelled in DCR graph, without them having any actual experience with either the process
or DCR graph, the thesis will use the design science research methodology. Furthermore, since the research
question is concerned with investigating the human learner’s experience when using this novel artifact, the
research will take an exploratory approach, using qualitative methods.
Figure 2: Hevner, Alan; Chatterjee, Samir. (2010) Design Research in Information Systems : Theory and
Practice. Hamburg, Germany: Springer.
The artifact will be iteratively designed and evaluated, while continuously being measured against the
relevant scientific methods in the fields of teaching, human cognition, and digital multimedia learning. Field
testing will be performed using eye-tracking, think-aloud protocol, post facto semi-structured interviews,
and a comprehension test.
• Think-aloud protocol will provide insight into the cognitive processes of the user and their comprehen-
sion of the DCR graph process being presented.
• Semi-structured interviews can allow the users to elaborate on the experiences during the think-aloud
protocol.
• A compression test will reveal to which degree information about the process modelled in DCR graph
was retained and understood.
7
==PAGE:8==
4
Related Works
In order to create a basis for the research, the search for relevant background literature was performed using
DTU Findit (https://findit.dtu.dk/). DTU Findit searches across multiple scientific databases and supports
flexible matching and truncation, which allows for creating a broader search using limited search terms.
4.1
Keyword generation
The following keywords was extracted from the first sub question and used to generate keywords for the
literature search:
• DCR graph
• 3D open world game
• visualize
In order to aid in generating synonyms the terms were abstracted into:
• business process
• 3D
• open world
• “game”
A web search, as well as a thesaurus search, was conducted for these terms, generating the synonymous or
alternatively spelled keywords:
• business process, BPMN, DCR
• 3D, 3-D, dimension, virtual reality, open world
• Game, simulation, interactive, representation
• Visualize, render, animate
The same process for the second sub-question generated the keywords:
• Understand, comprehend, learn, remember, retain.
Finally exact phrases, stemming and variation were added to some of the search terms.
• “business process”
• “dynamic condition response”
• declarative workflow
• “open world”
• “virtual world”
• “virtual reality”
• vr
• simulate
• interact
• visual
8
==PAGE:9==
• artifact
• design
• comprehension
• usability
• teach
• engage
• interact
4.2
Inclusion criteria
Putting together the keywords from the previous section generated the search string:
(”business process” OR bpmn OR dcr OR ”dynamic condition response” OR (declarative AND workflow))
AND (3d OR 3-d OR ”virtual world” OR ”virtual reality” OR vr OR ”open world”) AND (game OR simulate
OR simulation OR interact OR visual OR animat OR artifact OR design) AND (understand OR comprehend
OR comprehension OR learn OR remember OR retain OR usability OR teach OR engage OR interact).
Flexible matching was turned on to widen the search. In order to limit the search to understandable sources
that were feasible to reach within the timeframe of the thesis, the inclusion criteria were added:
• Access: Online
• Type: Article, Thesis
• Language: English
Furthermore, since the research concerns itself with DCR graph, the search was limited to sources going
back to 2011.
4.3
Exclusion criteria
The initial search yielded 192 titles, which were then further sorted by relevance, and filtered by a manual
search through their titles, introductions, abstracts and conclusions. For this more refined filtering process,
any sources fitting the following criteria were discarded:
• Sources that were either Non-digital game, simulation or visualization-related sources or non-business
process-related sources.
• Sources that deal with collaboration or knowledge sharing.
• Paid sources.
• Literature reviews.
• Sources concerning only theoretical frameworks or processes.
• Sources that were less than 4 pages long.
4.4
Litterature
The search resulted in two types of literature: Research papers and tool presentations. Research studies
have been analyzed for quality and summarized, while tool presentations have just been summaried. Note:
Sources marked with an asterix (*) were found using a manual search after the automated search returned
the journals they were featured in.
9
==PAGE:10==
4.4.1
Research papers
Abbad Andaloussi, A., Zerbato, F., Burattin, A., Slaats, T., Hildebrandt, T. T.,
Weber, B. (2020).
Exploring how users engage with hybrid process artifacts based on declarative process models: a behav-
ioral analysis based on eye-tracking and think-aloud. Software and Systems Modeling, 20(5), 1437–1464.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-020-00811-8
Summary:
The aim of the research is to investigate the way users with different backgrounds
(DCR vs. knowledge domain experts) engage with hybrid process artifacts (specif-
ically DCR graphs (DCR-HR), which combines a process model, textual annota-
tions, and an interactive simulation) during comprehension tasks.
Research design:
Qualitative approach using process mining, eye tracking, and verbal data analysis.
Scrutinizes users’ reading patterns and strategies when interacting with DCR-HR.
Research execution:
Comprehension tasks: Using the DCR graph as an information source the users
were asked several questions regarding the process being rendered. Think-aloud:
Users were asked to vocalize for which purposes they used the various elements of
the artifact and any challenges associated with executing their tasks. Eye-tracking:
Users’ eye patterns when engaging with the artifact where recorded using eye-
tracking and analyzed through process mining
Key Findings:
Two types of user behavior were identified: Goal-directed and exploratory (Focus
on questions vs artifact elements). Knowledge experts were observed focusing on
text rich areas of the artifact while DCR experts focused on the graph. Users were
observed switching from exploratory to goal-directed behavior.
Credibility
High
The size of the cohort is quite small, but the authors argue that this is accept-
able in an exploratory study. The participants were also taught the semantics
of DCR graph as well as the features of the tool to level the playing field for the
validation. The researchers have strictly adhered to their preestablish research
protocol to minimize bias.
Generalizability
High
The area of research is quite specific: Hybrid artifacts for DCR graph. De-
spite the specific area of research, the researchers observed previously report
behavior, and the research can be applied to other declarative languages.
Confirmability
High
To account for the size of the cohort and the interpretive nature of quantitative
research, the authors have triangulated the eye-tracking data with participant
utterances and existing literature.
Replicability
High
The study goes to great lengths to document the rationale, background, re-
search process and findings.
Harman, J., Brown, R., Johnson, D., Rinderle-Ma, S., and Kannengiesser, U. (2016).
Augmenting
process elicitation with visual priming: An empirical exploration of user behaviour and modelling outcomes.
Information Systems, 62, 242–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2016.01.005
Summary:
The aim of the research is to explore the differences in users’ process modelling
approaches and outputs when using a virtual world-based tool as opposed to regular
modeling tools.
Research design:
The researchers implemented a virtual modelling tool using S-BPM modeling gram-
mar and validated it using the build-evaluate design science methodology. An A/B
comparative experiment was used, comparing the virtual tool with a regular mod-
eling tool.
10
==PAGE:11==
Research execution:
The users were tasked to recall and structure a series of process tasks. One group
used a regular modeling tool and the other used a virtual world which had been
rendered to simulate the environment in which the process would normally take
place (in this case the check-in area of an airport).
Key Findings:
The study concludes that the use of virtual worlds aided users in recalling of process
tasks to a greater degree than did standard process modeling tools.
Credibility
Medium
The size of the study cohort was not small, but not great either. Participants
were well primed in order to level the playing field before the validation,
but this priming may also have mean that short term memory impacted the
study.
Generalizability
Medium
Results were specific to the virtual world and scenario rendered for the
validation
Confirmability
Medium
Reasonably sized quantitative study. Maybe a bit on the small side without
triangulation.
Replicability
Low
Limited description of validation process. No appendices with the raw data
or links to material online.
Oberhauser, R., Pogolski, C.,
Matic, A. (2018).
VR-BPMN: Visualizing BPMN Models in Virtual
Reality. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 319, 83–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
94214-8 6
Summary:
The paper showcases a VR implementation for visualizing navigating, and interacting
with a BPMN graph.
Research design:
A comparative study of the implementation’s effectiveness, efficiency, and intuitiveness
as opposed to other models (common PC tools as well as pen and paper).
Use cases:
The population was split into 3 groups (VR, PC and Pen and Paper) and were asked
to: Find all errors in a BPMN model; Connect all elements that with a given process;
Connect end nodes with the appropriate start nodes; Select which tasks must be
completed before a given event. The tasks were compared correctness and completion
time.
Key Findings:
While the VR tool was shown to be more efficient than the PC tool it was 4 percent
slower than traditional pen and paper use for equivalent tasks. Furthermore, while the
VR tool was intuitive, the majority of the test population preferred the PC tool due
to poor text legibility and hidden objects in 3D space, as well as some VR sickness.
Credibility
Low
The cohort size was only 8 people, which is very little for a validation based
on quantitative data.
Generalizability
Low
The study concludes that while the tool is more effective than traditional
BPMN tools, the vast majority (83%) preferred using the traditional tool.
Confirmability
Medium
While the cohort is small, the measurements performed, seem to be correct
and easy to confirm. However, the study does not go into why the students
did not prefer the tool. Considering the large number of participants who
rejected the tool, it would have been interesting to triangulate the findings
with some qualitative research,
Replicability
Medium
The study uses standard student BPMN problems for the comparison test,
which aids replicability, but the authors have not provided appendices or
links to repositories.
11
==PAGE:12==
Zenner, A., Makhsadov, A., Klingner, S., Liebemann, D., Kr¨uger, A. (2020). Immersive Process Model
Exploration in Virtual Reality. Ieee Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(5), 2104–2114.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2020.2973476
Summary:
This paper presents and evaluates a VR multi-sensory interface for enhancing business
process usability and understandability.
Research design:
A comparative test was conducted: One where the population interacted with a busi-
ness process on an ipad; one where they used a VR headset and a controller, and one
where they used a VR headset and an elaborate set of physical props
Use cases:
The three approaches were compared using five metrics:
• Conceptual model understanding (Objective efficiency: time to understand pro-
cess; Subjective effectiveness: 1-7 point Likert scale; Objective effectiveness:
Process comprehension)
• Task load
• Immersion
• User experience
• Qualitative participant response (questions and debriefing comments)
Key Findings:
The novel approach to process exploration yielded an increase in user interest, but at
the cost of efficiency. The paper goes on to conclude that the interface might be useful
in a scenario where user interest is important, but time is not, such as a training.
Credibility
Low
The size of the cohort is very small for a quantitative study and the paper
does not report any kind of normalizing preparation of the participants.
Generalizability
Medium
It is difficult to say; the study relies very much on the novelty of the setup,
i.e., the prop environment. It is difficult to imagine an elaborative setup in
a serious training environment.
Confirmability
Medium
While the cohort is small, the researchers make exhaustive use of them,
using 8 different measurement techniques to gather data.
Replicability
Medium
Although very well documented, the research relies greatly on props, that
may be difficult to recreate.
Note: The following sources were found using a manual search after the automated search returned the
journals they were featured in:
(*) In 7th International Workshop on Learning Technology for Education Challenges, LTEC 2018:
Rajˇsp, Alen; Horng-Jyh, Paul Wu; Beraniˇc, Tina; Heriˇcko, Marjan (2018).
Impact of an introductory
ERP simulation game on the students’ perception of SAP usability.
Communications in Computer and
Information Science — 2018, Volume 870, pp. 48-58
Summary:
A small study which uses a gamified workshop to introduce novice users to an enter-
prise resource planning solution.
Research design:
Following an gamified introduction to the system users followed a non-gamified ERP
course.
Use cases:
The users were asked to perform a system usability scale questionnaire on the ERP
solution, which rates the users’ perception of the system’s usability.Use cases:
12
==PAGE:13==
Key Findings:
The research reports an increase in usability when introducing new users to the system
through a business simulation game, as opposed to traditional methods. This increase
persisted when moving on to areas of learning that had not been gamified, indicating
lasting benefits from gamified learning earlier in the process.
Credibility
Medium
The cohort size is similar to the larger examples found in this literature
review. Since it was done as a part of a university course, there may be
some bias involved, depending on the motivation of the participant.
Generalizability
Low
The research was done as a part of a university engineering course, and
comparison was done with similar courses. This does limit he applicability
of the findings somewhat.
Confirmability
Medium
The paper does a fine job of documenting its findings, but lacks an appendix
or access to an online repository.
Replicability
Low
Again, since this study was done as a part of a university course, exact
replication will be difficult.
(*) In 7th International Workshop on Learning Technology for Education Challenges, LTEC 2018: Ploder,
Christian; Bernsteiner, Reinhard; Schl¨ogl, Stephan (2018). Improving business process management compe-
tencies by applying gamification aspects in teaching bachelor students. Communications in Computer and
Information Science — 2018, Volume 870, pp. 15-23
Summary:
The paper investigates the effect of introducing gamification as a driver for motivated
learning.
Research design:
Qualitative analysis of observed student behavior as well as written assignments
handed in after the game.
Use cases:
The students were asked to play a game involving the construction of sail boats, while
constructing BPMN diagrams for each step of the construction process.
Key Findings:
The study found general high motivation and fun among the students, with only mid-
dling results in the areas of knowledge increase and expectations of practical transfer.
Credibility
Medium
While the size of the cohort was only 44. The author did use a qualitative
approach. The qualitative method deployed is, by the authors own words,
basic, and they do not document any methods for avoiding bias.
Generalizability
Medium
The study is very general and could be applied to other learning settings
where collaborative play might enhance the learning experience.
Confirmability
Medium
The author does some triangulation, cross referencing the coded reflection
papers with their own observations, but with only very limited reference to
existing work.
Replicability
Low
The author does not go into details about how they went about coding the
student response, nor do they provide any appendices or links to reposito-
ries.
(*) In 31st International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, CAiSE 2019: Leyer,
Michael2; Brown, Ross; Aysolmaz, Banu; Vanderfeesten, Irene; Turetken, Oktay (2019). Virtual World BPM
Training Systems Process Gateway Experimental Results. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) — 2019, Volume
11483, pp. 415-429
13
==PAGE:14==
Summary:
The paper presents a tool for rendering a BPMN process as familiar 3D models and
locations in an office environment and roles as the people present in the environment.
Research design:
After training on the simulator, the research subjects were asked to complete a ques-
tionnaire to gage their retention of the process information presented in the simulator.
Use cases:
The subjects were asked to navigate through the office environment and interact with
the events (e.g., an XOR split represented by two desks, each with an activity rendered
on the screen0). They were subsequently asked to fill out the questionnaire.
Key Findings:
The researched showed a positive effect of using a 3D virtual world visualization com-
pared to a 2D process visualization.
Credibility
Medium
The study has a decent sample size, but the researchers do not seem to
consider any scrutinizing of the population.
Generalizability
Medium
The validation was performed with students on a small process “toy” ex-
ample process.
Confirmability
Medium
The paper is based on existing research and population size is not small,
but not particularly large, either.
Replicability
Medium
The description of the validation process is somewhat vague and the ques-
tionnaire and other data is not accessible at the URL provided.
4.4.2
Tool presentations
Abdul, B. M., Corradini, F., Re, B., Rossi, L.,
Tiezzi, F. (2019). UBBA: Unity based BPMN animator.
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 350, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-21297-1 1
Summary:
This paper offers no research per se, but is a demonstration of the UBBA 3D process vi-
sualization and interaction tool. It aims to abstract away BPMN symbolism in favor of
recognizable graphical elements related to the process being modelled. In this paper a pizza
ordering and -eating process is rendered in 3D by a little man walking from event to event
ordering and eating pizza.
Users are able to “click” through a given process, with each
process event being rendered as a small scene representing the event.
Aysolmaz, B., Brown, R., Bruza, P.,
Reijers, H. A. (2016). A 3D visualization approach for process
training in office environments Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 10033, 418–436. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-48472-3 24
Summary:
The paper presents a 3D visualization of a BPMN process in an office environment, complete
with avatars for the various roles in the process, allowing the user to navigate through the
various traces of the business process. The authors argue that the rendering of the BPMN
elements in an office environment will immerse the learner, enhancing long term learning.
Effinger, Philip (2013). A 3D-navigator for business process models. . Lecture Notes in Business Infor-
mation Processing — 2013, Volume 132, pp. 737-743
Summary:
This paper is a report on a tool which allows the user to “fly” through a 3D representation
of a business process model. The tool allows the user limited free movement from elements
in the process model, allowing the user to jump between elements only if they are connected
in the process as well as zoom in/out to allow for either an overview or a detailed view of
the model.
14
==PAGE:15==
Oberhauser, Roy; Pogolski, Camil (2019). VR-EA: Virtual Reality Visualization of Enterprise Architec-
ture Models with ArchiMate and BPMN. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing — 2019, Volume
356, pp. 170-187
Summary:
The paper presents a VR hypermodel concept for visualizing, navigating and interacting
with BMPN and Archimate models. One of the obvious advantages of 3D is that the tool
allows for the “stacking” of swim lanes along the vertical axis giving a more comprehensive
overview of complex models. The authors argue for the superiority of VR over 3D or 2D, due
to its capacity for creating immersion, creating a space which users can explore and interact
with. This, they believe, will allow for the rendering of more complex tasks and reducing
the need for model abstraction, while still allowing the users to hide and show information
as desired.
Panzoli, D., Pons Lelardeux, C., Galaup, M., Lagarrigue, P., Minville, V., Lubrano, V. (2017). Inter-
action and communication in an immersive learning game: The challenges of modelling real-time collab-
oration in a virtual operating room. Serious Games and Edutainment Applications: Volume II, 147–186.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51645-5 7
Summary:
The paper presents a tool geared towards rendering a collaborative BPMN process. The
game allows multiple players to each execute events in their respective swim lanes, the
object of the game being to have players execute their events in the order specified in the
process. Once the game has played out, it is able to debrief the players on the correctness
of their process execution. The authors believe that this allows for a safe environment to
conduct an immersive and collaborative learning experience.
Saito, S. (2019). Processcity: Visualizing business processes as city metaphor. Lecture Notes in Business
Information Processing, 350, 207–214. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-21297-1 18
Summary:
This paper introduces a novel visualization technique, which renders BPMN process as cities,
the “buildings” being the activities of the process, and the vertical dimension being used
to represent the number of executions of activities.
The taller the building, the greater
the number of executions. The author believes that the rendering of a complex process as
something no less complex, but more familiar, such as a city will aid comprehension.
Saito, S. (2019).
Processcity: Digital twincity: A holistic approach towards comparative analysis of
business processes. Proceedings - Acm/Ieee 25th International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Lan-
guages and Systems, Models 2022: Companion Proceedings, 17–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3550356.3559086
Summary:
An expansion on the work in paper ProcessCity, the paper introduces the idea of using the
city methaphor to compare similar or related processes.
(*) In 10th International Conference on Games and Learning Alliance, GALA 2021:
Allegra, Mario, et. al. (2021). The Role of Metaphor in Serious Games Design the BubbleMumble Case
Study. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) — 2021, Volume 13134, pp. 198-207
15
==PAGE:16==
Summary:
The paper presents and discusses two serious games aimed at teaching complex biological
processes using metaphors presented through game mechanics. A MarioCart-like game tasks
the player with collecting elements to simulate, in the Multivescicular body, the inclusion
in intraluminal vesicles of those elements necessary for the process of bio-genesis. Another
game uses the mechanics of the action-cooking game Overcooked to simulate the goings on
in a laboratory for nanovesicles production. Based on research that illustrates the success
in using metaphor to facilitate education, the authors argue for the use of game mechanics
to convey learning content.
4.5
Summary of related Work
The search for background literature has revealed a great deal of interest in 3D visualization of business
processes over the last decade, as well as the potential for teaching through games and metaphor. What is
immediately apparent, is that the research has been done exclusively in the world of declarative business
process models, like BPMN, with most of the serious research having been done in expanding the models
into 3D and allowing the user to “fly around it.” The more gamified tools limit the user to an “on-rails”
experience, where the avatar walks from activity to activity, and some of tools seem to limit their immersion
to rendering an office environment and projecting the symbols of BMPN in front of the user in 3D.
Much of the background literature returned tool presentations, and while those certainly can serve as inspi-
ration, the lack of validation means it cannot serve as a basis for further research. The knowledge gained
from the research papers is outlined below.
Leyer, et. al. (2019) showed that immersing the learner in a 3D VW environment had a positive effect on
learning.
Abdul, et. a. (2019) have created a simulator which models a 3D world from a BPMN diagram, and allows
stakeholders to explore a business process. This article is proof of concept that a business might be modelled
in a 3D environment, though since it deals with static business processes, and thus keeps the user “on rails”
it cannot speak to the feasibility of navigating a dynamic graph in a 3D world.
Oberhauser, et. al. (2019) have explored the virtual reality visualization of the imperative business process
modelling notation (BPMN) language, and Brown, et. al. (2011) have done similar work in using VR to
allow for the collaborative modeling of business processes. This is very different from what this thesis pro-
poses, since it will not be dealing with VR, collaboration or modelling, but it does highlight that there is
interest in the area of bringing business processes into an explorable 3D domain.
While the response from the user has generally been positive with regards to ”immersion and “fun”, the
research has also shown the drawbacks of using 3D (the first person view means that the “big picture” can
become obfuscated) and especially virtual reality, where efficiency can become secondary to fun, the gear
can be cumbersome, and some participants may succumb to VR sickness.
A very interesting study was done by Andaloussi, et. al. (2021), who explored how users engaged with a
hybrid interactive 2D model of DCR graph, using eye-tracking and think-aloud. This study dealt with a
model that combines a DCR graph, an interactive text-and-button based simulation of the process in action,
and explanatory text. The study concludes that the hybrid elements allow users from different backgrounds
to interact with and comprehend the same interface. The study briefly goes into the possible extrinsic cog-
nitive load placed on the users by the hybrid interface. While this study does not deviate from the classical
presentation of the process as a graph, it identifies some interesting areas that might be exploited in a 3D
game setting, the possibility of overlaying context-relevant information. Also, the research method does
16
==PAGE:17==
provide some interesting inspiration to build on, since it tracks the behavior of the user during their use of
the graph, as well as their comprehension.
However, to the knowledge of the author, there has not been any work done exploring the affordances of
using a 3D open world game to simulate a business process based on the declarative semantics of DCR graph,
as of the writing of this introduction, and so there seems to be rich opportunity to explore the effects on the
user from being allowed to explore an open world representation of a declarative DCR graph.
17
==PAGE:18==
5
Development of the use case
Much deliberation was done on the choice of domain for the use case, but finally the decision of making use
of the researcher’s personal connection with a department within the municipal health care service, which
provides education and training for the teams responsible for developing duty rosters for all health care
workers in the greater Copenhagen area. This access allowed for the recruitment of a validation cohort, so
the challenge was to find a reasonably small process within that domain, which was complicated enough to
lent itself to showcasing DCR Graph, but simple enough to consist of less than 10 activities. In collaboration
with a representative of the department, the following use case was decided upon.
Figure 3: Register sickness process
18
==PAGE:19==
6
Defining the features of DCR Graphs
Depending on the source, the student of DCR Graphs will encounter different names for the markings and
rules used. Even rules can have different names, sometimes being refered to as constraints or relations.
In this paper we will be using the definitions as they appear in the DCR Graphs process construction and
simulation tool at https://www.dcrgraphs.net/, which will be used to generate the input process for this tool.
Formally a DCR graph consists of three sets of Markings (Included, Pending, Executed) , with a fourth
marking (Enabled) derived from the other three in combination with the configuration of the rules of the
DCR graph (Includes, Excludes, Condition, Response, Milestone).
The rules can be represented as set
of Key-value pairs, with the key being the constraining Activity and the Value being a set of Activities
constrained by said Activity.
Formally an activity can only be executed if it is currently an member of the Included-set and is enabled:
• The executed Activity is added to the set Executed.
• If the executed Activity was a member of the set Pending, it is removed from this set.
• If the executed Activity is a key in Response, each of the members in its Value set are added to the
Pending set.
• If the executed Activity is a key in Includes, each of the members in its Value set are added to the
Included set.
• If the executed Activity is a key in Excludes, each of the members in its Value set are added to the
Excluded set.
The Enabled-marking is calculated on the fly:
• If an Activity, which is the key in a Key-Value pair in Conditions, is a member of the Included set, but
is not a member of the Executed set, then each of the members in its Value are disabled. Else they
are enabled.
• If an Activity, which is the key in a Key-Value pair in Milestones, is a member of the Included set,
and a member of the Pending set, then each of the members in its Value are disabled. Else they are
enabled.
6.1
Activity states
The four different markings can be combined into 16 different states, and while some states cannot exist
according to the rules of DCR (i.e., an activity can never be enabled while it is also excluded) we may still
need to be able to visualize the its markings to the user at any given time. As such the we must be prepared
to generate audio-visual cues for any combination of markings. These will be used in the following section
to generate ideas with an cross-disciplinary expert panel.
Included
Pending
Executed
Enabled
1
T
T
T
T
2
T
T
F
T
3
T
F
T
T
4
T
F
F
T
5
T
T
T
F
6
T
T
F
F
7
T
F
T
F
8
T
F
F
F
9
F
T
T
T
19
==PAGE:20==
10
F
T
F
T
11
F
F
T
T
12
F
F
F
T
13
F
T
T
F
14
F
T
F
F
15
F
F
T
F
16
F
F
F
F
Table 1: The 16 states of a DCR Activity
20
==PAGE:21==
7
Expert interviews
In accordance with the Design science research methodology, a panel of experts from different fields of study
was interviewed to generate the knowledge base necessary for creating the artefact. Each expert was briefed
on the scope of the research project and asked to consent to participate. The consent email can be seen in
appendix A.
The panel consisted of the following experts:
• A UX designer working in games development, with a history working with process models
• A lighting designer and artist
• An associate professor in Software Engineering with a focus on business process management
• An associate professor in Digital Design, with a focus on games design
7.1
Teaching the basics of DCR
In order to bring the experts up to speed in DCR, a crash course teaching was prepared. The course was
designed to teach the basics of DCR Graphs to an audience expected to have little knowledge of process
management, and no knowledge of declarative notations in less than an hour. Of the four experts, the UX
and the lighting designer partook in the whole session, while the AP in in Digital Design, due to their busy
schedule was only subjected to a condensed, verbal version. The AP in Software Engineering, being an
expert on DCR, did not partake in the session.
A figma (www.figma.com) board was set up for the purposes of this teaching session and populated with
various teaching aids.
The session was split into three sections.
Section one explained the concepts of
activities and rules, beginning by describing the parts on an ”atomic” level, and gradually combining them
into more advanced constructions.
In the second part, the experts were tasked with using their newly
acquired knowledge to construct a process model for constructing and eating a sandwich.
In the third
section a solution was proposed and the experts were left with the revelation that the exact same sandwich-
process construction could be used for something wildly different by simply switching out the labels of the
activities. This last flourish was added to prime the experts to think in abstract, cross-domain purposes.
The entire array of teaching materials can be seen in appendix B.
7.2
The semi-structured interview
The researcher then guided the experts through a series of semi-structured interviews. The designers spent
3 60-90 minute session generating ideas for the game, while the associate professors spent about 45 minutes
each. For the designers, the interview was structured in such a way that the researcher went through the
atomic elements of a basic DCR graph one by one and asked the experts their opinion on how these might
be visualized in a game environment. The researcher made sure to allow the experts to think aloud and
bounce ideas off each other, and asking for clarification or encouraging further exploration of a subject. The
interview protocol can be seen in appendix C.
7.3
Extracting data
The interviews were either conducted on Teams and automatically transcribed or recorded in person and
transcribed via Word. These transcripts can be shared upon request In order to subsequently gain insight
from the interviews the data was coded[5] to extract insight on how to best represent the semantics of DCR
graph has the rules and visual elements of a 3D game world.
21
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4: Figma (2023) https://figma.com (accessed 31 December 2023)
7.3.1
First coding
First the interview transcripts were read through by the researcher to manually identify any comments
pertinent to the research at hand. During this stage any personally identifiable information was scrubbed
from the data and corrections were made to ensure the transcribed data coincided with the recorded voice
data. Each fragment was then coded with the timestamp and which participant made the comment and in
which context. Each comment was then grouped by the following coarse-grained game design categories:
[Exploration, Game Design, General Advice, Hints and Feedback, Process Domain, Rules, Rule Types, State
Changes, UI, UX]. The result of this coding can be seen in appendix D.
7.3.2
Second coding
During the second round of coding the fragments of the interview was subjected to a more fine-grained
categorization and tagged according to the following categories. Each fragment could be tagged with more
than one category:
• accepting
• activity
22
==PAGE:23==
• domain
• labels: disabled
• labels: enabled
• labels: excluded
• labels: executed
• labels: included
• labels: pending
• labels: unexecuted
• labels: unpending
• navigation
• rules: condition
• rules: excludes
• rules: includes
• rules: milestone
• rules: response
• UI
• UX
The fragments were also numbered for use in the next step. The result of this coding can be seen in appendix
E.
7.3.3
Third coding
Finally the fragments were grouped into an nxm matrix with n = [Animation, Color, Domain, Effect, Light,
Object, Sound, UI] and m = the tags from the previous coding. This clustered the fragments into blocks
of fragments, each dealing with the same DCR or game element, and its audio/visual representation. The
result of this coding can be seen in appendix F. These blocks became the foundation of the recommended
feature set detailed in the next section.
23
==PAGE:24==
7.4
Recommended feature set
Some recommendations where disregarded. See table x. Some recommendations have been combined due
to their complimenting each other, or merged due to their overlapping content (e.g., comments on the
significance of red and green). Recommendations that contradict each other (such as the merits of using a
fantastical setting as opposed to a domain specific one) are combined and discussed. All recommendations
can be seen in table Y.
Element
Feature
Accepting
• [light] The global lighting should be normal when the DCR graph is in an accepting
state, and change to dark when the DCR graph is in a non-accepting state.
• [light] The global lighting should be limited to two states (normal and unexecuted
pending or unmet milestones) as opposed to three (normal and unexecuted pending
and unmet milestones).
Activities
• [UI] Recognizable iconography should be used wherever possible.
Rules:
condition /
24
==PAGE:25==
milestones
• [animation, lights, sound] When a user clicks a disabled activity everything that
it is a condition of should draw attention.
• [color, effect, object] A disabled activity should be greyed-out, blocked off, or
shrouded in fog until it is enabled.
• [effects, light, UI] The number yet to be executed condition activities (or pending
activities in the case of milestones) can be signaled by gradually reducing the opacity
of the fog effect until completely transparent, signaling 0 required activities yet to
be executed. Alternatively some kind of progress bar, or array of objects, such as
padlocks, could be implemented.
• [light] In the case of a many-to-one / one-to-many relationship between a disabled
activity and the activities needed to be executed for it to be enabled, a cyclic color
effect can be used to show all relevant activities yet to be executed.
• [light] Whenever a new disabled activity is selected, any lit-up relations to previously
selected disabled activities should be turn off, to avoid confusion on the part of the
user.
• [light] Once enabled the activity, or the path back to it, might light up to signal the
user of the state change.
• [light] Light should be used to highlight the activity that needs to be executed in
order to proceed.
• [light] The light from the highlighted activity should influence the lighting of the
players immediate environment, so the player notices the change, even when they are
facing the other way.
• [light, object] The relationship between disabled activities and the activities needed
to unlock them should be signified by a uniquely color-coded, possibly physical, link.
• [UI] There should be an interact-able onscreen element that shows the user can refer
to at any time to see the state of a disabled object (i.e., how far along it is in being
enabled), with the possibility of seeing further information about what needs to be
done next.
25
==PAGE:26==
Domain
• A non-domain specific, fantastical setting might increase user engagement with the
tool, due to the break from mundanity it offers.
• However, moving away from the specifics of a well-known domain and into a more
abstract game space might add to the cognitive load of the user, if they are trying to
learn a specific process within their domain, or if they are trying to figure out how
to apply DCR semantics to their domain.
• Furthermore, trying to apply domain-specific activities to a fantastical setting might
break suspension of disbelief in the user, leading to decreased engagement.
• If using the tool to teach a specific process, It is recommended to use a setting
appropriate to that process.
• If using the tool for teaching DCR semantics, a more engaging, fantastical setting
might be appropriate.
• [Effects] Most of the features discussed in the ideation process should work across
domains, with the possible exception of the fog-effect discussed to symbolize the
disabled state.
labels:
excluded
• [Color] The user should know about excluded activities, but not care about them
until their included. Suggest making them transparent.
labels:
executed /
un-executed
• [effect, light] The user’s attention should be drawing to unexecuted activities by a
beam of light to entice them to go interact with it.
• [animation, effect, light] When executed, the sky beam should disappear from the
activity, accompanied by a burst of sparks, and subsequent animation and sparkles.
labels:
pending
• [animation, light] A pending activity should draw attention to itself with a pulsat-
ing light.
26
==PAGE:27==
navigation
• [UI] If something off-screen happens, the user’s attention should be drawn to it
by some kind on-screen element. Possibilities include: a static compas; a dynamic
object, such as a speech bubble, on the edge of the screen in the direction of the area
of interest, or a button to allow immediate panning to the area of interest, and back
again.
• [UI] The game space should contain visual clues as to whether an event is enabled
or not, since this drives to user forward in simulation mode.
• [UI] If an event is disabled there should be some kind of visual clue as to where the
relevant activity that enables it is located.
• [UI] If possible, the user should be able to move back through their execution history.
• [UI] The user should be able to see the next couple of steps into the future to help
them in deciding their next step.
UI
• Giving the user the option to point and click might make interaction easier for users
that are less comfortable with modern game controls.
• Any interaction the user can make should be hintet at, and the user should be
informed of any keyboard bindings.
27
==PAGE:28==
UX
• [animation] Movement should be used to catch the user’s attention.
• [animation] The manner of the movement can be used to signal the urgency of
the information. Large, aggressive movements can be used to communicate urgency,
while calmer, slower movements can be used to communicate less important, ongoing
information.
• [animation, light] Animating light can also be effective.
• [animation, color] Bringing an animated object to a stop can signify that its effect
is no longer active. Dimming the colors at the same time can underscore the effect.
• [color] Consider using traffic light colors to communicate readiness, but be careful of
ambiguity. Green universally means good to go. red means stopped for some reason.
Possibly excluded. On the other hand red may be enterpreted as being bad or wrong
in some way.
• [Domain] Be careful when choosing iconography. It should complement the chosen
domain to avoid breaking the suspension of disbelief, while not being so abstract as
to add extranious cognitive load to the user.
• [sound] If something is important it should signal the user on all channels, which
means also incorporating sound.
• [UI] Make use of univerally understood iconography, such as play, pause and stop
where relevant, to signal possible state changes.
• [UI] Use mouseover to allow the user preview the conesequences of their actions
before commiting. This has the added benefit of freeing up the right mouse button
for additional interactivity, such as bringing up additional information about the
activity, or making use of voice over.
• [UI] The downside of mousing over in the first person view, is that what’s interesting
to the user might be behind them.
In that case they would need to be able to
persistently see the preview and manually cancel it. Alternatively, make preview
mode exclusive to the top down view.
• [UI] Be careful of giving the user too much freedom in the top down view. They may
fall back on what they’re used to using and disregard the first person view altogether.
• [UI] Limit on what’s screen to what is absolutely necessary. Information overload
will lead to extrenious cognitive load on the part of the user.
The following recommendations, which clashed with certain pre-determined objectivess for the artefact
the were disregarded due to the stated concerns and given no further consideration.
Element
Feature
Reason for disregard
Rules
There should be a specific animation for each
activity and rule pair
Would likely place too large a burden on the
required assets and animations needed for
each rule pair. There are also concerns about
the increase in cognitive load placed upon the
user.
28
==PAGE:29==
Rules
Rule pairs should be connected by direct
paths. One-to-many/many-to-one/many-to-
many-rules could be connected by ”highway”
systems with cars driving between activities.
Would likely lead to on-screen visual clutter
and be difficult for the user to keep track of
from a ground level viewpoint.
Rules
Rules and activity states should be symbol-
ized by animated assets walking between the
activities. Their interactions reflect the state
of the activity.
Again concerns about cost of development.
There are also concerns about the increase in
cognitive load placed upon the user.
Rules
Each activity should have a uniquely ani-
mated object which represents the execute
activity button, e.g., a ringing phone in the
call in sick activity.
Again concerns about cost of development.
There are also concerns about the increase
in cognitive load placed upon the user do to
having to consider each object in the game
space as a possible interactive element.
The recommended feature set was used as the basis for the design requirements in the following section.
29
==PAGE:30==
8
Design Requirements
Based on the recommendations of the experts the following design requirements were established.
The
Must-have and Should-have requirements have all been implemented. The Could-have requirements should
be prioritiezed in any future iterations of the tool. They were not implemented due to time or resourece
constraints. Implementing these functionalities should be reasonably straight forward with the existing code.
Shouldn’t-have requirements are recommendations that should be disregarded due to the reasons given below.
8.1
Must have
• The relationship between disabled activities and the activities needed to unlock them must be signified
by a uniquely color-coded
• When a user clicks a disabled activity it, and is condition(s) must emit particles of matching color.
The disabled activity can cycle through the colors of its conditions.
• The colors must be rendered on a padlock symbol on the disabled activity to denote its locked state.
The user must be able to click on it to see how far along they are in unlocking it.
• A disabled activity must be visually obstructed (fog or door*) until it is enabled.
• The number of yet to be executed condition activities (or pending activities in the case of milestones)
must be signaled by by removing the relevant color from the padlock’s color cycle.
• Whenever a new disabled activity is selected, any lit-up relations to previously selected disabled activ-
ities must be turned off.
• Pending Activites must be lit up to a great degree. Light should pulsate and a skybeam should be seen
from afar. The light from the highlighted activity must influence the lighting of the players immediate
environment.
• For the validation the game environment must be domain specific.
• Excluded activities must be transparent.
• Enabled events should give off sparks if the user has not interacted with them yet.
• executing an activity must result in a visual feedback in the form of a shower of sparks.
• Executed activities must animate slightly to signal their ongoing activation,
• Keep red, yellow and green in reserve for important UI communicaiton. Do not use them for activities.
• Executed buttons must turn green.
8.2
Should have
• The global lighting must be normal when the DCR graph is in an accepting state, and change to dark
when the DCR graph is in a non-accepting state.
• The global lighting must be limited to two states (normal and unexecuted pending or unmet milestones)
as opposed to three (normal and unexecuted pending and unmet milestones).
• Use positive sounds for execution, negative for refusal and triumphant for milestones.
• Mousing over in bird’s eye mode allows the user preview the consequences of their actions before
committing.
• The user cannot commit to actions in bird’s eye view.
30
==PAGE:31==
8.3
Could have
• [UI] The user should be able to see the next couple of steps into the future to help them in deciding
their next step.
• [UI] If possible, the user should be able to move back through their execution history.
• Once the final lock is opened an enabled activity should make itself known to the user.
• Any interaction the user can make should be hinted at (say with screen text), and the user should be
informed of any keyboard bindings.
• draw the user’s atttention to off screen events, like using a compas or similar.
• Consider expanding the icons and particle system to allow users to see any rules from the ground level
perspectives (e.g., include could be a plus icon emitting green particles).
• Provide an alternative environment for non-domain experts learning DCR.
• Giving the user the option to point and click might make interaction easier for users that are less
comfortable with modern game controls.
8.4
Shouldn’t have
• The user’s attention should not be drawn to unexecuted activities by a beam of light to entice them to
go interact with it. This was tried and distracted the user from the important activites like pending.
Although the author was initially skeptical about using fog as an obstructive visual effect in an office envi-
ronment (after all, since nobody wants to see smoke in their office it might be viewed as a sign of trouble),
it was tested on the first batch of validation participants who confirmed that they would prefer something
more domain-appropriate like a closed door. This was amended to greater success in subsequent tests.
8.5
Activity Features
Here is the Activity state truth table from before, now adorned with the relevant features in any given state.
In
Pe
Ex
En
Features
T
T
T
T
[Opaque, Lit up, Jumping & no sparkles, No visual obstruction]
T
T
F
T
[Opaque, Lit up, Stationary & sparkles, No visual obstruction]
T
F
T
T
[Opaque, no lights, Jumping & no sparkles, No visual obstruction]
T
F
F
T
[Opaque, no lights, Stationary & sparkles, No visual obstruction]
T
T
T
F
[Opaque, Lit up, Jumping & no sparkles, Visual obstruction]
T
T
F
F
[Opaque, Lit up, Stationary & sparkles, Visual obstruction]
T
F
T
F
[Opaque, no lights, Jumping & no sparkles, Visual obstruction]
T
F
F
F
[Opaque, no lights, Stationary & sparkles, Visual obstruction]
F
T
T
T
[Transparent, Lit up, Jumping & no sparkles, No visual obstruction]
F
T
F
T
[Transparent, Lit up, Stationary & sparkles, No visual obstruction]
F
F
T
T
[Transparent, no lights, Jumping & no sparkles, No visual obstruction]
F
F
F
T
[Transparent, no lights, Stationary & sparkles, No visual obstruction]
F
T
T
F
[Transparent, Lit up, Jumping & no sparkles, Visual obstruction]
F
T
F
F
[Transparent, Lit up, Stationary & sparkles, Visual obstruction]
F
F
T
F
[Transparent, no lights, Jumping & no sparkles, overridden]
F
F
F
F
[Transparent, no lights, Stationary & sparkles, Visual obstruction]
31
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5: Data parser
9
Some notes on Unity
This section of the report will spend some time on the development of the tool. Although, since the focus
of this thesis is the research and validation of ways to represent DCR concepts in a 3D Game space and not
so much software engineering aspects, only the most salient information will be covered. The game uses a
standard MVC structure, with the Model parsing the XML file containing the graph and storing it in local,
mutatable data structures, the View rendering the Activities in whatever state they are supposed to be in
and the Controller in the middle handling the business logic.
9.1
The Unity Asset Store
Since there is no budget to pay for asset packages, this thesis has had to make due with the inbuilt tools in
unity. Luckily, the Unity Asset Store offers several packages for free, and these have been integrated to give
the domain a little flavor. For a full list of pacakges, please refer to the Unity Store Assets Package folder in
the games Assets folder.
9.2
Data parsing
Them most interesting part of the code is probably the data parser, which can take an XML file out put by
the DCR Graphs tool at https://www.dcrgraphs.net/ and save the activities, their states and rules to a local
data structure. Using prebuilt Unity Game Objects and the location properties which the DCR Graphs tool
includes in the XML file, it should theoretically be quite easy to design the layout of the gamespace in the
DCR Graphs tool, then specify which preexisting data object should correspond to a given activity in its
description and let Unity place activity in the gamespace at runtime. This is sadly outside the scope of this
thesis.
32
==PAGE:33==
10
Validation tests
In accordance with the Design science research methodology, the artefact was field tested with potential end
users to gauge how it matched their needs. Two such validation cycles was performed, with the takeaways
from the first cycle used to improve the artefact before the second cycle. Each participant was briefed on the
scope of the research project and asked to consent to participate. The consent email can be seen in appendix
A.
The validation cohort consisted of people from multiple backgrounds.
First round:
• 4 professionals working in the public health sector in the area of rooster planning (3 females, aged
mid-30s to mid-50s and 1 male in their mid-50s).
Second round:
• 1 software engineering student with some experience in business process management (male, late 20s.
• 1 pedagogue working in daycare (male, early 40s)
• 1 professionals working in the public health sector in the area of case work (female, mid-30s)*
• 1 DCR expert (male, late 40s/early 50s)**
*This participant took part by way of video conference and was unable to interact with the tool personally.
They were therefore taken on a guided tour and asked questions about the environment, and asked to voice
any interactions they wished to perform. **This participant took part by way of video conference and was
unable to interact with the tool personally. They were also very busy and were therefore taken on a guided
tour and asked questions about the environment.
10.1
Test design
Despite being an exploitative study the validation tests were designed to measure the participants’ perception
of usefulness, learnability, commitment and preference, as well as comprehension when comparing different
representations of the DCR graphs.
Two experiments were conducted, with the experiment A testing the participants’ comprehension of
a canonical 3D representation of DCR graphs compared to the existing 2D representation available at
www.dcrgraphs.net. Experiment B tests the impact of adding domain-specific graphical elements to the
3D representation by comparing this representation to the canonical 3D representation. The outer order of
experiments is randomized, i.e., sometimes experiment A is performed before experiment B and visa versa.
The inner order of experiments is also randomized, meaning that sometimes the cannonical representation
is tested before its counterpart and visa versa.
10.2
Think-aloud protocol and semi-structured interview
The participants were asked to navigate the various game environments and voice their thoughts.
The
researcher would periodically remind them to keep speaking and ask open-ended follow-up questions (e.g., P:
”I pressed a thing”; R: ”What happened then?”; P: ”Another thing”; R: What do you think the significance
of that is? Etc.) If a particular screen feature went uncommented, the researcher would ask the user if
they noticed it and follow the think-aloud protocol. The researcher was very careful to avoid asking loaded
questions and to every possible extend let the information flow only from the participant.
10.3
Extracting data
The interviews were either conducted on Teams and automatically transcribed or recorded in person and
transcribed via Word. These transcripts can be shared upon request In order to subsequently gain insight
from the interviews the data was coded to extract insight on how the participants interacted with the
representations of DCR Graphs semantics, that had been developed for the artefact..
33
==PAGE:34==
10.3.1
First coding
Similar to the coding of data from the expert interviews, first the validation transcripts were read through
by the researcher. During this stage any personally identifiable information was scrubbed from the data and
corrections were made to ensure the transcribed data coincided with the recorded voice data. Each fragment
was then coded with the timestamp and which participant made the comment and in which context. Each
comment was then grouped by which representation the comment was pertaining. The result of this coding
can be seen in appendix G.
10.3.2
Second coding
During the second round of coding the fragments of the interview was subjected to a more fine-grained
categorization and issued three tags according. The first tag identified the representation the comment was
made in relation to: [2D, canonical 3D, cannonical 3D with domain labels and domain-specific]. The second
tag identified if the representation was being tested as the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th. Finally, the last tag belongs
to the following categories. Each fragment could be tagged with more than one category:
• accepting
• activity
• condition
• disabled
• domain
• enabled
• excluded
• excludes
• executed
• included
• includes
• labels
• milestone
• navigation
• pending
• response
• unexecuted
• unpending
• UI
• UX
The fragments were also numbered for use in the next step. The result of this coding can be seen in appendix
H.
34
==PAGE:35==
10.3.3
Third coding
Finally the fragments were grouped into one of 3 nxm matrices. The ”Markings” matrix with n = [Included,
Execute, Pending, Enabled]; the ”Rules” matrix, with n = [Includes, Excludes, Condition, Response, Mile-
stones], and the ”Other Features” matrix with n = [Accepting, Evaluation, Labels, Navigation, UI], and for
all three m = the [representation][order] tags from the previous coding. This clustered the fragments into
blocks of fragments (which can be seen in appendix I), each dealing with the same representation and the
implementation of its features. The result of this coding can be seen in appendix X. These blocks became
the foundation of validation results discussed in the next section.
35
==PAGE:36==
10.4
Discussion of validation results
10.4.1
Markings
Included
There was general understanding across the representations that a transparent (or grey or black,
depending on the participant) activity was not part of the process, with participants using such phrases as
”we are no longer working on this”, both due to the signal value of the transparency, as well as the lack of
visual feedback when mousing over, as well as the negative feedback (the shaking and unpleasant noise) the
participants received when they tried interacting with it. There was some uncertainty as to the meaning
of an excluded activity, with one participant worrying, that it was somehow a signal of less than desirable
choice on their part:
”It’s black [transparent], so in another way, it tells me it’s not the right solution. Well, then it’s okay, but
I don’t know if it’s because I’ve chosen not to go with that solution. [...] This is the best solution I have
chosen and now I have, so I would say. Well, then I should choose again. That’s how I feel, so I must try
something else and. And think, I can’t figure this out.”
This comment was made by a participant quite late in the test, while working with the Canonical 3D
representation with domain-specific labels, after already having worked with the classic 2D representation,
and the Canonical 3D representation without domain-specific labels.
Despite understanding that both markings meant that an activity could not be executed in the current state
of the process, all participants that were asked to compare the difference in semantic meaning between an
excluded activity and a disabled activity struggled with comprehending or articulating it. One participant
did comment on the excluded state coming about as a sort of inverse of the enabled state, saying: ”The
walls depend on whether it gets locked or unlocked, one can lock it unlocked by others. The interaction you
have with the grayed out, it means that if you activated another. So it’s the opposite. It requires so well,
so the opposite of it being locked.”, but none were able to independently figure out the impact including or
excluding an activity had on its rules.
Executed
When interacting with the classic 2D representation of DCR graph, all participants understood
the use of the color green and the check-mark as an indication of completion. One participant went further
and stated that ”The ticks seem to signify that the choice was correct - even though you said that there
were no incorrect choices (laughs).” This is interesting, since neither statement is true in the semantics of
DCR graph. Unless self-excluding, an activity is never completed and may be executed as many times as
the user desires. Furthermore there is in the language of DCR no notions of ”right” or ”wrong” choices. The
expectation that they can make right or wrong or better or worse choices is something that many participants
vocalized during their time exploring the process, as will be seen in the subsequent sections of this report.
The canonical representation of DCR graph makes use of an animated geometric object to signal an activity’s
executed status as a supplement to the activity’s button turning green after a successful execution. In the
first round of validations this cube was simply placed in the center of the activity, in the same location as the
domain assets in the the domain-specific representation. This design choice had the unfortunate consequence
of the cube, by some participants, being mistaken for a obstacle, placed there to block their progress, as is
evident in the comment ”I certainly can’t get past those [cubes]. I can get past but I can’t get over them.
Or through them,” which is just one among several similar comments. However, after playing for a while,
most participants realized that the cube was not their to hinder their progress, and in the second round of
validations, the jumping objects were placed out of player’s way and none of the participants in the second
round commented that they perceived the object as an obstacle.
As opposed to the check-mark in the classic 2D representation, none of the participants commented that the
saw the animated object as an indicator of completeness. There did not however seem to be a consensus on
the actual meaning of the animation, with explanations including ”In any event I have executed this activity
and that one is jumping, which I expect means that I have completed the task”, ”[The jumping box] just
signals that the next step is open”, ”You can see [the box] moving up and down, suggesting something is
concealed”, ”It’s almost jumping, signaling that I need to do something”, ”The jumping boxes tell me that
you can still work on it”, ”It indicates an ongoing process. That’s what I would say, but I don’t know. It
36
==PAGE:37==
could be that when you finish, it stops moving. Because if you’re engaged in these activities, you don’t need
to finish one to proceed with the next. You can work on several things at once”, ”[The animated sphere
means ] that you have to do something with the sphere and the cube in order to get the key”, ”[The jumping
animation] must mean something has to happen. Does it mean pending again?”, and ”So everything’s okay,
because that’s what I expect, when it jumps up and down. Then it’s like, the place is completed, also a bit
like a check mark, right?”
Another interesting observation is that, despite being briefed on the dynamic, non-linear nature of DCR
graph, almost all participants treated the process as a linear affair, expecting that they needed to execute all
activities (check all the boxes, one might say) before being done. Most participants also did not experiment
with doubling back and executing activities multiple times, although those who did expressed surprise that
they were allowed to do so: ”Oh hey, I can execute multiple times” and ”I can’t press... Oh, it seems I could
[execute an activity more than once].” Interestingly enough when this behavior did manifest, it only did so
in the 3D representations.
Most participants also seemed to understand that a green button meant the activity had executed, while a
white button meant it was yet to execute. One participant did however, as will be seen repeatedly throughout
this section, associate the white color with the button being inactive: ”his [activity] is closed because [the
button] is white.”
When asked, to describe the particles being emitted by some enabled activities, the participants correctly
identified them as being indicators that those activities had yet to execute. One participant, viewing the
process from the bird’s eye view, mused ”It’s funny it seems like those particles are directing me to one
of the other rooms.” This turned out to be an effect created by the 3D environment, where the particles,
floating upwards towards and past the camera, did indeed create the illusion of pointing outwards towards
the other activities. When instructed to move the camera, the participant realized that the particles were
in fact floating straight up.
The DCR expert brought in to validate the tool commented that they found the particle effect superfluous,
and against tehe philosophy of DCR Graphs:
”I think, I would rather focus on whether whether an activity was pending and enabled. I would be quite
indifferent whether or not it has executed [...] because that’s a classic way of thinking. ”If it’s happened
once, then it’s probably not important to do it again”, but frankly you don’t know that. Because you might
end up doing many things several times. We can show many states on an activty if you count them all. But
you quickly find out that there’s only really two that are interesting. [...] But it’s because we come from
a world of checklist, where having ticked the box is central. But now when its suddenly no longer central,
people have a hard time letting go. People want control. [...] That’s the challenge here; you have to let go
of control to gain control, if you insist on having control like a checklist, then you end up doing something
so rigid there’s only one way to do it and then you really lose control. So people don’t do it.”
Regardless, all participants asked about the use of color and effects to indicate an activity’s state of execution
correctly identified what was intended to be conveyed. This was true even when the users were asked to test
the 3D environments before the 2D environment.
In the first round of validations, unexecuted activities were highlighted with light columns whenever they
were enabled, however one of the participants vocalized the interpretation, that the light columns meant that
were meant to visit each of them. Due to concern that this would eliminate focus from pending activities
and unmet conditions, the light columns only appear on pending activities, which will be discussed later in
the relevant section.
Pending
There was general agreement among the cohort that the exclamation marks used to represent a
pending activity in the 2D representation were meant to draw the user’s attention, but not what it was meant
to draw attention to. One user thought it might be related to a split-join operation, while another correctly
identified their role in the milestone relation. The general attitude to among the cohort was summed up by
one participant who remarked ”There are [...] some exclamation marks. Yes, so there must be something I
need to pay attention to. Maybe something where I need to provide input or something similar, but I can’t
do anything here. I can’t click on anything. It could be that there is something that needs to be done.
37
==PAGE:38==
Something that needs active consideration, perhaps? The exclamation marks draw attention to something.
But there’s not much that directly tells me what to do here.” In the 3D representation however, there was
general agreement that the use of bright, pulsating light, as well as a light column in the second round of
validation was meant to spark an immediate call to action, with all but one of the participants, when asked
responding with some variation on ”It definitely wants me to go over there and check out those activities”
and the DCR expert immediately identified the effect as representing a pending activity.
Enabled
In the classic 2D representation of DCR graph, all participants that were asked to comment on
the green color of enabled, unexecuted activities correctly identified the green border as a marking of this
state. One participant however stated ”[The activity] is green now, which presumably means that it was
better that I executed that [condition] first” indicating that tendency to incorporate the ”goodness of choice”
thinking which was prevalent among the cohort.
In the 3D representations, during the first round of validations, a disabled activity was denoted by being
shrouded in a thick fog. The participants were evenly split between those who correctly identified the mist
as having something to do with the activity being inaccessible (”There’s a bunch of smoke there. I don’t
want to go there.”) and those who simply did not notice it. Those who did notice it also indicated that they
felt compelled to explore an activity when it had the fog removed (”The clouds disappear on the picture
right over to the right, so I think that’s where I should go next.”).
However, one of these participants
vocalized a strong preference for something more domain-specific like a locked door, which was subsequently
successfully incorporated into the second round of validation. Furthermore, in the first round of validation, if
the user attempted to press the button of a disabled activity, it would trigger an emission of (multi-) colored
particles, which would hint at how many and which activities would need to be executed first, before the
activity would become enabled. This turned out to be too subtle, since most participants simply did not
attempt to interact with the disabled activity in the first place, and those that did, failed to pick up the
hint, overlooking the particle emissions. In the second round of validation, these hints were supplemented
by a more obvious metaphor: A (multi-) colored lock on the disabled activity, and a key with a matching
color on the relevant condition. The combination of walls and a locked door made it more easy for the
participants to relate to the nature of the disabled activity, and reason that if there was a lock there would
likely also be a key. However, despite the lock animating when moused over (it would get noticeably bigger
and subsequently return to its original size) the participants were not enticed into clicking it. However,
when directly asked to click it and explain the resulting particle emissions, participants were successful in
reasoning that the matching particle effects offered a hint as to the location of the matching key, with the
DCR expert correctly identifying the lock and key symbols as denoting a condition relation: ”So, I guess
that the lock must mean there’s something else I should do. A condition, I guess. I wonder if it won’t let
you know where the condition leads to, if you click on the lock.”
All but one participant accepted that a white button meant enabled, with the one participant remaining
adamant that they saw the white color as signaling that the button was disabled.
Several participants remarked that the sounds emitted by the buttons on either a successful or unsuc-
cessful activation helped in underlining the result of the attempted action, although one participant referred
to the unsuccessful activation noise as ”unpleasant”.
10.4.2
Rules
Includes
The participants’ comments about the classic 3D representation of DCR graph revealed some-
thing interesting about the use of arrows to symbolize rules, as well as the participants’ assumptions about
the process, Despite being informed beforehand about the declarative nature of DCR graphs, when asked
about the significance of the includes-relation, comments tended to be on the perceived impact on the order
of execution: ”[The green arrow] is the way you should go.”, ”Green signifies a possible order of execution.”
What’s interesting is that these statements were made after the participants had the option to play around
with the includes-relation and see its effects in the 3D representation.
Excludes
A similar story plays out when asked to comment on the excludes relation with explanations
ranging from order of execution: ”Red [is] an impossible order of execution [...] I don’t know what the
hiearchy is, except that red seems to be a ”bad” act”, to inactivity: ”There’s a percentage mark on it? I
38
==PAGE:39==
honestly don’t know. Maybe that something isn’t active?” and ”You can’t do that”, to the correct semantic
meaning: ”I would guess it makes it inactive, so it doesn’t ”count” in this context.”
In the 3D representation, seeing the effects of the includes- and excludes relation seems to have helped the
participants along ind reasoning about the rules between two activities. Several participants managed to
correctly reason the workings of a ’switch’ construction: ”If the roster is within budget, then you don’t have
to inform the manager” and ”I think it deactivates Inform Manager and activates Roster Exceeds Budget”
and ”I think that I have turned off the task in a way or another. So either I should find a place to light
it again, or... [...] The name of the button indicates that it is necessary, I think. It’s about the manager
wanting to be informed, but it could also be that it was only if I chose to select that something exceeded
the budget. Well then, that one lit up again so. it might be that I should get permission from the manager
to exceed the budget. I lit that one up again. I prefer that one. So now it’s within the budget, that one is
jumping it’s completed. It’s not necessary to inform the manager.”
Condition
In the 2D representation approximately half of the participants were able to correctly identify
the condition rule as having significance for the enabledness of the succeeding activity, remarking: ”I think
[the yellow arrow] means that A must have executed before B can execute” and ”Orange I’m not sure. It
might signify a preceding act” whereas the rest of the cohort either attributed a different rule to the rule or
did not care to guess.
In the 3D representation, as mentioned earlier, during the first round of validations the condition activities
were marked by their buttons having unique colors, with the rule being marked by that color being emitted as
particles by the disabled activity and its conditions if the user tried to interact with the disabled activity. This
approach was chosen in an attempt to reduce on screen clutter, but had multiple downsides. Also mentioned
earlier, was the fact that many users simply didn’t try to interact with the disabled activities, bypassing the
particle effect entirely. Another downside, related to the condition activity, was that overloading meaning
of the condition button color beyond its internal execution state, created some confusion among certain
participants, in particular the participant who was already unsure about the meaning of the white and green
color: ”The light blue color doesn’t really tell me anything. If it were red I’d want to push it, but I don’t
know what the blue color signifies” and ”It could be anything, but that’s what I’m saying, the purple color
doesn’t really tell me anything. I can’t see what the purple color signifies for me” and ”It could indicate
that the blue [buttons] are dependent on one of the white ones being done first.”
However, once the participants had managed to activate the sparkle effect, especially after the condition
rules had been augmented with the lock-key symbol combination, their understanding of its significance was
almost universal. The challenge with getting them to actually activate the sparkle effect, either by pressing
the lock or disabled execute button, unfortunately remained.
Response
In the 2D representation none of the participants managed to properly articulate the significance
of the response condition, with one participant interpreting it as a bi-directional arrow: ”It’s an arrow that
runs both ways. That’s the thing... There is an arrow at both ends of the line, so I think something goes
back and forth”, and the rest being unsure or giving up.
The participants interpretation of the response rule the 3D representation has largely been covered in
the markings:pending section. There seemed to be a general understanding among the participants, that if
executing an action resulted in another action lighting up, they were expected to proceed to that activity
next.
Milestone
The milestone was probably the second-most difficult concept to get across, since its disabled
state is mechanically identical to the disabled state in the condition rule, and when seen from a ground
level perspective, the player might easily overlook an activity becoming disabled if their attention is focused
on the other activity becoming pending. As a result most of the comments made by the cohort about the
milestone relation comes from the 2D representation, where two of the participants managed to spot and
articulate the response-milestone rule: ”It seems like activity 4 is dependent on me having executed 3 and
5” and ”So [pending activity 1] and [pending activity 2] must have [executed] before [milestone activity] can
execute.”
39
==PAGE:40==
In while some participants, in the 3D representation, correctly spotted and identified the key-lock relation
between disabled activities, that had a milestone-rule with pending response activities, did not articulate
why this rule might be different from the normal condition-rule.
10.4.3
Other features
Accepting
The 3D representations of DCR graph has a lighting effect for signaling the user when the
graph is not in an accepting state. This is the feature of DCR that was the most difficult to convey to
users with no prior knowledge of DCR Graph. When the graph is in an accepting state the lighting is
normal, but when the state becomes non-accepting the lights dim. This has two goals: 1) Creates a lighting
environment where the lit-up pending activities can attract more focus, since the ambient light is lower, and
2) Communicate to the user that something about the global state has changed.
According to all but one of the participants (the DCR expert), the effect reaches its first goal and completely
misses the second goal. When asked about the change in light, all participants immediately noticed it. The
also all notice the pending states lighting up in the lower lighting environment. However, when asked about
the meaning of the change in global lighting, practically all assume that it is related to the passing of time,
e.g., ”[The switch from day to night] means that it needs to process something. Something needs to be
considered before moving on.” One participant did consider that the reason for the change might be related
to the pending states: ”I can see that maybe it’s the darkness so that you can see the spotlight even more.
And when I have solved this task in the spotlight and the glitter is gone, then it can become day again, then
it’s back to the normal flow, or whatever you call it.” However, the DCR expert immediately realized that it
was signaling the switch from/to an accepting state: ”Yes, okay, the graph became accepting, that’s pretty
clear.”
Evaluation
Most participants did not provide unsolicited information about their experience with the 3D
presentation, with the exception of one, the oldest, who did not find the tool very engaging or useful: ”This
didn’t give me a very good insight into the process. I like the DSB journey planner, you know? 1, 2, 3, 4...
Here there was a lot of back and forth. That might be easier for some, but for my brain, it’s better to have
something more concrete like 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And you can even have splits, like... 2, 3, boom, and then you go
back again. But this was not for me.”
Labels
The cohort seemed to be split between participants who immediately used the labels to guide
their exploration, trying to find the logical starting point or next logical step based on the text descriptions
provided for each activity, and those who initially disregarded the labels in favor of letting the visual cues
guide the exploration (” I’m too lazy to read the text.”). One participant, again the oldest, completely
ignored the labels and only used the visual cues to guide them (”When I was doing this, I didn’t get much
into it, I almost didn’t even see what was written, because I was looking for where it lit up next. All that
written there, it’s probably made into a nice little story. I didn’t pay much attention to it, because I was
focused on where to go next.”). One potential problem with labels, which was discovered is when the user’s
understanding of the label clashes with what the graph is telling them: ”It doesn’t seem like it’s a logical
place to start if you look at the text.” Another point of interest was stumbled upon by the DCR Graphs tool
used to generate the process’ convention of labeling its activities numerically by default. This fed into the
users’ expectation of linearity in the graph structure and gave rise to confusion when prompted to experiment
with executing the activities in different order: ”It’s illogical to me that one must do 3 and 5 before you
can do 4” and ”No, because then someone like me might think of trying 6 and 4. I can start from the back,
so now I press there. And a checkmark appears, apparently, you can start with that one. There’s nothing
indicating you can’t start with it. Normally, when it’s in sequence, you’d think you have to follow it, but
here you don’t need to. So now this one is fixed, and the number five is gone, strangely enough.”
Navigation
This final section deals with the users’ experiences with the representations of DCR graph as
a whole, and not any one feature of DCR which is represented in the graph.
One of the main takeaways from the users’ interaction with the DCR graph, especially in its 2D representation
was that, despite their being told beforehand, that DCR Graph was a dynamic and not a linear affair, they
40
==PAGE:41==
explored and executed the graph in a linear fashion.
This assumption fed into their reading the use of
arrows in the 2D representation, not as rules between activities, but as rules for order of execution (”It’s a
sort of flowchart. The arrows signify order of execution; if this then that”) and that there was a set order
in which to execute the activities. This expectation bled over into their subsequent exploration of the 3D
representation, which did not use arrows to connect the activities (”So these two, I can’t see what order I
should take them in. Now I’m just taking it in that order, because that’s the order they lie in along the
way here”). There also seemed to be a pervasive expectation that they needed to complete all activities,
and several participants continued searching for clues as to which activity they were supposed to execute
next, even after the activity helpfully named ”process completed” became available for executing (”[I didn’t
execute the complete process activity immediately when it became available] because I didn’t think I’ve
been through all the steps.”). There were however signs that many participants after being urged to conduct
multiple playthroughs and experiment with different choices of activities to execute began to realize the
dynamic nature of the graph (”As it stands I think I am allowed to decide if I want to do it myself or if I
want to involve the planner, because there’s nothing telling me that I have to go into that room now, like
there was with this room”) and (”Well, when everything I assigned an employee to consider, I actually... So
I could have skipped everything else”).
41
==PAGE:42==
11
Test results
After the test, the participants were asked to chose their preferred representation along 4 usability measure-
ments. Unfortunately only 5 of the 8 participants responded. These are the results.
11.1
Usefulness
Comparing ease of using the tool
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
2
3
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
1
4
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
1
1
3
11.2
Learnability
Comparing ease of learning the underlying process
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
2
3
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
1.5
3.5
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
1
1
3
11.3
Engagement
Comparing desire to using the tool during test
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
1
4
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
2
3
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
0
1
4
42
==PAGE:43==
11.4
Preference
Comparing desire for future use
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
3
2
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
2
3
Existing 2D
Canonical 3D
Domain-specific 3D
2
1
2
11.5
Score considerations
In general the preference seems to skew towards the 3D representation except in the last question, when the
cohort is asked to choose between the representations for future use, where 2D and 3D are neck and neck.
This may be down to an aversion to commit to new technology over existing, proven solutions, or because
they were asked to learn a lot in a very short time. Or it may simple being measuring error. The sample
size is much too small to draw any sort of conclusions, but there seems to at least be interest in the 3D
representation.
11.6
Process comprehension
Of the 8 participants, 5 submitted comprehension tests, which can be seen in appendix J.
Participant 1
Rule
Correct
Includes
1/8
Excludes
0/4
Condition
0/2
Response
0/3
Milestone
0/2
Participant 3
Rule
Correct
Includes
0/8
Excludes
0/4
Condition
0/2
Response
1/3
Milestone
2/2
Participant 5
Rule
Correct
Includes
0/8
Excludes
0/4
Condition
2*/2
Response
0/3
43
==PAGE:44==
Milestone
2/2
*correct but wrong direction
Participant 6
Rule
Correct
Includes
0/8
Excludes
2/4
Condition
0/2
Response
1/3
Milestone
0/2
Participant 7
Rule
Correct
Includes
1/8
Excludes
2/4
Condition
0/2
Response
0/3
Milestone
0/2
Milestone seems to have been the easiest to comprehend, with two participants scoring 100
44
==PAGE:45==
12
Conclusion and future recommendations
Although the size of the validation cohort was relatively small, rendering the results statistically insignificant,
this limitation is frequently encountered and acceptable in the context of other qualitative exploratory stud-
ies[1]. The main goal of this research was not to establish broad, generalizable conclusions, but to attempt
to create some understanding of user engagement with the artifact.
The results from the comprehension test showed a rather poor level of retention among the test cohort. It
is expected that this result is primarily due to the complex nature of the DCR Graph rule set. However,
a closer examination of think-aloud tests reveal a greater understanding of the overall process flow, even
as participants struggled with the specifics of the rules. This highlights the need for a more fine-grained
approach to teaching the semantics of DCR Graph through games.
The usability tests conducted revealed a general preference for the domain-specific representation over the
traditional 2D or canonical ones. This finding is consistent with other studies [12, 23] which report greater
enjoyment during the learning process with similar novel approaches. A word of caution though, regarding
the potential threats to validity, since most participants in the validation are direct or indirect acquaintances
of the researcher, there is always the risk of their tempering their response to avoid causing offense. Fur-
thermore, there is a risk of the researcher forgetting their place as a neutral observing party. The researcher
was well aware of this and, while it ws necessary to nudge the proceedings along from time to time, did
their utmost to avoid influencing the data in any way. Another threat to validity is that the DCR expert
who was the subject on one of the semi-structured interviews is the advisor on this thesis. Both they and
the researcher were aware of the potential threat to validity inherent in this and remained neutral in their
discussions of the merits of presenting DCR Graph in a 3D environment.
For future studies, it is recommended to focus on performing A/B tests on various user interface (UI) and
user experience (UX) elements. This approach should be taken to maximize user engagement. Additionally,
developing a series of learning scenarios similar to tutorial missions in video games or the gradual difficulty
progression in puzzle games like Portal could be beneficial. Incorporating worked examples and adaptive
feedback would further enhance the learning experience. While this study may not have achieved statistical
significance, it has successfully developed an artifact that is rooted in UX best practices and has received
positive validation from its user base.
The inclusion of extensible prefabs in Unity and the parsing logic within the game’s Model class, which is set
up to work with the XML formats exported by the modelling tool available at https://www.dcrgraphs.net/
could potentially allow for the generation of 3D representations of graphs with very little game development
needed.
The entire project is publicly available at https://github.com/GloriousHypnotoad/DCR-Graph-
Game-Prototype. This repository offers an open invitation to ongoing development by students and aca-
demics.
45
==PAGE:46==
13
Bibliography
1. Abbad Andaloussi, A., Zerbato, F., Burattin, A., Slaats, T., Hildebrandt, T. T., Weber, B. (2020). Ex-
ploring how users engage with hybrid process artifacts based on declarative process models: a behavioral
analysis based on eye-tracking and think-aloud. Software and Systems Modeling, 20(5), 1437–1464.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-020-00811-8
2. Abdul, B. M., Corradini, F., Re, B., Rossi, L., Tiezzi, F. (2019). UBBA: Unity based BPMN animator.
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 350, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-21297-
1 1
3. Allegra, Mario, et. al. (2021). The Role of Metaphor in Serious Games Design the BubbleMumble Case
Study. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) — 2021, Volume 13134, pp. 198-207
4. Aysolmaz, B., Brown, R., Bruza, P., Reijers, H. A. (2016). A 3D visualization approach for process
training in office environments Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 10033, 418–436.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48472-3 24
5. Charmaz, K.(2014) Constructing grounded theory (introducing qualitative methods series).
6. Effinger, Philip (2013). A 3D-navigator for business process models. Lecture Notes in Business Infor-
mation Processing — 2013, Volume 132, pp. 737-743
7. Dalgarno, B.,
Lee, M. J. W. (2010).
What are the learning affordances of 3-D virtual environ-
ments?
British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(1), 10–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
8535.2009.01038.x
8. Erhel, S.,
Jamet, E. (2013). Digital game-based learning: Impact of instructions and feedback on
motivation and learning effectiveness. Computers and Education, 67, 156–167.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.02.019
9. Harman, J., Brown, R., Johnson, D., Rinderle-Ma, S., and Kannengiesser, U. (2016). Augmenting
process elicitation with visual priming: An empirical exploration of user behaviour and modelling out-
comes. Information Systems, 62, 242–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2016.01.005
10. Kiili, K. (2005). Digital game-based learning: Towards an experiential gaming model. Internet and
Higher Education, 8(1), 13–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2004.12.001
11. Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not
work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-
based teaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75–86. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep410 1
12. Leyer, Michael2; Brown, Ross; Aysolmaz, Banu; Vanderfeesten, Irene; Turetken, Oktay (2019). Virtual
World BPM Training Systems Process Gateway Experimental Results. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
— 2019, Volume 11483, pp. 415-429
13. Litman, J. A. (2005). Curiosity and the pleasures of learning: Wanting and liking new information. In
Cognition and Emotion (Vol. 19, Issue 6, pp. 793–814). https://doi.org/10.1080/02699930541000101
14. Oberhauser, R., Pogolski, C.,
Matic, A. (2018). VR-BPMN: Visualizing BPMN Models in Virtual
Reality. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 319, 83–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-94214-8 6
15. Oberhauser, Roy; Pogolski, Camil (2019). VR-EA: Virtual Reality Visualization of Enterprise Archi-
tecture Models with ArchiMate and BPMN. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing — 2019,
Volume 356, pp. 170-187
46
==PAGE:47==
16. Oblinger, D. G. (n.d.). The Next Generation of Educational Engagement. IN Journal of Interactive
Media in Education — 2004, Volume 2004, Issue 1, pp. 10
17. Panzoli, D., Pons Lelardeux, C., Galaup, M., Lagarrigue, P., Minville, V.,
Lubrano, V. (2017).
Interaction and communication in an immersive learning game: The challenges of modelling real-time
collaboration in a virtual operating room. Serious Games and Edutainment Applications: Volume II,
147–186. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51645-5 7
18. Ploder, Christian; Bernsteiner, Reinhard; Schl¨ogl, Stephan (2018). Improving business process man-
agement competencies by applying gamification aspects in teaching bachelor students. Communications
in Computer and Information Science — 2018, Volume 870, pp. 15-23
19. Rajˇsp, Alen; Horng-Jyh, Paul Wu; Beraniˇc, Tina; Heriˇcko, Marjan (2018). Impact of an introductory
ERP simulation game on the students’ perception of SAP usability. Communications in Computer and
Information Science — 2018, Volume 870, pp. 48-58
20. Saito, S. (2019).
Processcity: Visualizing business processes as city metaphor.
Lecture Notes in
Business Information Processing, 350, 207–214. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-21297-1 18
21. Saito, S. (2019). Processcity: Digital twincity: A holistic approach towards comparative analysis of
business processes. Proceedings - Acm/Ieee 25th International Conference on Model Driven Engineer-
ing Languages and Systems, Models 2022: Companion Proceedings, 17–21.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3550356.3559086
22. Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Review of Educational Research, 78(1), 153–189.
https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654307313795
23. Zenner, A., Makhsadov, A., Klingner, S., Liebemann, D.,
Kr¨uger, A. (2020).
Immersive Process
Model Exploration in Virtual Reality.
Ieee Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
26(5), 2104–2114. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2020.2973476
24. Ziv, A., Ben-David, S., Ziv, M. (2005). Simulation Based Medical Education: An opportunity to learn
from errors. Medical Teacher, 27(3), 193–199. https://doi.org/10.1080/01421590500126718
47
==PAGE:48==
13.1
Appendix A
You have been invited to partake in a ¡type of session¿ about designing a 3D open world environment.
Your participation in this interview is voluntary.
Purpose of ¡type of session¿
The purpose of the ¡type of session¿ is to ¡type of purpose¿ an interactive 3D open world environment
for the representation of DCR graphs.
Time Commitment
The interview is anticipated to be completed in a session of 60-90 minutes.
Data Collection
The interview will be recorded on video and audio. You may request not to be video recorded,
If you so desire. The data will only be used for research purposes.
Confidentiality
Only the researcher will have access to any personal information
The research will however include a small professional biography stating your qualifications.
Your Rights
You have the right to:
at any time withdraw from the interview without penalty. refuse to respond to any questions. refuse
anything that may be asked of you. have any questions about the interview answered, if answering those
questions will not affect the data collected during the interview. At any time request that any data you have
supplied be destroyed. Your Privacy
Your privacy is protected according to Danish law and European guidelines.
The transcribed interview will be included as an appendix to the research, and this may be published or
shared for scientific purposes, but will not include any personally identifiable information.
Data Security
The data collected from the interviews will be stored securely and access to the data will be restricted
to the researcher.
Best regards,
Simon
48
==PAGE:49==
13.2
Appendix C
• Welcome the participant at the start of the interview.
• Express gratitude for their time and participation.
• Briefly describe the purpose of the research
• Confirm that the participant has read and responded to the consent email.
• Run the participants through the teaching material available on the Figma board.
• Guide the participant to brainstorm how DCR rules can manifest in the physical world.
• Instruct them to use the digital post-it notes available at the Figma board. T
• think about sights, sounds, shapes, light, physical elements such as gravity and personal feelings
Ask how we can represents (use words like illustrate, visually, symbolic, features, indicators, differences,
cues):Included Excluded Enabled Disabled Executed Not Executed Pending Non-pending. Includes
Excludes Condition Response Milestone One-to-one One-to-many Many-to-one Many-to-many
Thank the participant for their contribution.
49
==PAGE:50==
13.3
Appendix D
13.3.1
Ideation Interview 01 - Ideator 02 and Ideator 03
Participant
Rules
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
So if I want to see a process, there
will be something at the beginning.
Then in this case, for example, you
said yourself the staff member calls
in sick, so I could imagine this
could be fun, but I don’t know if
it’s a good idea that you know if
phone is calling and then you actu-
ally go, then you you pick up the
phone in a virtual environment and
then you can see once it picked up
then suddenly and you answinter-
ered then you can see. OK, here’s
the shift planner suddenly showing
up as well and starting to to make
sounds.
When asked how to model an ac-
tivity being a condition of another
activity.
[1:30:39]
Ideator-02
Now, what happens then?
Then
we have to look at all the condi-
tions. And what is then required?
So when I answer the call, then sud-
denly the shift planner will show
up, right and the and and be like
OK, you need to do something over
here in order to make sure we can
call in staff.
When asked how to model an ac-
tivity being a condition of another
activity.
[1:33:31]
Ideator-02
In my mind, a condition is typically
represented by a door, you know,
the door opens when something has
been achieved, right?
When asked how to model an ac-
tivity being a condition of another
activity.
[1:40:00]
Ideator-02
What I would do is make the ’call
in staff’ option greyed out, literally
disabled, until something happens
with the assigned shift planner.
When asked how to model an ac-
tivity being a condition of another
activity.
[1:49:03]
Participant
Hints and Feedback
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
Then I would everything that is and
condition of would then take its at-
tention.
When asked what should happen
when a user clicks a disabled activ-
ity
[1:50:26]
Ideator-02
Maybe
would
shake,
maybe
it
would have a sound.
When asked what should happen
when a user clicks a disabled activ-
ity
[1:50:37]
Participant
Process Domain
Context
Timestamp
50
==PAGE:51==
Ideator-02
What if we model it one-to-one in
the 3D environment where we can
actually visualize the different rel-
evant parts?
For instance, when
there’s a phone call, a phone ap-
pears, and it rings.
Since you
have two ears, you can discern the
sound’s origin.
When asked how to model an ac-
tivity being a condition of another
activity.
[1:29:01]
Ideator-02
How is that connecting could still
make a wire between those two that
you have a staff member in the bed
grabbing a phone. You see the tele-
phone wire to the phone at the of-
fice, and when he calls, it’ll light up.
So you know, OK, he does some-
thing. Then the cable is lighting up
or something, you know, and then
start moving and you have some
some noise.
When asked about how to avoid ac-
tivites being connected by arrows
and boxes
[1:46:45]
Participant
State Changes
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
I’m not sure about which actions
need to be done there, but once
that’s correct, it will light the path
and then enable the ’call in staff’
option, you know, if other condi-
tions are met
When asked how to signal the con-
nections and disabledness
[1:49:21]
Ideator-02
Maybe it explodes in a enabled you
know, achievement unlocked.
When asked how to signal the con-
nections and disabledness
[1:49:59]
Ideator-03
I use shadows and light at the same
time.
When asked how to signal activities
being enabled/disabled
[1:51:23]
Ideator-02
I think it’s a Disney has a some
game. I don’t remember where it
is that some areas, if the condi-
tions aren’t met, yet there’ll be a
cloud and will be dark and look su-
per spooky.
But once conditions
are met, it’ll clear up and be sunny,
you know, and all that. And then
you feel, oh, I want to go over there
now.
Because now it’s more wel-
coming and warm.
When asked how to signal activities
being enabled/disabled
[1:52:10]
13.3.2
Ideation Interview 02 - Ideator 02
Participant
Rules
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
Now an obvious way of doing this
is making a path between those two
in our world to vary, but that’s very
much related to an arrow, so I don’t
know.
When asked how to visualize the
existence of rules.
[1:06:11]
51
==PAGE:52==
Participant
Rule Types
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
I’m thinking a highway with lanes
inside, and each lane represents a
condition.
When asked how to visualize the
existence of multiple rules.
[1:08:55]
Ideator-02
I think that [some kind of color col-
ored colored physical link between
activities to indicate their status] is
the safe bet.
When asked about keeping track of
condition rules.
[1:22:40]
Ideator-02
When I click the make sandwich it
should somehow highlighted these
conditions aren’t met right? Light
them up.
When asked when rules should be
visual.
[1:23:52]
Ideator-02
Yes. So I think it’s very important
that we need to show what’s in and
what’s out, so to speak, right?
When asked whether only rules re-
lated to the latest selection should
light up.
[1:26:29]
Participant
General advice
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
I think it’s very hard to avoid using
iconography and the main reason
I’m saying is saying this is because
you don’t want players to use their
their mental capacity on learning to
use the tool you want them to.
When asked for alternatives to la-
belled buttons.
[1:08:55]
Participant
UI
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
I would put a big fat button that
says go to and another one in that
says return.
When asked when panning should
happen
[1:11:50]
Ideator-02
We would, if we were keeping the
highway Rd metaphor, we would of
course be a car. You know you can,
or maybe it’s a train.
When asked for alternatives to la-
belled buttons.
[1:13:49]
Participant
UX
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
I would go back to what we already
discussed based on what we know
from at least the UX field of re-
search that we know that.
Move-
ment and sound are too ways to
catch people’s attention.
When asked how to draw attention
to important events
[7:20]
Ideator-02
So movement can also have, you
know, personality. It can be very
aggressive, it can be calm and we
can use that for, you know, for how
severe the information is to commu-
nicate.
When asked how to draw attention
to important events
[8:56]
52
==PAGE:53==
Ideator-02
If it’s super important, something
you have to do something about
right now, it should take all the at-
tention.
When asked how to draw attention
to important events
[9:25]
Ideator-02
And that’s why I would also add
sound effects.
When asked how to draw attention
to important events
[9:25]
Ideator-02
Not only does it move, it also makes
a sound, but also makes the light
suddenly move not only itself.
When asked how to draw attention
to important events
[9:25]
Ideator-02
You can even if you if it’s not im-
portant to look at very often, they
can just be very slow movement,
because if it’s very slow, we will not.
When asked how to draw attention
to important events
[9:25]
Ideator-02
So we can use movement to say
for example, OK, everything’s go-
ing on. Maybe it’s just in a small
floaty state, and if it breaks down
we put some great dark colors on it.
Stops moving, so we know this is no
longer active.
When asked how to communicate
differences in state
[12:49]
Ideator-02
For example include exclude that
could possibly be a, you know, a
traffic light, green light, red light,
yellow light, right ohm if it’s green
light it means that this includes
over here this this is ready to con-
tinue if it’s red light is because it’s
stopped for some reason maybe it’s
been excluded.
When asked how to make state sig-
nals domain agnostic.
[20:02]
Ideator-02
So you can use iconography in that
way to to communicate this right?
Or a pause button which we also
know from from using it. Everyone
knows play. Pause. That’s some-
thing we can relate to, right? Or
even a stop if it’s excluding some-
thing, we stop it possibly.
When asked how to make state sig-
nals domain agnostic.
[22:50]
Ideator-02
So if it’s pending right now, I’m
thinking it’s pulsing, you know,
take attention over here because,
you know, we need to figure out
why is this pending?
When asked how to identify the
specific disabling activity.
[38:24]
Ideator-02
You know, some games at the top
have this compass kind of thing.
When asked how to signal user from
off-screen
[1:00:51]
Ideator-02
[draws a speech balloon on the
edge of the screen] then when you
start looking around, this will move
through no until it gets at least into
the field of vision.
When asked how to signal user from
off-screen
[1:00:51]
53
==PAGE:54==
Ideator-02
Just writing here between the two
activities it says pans, so in. So in-
stead of having an arrow, we actu-
ally move the camera, in this case,
right?
When asked how to signal user from
off-screen
[1:05:22]
Ideator-02
[panning] must never happen auto-
matically. It has to be a user action.
When asked when panning should
happen
[1:11:21]
Ideator-02
Green means done.
Think pretty
much in all cultures, green is kind
of like, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And
then among usual color when it’s
not yet, I wouldn’t put red because
red is a, you know. But then again,
red means something is wrong.
When asked how to keep track of
met condition
[1:21:04]
Ideator-02
Just putting in some, whereas un-
touched needs to shout. ”Ohh, you
need to to be clicking me.” By giv-
ing it in this case, I’m giving it a
border color to show some kind of
action on it, right?
When asked how to signal whether
an activity has happened/has not
happend (unotuched)
[1:30:23]
13.3.3
Ideation Interview 03 - Ideator 03
Participant
Rules
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-03
You need to do something before
and then also you will use light to
show what is the other thing you
have to do it before or and then this
is.
When asked how to visualize re-
sponses and conditions
[48:07]
Participant
UX
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-03
You can perceive the light because
the colors of all space change.
When asked how to signal off-screen
changes.
[49:51]
Ideator-03
And then that light can give you a
perception that you have to move
your body to see where is actually
the light.
When asked how to signal off-screen
changes.
[50:20]
Ideator-03
I mean in terms of light, I was
thinking about a theater when ev-
erything is finished in a theater and
everything, everybody’s gone.
When asked how to signal a global
state change, i.e., accepting/non-
accepting.
[55:15]
13.3.4
Ideation Interview 04 - Ideator 02 and Ideator 03
Participant
Rules
Context
Timestamp
54
==PAGE:55==
Ideator-02
So you could have it so if we have
paths going from things you know
with small Rd for people walking
or whatever, and then we have a
path directly from the the in to the
church and we can see that no one
walks from the end to the church,
but we see that people are walking
from the church to the inn.
On being asked how to immersively
visualize rules in the game world.
[38:28]
Ideator-02
I mean, I guess if we trigger it, we
need to see what happens, right?
So in that case, I would imagine
that we then see a drunk cool fol-
low me along now that that then
walks to the church and then some-
one would be like, no, you’re not
getting in here.
On being asked how to immersively
visualize rules in the game world.
[39:24]
Ideator-02
And then we might consider these
people who come from the inn in a
good color code. Maybe in yellow.
On being asked how to immersively
visualize rules in the game world.
[39:48]
Participant
Rule types
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-03
I was thinking like to create a great
scale of colors and that part and
then if you move outside of that
area that is disabled and then you
can start seeing the colors, they’ll
natural colors of the environment.
On being asked how to immersively
visualize rules in the game world.
[41:11]
Ideator-03
For example, if you have an area
that is disabled [...] I will put it in
Gray colors like in black, white and
then if you go out of that area that
is disabled and then you can start
seeing the colors that like the yeah,
they’re all rainbow.
On being asked how to immersively
visualize rules in the game world.
[41:46]
55
==PAGE:56==
Ideator-02
I mean the obvious one is some kind
of progress bar somewhere, right?
[...] I would definitely recommend
having some kind of calendar so you
can see how many are we talking
about. Otherwise it might get too
abstract, especially one to end a sit-
uation where there are a lot of stuff
that needs to be a lot of activities.
We need to make sure that we ac-
tually that actually getting active
because it’s it’s easy if it’s only two
or three activities need to be ac-
tive, but once you have like 10 or 11
gets really hard to to do it without
something concrete that you can
take a look at. It could be a circular
diagram where it’s like, you know,
like when you play Trivial Pursuit,
you have the different cheese that
gets filled out as you progress.
On being asked how to visualize
condition rules.
[51:48]
Ideator-03
I was thinking like to reduce the
kind of smoke step by step every
time that you do on a task and then
we’ll do a start just removing the
smoke until you can see the com-
pleted image.
On being asked how to visualize
condition rules.
[58:22]
Ideator-02
I was just thinking maybe if you
color code of the light between the
the pinning activity and the mile-
stone then you get an immediate
one-to-one.
You see ”oh, this is
red, this is green.
You just add
more color, right, different color
sources. For example, if there’s a
pending activity influencing three
or four milestones, then you should
have three or four light sources on
the activity. Then you could start
turning off the lights as they ac-
tually become non-pending. That
also solved the thing that we talked
about earlier about showing pro-
gression. You can even have it like
disco laser lights.
On
asked
about
differentiating
pending events
[1:23:35]
Participant
Process Domain
Context
Timestamp
56
==PAGE:57==
Ideator-03
They actually feel happier for be-
ing involved in these kind of envi-
ronments, completely different, be-
cause sometimes they they don’t
have the opportunity to be to be
there and then it’s actually more
simple.
I mean, I think that it’s
not a problem, in my humble opin-
ion, of course, because I don’t re-
ally know what kind of stakeholder
do you have.
On being asked about using domain
specific or fantastical assets
[30:20]
Ideator-02
I think that if we go with a fan-
tasy world, those people you’re us-
ing to validate it on will need to
learn the abstractions of the system
itself, but also need to spend time
trying to figure out how [they] can
apply this to a real life situation.
I think it’s too abstract.As a [for-
mer] consultant who went and did
consulting work for different com-
panies I found that When I was try-
ing to use examples, the more close
I could get to their ways of working
and their ways of understanding the
world, the better results.
On being asked on the merits of fan-
tastical vs domain-specific setting
[1:43:31]
Ideator-02
I think it depends on where you
want to. If you want to teach peo-
ple about DCR, this could probably
work. If you want to use DCR as a
workflow tool in a company setting
you might need to get at least a lit-
tle closer.
On being asked on the merits of fan-
tastical vs domain-specific setting
[1:45:37]
Ideator-02
Fog maybe the only thing that
doesn’t necessarily fit [in an office
domain].
[In an office setting] of
a nice forest, which which is bor-
dered by these trees, it could just
be a wall. I think it’s fine to have
the light. I can easily see how [the
day/night cycle] can work. Natural
light, the colors we just discussed,
worked just fine when I was map-
ping out process flows.
On being asked on the merits of fan-
tastical vs domain-specific setting
[1:46:51]
Participant
States
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
We need to know [the excluded ac-
tivity] is there, but we shouldn’t
care about it until [it’s included].
So yes, throw transparency on it.
Lots.
On asked about the visibility of ex-
cluded activities
[1:13:24]
57
==PAGE:58==
Ideator-02
Make [a disabled] button grayscale
and make it stop spinning.
On asked about the visibility of dis-
abled activities
[1:16:13]
Participant
State Changes
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
I think if it’s executed maybe it
should move to indicate that some-
thing has happened to it in some
way.
[...]
Maybe you know turn,
spin or something like that’s been
around to indicate that something
is going on, cause then you know
the difference between it’s a static
thing that’s ready to start and then
you have this thing that is moving
because you know it’s ongoing.
On being how visualize execution
state change.
[54:07]
Participant
UI
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-02
It depends on what we want. Do
we want to know about it at all
times, or do we want to know about
it sometimes?
If we if we want
to keep an overview, we can show
how the game will change if you
execute an activity.
If it’s some-
thing that’s critical to know before-
hand we could have a small indica-
tor when were looking at the map,
just to show you that we aren’t
there yet, but then when you tab
you get more details on why aren’t
we there yet.
On being asked when and where to
visualize condition rules.
[54:07]
Ideator-02
Mouseover gives us more options
if we want to [free up right click-
ing], which is often allows panning
or more information.
I really like
mouse over interaction, because it’s
very simple.
You get immediate
feedback on what you’re doing, but
you’re not committing. That’s the
most important part.
Mouseover
never commits.
On asked about how to allow the
user to preview the effects of exe-
cuting activities.
[1:30:34]
Ideator-02
When previewing the activity [I can
navigating and cancel the preview].
Alternatively, when you preview an
activity, you get to fly up and see
get the overview.
On asked about how to allow the
user to preview the effects of exe-
cuting activities.
[1:33:31]
Ideator-02
However, if I’m able to see the [pro-
cess] from up here, why would I ever
want to watch it in first person?
On asked about how to allow the
user to preview the effects of exe-
cuting activities.
[1:35:32]
58
==PAGE:59==
Participant
UX
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-03
Well, those I cannot see actually
the difference between one and the
other one.
On being asked about the difference
between many sparkles (idea for un-
executed activity) and few sparkles
(executed activity)
[19:20]
Ideator-03
That is like noon, I suppose. And
then we have the sunset, and then
we have actually at night. But be-
tween those steps, I don’t really rec-
ognize actually from the sunset and
to until the night, I cannot recog-
nize the difference between both of
them.
On being asked about the differ-
ence between day (process is ac-
cepting), sunset (pending activi-
ties), night (pending activities with
milestones).
[20:12]
Ideator-02
Maybe it makes more sense to have
it like a a beam of light on it to in-
dicate to indicate ”Ohh, look over
here there’s something.” And then
maybe there’s some,
you know,
some God ray around it, like ”Ohh,
you want to go and touch it?”
On being asked how to visualize un-
executed activities
[1:05:5]
Ideator-02
I think it makes sense to that when
the activity executes, sparks shoot
out, the God ray disappears and the
activity starts shining and bobbing
instead
On being asked how to visualize un-
executed activities
[1:09:08]
13.3.5
Ideation Interview 05 - Ideator 05
Participant
Exploration
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-05
If it’s in simulation mode I will basi-
cally look at the derived property of
is enabled, so that’s the. I would di-
rect my attention to the visual clue
that tells me whether an event is
enabled or not.
On being asked what is important
when they navigate a DCR graph
[00:00:18]
Ideator-05
But I can also ask when can I exe-
cute B? [...] I’m in a state in which
I cannot really execute it right now.
So how do I get there?
On being asked what is important
when they navigate a DCR graph
[00:02:38]
Ideator-05
So for me enabledness [...]
that
is composed by inclusion, pending,
executed and not disabled.
What
are good metaphors for that?
On being asked what is important
when they navigate a DCR graph
[00:05:41]
Ideator-05
[Allowing the player to move back-
wards thorough their execution his-
tory] would be nice, yes.
On being asked whether execution
history and backtracking would be
useful.
[00:05:41]
59
==PAGE:60==
Ideator-05
I think I do not need the full path,
but I need some indications that
I’m not going over and over in the
same loop, I need some indications
of what are the next two or three
stages, whether the these two three
stages are somehow helping me to
[my goal], but I don’t need every
single step on the way.
On being asked whether seeing all
rules concurrently would be useful.
[00:07:52]
Ideator-05
I think if if I get too much data it
would get too cluttered, so it’s like
my my attention would go ”plop”.
On being asked whether seeing all
rules concurrently would be useful.
[00:08:33]
Ideator-05
Why I cannot execute B? I go back
to B and then I see that B has 3
padlocks. OK, where do I get the
keys from these padlocks?
On being asked how they envision
guiding the player.
[00:09:52]
13.3.6
Ideation Interview 06 - Ideator 06
Participant
Game Design
Context
Timestamp
Ideator-06
If I have to make an educated guess,
I would imagine that like the point
and click type of interface. Is prob-
ably going to reduce like the focus
on the controls and increase the fo-
cus on the activities
On asked about the most sensible
choice of player perspective.
[00:13:55]
Ideator-06
You have an objective within the
game and that objective is not to be
a commercial success or anything
beyond people being given tasks
to actually perform. So my point
with that is simply that if you add
some levels of metaphor, you risk
like to fail on the the actual objec-
tive of the game. People will play
the game anyway because they are
tasked to do it. I’m not an expert in
gamification and serious games, but
I would be worried that like people
would have a hard time like relat-
ing back to the scenario that they
actually need to apply those rules
on if you create any form of like ab-
straction or metaphor which is not
using with domain context.
On being asked about fantastical
versus domain specific settings
[00:18:51]
Ideator-06
I don’t feel there is like a right
answer other than like a whatever
you’re doing, it should be visible to
the user like using keyboard short-
cuts, for instance.
On being asked about on-screen
menus versus keyboard shortcuts.
[00:22:57]
60
==PAGE:61==
Ideator-06
Suspension of disbelief is this idea
where, when consuming any form
of narrative or like entertainment,
you’re accepting the rules of the
world you are actually involved in.
Putting a waste paper basket like
a in a fantasy scenario has like the
high risk of actually breaking the
suspension of disbelief, because it
breaks the internal rules of the envi-
ronment you have created in terms
of like what you’re talking about
there.
On being asked about the risks of
placing domain specific elements in
a fantastical setting
[00:25:45]
61
==PAGE:62==
13.4
Appendix E
#
Participant
Fragment
1
Ideator-03
[accepting] I mean in terms of light, I was thinking about a theater when everything
is finished in a theater and everything, everybody’s gone.
2
Ideator-03
[accepting] That is like noon [(process is accepting)], I suppose. And then we have
the sunset [(pending activities)], and then we have actually at night. But between
those steps, I don’t really recognize actually from the sunset and to until the night
[(pending activities with milestones)], I cannot recognize the difference between both
of them.
3
Ideator-02
[activity] I think it’s very hard to avoid using iconography and the main reason I’m
saying is saying this is because you don’t want players to use their their mental
capacity on learning to use the tool you want them to.
4
Ideator-02
[rules] How is that connecting could still make a wire between those two that you have
a staff member in the bed grabbing a phone. You see the telephone wire to the phone
at the office, and when he calls, it’ll light up. So you know, OK, he does something.
Then the cable is lighting up or something, you know, and then start moving and
you have some some noise. Maybe it explodes in a enabled you know, achievement
unlocked.
5
Ideator-02
[rules] Now an obvious way of doing this is making a path between those two in our
world to vary, but that’s very much related to an arrow, so I don’t know.
6
Ideator-02
[rules] I’m thinking a highway with lanes inside, and each lane represents a condition.
7
Ideator-02
[rules] [As an alternative to labelled buttons] We would, if we were keeping the high-
way Rd metaphor, we would of course be a car. You know you can, or maybe it’s a
train.
8
Ideator-02
[rules] o you could have it so if we have paths going from things you know with small
Rd people walking or whatever, and then we have a path directly from the the in to
the church and we can see that no one walks from the end to the church, but we see
that people are walking from the church to the inn.I mean, I guess if we trigger it, we
need to see what happens, right? So in that case, I would imagine that we then see a
drunk cool follow me along now that that then walks to the church and then someone
would be like, no, you’re not getting in here.And then we might consider these people
who come from the inn in a good color code. Maybe in yellow.
9
Ideator-03
[rules condition and milestone] I was thinking like to create a great scale of colors
and that part and then if you move outside of that area that is disabled and then
you can start seeing the colors, they’ll natural colors of the environment. example, if
you have an area that is disabled [...] I will put it in Gray colors like in black, white
and then if you go out of that area that is disabled and then you can start seeing the
colors that like the yeah, they’re all rainbow.
10
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] In my mind, a condition is typically represented by
a door, you know, the door opens when something has been achieved, right?
11
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] So if I want to see a process, there will be something
at the beginning. Then in this case, example, you said yourself the staff member
calls in sick, so I could imagine this could be fun, but I don’t know if it’s a good idea
that you know if phone is calling and then you actually go, then you you pick up the
phone in a virtual environment and then you can see once it picked up then suddenly
and you answered then you can see. OK, here’s the shift planner suddenly showing
up as well and starting to to make sounds.
12
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] Now, what happens then? Then we have to look
at all the conditions. And what is then required? So when I answer the call, then
suddenly the shift planner will show up, right and the and and be like OK, you need
to do something over here in order to make sure we can call in staff.
62
==PAGE:63==
13
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] What I would do is make the ’call in staff’ option
greyed out, literally disabled, until something happens with the assigned shift planner.
14
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] [When a user clicks a disabled activity] everything
that it is a condition of would then take its attention. Maybe would shake, maybe it
would have a sound.
15
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] What if we model it one-to-one in the 3D environ-
ment where we can actually visualize the different relevant parts? instance, when
there’s a phone call, a phone appears, and it rings. Since you have two ears, you can
discern the sound’s origin.
16
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] I’m not sure about which actions need to be done
there, but once that’s correct, it will light the path and then enable the ’call in staff’
option, you know, if other conditions are me
17
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] I think that [some kind of color colored colored phys-
ical link between activities to indicate their status] is the safe bet.
18
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] When I click the make sandwich it should somehow
highlighted these conditions aren’t met right? Light them up.
19
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] [Only rules related to the latest selection should light
up]. I think it’s very important that we need to show what’s in and what’s out, so to
speak, right?
20
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] It depends on what we want. Do we want to know
about [a rule] at all times, or do we want to know about it sometimes? If we if we
want to keep an overview, we can show how the game will change if you execute an
activity. If it’s something that’s critical to know beforehand we could have a small
indicator when were looking at the map, just to show you that we aren’t there yet,
but then when you tab you get more details on why aren’t we there yet.
21
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] I mean the obvious one is some kind of progress bar
somewhere, right? [...] I would definitely recommend having some kind of calendar
so you can see how many are we talking about. Otherwise it might get too abstract,
especially one to end a situation where there are a lot of stuff that needs to be a lot of
activities. We need to make sure that we actually that actually getting active because
it’s it’s easy if it’s only two or three activities need to be active, but once you have
like 10 or 11 gets really hard to to do it without something concrete that you can take
a look at. It could be a circular diagram where it’s like, you know, like when you play
Trivial Pursuit, you have the different cheese that gets filled out as you progress.
22
Ideator-02
[rules: condition and milestone] I was just thinking maybe if you color code of the
light between the the pinning activity and the milestone then you get an immediate
one-to-one. You see ”oh, this is red, this is green. You just add more color, right,
different color sources. example, if there’s a pending activity influencing three or four
milestones, then you should have three or four light sources on the activity. Then
you could start turning off the lights as they actually become non-pending. That also
solved the thing that we talked about earlier about showing progression. You can even
have it like disco laser lights.
23
Ideator-03
[rules: condition and milestone] I was thinking like to reduce the kind of smoke step
by step every time that you do on a task and then we’ll do a start just removing the
smoke until you can see the completed image.
24
Ideator-05
[rules: condition and milestone] Why I cannot execute B? I go back to B and then I
see that B has 3 padlocks. OK, where do I get the keys from these padlocks?
25
Ideator-03
[rules: condition and milestone] You need to do something before and then also you
will use light to show what thing you have to do before is
26
Ideator-03
[rules: condition and milestone] You can perceive the [offscreen] light because the
colors of all space change and then that light can give you a perception that you have
to move to see where the light actually is.
63
==PAGE:64==
27
Ideator-03
[domain] They actually feel happier being involved in these kind of environments,
completely different, because sometimes they they don’t have the opportunity to be to
be there and then it’s actually more simple. I mean, I think that it’s not a problem,
in my humble opinion, of course, because I don’t really know what kind of stakeholder
do you have.
28
Ideator-02
[domain] I think that if we go with a fantasy world, those people you’re using to
validate it on will need to learn the abstractions of the system itself, but also need
to spend time trying to figure out how [they] can apply this to a real life situation.
I think it’s too abstract.As a [former] consultant who went and did consulting work
different companies I found that When I was trying to use examples, the more close
I could get to their ways of working and their ways of understanding the world, the
better results.
29
Ideator-02
[domain] I think it depends on where you want to. If you want to teach people about
DCR, this could probably work. If you want to use DCR as a workflow tool in a
company setting you might need to get at least a little closer.
30
Ideator-02
[domain] Fog maybe the only thing that doesn’t necessarily fit [in an office domain].
[In an office setting] of a nice forest, which which is bordered by these trees, it could
just be a wall. I think it’s fine to have the light. I can easily see how [the day/night
cycle] can work. Natural light, the colors we just discussed, worked just fine when I
was mapping out process flows.
31
Ideator-06
[domain] You have an objective within the game and that objective is not to be a
commercial success or anything beyond people being given tasks to actually perform.
So my point with that is simply that if you add some levels of metaphor, you risk
like to fail on the the actual objective of the game. People will play the game anyway
because they are tasked to do it. I’m not an expert in gamification and serious games,
but I would be worried that like people would have a hard time like relating back to
the scenario that they actually need to apply those rules on if you create any form of
like abstraction or metaphor which is not using with domain context.
32
Ideator-02
[labels: disabled] Make [a disabled] button grayscale and make it stop spinning.
33
Ideator-03
[labels: disabled and enabled ] I use shadows and light at the same time.
34
Ideator-02
[labels: disabled and enabled] I think it’s a Disney has a some game. I don’t remem-
ber where it is that some areas, if the conditions aren’t met, yet there’ll be a cloud
and will be dark and look super spooky. But once conditions are met, it’ll clear up
and be sunny, you know, and all that. And then you feel, oh, I want to go over there
now. Because now it’s more welcoming and warm.
35
Ideator-02
[labels: executed] I think if it’s executed maybe it should move to indicate that some-
thing has happened to it in some way. [...] Maybe you know turn, spin or something
like that’s been around to indicate that something is going on, cause then you know
the difference between it’s a static thing that’s ready to start and then you have this
thing that is moving because you know it’s ongoing.
36
Ideator-03
[labels: executed] Well, those I cannot see actually the difference between [many
sparkles ( un-executed activity)] and [few sparkles (executed activity].
37
Ideator-02
[labels: un-executed] Maybe it makes more sense to have it like a a beam of light on
it to indicate to indicate ”Ohh, look over here there’s something.” And then maybe
there’s some, you know, some God ray around it, like ”Ohh, you want to go and
touch it?”, then I think it makes sense to that when the activity executes, sparks
shoot out, the God ray disappears and the activity starts shining and bobbing instead.
38
Ideator-02
[labels: excluded] We need to know [the excluded activity] is there, but we shouldn’t
care about it until [it’s included]. So yes, throw transparency on it. Lots.
39
Ideator-02
[labels: pending] So if it’s pending right now, I’m thinking it’s pulsing, you know,
take attention over here because, you know, we need to figure out why is this pending?
40
Ideator-02
[navigation] You know, some games at the top have this compass kind of thing.
64
==PAGE:65==
41
Ideator-02
[navigation] [draws a speech balloon on the edge of the screen] then when you start
looking around, this will move through no until it gets at least into the field of vision
42
Ideator-02
[navigation] Just writing here between the two activities it says pans, so in. So instead
of having an arrow, we actually move the camera, in this case, right?
43
Ideator-02
[navigation] [panning] must never happen automatically. It has to be a user action.
44
Ideator-05
[navigation] If it’s in simulation mode I will basically look at the derived property of
is enabled, so that’s the. I would direct my attention to the visual clue that tells me
whether an event is enabled or not.
45
Ideator-05
[navigation] But I can also ask when can I execute B? [...] I’m in a state in which I
cannot really execute it right now. So how do I get there
46
Ideator-05
[navigation] So for me enabledness [...] that is composed by inclusion, pending, exe-
cuted and not disabled. What are good metaphors for that?
47
Ideator-05
[navigation] [Allowing the player to move backwards thorough their execution history]
would be nice, yes.
48
Ideator-05
[navigation] I think I do not need the full path, but I need some indications that I’m
not going over and over in the same loop, I need some indications of what are the
next two or three stages, whether the these two three stages are somehow helping me
to [my goal], but I don’t need every single step on the way.
49
Ideator-02
[UI] [On panning to points of interest] I would put a big fat button that says go to
and another one in that says return.
50
Ideator-06
[UI] If I have to make an educated guess, I would imagine that like the point and
click type of interface. Is probably going to reduce like the focus on the controls and
increase the focus on the activities
51
Ideator-06
[UI] I don’t feel there is like a right answer other than like a whatever you’re doing,
it should be visible to the user like using keyboard shortcuts, for instance.
52
Ideator-02
[UX] I would go back to what we already discussed based on what we know from at
least the UX field of research that we know that. Movement and sound are too ways
to catch people’s attention.
53
Ideator-02
[UX] So movement can also have, you know, personality. It can be very aggressive,
it can be calm and we can use that for, you know, how severe the information is to
communicate.
54
Ideator-02
[UX] If it’s super important, something you have to do something about right now,
it should take all the attention. And that’s why I would also add sound effects.
55
Ideator-02
[UX] Not only does it move, it also makes a sound, but also makes the light suddenly
move not only itself.
56
Ideator-02
[UX] You can even if you if it’s not important to look at very often, they can just be
very slow movement, because if it’s very slow, we will not.
57
Ideator-02
[UX] [state changes] we can use movement to say example, OK, everything’s going
on. Maybe it’s just in a small floaty state, and if it breaks down we put some great
dark colors on it. Stops moving, so we know this is no longer active.
58
Ideator-02
[UX] example include/exclude that could possibly be a, you know, a traffic light, green
light, red light, yellow light, right ohm if it’s green light it means that this includes
over here this this is ready to continue if it’s red light is because it’s stopped some
reason maybe it’s been excluded.
59
Ideator-02
[UX] So you can use iconography in that way to to communicate [state changes]? Or
a pause button which we also know from from using it. Everyone knows play. Pause.
That’s something we can relate to, right? Or even a stop if it’s excluding something,
we stop it possibly.
60
Ideator-02
[UX] Green means done. Think pretty much in all cultures, green is kind of like,
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And then among usual color when it’s not yet, I wouldn’t put
red because red is a, you know. But then again, red means something is wrong.
65
==PAGE:66==
61
Ideator-02
[UX] Mouseover gives us more options if we want to [free up right clicking], which
is often allows panning or more information. I really like mouse over interaction,
because it’s very simple. You get immediate feedback on what you’re doing, but you’re
not committing. That’s the most important part. Mouseover never commits.
62
Ideator-02
[UX] When previewing the activity [I can navigating and cancel the preview]. Alter-
natively, when you preview an activity, you get to fly up and see get the overview.
63
Ideator-02
[UX] However, if I’m able to see the [process] from up here, why would I ever want
to watch it in first person?
64
Ideator-05
[UX] I think if if I get too much data it would get too cluttered, so it’s like my my
attention would go ”plop”.
65
Ideator-06
[UX] Suspension of disbelief is this idea where, when consuming any form of narrative
or like entertainment, you’re accepting the rules of the world you are actually involved
in. Putting a waste paper basket like a in a fantasy scenario has like the high risk
of actually breaking the suspension of disbelief, because it breaks the internal rules of
the environment you have created in terms of like what you’re talking about there.
66
==PAGE:67==
13.5
Appendix F
Element
AnimationColor
Domain
Effects
Light
Object
Sound
UI
accepting
and non-
accepting
1, 2
activity
3
constraints:
condi-
tion and
mile-
stone
14
13
23
9, 16, 17,
19,
22,
25, 26
4,
5,
6,
7, 8, 10,
11,
12,
15,
16,
17, 20
14
21,
24,
25, 26
Domain
27,
28,
29, 31
30
labels:
disabled
32
32
33, 34
33, 34
labels:
executed
35
36
labels:
un-
executed
37
37
labels:
excluded
38
labels:
pending
39
39
navigation
40,
41,
42,
43,
44,
45,
46,
47,
48
UI
49,
50,
51
UX
52,
53,
55,
56,
57
57,
58,
60
65
55
52,
54,
55
59,
61,
62,
63,
64
67
==PAGE:68==
13.6
G
13.6.1
Validation Interview 01 - Validator 01
Participant
2D DCR representation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 1
It signals that it’s okay, I think. I
can move on. Then I go to number
two and press execute there. And it
also turned green and fine. So that
activity is completed.
On being asked on the meaning of
the green checkmark
[00:02:46]
Validator 1
I think maybe something orange
appeared. I’m actually not sure.
On being asked about the effect of
executing an activity on the state
of the process overview.
[00:03:08]
Validator 1
There are [...]
some exclamation
marks. Yes, so there must be some-
thing I need to pay attention to.
Maybe something where I need to
provide input or something similar,
but I can’t do anything here.
I
can’t click on anything. It could be
that there is something that needs
to be done. Something that needs
active consideration, perhaps? The
exclamation marks draw attention
to something. But there’s not much
that directly tells me what to do
here.
On being asked about the meaning
of the blue arrows
[00:03:50]
Validator 1
It’s illogical to me that one must do
3 and 5 before you can do 4.
Commenting on the discrepancy
between the numerical labels and
the
non-linear
structure
of
the
graph.
[00:06:18]
Validator 1
If it was something temporary, an
option or a fallback or something
similar, it could be something we
don’t need after all. [...] It’s some-
thing it removes, I think. It’s some-
thing else you do, make an interme-
diate calculation, and then it’s no
longer needed, so away with it. I
think that, I don’t know, but you
do.
On being asked about the meaning
of the read arrow and the target
state change of the target activity
upon source activty execution.
[00:07:53]
Validator 1
No, because then someone like me
might think of trying 6 and 4. I can
start from the back, so now I press
there.
And a checkmark appears,
apparently, you can start with that
one.
There’s nothing indicating
you can’t start with it. Normally,
when it’s in sequence, you’d think
you have to follow it, but here you
don’t need to. So now this one is
fixed, and the number five is gone,
strangely enough.
On being prompted to try execut-
ing an activity in the lower part of
the graph first.
[00:09:14]]
68
==PAGE:69==
Validator 1
It’s an arrow that runs both ways.
That’s the thing... There is an ar-
row at both ends of the line, so
I think something goes back and
forth.
Commenting on the *-¿ shape of
the response relation.
[00:14:48]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 1
I can’t pass through here, there’s
sometbhing jumping up and down.
Now it’s blocking, and now I’m let
in so I can pass on. Now I’ve figured
out, I have to press the button, so
I can go under it [...] so I can move
on. And then suddenly it’s a differ-
ent color.
Commenting on jumping box ani-
mation, which denotes an executed
activity in the Canonical 3D DCR
representation.
[00:20:30]
Validator 1
I haven’t tried that, but I will defi-
nitely try. I can do that easily, so I
really don’t need to wait for it.
On being asked if they could go
around the jumping box
[00:26:16]
Validator 1
But it just signals that the next
step is open, as I see it.
On being asked the purpose of the
jumping box
[00:26:45]
Validator 1
It’s something to do with time.
On being asked about the meaning
of the global switch from day (ac-
cepting) to night (non-accepting).
[00:27:52]
Validator 1
Or it needs to processs something.
Something needs to be considered
before moving on.
On being asked about the meaning
of the global switch from day (ac-
cepting) to night (non-accepting).
[00:28:31]
Participant
Domain specific 3D DCR rep-
resentation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 1
No.
On being asked if they noticed the
fog effect on the disabled activities.
[00:30:43]
Validator 1
This didn’t give me a very good in-
sight into the process
Commenting on their experience
with the process representation.
[00:33:15]
Validator 1
I like the DSB journey planner, you
know? 1, 2, 3, 4... Here there was
a lot of back and forth. That might
be easier for some, but for my brain,
it’s better to have something more
concrete like 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And you
can even have splits, like...
2, 3,
boom, and then you go back again.
But this was not for me.
Commenting on their experience
with the process representation.
[00:33:28]
69
==PAGE:70==
Validator 1
When I was doing this, I didn’t get
much into it, I almost didn’t even
see what was written, because I was
looking for where it lit up next.
All that written there, it’s proba-
bly made into a nice little story. I
didn’t pay much attention to it, be-
cause I was focused on where to go
next.
Commenting on their experience
with the process representation.
[00:34:09]
Validator 1
There are these little stars that tell
me where to start.
Where some-
thing is going on.
Commmenting on the glitter effect
on un-executed activities.
[00:35:40]
Validator 1
I can’t press... Oh, it seems I could.
On realizing that activities can be
executed more than once.
[00:35:46]
Validator 1
To me green signales, like the tick
mark, that everything is okay.
Commenting in the buttons turning
green upon activity execution.
[00:35:53]
Validator 1
And now I can see the moon,
so it will take some time...
but
it shouldn’t take long to register
someone calling in sick. And I click
and there, it became light again.
But you can see that something
isn’t adding up...
Musing on the meaning of global
state change from day to night
and
back
again
(accepting/non-
accepting state).
[00:36:06]
Validator 1
It’s a tool for calling in sick.
On being asked about the meaning
of the phone jumping upon activity
execution.
[00:36:41]
Validator 1
So I expect that those light columns
[...] are where I have to do some-
thing.
As you can see, so I just
have to go into them, and well, then
they’re gone.
Commenting on the meaning of
the light columns that accompany
newly included, un-executed activ-
ities.
[00:38:23]
Validator 1
So everything’s okay, because that’s
what I expect, when it jumps up
and down. Then it’s like, the place
is completed, also a bit like a check
mark, right?
Commenting on the activity anima-
tion functioning as a check mark.
[00:39:35]
13.6.2
Validation Interview 02 - Validator 02
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 2
I pressed the button [...]
Some
green light came out [...]
That
means I can move on, it being
green.
On being asked what happened
when an execute activity button
was pressed.
[00:00:50]
Validator 2
I certainly can’t get past those
things. I can get past but I can’t
get over them. Or through them.
Reflecting on the static cubes wait-
ing to bounce upon activity execu-
tion.
[00:02:37]
Participant
2D DCR representation
Context
Timestamp
70
==PAGE:71==
Validator 2
Well, I think it’s green and active,
so that’s where I think I can start.
Then I think maybe this one ac-
tivates afterward.
The one that
is yellow, it seems like something
needs to be done here before I can
do that.
Commenting on the colors of the
activities and rules.
[00:03:23]
Validator 2
There are some exclamation marks.
I wonder if that means I have run
them before I can go down there.
Commenting on the pending icons.
[00:05:09]
Validator 2
There’s a percentage mark on it? I
honestly don’t know. Maybe that
something isn’t active?
On being asked about the red ex-
clude rule.
[00:05:32]
Validator 2
It seems like activty 4 is dependent
on me having executed 3 and 5.
Commenting on the milestone rela-
tion.
[00:06:03]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation with domain specific la-
bels
Context
Timestamp
Validator 2
There’s a bunch of smoke there. I
don’t want to go there.
Commenting on a disabled activity.
[00:11:01]
Validator 2
I think that those are dependent on
these completed activites, but it’s
also because I have cheated a little
by peeking at the buttons, so the
fog in and of itself does not make
me think that this is dependent on
that.
On being asked about the fog effect
on the disabled activities.
[00:14:14]
Validator 2
If there was a closed door, that
would more indicate to me that I
needed to do something before be-
ing able to do this.
On being asked about the fog effect
on the disabled activities.
[00:14:33]
Validator 2
Nope that burned my fingers [...]
That one started to glitter, so I
think that means i need to activate
it before I can activate this.
On pressing a disabled button and
triggering a glitter effect on a con-
dition activity.
[00:14:59]
Validator 2
The fog has disappeared and this
activity over here is glittering with
some green glitter.
I’ll interpret
that as a signal that this needs to be
executed. Also that button is now
blue.
On executing a condition activty.
[00:15:32]
Validator 2
In any event I have exectued this
activity and that one is jumping,
which I expect means that I have
completed the task.
On executing an activity.
[00:15:47]
71
==PAGE:72==
Validator 2
I think that I have turned off the
task in a way or another.
So ei-
ther I should find a place to light
it again, or...
[...]
The name of
the button indicates that it is nec-
essary, I think. It’s about the man-
ager wanting to be informed, but it
could also be that it was only if I
chose to select that something ex-
ceeded the budget. Well then, that
one lit up again so.
it might be
that I should get permission from
the manager to exceed the budget.
I lit that one up again. I prefer that
one.
So now it’s within the bud-
get, that one is jumping it’s com-
pleted. It’s not necessary to inform
the manager.
On experimenting with mutually
excluding activites.
[00:20:03]
Validator 2
This one has a spotlight on it. It
want’s to be pressed, I feel.
On noticing a pending activity.
[00:21:41]
Participant
Domain specific 3D DCR rep-
resentation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 2
Now it got dark outside.
I still
haven’t quite... Why is it night? I
haven’t... Why is it night?
On the global state switching to
night (non-accepting state).
[00:26:02]
Validator 2
I think this one, since there’s a
spotlight on it and there’s glitter
coming up, I think this is what I
should do next. I think it’s like a
hint, come over here [...] So I think,
I’m going over here now. And then
I press on. This one. Oh, then it
became light again.
On triggering a pending state.
[00:26:46]
Validator 2
I can see that maybe it’s the dark-
ness so that you can see the spot-
light even more. And when I have
solved this task in the spotlight and
the glitter is gone, then it can be-
come day again, then it’s back to
the normal flow, or whatever you
call it.
On being asked if there is any rela-
tionship between the global lighting
and the pending activities.
[00:27:44]
Validator 2
It could indicate that the blue ones
are dependent on one of the white
ones being done first.
On being asked the significance of
a button being blue (a condition)
[00:29:43]
Validator 2
It’s because I don’t think I’ve been
through all the steps. And this one
is turned off.
On being asked why they did not
execute the complete process ac-
tivity immediately when it became
available.
[00:33:19]
72
==PAGE:73==
Validator 2
As it stands I think I am allowed
to decide if I want to do it myself
or if I want to involve the planner,
because there’s nothing telling me
that I have to go into that room
now, like there was with this room.
Comments on only some activities
being conditions of reaching the
goal.
[00:36:38]
13.6.3
Validation Interview 03 - Validator 03
Participant
2D DCR representation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 3
It seems like if you have activity 2
active, you can choose either activ-
ity 3 or activity 5, and no matter
which one of those two you choose,
you can return to activity 4. But
this is only if you want to go down
to activity 6. For activity 5, you go
directly to activity 6, not directly,
but then you have two options at
that activity.
On being asked to interpret the
meaning of the rules in the 2D DCR
representation.
[00:03:54]
Validator 3
It tells me that I have pressed 0, 1,
2 and 6 but not 3.
On being asked to describe the ex-
ecution buttons in the 2D DCR
graph simulation.
[00:06:36]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 3
There is a white box where some-
thing is hidden. You can see it mov-
ing up and down, suggesting some-
thing is concealed.
It also shows
me, when I hold it, that it is an ac-
tivity. If I press on it, it turns green,
and then I could imagine some-
thing, some text or something that
could help me understand what it
is. So, a box has been opened over
here, the one in the corner. It’s al-
most jumping, signaling that I need
to do something. But I can’t click
on it. No, okay. So, nothing hap-
pens with it.
It just stands and
jumps, and it could be that the
task is over there. I have no idea.
So, I continue to the next activity.
It might not be in that order, but
that’s what I do, can I?
On executing an activity, triggering
a jumping animation on the cube
object.
[00:11:54]
Validator 3
It definetely wants me to go over
there and check out those activities.
On being asked about pending ac-
tivities lighting up.
[00:14:39]
Validator 3
It means you probably won’t be
making it over there at all.
You
probably can’t.
On being asked about the fog effect
on a disabled activity.
[00:15:19]
73
==PAGE:74==
Validator 3
Well this being blue tells me that I
don’t need to progress any further.
If I could go back and click on ac-
tivity 5 i expect it would be green
instead.
On being asked about the dynamic
coloring of buttons (blue signifying
it being an un-executed condition).
[00:16:17]
Validator 3
It indicates an ongoing process.
That’s what I would say, but I don’t
know. It could be that when you
finish, it stops moving. Because if
you’re engaged in these activities,
you don’t need to finish one to pro-
ceed with the next. You can work
on several things at once.
On being asked about the meaning
of the animated elements (signify-
ing an activated activity).
[00:17:01]
Validator 3
But this one is green, and that
means to me that you can still work
on it, also because the boxes are
jumping.
The jumping boxes tell
me that you can still work on it.
Commenting on the meaning of the
green button and animated cubes.
[00:18:07]
Validator 3
This one is closed because it’s
white.
Commenting on button colors.
[00:18:37]
Validator 3
It could mean that the cloud indi-
cated that you didn’t really know
what you were supposed to solve,
and it’s only something you can fig-
ure out after you have engaged in
this activity. Before that, you can’t
start the process there, so maybe it
was necessary to activate this pro-
cess to move forward.
When asked to comment on the
meaning of the fog disappearing
when an activity becomes enabled.
[00:19:12]
Validator 3
It’s gone gray. So it has kind of said
we are no longer working on this.
Maybe there was a choice? I’m not
sure.
When asked to comment on an ac-
tivity becoming excluded.
[00:20:19]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation with domain-specific la-
bels
Context
Timestamp
Validator 3
The light blue color doesn’t really
tell me anything. If it were red I’d
want to push it, but I don’t know
what the blue color signifies.
When asked about the meaning of
the colored execute activity button
(un-executed condition).
[00:22:54]
Validator 3
It could be anything, but that’s
what I’m saying, the purple color
doesn’t really tell me anything.
I
can’t see what the purple color sig-
nifies for me.
When asked about the meaning of
the colored execute activity button
(un-executed condition).
[00:22:58]
Validator 3
They are the same color, okay?
They have the same colors and
the one further ahead is misty and
turquoise blue. I can only see it’s
white down here, so yes, I link them
together.
After having their attention di-
rected to similarly colored particles
emitting from a disabled activity.
[00:27:17]
74
==PAGE:75==
Validator 3
The one over here to the left that
was there before turns white. That
tells me that I can’t use it anymore.
It seems like I shouldn’t use it any-
more after making this choice.
Commenting on the meaning of a
presence of a white button after an
activity becomes enabled.
[00:27:45]
Validator 3
So there’s an option, but it’s white.
I find the colors a bit disturbing.
Yes.
On being asked if they associate the
white colored buttons with inactiv-
ity.
[00:30:37]
Validator 3
So now it’s just black instead of
white, yes, yes, yes. But it’s black,
so in another way, it tells me it’s
not the right solution.
Commenting on an excluded activ-
ity turning transparent.
[00:33:16]
Validator 3
Well, then it’s okay, but I don’t
know if it’s because I’ve chosen
not to go with that solution, so...
And now it’s... Well, it’s difficult.
It’s difficult for me to visualize this
other than now it seems like this.
This is the best solution I have cho-
sen and now I have, so I would say.
Well, then I should choose again.
That’s how I feel, so I must try
something else and. And think, I
can’t figure this out.
Commenting on an excluded activ-
ity removing a condition rule.
[00:34:08]
Participant
Domain specific 3D DCR rep-
resentation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 3
I have to start over here on the left,
it looks like. A hospital, so the pic-
ture tells me that someone needs to
call in sick.
Commenting on the inclusion of do-
main specific graphical assets.
[00:40:58]
Validator 3
The clouds disappear on the picture
right over to the right, so I think
that’s where I should go next.
Commenting on a condition becom-
ing enabled.
[00:41:16]
Validator 3
The little man, he becomes.
He
actually gets happy, he starts to
jump. Like the boxes.
Commenting on executed activities
becoming animated.
[00:42:23]
Validator 3
So these two, I can’t see what or-
der I should take them in. Now I’m
just taking it in that order, because
that’s the order they lie in along the
way here.
Musing on which activity to exe-
cute next.
[00:42:23]
Validator 3
Well, when everything I assigned an
employee to consider, I actually...
So I could have skipped everything
else.
Upon being asked why the Com-
plete Process activity is enabled.
[00:45:33]
13.6.4
Validation Interview 04 - Validator 04
Participant
2D DCR representation
Context
Timestamp
75
==PAGE:76==
Validator 4
The check mark means success.
Commenting on an executed ac-
tivty state change.
[00:04:36]
Validator 4
My guess is that the yellow means
that it is not active. The activity is
not in progress, so.
On being asked about the condition
rule.
[00:05:35]
Validator 4
It is happening in parallel with
something else.
On being asked about the meaning
of the exclamation marks.
[00:08:10]
Validator 4
I would guess it means that they are
currently running.
On being asked about the meaning
of an activity being bordered green.
[00:14:19]
Validator 4
I think dotted means that it cannot
run.
On being asked about disabled ac-
tivities.
[00:15:09]
Validator 4
I think [the yellow arrow] means
that A must have executed before
B can execute.
On being asked about the meaning
of the condition relation.
[00:15:52]
Validator 4
So [pending activity 1] and [pend-
ing activity 2] must have [executed]
before [milestone activity] can exe-
cute.
On being asked about the pending
and milestone rules.
[00:18:09]
Validator 4
I would guess it makes it inactive,
so it doesn’t ”count” in this context
On being asked about the exclude
rules.
[00:19:04]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 4
I think it means it activates, like the
check mark in the previous assign-
ment.
On being asked about the bounc-
ing cube and green particle emis-
sion when executing an activity.
[00:22:36]
Validator 4
Oh hey, I can execute multiple
times.
On realizing that the button will
shoot particles each time you click
it.
[00:22:44]
Validator 4
It means that it is un-executed, but
is executable.
On being asked about the meaning
of a white button.
[00:23:31]
Validator 4
I think it means that it’s locked.
On being asked about a transparent
activity (excluded).
[00:24:11]
Validator 4
I think it means...
something be-
cause the other activitues aren’t
colored.
On being asked about a pending ac-
tivity ligthing up in color.
[00:24:11]
Participant
Domain specific 3D DCR rep-
resentation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 4
I think it means that the process
splits.
On being asked about the global
ligthing changing from day to night.
[00:32:51]
Validator 4
I can see a color coded lock and key
so I guess I need to activate a blue
thing in order to unlock it.
Commenting on the relation be-
tween the source and target of a
condition rule.
[00:33:47]
76
==PAGE:77==
Validator 4
I think that if it’s gray, it means
that.
It requires that.
You have
to think about whether it was? It
meant at least that the walls de-
pend on whether it gets locked or
unlocked, one can lock it unlocked
by others.
But and I think that.
The interaction you have with the
grayed out, it means that if you ac-
tivate another. So it’s the opposite.
It requires so well, so the opposite.
Of it being locked. Yes, that makes
sense so if.
So they really mean
that they’re not locked, and they
are dependent on some processes,
so they can read with light, whereas
if they are gray, it means that they
are the opposite. So if they get a re-
sponse required that another state
was where a state should be acti-
vated, then it means now inactive
before it works.
On being asked to explain the dif-
ference between a disabled and an
excluded activity.
[00:44:18]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation with domain-specific la-
bels
Context
Timestamp
Validator 4
I think it deactivates Inform Man-
ager and activates Roster Exceeds
Budget.
In being asked about an activity
with an outgoing include and ex-
clude rule.
[00:48:26]
13.6.5
Validation Interview 06 - Validator 06
Participant
Domain specific 3D DCR rep-
resentation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 5
It’s locked, so it’s possible I need to
use a key.
Commenting on a disabled activity.
[00:02:01]
Validator 5
There’s a key that I presume I need
for a lock.
Commenting on a condition activ-
ity.
00:02:43]
Validator 5
Now it’s night again, so that means
time has passed.
Commenting on the global state
change to an un-accepting state.
00:03:33]
Validator 5
It’s funny it seems like those parti-
cles are directing me to one of the
other rooms.
Commenting on the look of the par-
ticles, when seen from above and at
an angle.
[00:06:17]
Validator 5
I’m too lazy to read the text.
Commenting on their own behav-
ioral pattern when exploring the
graph.
[00:14:42]
Validator 5
The sounds help me by letting me
know if I do something right or
wrong.
Commenting on sound feedback
when pushing activity execution
buttons.
[00:15:34]
77
==PAGE:78==
Validator 5
The [transparent activity] is not
part of the available decision pro-
cess.
Commenting on the excluded activ-
ities.
[00:18:07]
Validator 5
The activities I haven’t interacted
with seem to have particles.
Commenting on un-executed activ-
ities.
[00:20:11]
Validator 5
Okay I can see that I could also
have chosen to cover the shift in-
ternally, rather than call people.
Commenting on a mutually exclud-
ing rule between two activities.
[00:24:26]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation with domain-specific la-
bels
Context
Timestamp
Validator 5
It doesn’t seem like it’s a logical
place to start if you look at the text.
Commenting the non-linear nature
of DCR.
[00:27:56]
Validator 5
[The activity lighting up] tells me
that I should really execute it now.
Commenting on a pending activity.
[00:30:18]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 5
I think maybe some actions require
time to pass before something new
can happen.
Commenting
on
the
day/night
changes that signify accepting/non-
accepting states.
[00:30:18]
Participant
2D DCR representation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 5
The ticks seem to signify that the
choice was correct - even though
you said that there were no incor-
rect choices (laughs).
On being asked the significance of
green check marks.
[00:41:14]
Validator 5
It’s a sort of flowchart.
The ar-
rows signify order of execution; if
this then that.
On being asked to describe the sig-
nificance of the arrows.
[00:41:18]
Validator 5
Green signifies a possible order of
execution and red an impossible or-
der of execution. Blue may also sig-
nify a possible execution.
I don’t
know what the hiearchy is, except
that red seems to be a ”bad” act.
Orange I’m not sure. It might sig-
nify a preceding act.
On being asked to describe the sig-
nificance of the arrow color.
[00:42:15]
Validator 5
[The activity] is green now, which
presumably means that it was bet-
ter that I executed that first.
On being asked about the signifi-
cance of disabled activity becoming
enabled.
[00:48:27]
13.6.6
Validation Interview 06 - Validator 06
Participant
Domain specific 3D DCR rep-
resentation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 6
[The activity descriptions] are writ-
ten at the bottom of the screen.
Commenting on the actvity labels.
[00:12:23]
78
==PAGE:79==
Validator 6
There’s a white divider, that must
be the activity.
Commenting on the actvity labels.
[00:12:54]
Validator 6
I think you need to click that thing
if you want to execute something.
Commenting on the activity but-
ton.
[00:16:18]
Validator 6
It turned green so that means it’s
executed.
Commenting on the activity but-
ton.
[00:16:18]
Validator 6
So, I guess that the lock must mean
there’s something else I should do.
A condition, I guess. I wonder if it
won’tlet you know where the con-
dition leads to, if you click on the
lock.
Commenting on a disabled activity.
[00:18:31]
Validator 6
Does it come down again over
there?
Yes, it comes down again,
I’m guessing on this one [...] should
probably happen.It’s clear [...]
I
need to perform that first.
Commenting on the matching col-
ored glitter on pairs of disabled and
condition activities.
[00:18:55]
Validator 6
Oh.
Yes, the cage.
It’s been re-
moved, and the lock is removed, so
I can enter the room. Now I can do
it, I understand that.
Commenting on the state change
after executing the condition activ-
ity.
[00:20:21]
Validator 6
It’s blinking, I guess it means it’s
pending.
On being asked about the meaning
of the lit up and pulsing activity
(pending).
[00:22:45]
Validator 6
Yes, okay, the graph became ac-
cepting, that’s pretty clear.
On being asked about the change
from day to night and back to day,
before, during and after a pending
activity.
[00:23:50]
Validator 6
One of the biggest challenges we
talk about in processes and commu-
nicating this, is that people expect
[a process to finish at some point],
but it’s very artificial.
It doesn’t
exist in the real world.
Musing on the expecations of a pro-
cess being done.
[00:24:47]
Validator 6
It’s like it is removed. It’s not in-
cluded at the moment.
On being asked about a transparent
activity (excluded).
[00:26:57]
Validator 6
Would it makes sense to say, that if
an activity is enabled, but not exe-
cuted, it will emit particles. Mean-
ing you haven’t done that yet.
On being asked to compare a white
button with particles to a green
button without.
[00:28:04]
Validator 6
I think, I would rather focus on
whether whether an activity was
pending and enabled.
I would be
quite indifferent whether or not it
has executed [...]
because that’s
a classic way of thinking.
”If it’s
happened once, then it’s probably
not important to do it again”, but
frankly you don’t know that. Be-
cause you might end up doing many
things several times.
Commenting on the particles emit-
ting from un-executed activities.
[00:29:09]
79
==PAGE:80==
Validator 6
It must mean something has to hap-
pen. Does it mean pending again?
Commenting on the jumping ani-
mation on executed activities.
[00:34:04]
Validator 6
We can show many states on an ac-
tivity if you count them all.
But
you quickly find out that there’s
only really two that are interesting.
[...] But it’s because we come from
a world of checklist, where having
ticked the box is central. But now
when its suddenly no longer cen-
tral, people have a hard time let-
ting go. People want control. [...]
That’s the challenge here; you have
to let go of control to gain control,
if you insist on having control like
a checklist, then you end up doing
something so rigid there’s only one
way to do it and then you really lose
control. So people don’t do it.
Commenting on what should be the
focus of DCR.
[00:34:04]
Validator 6
The reason you have check-boxes
is because when you look at them,
you can see what you have done,
and when you look down the list,
it’s here, so that’s why it has value.
But in a world where things move
around and where things can be-
come something you have to do
again, what you have done becomes
less important, and suddenly what
you need to do becomes much more
important. [...] I think we need to
let go of the sequence, and we need
to let go of that, like what makes us
navigate.
Commenting on what should be the
focus of DCR.
[00:37:15]
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation with domain-specific la-
bels
Context
Timestamp
Validator 7
There’s a spinning box with a thing
on top of it; a key.Then there’s an-
other box like the first one.
And
then in the back, it looks like there’s
a lock. It’s the same color as the
key that was over on the other side.
On being asked to describe two
neighboring activities with a condi-
tion rule.
[00:02:48]
Validator 7
OK, it’s getting bigger and smaller.
On being asked to about any noti-
cable effects when mousing over the
lock object.
Question had to be
amended with ”animated” before
subject could answer.
[00:05:07]
Validator 7
Well, it changes when when you
hover the mouse over it so.
On being asked if the lock was in-
teractive.
[00:05:36]
80
==PAGE:81==
Validator 7
Umm that you need that key to
open that lock.
On being asked if there was signifi-
cance in the particles emitting from
lock and key had the same color.
[00:06:13]
Validator 7
That you have to do something
with the sphere and the cube in or-
der to get the key.
On being asked the significance of
the burst of green particles and sub-
sequent animated sphere on an ex-
ecuted activity.
[00:06:42]
Validator 7
No.
Because none of the shapes
are are solid, nothing happens when
you hold the mouse over them.
On being asked if (and subse-
quently why not) they could inter-
act with a transparent (excluded)
activity.
[00:08:21]
Validator 7
You can interact with it now.
On being asked what the change
from transparent to opaque means
for the state of an activity.
[00:11:40]
Validator 7
Go to that area first.
On being asked what the lit up ac-
tivity might compel.
[00:12:07]
Validator 7
Umm, that time has passed.
On being asked the meaning of the
global lighting turning to night and
back to day when a pending activity
is executed.
[00:13:17]
Validator 7
With the locked door, you need to
go find the key. Whereas with the
the [transparent] shapes it’s not as
clear what you need to do to make
them opaque.
On being asked the significance
of transparent (excluded) activities
vs. walled-off (disabled) activities.
[00:15:27]
Validator 7
If the roster is within budget, then
you don’t have to inform the man-
ager.
On being asked the significance of
executing A in the A -excludes-¿ B
-condition-¿ rule structure.
[00:20:41]
Participant
Domain specific 3D DCR rep-
resentation
Context
Timestamp
Participant
2D DCR representation
Context
Timestamp
Validator 7
It’s something you can interact
with.
On being asked to comment on an
activity with a solid green border.
[00:34:57]
Validator 7
The step is completed.
On being asked to comment on an
activity with a check mark.
[00:35:56]
Validator 7
You need to focus your attention on
it.
On being asked about the signifi-
cance if an exclamation mark.
[00:36:37]
Validator 7
I’m not sure.
On being asked the significance of
the blue arrow.
[00:37:14]
Validator 7
You can’t do that.
On being asked the significance of
the red arrow.
[00:42:21]
Validator 7
That that’s the way you should go.
On being asked the significance of
the green arrow.
[00:42:48]
Validator 08
I don’t know.
On being asked the significance of
the yellow arrow.
[00:43:46]
81
==PAGE:82==
Participant
Canonical 3D DCR represen-
tation
Context
Timestamp
82
==PAGE:83==
13.7
H
#
Participant
Fragment
1
Validator-01
[2D DCR representation][1][marking:executed] It signals that it’s okay, I think.I can
move on. Then I go to number two and press execute there. And it also turned green
and fine. So that activity is completed.
2
Validator-01
[2D DCR representation][1][rule:condition] I think maybe something orange ap-
peared. I’m actually not sure.
3
Validator-01
[2D DCR representation][1][marking:pending] There are [...]
some exclamation
marks. Yes, so there must be something I need to pay attention to. Maybe some-
thing where I need to provide input or something similar, but I can’t do anything
here. I can’t click on anything. It could be that there is something that needs to be
done. Something that needs active consideration, perhaps? The exclamation marks
draw attention to something. But there’s not much that directly tells me what to do
here.
4
Validator-01
[2D DCR representation][1][labels] It’s illogical to me that one must do 3 and 5
before you can do 4.
5
Validator-01
[2D DCR representation][1][rule:excludes] If it was something temporary, an option
or a fallback or something similar, it could be something we don’t need after all. [...]
It’s something it removes, I think. It’s something else you do, make an intermediate
calculation, and then it’s no longer needed, so away with it. I think that, I don’t
know, but you do.
6
Validator-01
[2D DCR representation][1][labels] No, because then someone like me might think
of trying 6 and 4. I can start from the back, so now I press there. And a checkmark
appears, apparently, you can start with that one. There’s nothing indicating you
can’t start with it. Normally, when it’s in sequence, you’d think you have to follow
it, but here you don’t need to. So now this one is fixed, and the number five is gone,
strangely enough.
7
Validator-01
[2D DCR representation][1][rule:response] It’s an arrow that runs both ways. That’s
the thing... There is an arrow at both ends of the line, so I think something goes
back and forth.
8
Validator-01
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking:executed] I can’t pass through here,
there’s sometbhing jumping up and down. Now it’s blocking, and now I’m let in so
I can pass on. Now I’ve figured out, I have to press the button, so I can go under
it [...] so I can move on. And then suddenly it’s a different color.
9
Validator-01
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking:executed] I haven’t tried [going
around the box], but I will definitely try.
I can do that easily, so I really don’t
need to wait for [the jumping box to clear].
10
Validator-01
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking:executed] [The jumping box] just
signals that the next step is open, as I see it.
11
Validator-01
[Canonical 3D DCR representation ][2][accepting state] [The switch from day to
night] has something to do with time.
12
Validator-01
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][accepting state] Or [The switch from day to
night] means that it needs to process something. Something needs to be considered
before moving on.
13
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking: pending] No [I did not notice
the fog effect on the enabled activities.]
14
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][evaluation] This didn’t give me a very
good insight into the process.
83
==PAGE:84==
15
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][evaluation] I like the DSB journey plan-
ner, you know? 1, 2, 3, 4... Here there was a lot of back and forth. That might be
easier for some, but for my brain, it’s better to have something more concrete like
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And you can even have splits, like... 2, 3, boom, and then you go back
again. But this was not for me.
16
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][labels] When I was doing this, I didn’t
get much into it, I almost didn’t even see what was written, because I was looking
for where it lit up next. All that written there, it’s probably made into a nice little
story. I didn’t pay much attention to it, because I was focused on where to go next.
17
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking: executed] There are these
little stars that tell me where to start. Where something is going on
18
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking:executed] I can’t press... Oh,
it seems I could [execute an activity more than once]
19
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][ accepting state] And now I can see
the moon, so it will take some time... but it shouldn’t take long to register someone
calling in sick. And I click and there, it became light again. But you can see that
something isn’t adding up...
20
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking:executed] [The jumping
phone] a tool for calling in sick.
21
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking: executed] So I expect that
those light columns [...] are where I have to do something. As you can see, so I just
have to go into them, and well, then they’re gone.
22
Validator-01
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking: executed] So everything’s
okay, because that’s what I expect, when it jumps up and down. Then it’s like, the
place is completed, also a bit like a check mark, right?
23
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] I pressed the button [...]
Some green light came out [...] That means I can move on, it being green.
24
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] I certainly can’t get past
those [cubes]. I can get past but I can’t get over them. Or through them.
25
Validator-02
[2D DCR representation][2][marking: executed; rule: condition] Well, [that button]
is green and active, so that’s where I think I can start. Then I think maybe this one
activates afterward. The [pending] one that is yellow, it seems like something needs
to be done here before I can do that.
26
Validator-02
[2D DCR representation][2][marking: pending] There are some exclamation marks.
I wonder if that means I have run them before I can go down there.
27
Validator-02
[2D DCR representation][2][rule: excludes] There’s a percentage mark on it?
I
honestly don’t know. Maybe that something isn’t active?
28
Validator-02
[2D DCR representation][2][rule: milestone] It seems like activity 4 is dependent on
me having executed 3 and 5.
29
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain specific labels][3][marking: en-
abled] There’s a bunch of smoke there. I don’t want to go there.
30
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain specific labels][3][marking:enabled]
I think that those are dependent on these completed activites, but it’s also because
I have cheated a little by peeking at the buttons, so the fog in and of itself does not
make me think that this is dependent on that.
31
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain specific labels][3][marking:enabled]
If there was a closed door, that would more indicate to me that I needed to do
something before being able to do this.
32
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain specific labels][3][marking:enabled]
Nope that burned my fingers [...] That one started to glitter, so I think that means
i need to activate it before I can activate this.
84
==PAGE:85==
33
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain specific labels][3][marking: en-
abled] The fog has disappeared and this activity over here is glittering with some
green glitter. I’ll interpret that as a signal that this needs to be executed. Also that
button is now blue.
34
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain specific labels][3][marking: exe-
cuted] In any event I have exectued this activity and that one is jumping, which I
expect means that I have completed the task.
35
Validator-02
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain specific labels][3][rule: excludes;
rule: includes] I think that I have turned off the task in a way or another. So either
I should find a place to light it again, or... [...] The name of the button indicates
that it is necessary, I think. It’s about the manager wanting to be informed, but it
could also be that it was only if I chose to select that something exceeded the budget.
Well then, that one lit up again so. it might be that I should get permission from
the manager to exceed the budget. I lit that one up again. I prefer that one. So
now it’s within the budget, that one is jumping it’s completed. It’s not necessary to
inform the manager.
36
Validator-02
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][accepting state] Now it got dark out-
side. I still haven’t quite... Why is it night? I haven’t... Why is it night?
37
Validator-02
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking: pending] I think this one,
since there’s a spotlight on it and there’s glitter coming up, I think this is what I
should do next. I think it’s like a hint, come over here [...] So I think, I’m going
over here now. And then I press on. This one. Oh, then it became light again.
38
Validator-02
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][accepting state] I can see that maybe
it’s the darkness so that you can see the spotlight even more. And when I have solved
this task in the spotlight and the glitter is gone, then it can become day again, then
it’s back to the normal flow, or whatever you call it.
39
Validator-02
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][rule: condition] It could indicate that
the blue [buttons] are dependent on one of the white ones being done first.
40
Validator-02
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][navigation] [I didn’t execute the com-
plete process activity immediately when it became available] because I didn’t think
I’ve been through all the steps.
41
Validator-02
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][navigation] As it stands I think I am
allowed to decide if I want to do it myself or if I want to involve the planner, because
there’s nothing telling me that I have to go into that room now, like there was with
this room.
42
Validator-03
[2D DCR representation][1][rule: milestone; rule: exclude] It seems like if you have
activity 2 active, you can choose either activity 3 or activity 5, and no matter which
one of those two you choose, you can return to activity 4. But this is only if you
want to go down to activity 6. For activity 5, you go directly to activity 6, not
directly, but then you have two options at that activity.
43
Validator-03
[2D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] [The execution buttons in the 2D
DCR graph simulation] tell me that I have pressed 0, 1, 2 and 6 but not 3.
44
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: executed] There is a white box
where something is hidden. You can see it moving up and down, suggesting some-
thing is concealed. It also shows me, when I hold it, that it is an activity. If I press
on it, it turns green, and then I could imagine something, some text or something
that could help me understand what it is. So, a box has been opened over here, the
one in the corner. It’s almost jumping, signaling that I need to do something. But
I can’t click on it. No, okay. So, nothing happens with it. It just stands and jumps,
and it could be that the task is over there. I have no idea. So, I continue to the
next activity. It might not be in that order, but that’s what I do, can I?
85
==PAGE:86==
45
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: pending] It definetely wants me to
go over there and check out those activities.
46
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: enabled] [The fog] means you prob-
ably won’t be making it over there at all. You probably can’t.
47
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][rule: condition] Well this [button] being blue
tells me that I don’t need to progress any further. If I could go back and click on
activity 5 i expect it would be green instead.
48
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: executed] It indicates an ongoing
process.
That’s what I would say, but I don’t know.
It could be that when you
finish, it stops moving. Because if you’re engaged in these activities, you don’t need
to finish one to proceed with the next. You can work on several things at once.
49
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: executed] But this one is green, and
that means to me that you can still work on it, also because the boxes are jumping.
The jumping boxes tell me that you can still work on it.
50
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: executed] This [activity] is closed
because [the button] is white.
51
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking:
enabled; rule:
condition] [The
cloud disappearing] could mean that the cloud indicated that you didn’t really know
what you were supposed to solve, and it’s only something you can figure out after
you have engaged in this activity. Before that, you can’t start the process there, so
maybe it was necessary to activate this process to move forward.
52
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: included; rule: excludes; marking:
included] [The activity] has gone gray. So it has kind of said we are no longer
working on this. Maybe there was a choice? I’m not sure.
53
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][3][rule: condition]
The light blue color doesn’t really tell me anything. If it were red I’d want to push
it, but I don’t know what the blue color signifies.
54
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][3][rule: condition]
It could be anything, but that’s what I’m saying, the purple color doesn’t really tell
me anything. I can’t see what the purple color signifies for me.
55
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][3][rule: condition]
[The button and the sparkles] are the same color, okay? They have the same colors
and the one further ahead is misty and turquoise blue. I can only see it’s white
down here, so yes, I link them together.
56
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][3][marking: en-
abled] The one over here to the left that was there before turns white. That tells me
that I can’t use it anymore. It seems like I shouldn’t use it anymore after making
this choice.
57
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][3][marking: en-
abled] So there’s an option, but [the button] is white. I find the colors a bit disturb-
ing. Yes.
58
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][3][ marking: in-
cluded] So now it’s just black instead of white, yes, yes, yes. But it’s black, so in
another way, it tells me it’s not the right solution.
59
Validator-03
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][3][marking:
in-
cluded; marking: enabled] Well, then it’s okay, but I don’t know if it’s because
I’ve chosen not to go with that solution, so... And now it’s... Well, it’s difficult.
It’s difficult for me to visualize this other than now it seems like this. This is the
best solution I have chosen and now I have, so I would say. Well, then I should
choose again. That’s how I feel, so I must try something else and. And think, I
can’t figure this out.
86
==PAGE:87==
60
Validator-03
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][domain] I have to start over here on
the left, it looks like. A hospital, so the picture tells me that someone needs to call
in sick.
61
Validator-03
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking: enabled] The clouds disappear
on the picture right over to the right, so I think that’s where I should go next.
62
Validator-03
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][marking: executed] The little man, he
becomes. He actually gets happy, he starts to jump. Like the boxes.
63
Validator-03
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][navigation] So these two, I can’t see
what order I should take them in. Now I’m just taking it in that order, because
that’s the order they lie in along the way here.
64
Validator-03
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][4][navigation] Well, when everything I
assigned an employee to consider, I actually... So I could have skipped everything
else.
65
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] The check mark means success.
66
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][rule: condition] My guess is that the yellow means that
it is not active. The activity is not in progress, so.
67
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][marking: pending] [The exclamation marks mean that]
it is happening in parallel with something else.
68
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled] I would guess [the green color] means
that they are currently running.
69
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled] I think dotted means that it cannot
run.
70
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][rule: condition] I think [the yellow arrow] means that
A must have executed before B can execute.
71
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][rule: milestone] So [pending activity 1] and [pending
activity 2] must have [executed] before [milestone activity] can execute.
72
Validator-04
[2D DCR representation][1][rule: excludes] I would guess it makes it inactive, so it
doesn’t ”count” in this context
73
Validator-04
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: executed] I think [the bouncing cube
and green particle emission] means it activates, like the check mark in the previous
assignment.
74
Validator-04
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: executed] Oh hey, I can execute
multiple times.
75
Validator-04
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: executed] [The white button] means
that it is un-executed, but is executable.
76
Validator-04
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: included] I think it means that it’s
locked.
77
Validator-04
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][2][marking: pending] I think [an activity light-
ing up] means... something because the other activities aren’t colored.
78
Validator-04
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][3][accepting state] I think [the global light-
ing changing to night] means that the process splits.
79
Validator-04
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][3][rule: condition] I can see a color coded
lock and key so I guess I need to activate a blue thing in order to unlock it.
87
==PAGE:88==
80
Validator-04
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][3][marking: enabled; marking: included]
I think that if it’s gray, it means that. It requires that. You have to think about
whether it was? It meant at least that the walls depend on whether it gets locked or
unlocked, one can lock it unlocked by others. But and I think that. The interaction
you have with the grayed out, it means that if you activate another. So it’s the
opposite. It requires so well, so the opposite. Of it being locked. Yes, that makes
sense so if. So they really mean that they’re not locked, and they are dependent
on some processes, so they can read with light, whereas if they are gray, it means
that they are the opposite. So if they get a response required that another state was
where a state should be activated, then it means now inactive before it works.
81
Validator-04
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][4][rule: excludes;
rule: includes] I think it deactivates Inform Manager and activates Roster Exceeds
Budget.
82
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled] It’s locked, so it’s
possible I need to use a key.
83
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][rule: condition] There’s a key that I
presume I need for a lock.
84
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][accepting state] Now it’s night again,
so that means time has passed.
85
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] It’s funny it seems
like those particles are direccting me to one of the other rooms.
86
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][labels] I’m too lazy to read the text.
87
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled] The sounds help me
by letting me know if I do something right or wrong.
88
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: included] The [transparent
activity] is not part of the available decision process.
89
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] The activities I
haven’t interacted with seem to have particles.
90
Validator-05
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][rule: exclude; rule: response] Okay I
can see that I could also have chosen to cover the shift internally, rather than call
people.
91
Validator-05
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][2][label] It doesn’t
seem like it’s a logical place to start if you look at the text.
92
Validator-05
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][2][marking: pend-
ing] [The activity lighting up] tells me that I should really execute it now.
93
Validator-05
[Canonical 3D DCR representation][3][accepting state] I think maybe some actions
require time to pass before something new can happen.
94
Validator-05
[2D DCR representation][4][marking: executed] The ticks seem to signify that the
choice was correct - even though you said that there were no incorrect choices
(laughs).
95
Validator-05
[2D DCR representation][4][navigation] It’s a sort of flowchart. The arrows signify
order of execution; if this then that.
96
Validator-05
[2D DCR representation][4][rule: include; rule: exclude; rule: condition; rule: re-
sponse] Green signifies a possible order of execution and red an impossible order
of execution. Blue may also signify a possible execution. I don’t know what the
hiearchy is, except that red seems to be a ”bad” act. Orange I’m not sure. It might
signify a preceding act.
97
Validator-05
[2D DCR representation][4][marking: enabled] [The activity] is green now, which
presumably means that it was better that I executed that first.
98
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][label] [The activity descriptions] are
written at the bottom of the screen.
88
==PAGE:89==
99
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][navigation] There’s a white divider,
that must be the activity.
100
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] I think you need to
click that thing if you want to execute something.
101
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] It turned green so
that means it’s executed
102
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled] So, I guess that the
lock must mean there’s something else I should do. A condition, I guess. I wonder
if it won’t let you know where the condition leads to, if you click on the lock.
103
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][rule: condition] Does it come down
again over there? Yes, it comes down again, I’m guessing on this one [...] should
probably happen.It’s clear [...] I need to perform that first.
104
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled] Oh. Yes, the cage.
It’s been removed, and the lock is removed, so I can enter the room. Now I can do
it, I understand that.
105
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: pending] It’s blinking, I guess
it means it’s pending.
106
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][accepting state] Yes, okay, the graph
became accepting, that’s pretty clear.
107
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][label] One of the biggest challenges we
talk about in processes and communicating this, is that people expect [a process to
finish at some point], but it’s very artificial. It doesn’t exist in the real world.
108
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: included] It’s like it is re-
moved. It’s not included at the moment.
109
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled; marking: executed]
Would it makes sense to say, that if an activity is enabled, but not executed, it will
emit particles. Meaning you haven’t done that yet.
110
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: enabled; marking: executed]
I think, I would rather focus on whether whether an activity was pending and en-
abled. I would be quite indifferent whether or not it has executed [...] because that’s
a classic way of thinking. ”If it’s happened once, then it’s probably not important
to do it again”, but frankly you don’t know that. Because you might end up doing
many things several times.
111
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] [The jumping ani-
mation] must mean something has to happen. Does it mean pending again?
112
Validator-06
[Domain specific 3D DCR representation][1][marking: executed] We can show many
states on an activty if you count them all. But you quickly find out that there’s only
really two that are interesting.
[...]
But it’s because we come from a world of
checklist, where having ticked the box is central. But now when its suddenly no
longer central, people have a hard time letting go. People want control. [...] That’s
the challenge here; you have to let go of control to gain control, if you insist on
having control like a checklist, then you end up doing something so rigid there’s
only one way to do it and then you really lose control. So people don’t do it.
113
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][rule: condition]
There’s a spinning box with a thing on top of it; a key.Then there’s another box like
the first one. And then in the back, it looks like there’s a lock. It’s the same color
as the key that was over on the other side.
114
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][UI] OK, [the lock]
is getting bigger and smaller.
115
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][UI] Well, it
changes when when you hover the mouse over it so [it might be interactive].
89
==PAGE:90==
116
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][rule: condition;
rule: milestone] [The matching particle colors signify] that you need that key to open
that lock.
117
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][marking: exe-
cuted] [The animated sphere means ] that you have to do something with the sphere
and the cube in order to get the key.
118
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][marking:
in-
cluded] [You cannot interact with a transparent activity] Because none of the shapes
are are solid, nothing happens when you hold the mouse over them.
119
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][marking:
in-
cluded] [The change from transparent to opaque means that] you can interact with
it now.
120
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][marking: pend-
ing] [A lit up area means that you should] go to that area first.
121
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][accepting state]
[The global light changing means] that time has passed.
122
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][marking: en-
abled; marking: included] With the locked door, you need to go find the key. Whereas
with the the [transparent] shapes it’s not as clear what you need to do to make them
opaque.
123
Validator-07
[Canonical 3D DCR representation with domain-specific labels][1][rule: excludes;
rule: condition] If the roster is within budget, then you don’t have to inform the
manager.
124
Validator-07
[2D DCR representation][3][marking: enabled; marking: executed] [An activity with
a solid green border] is something you can interact with.
125
Validator-07
[2D DCR representation][3][marking: executed] [A check mark means that] the step
is completed.
126
Validator-07
[2D DCR representation][3][marking: pending] [An exclamation mark means that]
you need to focus your attention on it
127
Validator-07
[2D DCR representation][3][rule: response] I’m not sure.
128
Validator-07
[2D DCR representation][3][rule: excludes] You can’t do that.
129
Validator-07
[2D DCR representation][3][rule: includes] That that’s the way you should go.
130
Validator-07
[2D DCR representation][3][rule: condition] I don’t know.
90
==PAGE:91==
13.8
I
Table 2: Markings
Representation[order]
Included
Executed
Pending
Enabled
2D [1]
1, 43, 65
3, 67, 69
68
2D [2]
25
26
2D [3]
125
126
124
2D [4]
94
97
Canonical 3D [1]
23, 24
Canonical 3D [2]
52
8, 9, 10, 44,
48, 49, 50, 73,
74, 75
45, 77
46, 51
Canonical 3D w/ Domain labels [1]
118, 119, 122
117
120
122
Canonical 3D w/ Domain labels [2]
92
Canonical 3D w/ Domain labels [3]
58, 59
34
29, 30, 31, 32,
33, 56, 57, 59
Domain specific 3D [1]
88, 108
85,
89,
100,
101, 109, 110,
111, 112
105
82,
87,
102,
104, 109, 110
Domain specific 3D [3]
80
80
Domain specific 3D [4]
17, 18, 20, 21,
22, 62
13, 37
61
Table 3: Rules
Representation [order]
Includes
Excludes
Condition
Response
Milestone
2D [1]
5, 42, 72
2, 66, 70
7
42, 71
2D [2]
27
25
28
2D [3]
129
128
130
127
2D [4]
96
96
96
96
Canonical 3D [2]
52
47, 51
Canonical 3D w/ labels [1]
123
113, 116, 123
116
Canonical 3D w/ labels [3]
35
53, 54, 55
Canonical 3D w/ labels [4]
81
Domain specific 3D [1]
90
83, 103
90
Domain specific 3D [3]
79
Domain specific 3D [4]
39
Table 4: Other Features
Representation [order]
Accepting
Evaluation
Labels
Navigation
UI
2D [1]
4, 6
2D [4]
95
Canonical 3D [2]
11, 12
Canonical 3D [3]
93
Canonical 3D w/ labels [1]
121
114, 115
Canonical 3D w/ labels [2]
91
Domain-specific 3D [1]
84, 106
86, 98, 107
99
Domain-specific 3D [3]
78
Domain-specific 3D [4]
19, 36, 38
14, 15
16
40, 41, 63, 64
91
==PAGE:92==
Table 5: Markings summary
Element
Representation
Observations
Included
Canonical 3D
• [2] The activity] has gone gray. So it has kind of said we are no
longer working on this. Maybe there was a choice? I’m not sure.
Included
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] [You cannot interact with a transparent activity] Because none of
the shapes are are solid, nothing happens when you hold the mouse
over them. The change from transparent to opaque means that] you
can interact with it now.
• [1] With the locked door, you need to go find the key. Whereas with
the the [transparent] shapes it’s not as clear what you need to do
to make them opaque.
• [3] It’s black [transparent], so in another way, it tells me it’s not the
right solution. Well, then it’s okay, but I don’t know if it’s because
I’ve chosen not to go with that solution. [...] This is the best solution
I have chosen and now I have, so I would say. Well, then I should
choose again. That’s how I feel, so I must try something else and.
And think, I can’t figure this out.
Included
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] It’s like [transparent activity] is removed. It’s not included at
the moment.
• [3] The walls depend on whether it gets locked or unlocked, one can
lock it unlocked by others. The interaction you have with the grayed
out, it means that if you activated another. So it’s the opposite. It
requires so well, so the opposite of it being locked.
Executed
2D
• [1] [The check mark] signals that it’s okay, [...] So that activity is
completed.
• [1] [The execution buttons] tell me that I have pressed 0, 1, 2 and
6 but not 3.
• [3] [A check mark means that] the step is completed.
• [4] The ticks seem to signify that the choice was correct - even
though you said that there were no incorrect choices (laughs).
92
==PAGE:93==
Executed
Canonical 3D
• [1] I pressed the button [...] Some green light came out [...] That
means I can move on, it being green.
• [1] I certainly can’t get past those [cubes]. I can get past but I can’t
get over them. Or through them.
• [2] I can’t pass through here, there’s something jumping up and
down. Now it’s blocking, and now I’m let in so I can pass on. Now
I’ve figured out, I have to press the button, so I can go under it [...]
so I can move on. And then suddenly it’s a different color.
• [2] I haven’t tried [going around the box], but I will definitely try.
I can do that easily, so I really don’t need to wait for [the jumping
box to clear].
• [2] [The jumping box] just signals that the next step is open, as I
see it.
• [2] There is a white box where something is hidden. You can see
it moving up and down, suggesting something is concealed. It also
shows me, when I hold it, that it is an activity. If I press on it,
it turns green, and then I could imagine something, some text or
something that could help me understand what it is. So, a box has
been opened over here, the one in the corner. It’s almost jumping,
signaling that I need to do something. But I can’t click on it. No,
okay. So, nothing happens with it. It just stands and jumps, and it
could be that the task is over there. I have no idea. So, I continue
to the next activity. It might not be in that order, but that’s what
I do, can I?
• [2] It indicates an ongoing process. That’s what I would say, but
I don’t know. It could be that when you finish, it stops moving.
Because if you’re engaged in these activities, you don’t need to finish
one to proceed with the next. You can work on several things at
once.
• [2] But this one is green, and that means to me that you can still
work on it, also because the boxes are jumping. The jumping boxes
tell me that you can still work on it.
• [2] This [activity] is closed because [the button] is white.
• [2] I think [the bouncing cube and green particle emission] means
it activates, like the check mark in the previous assignment.
• [2] Oh hey, I can execute multiple times.
• [2] [The white button] means that it is un-executed, but is exe-
cutable.
93
==PAGE:94==
Executed
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] [The animated sphere means ] that you have to do something
with the sphere and the cube in order to get the key.
• [3] In any event I have exectued this activity and that one is jump-
ing, which I expect means that I have completed the task.
94
==PAGE:95==
Executed
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] It’s funny it seems like those particles are direccting me to one
of the other rooms.
• [1] The activities I haven’t interacted with seem to have particles.
• [1] I think you need to click that thing if you want to execute some-
thing.
• [1] It turned green so that means it’s executed
• [1] Would it makes sense to say, that if an activity is enabled, but
not executed, it will emit particles. Meaning you haven’t done that
yet.
• [1] I think, I would rather focus on whether whether an activity was
pending and enabled. I would be quite indifferent whether or not it
has executed [...] because that’s a classic way of thinking. ”If it’s
happened once, then it’s probably not important to do it again”,
but frankly you don’t know that. Because you might end up doing
many things several times.
• [1] [The jumping animation] must mean something has to happen.
Does it mean pending again?
• [1] We can show many states on an activty if you count them all.
But you quickly find out that there’s only really two that are in-
teresting. [...] But it’s because we come from a world of checklist,
where having ticked the box is central. But now when its suddenly
no longer central, people have a hard time letting go. People want
control. [...] That’s the challenge here; you have to let go of control
to gain control, if you insist on having control like a checklist, then
you end up doing something so rigid there’s only one way to do it
and then you really lose control. So people don’t do it.
• [4] There are these little stars that tell me where to start. Where
something is going on
• [4] I can’t press... Oh, it seems I could [execute an activity more
than once]
• [4] [The jumping phone] a tool for calling in sick.
• [4] So I expect that those light columns [...] are where I have to do
something. As you can see, so I just have to go into them, and well,
then they’re gone.
• [4] So everything’s okay, because that’s what I expect, when it jumps
up and down. Then it’s like, the place is completed, also a bit like
a check mark, right?
• [4] The little man, he becomes. He actually gets happy, he starts
to jump. Like the boxes.
95
==PAGE:96==
Pending
2D
• [1] There are [...] some exclamation marks. Yes, so there must be
something I need to pay attention to. Maybe something where I
need to provide input or something similar, but I can’t do anything
here. I can’t click on anything. It could be that there is something
that needs to be done. Something that needs active consideration,
perhaps? The exclamation marks draw attention to something. But
there’s not much that directly tells me what to do here.
• [1] [The exclamation marks mean that] it is happening in parallel
with something else.
• [1] I think dotted means that it cannot run.
• [2] There are some exclamation marks. I wonder if that means I
have run them before I can go down there.
• [3] [An exclamation mark means that] you need to focus your at-
tention on it
Pending
Canonical 3D
• [2] It definetely wants me to go over there and check out those
activities.
• [2] I think [an activity lighting up] means... something because the
other activities aren’t colored.
Pending
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] [A lit up area means that you should] go to that area first.
• [2] [The activity lighting up] tells me that I should really execute it
now.
Pending
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] It’s blinking, I guess it means it’s pending.
• [4] No [I did not notice the fog effect on the enabled activities.]
• [4] I think this one, since there’s a spotlight on it and there’s glitter
coming up, I think this is what I should do next. I think it’s like a
hint, come over here [...] So I think, I’m going over here now. And
then I press on. This one. Oh, then it became light again.
96
==PAGE:97==
Enabled
2D
• [1][3] I would guess [the solid green color] means that they are
currently running / active / is something you can interact with.
• [4] [The activity] is green now, which presumably means that it was
better that I executed that [condition] first.
Enabled
Canonical 3D
• [2] [The fog] means you probably won’t be making it over there at
all. You probably can’t.
• [2] [The cloud disappearing] could mean that the cloud indicated
that you didn’t really know what you were supposed to solve, and
it’s only something you can figure out after you have engaged in this
activity. Before that, you can’t start the process there, so maybe it
was necessary to activate this process to move forward.
Enabled
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] With the locked door, you need to go find the key. Whereas with
the the [transparent] shapes it’s not as clear what you need to do
to make them opaque.
• [3] There’s a bunch of smoke there. I don’t want to go there.
• [3] I think that those are dependent on these completed activites,
but it’s also because I have cheated a little by peeking at the but-
tons, so the fog in and of itself does not make me think that this is
dependent on that.
• [3] If there was a closed door, that would more indicate to me that
I needed to do something before being able to do this.
• [3] Nope that burned my fingers [...] That one started to glitter, so
I think that means i need to activate it before I can activate this.
• [3] The fog has disappeared and this activity over here is glittering
with some green glitter. I’ll interpret that as a signal that this needs
to be executed. Also that button is now blue.
• [3] The one over here to the left that was there before turns white.
That tells me that I can’t use it anymore. It seems like I shouldn’t
use it anymore after making this choice.
• [3] So there’s an option, but [the button] is white. I find the colors
a bit disturbing. Yes.
• [3] Well, then it’s okay, but I don’t know if it’s because I’ve chosen
not to go with that solution, so... And now it’s... Well, it’s difficult.
It’s difficult for me to visualize this other than now it seems like
this. This is the best solution I have chosen and now I have, so I
would say. Well, then I should choose again. That’s how I feel, so I
must try something else and. And think, I can’t figure this out.
97
==PAGE:98==
Enabled
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] It’s locked, so it’s possible I need to use a key.
• [1] The sounds help me by letting me know if I do something right
or wrong.
• [1] So, I guess that the lock must mean there’s something else I
should do. A condition, I guess. I wonder if it won’t let you know
where the condition leads to, if you click on the lock.
• [1] Oh. Yes, the cage. It’s been removed, and the lock is removed,
so I can enter the room. Now I can do it, I understand that.
• [1] Would it makes sense to say, that if an activity is enabled, but
not executed, it will emit particles. Meaning you haven’t done that
yet.
• [1] I think, I would rather focus on whether whether an activity was
pending and enabled. I would be quite indifferent whether or not it
has executed [...] because that’s a classic way of thinking. ”If it’s
happened once, then it’s probably not important to do it again”,
but frankly you don’t know that. Because you might end up doing
many things several times.
• [3] I think that if it’s gray, it means that. It requires that. You
have to think about whether it was?
It meant at least that the
walls depend on whether it gets locked or unlocked, one can lock
it unlocked by others. But and I think that. The interaction you
have with the grayed out, it means that if you activate another. So
it’s the opposite. It requires so well, so the opposite. Of it being
locked. Yes, that makes sense so if. So they really mean that they’re
not locked, and they are dependent on some processes, so they can
read with light, whereas if they are gray, it means that they are the
opposite. So if they get a response required that another state was
where a state should be activated, then it means now inactive before
it works.
• [4] The clouds disappear on the picture right over to the right, so I
think that’s where I should go next.
Table 6: Rules summary
Element
Representation
Observations
Includes
2D
• [3] That that’s the way you should go.
• [4] Green signifies a possible order of execution and red an impos-
sible order of execution. Blue may also signify a possible execution.
I don’t know what the hiearchy is, except that red seems to be a
”bad” act. Orange I’m not sure. It might signify a preceding act.
98
==PAGE:99==
Excludes
2D
• [1] If it was something temporary, an option or a fallback or some-
thing similar, it could be something we don’t need after all. [...] It’s
something it removes, I think. It’s something else you do, make an
intermediate calculation, and then it’s no longer needed, so away
with it. I think that, I don’t know, but you do.
• [1] It seems like if you have activity 2 active, you can choose either
activity 3 or activity 5, and no matter which one of those two you
choose, you can return to activity 4. But this is only if you want to
go down to activity 6. For activity 5, you go directly to activity 6,
not directly, but then you have two options at that activity.
• [1] I would guess it makes it inactive, so it doesn’t ”count” in this
context
• [2] There’s a percentage mark on it? I honestly don’t know. Maybe
that something isn’t active?
• [3] You can’t do that.
• [4] Green signifies a possible order of execution and red an impos-
sible order of execution. Blue may also signify a possible execution.
I don’t know what the hiearchy is, except that red seems to be a
”bad” act. Orange I’m not sure. It might signify a preceding act.
Excludes
Canonical 3D
• [2] The activity] has gone gray. So it has kind of said we are no
longer working on this. Maybe there was a choice? I’m not sure.
Excludes
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] If the roster is within budget, then you don’t have to inform the
manager
• [3] I think that I have turned off the task in a way or another. So
either I should find a place to light it again, or... [...] The name
of the button indicates that it is necessary, I think. It’s about the
manager wanting to be informed, but it could also be that it was only
if I chose to select that something exceeded the budget. Well then,
that one lit up again so. it might be that I should get permission
from the manager to exceed the budget. I lit that one up again. I
prefer that one. So now it’s within the budget, that one is jumping
it’s completed. It’s not necessary to inform the manager.
• [4] I think it deactivates Inform Manager and activates Roster Ex-
ceeds Budget.
99
==PAGE:100==
Excludes
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] Okay I can see that I could also have chosen to cover the shift
internally, rather than call people.
Condition
2D
• [1] I think maybe something orange appeared.
I’m actually not
sure.
• [1] My guess is that the yellow means that it is not active. The
activity is not in progress, so.
• [1] I think [the yellow arrow] means that A must have executed
before B can execute.
• [2] Well, [that button] is green and active, so that’s where I think
I can start. Then I think maybe this one activates afterward. The
[pending] one that is yellow, it seems like something needs to be
done here before I can do that.
• [3] I don’t know.
• [4] Green signifies a possible order of execution and red an impos-
sible order of execution. Blue may also signify a possible execution.
I don’t know what the hiearchy is, except that red seems to be a
”bad” act. Orange I’m not sure. It might signify a preceding act.
Condition
Canonical 3D
• [2] Well this [button] being blue tells me that I don’t need to
progress any further. If I could go back and click on activity 5 i
expect it would be green instead.
• [2] [The cloud disappearing] could mean that the cloud indicated
that you didn’t really know what you were supposed to solve, and
it’s only something you can figure out after you have engaged in this
activity. Before that, you can’t start the process there, so maybe it
was necessary to activate this process to move forward.
100
==PAGE:101==
Condition
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] There’s a spinning box with a thing on top of it; a key.Then
there’s another box like the first one. And then in the back, it looks
like there’s a lock. It’s the same color as the key that was over on
the other side.
• [1] [The matching particle colors signify] that you need that key to
open that lock.
• [1] If the roster is within budget, then you don’t have to inform the
manager.
• [3] The light blue color doesn’t really tell me anything. If it were red
I’d want to push it, but I don’t know what the blue color signifies.
• [3] It could be anything, but that’s what I’m saying, the purple
color doesn’t really tell me anything. I can’t see what the purple
color signifies for me.
• [3] [The button and the sparkles] are the same color, okay? They
have the same colors and the one further ahead is misty and
turquoise blue. I can only see it’s white down here, so yes, I link
them together.
Condition
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] There’s a key that I presume I need for a lock.
• [1] Does it come down again over there? Yes, it comes down again,
I’m guessing on this one [...] should probably happen.It’s clear [...]
I need to perform that first.
• [3] I can see a color coded lock and key so I guess I need to activate
a blue thing in order to unlock it.
• [4] It could indicate that the blue [buttons] are dependent on one
of the white ones being done first.
Response
2D
• [1] It’s an arrow that runs both ways. That’s the thing... There is
an arrow at both ends of the line, so I think something goes back
and forth.
• [3] I’m not sure.
• [4] Green signifies a possible order of execution and red an impos-
sible order of execution. Blue may also signify a possible execution.
I don’t know what the hiearchy is, except that red seems to be a
”bad” act. Orange I’m not sure. It might signify a preceding act.
101
==PAGE:102==
Response
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] Okay I can see that I could also have chosen to cover the shift
internally, rather than call people.
Milestone
2D
• [1] It seems like if you have activity 2 active, you can choose either
activity 3 or activity 5, and no matter which one of those two you
choose, you can return to activity 4. But this is only if you want to
go down to activity 6. For activity 5, you go directly to activity 6,
not directly, but then you have two options at that activity.
• [1] So [pending activity 1] and [pending activity 2] must have [exe-
cuted] before [milestone activity] can execute.
• [2] It seems like activity 4 is dependent on me having executed 3
and 5.
Milestone
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] [The matching particle colors signify] that you need that key to
open that lock.
Table 7: Other features summary
Element
Representation
Observations
Accepting
Canonical 3D
• [2] [The switch from day to night] has something to do with time.
• [2] Or [The switch from day to night] means that it needs to process
something. Something needs to be considered before moving on.
• [3] I think maybe some actions require time to pass before something
new can happen.
Accepting
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] [The global light changing means] that time has passed.
102
==PAGE:103==
Accepting
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] Now it’s night again, so that means time has passed.
• [1] Yes, okay, the graph became accepting, that’s pretty clear.
• [3] I think [the global lighting changing to night] means that the
process splits.
• [4] And now I can see the moon, so it will take some time... but it
shouldn’t take long to register someone calling in sick. And I click
and there, it became light again. But you can see that something
isn’t adding up...
• [4] Now it got dark outside. I still haven’t quite... Why is it night?
I haven’t... Why is it night?
• [4] I can see that maybe it’s the darkness so that you can see the
spotlight even more. And when I have solved this task in the spot-
light and the glitter is gone, then it can become day again, then it’s
back to the normal flow, or whatever you call it.
Domain
Domain
specific
3D
• [4] I have to start over here on the left, it looks like. A hospital, so
the picture tells me that someone needs to call in sick.
Evaluation Domain
specific
3D
• [4] This didn’t give me a very good insight into the process.
• [4] I like the DSB journey planner, you know? 1, 2, 3, 4... Here
there was a lot of back and forth. That might be easier for some,
but for my brain, it’s better to have something more concrete like
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And you can even have splits, like... 2, 3, boom, and
then you go back again. But this was not for me.
Labels
2D
• [1] It’s illogical to me that one must do 3 and 5 before you can do
4.
• [1] No, because then someone like me might think of trying 6 and
4. I can start from the back, so now I press there. And a checkmark
appears, apparently, you can start with that one. There’s nothing
indicating you can’t start with it. Normally, when it’s in sequence,
you’d think you have to follow it, but here you don’t need to. So
now this one is fixed, and the number five is gone, strangely enough.
Labels
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [2] It doesn’t seem like it’s a logical place to start if you look at the
text.
103
==PAGE:104==
Labels
Domain
specific
3D
• [1] I’m too lazy to read the text.
• [1] [The activity descriptions] are written at the bottom of the
screen.
• [1] One of the biggest challenges we talk about in processes and
communicating this, is that people expect [a process to finish at
some point], but it’s very artificial.
It doesn’t exist in the real
world.
• [4] When I was doing this, I didn’t get much into it, I almost didn’t
even see what was written, because I was looking for where it lit up
next. All that written there, it’s probably made into a nice little
story. I didn’t pay much attention to it, because I was focused on
where to go next.
Navigation 2D
• [4] It’s a sort of flowchart. The arrows signify order of execution; if
this then that.
Navigation Domain
specific
3D
• [1] There’s a white divider, that must be the activity.
• [4] [I didn’t execute the complete process activity immediately when
it became available] because I didn’t think I’ve been through all the
steps.
• [4] As it stands I think I am allowed to decide if I want to do it
myself or if I want to involve the planner, because there’s nothing
telling me that I have to go into that room now, like there was with
this room.
• [4] So these two, I can’t see what order I should take them in. Now
I’m just taking it in that order, because that’s the order they lie in
along the way here.
• [4] Well, when everything I assigned an employee to consider, I
actually... So I could have skipped everything else.
UI
Canonical
3D
w/labels
• [1] OK, [the lock] is getting bigger and smaller.
• [1] Well, it changes when when you hover the mouse over it so [it
might be interactive].
104
==PAGE:105==
13.9
J
Ranking
Last time we saw each other, we tried 4 different process representations.
1a) The classic ”boxes and arrows” representation, without domain-specific descriptive text. 1b) A 3d
representation of the same process, again without domain-specific descriptive text.
2a) A 3d representation of a domain-specific process, with abstract graphic elements. 2b) A 3d represen-
tation of a domain-specific process, with domain-specific graphic elements.
Validation Participant 1
Usability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to find
around?” Your answer: 2b
Understandability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate
the underlying process?” Your answer: 2b
Engagement:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the
process the most” Your answer: 2b
Preference:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future
if you had to learn a new process” Your answer: 2b
Validation Participant 3
Usability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: 1a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to find
around?” Your answer: 1a
Understandability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: 1a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate
the underlying process?” Your answer: 2b
Engagement:
105
==PAGE:106==
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 1a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 1a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the
process the most” Your answer: 2b
Preference:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 1a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 2a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future
if you had to learn a new process” Your answer: 1a
Validation Participant 5
Usability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: I thought 1a was the easiest. It was easier to form an overview
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: I liked 2b best. It was easier to remember the relationships between the elements and their
location.
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to find
around?” Your answer: 2b for the same reason as previous question
Understandability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: 1a one could see both processes simultaneously
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: I would probably say that they were about equally difficult
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate
the underlying process?” Your answer: 1a for the same reason as the previous question
Engagement:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 1b. It’s fun to move around the world
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 2b. Just like previous questions but even more fun since there was more to look at
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the
process the most” Your answer: 2b
Preference:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 1a because it is faster to see the relationships between the elements
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 2b since it is the most fun
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future
if you had to learn a new process” Your answer: I would probably choose 1a as it is the most manageable
Validation Participant 6
Usability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to get around?”
Your answer: 2a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model did you find the easiest to find
around?” Your answer: 2a
Understandability:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: 1b
106
==PAGE:107==
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate the
underlying process?” Your answer: 2a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, with which model was it easiest to calculate
the underlying process?” Your answer: 2a
Engagement:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the process
the most” Your answer: 2a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model made you want to explore the
process the most” Your answer: 2a
Preference:
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a and 1b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 1a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future if you
had to learn a new process” Your answer: 2a
Question: ”If you had to choose between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer in the future
if you had to learn a new process” Your answer: 2a
Validation Participant 7
Usability:
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a and 1b, which model did you find most easily navigable?”
Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If given the choice between 2a and 2b, which model did you find most easily navigable?”
Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model did you find most easily navigable?”
Your answer: 2b
Understandability:
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a and 1b, which model made it easiest to figure out the process
underlying process.”
Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If given the choice between 2a and 2b, which model made it easiest to figure out the process
underlying process.”
Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model made it easiest to figure out the
process underlying process.”
Your answer: 2b
Engagement:
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a and 1b, which model most inspired you to explore the process?”
Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If given the choice between 2a and 2b, which model most inspired you to explore the process?”
Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model most inspired you to explore the
process?”
Your answer: 2b
Preference:
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a and 1b, which model would you prefer to learn new processes
in the future?”
Your answer: 1b
Question: ”If given the choice between 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer to learn new processes
in the future?
Your answer: 2b
Question: ”If given the choice between 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b, which model would you prefer to learn new
processes in the future?
Your answer: 2b
107
==PAGE:108==
Figure 6: Comprehension: Validation Participant 1
13.10
Appendix K
108
==PAGE:109==
Figure 7: Comprehension: Validation Participant 3
Figure 8: Comprehension: Validation Participant 5
109
==PAGE:110==
Figure 9: Comprehension: Validation Participant 6
Figure 10: Comprehension: Validation Participant 6
110
