==PAGE:1==
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a re-
sult of the COVID-19 pandemic
A Review
Master Thesis
Virginia Stinchi
DTU Management
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
A Review
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Virginia Stinchi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the Master degree in Industrial Engineering and Management.
Virginia Stinchi - s213230
Signature
Date
ii
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
22/01/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The pandemic of COVID-19 deeply affected the lives of people worldwide from different
points of view. The purpose of this Master thesis is to investigate the main consequences
related to the disruption of supply chains with the final goal of identifying mitigation actions
and frameworks to build resilience that could be adopted in addressing future challenges.
Additionally, opportunities for future development like digitalization are also analyzed.
These objectives are pursued by a comprehensive literature review. The theoretical back-
ground is complemented by more practical information that comes from interviews with
DHL. Relevant stakeholders in the company provided information regarding the disruption
related to the pandemic in the context of the ocean freight industry with a focus on the
container industry. Finally, a successful example of how appropriate supply chain man-
agement can be key in managing a pandemic is illustrated in Chapter 5 which is entirely
dedicated to a case study presented by DHL. The final chapter of this thesis includes a
summary of the main findings and closing remarks related to this work. To conclude, I
would like to highlight that sustainability is a topic of great interest for this project and it
is presented both as a challenge and an opportunity for improving supply chain resilience.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Professor Harilaos N. Psaraftis, Department of Technology, Management and Eco-
nomics, Technical University of Denmark
I am profoundly grateful for the guidance, support, and invaluable feedback provided by
my supervisor, Professor Psaraftis, throughout the entire research process. His exper-
tise, dedication, and commitment have played a key role in shaping the trajectory of this
research. His insights and constructive critiques have been instrumental in refining the fo-
cus of this study. The encouragement and support I received were crucial in overcoming
obstacles and persevering through the ups and downs of this journey.
Hanne Reher, Sub-Regional Sector Head, Life Science&Healthcare, DGF Nordics/Baltics,
DHL
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Hanne Reher for her invaluable contribu-
tions to this research. Her expertise and insights into the Ocean Freight Industry signifi-
cantly enriched this work. She also played a crucial role in providing key insights through
insightful interviews, sharing her experience in the industry and retrieving relevant mate-
rials and data that contributed to the comprehensive nature of this work. The success of
this research owes much to Hanne’s generous sharing of knowledge and her willingness
to go above and beyond in supporting my inquiries.
My family
A special thank you goes to my family. Without your daily support, even though hundreds
of kilometres away, I could have not completed this work, especially in the challenging
times. Thank you Dad for all the brainstorming sessions on the phone to decide the
topic of this thesis. Your help in giving shape to my thoughts was priceless. I would be
lost without your guidance which you always provide when I need you. Thank you Mum
for always believing in me and being my greatest supporter. You shared with me your
experience in writing your thesis and I can now relate to your challenges. I know I do not
say it enough, but you are my role model and I aspire to become as successful as you.
Last but not least, a special thank you to my little sister. I would like to tell you that I do not
always understand all the challenges you are going through but I will always be there for
you. Even though we might be far away and follow different paths we will never be apart.
Thank you all for being the best family I could have asked for.
Andrea
I know you wanted me to add your title to this acknowledgement but I could not summarize
in a few words who you have been to me during this time of writing my thesis. Let’s be
honest, Management Engineer would have not been enough. I would like to thank you
simply for being there with me every day, all the good ones and all the bad ones. None
knows better than you all that I have been through lately and you are the only person who
can fully understand me. Every time I had a bad day or felt that I could not accomplish
everything I wanted to achieve, you reminded me how great I am. Seeing how much you
believe in me gave me the motivation and the courage to face every challenge. Thank
you for all the laughs, the chocolate, the coffee, the support and everything else that could
not be included in a list. Thank you Andre!
My friends
One final thank you goes to all my friends, the ones who supported me from far away and
the ones who were here with me during this time. I could name you all and individually
thank you but I am not sure there would be enough space here. Thank you all for being
there with me along this journey. I cannot wait to celebrate together.
Christian Nicolai Nielsen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU, Creator of this thesis template.
iv
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Introduction to DHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of this Master thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Literature review protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Literature Review
9
3.1
Definition of Supply Chain and Supply Chain Management
. . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Definition of Supply Chain Disruption, Risk and Resilience . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Supply Chain Disruption during the pandemic of COVID-19 . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Supply Chain Resilience and strategies to mitigate disruption . . . . . . . . 19
3.5
How to build resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.6
Opportunities for development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
The Ocean Freight Industry
33
4.1
Introduction to the Ocean Freight Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Ocean Freight during the Pandemic (2020-2021) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Ocean freight overview 2022-2024 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.4
Disruptive effects of the pandemic on maritime freight services . . . . . . . 51
4.5
Considerations for Policymakers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.6
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5
DHL case study: Revisiting Pandemic Resilience
57
5.1
Revisiting Pandemic Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.2
Relevance of logistics and supply chain management in addressing a pan-
demic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
6
Conclusions
71
6.1
Builging supply chain resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6.2
Strategies to mitigate disruption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
6.3
Digitalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
6.4
Sustainability: a challenge and an opportunity for supply chains . . . . . . . 74
6.5
Long term outlook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
6.6
Successful example of effective supply chain management in addressing
a pandemic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Bibliography
79
A Appendix
86
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The pandemic of COVID-19 started in 2020 and it deeply affected the whole world in dif-
ferent ways. Even though the World Health Organization has declared that the pandemic
is now an ongoing health issue and no longer a public emergency[1], it unfolded issues
that cannot be ignored.
Among other fields, it had a significant negative impact on the business continuity of sup-
ply chains and it exposed vulnerabilities across different industries. Manufacturing and
distribution operations suffered significant disruption, service levels and lead times were
negatively affected, and demand experienced unprecedented volatility. A clear example
of this complex situation was presented by the Institute for Supply Chain Management
which stated that, in April 2020, the average lead time for operations in Asia was at least
double compared to the pre-pandemic era[2]. The negative effect of COVID-19 was not
limited to a small group of companies. Indeed, according to Jingzhe et al., 938 of Fortune
1000 main companies were seriously affected by the spreading of the virus in their supply
chain operations due to a lack of raw materials and issues in the production[3]. One of
the main reasons why the pandemic deeply affected the stability of supply chains all over
the world is the simultaneous disruption at both demand and supply levels. Indeed, up-
stream flows were negatively impacted by lockdowns and travel restrictions while at the
downstream level panic buying started unpredictable demand patterns[4].
In this context, the resilience of supply chains became a critical concern for companies
that operate in several industries. This work aims to provide a significant contribution
in presenting the main vulnerabilities exposed by the pandemic and identify solutions to
build resilience and mitigate the negative impact of disruptive events. The objectives of
this thesis are further illustrated in the following section.
1.1
Objectives
This Master thesis aims to investigate how the pandemic of COVID-19 impacted global
supply chains to identify solutions to build resilience and mitigation actions that can be
adopted to address future challenges. The results will be of interest to companies that
are looking for ways to mitigate the impact of disruptive events to ensure the continuity of
the activities of their supply chains.
The ultimate goal of this project is to identify strategies to mitigate supply chain disruption
and resilience frameworks that can be applied in different contexts. To achieve this ob-
jective, this thesis aims to reach a deep understanding of the current body of knowledge
regarding supply chain disruption and resilience, as well as existing approaches that can
be relevant to ensure continuity in operations and mitigation measures. This theoretical
approach will then be combined with a presentation of a real-life case study from DHL.
The white paper provided by the company is titled Revisiting Pandemic Resilience, the
race against the virus: what we’ve learned one year into COVID-19 and how the world’s
healthcare supply chains will be ready for the next public health emergency[5]. It presents
significant results regarding the speed that was required to build an entire supply chain
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
1
==PAGE:10==
to develop, produce, and distribute vaccines all around the world in 2021. The aim of the
case study is to explain how efficient supply chain management is necessary to success-
fully manage a pandemic and the importance of partnerships across different countries
and industries. The combination of theoretical and practical approaches will be used to
develop suggestions for mitigation strategies that companies can adopt in different con-
texts. Additionally, this work aims to identify opportunities for the future that could help
to build supply chain resilience, like digitalization. Finally, environmental concerns and
sustainability requirements are investigated both as an opportunity and a challenge for
the future. To provide additional context to the definition of the objectives of this work, the
research question defined in this project is further presented below.
1.1.1
Research question
This paragraph illustrates the research question that this project aims to answer and it
provides a description of the reasons behind this choice.
The research question is the following:
What lessons can be learned from DHL’s experience and contribution during the COVID-
19 pandemic in terms of supply chain disruption and resilience with a focus on the Ocean
Freight Industry, and how can these lessons be combined with the current body of knowl-
edge on the topic to identify solutions to build more resilient and adaptable supply chains
for companies?
This research question highlights that the DHL experience in supply chain management
especially related to the Ocean freight industry during the pandemic will be analysed as
a case study in this investigation. Additionally, it allows to conduct a comprehensive re-
search on the body of knowledge of supply chain disruption and related mitigation actions.
Finally, it also states that the final purpose of the project is to identify solutions that can
be applied to improve the resilience of companies’ supply chains.
1.2
Introduction to DHL
DHL is the leading global brand in the logistics industry. It was founded in 1969 by Adrian
Dalsey, Larry Hillblom and Robert Lynn who brought a revolution in the logistics industry.
The DHL divisions offer a portfolio of logistics services ranging from national and interna-
tional parcel delivery, e-commerce shipping and fulfilment solutions, international express,
road, air, ocean and rail transport to industrial supply chain management. With about
600,000 employees in more than 220 countries and territories worldwide, DHL connects
people and businesses securely and reliably, enabling global sustainable trade flows.
With specialized solutions for growth markets and industries including technology, life
sciences and healthcare, engineering, manufacturing and energy, auto-mobility and re-
tail, DHL is positioned as the logistic company leader in its industry[6].
1.3
Structure of this Master thesis
The aim of this section is to present the overall structure of this work and provide a brief
summary of the content of each chapter.
The first chapter of this Master thesis is related to introducing the main topic of this work
and its relevance in the field of supply chain management. Additionally, the main objec-
2
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:11==
tives are illustrated in the above section.
Chapter 2 is entirely dedicated to illustrating the methodology adopted to develop this
work. It describes the combined theoretical and practical approach that allowed the inte-
gration of theoretical findings based on the literature review with real-life examples and a
case study. Furthermore, it includes a description of the literature review protocol adopted
in this project. This section includes the definition of the main sources, the search string,
and inclusion criteria that were adopted to identify relevant material to support this work.
Finally, this chapter includes an introduction to the case study presented by DHL and
the interviews conducted with the company to retrieve relevant information regarding the
ocean freight industry.
Chapter 3 summarizes the main findings that emerged during the literature review. It con-
tains relevant definitions of key topics for this work like supply chain (SC), supply chain
management (SCM), supply chain risks (SCR), and supply chain resilience (SCRES). Ad-
ditionally, it aims to investigate the main disruptive effects that the pandemic of COVID-19
had on supply chains. Furthermore, it includes one section dedicated to measures to mit-
igate the disruption and one regarding frameworks that can be adopted to build supply
chain resilience. Finally, this chapter includes an overview of the main opportunities for
the future to ensure more resilient supply chains, like digitalization and sustainability.
Chapter 4 is entirely based on interviews conducted with Hanne Reher, the Sub-Regional
Sector Head for Life Science & Healthcare for the Nordics and Baltics at DHL. She pro-
vided relevant insights from the point of view of the distribution industry regarding how the
ocean freight industry, especially the container industry, was negatively impacted by the
pandemic. Additionally, this chapter contains key figures on this topic based on the mate-
rial retrieved from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
website.
Chapter 5 is entirely dedicated to presenting the DHL white paper Revisiting Pandemic
Resilience, the race against the virus: what we’ve learned one year into COVID-19 and
how the world’s healthcare supply chains will be ready for the next public health emer-
gency[5]. This case study is a brilliant example of how supply chain management is key
in managing a pandemic. Indeed, it presents key figures that explain how an entire supply
chain was put in place to develop, manufacture, and deliver vaccines against the virus in
record time and succeeded in its goal. Additionally, it highlights the importance of coop-
eration across industries and borders to achieve common objectives.
Finally, Chapter 6 summarizes the main conclusions of this work. It aims to sum up the
main findings of this thesis. Indeed, it includes one section dedicated to the frameworks
identified to build supply chain resilience and one regarding the strategies to mitigate dis-
ruption. Additionally, it presents digitalization as an opportunity for future development
and summarizes the double role of sustainability which results to be both an opportunity
and a challenge. Finally, it includes one section dedicated to the long-term outlook related
to the maritime logistics industry and a summary of the key findings of the case study pre-
sented in Chapter 5.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:13==
2
Methodology
To investigate the research question presented in Chapter 1, a mixed methodology was
adopted. This methodology combines a theoretical approach related to the literature re-
view and a more practical one from the analysis of data, information, and a case study
provided by DHL. This mixed methodology is further illustrated below.
The theoretical component involves a comprehensive literature review and the analysis
of the current body of knowledge on supply chain disruption, resilience, and mitigation
actions. To retrieve material, DTU FindIT and the UNCTAD website have been consulted.
The findings from the literature review were synthesised to identify best practices and
strategies that can be applied to improve supply chain resilience to better face future
challenges and the main mitigation actions. Additional information related to the literature
review protocol is included in the following section.
The practical component of the research involves interviews with key stakeholders in DHL
to understand the evolution of the ocean freight industry with a specific focus on the con-
tainer industry during the pandemic of COVID-19. Additionally, a practical case study
based on a white paper provided by DHL, which is introduced below, was analysed to
investigate the relevance of effective supply chain management in managing a pandemic.
The findings of the theoretical and practical approaches have been combined to identify
best practices and strategies that can be applied to build more resilient and adaptable
supply chains to address challenges in the future.
2.1
Literature review protocol
This section is dedicated to outlining the literature review protocol that was adopted in this
Master’s thesis project. The development of a protocol aims to ensure that the literature
review is transparent and improve its credibility.
2.1.1
Sources
To retrieve relevant material necessary to conduct the literature review, Scopus was origi-
nally selected as the main database. However, it was later discarded due to the apparent
impossibility of retrieving an adequate number of papers to perform the review despite
several attempts to refine the search string. Indeed, the search produced hundreds of re-
sults that were impossible to review. To overcome this difficulty, DTU FindIt was selected
as a valid alternative for the database. The same search string originally adopted in Sco-
pus was then applied to DTU FindIT and this search produced an appropriate amount of
papers for a literature review. The process of defining the search string and additional
filters is further described in the following section.
It is relevant to underline that the lower number of articles retrieved by using the same
search string in two different databases, does not affect the quality of the review. Indeed,
using DTU FindIT, which offers access to a more limited number of papers, allowed to filter
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
5
==PAGE:14==
out from the search a great number of articles not related to the search question. Indeed,
a quick overview of the abstracts of the papers retrieved in Scopus, showed that the ma-
jority could not be used to answer the research questions and selecting only the relevant
ones among hundreds of results was not possible in a timely manner. A more detailed
explanation of the results obtained with both databases is included in the following section.
2.1.2
Search string
As mentioned above, a first attempt to define a search string to retrieve relevant material
was performed in Scopus. The first search string was the following:
( ”supply chain” OR ”value chain” OR ”logistics” OR ”distribution” ) AND ( ”freights” OR
”products” OR ”goods” ) AND ( ”COVID- 19” OR ”coronavirus” OR ”pandemic” ) AND (
”disruption” OR ”resilience” ) AND ( ”mitigation” OR ”recovery” )
This search produced 9,249 results. It appeared immediately clear that, even by applying
relevant filters such as document type, language and time frame, it would not be possible
to obtain a manageable number of papers. Several other attempts to refine and improve
the search string were made and led to the development of a new string that allowed to
significantly reduce the number of results. The updated search string was the following:
(impact OR effect OR consequence OR disruption) AND (pandemic OR ”pandemic covid-
19” OR covid-19 OR coronavirus) AND (stability OR resilience OR reliability) AND (”sup-
ply chain” OR ”global supply chain” OR ”value chain” OR distribution OR logistics) AND
(freight OR goods OR product) AND (mitigation OR recovery) AND (”supply chain flexibil-
ity” OR ”supply chain agility” OR ”supply chain integration” OR ”supply chain management”
OR ”supply chain risk” OR ”supply chain performance”)
This search string produced 2,937 results. Even by applying the filters mentioned above,
it was not possible to obtain a number of papers appropriate to conduct a literature review.
For this reason, the need to make significant changes became clear. One way to obtain
a lower number of results and refine the search is to use a database that offers access
to fewer publications. Thus, DTU FindIT was selected as an alternative database. The
same search string was applied and produced 145 results. After a first review of the ab-
stracts, they mostly resulted to be related to the search question. We can conclude that
changing the database allowed to refine the search and retrieve more appropriate papers
related to the review question without compromising the quality of the sources.
To summarize the key point of this paragraph, the database selected to retrieve papers is
DTU FindIT and the final search string is the following:
(impact OR effect OR consequence OR disruption) AND (pandemic OR ”pandemic covid-
19” OR covid-19 OR coronavirus) AND (stability OR resilience OR reliability) AND (”sup-
ply chain” OR ”global supply chain” OR ”value chain” OR distribution OR logistics) AND
(freight OR goods OR product) AND (mitigation OR recovery) AND (”supply chain flexibil-
ity” OR ”supply chain agility” OR ”supply chain integration” OR ”supply chain management”
OR ”supply chain risk” OR ”supply chain performance”)
6
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:15==
To refine the search, three additional filters were added:
• ACCESS: Online
• LANGUAGE: English
• YEAR: 2023 or 2022 or 2021 or 2020
The search was conducted on 15/09/2023 and produced 145 results that were exported
to Zotero to be stored and used as a reference for this project.
2.1.3
Inclusion Criteria
Once all files were exported to Zotero, this tool was used to create an Excel file with key
information about each paper. More specifically, this file includes the following columns:
• Item type
• Publication year
• Author
• Title
• Language
• Abstract
To these columns, others were added to display the inclusion criteria. For this literature
review, three inclusion criteria were selected:
• Publication year: No older than 2020
• Language: English
• Relevant to the research question
Each paper was reviewed based on the information recorded in the Excel file to evalu-
ate if was aligned with the inclusion criteria. All articles satisfied the publication year and
language criteria since a filter on these aspects was already applied during the retrieving
process in DTU FindIT. To evaluate the relevance for the research questions, all abstracts
were reviewed and, in case of doubt, a deeper evaluation of the text of the document was
conducted. The documents classified as ”non-relevant” were excluded from the literature
review.
This phase of selection of relevant papers resulted in a list of 20 papers that have been
used in this project to conduct a literature review. The final list of papers included in the
literature review is included in Appendix A in figure A.1 and A.2.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Case study
Once the literature review was completed, a number of interviews with DHL’s employees
were scheduled to investigate how the pandemic of COVID-19 affected the ocean freight
industry with a specific focus on the container industry. The results from these interviews
were combined with the learnings from relevant papers published by UNCTAD and they
are summarized in Chapter 4 of this work. This chapter is highly relevant to provide in-
formation regarding the time frame in which DHL’s white paper takes place. This paper
was investigated as a practical case study to understand the relevance of effective supply
chain management in managing a pandemic. To complement the information provided in
the white paper, additional interviews with DHL were conducted. The case study is sum-
marized an analysed in Chapter 5 of this work which also includes relevant conclusions
on supply chain management to ensure resilience during disruptive events.
8
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:17==
3
Literature Review
This chapter is entirely dedicated to the literature review based on the material retrieved
as previously illustrated in Chapter 2 related to the methodology. The aim is to provide
a comprehensive overview of the current body of knowledge regarding supply chain dis-
ruption, risk, and resilience in the context of the pandemic of COVID-19. It includes a first
section dedicated to introducing key definitions that will be relevant to the rest of this doc-
ument. First, we introduce the definitions of supply chain and supply chain management
that are better suited for the purpose of this project. Additionally, the definition section
includes an introduction to the concept of supply chain disruption, risk, and resilience in
relation to the current body of knowledge.
Furthermore, this chapter focuses on investigating the disruptive effects that the pandemic
of COVID-19 had on SCs. This section includes a list of types of disruptions based on
the analysis of the retrieved material and a summary of the main learnings and opportu-
nities for further research. Furthermore, a section dedicated to resilience and mitigation
strategies is also included. This part of the chapter summarizes the main mitigation ac-
tions that emerged from the analysis of the current body of knowledge. Additionally, three
models for building supply chain resilience are also illustrated. Finally, this chapter in-
cludes an analysis of the opportunities for development that emerged with the pandemic.
More specifically, this section includes opportunities for resilience related to digitalization
and sustainability.
3.1
Definition of Supply Chain and Supply Chain
Management
Before defining SC disruption and resilience and investigating the current literature on
these topics, it is necessary to provide a definition of Supply Chain and Supply Chain
Management. Already in 2001, Mentzer et al.[7] highlighted the importance of investigat-
ing different definitions of SC and SCM to develop a comprehensive one that managers
and academics could actively use. Based on their research, they developed the following
definition of Supply Chain:
A set of three or more entities (organizations or individuals) directly involved in the up-
stream and downstream flows of products, services, finances, and/or information from a
source to a customer.[7]
This definition highlights three interesting points. First of all, it sets the limit of at least
three entities to have a supply chain. Additionally, they specify that not only downstream
flows need to be taken into consideration but also the upstream ones. Finally, the def-
inition does not refer only to physical products and it is extended to flows of services,
finances, and information. To understand why these elements highlighted in Mentzer et
al.[7] definition are interesting, it would be relevant to compare it to the one proposed by
Oh et al.[8] illustrated below.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
9
==PAGE:18==
A SC is considered a meta-organization composed of interdependent organizations that
integrate business systems and build inter-organizational relationships. Therefore, it in-
volves all the organizations belonging to design, manufacturing, distribution, marketing,
and retailing of product or service process, making its management complex and chal-
lenging[8].
Three elements emerge from this definition, and they are interesting due to their differ-
ent nature compared to the ones mentioned above regarding the definition proposed by
Mentzer et al.[7]. The first element is the limit to products and services. Therefore, it does
not include any references to information. Additionally, there is no specific reference to
the direction of the flow (downstream and upstream) but it clearly mentions which are the
organizations involved. It is stated that they are related to design, manufacturing, distribu-
tion, and retail. Lastly, the interconnected nature of modern supply chains emerges from
this definition. Indeed, without a strong interconnectivity among different nodes, it would
not be possible to have the meta-organization mentioned in the definition.
What appears clear from the comparison of these two definitions is that achieving a shared
understanding of SC is not trivial. For the purpose of the thesis, we will refer to the defini-
tion proposed by Oh et al.[8] because of the relevance given to the interconnected nature
of SC. Indeed, Ergun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc[9] highlight that modern supply chains are
highly interconnected compared to the past. Such interconnectivity brings advantages like
access to a large variety of products around the world, shorter lead times and higher vol-
umes. However, the drawback of such a degree of interconnectivity is an increased level
of risk and vulnerability for SCs and higher chances of a mismatch between demand and
supply. In fact, each node strictly depends on the activities of all the others. If one of
them encounters challenges that slow down its operations, the whole SC is at risk[9]. The
topic of interconnectivity is particularly relevant in the context of disruption related to the
pandemic of COVID-19 and therefore for the purpose of this document.
Now that the writer and the reader have achieved a shared understanding of what a supply
chain is, it is now necessary to define Supply Chain Management. In the paper Defining
Supply Chain Management by Mentzer et al.[7] several definitions are deeply analysed
to develop a new one that represents the writer’s point of view. The final result is the
following:
The systemic, strategic coordination of the traditional business functions and the tactics
across these business functions within a particular company and across businesses within
the supply chain, for the purposes of improving the long-term performance of the individ-
ual companies and the supply chain as a whole[7].
In this project, the definition proposed by Mentzer et al.[7] will be the main reference
point. Indeed, as reminded in the paper Defining Supply Chain Management: In the Past,
Present, and Future[10], the article published by Mentzer et al.[7] in 2001 collected 4,900
citations over 17 years. Even though this definition was published several years ago, it is
not outdated and the number of citations over the years clearly highlights its relevance.
Now that a definition of SC and SCM has been provided, this thesis can proceed with the
10
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:19==
definition of Supply Chain Disruption, Risk, and Resilience which are included below.
3.2
Definition of Supply Chain Disruption, Risk and
Resilience
The previous section introduced relevant definitions related to Supply Chain and Supply
Chain management. Before proceeding with the literature review, it is important to intro-
duce other relevant definitions that will be useful in the rest of this project. More specifi-
cally, this section aims to introduce the definitions of Supply Chain Disruption, Risk, and
Resilience which are based on the review of the retrieved material.
The definition of Supply Chain Disruption is provided by Novoszel and Wakolbinger in the
paper Supply Chain Challenges during the COVID-19 Pandemic[11]. The writers define
Supply Chain disruption as following:
Supply chain disruptions are unanticipated and unplanned events and occurrences that
disrupt the regular flow of goods and materials within supply chain processes[11].
Now that a definition of supply chain disruption has been provided, it is also relevant to in-
troduce a definition of Supply Chain Risk. This thesis refers to A New Definition of Risk by
Heckmann[12]. This paper is particularly relevant because it highlights in the introduction
why a clear definition of risk is necessary according to the writer. Indeed, he argues that
the level of risk is often related to the individual perception and to specific circumstances.
Furthermore, the consideration of risk happens to be treated as exaggerated, while the
risk concept itself is often oversimplified. With these premises, the writer proceeds to in-
vestigate a new definition of SCR which is included below:
Supply chain risk is the potential loss for a supply chain in terms of its target values of
efficiency and effectiveness evoked by uncertain developments of supply chain charac-
teristics whose changes were caused by the occurrence of triggering-events[12].
According to this definition, SCR is represented by a potential loss for the supply chain
which comes from the occurrence of triggering events. To provide more context related to
the nature of these types of risk, we refer to Black and Glaser-Segura in the paper Supply
Chain Resilience in a Pandemic: The Need for Revised Contingency Planning[13]. In this
article, the writers refer to two types of SCR, organizational and disruption. They quote
the following definition provided by Tang in the paper Perspectives in Supply Chain Risk
Management[14]:
Operational risks are referred to the inherent uncertainties such as uncertain customer
demand, uncertain supply, and uncertain cost. Disruption risks refer to the major disrup-
tions caused by natural and man-made disasters such as earthquakes, floods, hurricanes,
terrorist attacks, etc., or economic crises such as currency evaluation or strikes. In most
cases, the business impact associated disruption risks is much greater than that of the
operational risks[14].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
11
==PAGE:20==
To further explore the definition of disruption risks, Heckmann[12] classifies them into 4
categories:
1. Environmental Disruption
This category refers to both natural and epidemic disasters. Global supply chains
are always exposed to changes in their environments and the recent experience of
the pandemic of COVID-19 is a reminder that SC networks are still vulnerable[12].
2. Economic Disruptions
The main risks that belong to this category are currency exchange rate fluctuations,
commodity price volatility, global financial crises, sudden demand shocks, supplier
glitches, and export/import restrictions which can threaten supply chain stability[12].
3. Socio-Geopolitical Disruptions
These risks are mainly related to geographical areas where there is no political sta-
bility and where terrorism is prevalent. Such type of geopolitical situation can rep-
resent a threat to supply chain performance[12].
4. Technological Disruptions
This risk category includes threats like IT failures, cyber-attacks, and corporate es-
pionage. Such types of risks are increasingly threatening SC operations[12].
To complete the definition of SCR, this project provides an additional contribution. Ri-
naldi et al.[15] cite Tang and Musa[16] who highlight two key elements in the definition of
risk. First of all, it needs to be related to an event with a small probability that can occur
abruptly. Secondly, a risk has to be associated with bad consequences. The writers also
classify SC risks into three main categories:
1. Material flow risk that originates either from the stage of sourcing, manufacturing or
delivering.
2. Financial flow risk that is related to improper investments and to the inability to settle
the payment.
3. Information flow risk that is linked to issues like information accuracy and secu-
rity[16].
Before moving to the next section which is dedicated to the investigation of disruption that
occurred in supply chains due to the pandemic of COVID-19 and to complete this section
dedicated to definitions, it is relevant to define also Supply Chain Resilience.
To provide a comprehensive definition of Resilience, Geske and Novoszel analysed dif-
ferent sources in the paper Definition and Development of Supply Chain Resilience[17].
They investigate the origin of the word Resilience and argue that it was originally re-
searched in the field of psychology and ecosystems and only at a later stage became a
subject for research in SCM. The interest in supply chain resilience increased starting from
the early 2000s. Tthis topic became more and more popular over the following years due
to major disruptive events like the terrorist attacks in the US, the hurricanes Katrina and
Sandy, the eruption of the volcano in Iceland, and the nuclear disaster in Fukushima[17].
The writers propose two definitions of Resilience illustrated by Bruneau[18]:
12
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:21==
• The capacity to cope with unanticipated dangers after they have become manifest,
learning to bounce back[19].
• The ability of a system, to withstand stress of ”environmental loading” ... a funda-
mental quality found in individuals, groups, and systems as a whole[20].
From these definitions, the writers argue that SCs should improve their ability to face un-
expected risks and disruptions that threaten their operations[17].
The process of developing a comprehensive definition of Resilience in the paper Defini-
tion and Development of Supply Chain Resilience[17] continues with the investigation of
its properties. The properties are the ones mentioned by Carpenter et al. [21]
1. The amount of change that a system can undergo [...] and [...] retain the same
control on structure and function [...]
2. The degree to which the system is capable of self-organization [...]
3. The degree to which the system can build the capacity to learn and adapt. Adaptive
capacity is a component of resilience that reflects the learning aspects of system
behaviour in response to disturbance[21].
The writers expand their definition by referring to the work of Kamalahmadi and Parast[22]
to identify three different stages in supply chain resilience:
1. Anticipation stage: the SC is prepared for any expected and unexpected disrup-
tion. Therefore, it is necessary to understand the impacts of disturbances and their
likelihood to occur to proactive develop contingency plans[22].
2. Resistance stage: in this phase, a detected disturbance needs to be contained be-
fore it spreads to ensure operations continuity[22].
3. Recovery and Response stage: now that the disturbance has occurred, the nega-
tive impact on stakeholders needs to be minimized. The organization should have
the capacity to restore the original status or even position the firm at a higher level
to leverage competitive advantage[22].
This definition introduces the element of proactive planning to anticipate disruptive events.
This idea is also illustrated in the definition presented by Ponis and Koronis[23] who in-
corporate proactive planning and design in their definition of resilience:
The ability to proactively plan and design the Supply Chain network for anticipating unex-
pected disruptive (negative) events, respond adaptively to disruptions while maintaining
control over structure and function and transcending to a post-event robust state of opera-
tions, if possible, more favourable than the one prior to the event, thus gaining competitive
advantage[23].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
13
==PAGE:22==
The last step presented in this work before developing the final definition of SC resilience
is the definition of enterprise resilience.
[...]the dynamic capability of an enterprise, which is highly dependent on its individuals,
groups, and subsystems, to face immediate and unexpected changes in the environment
with a proactive attitude and thought, and adapt and respond to these changes by devel-
oping flexible and innovative solutions[22].
This definition is key to understanding that some characteristics of the enterprise can
contribute to its vulnerability to disruption. For example, resilience decreases with the
increase of complexity in an organization.
Geske and Novoszel[17] finally argue that the definition they will be adopting for their work
is the one proposed by the National Research Council (NRC) which states:
The ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt to
adverse events” in the supply chain context[24].
The section dedicated to introducing relevant definitions for this work is now concluded.
The next sections will explore which have been the consequences of the pandemic of
COVID-19 on SCs in relation to disruption and mitigation actions to enhance resilience.
3.3
Supply Chain Disruption during the pandemic of
COVID-19
Now that relevant definitions have been provided to the reader, it is time to further inves-
tigate the disruptive effects of the pandemic of COVID-19 on supply chains. The current
body of knowledge on this topic is broad due to the high impact of this event on people’s
lives. Indeed, not only companies with global supply chains have been affected but entire
SCs until the final consumer who experienced shortages in critical products all around
the world. Due to this peculiar situation, SCM shifted from a highly specialized topic of
research to a front page news[9].
The main issue with this approach is that complex problems have been oversimplified un-
til banal solutions were proposed to address them. This issue is described in the paper A
structured overview of insights and opportunities for enabling supply chain resilience[9].
The writers highlight that inventory management practices like Just-in-Time have been
criticized in favour of Just-in-Case inventory solutions. Others blamed globalization and
suggested onshoring as the main solution. These answers come from a simplification
of a complex problem. Indeed, carrying excessive inventory is expensive and onshoring
needs to be explored to evaluate which part of the supply chain should be moved closer
to the consumers. Such mitigation measures should not be discarded, but they do not
represent a solution on their own. This is why identifying relevant mitigation actions for
disruptions like the pandemic requires a much deeper analysis[9]. This analysis should
start with the investigation of how a supply chain can fail due to disruptive events.
14
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:23==
The pandemic is not the first disruptive event to have an impact on the global supply
chain. Examples of other disasters include the earthquake in Japan in 2011, the outbreak
of SARS in China in 2003, and the tsunami in Indonesia in 2004. Regardless of the origin
of a disruption, they all have something in common. Indeed, they are related to a collapse
of supply chains in different regions or countries of origin and caused a set of disorders
in supply chain operations starting from the suppliers, to the manufacturing, until the fi-
nal supply to the consumers[25]. The pandemic of COVID-19 is a special example of
a disruptive event. It presents some differences compared to other incidents or events
like natural disasters, nuclear accidents, wars and so on. Indeed, such disruptive events
are usually limited both geographically and in time. On the other hand, the pandemic of
COVID-19 spread all over the world in a short period of time and, in the beginning, there
was no way to tell how long it would have taken to contain it[26].
Moosavy and Hosseini[27] highlight the definition of the magnitude and duration of SC
disruptions. The magnitude is related to the scale of the disruption impact on an orga-
nization while the duration refers to how long the disruption affects the SC. They define
the magnitude and duration of the disruption caused by the pandemic as catastrophic
compared to other events. They also argue that this is the reason why SC disruption and
resilience gained so much importance since the pandemic outbreak.
The following section aims to provide an overview of different types of disruptions related
to supply chains based on the analysis of the material retrieved for this literature review.
3.3.1
Types of Disruptions related to the pandemic of COVID-19
Novoszel and Wakolbinger[11] highlight that the main types of disruptions that occurred
during that pandemic regarded supply, demand, distribution, and infrastructure nodes.
The main reasons behind these disruptions cited in the paper are increased and shifted
demand, constraints regarding distribution, and health and safety restrictions that affected
employee availability. This section further explores the aforementioned types of disrup-
tions.
Supply disruption
Supply disruption occurs when there are no available components to perform a down-
stream task. Examples of reasons behind the shortage of raw materials during the pan-
demic are the limited mining activities, bans on exports, and interruptions in transportation
routes. Additionally, the health regulations limited the production capacity of the suppli-
ers. Finally, financial constraints had a non-negligible impact[28]. If available stocks are
not enough to satisfy downstream demand, shortages occur[9]. A good example of a
shortage of components for downstream operations during the pandemic is related to
the computer chip industry. In fact, the demand for computers and electronic equipment
drastically increased in 2020. Such a sudden increase in customer requests affected the
demand for semiconductors in several other industries. For example, the motor vehicle in-
dustry was impacted by this phenomenon. Additionally, once the global recovery started,
semiconductor production was still insufficient to meet the demand from the motor vehicle
industry[29].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
15
==PAGE:24==
Demand disruption
Regarding demand, disruptions occur when there are significant changes in consumer
behaviours. Such changes can have different origins. For example, they might come
from shifts in market requirements. During the pandemic, demand for home office sup-
plies increased while the one related to travelling significantly dropped due to the restric-
tions. Furthermore, demand for additional applications like face masks and hand sanitis-
ers raised. Another factor that cannot be ignored is the psychological component[11]. This
issue has been analysed also by Ergun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc[9]. They highlighted
how the perception of a potential shortage can lead people to purchase products ex-
ceeding their needs in the process of panic buying[9]. Indeed, people started purchasing
essential goods (like toilet paper and groceries) in bulk because afraid of shortages. Com-
panies struggled to adapt to such changes in demand that could have not been forecasted
before or even during the first months after the outbreak of the pandemic. However, this
situation also created space for innovation and market opportunities for collaboration[11].
Distribution disruption
Changes in consumer demand and supply availability can affect the distribution of ma-
terials from the providers to the users. Indeed, such changes can impact product trans-
portation capacity and demand. For example, changes in travel behaviour due to the
restrictions to limit the spread of the virus deeply affected air cargo space. In fact, the
demand for air travel was so low that limited the availability of air cargo space since the
number of aircraft that could travel was reduced. While people were travelling less and
limiting air cargo space, their demand for home delivery increased which led to the need
to revise the delivery modes and capacity[11].
Infrastructure disruption
Supply chain networks require collaboration between several stakeholders within the same
environment. This level of interconnection implies that disturbances in the operation of
one node risk not being limited to the boundaries of a single one of them but spreading
affecting the whole network. This propagation effect is classified as the bullwhip and rip-
ple effect depending on the reason behind the disruption[11].
The bullwhip effect is related to sudden changes in demand with limited information flow in
the direction of the supplier. The main consequences are either an increased stock level
or stock-out and longer lead times. On the other hand, the ripple effect is related to the
structural dynamics of the SC network. It describes how a disturbance in one node of the
SC propagates and affects the others. In extreme cases, the ripple effect can have major
implications and lead to the unavailability of one node in the SC[11]. These phenomena
are highly relevant in supply chain disruption. Therefore, they are further explained in the
following section.
3.3.2
Bullwhip and Ripple effect
As mentioned above, the bullwhip effect is related to the inability to respond to sudden
changes in demand due to the limitations in the information flow in the supply chain net-
work. On the other hand, the ripple effect refers to how disturbances propagate from one
node to the others in the network affecting their operations. One of the characteristics
of the latter effect is that its consequences might require middle to long-term recovery
strategies with high investments and coordination efforts[15]. To provide a more formal
16
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:25==
definition of ripple and bullwhip effect this work refers to Dolgui, Ivanov, and Rozhkov[30]
who provide the following definitions:
The ripple effect refers to structural dynamics and describes a downstream propagation
of the downscaling in demand fulfilment in the supply chain as a result of a severe disrup-
tion[30].
The bullwhip effect refers to operational dynamics and amplifies in the upstream direc-
tions ordering oscillations[30].
According to the writers, the ripple effect can be driven by the bullwhip effect which can
be caused by a severe disruption in the downstream direction[30]. The definition of the
ripple effect is particularly relevant in the context of supply chain disruption related to the
outbreak of the pandemic. Rozhkov, Ivanov, Blackhurst, and Nair[31] investigate how
SC design can be improved to anticipate and react to disruptive events and they analyse
how such policies can mitigate the bullwhip and ripple effect. For example, they explore
different network designs to understand which one would guarantee better preparation in
anticipating disruptive events like pandemics.
3.3.3
Learnings on Supply Chain Disruption
Now that a list of reasons why supply chains can fail in relation to the pandemic of COVID-
19 has been provided, it is relevant to summarize the main learnings about SC disruption
presented by Ergun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc in their work A structured overview of in-
sights and opportunities for enhancing supply chain resilience[9]. The main findings are
illustrated below in this section.
1. Mismatches between demand and supply can either result from supply reduction,
demand shift or coordination failure[9].
This analysis presents some points in common with the one illustrated by Novoszel
and Wakolbinger[28]. In fact, they also investigate the impact of disruptions in de-
mand and supply. However, Ergun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc[9] fail to mention dis-
tribution disruptions among such root causes. Another interesting point is that both
papers highlight the importance of communication and collaboration among stake-
holders in the supply chain network, even though they choose a different name for
it. Indeed, Novoszel and Wakolbinger[28] refer to Infrastructure disruption while Er-
gun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc[9] to Coordination failure. It is interesting to record
similarities and differences between the aforementioned works and how they both
refer to the same key topic of communication even though they choose a different
name for it.
2. Inventory and capacity can be used as complementary buffers against shortages in
supply.
Even though inventory and capacity buffers are considered complementary mea-
sures, they do not provide an effective response to disruption in the same time frame.
Indeed, in the short term, extra inventory can prevent disruption from propagating to
downstream nodes in the network. On the other hand, capacity might require time
to be increased but it provides a steady response in the longer term compared to
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
17
==PAGE:26==
extra inventory. The recommended solution is to increase resilience in the SC by
investing in flexibility measures that combine both inventory and capacity buffers.
Indeed, inventory buffer results to be useful against shortages while capacity buffer
measures are implemented[9].
3. Supply chain resilience can be enhanced by the interdependence of capacity sources.
Some forms of correlations are often not transparent among the stakeholders of the
same supply chain. For example, different companies might rely on the same sup-
plier and this could represent a vulnerability in the SC. Indeed, both of them might
have to face supply shortages with a great impact on the final supplier that cannot
shift from one company to another. However, companies are often not interested
in addressing this vulnerability. Indeed, if neither product is available on the mar-
ket due to a supply shortage affecting both companies, consumers are less inclined
to shift from one provider to another. This applies only to industries which supply
products that are not critical for the consumers. For example, medical supply chains
might require investments from the public sector to address such vulnerabilities[9].
4. Supply chain resilience can be enhanced by the flexibility of capacity sources.
In this context, flexibility refers to the ability to address different types of demand.
Such differences can be related to volume, different products, different locations and
different times. More flexible production capabilities can help to avoid shortages[9].
3.3.4
Further research opportunities
To conclude this section dedicated to the findings regarding the disruption caused by the
pandemic of COVID-19 on SCs, it is relevant to present a list of opportunities for further
research that emerged while conducting the literature review.
1. In interconnected supply chains, it is important to investigate and characterize shared
vulnerabilities.
For example, the pandemic of COVID-19 uncovered the risks of capacity shared
among multiple sectors. Indeed, companies related to different industries were all
dependent on the same suppliers of semiconductors that faced the computer chip
shortage. These complex risks require further investigation[9].
2. Hoarding behaviours should be understood and predicted.
These types of behaviours are common when there is a perceived risk of shortage.
Such spikes in demand might not be aligned with the actual consumption needs. Be-
havioural causes should be integrated into the forecast activities to increase readi-
ness[9].
3. Capacity flexibility plays a key role in developing resilience.
As mentioned in the section related to the main learnings, flexibility should be further
incorporated into supply chain activities to prevent SC failures. Flexibility should re-
sult from a combination of flexible inventory and capacity. These preventive actions
are especially relevant in industries where stockouts need to be avoided at all costs
like pharmaceutical manufacturing[9].
18
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:27==
4. Reverse flows and reusable inventory should be further investigated and adopted.
The common design of a supply chain includes a forward flow of material and a back-
ward flow of information. Rarely, backward flows of reusable sources are taken into
consideration. For example, ships, trucks and containers can be shared among
different industries to avoid travelling back to their origin point empty. Extreme sit-
uations can exacerbate supply shortages if there is an imbalance in the demand
between different locations[9].
5. Emergency responses are often not enough and the supply chain activities need to
be restored.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop emergency responses that allow to quickly
return to normalcy while avoiding prolonged excessive inventory and unmet de-
mand[9].
3.4
Supply Chain Resilience and strategies to mitigate
disruption
Now that disruption in the context of the pandemic of COVID-19 has been analysed, it
is necessary to investigate how to react to such disruptive events. It is possible to either
prevent the disruptive event from compromising the supply chain by investing in resilience
or to focus on mitigation strategies that can limit the negative impacts once the disruption
has occurred. This section aims to investigate the main mitigation strategies proposed in
the current body of knowledge and models to build resilience within the supply chain.
Pellegrino and Gaudenzi[32] provide a comprehensive literature review on Supply Chain
Resilience strategies in the context of the pandemic. This section includes a summary
of their findings complemented by the results presented by Black and Glaser-Segura in
the paper Supply Chain Resilience in a Pandemic: The Need for Revised Contingency
Plan[13].
3.4.1
Mitigation Strategies
Visibility and communication
Visibility refers to the status of knowledge of current operational resources in a supply
chain and its environment[33]. It can be defined as the degree of shared understanding
among the actors of the same supply chain[34]. Azadeh et al.[35] argue that visibility is
required to have an overview of inventories, conditions in demand and supply and pro-
curement and production schedules.
SC visibility is largely investigated as a potential mitigation action. Black and Glaser-
Segura[13] quote Ivanov and Dolgui[36] who argue that visibility and communication can
reduce the ripple effect caused by uncertainties. Furthermore, they suggest that visibility
can produce better effects than a higher degree of robustness in approaching uncertainty.
On the other hand, Pellegrino and Gaudenzi[32] refer to Yang et al.[37] who argue that SC
visibility during disruptions like that pandemic allows companies to make better decisions
regarding mitigation actions mainly through information sharing and communication. Ad-
ditionally, the writers state that visibility can be used to improve the service level, reduce
the bullwhip effect, optimize raw material purchases, and develop a more resilient supply
chain[32].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
19
==PAGE:28==
Visibility is also mentioned as a mitigation strategy by Rinaldi et al.[15]. The writers con-
ducted a literature review regarding quantitative models applied to supply chain risk man-
agement. From their search, visibility along the supply chain and communication among
partners proved to be fundamental to addressing risks.
To successfully implement visibility, improvements in information technology to enable
transparency within the supply chain are necessary[38]. Due to the relevance of the
topic, technology opportunities in disruption mitigation are deeper analyzed in the ded-
icated section of this project.
Robustness
Robustness is defined as relying on several suppliers instead of only one or having addi-
tional suppliers in waiting who intervene only in case of emergency as stated in the con-
tingency plan that a company has developed to address a crisis. However, this resilience
measure can be hard to implement successfully in case of an emergency or disruption[13].
Resilience and Stability
Black and Glaser-Segura[13] refer to Holling[39] in discussing the relevance of resilience
and stability to mitigate disruption. In this context, resilience is defined as the ability to
absorb changes and stability refers to the capacity of returning to an equilibrium after a
disruption. These two properties are defined as essential for ecological systems and en-
able the SC to absorb disturbances.
Service Innovation
To define service innovation, Black and Glaser-Segura[13] quote Heinonen and Strand-
vik[40]. They argue that service innovation could be a way to retain clients in a changing
environment. The pandemic forced companies to go beyond existing business strategies
to retain customers. More in detail, in this context, service innovation refers to spatial
flexibility, social and health outreach and technology exploitation. The pandemic forced
service innovation because of managerial sense-making, the role of consumers, and the
role of restrictions.
Flexibility
Flexibility is a popular topic regarding measures to increase resilience and it is cited in
different papers. Pellegrino and Gaudenzi[32] highlight that flexibility is one of the most
discussed strategies to address the disruption generated by the pandemic. Among the
flexibility strategies, they mention geographical diversification of suppliers, multiple sourc-
ing, restoring or nearshoring, and flexibility related to products and volumes.
Black and Glaser-Segura[13] refer to flexibility only among the additional topics that re-
quire further investigation. More specifically, they suggest that companies include flexi-
bility in their manufacturing activities. In this way, they can accommodate manufacturing
changes in their products to adapt to changes in consumers’ needs. Rinaldi et al.[15] also
cite flexibility as a topic to further explore to enhance resilience. Indeed, pandemics are
characterized by a variable and unpredictable nature. Therefore, a flexible supply chain
that is able to adapt to different situations is more likely to mitigate disruption.
20
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:29==
Inventory Management
Pellegrino and Gaudenzi[32] mention inventory management in their paper among other
mitigation actions. However, the purpose is only to highlight that it is mainly a measure to
increase efficiency rather than to mitigate disruption.
Reactivity
Reactivity is one of the measures mentioned in the paper Impact and Supply Chain Re-
silience Strategies to Cope with COVID-19 Pandemic: A Literature Review by Pellegrino
and Gaudenzi[32]. The idea with reactivity is to quickly redesign the distribution network
or to shorten the SC when it becomes too complex. It could also be related to redesigning
B2B contracts and agreements on logistics services.
Government Incentives
Pellegrino and Gaudenzi[32] argue that short-term and temporary incentives by the gov-
ernments can help minimise disruptions related to the pandemic.
Operational slack
Black and Glaser-Segura[13] mention operational slack as one of the additional measures
that require further investigation. Indeed, operational slack is reported to be effective
in mitigating disruption in the supply chain. They refer to Kovach et al.[41] who stated
that companies that adopt operational slack better perform in SC management in unpre-
dictable environments.
Diversification
Diversification can be adopted in the number of suppliers, manufacturing processes, lo-
gistics, and other operations. Organizational vulnerabilities emerged for several Fortune
1000 companies due to the fact they were directly sourced by the Wuhan area in China.
This is a clear example of why diversification of suppliers is key in unpredictable con-
texts[13].
Vertical Integration
In complex environments, vertical integration might be a good strategy. Indeed, it allows
companies to directly manage manufacturing and distribution. On the other hand, in stable
environments, this strategy is usually not recommended. Companies that are vertically
integrated during times of disruptions are reported to perform better than the ones that
did not do it[13].
Resilience portfolio
A strategy to mitigate disruption impact which is not investigated in the aforementioned pa-
pers is Resilience portfolio. This measure is analysed by Aldrighetti, Battini and Ivanov[42].
The expression Resilience supply portfolio refers to the allocation of components demand
among a set of suppliers and, at the same time, the identification of a subset of suppliers
to pre-position inventory to mitigate disruption risks. This approach allows the selection
of primary and recovery suppliers to adopt a proactive and reactive sourcing strategy[42].
A proactive approach to mitigation refers to planning and designing the SC to anticipate
unexpected disruptions and increase SC robustness. Reactive strategies refer to the
ability to identify sources of risks and to adjust in a flexible and agile way for efficient
recovery[43]. Aldrighetti, Battini and Ivanov[42] argue that a combination of these two
strategies is desirable to address disruption.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
21
==PAGE:30==
3.5
How to build resilience
Now that relevant mitigation strategies to address the disruptive effects of events such as
the pandemic of COVID-19 have been illustrated, this section focuses on presenting three
models about how to build resilience in a supply chain. The first one is presented by Er-
gun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc[9] and referees to the phases of Mitigation, Preparedness,
and Response supported by shared communication called Awareness. The second one
is the model presented by Black and Glaser-Segura[13] which identifies five dimensions
that a company should focus on to build resilience. Finally, the last model is presented
by Fjørtoft et al. who illustrate how to adopt the bow-tie framework to build resilience[44].
3.5.1
Framework for Supply Chain Resilience
Ergun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc[9] proposed an interesting model that describes how
to build a resilient supply chain. This model presents three stages with corresponding
mitigation actions that should be taken into consideration. First of all, they define what
type of event can cause a disruption and they mention demand increase, supply reduc-
tion, and coordination failure. Before such type of events occur, Mitigation actions can
be put in place. Once the disruption has already occurred, Preparedness measures can
be adopted to avoid shortages from happening. If the shortage occurs, it is necessary
to adopt Response measures to prevent additional harmful consequences. In order to
make this system work, information flow is key. Therefore, the foundation for this model
is Awareness. The model is illustrated in figure 3.1 and further described below in this
section.
Figure 3.1: Framework for supply chain resilience[9]
Mitigation
The Mitigation stage includes all measures that can be adopted to prevent the disruption
from occurring or to reduce the size of the consequences if it actually happens. Actions
that can be taken at this stage are classified as hardening and diversification. Hardening
measures reduce the likelihood of existing failure modes while improving system reliabil-
ity. For example, in SCM hardening might involve measures to make existing suppliers
more reliable. On the other hand, diversification is related to an increase in system reli-
ability by adding failure modes in parallel. In SCM such measures are related to adding
other supply sources or to increasing flexibility[9].
22
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:31==
Preparedness
The Preparedness stage involves measures to prevent a certain disruptive event from
creating shortages in supply or to contain the size of the shortage if it occurs. Measures
that belong to this stage are, for example, inventory buffering or capacity buffering. In-
ventory buffering refers to physical inventory available to compensate for a shortage. On
the other hand, capacity buffering refers to virtual inventory which means that there are
available physical assets to produce the required inventory. Another interesting measure
is represented by a contingency plan. A contingency plan is necessary to find a way to
produce inventory despite the lack of immediately available capabilities. For this reason,
the writers state that it can refer to virtual capacity. The last measure that belongs to the
Preparedness stage is Readiness. This measure can be considered as a virtual contin-
gency plan. In fact, it includes preparatory measures to facilitate planning in case fast
decisions need to be taken[9].
Response
The response stage occurs once the shortage has already happened. The goal of this
phase is to prevent the shortage from harming people or to reduce the amount of harm that
can occur. Three submeasures belong to this phase: demand reduction, supply increase
and prophylaxis. Demand reduction and supply increase are the most straightforward
measures to adopt in the field of supply chain. Indeed, such actions allow companies
to better allocate their limited resources. Other ways to protect people beyond closing a
supply gap belong to the Prophylaxis category. This category includes all measures that
are protective in nature[9].
Awareness
Without information flow, it would not be possible to implement Mitigation, Protection, and
Response measures. Awareness is the foundation of this model. It requires transparency
that allows relevant data to be available, analytics measures to process data, and com-
munication measures to communicate relevant info to appropriate stakeholders[9].
According to the writers, by adopting these four measures it should be possible to build a
resilient supply chain[9].
Findings
The model described above allowed the writer to draw interesting conclusions.
1. Supply chain resilience is complex
There is no single measure that can protect alone a supply chain from disruption.
Therefore, the framework can be used to develop a layered approach that combines
different measures in a comprehensive resilience strategy[9].
2. Early intervention is often cheaper than a late response
In the model described, mitigation measures result to be cheaper than prepared-
ness ones which are cheaper than response actions. Indeed, developing a better
process control to avoid supply disruption is better than adopting measures to pre-
vent the disruption from causing a shortage. Finally, addressing the consequences
of a shortage after it has occurred would be the most expensive measure[9].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
23
==PAGE:32==
3. Physical and virtual protections need to be coordinated
Physical measures about inventory and capacity are effective but costly. This is why
it is necessary to invest in virtual solutions like contingency plans. They take time
to be executed but they are less expensive. Therefore, the best strategy is to adopt
physical measures during the time virtual measures are required to be put in place
to achieve a cost-effective strategy[9].
4. Flexibility is essential to resilience
Preparedness measures (inventory buffering, capacity buffering, contingency plan)
are more effective in achieving resilience if they are designed in a flexible way. For
example, they can be combined with flexible allocation of resources or flexible man-
ufacturing[9].
3.5.2
Strategic pandemic mitigation model
Another interesting model for mitigation in disruptive environments such as the pandemic
of COVID-19 is illustrated by Black and Glaser-Segura[13] in the paper Supply Chain
Resilience in a Pandemic: The Need for Revised Contingency Plan. The model is sum-
marized in figure 3.2. It covers five dimensions, leadership, preparedness, digitalization,
resilience, and pivoting which a company should focus on to build resilience.
Figure 3.2: Strategic Pandemic Mitigation Model[13]
Leadership
To develop a risk management framework related to a pandemic, leadership support is
necessary. Indeed, effective leadership enhance communication along the whole SC
which allows coordination between different levels. The writers argue that a leadership
approach is more desirable than a management one. Indeed, leaders are better suited for
motivating others in difficult times and working in uncertain environments. On the other
hand, managers mostly deal with daily operations and often present a risk-averse mind-
set. For this reason, a leadership approach that goes beyond the role of management is
necessary to face challenges such as the ones presented by the pandemic[13].
24
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:33==
Preparedness
Events like pandemics bring complex consequences which are often unknown. Building
preparedness for such types of consequences required epidemiology models, SC pro-
cesses simulations and forecasts. This is why modellers work to provide models that can
support the development of contingency plans to address disruption. The preparedness
dimension is necessary to quantify the degree of risk, identify disruption and operational
risks, and allocate resources in order to mitigate the consequences of the identified risks.
In this model, the outputs of this preparedness phase are the inputs for resilience plan-
ning[13].
Digitalization
Digitalization of the information systems within a supply chain can help improve communi-
cation among different players. However, it requires time to be implemented and it cannot
be designed once the disruption has already happened. For this reason, companies with
complex and global SCs need to develop a high degree of digitalization in the phase of
planning for a pandemic and not once it has already occurred. Measures that can be
adopted to reduce uncertainty risks in this field are vendor management inventory (VMI),
collaborative forecasting replenishment planning (CFPR), and Enterprise Resource Man-
agement (ERP). An additional innovative measure is Blockchain which allows the regis-
tration of decentralized information in a safer way than traditional ERP systems[13]. Due
to the relevance of this software tool, it is further investigated in the section dedicated to
digital opportunities.
Resilience
As mentioned in the section dedicated to the definition of supply chain resilience, several
academics have investigated this topic in more than a single field. For the purpose of
illustrating this model, we will not include once again definitions of resilience and we will
limit to present three general areas where companies can include resilience measures
according to this model.
1. The first thing that a company can do to limit disruption risks related to its supply
chain is to diversify its suppliers. For example, the organization can arrange multiple
suppliers, possibly based in different countries to mitigate exchange rate risks. If it
is not possible to implement this strategy, companies should invest in a trust-based
relationship with key suppliers. This concept can be extended to other levels of the
supply chain such as contract producers, shipping suppliers and alternative distri-
bution channels[13].
2. Secondly, demand management strategies should be evaluated. For example, a
company can decide to enlarge the range of products offered. This strategy allows
for a shift in production from one product to another in case of demand disruption[13].
3. Demand postponement could represent an alternative. Indeed, where possible, a
company can postpone product delivery to customers who can wait by offering spe-
cial prices[13].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
25
==PAGE:34==
To achieve a desirable degree of resilience it is also important to monitor the development
of the pandemic such as the spread of the disease, infection rate, waves, treatments, and
vaccination effectiveness. Several of these elements might be still unknown during the
phase of planning for resilience and they will become clear over time. Such initial uncer-
tainty represents a challenge when planning for resilience and needs to be addressed[13].
Pivoting
Pivoting is defined as the organizational strategy of moving from one process or business
line to another. This type of measure is usually adopted only in extreme cases of threat to
the company with little warning. It also requires appropriate leadership skills to move the
whole organization in the desired direction. A new SC network design might be required,
as well as the selection of new supply chain partners and changes inside the organization.
However, such changes require time to be implemented therefore long-term planning is
necessary. This strategy should be considered the last resource for a company and the
best way to prepare for its implementation is to build resilience in the company and the
supply chain[13].
Benefits of this model
Building strategies to deal with events like future pandemics or other disruptions at a
global level requires a lot of planning and can be very complex. However, not having a
plan can lead to worse outcomes. This model aims to provide a practical guide on how
to build a strategic mitigation model that can be adopted to face not only pandemics but
other large-scale disruptions such as climate change and wars[13].
3.5.3
The AEGIS Resilience methodology
Fjørtoft et al. in the paper Assessing the resilience of sustainable autonomous shipping:
New methodology, challenges, opportunities explore a relevant methodology for building
resilience and apply the bow-tie framework to sustainable autonomous maritime trans-
portation networks in the context of the Advanced, Efficient and Green Intermodal Sys-
tems project (AEGIS) funded by the EU[44]. The aim of this section is to illustrate the
methodology described in the paper, even though automation in the maritime industry is
not the main focus of this Master thesis. Indeed, the framework is still highly relevant in
the identification of threats and risks to adopt both proactive and reactive measures to
ensure resilience. The definition of Resilience adopted in the paper is quoted below:
Resilience is defined as the ability to prevent events that may lead to disruption, or, should
this prove impossible, quickly recover once such events cannot be prevented[44].
To complete this definition, Fjørtoft et al. refer to Woods[45] who identified four ways to
use resilience.
1. Rebound which means that resilience is applied to returning to a stable state after
a disruption;
2. Robustness which refers to being able to withstand challenges;
3. Opposite of brittleness which means being flexible in addressing the challenges
related to unexpected events;
26
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:35==
4. Network architecture which summarizes the importance of building a strong network
that can help in adapting to future challenges[45].
The method presented by Fjørtoft et al. to evaluate resilience based on the above defini-
tions is the bow-tie framework. This method is usually adopted to both prevent unexpected
events and, if the event occurs, minimise its impact. This approach was selected because
it is aligned with the Formal Safety Assessment (FSA) framework which is usually adopted
by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to identify risks and how to mitigate them
in the context of maritime activities. The adoption of the bow-tie framework aims to con-
nect rebounding actions to reactive barriers, building robustness to reduce the impact of
unwanted events, and developing flexibility to adapt in unexpected events[44]. These
three main goals refer to three out of four pillars of resilience presented by Woods[45].
The bow-tie framework includes 5 dimensions, hazard identification, risk assessment, risk
control options, cost-benefit assessment, and recommendation for decision making[44],
and it is illustrated in figure 3.3
Figure 3.3: FSA Flowchart. Source: IACS.[44]
In their paper, Fjørtoft et al. explore additional solutions to identify and address risks to
build resilience. The methodology that they propose is inspired by the bow-tie framework
illustrated in figure 3.3 and it is applied to sustainable autonomous shipping in the con-
text of the Advanced, Efficient and Green Intermodal Systems project (AEGIS) funded by
the EU to develop a sustainable seaborn transport system, as previously mentioned[44].
Even though in this paper the AEGIS method is applied to autonomous shipping risk
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
27
==PAGE:36==
identification and resilience implementation, it can be relevant in other contexts as well.
Therefore, the framework is further illustrated below in this section.
The AEGIS resilience methodology
In the Assessing the resilience of sustainable autonomous shipping: New methodol-
ogy, challenges, opportunities paper, the bow-tie framework is used to visualize potential
threats and their unwanted consequences which could negatively impact the supply chain
and its operations[44]. This approach is displayed in figure 3.4. The main threats are sum-
marized on the left side of the framework and are connected by arrows to the top event
located in the middle. Preventive barriers and measures are displayed between the risks
and the top event to reduce the likelihood of unwanted consequences. On the right side
of the top event, the consequences that come from the threats are summarized. Between
the top event and the negative consequences, Reactive barriers and measures are dis-
played and their purpose is to mitigate the negative consequences of the threats. The
main reason why this model is relevant in building resilience is the fact that allows the
identification of both threats and mitigation measures[44]. A generic presentation of the
steps required to implement the AEGIS methodology is included in the following section.
Figure 3.4: Generic bow-tie diagram[44]
Step 1
The first thing to do to implement the bow-tie framework is to identify impact categories
which represent who and what can be negatively impacted by diruptive events. An exam-
ple of an incident category is people who can be affected by safety-related issues. Other
examples could be technology, reputation, equipment, infrastructure, and service disrup-
tion. Identifying the correct incident categories allows to define the limits of the scope[44].
Step 2
The aim of step 2 is to identify top events that could affect the previously selected inci-
dent categories in case they occur. Such types of top events can be identified based on
workshops, inputs from the industry and available literature. For example, a specific top
event related to a human incident category can be an injured person[44].
28
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:37==
Step 3
Once the top events are selected, it is necessary to identify risks that could potentially
trigger every top event. These types of threats are grouped into categories like humans,
organizational and operational, technology, and external threats[44].
Step 4
After identifying all potential threats, it is important to define preventive barriers and mea-
sures that can be put in place to reduce the likelihood of that threat to result in a top event.
The main goal of preventive actions is to prevent a top event from occurring when possi-
ble[44].
Step 5
Once the proactive barriers have been selected, it is necessary to define reactive barriers
as well. Additionally, depending on the top event that could occur if the barriers fail, it is
important to describe what consequences might arise. Indeed, the goal of the reactive
barriers is to reduce the negative impact of the occurred event. This step includes the
opportunity to think about resilience measures to implement. Indeed, if the top event to
mitigate is an injured person, a plan for quick medical treatment and intervention from
medical personnel could be put in place[44].
Step 6
The final step of this approach is to identify what could be the worst-case scenario in case
a top event occurs. For example, an injured person might result in a life loss[44].
The abovementioned steps are displayed in figure 3.5. The aim of this figure is to com-
plement the initial general AEGIS model with the steps in the order they are presented.
To summarize the importance of the AEGIS model in building supply chain resilience, it is
relevant to highlight that this framework allows the identification of both threats and how
they could affect different areas of a company and mitigation actions from the proactive
and reactive points of view. Additionally, reflecting on the requirements to complete each
step gives the opportunity to identify relevant measures to include in a resilience plan.
3.6
Opportunities for development
This section aims to illustrate the main opportunities for further development in Supply
Chain Resilience to address potential disruption. In particular, it is focused on the op-
portunities offered by technology and digitalization and the adoption of more sustainable
approaches which emerged during the literature review.
3.6.1
Digitalization
Moving towards a digital transformation is not a choice if a company wants to be com-
petitive in the current globalized world[46]. Therefore, it is important to investigate the
opportunities offered by digitalization strategies. Traditional SC resilience strategies are
increased safety stock level, supplier diversification and partial order allocations. On the
other hand, modern times offer great opportunities to build resilience through digital solu-
tions[47].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: Steps in the AEGIS Resilience model[44]
As already mentioned in this work, digitalization offers several opportunities to achieve a
higher degree of resilience in a supply chain that can reduce the risk of disruption. Hos-
seini et al.[48] argue that technologies related to Industry 4.0 can facilitate the application
of strategies to enhance supply chain resilience. This section aims to investigate some
of the solutions proposed in the papers retrieved to perform the literature review which
include Digital Twin, Big Data Analytics, Blockchain, the Internet of Things (IoT)[49], and
Artificial Intelligence (AI)[50].
Industry 4.0
Before exploring different digital solutions that can support companies in building re-
silience, it is relevant to define what Industry 4.0 refers to. Singh et al.[50] refer to the def-
inition presented by da Silva et al.[51]. They state that Industry 4.0 is related to methods,
principles, and technologies that aim to make manufacturing systems more autonomous,
precise, and adaptable. Some of the technologies that belong to this broad category are
further described below.
Digital Twin
The first solution that this project analyses is represented by Digital Twins (DT). DTs are
simulation-based models designed to accurately represent the physical supply chain with
the actual capacity, demand, transportation, and inventory data[52]. The main applica-
tions are to increase visibility, improve resilience and test contingency plans. Therefore,
it helps predict future impact and reactions, promising strategic and logistical decisions
and efficiently execute contingency plans. A supply chain that has been associated with
a digital twin results more resilient than one that has not[53].
30
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:39==
Big Data Analytics
Big Data Analytics refers to processes and techniques that allow the integration of data
from different sources to produce actionable information. Such information can be used
to support decision-making processes and generate proactive response plans[54]. The
impact of adopting Big Data Analytics on supply chain risks is deeply evaluated by Li et
al.[55]. The aim of their paper is to evaluate if the adoption of such techniques is related
to improvements in the performance of the supply chain. The main finding is that there
are contradictory opinions about this topic. However, it is certain that Big Data Analytics
cannot guarantee better performance on its own. Therefore, it is necessary to combine it
with Supply chain Integration (SCI) techniques. Especially during disruptive events, com-
panies should not rely entirely on Big Data but they should also invest in integrating with
other members of the SC. Only by sharing information regarding available inventory and
demand forecast with the network, it is possible to better deliver value to customers[55].
Blockchain
Blockchain is a great tool to improve visibility. Indeed, its main characteristic is to ensure
that digital information is authentic. The communication, coordination, and collaboration
between different players in the supply chain results to be improved since everyone has
access to valid information[56].
Internet of Things
The Internet of Things refers to an autonomous interaction between different physical
objects that are equipped with digital technologies. These interactions can also include
human users or other digital systems that can either be internal or external to the orga-
nization. The main outcome of these interactions is item traceability which improves risk
knowledge and mitigation strategies. To achieve such results, monitoring devices such
as radiofrequency identifiers, barcode readers or wireless sensors are widely used[54].
Artificial Intelligence
AI is the main focus of the paper Role of Industry 4.0 Practices in Supply Chain Re-
silience[50] because it incorporates the capabilities of other practices like machine learn-
ing, deep learning, and big data. AI can help people perform tasks that in the past were
thought to require human cognition. For example, recognizing patterns, integrating in-
formation, performing forecasting activities and drawing conclusions. In the case of the
supply chain, it can help analyse data to spot patterns and use algorithms to suggest
models that offer solutions to improve operations. It can also support inventory manage-
ment activities. Indeed, it tracks demand and shelf time to evaluate warehouse perfor-
mance. It becomes particularly relevant in unpredictable situations such as the pandemic
of COVID-19. In fact, AI allows to analysis great amount of data which can be used to
quickly evaluate the situation and suggest promptly actions to minimize risks. For this
reason, organizations have started in recent years to introduce AI in their SC operations
to address unpredictable circumstances[50].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
31
==PAGE:40==
3.6.2
Sustainability
As mentioned in the introduction to this section, the adoption of more sustainable prac-
tices can provide a contribution to the resilience of the supply chain. Eggert and Hartmann
[57] argue that sustainable supply chain management (SSCM) is key to building resilience
in the context of disruptive events. The goal of sustainable supply chain management is
to improve the supply chain from the environmental and social point of view while ensur-
ing economic and sustainable viability. To support their hypothesis, the writers monitored
a sample of 231 of the largest public companies in Europe during the pandemic. For
example, Schneider Electric experienced significant growth compared to its competitors
during the pandemic. The success of the company can be ascribed to its supply chain
management strategy which values fair relationships with suppliers, transparency, and
sustainability. This approach gives the company the opportunity to heavily rely on its
relationship with key suppliers in finding solutions to address challenging situations. An-
other example of the relevance of supply chain resilience is a survey conducted in 2020
among practitioners. 32% of the respondents stated that they are working to build solid
relationships with suppliers based on environmental and social governance to mitigate the
risk of disruption. From these examples, it is clear that one of the key elements of SSCM
is building a strong relationship with suppliers in the long term while reducing information
asymmetry. According to the authors, the importance of this approach was clear both
before and after the outbreak of the pandemic. The main argument of the paper is that
companies that adopted SSCM resulted to be more resilient to unexpected disruption.
Additionally, the time required to recover from the disruption is reduced by longer experi-
ence with SSCM[57].
Even though sustainable approaches like SSCM can have a positive impact on building
more resilient supply chains, environmental challenges are a rising and pressuring issue
for companies. Sustainability and the related challenges in the field of supply chain man-
agement are further investigated in the conclusions of this work.
32
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:41==
4
The Ocean Freight Industry
Marine Transportation Systems (MTS) are a key part of global supply chains[58]. It is
estimated that 80% of goods are carried by sea all around the world. For this reason,
maritime shipping represents the backbone of global trade. To provide more context, it is
relevant to highlight the importance of container trade in this industry. It is estimated that
container trade accounts for 60% of the value of seaborne trade. An estimation from 2019
argues that this percentage is valued at around $14 trillion[59]. One of the purposes of
this thesis is to investigate how the maritime transportation industry was impacted by the
pandemic of COVID-19. It is relevant to highlight that the main focus will be the container
industry even though other forms of transportation like bulk and tankers also characterize
this market. At the outbreak of the pandemic in 2019, seaborne trade, especially con-
tainerized trade, was expected to drastically decrease. On the contrary, import demand
for manufactured goods suddenly increased in the third quarter of 2020. Carriers failed to
forecast this customer behaviour and this situation led to complex consequences that dis-
rupted global supply chains[60]. A clear example of how an incident related to maritime
transportation can significantly affect supply chains all around the world is represented
by the container ship Ever Given that ran aground in the Suez Canal in March 2021. To
resolve the incident 6 days were necessary. However, the consequences of such delays
had an impact on global distribution for a much longer time. At that point in time, maritime
traffic had already been compromised by the pandemic of COVID-19. This incident exac-
erbated port congestion, container shortages, increasing freight and commodities prices,
and several other issues that started with the pandemic[58] that are further presented in
this chapter.
Due to the relevance of maritime transportation, and more specifically container trade for
the global supply chain, this chapter aims to provide an overview of the industry based
on relevant papers retrieved on the UNCTAD website and several interviews conducted
with Hanne Reher, the Sub-Regional Sector Head for Life Science & Healthcare for the
Nordics and Baltics at DHL. Additionally, the aim of this chapter is to present a clear time-
line of the main events that had disruptive consequences on global trade starting from
the outbreak of the pandemic at the beginning of 2020 until mid-2023. Additionally, a
summary of the main reasons behind the disruptive effect that the pandemic had on the
industry is also included in this chapter. The conclusion to this chapter containers sugges-
tions for policymakers based on UNCTAD papers and forecasts regarding the expected
behaviour of the ocean freight industry in the short, mid and long term.
4.1
Introduction to the Ocean Freight Industry
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, 80% of goods are carried by sea[59]. To
understand how the Ocean Freight industry works, it is relevant to investigate who the
main players are, how they can cooperate to reduce costs, who the customers are, and
how this business evolved over the years. The main findings about these topics come
from the interviews conducted with DHL and are presented in this section.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
33
==PAGE:42==
4.1.1
Alliances
The container shipping industry is dominated by three alliances which cover 80% of the
global container market. The first types of agreements between different carriers dates
back to 1875 and they were called liner conferences. Members of these conferences had
the right to agree on freight rates and surcharges that were then published in common tar-
iffs available for clients. However, institutions like the EU decided to ban the conferences
in 2008 because their agreements on rates did not comply with modern competition and
antitrust regulations. Therefore, these alliances were dissolved and a new type of agree-
ment was established. In this type of alliance, carriers are allowed to share vessels, slot
times, and port terminals but they cannot agree on prices to minimize competition. In-
deed, freight rates have to be negotiated with the clients every time they want to stipulate
a contract[59].
The current set-up dates back to 2017 and the main alliances are:
1. 2M Alliance which involves Mærsk Line and MSC;
2. Ocean Alliance between OOCL, CMA CGM, China Cosco Shipping, and Evergreen;
3. The Alliance which includes Hapag-Lloyd, One, Yang Ming, and HMM[59].
These alliances dominate the Est-West Trades between major locations in North America,
Western Europe and Asia. There are two main reasons why it is convenient for carriers
to join efforts in an alliance. First of all, such a type of agreement allows companies to
share costs. Indeed the container shipping industry involves high fixed costs that can
be reduced, for example, by sharing vessels. Additionally, no carrier can provide to its
clients a global service coverage. Therefore, joining an alliance allows carriers to cover a
bigger part of the global market and, therefore, be more competitive in satisfying clients’
demands. Alliances are beneficial also for clients because they result in lower freight
rates. Indeed, if carriers can lower their fixed costs by sharing resources, they can offer
lower and more competitive prices to their clients. However, alliances can exert a great
influence on rates, especially in times when prices are particularly high like during the
pandemic[59].
To understand how carriers reached the current set-up, it is relevant to explain how an
alliance is formed. The French liner CMA CGM, the Swiss liner Mediterranean Shipping
Company (MSC) and the Danish Mærsk Line attempted to ally in 2014. However, their
request was declined by institutions like Chinas Ministry of Commerce due to antitrust
issues. Indeed, these types of agreements are not informal accords between compa-
nies and require formal and legal approval by antitrust institutions. CMA CGM, MSC and
Mærsk are the largest players in the industry and their alliance would have been too influ-
ential in the market. This is why CMA CGM joined The Alliance and the alliance between
Mærsk and MSC was established in 2015 under the name 2M Alliance. According to
2021 figures, Mærsk is the leading shipping company worldwide based on the number
of ships as displayed in graph 4.1. However, MSC overtook Mærsk’s position in 2022 as
the leader in terms of TEU as shown in diagram 4.2. The 2M Alliace will be dissolved in
2025[59].
34
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.1: Leading container shipping companies worldwide based on the number of
ships as of November 30, 2021[61]
Figure 4.2: Owned and chartered TEUs of the world’s leading container ship operators
as of January 31, 2022[61]
4.1.2
The role of forwarders
Liners and carriers are the companies that own the vessels which are used to deliver
containers around the world. To provide additional context regarding the Ocean Freight
Industry, it is relevant to describe what the role of forwarders is.
In every shipping, there is a liner or a carrier that is the owner of the vessel that will be
used for the transportation. A client can choose to go ”carrier direct” or to contract their
shipments via a freight forwarder who provides services to export goods around the world
on behalf of the clients. A freight forwarder is defined as an asset-light company that acts
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
35
==PAGE:44==
as an intermediary between the client making the shipment and the final destination of the
goods. Forwarders use their trusted network of partners like various liners to negotiate the
best possible price and to identify the optimal routing on behalf of their clients. Usually, a
freight forwarder handles a large number of different international shipments. Clients are
often located in different countries wherefore the freight forwarder is an important logistic
coordinator concerning pick-up, main carriage and delivery. Next to the physical trans-
portation of goods, a freight forwarder also manages the often complex documentation
and filing requirements between countries, harbours, and customs authorities[59].
4.1.3
Container ships and Shipping hubs growth
To understand the significant growth of the container shipping industry it is relevant to
present the evolution of vessels and ports over the years. For example, in the past 50
years, container ships have significantly increased their size. Before containerization,
goods were usually carried in bulks which were manually loaded and unloaded on the
vessels. The issue was that they could not be loaded and unloaded by crane due to tech-
nical reasons.
The first form of recorded container shipping dates back to the 18th century in Britain for
combined rail and horse-drawn transport. However, container shipping as we know it now
started in the US in the 1960s and then extended to Europe and afterwards to Japan. A
good example of this transition is represented by the food industry. Before this time, food
products were carried in bulk. It was tough to deliver fresh fruit like bananas to Europe
due to the temperature and the long travel time. To address this issue, they started to be
stored in containers and now they are carried in temperature-controlled containers that
can preserve them for longer time[59].
When containerization started, the vessels were still fairly small compared to the current
ones. The evolution of containers and container vessels started in the 1970s and from that
time the size of ships never stopped increasing. The first vessels in the 1960s could carry
up to 1,530 TEU. Modern vessels can carry up to 24.000 TEU[59], as shown in graph
4.3. The main argument that supports the increasing size of vessels is the lower envi-
ronmental impact. Indeed, modern vessels are built to comply with recent environmental
regulations. Additionally, more containers per vessel should result in fewer vessels trav-
elling and a reduction of the emissions[59].
Before the pandemic, the only time when the industry slowed its growth was the financial
crisis in 2008. Indeed, until 2009, the industry had a steady growth of 6% per year but,
when the financial crisis of 2008 started, the industry faced a decline in the shipyard order
books. Many shipyards were closed down and only after several years the order books
have recovered from the crisis. After this crisis, the industry recovered and the growth of
vessels and shipyards restarted[59].
This significant growth started a debate about whether the vessels had outgrown the in-
frastructure needed to support them. Bigger vessels require more people to manoeuvre
them, more dock workers and more truck drivers to deliver containers to their final desti-
nations. One of the questions regards the harbour’s capacity to handle such amount of
containers coming all at once from the same vessel. To manage the increasing size of the
vessels, ports started growing as well. In 2005, North American and European ports still
36
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.3: 50 years of container ship growth[62]
figured in the top 10 list of the largest harbours around the world. Now, the largest ports
are almost entirely located in Asia. In 2019, only Rotterdam was still part of this rank and
in the bottom part of the top-10 list[59], as displayed in graph 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Tbe World’s largest shipping hubs[63]
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
37
==PAGE:46==
The main reason why the largest ports are now located in Asia is the great growth that
Asian economies are experiencing. Especially China has been increasingly dominating
the industry since 2005. Until 2005 there were still US and European ports in the top 10
of the largest harbours. Now the largest harbours are Shanghai, Singapore, Guangzhou
and the only western port in the top-10 rank is Rotterdam. Several Chinese ports, Singa-
pore, and Busan in South Korea made it to the top 10 in recent years. Emerging hubs are
now present in Malaysia, Taiwan and Thailand[59].
4.2
Ocean Freight during the Pandemic (2020-2021)
The container shipping industry is a mature industry, and it has been considered reliable
for decades to the point that containers were taken for granted. Additionally, it is a truly
global industry that affects everyone’s lives more than we could have imagined. For these
reasons, when the pandemic of COVID-19 started, the industry was affected by serious
disruptions that was not ready to address[59].
When the pandemic of COVID-19 broke out in 2020, measures to prevent the spread of
the virus deeply affected consumers’ behaviour and manufacturing and distribution activi-
ties. The number of goods produced decreased and shipping demand followed the same
negative trend. Therefore, liner companies quickly adjusted to such types of changes in
container distribution demand. However, by the third quarter of 2020, this situation of low
distribution demand deeply changed. Indeed, demand recovered rapidly also because of
incentive monetary policies implemented by governments in several countries. The result
was a sudden increase in demand for container transportation which led to a shortage of
empty containers and space, as well as port congestion and poor welfare conditions for
seafarers[64]. This section aims to describe the timeline of the main events that led to the
disruption of the global supply chain between 2020 and 2021.
4.2.1
Outbreak of the pandemic in January 2020
At the end of December 2019, the virus of COVID-19 started spreading in China from the
city of Wuhan. The spreading of the virus alerted the logistics industry at the beginning of
January 2020 when the Chinese government imposed restrictions after the Chinese New
Year. The lockdowns were firstly imposed in China in January, then Europe followed by
adopting a similar approach in March, the restrictions then moved to the US in April, and
finally, they reached the rest of the world. Global trade was deeply affected and sales
drastically dropped[59].
The lockdowns that followed the spreading of the virus deeply impacted the whole logis-
tics infrastructure starting from harbours and terminals in China in January 2020. Indeed,
truck drivers and port workers were affected by the restrictions and they could not perform
their usual jobs like before. This situation led to a lack of port handlers which resulted in a
large number of containers piling up in the Chinese harbours. Part of the vessels were at
sea at the time the lockdowns started to be imposed all over the world. Therefore, when
they reached the harbours to be loaded and unloaded, there were not enough workers to
complete the job. The main consequence was that they had to be diverted from China to
other ports like Korea[59].
38
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:47==
The main result of this complex situation was that containers started to be placed where
they were not supposed to be and often it was not possible to track their location. Ad-
ditionally, delivery time increased and materials for production could not be delivered to
China in time to be manufactured. Therefore, manufacturing activities were delayed and
manufacturers had to cancel their orders with clients[59].
To address the disruption and reduce costs, some liners reduced the number of vessels.
To do so, some containers were returned to the leasing companies, while ships were
stopped for refurbishment or stuck at sea because, if anyone on board tested positive
for COVID-19, the whole ship had to be quarantined due to the restrictions imposed by
governments. Different countries introduced different regulations. This resulted in an in-
creasing number of blank sailings. Additional information regarding this topic is included
in section 4.4 dedicated to the disruptive effects of the pandemic on the maritime trans-
portation industry. Between January and June 2020, the situation was extremely complex
and liners tried to mitigate the consequences of the outbreak of the pandemic however
they could. Despite their efforts, demand drastically dropped none could forecast what
would have happened next[59].
4.2.2
Recovery phase starting from June 2020
Despite the lockdowns, China managed to recover production at an early stage. There-
fore, goods were ready to be exported again. New orders for products started arriving from
the US and Europe and, starting in June 2020, global cargo volumes increased sharply.
The main reason behind this phenomenon was the quick recovery of Chinese production
facilities and the fact that it was possible to place orders again. The first routes to recover
were between Asia and the USA, between Asia and South America and between Asia and
Oceania. Therefore, carriers quickly reinstalled capacity along these routes to support the
increasing demand. In the meantime, other lines started to recover and the situation be-
came more and more difficult to manage due to capacity constraints at different levels[59].
In normal situations, large volumes of products are delivered from China to the US in
September to anticipate the Christmas demand that could otherwise face delays due to
the national holidays in China scheduled for October. In September 2020, the situation
was not as easy to handle. Indeed, during the lockdowns, consumer behaviour deeply
changed and shifted from service to product. Therefore, demand for goods from China to
the US increased by 20% compared to the same time period in 2019 which is an increase
never seen before and that no one could have forecasted. To cope with such demand,
900.000 20-foot containers started to be shipped from China to the US every month[59].
Such volumes created congestion in the harbours in the US. Indeed, in North America,
containers that reach the main harbours are then trucked to their inland destinations. How-
ever, during this phase of the pandemic, there were not enough truck drivers to handle
such a number of containers that started arriving in the US harbours. The main reasons
behind this shortage were excessive volumes to handle, Corona infections, quarantines,
testing policies to travel in the country, and more strict rules regarding resting times from
driving. For all these reasons, it was difficult to deliver containers to their inland destina-
tions. This resulted in containers not being picked up in time in the ports from the truck
drivers. Therefore, they were not returned in time to the harbour in the US to be delivered
back to Asia. For this reason, vessels had to travel back without the empty containers
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
39
==PAGE:48==
to return to Asia to be filled again with goods for another shipment. It would usually take
a maximum of two days to pick up, deliver and rerun a container to the harbour. In this
context, the same process could take up to two weeks[59].
4.2.3
Overview of the industry at the end of 2020
By the end of 2020, the situation was extremely complex to handle. The shortage of con-
tainers reached an alarming and unprecedented level. Massive delays in the harbour’s
operations and deliveries to inland destinations resulted in vessels being forced to wait
at anchorage to be berthed. This issue was particularly evident in North America due to
truck driver shortages. In this context, it was almost impossible for customers to place
an order and spot rates reached levels never seen before. On the other hand, schedule
reliability significantly dropped and it reached a level of 44% compared to an average of
70/80% in normal times. At this point, the whole global supply chain was under attack[59].
4.2.4
Disruption of the beginning of 2021
As mentioned above, the situation at the end of 2020 was extremely complex and in 2021
it did not seem to improve. Several events around the world exacerbated the already
precarious situation. If the industry had not been so compromised, the impact of these
events would have not been so catastrophic. However, they compromised the global sup-
ply chain even further. This section aims to provide an overview of the main events that
impacted the global supply chain in 2021[59].
• The Ever Given vessel ran aground in the Suez Canal on 23 March
On 23 March 2021, the Ever Given ship ran aground in the Suez Canal and blocked
the passage of other vessels. It took 6 days to resolve the incident, however, it
caused delays for an additional 6 weeks for the vessels involved. Customers who
could afford it decided to shift to air cargo delivery[59]. Additionally, some ves-
sels were re-routed around the Cape and they had to add 7,000 miles to their travel
distance[65]. This incident exacerbated the already precarious situation of port con-
gestion, container shortages, and higher freight and commodities prices[59].
• Three cranes broke down in the port of Kaohsiung, Taiwan on 3 June
In June 2021, three cranes in the harbour of Kaohsiung stopped working. This inci-
dent resulted in additional delays in the operations of loading and unloading vessels.
Such an episode limited to a single port would have not had the same impact in a
regular situation. However, the already compromised supply chain suffered addi-
tional disruption and delays due to this incident[59].
• A lockdown was imposed in the port of Yantian, China on 8 June
The entire harbour of Yantian was in lockdown in June 2021, therefore, there were
no workers who could perform the normal port operations. For this reason, vessels
could not be loaded and unloaded and this caused additional delays. It resulted in
an additional 6 weeks of delays for 350.000 TEU[59].
• Brazil faced a complete shortage of containers in June 2021
All the delays caused by the events mentioned above in this list resulted in the im-
possibility of finding containers for deliveries in Brazil. All containers at that time
40
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:49==
were either stuck in the Suez Canal or in ports in the US, China or Taiwan. For this
situation to recover it was necessary to wait until the market reached a new level of
stability[59].
• Brexit in the UK caused additional port congestion
With Brexit, a new customs system had to be put in place since the regulations re-
garding import and export, especially with the EU, changed. Therefore, during this
crisis, it had just been launched and it caused delays in carriers operations[59].
• Truck driver shortage in the US continues
As previously mentioned in this chapter, truck drivers play an important role in de-
livering containers to inland destinations in North America. The shortage caused
by the pandemic, testing regulations, quarantines, and more strict rules regarding
resting times from driving caused a shortage and therefore additional delays. This
shortage started in 2020 and it did not improve in 2021[59].
This complex situation deeply challenged the Ocean Freight Industry and reached public
attention between August and September 2021. Indeed, final consumers experienced
delays in their orders, especially households. The industry was not ready to handle any
further increase in demand, especially high volumes related to demand for Christmas. At
this point, it was impossible to book containers and freight rates skyrocketed[59].
The situation described above led to further capacity shortage and port congestion. The
next section aims to provide an overview to contextualize the disruption at the end of 2021.
An in-depth analysis of the disruption is included in section 4.4 dedicated to the disruptive
effects of the pandemic on the maritime transportation industry.
Capacity and equipment shortage in 2021
As already mentioned in this chapter, it was impossible to find available containers be-
cause they were stuck where they were not supposed to be. Many were piling up in inland
depots, others were waiting in the harbours to be delivered to inland customers, and the
rest were still onboard vessels either travelling, especially along the Transpacific line, or
waiting in the ports to be unloaded. The largest container shortage happened in Asia due
to the increased turnaround time required to reposition containers. The situation was not
better either in Europe or in the US. Indeed, Europe was facing difficulties in delivering
goods to the hinterland. On the other hand, North America faced a 40% imbalance be-
tween the received containers and the ones returned to the harbour to be delivered back
to Asia. This means that out of 100 containers only 40 were shipped back to Asia and the
rest was accumulating in depots in the US. One of the main reasons for this imbalance
was the new regulations regarding truck drivers’ consecutive working hours. Due to this
imposed limit, truck drivers started accepting only deliveries that they could complete in
one day and the rest of the containers were left to pile up in the ports[59].
This whole situation resulted in an increased number of blank sailings and ports omitted by
vessels due to congestion. To address the issue, carriers started using any type of ship to
move products in the Transpacific trade and the EU Westbound because port congestion
and vessel delays had caused 10% of the global fleet to be at anchorage outside ports[59].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
41
==PAGE:50==
4.2.5
Port congestion status at the end of 2021
As mentioned above, one of the main consequences of this complex situation was port
congestion. This section aims to provide an overview of the congestion of the main har-
bours around the world at the end of 2021.
In the US, extreme port congestion results in an estimation of 32$ billion worth of goods to
be left floating at sea on the coast of California. More than 80 vessels were queuing up at
Long Beach bringing the port stay up to 11 days. An Emergency Dwell Surcharge had to
be introduced to speed up the container pick-up at the terminals[59]. Additionally, the US
government decided to provide loans valued up to 5$ billion to support the development
of the infrastructure in California. However, this does not address the main issue which
still relies on the lack of workers further down the supply chain, mostly truck drivers and
warehouse workers. The American Trucking Association estimated a shortage of 61,500
truck drivers before the pandemic and a shortage of up to 80,000 at the end of 2021 (an
increase of 30%)[59].
Also in Asia, several ports faced congestion issues. For example, in Shanghai vessels
would spend 10 days anchored waiting to be unloaded. More than 380 vessels were an-
chored or moored between Shanghai and Ningbo and the berthing time was beyond 10
days in Taicang[59].
In Europe, Northern ports faced congestion as well. For this reason, vessels were rerouted
to smaller harbour alternatives such as Zeebrugge, Wilhelmshaven, and Amsterdam. To
complete a round trip between Europe and Asia, ships would require up to 54 extra days.
Additionally, carriers’ services were sliding with a global average of 6 days delay for late
vessel arrivals as displayed in figure 4.5[59].
Figure 4.5: Average delay for vessels arrivals between 2018 and 2021 (days)[66]
42
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:51==
4.2.6
Overview of the industry at the end of 2021
It appears clear that the situation was extremely difficult to handle. The purpose of this
section is to provide an overview of the Container Shipping Industry at the end of 2021,
to sum up what is stated above in this chapter.
Capacity shortage
The unexpected increase in demand led to a capacity shortage. Indeed, there were not
enough containers and vessels available to meet such demand. During 2020 orders for
new ships declined by 16%. Therefore, in 2021 liners reacted to the shortage by plac-
ing orders for new vessels[65]. However, these ships could not be delivered earlier than
2023. In 2023, 276 new ships should be delivered to join the market. Another reason
for placing these orders for new vessels is the introduction of the IMO 2023 regulation by
the International Maritime Organization. The new rules state that several of the currently
available ships will not be allowed to enter the ports in the future due to their elevated
level of emissions. Therefore, part of the new vessels available from 2023 is required to
compensate the ships that have to be scrapped due to environmental regulations[59].
Unprecedented demand
Global consumer demand increased by 22% between before the beginning of the pan-
demic and the end of 2021. However, the increase was limited to some specific industries
like games and sporting goods (+74%) and household appliances (+49%). The reason
behind this unsual consumer behaviour was the prolonged lockdown. Indeed, consumer
demand shifted from services to specific products that could be useful while staying at
home for a long time[59].
Infrastructure and labour shortage
The global infrastructure was not built for the increase in demand presented above. Such
an unforeseen increase led to congestion which increased significantly the berthing and
anchorage time. For example, the waiting time increased up to 14 days in Long Beach.
The issue was exacerbated by the shortage of truck drivers. This shortage was estimated
to be around 80,000 drivers in the US and 40,000 in the UK[59].
Freight rate increase
At the end of 2021, the freight rates reached the highest point in most of the trades. For
example, the SCFI (Shanghai Containerized Freight Index) index, which measures the
fluctuation of spot freight rates in the export container transport market from Shanghai, in
2021 was on average +358% higher than in 2019[59]. A complete overview of the fluctua-
tions in container freight rates measured by the SCFI between 2009 and 2023 is included
in figure 4.11[67].
Schedule reliability
While freight rates were the highest of all time, schedule reliability was at the lowest. For
example, the reliability in trades between Asia and the US dropped to 10% while reliability
in deliveries between Asia and Europe dropped to 30%[59]. The behaviour of schedule
reliability over the years 2018-2021 is displayed in graph 4.6.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.6: Ocean Schedule Reliability between January 2018 and September 2021[68]
4.3
Ocean freight overview 2022-2024
At the beginning of 2022, the main issues that emerged in 2021 persisted. Indeed, de-
mand was still high and container imbalance continued. Harbours had not recovered and
they were usually not working at full capacity. Indeed, the threat of port closure with short
notice due to local outbreaks of COVID-19 persisted. Additionally, congestion in US ports,
mainly related to the shortage of truck drivers, was not resolved yet[59].
Another issue was represented by the stability of the Chinese market. Indeed, orders for
containers and vessels had been placed to be manufactured in China. Therefore, de-
livery times highly depended on the stability of the manufacturing activities in Chinese
factories[59]. The main issue in China in 2022 was the zero-COVID policy that triggered
shutdowns all over the country disrupting manufacturing, logistics, and supply chain ac-
tivities[69]. Such policies risked to compromise the manufacturing of new vessels which
should be delivered in 2023 and relieve some pressure in the market. A flood of new ves-
sels is forecasted to ease rate pressure in 2023, however, it was not possible to obtain
an increase in capacity until this time[59]. Graph 4.7 and 4.8 clearly display that, even
though new vessels will be delivered between 2023 and 2024, a significant amount of the
already existing ones will have to be scrapped.
In February 2022, Russia invaded Ukraine starting a war that is still ongoing. One of
the consequences of the war was the closure of ports in the Black Sea which compro-
mised trade since Ukraine is one of the major food exporters[69]. Additional information
regarding the consequences of the war in Ukraine is included in section 4.3.2. Further-
more, maritime transportation was affected by labour strikes that spread all over the world.
The main countries involved were Germany, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the
Republic of Korea. The situation was further compromised by extreme weather events
and heatwaves that characterized Australia, Pakistan, Europe, Brazil, East Africa, and
the United States. At the same time, inflation remained high and living costs kept rising
threatening stagflation and even recession[69].
44
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.7: Vessels deliveries between 2015 and 2020 and expected deliveries between
2021 and 2024[70]
Figure 4.8: Scrapped vessels between 2015 and 2020 and expected vessels to scrap
between 2021 and 2024[70]
4.3.1
Review of Maritime Transport 2023
Seaborne trade volume marginally reduced by 0.4% in 2022. However, UNCTAD fore-
casts a growth of 2.4% for 2023 and a stable but moderate growth in the medium term.
Additional information regarding past and forecasted growth is displayed in graph 4.9[67].
Figure 4.9: Seaborne trade forecast, 2024–2028 (Annual percentage change)[67]
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
45
==PAGE:54==
Despite this expected growth, global trade continues to be challenged in 2023 for several
reasons. First of all, geopolitical tensions that started with the invasion of Ukraine from
Russia are still a challenge for the market. Additionally, new sustainability regulations for
decarbonization cannot be ignored[67]. To comply with regulations like IMO 2023, orders
for new vessels to substitute the obsolete ones have been placed already in 2021 and they
are expected to be delivered in 2023. New vessel deliveries are delayed due to scarce
and expensive raw materials and shipyards keep running at their limit. If vessels are not
ready to comply with the new IMO 2023 regulation, carriers will be forced to implement
slow steaming which reduces capacity even further to compensate for the environmental
impact. Despite the delays, new vessels have started to reach the market and they are
no longer working at full capacity[59].
Global fleet capacity expanded and contracted over the years depending on market and
financial fluctuations. For example, between 2005 and 2010, a stable annual growth
referred to global deadweight tonnage of 7.1% was recorded. From the 2008 financial
crisis, annual growth stabilized around 4.9% per year and, since the pandemic, growth
further slowed to an average of 3.1% per year. In January 2023, the world fleet could
count 105,493 vessels of 100 tons each after an expansion in 2022 of 3.2% in the overall
deadweight tonnage. Further information is displayed in graph 4.10[67].
Figure 4.10: The world fleet, 1980–2023 (Thousand deadweight tonnage and annual per-
centage change)[67]
One good news is that container freight rates are slowly stabilizing and returning to pre-
pandemic levels. They reached record levels in early 2022 and started declining in the
second half of the same year across major trade lanes. In early 2023, container freight
rates finally stabilized as displayed in graph 4.11[67].
46
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.11: Shanghai Containerized Freight Index, monthly spot rates, June 2018 – June
2023, selected routes[67]
Additionally, demand has diminished and reached a new stability. One of the reasons
behind this reduction is the financial crisis and high inflation. Another reason is a shift
in consumer behaviour from products to services, as it was before the beginning of the
pandemic since there are no longer restrictions to prevent the spread of the virus. Finally,
a more conscious consumer behaviour has been recorded. Indeed, consumers started
to consider the environmental impact of their purchases and the order volume has de-
creased. In this context, freight rates have significantly dropped to reach pre-pandemic
values. Finally, all containers have been localized and disruption is no longer recorded in
the industry[59].
4.3.2
Evaluation of the impact of the war in Ukraine on global trade
recovery
The war in Ukraine started on 24 February 2022 and affected the recovery of global trade
beyond the borders of the war zone and Europe. Indeed, it exacerbated market uncer-
tainty and increased volatility. One of the main consequences was a sharp increase in
commodity prices which deeply affected supply chain operations[69]. The invasion of
Ukraine from Russia is outside the scope of this project which aims to evaluate the dis-
ruptive consequences of the pandemic of COVID-19 on global supply chains. However,
the war had a significant impact on the market and it is relevant to highlight the main con-
sequences on the industry to provide context. This section does not aim to investigate the
evolution of the conflict but only to highlight the main consequences on the ocean freight
industry.
In 2022 the sharp increase in commodity prices due to the war drove up inflation that had
already started in 2021. Due to prolonged high inflation rates, the market started fearing
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
47
==PAGE:56==
stagflation and potential global recession. Additionally, rising energy prices resulted in a
further increase in freight rates that had already skyrocketed due to the pandemic. The
war also had a direct impact on liners’ activities. Indeed, it is reported that nine of the
top ten global container carriers are no longer operating in the Black Sea region. There-
fore, in 2022 Ukraine lost almost all liners’ shipping connections. Furthermore, Russia
lost 50% of its liner services since several logistics businesses have exited the Russian
market. Additionally, the restrictions against Russia made it difficult for shippers and lo-
gistics companies to use the railway that connects China with Europe since the route runs
across Russia[69].
Slow trade recovery in the EU and the US due to the war in Ukraine
The latest evaluation from the International Transport Forum (ITF) in 2023 highlighted that
the impact of the war on global trade still continues. Additionally, the quantity of global
trade has not recovered to pre-pandemic levels in some regions. Especially trade be-
tween members of the EU and between Europe and the rest of the world is still evaluated
to be below the pre-pandemic levels. On the other hand, trades between the US and the
rest of the world were recorded to be higher in early 2023 than in February 2020[71].
Regarding ocean freight import and export figures in the EU, the main findings are dis-
played in graph 4.13. A legend to interpret graphs included in this section is presented
in figure 4.12. It clearly emerges that sea-born exports are still lower than pre-pandemic
levels. On the other hand, imports to the EU quickly recovered even though they were
deeply impacted by the pandemic. However, they suffered the impact of the war in 2022
and dropped again below the levels recorded in February 2020. Data analysis from ITF
also highlights that airfreight imports sharply increased in 2021 compared to pre-pandemic
levels. However, suffered the impact of the war in 2022 and they dropped below pre-
pandemic levels at the end of the year[71]. The main findings are displayed in graph 4.14.
Figure 4.12: Legend to interpret graphs included in this section[71]
Figure 4.13: Sea trade in the EU between 2020 and 2023[71]
48
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.14: Air trade in the EU between 2020 and 2023[71]
On the other hand, trade between the US and the rest of the world showed a higher de-
gree of resilience both during the outbreak of the pandemic and throughout the war. The
data from ITF are displayed in graph 4.15 and 4.16. It is relevant to highlight the sig-
nificant increase in airfreight during the pandemic. This is related to the need to keep
delivering products even though it was almost impossible to do it by sea for the reasons
further explained in this chapter. Indeed, cargo aeroplanes were the only option to com-
plete delivery without significant delays[71].
Figure 4.15: Sea trade in the US between 2020 and 2023[71]
Rail trade disruption between Europe and Eurasia
Severe port congestion led to an increase in the volumes of goods transported by train
between Asia and Europe. This increase characterized the phase of recovery from the
pandemic. However, it was negatively impacted by the war in Ukraine. Indeed, trade
between the EU and the Eurasian Customs Union (Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyr-
gyzstan, and Russia) drastically dropped after the beginning of the war as displayed in
graph 4.17.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.16: Air trade in the US between 2020 and 2023[71]
Figure 4.17: Rail trade between the EU and the Eurasian Customs Union (2020-2023)[71]
Road trade recovery in the US
As mentioned in this chapter, road transportation in North America represented a sig-
nificant bottleneck for port operations and was one of the causes of congestion. Road
transportation started showing signs of recovery since the pandemic despite the impact
of the war. Trade with Canada registered an increase of 29% compared to February 2020
while trade with Mexico registered an increase of 31% compared to the same time[71].
These findings are supported by the data displayed in graphs 4.18 and 4.19.
4.3.3
Market Outlook for 2024
The situation stabilized in 2023 and in 2024 the recovery is expected to continue. New
capacity is expected to enter the market thanks to the new vessels ordered already in
2021. Additionally, carriers have now much more experience than before in managing
disruption and how to prevent it from happening in such a serious way. Indeed, they
learned how to carefully balance their supply. Finally, the rates are expected to stabilize
at a higher rate level than before while schedule reliability reaches an acceptable level[59].
50
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.18: Road trade between the US and Mexico (2020-2023)[71]
Figure 4.19: Road trade between the US and Canada (2020-2023)[71]
4.4
Disruptive effects of the pandemic on maritime freight
services
This section aims to illustrate the main disruptive effects of the pandemic of COVID-19 on
the maritime transportation industry. As mentioned above, the pandemic deeply affected
demand for container distribution. To better understand the extent of such negative im-
pact, an in-depth research on the material retrieved from the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) website concerning this topic has been conducted
and the main findings are summarized in this section.
The paper Contracts for the carriage of goods by sea and multimodal transport, Key is-
sues arising from impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic[72] by UNCTAD aims to provide
an overview of the disruptive effects of the pandemic on the carriage of goods opera-
tions. Among the main issues, the writers list port quarantines and congestion, seafarers’
health protection and container detention, and delays on both road and rail freight. The
main findings are further illustrated below.
4.4.1
Port quarantines
Several measures have been introduced by governments all over the world in port oper-
ations, both at loading and discharging levels, to prevent the further spread of the virus.
A list of exemplary measures in this regard is presented in the aforementioned paper.
For example, exceptional preventive measures have been introduced by the UK in Novem-
ber 2020 in relation to travel from Denmark. Indeed, health officials in Denmark released
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
51
==PAGE:60==
information regarding a mink-related mutation of the virus identified among people, espe-
cially in the North Jutland region. Such measures resulted in a ten-day embargo towards
all ships carrying freights from Denmark which were not allowed to dock in any English
port[59].
Another significant example is related to Australia at the beginning of the pandemic in
2020. Indeed, the country imposed a ban on all personnel entering the country if they had
been to China after 1 February. All ships were asked to provide official documentation
regarding their last five ports of call to verify if they fulfilled the aforementioned require-
ments. If yes, the whole crew was subject to a 14-day quarantine. Such a period included
the time at sea since the ship left the last port in China. These measures became even
more restrictive starting from April 2020 when the mandatory quarantine period was ex-
tended to crews of any foreign ship[72]. These measures exacerbated the already critical
capacity shortage.
4.4.2
Container detention charges
Another common measure that deeply affected the carriage of goods operations is con-
tainer detention which is usually associated with charges. To mitigate the negative impact
of regulations related to container detention charges, governments all around the world
introduced measures to limit the cases in which they could be applied. For example, start-
ing in April 2020, the US Federal Maritime Commission (FMC) issued a rule on detention
charges under the Shipment Act 1984. The new interpretive rule granted the FMC the
right to evaluate case by case if detention charges could be justified. Among the evalu-
ated factors they listed cargo availability, whether notice of cargo availability was given,
if government inspections delayed movement, and whether empty containers could be
returned to the terminal[72]. Despite measures to limit demurrage and detention, these
phenomena significantly increased in 2021 compared to 2020. The costs of detention and
demurrage are reported to have increased by 126% from 2020 to 2021[72].
4.4.3
Seafarers safety and Maritime Labour Convention
The Maritime Labour Convention from 2006 states that the maximum number of months
seafarers are allowed to serve on board a vessel without leave is 11. However, in August
2020 the International Chamber of Shipping evaluated that around 250.000 seafarers
were not allowed to come ashore far beyond this limit stated in their employment con-
tract. The same organization reported that such a number has not been subject to major
variations between April 2020 and July 2021. The main reason behind this phenomenon
was the quarantine time imposed on vessels before they had the chance to unload their
cargo[72].
To address this issue, The United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution on
“International cooperation to address challenges faced by seafarers as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic to support global supply chains” (A/RES/75/17) in December 2020.
This measure urged Member States to include seafarers among the key workers to fa-
cilitate crew changes and access to medical care. In response to this measure, more
than 600 companies and organizations signed the ”Neptune Declaration on Safarer Well-
being and Crew Changes” which stated practical measures to facilitate crew changes
while ensuring the efficient functioning of global supply chains. Such measures included
priority access to vaccinations against COVID-19, improved health protocols, increased
52
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:61==
communication between ship operators and charterers for better crew changes, and air
connectivity between key maritime hubs for seafarers[72]. Even though seafarers were
recognized as key workers and front liners of the health crisis, their priority access to
the vaccination campaign was evaluated as an issue by UNCTAD. Indeed, they predom-
inantly come from developing countries and governments were required to quickly imple-
ment vaccine procurement and distribution plans[65].
In 2022, additional measures to ensure seafarers’ well-being were adopted. The Interna-
tional Chamber of Shipping released additional guidelines for ship operators and shipping
companies to ensure workers’ well-being and safety and an efficient vaccination cam-
paign. Furthermore, the IMO adopted a resolution regarding how to evacuate workers
from war zones in the Black Sea after the invasion of Ukraine[69].
4.4.4
Port congestion
Port congestion significantly increased starting in Autumn 2020 when health and safety
procedures started slowing down dock operations. The impact of regulations to prevent
the spread of the virus did not impact the market until September 2020 because demand
drastically dropped with the outbreak of the pandemic. The situation became more com-
plex to manage when production activities in China recovered and demand suddenly sky-
rocketed. Ports were not prepared to face such an increase in demand and the main
consequence was congestion[59]. In such a situation, container liners even started ap-
plying congestion surcharges. For example, on 14 November, Evergreen directed one of
its ships to bypass the port of Felixstowe due to serious congestion and the cargo was
redirected to Rotterdam from where it reached the UK via ferry. Unprecedented conges-
tion was reported in ports all over the world, from China to the US[72].
More information regarding how the average waiting time changed over time between
2016 and mid-2023 can be found in graph 4.20. It is relevant to highlight that waiting
times increased more in developed countries compared to developing ones in early 2022.
The areas that suffered the most port congestion were North America and Europe[67].
Figure 4.20: Average waiting times of container ships at port in hours, monthly, January
2016 – July 2023[67]
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
53
==PAGE:62==
4.4.5
Delays in road and rail freight
Severe disruption was not limited to maritime transportation. Indeed, road freight dis-
ruption was registered at borders within the EU due to the measures introduced to limit
the spread of the virus which had slowed and even paralyzed transportation. The risk of
stockouts and delays was serious with queues of up to 40km at some crossing points. To
improve the situation, the European Commission issued on 23 March 2020 the implemen-
tation of green lanes for freight vehicles carrying goods to limit the waiting times at the
borders. To further improve the situation, the Commission proposed on 25 January 2021
to remove quarantine for transport workers and they were exempted from travel-related
tests[72].
At the same time, rail traffic between China and Europe increased. However, long delays
were registered due to bad weather conditions and a dispute between Kazakhstan and
China over COVID-19 restrictions. It is reported that, in December 2020, 7.000 containers
were waiting to cross into China via the Dostyk and Altynkol border, with some waiting up
to 42 days[72].
In the US, road freight delays were exacerbated by the truck driver shortage that limited
the available capacity to deliver containers to the inland. Such delays resulted in contain-
ers not being delivered back in time to the harbours to be loaded in the vessel responsible
for carrying them back from their origin point[59].
4.5
Considerations for Policymakers
The timeline of the events presented in this chapter clearly shows that carriers, ports,
and shippers were not ready to face a complex situation like the pandemic of COVID-19.
Some argue that they were taken by surprise and that the container shortage that fol-
lowed the outbreak of the pandemic is unprecedented. The paper Container Shipping in
times of COVID-19: Why freight rates have surged, and implications for policy makers[60]
provides considerations for policymakers in the attempt to support the implementation of
a contingency plan for future disruptive events. The main conclusions are summarized
below.
1. Trade facilitation and digitalization for resilient supply chains
One of the main learnings of the pandemic is that physical contact during harbour
operations and in cross-border trade should be reduced without compromising work-
ers’ activities. UNCTAD provided a contribution to facilitating trade while ensuring
the safety of the population from the spreading of the virus. A significant part of the
proposed measures involved some degree of digitalization in maritime transporta-
tion. For example, a joint project with regional commissions of the United Nations
has been implemented to build more resilient supply chains, transport and trade.
UNCTAD argues that policymakers have the duty to implement ambitious reforms
to reduce the impact of future disruptions[60].
2. Tracking and Tracing
One of the main issues during the container shortage was the impossibility of locat-
ing containers all over the world. UNCTAD argues that policymakers should invest
in promoting transparency and encouraging collaboration between different play-
ers in the maritime supply chain to mitigate this type of issue. Additionally, these
measures should aim to prevent market power abuse[60].
54
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:63==
3. Competition in maritime transport
It is clear that one of the main disruptive effects of the pandemic was the container
shortage which led to higher freight rates. UNCTAD argues that it is necessary
to investigate that, in such complex times, no one violated antitrust measures to
increase profits. Therefore, national competition authorities must keep monitoring
freight rates and market behaviour. It is important that policymakers continue to
support national competition authorities to perform such monitoring activities[60].
To define a set of relevant recommendations for policymakers to build resilience for har-
bours against pandemics, two conferences of TrainForTrade were held in March and be-
tween June and July 2021. More than 1,200 port professionals from 105 countries par-
ticipated to provide their contribution. During the second session, the participants listed
250 recommendations to submit to policymakers[73]. The most relevant ones are sum-
marized below.
1. Harbours need to implement business continuity plans to address pandemic sce-
narios based on recommendations from national and regional authorities.
2. To successfully implement preventive actions to limit the number of infections, it is
relevant to develop contingency planning scenarios.
3. A communications strategy is essential. It should fit the purpose and be aimed at
all stakeholders, including employees, suppliers, customers, and port users.
4. Physical and mental well-being of port workers should be a priority. Therefore, port
managers should invest in education on how workers can focus on their well-being.
5. Vaccination facilities, testing centres and contact tracing should be key to supporting
the health and well-being of harbour workers
6. Harbours should ensure that technology and security measures are redesigned to
support staff that has to rely on telecommuting for work meetings.
7. To ensure that operations can proceed uninterrupted while improving telecommu-
nication infrastructure, port managers should assign a high level of priority to the
implementation of digitalization measures.
8. Harbour managers should provide green lanes for designating transport and port
workers to ensure they can help alleviate disruptions to supply chains[73].
4.6
Conclusions
This chapter provided an overview of the Maritime Transportation industry with a focus on
the container industry between 2020 and 2023 to analyse the disruptive impact of the pan-
demic of COVID-19. This section aims to present the current status of the business and
introduce the main future challenges. The container industry seems to have overcome
most of the challenges that started with the pandemic. Fleet capacity is steadily growing
because of the vessels delivered in 2023 and it is expected to increase in 2024 as well.
More specifically, the total capacity of the global fleet is forecasted to exceed 30 million
TEU by the end of 2024 with an annual growth of 9.1% compared to 2023[74]. Additional
information regarding data trends related to fleet capacity, annual capacity growth, and
global throughput growth is included in graph 4.21.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.21: Supply and Demand trends in container shipping industry[74]
4.6.1
Ocean Freight Oulook
To conclude this chapter, it is relevant to summarize the expectations regarding the evo-
lution of the industry in the short, mid, and long term.
Short Term
In the short term, carriers are expected to keep working to provide the best possible ser-
vice with the available capacity. Therefore, service reliability will remain low and carriers
will adopt measures like blanking, super slow steaming, and sailing via the Cape to pro-
tect their operations. Additionally, spot rates are expected to drop compared to the prices
of recent years while port congestion and shortages will go back to normal[74].
Mid Term
In the mid term, schedule reliability is expected to remain low at around 65% while pollut-
ing and inefficient vessels start to be scrapped at a moderate level to reduce costs related
to emissions. Additionally, longer-term contracts will start to be adopted again to secure
supply chains because of the higher stability of the freight rates[74].
Long Term
In the long term, increasing capacity will be one of the main challenges. Indeed, ETS (EU
Emission Trading System) & IMO regulations are expected to have an impact on 10% of
the current available capacity. To compensate for the vessels that require to be scrapped
due to their emissions, new ships will have to be delivered. Current estimations forecast
major deliveries to continue in 2023 and in 2024[74].
The end of alliances
As mentioned above, alliances are one of the main pillars of the container shipping in-
dustry and they are advantageous for both clients and carriers. However, the current
situation is expected to end in 2024. Indeed, the 2M alliance between MSC and Mærsk
will be dissolved in 2025. Additionally, the EU ruled against the legality of alliances in the
industry and significant changes are expected for April 2024[74].
56
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:65==
5
DHL case study: Revisiting Pandemic
Resilience
Logistics companies were fundamental in the management of the pandemic of COVID-19
from the beginning to ensure the distribution of key pandemic management tools. For ex-
ample, they contributed to delivering medicines and medical supplies, ancillary supplies,
test kits, treatments, and personal protective equipment (PPE). Among these companies,
DHL provided a valuable contribution which involved 9,000 flights and 350 DHL facilities to
deliver millions of doses of vaccines to 120 countries in 2021. The company delivered 200
million doses in one year and renewed its commitment to vaccine distribution for 2022[75].
5.1
Revisiting Pandemic Resilience
This chapter aims to investigate the DHL white paper titled Revisiting Pandemic Re-
silience, the race against the virus: what we’ve learned one year into COVID-19 and
how the world’s healthcare supply chains will be ready for the next public health emer-
gency[5]. This case study is highly relevant to this Master thesis because it describes a
practical example of how a company invested in building resilience in its supply chain to
address the challenges of the pandemic. It is relevant to mention that the white paper
dates back to May 2021, therefore the main learnings and action plan for the future refer
to this time and might not be the most updated data.
5.1.1
Introduction
Logistics and supply chain management play a relevant role in pandemic management
which usually involves infection prevention, monitoring and countermeasures. Indeed,
logistics companies are involved in the distribution of medicines and medical supplies,
ancillary supplies, test kits, treatments, personal protective equipment (PPE), and vac-
cines. Once the COVID-19 vaccine had been fully developed and approved by the health
authorities, quick delivery became the most pressing issue to address the pandemic. With
this white paper, DHL aims to support continuous dialogues between governments, phar-
maceutical manufacturers, life sciences institutions, and logistics companies[5].
5.1.2
Out of the starting blocks: 10 key achievements of the global
community
The pandemic of COVID-19 raised challenges in every field and industry. However, it is
important to underline that there have been plenty of success stories and achievements
in R&D, production, supply chain management, and policy management. These achieve-
ments played a key role in helping the global community to get through this humanitarian
crisis[5]. This section aims to illustrate 10 success stories related to the vaccines de-
scribed in the DHL white paper.
1. COVID-19 vaccine development occurred 5 times faster than any other vaccine
in history
The scientific community focused its efforts on the development of the COVID-19 vac-
cine. It usually takes many years to develop a vaccine in traditional sequential processes
while it only required 9 months to create the COVID-19 one. This process was 5 times
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
57
==PAGE:66==
faster than any other before. Indeed, the fastest development process was for the Mumps
vaccine which required 4 years, as displayed in graph 5.1. It is relevant to highlight that
researchers all around the world conducted simultaneously different research and shared
their results to facilitate the process. Additionally, researchers worked together with reg-
ulators to ensure smooth approvals by sharing their results for review processes[5].
Figure 5.1: Vaccination Innovation: Time from infectious agent identification to vaccine
approval in the US, years[5]
2. New vaccine platform, that can tackle disease beyond COVID-19, have emerged
and begun to mature
The development of the COVID-19 vaccine accelerated the development process of tech-
niques like viral vectors and mRNA. Indeed, during the pandemic, they have been estab-
lished as vaccine platforms and they will be useful in the future to address other diseases.
They have now achieved market maturity after 30 years of research for mRNA and 50 for
viral vectors. From these activities of research and developments, patients suffering from
other diseases than COVID-19 are expected to benefit in the future[5].
3. Total global vaccine production quadrupled within a year
To manufacture enough doses of the COVID-19 vaccine, building additional manufactur-
ing capacity was necessary. In 2021, 100 production facilities had already been launched
around the world and the number kept increasing steadily. It is estimated that the time
required to build manufacturing capacity was 3 times faster than for any other vaccine.
For this reason, by 2021, the total global vaccine production capacity had quadrupled.
This accounts for 20 billion doses, including 15 billion doses of COVID-19 vaccine, as
displayed in graph 5.2. Additionally, if necessary, an additional pipeline of 5 billion doses
could have been made available. To achieve such a result, unprecedented global col-
laborations and industry partnerships were necessary. The most important partnerships
between vaccine developers and manufacturers are BioNTech and Pfizer, Moderna and
Lonza, the University of Oxford and AstraZane[5].
4. The complex global vaccine supply chain was ramped up successfully
To set up the whole supply chain for a vaccine it takes an average of 18 months. In
the case of the COVID-19 vaccine, this process required only 6 months which is 3 times
58
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.2: Vaccine production in 2021, billion doses[5]
faster. The DHL white paper reports a quote from an anonymous supply chain executive
who stated that ”Ramping up the COVID-19 vaccine supply chain felt like building the
plane while flying it”. Despite the strict time requirements, the implementation was suc-
cessful. Indeed, in only 4 months after starting shipping the vaccines, 1 billion doses were
already delivered. Additionally, virtually no doses were damaged and the production to
injection timeframe could be as fast as 2 days. It might seem that the implementation of
such a supply chain required excessive investments. On the other hand, considering the
cost of the end-to-end vaccine supply chain, the supply chain costs account for only 1%.
In order to achieve such a result, multisector and international cooperation was required.
For example, logistics carriers could transport vaccines on military helicopters and boats
to reduce the lead time. Additionally, investments in transportation and storage infrastruc-
ture were key to ensuring available capacity. Finally, it is relevant to mention that logistics
companies had to take risks to achieve successful results[5].
Table 5.3 summarizes the main contribution of DHL in the distribution of COVID-19 vac-
cines.
5. Extreme cold-chain requirements were met at scale - flawlessly!
In implementing the global supply chain for the COVID-19 vaccine, extreme cold-chain re-
quirements needed to be taken into consideration. Indeed, the Pfitzer/BioNTech vaccine
required transportation and storage temperature of -70°C. To prevent the disruption of the
cold chain, it is necessary to introduce dry ice while shipping and expand freezer capac-
ity for storage. Despite the rapid expansion, the implementation of measures to ensure
cold-chain continuity was successful and only 0.01% of vaccine doses were damaged for
this reason during logistics processes. Such success is generally associated with factors
like critical cooling infrastructure, reliable temperature monitoring equipment, trained staff
in standard procedure of storage and handling of vaccines, accurate inventory manage-
ment, and packaging solutions that integrate cooling features[5].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.3: DHL’s contributions to the COVID-19 vaccine distribution until April 2021[5]
6. The vaccine rate already outpaces the infection rate by a factor of 9
It was estimated that, to achieve the sustainable management of the virus with a minimal
mortality rate, 5 to 6 billion people needed to be vaccinated. Therefore, the vaccination
campaign was crucial to achieve this goal. Since the beginning of the vaccination cam-
paign, it took 2 months for the number of daily vaccinations to exceed the number of
infections. In the first quarter of 2021, the vaccination rate was 9 times faster than the in-
fection rate[5]. The evolution of the number of infections and vaccinations between 2020
and 2021 is summarized in graph 5.4.
Figure 5.4: COVID-19 vaccination vs cases, million people (Mar 2020 - May 2021)[5]
7. Multilateral action was taken to ensure global access to vaccines
To end the most critical phase of the pandemic and prevent mutations, vaccinating the
population is not enough. The vaccination efforts need to reach people all over the world.
Initially, the vaccination campaign only reached high and middle-income economies. Fi-
nancial access and infrastructure availability are critical to support the vaccination of peo-
ple in low-income countries and remote locations. The efforts should be focused also
on inbound logistics and last-mile delivery to ensure success. UNICEF and the World
Economic Forum signed an agreement with 18 airlines and logistics companies to solve
bottlenecks and delivery gaps in last-mile deliveries of the vaccines in remote areas[5].
60
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:69==
8. Vaccine economics work: on a per capita basis; end-to-end costs for
vaccination equal just 1 week of lockdown costs
The economic viability of the vaccination campaign cannot be ignored, even though it is
not the most critical factor compared to people’s safety. However, the vaccines are not
only safe but also economically viable to end the pandemic. Indeed, the total average cost
for a typical industrial nation can be between €60-90 per capita. This cost includes the
vaccine itself, the administrative fee, and the end-to-end logistics cost. On the other hand,
the average cost of a lockdown is evaluated to be around €300-500 per capita per month.
By comparing these numbers, it is clear that vaccines can be up to 8 times cheaper than
a lockdown. Therefore, they can save economies together with lives[5]. The aforemen-
tioned numbers are displayed in picture 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Average cost per person vaccination vs 1 month of lockdown, EUR[5]
9. Markets quickly met the surging demand for testing, ancillary supplies, and PPE
The pandemic triggered unprecedented demand for testing, ancillary supplies and PPE.
For example, global PPE demand increased by a factor of more than 3 times higher than
before the pandemic. This increase in demand caused prices to skyrocket. Luckily, pro-
duction reacted fast and prices dropped to normal levels quickly[5]. Graph 5.6 shows the
difference between prices in 2020 and 2021. Additionally, production for rapid test prod-
ucts and ancillary vaccination supplies had to be scaled to meet demand[5].
10. Large-scale research on therapeutics has been promised
Vaccines are not the only pharmaceutical products required to address the pandemic.
Indeed, diagnostics, antibody medicines and other therapeutics need to be developed to
complement the vaccination campaign. To identify the ultimate therapeutic for COVID-19,
400 candidates to become the COVID-19 therapeutic were in the pipeline in 2021. 11 out
of these 400 candidates were already approved and had received the Emergency Use
Authorization. The goal of these pharmaceutical products is to prevent severe cases and
reduce mortality rates[5].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.6: Average cost of FFP-2 Mask between 2020 and 2021, EUR[5]
5.1.3
It’s a marathon, not a sprint going from 4 to 220 countries and
territories with resilient vaccine distribution
In the second quarter of 2021, the vaccination campaign seemed to proceed successfully.
Indeed, it started in January and, by the end of April, 1 billion doses had already been dis-
tributed. Additionally, expansion of manufacturing capacity was proceeding and 15 billion
doses were expected to reach the market by the end of the year. With these premises,
it seemed possible to vaccinate everyone by the end of 2021. Time was a significant
constraint in preventing viral mutations. Indeed, by the end of April, only 4 countries had
achieved vaccination rates higher than 50% and, as an anonymous executive cited in
the DHL white paper stated ”No one is safe until everyone is safe”. An overview of the
progress of the vaccination campaign by the end of April 2021 is included in figure 5.7.
The main issue related to the distribution of the vaccines is the fact that they are produced
in only 8 countries and they need to be delivered all over the world, including territories
with less developed infrastructure. Therefore, international collaboration is key to achiev-
ing successful results in logistics operations[5]. DHL proposed a strategy based on 10
building blocks, grouped into 4 main categories, for scaling the supply chain to reach all
220 countries and territories involved. Each step is further described below and summa-
rized in picture 5.8.
Fostering collaboration
1. Partnerships without borders
To ensure a smooth distribution of the vaccines, collaborations between pharmaceutical
companies, governments, the military and logistics players are required. Some kind of
collaboration has always existed, however, more and more players are required to go the
extra mile to ensure the success of the partnership. For example, UNICEF and the World
Economic Forum signed a charter regarding the distribution of vaccines for COVID-19
to offer pro bono support. Indeed, they offered specialized logistics personnel for global
distribution and assistance for cold-chain solutions across borders[5].
2. Supportive data backbone
To increase the resilience of the supply chain, end-to-end transparency is key. It can be
achieved by combining new tools, systems, and data-sharing protocols. If end-to-end
62
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.7: Vaccination progress based on the share of the population that is fully vacci-
nated, number of countries[5]
transparency is achieved, stakeholders can better collaborate to address faster bottle-
necks that might occur. For example, the DHL Quality Control Center utilized active log-
gers to track location and monitor temperature to improve predictions of shipment sched-
ule, identification of anomalies and identification of solutions[5]
Securing inbound flows
3. Transportation capacity management
Accurate forecasts regarding required transportation capacity are important to ensure a
safe delivery of the vaccines. Indeed, capacity limits related to air freight and dry ice
might compromise logistics operations. Indeed, they can lead to bottlenecks, delays in
deliveries, and endanger aviation workers. To address such issues, DHL implemented an
Ice Tracker to monitor and forecast dry ice levels. These measures can help ensure the
quality of the vaccines and the safety of the flight crew[5].
4. Packaging sustainability
To ensure that cold and ultracold storage temperatures are met at any time to prevent the
disruption of the cold chain, special packaging systems are necessary. This type of pack-
aging can be very expensive. Therefore, logistics partners should cooperate to ensure
sustainability, circularity, refurbishment, and reuse of packaging solutions[5].
Setting up the last mile for success
5. Strategic wharehousing
To ensure that COVID-19 vaccines can be safely stored once they reach the destina-
tion country, appropriate storage capacity at local and regional levels needs to be set up
by national governments. Indeed, in 2021, up to 70% of healthcare facilities in low and
middle-income countries did not have the infrastructure to ensure the chain of cold for
large volumes of vaccines. For example, Rwanda implemented cold-chain warehouses
located close to international gateways to distribute vaccines and ancillary supplies as
needed[5].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
63
==PAGE:72==
6. Synchronized flow of goods
Vaccines are not the only product that is required to be delivered to every country of desti-
nation to ensure the success of the vaccination campaign. Indeed, the distribution capac-
ity of ancillary supplies like needles, syringes, diluents, and hazardous waste containers
needs to be increased as well. These supplies and the vaccines should be delivered
jointly or separately depending on the local infrastructure. For example, in the kingdom
of Bhutan, vaccines and ancillary supplies were combined and then delivered jointly to
remote locations by foot or helicopter. This effort allowed to vaccinate 95% of the adult
population[5].
7. Vaccination points
A network of vaccination sites is required to be put in place to ensure the population can
easily access the vaccination campaign in a short time. Therefore, the number and loca-
tion of the sites needed to be optimized. For example, in the US and Israel, the vaccination
campaign started in centralized mass vaccination sites. It then spread out to involve other
types of locations like supermarkets and shopping malls[5].
Maximizing demand for vaccines
8. Well-informed populations
To ensure the population is willing to be vaccinated, it is necessary to inform people
through education and targeted communication. For example, a survey conducted in the
first quarter of 2021 by the Africa Center for Disease Control and Prevention that involved
15 countries of the continent highlighted that 79% of the population was willing to be
vaccinated. However, around 50% stated that they considered themselves not enough
informed regarding the vaccines. Therefore, Rwanda’s Ministry of Health launched a
successful communication via Twitter, TV, and radio which also involved the influence of
community leaders[5].
9. User-friendly process
To involve the largest possible part of the population, the vaccination process needs to
be frictionless for the patients. Indeed, the registration and scheduling process should be
centralized and based on clear criteria. Additionally, vaccination locations should have
minimum barriers to access. For example, in Estonia, people with vaccination priority
could register through the national e-booking system and high-risk groups were contacted
directly and linked to the system[5].
10. Incentives convincing last movers
The first wave of people who joined the vaccination campaign was moved by the promise
of personal protection and the cause of public health. To convince later movers, other
incentives like cost reduction or bonuses to compensate for transportation or unpaid sick
leaves might be required. For example, the US state of West Virginia offered to every
resident between 16 and 35 years of age $100 to get vaccinated[5].
64
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:73==
Figure 5.8: 10 building blocks for scaling the supply chain from 4 to 220 countries and
territories[5]
5.1.4
The home stretch, 7 billion to 9 billion additional shots per year to
end the pandemic
The COVID-19 virus is dynamic, therefore, it is important to prevent further mutations.
To achieve so, it is necessary to quickly reach the immunization of the largest possible
part of the population and keep reinfection rates low. Therefore, efforts in the vaccination
campaign are likely to continue in the future[5]. According to the DHL white paper, there
are three main areas that will be relevant in the future which are further illustrated in the
sections below.
1. Remain prepared for high patient and vaccine volumes
Once 75% of the willing and eligible global population to receive the vaccine has received
the full recommended dosage, an additional 7 to 9 billion doses will be required annually.
Indeed, 4 to 5 billion vaccines will be used to complete the first round of booster shots
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
65
==PAGE:74==
for the people who have already received the first dose. Additionally, 2 to 3 billion will
be required to initiate the vaccination of newly eligible patients. Lastly, around 1 billion
doses will be necessary to vaccinate people who are currently eligible but unwilling to be
vaccinated[5]. The information illustrated above is displayed in graph 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Estimated additional vaccine quantities from 2022 and beyond, billions per
year[5]
2. Maintain logistics infrastructure and capacity
New versions of the vaccines updated to tackle mutations of the virus might require dif-
ferent transportation operations. As displayed in picture 5.10, such changes are not ex-
pected to impact the logistics operations but mostly R&D and production activities. Ad-
ditionally, distribution and warehousing are expected to become less complex due to
the predicted temperature stabilization of the vaccines that might no longer require to
be stored in an ultracold chain[5].
Figure 5.10: Expected level of change required to adapt the vaccine to a mutation[5]
66
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:75==
3. Plan for seasonal fluctuations
In 2021, experts were planning to administrate the COVID-19 vaccine as the annual flu
shot. Therefore, demand levels are expected to be highly predictable which will result
in easy-to-forecast production, distribution and administrative activities. Due to the pre-
dictability of demand, the required doses could be produced in advance and delivered by
sea freight reducing the environmental impact of the global supply chain[5]. A forecast
of the global vaccine volumes is included in graph 5.11. The grey part of the bar chart
refers to the usual volume of vaccines distributed every year before the pandemic while
the yellow part refers to the COVID-19 vaccines demand.
Figure 5.11: Projected global vaccine shipping volumes, billion doses[5]
5.1.5
Getting ready for the next race: Ensuring systematic preparedness
for the next public health emergency
The pandemic of COVID-19 taught us about how much disruption the spread of a virus can
cause in so many different fields. Respiratory viruses are the most likely to cause a pan-
demic to spread, therefore, the next public health emergency might be similar to the one
that resulted from the Coronavirus. It is essential to prepare for the next crisis by focusing
on early identification, efficient containment, and effective remedies. The infrastructure
built to address the COVID-19 pandemic might be useful in the future and, maintaining
such infrastructure should be cheaper than building a new reactive supply chain in case
a new pandemic begins[5]. The DHL white paper presents 10 strategic actions to ensure
readiness for future health crises grouped into three categories: prevention and early
identification, containment and countermeasures, and medication rollout capacity. Each
step is further illustrated below.
Prevention and early identification
1. Institutionalize active partnerships and systems
Cross-sector partnerships are key to providing an effective response to the outbreak of
a pandemic. They should become permanent and invest in information-sharing systems
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
67
==PAGE:76==
to ensure data consolidation. Additionally, regular outbreak simulations should be con-
ducted to support response capacity to epidemiological emergencies[5].
2. Double down on global early-warning systems
Surveillance systems at both national and regional levels should be implemented to mon-
itor the evolution of diseases prone to becoming epidemic and estimate the epidemiolog-
ical trajectory through statistical models. These systems should provide prompt warnings
to public health authorities to ensure their appropriate reaction[5].
3. Create and follow through on integrated epidemic-prevention agenda
A reactive response to a pandemic might not be sufficient. Therefore, a proactive ap-
proach to investigating the root causes of an outbreak could help researchers understand
how to prevent them altogether.
Additionally, other measures could include reducing
the risk of zoonotic diseases in shared human-wildlife environments. For example, such
measures could include reducing deforestation, increasing environmental protection, and
decreasing monoculture crops. [5].
4. Invest in targeted research and development to improve diagnosis, therapeutics
and vaccines
The COVID-19 pandemic taught us that vaccines and broad-spectrum antivirals that can
address different viruses can be key to managing a viral outbreak. Therefore, R&D in-
vestments should focus on diagnostics, therapeutics, antibiotics, and vaccines[5].
Containment and countermeasures
5. Implement national containment and escalation plans
The aforementioned systems to detect early signs of potential viral outbreaks should be
paired with national containment and escalation plans. These might include quarantine
regulations, local lockdowns, and testing regimes[5].
6. Leveraging digital contact tracing and monitoring app
The implementation of digital solutions for patient management can provide support to
government and healthcare authorities to prevent misidentification, share accurate in-
formation, and promote patient safety. Additionally, apps to trace contacts to monitor
transmission can provide additional support. To become effective, such digital measures
should be institutionalized and involve partnerships with stakeholders[5].
7. Establish emergency stockpile and associated ”supplies and logistics” emer-
gency plan
As previously mentioned, the cost of building from scratch a reactive supply chain to ad-
dress a pandemic is far more costly than maintaining an already existing infrastructure.
For example, it should include a national safety stock of supplies like masks, tests, dis-
infectants, freezers, packaging, and dry ice. To calculate the optimal stock level it is
necessary to follow the models to determine required stocks for flu vaccines. To achieve
these results, contracts between countries and logistics providers are key. Indeed, the
pandemic of COVID-19 taught us the importance of an efficient and flawless supply chain
with a focus on distribution activities[5].
68
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:77==
Medication rollout capacity
8. Maintain ”ever-warm” manufacturing capacity
To ensure an efficient response to a viral outbreak, the development and maintenance of
manufacturing capacity for diagnostics, vaccines, and therapeutics is key even between
crises. Indeed, this would allow an easy ramp-up of production capacity in case of emer-
gency. Such capacity can be used to support commercial production in noncrisis times[5].
9. Define blueprint research, production and procurement plan for diagnostics,
therapeutics, and vaccines
The World Health Organization’s R&D blueprint includes specific R&D roadmaps and pro-
tocols that can be used as a starting point to develop processes and frameworks to guar-
antee the production of diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccines. Additionally, national
governments should develop frameworks that can guarantee early and reliable purchase
orders of diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccines[5].
10. Maintain and expand rollout capabilities, for diagnostics, therapeutics, and vac-
cines.
National governments should build partnerships with logistics companies to design trans-
portation protocols for commodity-specific requirements and identify routes based on ex-
isting infrastructure. Indeed, such infrastructure should be built in a way to support in-
country distribution of diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccines. Therefore, it is essential to
define which products should be sourced nationally and which ones should be imported[5].
5.2
Relevance of logistics and supply chain management in
addressing a pandemic
The DHL white paper clearly highlights the relevance of logistics and supply chain man-
agement in managing a pandemic. Indeed, without a rapid and efficient implementation
of an entire supply chain including R&D, manufacturing, warehousing, and distribution it
would not have been possible to successfully vaccinate the world’s population. The key
to such success needs to be identified in multisector and multinational partnerships that
allowed the sharing of knowledge, information and resources[5].
Building an entire supply chain with the aim of developing, producing, storing and distribut-
ing the COVID-19 vaccine was a highly challenging task. Indeed, time was a significant
constraint and relevant partnerships were key to scale manufacturing and delivering ca-
pacity. Such a task was particularly challenging due to the limits of the infrastructure at
the time. Indeed, production activities were limited to 8 countries while the vaccines had
to reach 120 including remote and low-income territories. Pharmaceutical companies,
governments, the military and logistics players initiate joint efforts to ensure that every-
one and everywhere could be vaccinated to guarantee safety and prevent mutations of
the virus. Additionally, cold chain requirements challenged warehousing and distribution
activities. Therefore, inventory facilities and packaging solutions that could comply with
the requirements had to be implemented and significant investments were required. DHL
provided an important contribution by implementing a Quality Control Centre and an Ice
Traker to ensure the quality of the vaccines delivered to people all over the world. An
additional challenge was represented by the need to synchronize the distribution of the
vaccines with the distribution of ancillary products to complete the vaccination process[5].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
69
==PAGE:78==
Despite the many challenges that had to be addressed, the vaccination campaign was
successful. To ensure safety from the Coronavirus in the future it is relevant to adopt
some measures related to logistics and supply chain management. Indeed, we learned
that building an entire supply chain as a reactive response to the outbreak of a pan-
demic is highly complex. Therefore, investments to maintain the current infrastructure as
a preventive measure against the next pandemic are necessary. Additionally, managing
prevention against future waves of recorded COVID-19 infections will be key in the future.
The expectation is to manage the Coronavirus in the same way as the flu with a vaccina-
tion campaign once a year. This approach will ensure easier and more efficient forecasts
of demand and capacity[5].
5.3
Conclusion
It is common knowledge that COVID-19 caught the global community off guard. Despite
the challenges, the world reacted and concentrated efforts and collaborations across bor-
ders and sectors to remove medical supply chain barriers. Such efforts ensured that,
once the vaccines were ready for the market, they could be effectively distributed with
unprecedented speed. Countries have now built relevant partnerships and capabilities to
face future challenges without being totally unprepared. Another global crisis might be
inevitable and we should be more prepared. With the right infrastructure already in place,
the global community should be able to address the next challenge in a better way to
minimize the impact on the global economy and on people’s lives[5].
70
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:79==
6
Conclusions
The aim of this Master thesis is to investigate how the pandemic of COVID-19 negatively
impacted global supply chains both from the theoretical and practical point of view and
to identify relevant mitigation actions and strategies to build resilience. The first objec-
tive was achieved by conducting a comprehensive literature review of the current body of
knowledge. The findings of this search are summarized in Chapter 3 of this work. Addi-
tionally, more practical findings related to the ocean freight industry with a focus on the
container industry were presented during the interviews with DHL and are summarized
in Chapter 4. This chapter also contains practical information regarding the disruptive
effects of the pandemic on the industry and mitigation actions proposed to policymak-
ers based on UNCTAD documents. Regarding the second objective, three models to
build resilience, the Framework for Supply Chain Resilience, Strategic pandemic mitiga-
tion model and the AEGIS Resilience methodology, emerged during the literature review
and are further summarized in Chapter 3. Relevant mitigation actions from the theoretical
point of view like visibility, robustness, flexibility and diversification, are summarized in
the same chapter. Finally, a practical example of the relevance of effective supply chain
management in managing a pandemic based on the white paper provided by DHL is in-
cluded in Chapter 5. Additionally, opportunities for further development of supply chain
resilience were identified in digitalization and sustainability and the learnings are included
in Chapter 3. A comprehensive summary of the findings related to the aforementioned
objectives is further illustrated in this chapter together with an introduction to the main
future challenges related to the environment.
6.1
Builging supply chain resilience
In this Master thesis, three models for building Supply Chain Resilience were identified
during the literature review.
The first model named Framework for Supply Chain Resilience is further illustrated in
the paper from Ergun, Hoppb, and Keskinocakc[9] and is displayed in picture 3.1. To
summarize the key elements of this framework, it includes three stages with specific mit-
igation actions for each one of them. Before adopting this approach, it is necessary to
define which types of events can result in disruption for the SC. Then, before the disrup-
tive events occur, it is important to define and prepare Mitigation actions. If the disruptive
event results in disruption despite the mitigating effort, then Preparedness is key. In this
stage, measures can be put in place to prevent a shortage from happening. Finally, if the
shortage occurs anyway, Response measures to prevent further disruptive consequences
need to be adopted. To ensure that this model can be successfully adopted, it is required
to rely on transparent communication. Indeed, information flow is key and it belongs to
the Awareness building block of this framework[9].
The second model to build resilience in the supply chain identified during the literature
review is named Strategic pandemic mitigation model. It is presented in the paper written
by Black and Glaser-Segura[13] and it is illustrated in figure 3.2. This framework is more
related to pandemics as disruptive events compared to the one illustrated above and it
describes five focus dimensions to build resilience. The first dimension is Leadership.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
71
==PAGE:80==
The writers argue that a leadership approach is more effective than a management one
in motivating people in challenging environments like a pandemic. Preparedness is the
second dimension which highlights the importance of identifying and quantifying risks and
developing a contingency plan. Additionally, investments in Digitalization are relevant to
building an effective information-sharing infrastructure that can help address the chal-
lenges of a pandemic. The fourth dimension is Resilience which involves strategies like
diversification of suppliers, demand management, and demand postponement. Finally,
Pivoting is a strategy that should be adopted only in extreme cases. It allows a company
to shift from one process or business line to another but it requires long-term planning to
be implemented[13].
The last model is presented in the paper Assessing the resilience of sustainable au-
tonomous shipping: New methodology, challenges, opportunities by Fjørtoft et al.[44]. In
this article, the bow-tie framework is applied in the context of the AEGIS project funded by
the EU to assess the challenges and opportunities in the implementation of autonomous
shipping. Even though in the aforementioned paper it is applied to a specific topic, this
approach to resilience is still highly relevant and is therefore presented in this work. To
correctly apply the AEGIS Resilience methodology it is necessary to follow six steps il-
lustrated in figure 3.5. The first step refers to the need to identify incident categories that
could be negatively impacted by unexpected events. Secondly, top events that might
occur and harm the incident categories previously selected are required to be identified.
The third step is related to the investigation of threats that could trigger top events and
categorize them according to the incident category they refer to. Additionally, preven-
tive barriers to reduce the likelihood of the top event from occurring need to be identified
and put in place in step 4. The fifth step refers to the identification and implementation
of proactive barriers that should mitigate the negative impact of the top even in case it
occurs despite the preventive measures. Finally, it is required to reflect on what could be
the worst-case scenario in case the top event happens and mitigation measures are not
enough to mitigate its impact. This framework is highly relevant in the context of building
resilience because it allows to deeply analyse what could be threats to the organization
and identify proactive and reactive measures to address them. This approach is relevant
for the development and implementation of a resilience plan[44].
6.2
Strategies to mitigate disruption
During the literature review, twelve mitigation strategies emerged from different writers
and this section aims to summarize them. The main sources were Pellegrino and Gau-
denzi[32] and Black and Glaser-Segura[13].
The first strategy is Visibility and communication which refers to a shared knowledge
among different actors of the same supply chain[34]. Black and Glaser-Segura argue
that visibility and communication can help reduce the ripple effect caused by uncertain-
ties[13]. On the other hand, Pellegrino and Gaudenzi state that visibility allows to make
better decisions regarding mitigation actions based on information-sharing[32].
Rubustness refers to relying on different suppliers instead of only one. This measure can
be challenging to implement in case of emergency but it is a helpful strategy to design in
the contingency plan[13].
72
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:81==
Resilience and stability are combined to allow the supply chain to absorb disturbances.
The first refers to the ability to absorb changes while the latter to the capacity of returning
to equilibrium after a disruption[13].
Service innovation is defined as a helpful strategy to retain customers in changing envi-
ronments. It forces companies to go beyond their current business to ensure they can
retain clients[13].
Flexibility is presented in Pellegrino and Gaudenzi’s paper where they state that it is one
of the most discussed strategies in this context. More specifically, they refer to measures
like geographical diversification of suppliers, multiple sourcing, restoring or nearshoring,
and flexibility on products and volumes[32].
Inventory Management is mentioned in Pellegrinon and Gaudenzi’s paper as a measure
to increase efficiency rather than a mitigation measure for disrutpion[32].
Reactivity is a measure that aims to quickly redesign the supply chain to shorten it in case
it becomes too complex[32].
Government incentives can be helpful in addressing the disruptive effects of an unex-
pected event on the short-term[32].
Operational slack is considered a measure that allows companies to perform better sup-
ply chain management in unpredictable environments which requires further investiga-
tion[13].
Diversification refers to selecting several suppliers, relying on different manufacturing pro-
cesses as well as logistics and other operations which allow to reduce the negative impact
of a disrutpion[13].
Vertical integration is defined as a successful measure to manage manufacturing and dis-
tribution in unstable environments while it should be avoided in more stable contexts[13].
Resilient portfolio refers to the allocation of demand for components across a set of suppli-
ers. At the same time, it requires the identification of a subset of suppliers to pre-position
inventory to mitigate disruption risk. This approach allows the implementation of both a
proactive and a reactive sourcing strategy[42].
6.3
Digitalization
In this Master thesis, digitalization is mentioned as one of the key opportunities for build-
ing resilience in the future. From the literature review, it emerges that digitalization and
technology offer great opportunities for building resilience alongside more traditional mea-
sures like safety stock and diversification. The main opportunities citied in this work are
Industry 4.0, Digital twin, Big data analytics, Blockchain, Internet of things and Artificial
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
73
==PAGE:82==
intelligence. This section aims to go beyond these findings by referring to the opinions ex-
pressed by UNCTAD on the topic in the Review of Maritime Transport 2022[69]. UNCTAD
argues that disruptions are responsible for accelerating the implementation of technologi-
cal solutions to address complexities of transportation and operations in the supply chain.
The ocean freight industry should improve its current business model to integrate digital
solutions to ensure efficiency, optimization, reliability, visibility, resistance, predictability,
and sustainability in meeting rapid delivery expectations. For example, a higher degree
of automation can reduce the need for offshore activities to reduce costs. Additionally,
online shopping will inevitably boost trade. Indeed, the pandemic resulted in a sharp in-
crease in e-commerce for consumer goods which are transported in containers. Carriers
started adopting measures to ensure they could meet this type of rising demand. For
example, they invested in air freight, final-mile delivery, and e-commerce logistics. It is
relevant to highlight that e-commerce demand is highly time-sensitive. Therefore, it is
necessary for carriers to speed up their operations to remain competitive. To access all
the potential gains that come from this industry, it will be necessary to change shipping
patterns and port operations while extending warehouse capacity. As it clearly emerges
from this analysis from UNCTAD regarding digitalization and especially e-commerce, car-
riers should prepare to adapt to technological innovation. A significant part of this process
is represented by preparing for the threat of cybersecurity attacks[69].
6.4
Sustainability: a challenge and an opportunity for supply
chains
In Chapter 3 of this Master thesis, sustainability was identified as one of the opportunities
for building more resilient supply chains together with digitalization. For example, sustain-
able supply chain management is described as a way to build supply chain resilience by
Eggert and Hartmann[57]. The aim of this section in the conclusive chapter is to highlight
that sustainability is not only an opportunity but also a challenge for SCM. To achieve this
result, the main findings related to the topic presented by UNCTAD in the Review of Mar-
itime Transport for 2021[65], 2022[69], and 2023[67] are further illustrated in this section.
It is relevant to highlight that the findings are mainly related to the ocean freight industry
as part of the supply chain.
Seaborne freight is still considered one of the most efficient modes of transportation con-
cerning weight and carbon dioxide emissions. However, diesel engine-propelled ships
contribute to increased production of greenhouse gasses (such as CO2) and other pollu-
tants like sulphur dioxide[59].
The Paris Agreement adopted in 2015 has the purpose of maintaining global warming
below 2°C and possibly at 1.5°C. During the pandemic, the emission of CO2 briefly de-
creased. However, at the current emission rate, the world is heading towards an increase
in the global average temperature of 3°C. Therefore, urgent actions are necessary[65].
The shipping industry is responsible for 11% of all transport-related CO2 emissions world-
wide and 3% of all anthropogenic CO2 emissions. The main polluting ships are bulk car-
riers, oil tankers, and container ships. Improving the efficiency of vessels can reduce the
carbon intensity of the world’s fleet[59]. Therefore, the shipping industry faces increas-
ing pressure regarding shifting to more sustainable operations from different sides like
74
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:83==
regulatory agencies, commercial drivers, customers, partners, and public opinion. One
of the main issues is related to the fact that carriers are required to adopt less polluting
solutions without knowing what is the best way to transition to lower or zero-carbon fuels.
Indeed, several options are available regarding fuels and green technologies. However,
purchasing new vessels that comply with the requirements is a significant investment and
making the wrong decision might be costly in the long term. For example, vessels are
often too old to be modernized to comply with the standards but are also too young to be
scrapped to be substituted by new ones. Therefore, investments to move towards more
sustainable solutions are not trivial and such decisions will have a direct impact on the
possibility of the industry to meet the IMO GHG emission targets. Therefore, ship owners
should decide if this is the right time to purchase new and more sustainable vessels with-
out clarity regarding alternative fuels, green technology options, and the future regulatory
landscape. Additionally, investment decisions are made even more difficult by uncertain-
ties regarding the timeline to renew the fleet and increasing building prices[67].
More stringent environmental regulations from IMO became effective starting in July 2023.
This regulation aims to reduce maritime GHG emissions and the impact of the ships on the
environment. The easiest way to reduce vessels’ emissions is slow sailing. Additionally,
alternative fuels are available like LNG, methanol, ammonia, and electricity. However, al-
ternative fuels currently cost two to five times more than conventional ones and they are
not economically viable on a large scale. An alternative is to make operational changes
to the vessels which drive up costs as well. One of the current solutions to address the
issues mentioned above is to adopt dual-fuel vessels which allow the ship to operate by
using two alternative fuels. From a survey conducted in 2022, around 40% of the new
vessels ordered consisted of dual-fuel ships[69]. One of the solutions adopted by DHL to
reduce emissions is to adopt Sustainable Marine Fuels (SMF) which are usually produced
by domestic or industrial wastes. As part of the sustainability strategy of the company,
customers can now decide to use sustainable fuels provided by DHL[76]
In the last decade, GHG emissions increased as displayed in figure 6.1. To reverse this
trend, the 2023 IMO Revised GHG Strategy includes an additional goal to reduce the to-
tal annual GHG emissions from the shipping industry by at least 20% aiming to 30% by
2030 compared to 2008. The main challenge is to ensure that the necessary amount of
new and more sustainable vessels required to achieve this goal can be built on time. In
the meantime, it will be necessary to reduce sailing speed, adopt more sustainable fuels
where possible and optimize routes[67].
It is relevant to highlight that it is necessary to quickly reduce GHG emissions to minimize
the negative consequences of climate change. Indeed, policymakers are already con-
cerned about improving ports to prevent the negative impacts of climate change. Despite
the efforts, changes require time[69]. The main issue for ports related to climate change
is the prospect of sea-level rise together with extreme weather events. Therefore, it is
necessary to secure global maritime transport by investing in solutions to build port re-
silience for this type of issues[65].
CO2 emissions are not the only ones that concern the shipping industry. For example,
from 2020 ships are required to operate by using fuels that contain less than 0.5% sul-
phur to comply with the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships,
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 6.1: Carbon dioxide emissions by main vessel types, tons, January 2012 – March
2023[67]
1973/1978. Another significant type of pollution related to the industry is bunker oil spills.
IMO is currently working to develop a claims manual for the Bunker Oil Pollution Con-
vention, 2001 which is related to the liability for oil spills produced by vessels other than
tankers[69].
To achieve the goals that have been set regarding GHG emissions and decarbonisation,
collaborative efforts across different industries will be necessary. For example, carriers,
ports, manufacturers, shippers, investors, energy producers, and distributors will have to
work together to achieve shipping decarbonization. An example of a collaborative effort
is represented by green corridors which require multiple players operating between two
ports. 21 initiatives related to green corridors started with the Clydebank Declaration and
it will be important in the future to involve developing countries in this type of initiatives[67].
6.5
Long term outlook
According to UNCTAD, the pandemic of COVID-19 accelerated megatrends which could
transform the maritime logistics industry[65]. These megatrends are further illustrated be-
low in this section.
Geopolitics
The pandemic highlighted how much nations are economically and socially interdepen-
dent. The perception of such interdependence has changed since then and it is now
partially considered a vulnerability. One of the reasons behind this new perception is
the risk related to rising tensions and wars that have affected international relations and
trade. Therefore, to mitigate risks and build resilience, companies aim to reduce their
dependence on distant foreign suppliers[65].
76
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:85==
Resilience
The supply chain disruption that followed the outbreak of the pandemic tested the re-
silience of SCs and transport and logistics networks. Therefore, companies started to
work to build resilience and robustness by, for example, diversification of suppliers and
partners. Additionally, inventory management strategies have been reconsidered. The
aim is now to combine just-in-time and just-in-case inventory[65].
Technology
During the pandemic, technologies were key to reducing physical contact while ensuring
continuity of the operations. These technological solutions include advanced analytics,
communication technology, port-call optimization, blockchains, big data, and autonomous
ships. The aforementioned technological approaches will be relevant in the future to ad-
dress crisis. Additionally, e-commerce stimulated online consumers’ spending. These
trends will continue to impact production and consumption in the future[65].
Shipping market dynamics
New disruptions will occur in the future and carriers, shippers, ports, and inland trans-
port operators must ensure they are ready to address them. To do so, building flexibility
to adapt to changing market conditions will be key. For example, when trade demand
sharply increased after an initial decline related to the pandemic of COVID-19, players in
the industry encountered technical difficulties and bottlenecks which did not allow them to
react as quickly as they wanted to the new demand levels. Therefore, carriers, shippers,
ports, and inland transport operators might reconsider their investments to better address
changes in the market[65].
Decarbonization and the energy transition
As previously mentioned in this chapter, the maritime freight industry is under pressure
to move towards decarbonization of its operations. To reduce the carbon footprint, a
new mix of fuels is expected to be introduced in the market. This will result in significant
changes in the energy shipping industry. Indeed, demand for oil tankers and coal carriers
will diminish while demand for transportation of hydrogen, ammonia and other fuels will
increase[65].
Climate adaptation and resilience
Climate change with extreme weather events started to have a significant impact on sup-
ply chain operations, especially coastal infrastructure and hinterland connections. For
example, floods, hurricanes, and cyclones have been causing significant disruption. The
ocean freight industry is not only required to invest to reduce its environmental impact but
also to build resilience to ensure the continuity of its operations despite disruptive weather
events. Indeed, the current projections estimate that global warming will exceed the tar-
get set by the Paris Agreement[65].
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
77
==PAGE:86==
6.6
Successful example of effective supply chain
management in addressing a pandemic
The main focus of this Master thesis is to understand how the pandemic on COVID-19
impacted global supply chains with a particular interest in the ocean freight and container
industry. Additionally, the aim was to identify mitigation strategies to minimize the neg-
ative impact of disruptive events and models to build resilience. Finally, challenges and
opportunities have been identified in sustainability efforts. To conclude this work, I would
like to highlight that the case study presented in Chapter 5 is a significant positive exam-
ple of how supply chain management can help in addressing the challenges presented
by a pandemic. While the entire freight industry was collapsing in 2021, cross-sector and
international cooperation allowed to successfully distribute vaccines to people all over the
world to ensure their safety. Despite the challenges, companies and governments worked
together towards a common goal and achieved impressive results in the very short term.
The hope is for this Master thesis to provide a small contribution to identifying ways to
address future disruptive events and for companies and governments all over the world
to bring some learnings from this experience with them for the future.
78
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
Statement on the fifteenth meeting of the IHR (2005), Emergency Committee on
the COVID-19 pandemic. URL: https://www.who.int/news/item/05- 05- 2023-
statement-on-the-fifteenth-meeting-of-the-international-health-regulations-(2005)-
emergency-committee-regarding-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-pandemic (visited
on 09/07/2023).
[2]
Seyedmohsen Hosseini. “A multi-layer Bayesian network method for supply chain
disruption modelling in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic”. In: (2021).
[3]
Kazi Safowan Shahed. “A supply chain disruption risk mitigation model to manage
COVID-19 pandemic risk”. In: (2021).
[4]
Stefan Seuring. “Comparing regions globally: impacts of COVID-19 on supply chains
– a Delphi study”. In: International Journal of Operations and Production Manage-
ment (2022).
[5]
Revisiting Pandemic Resilience - DHL -. DHL. URL: https://www.dhl.com/global-en/
home/insights-and-innovation/thought-leadership/white-papers/revisiting-pandemic-
resilience.html (visited on 11/29/2023).
[6]
DHL - Global Logistics and International Shipping. URL: https://www.dhl.com/dk-
en/home.html (visited on 11/25/2023).
[7]
John T. Mentzer et al. “Defining Supply Chain Management”. In: Journal of Business
Logistics (Sept. 2001).
[8]
Segu Oh, Hee Cheol Moon, and Yongping Zhong. “Contingency Management and
Supply Chain Performance in Korea: A COVID-19 Pandemic Approach”. In: (Jan.
2020). Number: 23 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[9]
Ozlem Ergun. “A structured overview of insights and opportunities for enhancing
supply chain resilience”. In: Iise Transactions (2023).
[10]
Soonhong Min, Zach G. Zacharia, and Carlo D. Smith. “Defining Supply Chain Man-
agement: In the Past, Present, and Future”. In: Journal of Business Logistics (2019).
[11]
Lydia Novoszel and Tina Wakolbinger. “Supply Chain Challenges During the COVID-
19 Pandemic”. In: Supply Chain Resilience: Insights from Theory and Practice.
2022.
[12]
Iris Heckmann. “A New Definition of Supply Chain Risk”. In: Towards Supply Chain
Risk Analytics. Wiesbaden, 2016.
[13]
Stephanie Black. “Supply Chain Resilience in a Pandemic: The Need for Revised
Contingency Planning”. In: Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy
(2020).
[14]
Christopher S. Tang. “Perspectives in supply chain risk management”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Production Economics (Oct. 2006).
[15]
Marta Rinaldi. “A literature review on quantitative models for supply chain risk man-
agement: Can they be applied to pandemic disruptions?” In: Computers and Indus-
trial Engineering (2022).
[16]
Ou Tang and S. Nurmaya Musa. “Identifying risk issues and research advance-
ments in supply chain risk management”. In: International Journal of Production
Economics (Sept. 1, 2011).
[17]
Alexander M. Geske and Lydia Novoszel. “Definition and Development of Supply
Chain Resilience”. In: Supply Chain Resilience: Insights from Theory and Practice.
2022.
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
79
==PAGE:88==
[18]
Michel Bruneau et al. “A Framework to Quantitatively Assess and Enhance the
Seismic Resilience of Communities”. In: Earthquake Spectra - EARTHQ SPECTRA
(Nov. 1, 2003).
[19]
Aaron Wildavsky. Searching for Safety. Routledge, Oct. 31, 2017.
[20]
John F. Home and John E. Orr. “Assessing behaviors that create resilient organi-
zations”. In: Employment Relations Today (Dec. 1997).
[21]
Steve Carpenter et al. “From Metaphor to Measurement: Resilience of What to
What?” In: Ecosystems (Dec. 1, 2001).
[22]
Masoud Kamalahmadi and Mahour Mellat Parast. “A review of the literature on the
principles of enterprise and supply chain resilience: Major findings and directions for
future research”. In: International Journal of Production Economics (Jan. 1, 2016).
[23]
Stavros T. Ponis and Epaminondas Koronis. “Supply Chain Resilience: Definition
Of Concept And Its Formative Elements”. In: Journal of Applied Business Research
(JABR) (Aug. 21, 2012).
[24]
Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative. Ed. by Committee on Increasing Na-
tional Resilience to Hazards and Disasters et al. National Academies Press, Nov. 29,
2012.
[25]
Carlos Juventino Ruiz Montoya. “Contingency plan in the supply chain of compa-
nies in the retail industry in the face of the impacts of COVID-19”. In: Advances in
Science, Technology and Engineering Systems (2021).
[26]
Zhitao Xu. “Impacts of COVID-19 on Global Supply Chains: Facts and Perspec-
tives”. In: Ieee Engineering Management Review (2020).
[27]
Javid Moosavi. “Simulation-based assessment of supply chain resilience with con-
sideration of recovery strategies in the COVID-19 pandemic context”. In: Computers
and Industrial Engineering (2021).
[28]
Roeland Baaijens. “How to Successfully Master a Pandemic in a Global Distribution
Network?” In: Springer Series in Supply Chain Management (2022).
[29]
Maria Grazia Attinasi et al. “The semiconductor shortage and its implication for euro
area trade, production and prices”. In: (June 24, 2021).
[30]
Alexandre Dolgui, Dmitry Ivanov, and Maxim Rozhkov. “Does the ripple effect in-
fluence the bullwhip effect? An integrated analysis of structural and operational
dynamics in the supply chain”. In: International Journal of Production Research
(Mar. 3, 2020).
[31]
Maxim Rozhkov. “Adapting supply chain operations in anticipation of and during the
COVID-19 pandemic”. In: Omega (united Kingdom) (2022).
[32]
Stefan Viehmann. “How International Logistics Service Providers Counter Supply
Chain Disruptions Through Increased Visibility and Mitigate Risk Through Technol-
ogy”. In: Springer Series in Supply Chain Management (2023).
[33]
E. M. A. C. Ekanayake et al. “Identifying supply chain vulnerabilities in industrialized
construction: an overview”. In: International Journal of Construction Management
(May 17, 2022).
[34]
Muhammad Shujaat Mubarik et al. “Resilience and cleaner production in industry
4.0: Role of supply chain mapping and visibility”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production
(Apr. 10, 2021).
[35]
A. Azadeh et al. “Modelling and improvement of supply chain with imprecise trans-
portation delays and resilience factors”. In: International Journal of Logistics Re-
search and Applications (July 4, 2014).
[36]
Dmitry Ivanov and Alexandre Dolgui. “New disruption risk management perspec-
tives in supply chains: digital twins, the ripple effect, and resileanness”. In: IFAC-
PapersOnLine (Jan. 1, 2019).
80
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:89==
[37]
Jie Yang et al. “Antecedents and consequences of supply chain risk management
capabilities: an investigation in the post-coronavirus crisis”. In: International Journal
of Production Research (Mar. 4, 2021).
[38]
Yu Han, Woon Kian Chong, and Dong Li. “A systematic literature review of the
capabilities and performance metrics of supply chain resilience”. In: International
Journal of Production Research (Aug. 2, 2020).
[39]
C S Holling. “Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems”. In: Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics (1973).
[40]
Reframing service innovation: COVID-19 as a catalyst for imposed service inno-
vation. URL: https : / / www . nhh . no / en / research - centres / digital - innovation - for -
growth/dig-news-and-blogs/2020/reframing-service-innovation-covid-19-as-a-catalyst-
for-imposed-service-innovation/ (visited on 10/10/2023).
[41]
Jeremy J. Kovach et al. “Firm performance in dynamic environments: The role of
operational slack and operational scope”. In: Journal of Operations Management
(July 1, 2015).
[42]
Riccardo Aldrighetti. “Efficient resilience portfolio design in the supply chain with
consideration of preparedness and recovery investments”. In: Omega (united King-
dom) (2023).
[43]
Wen Jun Tan, Allan N. Zhang, and Wentong Cai. “A graph-based model to mea-
sure structural redundancy for supply chain resilience”. In: International Journal of
Production Research (Oct. 18, 2019).
[44]
Kay Fjørtoft et al. “Assessing the resilience of sustainable autonomous shipping:
New methodology, challenges, opportunities”. In: Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain
(Dec. 1, 2023).
[45]
David D. Woods. “Four concepts for resilience and the implications for the future of
resilience engineering”. In: Reliability Engineering & System Safety (Sept. 1, 2015).
[46]
Prakash Agrawal and Rakesh Narain. “Digital supply chain management: An Overview”.
In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Dec. 2018).
[47]
Adnan Al-Banna. “Roadmap to digital supply chain resilience”. In: Computer Aided
Chemical Engineering (2022).
[48]
Seyedmohsen Hosseini, Dmitry Ivanov, and Alexandre Dolgui. “Review of quan-
titative methods for supply chain resilience analysis”. In: Transportation Research
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 125 (May 1, 2019), pp. 285–307. ISSN:
1366-5545. DOI: 10.1016/j.tre.2019.03.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1366554518313589 (visited on 10/15/2023).
[49]
Ingra Viel de Farias. “Visibility model for enhancing supply chains resilience”. In:
Ifac-papersonline (2022).
[50]
Devnaad Singh. “Role Of Industry 4.0 Practices In Supply Chain Resilience”. In:
Ecs Transactions (2022).
[51]
Vander Luiz da Silva, João Luiz Kovaleski, and Regina Negri Pagani. “Technology
transfer in the supply chain oriented to industry 4.0: a literature review”. In: Tech-
nology Analysis & Strategic Management (May 4, 2019).
[52]
Ícaro Romolo Sousa Agostino et al. “Using a Digital Twin for Production Planning
and Control in Industry 4.0”. In: Scheduling in Industry 4.0 and Cloud Manufacturing.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020.
[53]
Dmitry Ivanov. “A digital supply chain twin for managing the disruption risks and
resilience in the era of Industry 4.0”. In: Production Planning and Control (2021).
[54]
Ghadafi M. Razak, Linda C. Hendry, and Mark Stevenson. “Supply chain traceabil-
ity: a review of the benefits and its relationship with supply chain resilience”. In:
Production Planning & Control (Aug. 18, 2023).
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
81
==PAGE:90==
[55]
Lixu Li. “Big data and big disaster: a mechanism of supply chain risk management
in global logistics industry”. In: International Journal of Operations and Production
Management (2023).
[56]
Stefan Kurpjuweit et al. “Blockchain in Additive Manufacturing and its Impact on
Supply Chains”. In: Journal of Business Logistics (2021).
[57]
Julius Eggert. “Sustainable supply chain management – a key to resilience in the
global pandemic”. In: Supply Chain Management (2023).
[58]
Dennis Egan. “Complex Economic Consequence Analysis to Protect the Maritime
Infrastructure”. In: 2022 Ieee International Symposium on Technologies for Home-
land Security, Hst 2022 (2022).
[59]
Hanne Reher, Sub-Regional Sector Head, Life Science Healthcare, DGF Nordic-
s/Baltics. Interview conducted on 01/11/2023.
[60]
Container shipping in times of COVID-19: Why freight rates have surged and im-
plications for policy makers. Apr. 19, 2021. URL: https://unctad.org/system/files/
official-document/presspb2021d2_en.pdf (visited on 10/21/2023).
[61]
Leading container shipping companies - number of ships. Statista. URL: https :
//www.statista.com/statistics/263291/container- shipping- companies- worldwide-
number-of-ships/ (visited on 11/29/2023).
[62]
Loss trends - Larger vessels bring bigger losses | AGCS. Allianz Commercial. URL:
https://commercial.allianz.com/news-and-insights/expert-risk-articles/larger-vessels-
bigger-losses.html (visited on 11/29/2023).
[63]
Infographic: The World’s Biggest Shipping Hubs. Statista Daily Data. Apr. 29, 2022.
URL: https://www.statista.com/chart/23766/biggest-container-ports-by-shipping-
volume (visited on 11/29/2023).
[64]
Jia Shi. “Construction of resilience mechanisms in response to container shipping
market volatility during the pandemic period: From the perspective of market super-
vision”. In: Ocean and Coastal Management (2023).
[65]
Review of Maritime Transport 2021 (Overview). Review of Maritime Transport. Nov. 18,
2021. URL: https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/rmt2021summary_en.
pdf (visited on 08/24/2023).
[66]
Average delays for late container vessel arrivals worldwide 2022. Statista. URL:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1303383/average-delays-for-late-ship-arrivals-
worldwide/ (visited on 11/29/2023).
[67]
. Review of Maritime Transport 2023 (Overview). Review of Maritime Transport.
Sept. 27, 2023. URL: https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/rmt2023overview_
en.pdf (visited on 11/12/2023).
[68]
Sea-Intelligence - Schedule reliability continues to improve. URL: https://www.sea-
intelligence.com/press-room/213-schedule-reliability-continues-to-improve (visited on
11/29/2023).
[69]
. Review of Maritime Transport 2022 (Overview). Nov. 29, 2022. URL: https : / /
unctad . org / system / files / official - document / rmt2022overview _ en . pdf (visited on
09/07/2023).
[70]
Container shipping’s equipment surplus is manageable and will recede. Drewry.
URL: https://www.drewry.co.uk/news/news/container-shippings-equipment-surplus-
is-manageable-and-will-recede (visited on 11/29/2023).
[71]
Internaltional Transport Forum. Global shocks reshape trade routes and supply
chains. Oct. 1, 2023.
[72]
. Contracts for the carriage of goods by sea and multimodal transport. Feb. 15,
2022. URL: https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/dtltlbinf2022d1_en.pdf
(visited on 10/21/2023).
82
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:91==
[73]
. Emerging strategies for ports during the pandemic. Feb. 9, 2022. URL: https :
/ / unctad . org / system / files / official - document / presspb2022d1 _ en . pdf (visited on
10/21/2023).
[74]
Ocean Freight Market Update (31/10/2023), DHL Global Forwarding.
[75]
May 18, 2021: The race against the virus: DHL white paper update reveals learnings
from one year into COVID-19. Deutsche Post DHL Group. URL: https://group.dhl.
com/en/media-relations/press-releases/2021/the-race-against-the-virus-dhl-white-
paper-covid-19.html (visited on 11/29/2023).
[76]
DHL adds sustainable marine fuel option for full-container load shipments. URL:
https : / / www . dhl . com / global - en / home / press / press - archive / 2021 / dhl - adds -
sustainable- marine- fuel- option- for- full- container- load- shipments.html (visited on
12/09/2023).
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
83
==PAGE:92==
84
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:93==
Abbreviations
UNCTAD: The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
SC: Supply Chain
SCM: Supply Chain Management
SCR: Supply Chain Risk
SCRES: Supply Chain Resilience
NRC: National Research Council
VMI: Vendor Management Inventory
CFPR: Collaborative Forecasting Replenishment Planning
ERP: Enterprise Resource Management
AEGIS: Advanced, Efficient and Green Intermodal Systems
FSA: Formal Safety Assessment
IMO: International Maritime Organization
DT: Digital Twin
SCI: Supply Chain Integration
IoT: Internet of Things
AI: Artificial Intelligence
SSCM: Sustainable Supply Chain Management
MTS: Marine Transportation Systems
SCFI: Shangai Containerized Freight Index
ITF: International Transport Forum
FMC: Federal Maritime Commission
ETS: Emission Trading System
PPE: Personal Protective Equipment
GHG: Greenhouse gasses
SMF: Sustainable Marine Fuels
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
85
==PAGE:94==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Papers retrieved during the literature review pt.1
Figure A.2: Papers retrieved during the literature review pt.2
86
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
==PAGE:95==
Disruption of the Global Supply Chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
87
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
