==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Mathematical Modeling and Computation Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Data-Driven Multi-Fidelity Techniques for
Solving Partial Differential Equations
Freja Mette Terp Petersen
Supervisor: Allan P. Engsig-Karup
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Advanced simulation tools for engineering purposes are based on partial differential
equations (PDEs).
However, these simulations are often very expensive, when a
certain accuracy is required. This motivates the development of techniques that can
speed-up these simulations while maintaining a high accuracy. A class of techniques
that are not yet well-established for practical engineering, is the construction of data-
driven multi-fidelity (MF) models. The primary objective of this Master’s thesis, is
to use the convolutional neural network (CNN) structure for constructing MF-models
for improving the accuracy of flexible-order finite difference based numerical solvers
for PDEs. The fidelity of the numerical solvers are determined by the order of the
numerical method, and the MF-model will be constructed with use of low-fidelity
(LF) and high-fidelity (HF) simulations.
The choice of CNNs for the MF-models
is due to the localized nature of such neural networks that is similar to common
finite difference schemes. This offers good opportunities in terms of generalizing to
new data and scaling the computational effort. In order to demonstrate and assess
the performance of the MF-models, numerical experiments will be conducted using
representative PDEs such as the heat, the advection and Burgers equation as well as
two test cases; the shallow water equations (SWE) and a new, high-order accurate
explicit free surface solver based on the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE). The models
are evaluated in terms of their accuracy compared to its low-fidelity (LF) and high-
fidelity (HF) counterparts as well as their computational requirements.
The construction of MF-models using CNNs evolves around a conceptual compu-
tational framework, where methods are formulated as general initial value problems
(IVPs). The system is then corrected based on learning a correction term to the
IVP from data. Through the lens of error analysis, this framework is used to explain
the connection between errors and order of accuracy of the scheme and to describe
how it is possible to achieve improved accuracy through learning a correction term.
Initially, the network is trained using the analytical solution to the heat equation. It
is possible to show that the CNN is limited to fit to only the leading order terms of
the truncation error. A novel MF-model that uses HF-data for training, is created to
establish relevance to a situation where the analytical solution is not available. When
testing different network structures for this MF-model, it is possible to establish the
following: an increased accuracy, a decreased computational effort compared to the
HF-model, scalability of the method, generalization to a different spatial domain and
a different initial value function for the three test equations as well as to show abso-
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
lute stability of one of the MF-models. The extended models for the SWE are also
successful in increasing the accuracy of the low-fidelity model. In the case of the NSE,
structural differences challenge the generalization of the MF-model, but the initial
work on this problem shows indications that it is possible. In conclusion, the thesis
establishes a crucial connection between the CNN-structure and classical numerical
analysis theory, which allows for a high level of interpretability as well as models
that are scalable and generalizable, making this project a contribution to the field of
Scientific Machine Learning.
Danish summary
Avancerede simuleringsværktøjer til ingeniørformål er baseret på partielle differential-
ligninger (PDE’er). Dog er disse simuleringer ofte meget omkostningstunge, når en
bestemt nøjagtighed er påkrævet. Dette motiverer udviklingen af teknikker, der kan
accelerere disse simuleringer og samtidig opretholde en høj nøjagtighed. En klasse af
teknikker, der endnu ikke er veletablerede inden for praktisk ingeniørarbejde, er kon-
struktionen af multi-fidelitets (MF) modeller. Målet med denne kandidatafhandling
er at anvende strukturen af convolutional neural networks (CNN) til at konstruere
MF-modeller med det formål at forbedre nøjagtigheden af numeriske løsere baseret
på finite difference-metoder af fleksibel orden for PDE’er. Løsernes nøjagtighed (high-
fidelity (HF) mod low-fidelity (LF)) bestemmes af de numeriske metoders orden. Val-
get af CNN’er til MF-modeller skyldes den lokale karakter af disse neurale netværk,
der ligner almindelige finite difference-skemaer. Dette giver gode muligheder for gen-
eralisering til ny data og skalerbarhed af metoden. For at demonstrere og vurdere
præstationen af MF-modellerne vil der blive udført numeriske eksperimenter ved brug
af repræsentative PDE’er, såsom varme-, advektions- og Burgers-ligningen samt to
testcases: ligningerne for lavt vand (Shallow Water Equations, SWE) og en ny, hø-
jere orden, eksplicit, fri-overflade løser baseret på Navier-Stokes-ligningerne (NSE).
Modellerne evalueres med hensyn til deres nøjagtighed sammenlignet med LF- og
HF-modellerne samt deres beregningsmæssige krav.
Konstruktionen af MF-modeller med CNNs baseres på et konceptuelt framework,
hvor metoder formuleres som generelle begyndelsesværdiproblemer (initial value prob-
lems, IVP’er). Systemet korrigeres baseret på indlæring af en korrektion ved brug
af data. Gennem fejl-analyse anvendes dette framework til at forklare forbindelsen
mellem fejl og nøjagtighed af skemaet og til at forklare hvordan det er muligt at opnå
forbedret nøjagtighed gennem indlæring af en korrektionsterm. Først trænes netvær-
ket ved hjælp af den analytiske løsning til varmeligningen. Det vises, at når CNN
trænes ved hjælp af analytisk data, begrænses CNN til kun at træne til de ledende
ordens led af truncation-fejlen (fejlen der opstår pga. simplificeringer i diskretiserin-
gen af ligningen).
En ny MF-model, der bruger HF-data til træning af CNN, er
konstrueret for at fastslå relevansen i en situation, hvor en analytisk løsning ikke er
tilgængelig. Ved test af denne MF-model for forskellige netværksstrukturer, er det
muligt at etablere følgende: øget nøjagtighed, et mindre beregningsmæssigt arbejde
==PAGE:5==
Summary
iii
sammenlignet med HF-modellen, skalerbarhed af metoden, generalisering til et andet
rumlig domæne og en anden begyndelsesværdifunktion for de tre testligninger samt
at vise absolut stabilitet af en af MF-modellerne. De udvidede modeller for SWE
lykkes også i at øge nøjagtigheden af lav-nøjagtigheds-modellen (low-fidelity-modellen,
LF-modellen). I tilfældet med NSE udfordrer strukturelle forskelle generaliseringen
af MF-modellen, men det indledende arbejde på dette problem indikerer, at det er
muligt. I sin helhed etablerer afhandlingen en afgørende forbindelse mellem CNN-
strukturen og klassisk numerisk teori, hvilket tillader en høj grad af fortolkning samt
modeller, der er skalerbare og generaliserbare, hvilket gør dette projekt til et bidrag
til feltet for videnskabelig maskinlæring (Scientific Machine Learning).
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master’s degree in Mathematical Modeling and Computation.
The project is equivalent to 30 ECTS and it has been developed over the course of 5
months.
Kongens Lyngby, January 17, 2024
Freja Mette Terp Petersen (s184321)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Allan P. Engsig-Karup,
whose expertise, encouragement and support has been crucial throughout the entire
process of this Master’s thesis. His guidance and feedback has been instrumental and
it extends beyond the scope of this project as I am about to take my first steps out
of the classroom and into the academic world. Thank you for believing in me.
I extend my thanks to the individuals who dedicated their time to review and
provide constructive feedback on earlier versions of this thesis. Many thanks to Jerrijn,
Magnus, Max, Mikkel, Morten, and Liv. In addition, I want to express my heartfelt
thanks to my fiancé, Magnus, for his immense emotional support, as well as to my
family and friends for cheering me on throughout this project.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Notation and
expected prerequisites
Expected prerequisites
This thesis is written on an academic level corresponding to a Master’s student within
the field of mathematical modeling and computation. The reader is expected to have
a basic knowledge of scientific computing for ordinary differential equations (ODEs).
This includes familiarity with finite difference methods such as the Forward Euler
method and Runge-Kutta-methods for temporal integration as well as familiarity
with the concept of stability regions of such methods. Knowledge of partial differential
equations is useful but not required, since relevant concepts will be introduced in the
thesis.
Basic knowledge about machine learning methods is useful. This includes being
familiar with neural networks and the concept of width and depth of a neural network,
as well as basic structures such as feed-forward neural networks. Convolutional neural
networks are the focus of this thesis and they will be introduced in the thesis. Knowl-
edge of basic training procedures for neural networks is also expected together with
familiarity with the concept of convergence as well as challenges such as overfitting
and vanishing gradient problems.
==PAGE:12==
x
Notation and expected prerequisites
Notation
In this thesis, the symbol u will be used to denote a state variable of a partial
differential equation. Subscripts on u will be used to denote partial derivatives, such
that:
ut ≡∂u
∂t ,
ux ≡∂u
∂x,
utt ≡∂2u
∂t2 ,
uxx ≡∂2u
∂x2 ,
and similar for higher order derivatives.
In the occurrence of vectors or matrices, these will be denoted by bold symbols
with higher case letters for matrices and lower case letters for vectors:
b is a vector,
A is a matrix.
For discretizations of a state-variables, u, the upper case letter, U, is used. For a
vector of state-variables, u, the upper-case, bold version, U, will be used. Thus, U
is a special case of the bold and upper-case-letter notation, and does not necessarily
hold a matrix of values.
Subscripts and superscripts on U or U indicate a grid-point. Subscripts will be
denoted by the letter j and they symbolize a spatial grid point. Superscripts will be
denoted by the letter i and they symbolize a time step, such that:
U i
j denotes the state at time i at the spatial grid index j,
U i denotes all grid points at time i.
In some cases, i will be used for the imaginary unit i = √−1, and in this case, n will
be used to denote the time step.
Unless otherwise specified, h denotes the spatial grid spacing, and k is time step
size. m is used to denote the number of internal grid points in the spatial discretiza-
tion.
Abbreviations
CNN convolutional neural network
FD finite difference
==PAGE:13==
Notation and expected prerequisites
xi
FDM finite difference method
FEM finite element method
FLOPs floating point operations
FTCS forward-time-central-space
FVM finite volume method
HF high-fidelity
IVP initial value problem
KS Kuramoto-Sivashinsky
LF low-fidelity
LSWE linear shallow water equations
MF multi-fidelity
MLP multi-layer perceptron
MOL method of lines
NSE Navier-Stokes equation
ODE ordinary differential equation
PDE partial differential equation
PINN physics-informed neural network
SciML Scientific Machine Learning
SVE Saint-Venant equations
SWE shallow water equations
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Notation and expected prerequisites
ix
Contents
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Machine and software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
A study on data-driven multi-level techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
11
2.1
Linear test PDEs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Non-linear test PDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Numerical methods for solving PDEs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Stability of numerical methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Higher order methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Connection between numerical methods and CNNs . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Multi-fidelity models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Unveiling Multi-Fidelity Models
39
4.1
Correcting an FDM to achieve high order method . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
A method from the literature: DeepFDM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
51
5.1
MF-models for the test equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Case 1: The Shallow Water Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3
Case 2: The Navier-Stokes Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Contents
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Conclusion
95
Bibliography
97
A
Project overview
103
B
Details of chapter 2
107
B.1
Summary of relevant knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
B.2
Fourier solutions to the heat equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
C
Details of chapter 3
111
C.1 Solving an elliptic PDE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
C.2 Showing order of numerical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
C.3 Stability analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
C.4 Higher order methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
C.5 Connection between numerical methods and CNNs . . . . . . . . . . .
122
D
Details of chapter 4
127
D.1 Convergence plots of initial MF-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
D.2 Details for Deep FDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
E
Details of chapter 5
129
E.1
Details of section 5.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
E.2
Shallow Water Equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are the cornerstone of mathematical models
that can be used for understanding and predicting dynamic phenomena. Say, you
are building a pier for maritime purposes, and you want to be able to predict the
movement of the water onto the pier in order to plan the construction. This is a
problem which can be modeled using, for instance, the Navier-Stokes equations. The
Navier-Stokes equations are a system of equations that describe the velocity, pressure,
temperature, and density of a moving fluid.
They are often too diﬀicult to solve
analytically for practical purposes and are therefore one example of a PDE, which
is usually solved numerically. Though, due to their structure, a mathematical model
based on the Navier-Stokes equations is very expensive to perform simulations with.
For this reason, there is a need for developing methods capable of accelerating
simulations of PDEs. One category of methods often used for accelerating simulations
is data-driven methods.
Recently, the use of data-driven methods have exploded
with the increasing popularity of neural networks. The use of neural networks for
e.g. image recognition tasks emerged early in the previous decade, whereas the use
of neural networks in the context of solving PDEs is more recent. Although popular,
neural networks have some great challenges, which is best illustrated by understanding
neural networks as ’black box’ methods in comparison to ’white box’ methods.
Figure 1.1: Examples of black, white, and gray box models.
Figure 1.1 shows an illustration of black box and gray box models in comparison to
white box models. Black-box models are purely data-driven and could, for example,
be a neural network. On the other hand, there are models that are purely based on
physics or models that in other ways are deterministic. In the cross-section between
the two, there are gray box models, which are models that combine data with domain
knowledge. For example, statistical models like a general linear model. In order to
apply this model, there is a need for some level of domain knowledge to ensure that the
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
assumptions of the model are satisfied. Then data is used to optimize the parameters
of the model allowing for some stochasticity. It can also be neural networks that are
structured in a way that fits a certain problem or where the weights are optimized
using some domain knowledge, for instance, as in physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) [1, 2].
This thesis operates in the gray box within the emerging area of Scientific Machine
Learning (SciML). SciML is a relatively new research area in the context of solving
partial differential equations numerically and it was first described in a 2018 report [3].
Resting upon decades of experience with simulating dynamical systems, SciML seeks
to combine domain-knowledge with data-driven technologies in order to decrease the
computational expense of data-driven models as well as improving the robustness
and allowing for interpretability. This has already led to new, improved data-driven
technologies such as recent developments on the PINNs. This thesis dives into SciML
by touching upon improvements of numerical solutions to partial differential equations
using data-driven techniques.
One way to improve eﬀiciency of solvers for PDEs, which can be data-driven, is
to utilize different fidelity levels in a multi-fidelity model. This could be in the form
of combining few data from an expensive high-fidelity model with much data from
a low-fidelity model. This thesis combines all of the above in the following research
question:
How and to what extent can convolutional neural networks improve the
eﬀiciency, accuracy and interpretability of numerical solvers for PDEs
using a multi-fidelity frame-work?
The thesis will investigate to what extend a specific type of neural networks, namely,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), can be utilized in a multi-fidelity framework to
improve the eﬀiciency and accuracy of numerical solvers for PDEs. Methods for error
quantification with Taylor series approximations known from white-box numerical
methods will be used to interpret the role of the CNNs in the multi-fidelity model. The
framework is tested on three test-PDEs; the heat, advection and Burgers equation, as
well as on two cases which are relevant for practical applications. First, a simplified
version of the Navier-Stokes equations, namely, the shallow water equations, and
second, a brief investigation of the extension to the full Navier-Stokes equations in
two dimensions to challenge the concept explored in this report.
The contributions of this thesis include: 1) the formulation of a general framework
for developing multi-fidelity models for future research, 2) data-driven multi-fidelity
experiments with numerical simulators of different complexities, highlighting the po-
tential of the proposed CNN-based multi-fidelity methods, 3) development of own
codes for solving PDEs and for training CNNs with code examples for easy adapta-
tion in later research as well as full access to all code1 in a Github repository,
1That is, all code written for this thesis.
The code for the NSE-solver is not shared as it is
subject to ongoing research.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Machine and software
3
4) analysis of data-driven methods through the lens of numerical analysis and trunca-
tion error including a, to my knowledge, unseen decomposition of CNNs for adaptation
of stability analysis.
The thesis is structured as follows: Section 1.2 gives an overview of state-of-the art
methods and research through a literature study on data-driven multi-fidelity tech-
niques for solving PDEs. In chapter 2, relevant theory on the three test equations
is presented. Chapter 3 introduces the methodology of the thesis including an intro-
duction to numerical methods for PDEs, an introduction to CNNs, some initial work
on connecting numerical methods with the CNN structure as well as the formulation
of a general framework for multi-fidelity models. In chapter 4, the first multi-fidelity
models will be explored. This serves as a basis for chapter 5, where a novel structure
for the MF-model is tested by training models for the three test equations. Chapter
5 ends with the two test cases: the shallow water equations and the Navier-Stokes
equations, where the MF-model framework is extended and tested. Chapters 4 and
5 are each rounded off by a discussion of the methods investigated the chapters.
1.1
Machine and software
All implementations of neural networks in this thesis use PyTorch [4]. PyTorch version
2.0.1 is installed with python version 3.10.12. The default precision of PyTorch is
single-precision floating-point format (float32).
This has been changed to double-
precision floating point-format (float64) throughout the work in this thesis to reduce
the influence of round-off errors
The machine used for training and collection of all results is a 2021 Macbook Pro
with an Apple M1 Pro chip, with 16 GB RAM memory and with the Mac Ventura
operating system version 13.2.1.
All code created for use in this thesis is found in the Github repository [5].
1.2
A study on data-driven multi-level techniques
The terms data-driven and multi-fidelity techniques both refer to a variety of tech-
niques within the area of scientific computing. This section provides an overview of
these different techniques through a literature study, which will be used to motivate
the scope of the thesis.
Data-driven techniques
The words data-driven techniques describe techniques that are driven by data. Al-
though, techniques can be driven by data in many different ways and data can be
almost anything. A non-exhaustive list of data types is: documents, images, sound
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
recordings, measurement data and simulation data. The context of this thesis is solv-
ing partial differential equation (PDE)s and, therefore, the data in question will be
simulation data. That is, data obtained from numerically solving a PDE. There are
cases where the methods described in this thesis can be relevant for use on measured
data, for instance, measurements of a system which can be described by a PDE or a
system of PDEs.
Similarly, techniques can be data-driven in many different ways, for example, using
regression, equation-free modeling, data mining or neural networks. In the context
of this thesis, data-driven techniques are understood in contrast to physical models;
models that are derived from physical laws. These models often have the form of
a (system of) ordinary differential equation(s) or a (system of) partial differential
equation(s). A purely data-driven model, on the other hand, is construced solely
based on data. Such a model assumes no knowledge of the physical system, instead,
it extracts knowledge from data coming from a system.
This could, for instance,
be black-box neural networks. More recently, there have been developments of new
types of neural networks that combine knowledge of the physical system and the
measurement data. These are called physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) and
they work by including knowledge of the physical system in the loss-function during
the parameter optimization of the neural network. This idea was first proposed by
Lagaris, Likas and Fotiadis in 1997 [1] and the idea has more recently been further
developed and popularized by Raissi, Perdikaris and Karniadakis [2].
Neural networks as function approximators
The fundamental idea of data-driven techniques is to be able to extract features and
knowledge from data. The aim is to recover the underlying dynamics of a system
using only the data.
Overall, the problem can be one of the two; the inverse or
the forward problem. The inverse problem consists of using some output data from a
PDE for estimating the parameters, initial conditions, boundary conditions or similar
of the original model, whereas the forward problem consists of predicting the output
of a PDE model given some input. This section focuses on the forward problem, since
this has relevance for the multi-fidelity models developed for PDEs in this thesis.
In order to solve the forward problem, one can use neural networks as function ap-
proximators. The function to be approximated could be the right-hand side function
of an initial-value problem, eg. for the construction of inexpensive surrogate models,
or, as is the case in this thesis, the error function of a numerical method. If successful,
one can obtain an approximator that resembles the original function. The advantages
and use-cases of such an approximator are many: surrogate modeling, optimization
of simulations, for instance, with reduced order modeling, and, of course, creation of
multi-fidelity models.
A fundamental principle when recovering the dynamics of PDEs using neural
networks is the universal approximation theorem presented by Hornik, Stinchcombe
and White [6].
According to their 1989 paper, a multi-layer feed-forward neural
network of down to one hidden layer with arbitrarily many hidden units is a universal
==PAGE:21==
1.2 A study on data-driven multi-level techniques
5
approximator of any Borel measurable function. They show, mathematically, that
any such neural network is, in theory, able to approximate a function arbitrarily well.
This function could be the solution function to a PDE or an approximation of the
equations themselves. In practice, however, the ability of the networks depends highly
on, for instance, the network structure and the optimization algorithm determining
the model weights. This has been the main challenge of the scientific area of neural
networks.
Early studies on neural networks as universal approximators in practice include
the work by Rico-Martínez, Kevrekidis and Krischer in 1995 [7], which was further
extended by González-García, Rico-Martínez and Kevrekidis in 1998 in the study
’Identification of distributed parameter systems: A neural net approach’ [8]. The
latter is a proof of concept, where the authors show that it is possible to recreate
the dynamics of a PDE using simulation data and a neural network. Simulation data
from the PDE is used to train a ’black-box’ feed-forward neural network to learn the
time integration of the PDE. The method shows to be very accurate for solving the
Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) equation. Thus, this article is a fundamental piece of
work that shows that it is possible, in practice, to use data to discover underlying
dynamics of a time-dependent PDE, and it has therefore inspired later work that
further develops the method.
Whereas these papers focus on feed-forward neural networks, also known as multi-
layer perceptrons, the use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which mainly
have dominated the area of computer vision and image recognition, has also entered
the field of function approximation. In a paper from 2020 [9], Zhou establishes the
universality of deep CNNs for approximating any continuous function given that the
network is deep enough. Whereas the previously mentioned universal approximation
theorem focuses on the width of the network, this theorem establishes the depth of
the network as a fundamental hyper-parameter.
The structure of a simple CNN is very similar to the structure of numerical meth-
ods that have been used for solving PDEs for decades, such as finite difference meth-
ods. Due to this structural similarity it is natural to expect that CNNs can approx-
imate functions in the same way as finite difference methods do it. This is an idea,
which will be explored thoroughly in this thesis. An example from literature that
utilizes this exact principle, is the 2022 paper by Kim and Choi [10]. The authors
show that it is possible to recreate the exact finite difference stencils used to simulate
a reaction-diffusion type PDE using simulation data and a CNN. Examples from this
paper will be explored in section 3.5.
Multi-fidelity techniques
The term multi-fidelity techniques refers to methods that operate with different fi-
delities. The word fidelity is a broad term, which describes the overall quality or
”truthness” of the model. The higher the fidelity, the closer to the truth the model
is. The fidelity of the model can be controlled in terms of grid-discretization, order
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
of the numerical method, and how well a model approximates the true system.
In general, high-fidelity (HF) models are more expensive to develop and simulate,
whereas low-fidelity (LF) models often are less accurate because of simplifications, but
they are usually also (much) less expensive. Going from a HF-model to an LF model,
one would compromise on physical laws and ”truthness” by reducing dimensionality,
coarsening the discretization grid and/or linearizing the model [11]. For example, a
simple way to construct an LF-model from a HF-model is to simply run the HF-model
in a coarser spatio-temporal resolution.
In a 2023 paper, Fernández-Godino [11] reviews and categorizes 157 papers on
multi-fidelity models from the year of 1987 all the way up to 2016. The MF-models
are categorized as one of two types: multi-fidelity surrogate models (MFSM) or multi-
fidelity hierarchical models (MFHM). The first is a MF-model that combines different
fidelities explicitly either as an additive, multiplicative or comprehensive (combina-
tion of both) model or as a space mapping (mapping from HF to LF-grid with some
function). The latter combines fidelities without requiring a certain model architec-
ture; instead, a criterion is used to optimize a process. Out of the 157 papers, 40%
deal with fidelity in terms of the physics of the model and 27% deal with numeri-
cal solution accuracy. The rest are categorized as numerical models, a combination
of simulation and experiments or ’other’. This shows that fidelity is a very broad
term. Focus of this thesis will be on MF-models concerned with numerical solution
accuracy. First, though, this literature study will take a broader view on data-driven
multi-fidelity methods before narrowing down to numerical solution accuracy-models.
Table 1.1 at the end of this section shows an overview of the articles mentioned.
According to [11], the most common types of MF-models are based on basis func-
tion regression (31%) and kriging (25%), where the latter is a method based on
Gaussian processes. Less than 1% of the papers are concerned with neural networks.
This shows that the use of neural networks for MF-models is a recent development
(since 2016), and that MF-models have existed in other forms for many years. The
earliest paper about an MF-model, which is reviewed by Fernándex-Godino, is the
1991 paper about Global-Local approximations (GLA)[12]. The proposed method
uses global, rather crude approximations of some engineering system (for instance, a
function) and uses a finer ’design point’ to compare and adjust the global approxi-
mation with. This is the first paper introducing a multiplication based MF-model.
Similarly, one of the first addition-based MF-models is presented in [13], which also
makes use of single point calculations for global approximations of the system (re-
sponse surface).
Neural network based MF-models
Since the development of the first data-driven MF-models, the models have been
extended with the use of neural networks, and there are many examples of neural
network-based multi-fidelity surrogate models. One early example is the 2019 pa-
per by Liu and Wang [14] on MF physics-constrained neural network for application
in materials modeling. The purpose of the model is to connect low-fidelity physics-
==PAGE:23==
1.2 A study on data-driven multi-level techniques
7
constrained model with high-fidelity data, which is sparse. Other papers solve the
same issue of sparsity of HF-data using neural networks, for instance, a PINN for
predicting viscosity of nanofluids [15], an MF-surrogate model for turbulent flows
[16], a transfer learning based multi-fidelity PINN [17] as well as the well-cited ’Com-
posite neural network that learns from multi-fidelity data’ by Meng and Karnidakis
[18]. The latter proposes one composite neural network that approximates HF-data
based on LF-data as well as another composite neural network that can be used for
PDE-identification. These networks all consist of feed-forward neural network struc-
tures. Even though, the authors show good results with their networks, this network
structure has some fundamental challenges. Most importantly, they usually do not
generalize very well. Incorporating physical models (eg. PINNs) does help, but it
does not do all of the job.
In a 2023 paper [19], the authors propose a recurrent neural network type called
long short-term memory (LSTM) networks for multi-fidelity modeling of time-dependent
PDEs. Their goal is to estimate time-parameter dependent HF quantities of interest,
where the amount of HF-simulation data is very limited and the LF-simulation data
is abundant. The authors show that the LSTM networks are able to detect the un-
derlying dynamics of the data, which allows the network to generalize well both with
respect to time and model parameters. They conclude that the networks ”not only
improve single-fidelity regression significantly, but also outperform the multi-fidelity
models based on feed-forward neural networks”.
Most of the above neural network-based models are concerned with the challenge
of sparsity of HF-data. This covers situations where experimental data is the sparse
HF-data, but also situations where HF-simulations are expensive and therefore have
to be limited. In the following, focus is on the latter; a simulation setting where the
desired HF-solution is a HF-simulation. Given some numerical solver for a PDE, it
is possible to vary the accuracy of the solution in mainly two ways: 1) changing the
order of the solution, for instance, choosing a higher order FD-discretization or 2)
changing the discretization step, e.g. the spatial grid or the time step. In the next
section, a closer look is taken on multi-grid and multi-resolution techniques, where
the spatial grid is determining the solution accuracy.
This is followed by a type
of multi-fidelity model that is concerned with correcting low-order solvers to higher
order solvers.
Multi-grid and multi-resolution techniques
Multi-grid techniques are concerned with combining coarse- and fine-grid models,
where the fine-grid models are the HF version. Similarly, multi-resolution techniques
combine low-resolution and high-resolution models.
The concept of resolution is
mostly relevant in the field of computer vision. Many of the data-driven methods,
which originate from computer vision, are currently being adopted in the field of scien-
tific computing, where models are being applied to a grid instead of a frame of pixels.
As an example, this applies to the CNNs, which first gained a lot of attention for
its properties in extracting features and recognizing digits from the famous MNIST
==PAGE:24==
8
1 Introduction
data set in the work by Lecun et al. [20]. Since then, it has been used extensively
in computer vision tasks. Recently, it has been applied more and more extensively
within the scientific computing field, which will be explored further in this thesis.
This means that the terminology is often being mixed up, but in this context, the
word multi-grid is preferred and used instead of multi-resolution.
In the article ’Learning data driven discretizations for partial differential equations’
from 2019 by Bar-Sinai et al. [21], the authors present a method for training a sub-grid
convolutional neural network with physical constraints such that it can be used for
course-grid modeling. The method uses fine-grid data for learning a specific numerical
time-integration on a coarser grid. This allows for the model to solve the given system
with a high accuracy but on a coarse grid, which ultimately can be used for faster
computations. In the article, the method is tested on the one-dimensional Burgers
equation, and the results are very promising with very low errors compared to other
numerical methods used on the coarse grid. It also generalizes well outside of the
training area due to the CNN being a local approximator. In 2021, the same research
group extended the method to also work for a two-dimensional turbulent flow system
[22].
More recent work from 2023 has taken the idea of modeling the time-integration on
sub-grids a step further. Liu, Ponce, Brunton and Kutz have developed a multiresolu-
tion convolutional autoencoder (MrCAE), which uses convolutional neural networks
and transfer learning on several grid levels [23]. The method starts at the coarsest
grid and trains a CNN. First, a simple CNN with only few layers is trained, but it is
widened until convergence. Then the CNN is transferred to a finer grid (deepening)
and used to train a new model. This is repeated until the desired resolution is reached.
The model proves to be better or comparable to a structurally similar model called
RED-Net [24] in terms of number of parameters, size of encodings and validation
error. The method is interesting because it attempts to optimize the training process
with use of transfer learning and by the dynamic structure of the network at the same
time as it utilizes a multi-grid hierarchical approach.
Model order corrections
In order to increase the accuracy of a LF-model, one idea is to decrease the error of a
numerical solver by correcting it using data from a high-order solver. One example is
the work by Manrique de Lara and Ferrer [25, 26], where a neural network is trained
on a high order discontinuous Galerkin solver to work as a corrective forcing when
simulating with a low order solver. The result is a corrected, low-order solver with
an accuracy, which is similar to that of the high-order solver. They test this method
first on the Burgers equation [25] and later on the 3D incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations [26]. In both cases, the authors successfully train a feed-forward neural
network to correct a low-order solver, and in the case for the Navier-Stokes equations,
they succeed for all Reynold’s numbers that they test on, that is, for all cases with
different occurrences of turbulence.
==PAGE:25==
1.2 A study on data-driven multi-level techniques
9
In a different paper from 2023 by Kossaczká, Erhrhardt and Günther [27], the
authors train a CNN to correct a low order explicit solver to a higher order error.
They test their method, called Deep FDM, on the heat equation, a linear diffusion-
convection equation and a finance problem called the European Call option with good
results.
They connect the network to error analysis known for explicit numerical
methods, and they show that their network generalizes well outside of the training
region. Their work is recreated and investigated in section 4.2 and the work of both
[27] and [25, 26] has inspired the ideas of chapter 5.
Table 1.1: Overview of articles mentioned in the literature study. The ’conservative’ methods are
methods that are not based on neural networks.
Type
Sparsity of
HF-data
Multi-
grid
Solution
accuracy
Conservative
All
[12],[13]
NN-based
Feed-forward
[14],[15],[16],[17],[18]
[25],[26]
LSTM
[19]
CNN
[21],[22],[23]
[27]
Motivation for the thesis
As already presented, focus of this thesis is on CNNs for creating multi-fidelity mod-
els for PDEs.
This literature study shows that CNNs have mostly been used for
multi-grid methods.
In the area of model order corrections, there are only a few
investigations of CNNs for this purpose. Therefore, this thesis takes a step in this
direction. The main idea is to utilize the structure of the CNN to make connections
to numerical methods known from scientific computing, as well as utilizing tools for
analyzing the networks.
Summary
This chapter introduced the thesis and state-of-the-art methods in the area of data-
driven multi-fidelity techniques. The key take-aways from the literature study are:
• Data-driven models have existed for many years and can take many forms. In
this thesis, focus is on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Already in the
late 80s, a paper by Hornik, Stinchcombe and White establishes neural networks
as universal approximators, and much later, in 2020, also CNNs were established
as a universal approximator for an arbitrary depth.
• Multi-fidelity (MF) models have existed since the 1980s, but it is only recently
that neural networks have been used to combine different fidelities. ’Fidelity’
refers to a model’s ’truthness’ and the idea of combining fidelities is to allow for
==PAGE:26==
10
1 Introduction
more eﬀicient and accurate models. The neural network-based papers that are
related to combining few high-fidelity data points with abundant low-fidelity
data all use feed-forward or recurrent neural networks.
• Looking at papers about combining different grid levels, the usage of CNNs is
more common due to their previous use in image recognition tasks and thereby
their ability to extract local features. Two examples are mentioned that both
seek to use a CNN for obtaining a high resolution from a low-resolution starting
point. In one case, physical constraints are combined with a relatively shallow
CNN, whereas in the other case, transfer learning and a gradual deepening of
the network are used.
• Focus of this thesis is on correcting a low-fidelity solver with use of a neural
network that fits to the error term of the solver. Two papers, which do exactly
that, are presented. In one, a ’black-box’ feed-forward network is correcting a
low order solver by fitting the network to the error compared to a high-order
solver. The other is a proof-of-concept paper to show that the local structure
of the CNN ensures generalization outside the training domain, as well as good
general performance.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
Throughout this thesis, three different test PDEs will be used for testing the methods
presented: the heat, advection and Burgers equation. In this section, the PDEs will
be presented together with their important characteristics as well as the context for
their use. Given a set of initial conditions, solutions to the PDEs will be introduced
and simulated to provide an understanding of their dynamics. For the purpose of this
chapter it is useful to be acquainted with general theory on partial differential equa-
tions such as categorization as elliptic, hyperbolic and/or parabolic as well as different
types of boundary conditions (Dirichlet and Neumann). Appendix B.1 summarizes
this theory.
In general, this thesis investigates general initial value problems (IVP)s of the
form:
ut = f(u, t),
t > t0,
(2.1a)
u(t0) = η.
(2.1b)
For the PDEs considered in this thesis, u is a function of x and t.
2.1
Linear test PDEs
2.1.1
The heat equation
The heat equation is an example of a parabolic PDE, which is given by:
ut = κ∇2u,
(2.2)
where ∇2 denotes the Laplacian operator and κ is called the diffusion constant. This
corresponds to the general IVP (2.1), with f(u, t) = κ∇2u. If u is a function of the
Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z), we have
ut = κ(uxx + uyy + uzz).
The heat equation is also called the diffusion equation, since it describes diffusive
properties. The solution, u, to this equation could, for example, describe the density
of a substance diluted in a liquid and according to the equation the substance would
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Theory
diffuse from areas with high density to areas with low density. The equation also
describes heat diffusion and in this case u represents the density of thermal energy
(which is proportional to the temperature), and κ is the heat conduction coeﬀicient
of the material.
One can use Fourier analysis to obtain solutions to linear PDEs or to analyze the
behavior of the PDE. This analysis is performed in appendix B.2, and the result will
be summarized here. With the Fourier transform of the true solution u(x, t) to ˆu(ξ, t),
one obtains the solution in the Fourier domain:
ˆu(ξ, t) = e−κξ2tˆη(ξ),
(2.3)
where ˆη(ξ) is the Fourier transform of the initial value function u(x, 0) = η(x). Thus,
according to the above solution, each of the Fourier modes, ˆu(ξ, t) will decay expo-
nentially fast, with a speed depending on the wave number, starting with the initial
value, hence, the diffusive properties of the heat equation. Because of the exponen-
tial decay of the solution, the equation can give rise to numerical diﬀiculties such as
stiffness [28].
Figure 2.1 shows the solution to the heat equation with initial function
η(x, 0) = c + a sin(bπx) on the domain −π ≤x ≤π. The solution to the equation
with the given conditions is u(x, t) = c + ae−b2π2t sin(bπx). Boundary conditions are
given by u(a, t) and u(b, t). The solution up to time t = 1 is shown. The figure shows
both a 3D representation of the solution as well as a projection of the solution into
the (x,t)-plane given by a heat-map. The heat-map is shown here to familiarize the
reader with this type of plot, since it will be used extensively later in the thesis, due
to its usefulness when displaying very small values. It is seen from the figure that the
solution to the heat equation expresses the diffusive behavior; the initial values are
smoothed with time.
-3.14 -1.89 -0.63 0.62 1.88 3.14
x
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
t
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
x
2
0
2
t
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
u(x,t)
1
0
1
Figure 2.1: Solution to the heat equation given initial condition η(x, 0) = c + a sin(bπx).
Left: contour plot of the solution. Right: surface plot of the solution.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Linear test PDEs
13
2.1.2
The linear advection equation
The advection equation is an example of a hyperbolic PDE, which is given by:
ut + aux = 0.
(2.4)
This corresponds to the general IVP (2.1), with f(u, t) = −aux. A physical example
that is described by this equation is the translation of the concentration of a substance
in a pipe, where x describes the distance along the pipe. The concentration in a cross-
section is constant. If the substance is simply carried along with some flow through the
pipe with a constant velocity a, the density can be described by the linear advection
equation. Considering the Cauchy problem, and some initial value u(x, 0) = η(x),
one would simply expect the initial function to be shifted with velocity a, such that
the solution is:
u(x, t) = η(x −at).
(2.5)
Thus, the magnitude of u across the domain does not change as opposed to the heat
equation, but the concentrations are simply shifted.
This can also be verified by
Fourier analysis, however, this is omitted since the analysis of such a derivation is the
same.
Figure 2.2 shows the solution to the advection equation with initial function
η(x, 0) = sin(2πx) on the domain −π ≤x ≤π and boundary conditions given
by η(−π, t) and η(π, t). The solution to the equation with the given conditions is
u(x, t) = sin(2π(x −at)). The figure shows the solution for a = 1. Compared to
previously, there is no damping of the initial values. Instead, the initial waves are
shifted (advected) towards the right with time. The direction of the advection of the
waves depends on the sign of a. If a < 0, the waves will be shifted towards the left.
-3.14 -1.89 -0.63 0.62 1.88 3.14
x
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
t
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
x
2
0
2
t
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
u(x,t)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Figure 2.2: Solution to the advection equation given initial condition η(x, 0) = sin(2πx).
Left: contour plot of the solution. Right: surface plot of the solution.
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Theory
2.2
Non-linear test PDE
The linear test PDEs from the previous section are common test equations in litera-
ture, but their applications in real life cases are limited due to their simple structure.
The diffusive and advective properties are, though, found in many, more complicated,
PDEs, and many PDEs even combine the two properties, and therefore fall in the
category of mixed equations.
This thesis also uses a non-linear test PDE that is also very simple in nature (in
many cases too simple), but which also contains the diffusive and advective properties.
2.2.1
Burgers equation
Consider a non-linear PDE referred to as Burgers equation.
Burgers equation is
named after the Dutch physicist, Johannes M. Burgers. The equation is one-dimensional
and given by:
ut + uux = vuxx,
(2.6)
where v is the diffusion constant. This corresponds to the general IVP (2.1), with
f(u, t) = −uux + vuxx. Burgers equation is a simplified version of the famous and
widely used Navier-Stokes’ equations. Burgers equation is comprised of a non-linear
advection term (uux) and a linear diffusion term (vuxx).
It turns out that the Burgers equation can be transformed to the heat equation,
and through this transformation, it is therefore possible to find an analytical solution
for a certain initial value and boundary conditions. The transformation is named
after the mathematicians Julian Cole [29] and Eberhard Hopf [30], and is therefore
called the Cole-Hopf transformation. To illustrate the transformation, consider the
PDE (2.6), with conditions:
u(x, 0) = sin(πx),
0 ≤x ≤2,
(2.7a)
u(0, t) = u(1, t) = 0,
t > 0.
(2.7b)
Now introduce the transformation: u = ϕx, which means, ϕx =
R x
0 u(z)dz.
By
insertion in the equation:
ϕxt + ϕxϕxx = vϕxxx,
ϕt + ϕ2
x
2 = vϕxx
(integration wrt. x).
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Non-linear test PDE
15
Now, further transform: ϕ = −2v log(ψ), which means ψ = exp(
ϕ
−2v). Upon insertion:
−2v
ψ ψt +
(−2v
ψ ψx)2
2
= v
 
−2v
ψ ψxx + 2v
ψx
ψ
2!
,
−2vψt + 2v2ψ2
x
ψ
= −2v2ψxx + 2v2 ψx
ψ ,
(Multiplication with ψ),
−ψt + v ψ2
x
ψ = −vψxx + v ψ2
x
ψ ,
(Division by 2v),
ψt = vψxx.
Hence, we have arrived at the heat equation in a transformed domain. The transfor-
mation translated directly from u to ψ is: u = −2vψx
ψ . The initial condition is:
ϕ0 =
Z x
0
u0(z)dz =
Z x
0
sin(πz)dz = −−1 + cos(πx)
x
,
ψ0 = exp

−ϕ0
2v

= exp

−1
2v

−−1 + cos(πx)
π

= exp

−1 −cos(πx)
2vπ

,
(2.8)
and the boundary conditions are on the form of Neumann conditions:
ψx(0, t) = ψx(2, t) = 0.
(2.9)
Thus, one can transform u to ψ and solve the heat equation and then transform back
to u in order to obtain the solution. This holds both numerically and analytically.
Using this, an analytical solution to the equation with conditions (2.7) can be derived
using a Fourier series as:
u(x, t) = 2πv
P∞
n=1 an exp(−n2π2vt)n sin(nπx)
a0 + P∞
n=1 an exp(−n2π2vt) cos(nπx),
(2.10)
for a0 =
R 1
0 exp(−(2πv)−1(1 −cos(πx)))dx and
an =
R 1
0 exp(−(2πv)−1(1 −cos(πx))) cos(nπx)dx for n = (1, 2, 3, ...). This solution
comes from [31]. Using this expression for the solution with finite sums up to N = 15
and for v = 0.1, the figure 2.3 has been produced. One can see from the figure, that
Burgers equation exhibits diffusive and advective properties, since the initial values
are damped with time and advected towards the middle at the same time. Compared
to the advection equation, which is linear, it is visible that the advection in Burgers
equation is non-linear, since the crest and trough of the initial sine-curve are shifted
towards the middle of the domain while diffusing.
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Theory
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
x
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
t
0.5
0.0
0.5
x
2
0
2
t
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
u(x,t)
0.5
0.0
0.5
Figure 2.3: Solution to Burgers equation given initial and boundary conditions (2.7). Left: contour
plot of the solution. Right: surface plot of the solution.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter introduces the methodology of the thesis. It is organized as follows:
In section 3.1, numerical methods for solving the test PDEs are introduced. This
is followed by stability analyses of the methods in section 3.2 and an introduction
to higher order methods in section 3.3. In 3.4, focus is turned towards CNNs with
an introduction to their structure. In section 3.5, the connection between numerical
methods and CNNs is explored and exemplified. Finally, a general framework for
multi-fidelity models is proposed in section 3.6. This serves as a basis for the CNN-
based multi-fidelity models, which are explored in chapters 4 and 5.
3.1
Numerical methods for solving PDEs
PDEs can be solved numerically in a variety of ways such as using an finite difference
method (FDM), finite volume method (FVM) [32, 33] or finite element method (FEM)
[34]. Focus of this thesis is on FDMs. When solving PDEs numerically, there can
be several sources of errors, for instance, round-off errors due to limited machine
precision, and, obviously, the errors stemming from the numerical approximation of
the true solution. Regarding the latter, it is possible to quantify the error of the
approximation using Taylor series expansions. This will be introduced in this section,
because the fundamental idea of the thesis is to reduce this error using CNNs.
3.1.1
Finite Difference Approximations
Finite difference (FD) approximations are used to approximate derivatives, and they
form the basis of FDMs. Therefore, this section presents the relevant theory behind
FD approximations. The section is based on theory presented in [28].
3.1.1.1
First derivatives
Assume a smooth function u(x). The first derivative of u with respect to the variable
x can be approximated using an FD approximation. One such approximation around
a point ¯x is given by the central difference:
u′(¯x) ≈Du(¯x) = u(¯x + h) −u(¯x −h)
2h
.
(3.1)
==PAGE:34==
18
3 Methodology
This formula comes from calculating the slope of the line going through the two
points u(¯x + h) and u(¯x −h). For h →0, we have Du(¯x) →u′(¯x) Many examples
of FD approximations exist, such as a right-sided approximation.
They are each
characterized by a set of coeﬀicients that can be derived using, for instance, the
method of undetermined coeﬀicients. In the case of (3.1), the coeﬀicient is 1
2.
The FD approximations have truncation errors that can be quantified. This is
done by considering the Taylor expansions of the terms u(¯x + h) and u(¯x −h):
u(¯x + h) = u(¯x) + hu′(¯x) + 1
2h2u′′(¯x) + 1
6h3u′′′(¯x) + O(h4),
(3.2a)
u(¯x −h) = u(¯x) −hu′(¯x) + 1
2h2u′′(¯x) −1
6h3u′′′(¯x) + O(h4).
(3.2b)
Inserting these into (3.1) yields:
Du(¯x) = u(¯x + h) −u(¯x −h)
2h
= 1
2h

2hu′(¯x) + 2
6h3u′′′(¯x) + O(h5)

= u′(¯x) + 1
6h2u′′′(¯x) + O(h4).
It is seen that all the terms with odd-valued powers of h cancel out, leaving just the
even terms. Now, the truncation error can be quantified as the difference between
the FD approximation and the true derivative function:
τ = Du(¯x) −u′(¯x) = 1
6h2u′′′(¯x) + O(h4)
(3.3)
Eq. (3.3) shows that the truncation error of the central difference approximation is
O(h2), and the numerical approximation is said to have second order accuracy.
From this, it is clear that all error terms will be on the form chpu(q). The choice
of stencil defines the value of c, for instance, in the case of the stencil (3.1), we
saw that some of the constants were zero, and thereby eliminated terms from the
truncation error. The error terms further depend on the function, u, and the mesh
size, h. By decreasing h, one can decrease the error, which is a fundamental part
of the challenges of scientific computing. When the mesh-size, h, is decreased, the
computational expense increases as it increases the number of nodes in the mesh and
hence the work. So it is crucial to find a good balance between decreasing the error
without increasing the amount of computations too much.
3.1.1.2
Second derivatives
Similarly, there exist FD approximations to second and higher order derivatives, and
these are all well known in literature. The central difference approximation of the
second derivative is:
u′′(¯x) ≈D2u(¯x) = u(¯x −h) −2u(¯x) + u(¯x + h)
h2
.
(3.4)
It can be shown with the same method as above that the truncation error is also of
second order with the leading term being:
1
12h2u′′′′(¯x).
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Numerical methods for solving PDEs
19
3.1.2
Solving PDEs with FDMs
Partial differential equations can be solved using an FDM. The FDM is based on the
above theory on finite difference approximations. In this section, it will be demon-
strated how the time-dependent test PDEs can be solved using an FDM. For com-
pleteness, appendix C.1 shows how to numerically solve a time-independent PDE,
known as the Poisson problem. First, it is shown how the continuous state variable
u can be discretized. This thesis assumes a uniform discretization grid.
3.1.2.1
Method of lines
A time-dependent PDE can be discretized in time and space using the method of
lines (MOL). In the MOL, the space-dimension is discretized first, and then a nu-
merical integration with respect to time is applied.
The discretization results in
a transformation from the continuous state variable u(x, t) to a discrete state vari-
able, U i, where i indicates the time step.
U i consists of the spatial grid points
[U i
0, U i
1, ..., U i
m, U i
m+1]. In this case, the grid has m interior points with grid spacing
h =
1
m+1. The boundary conditions define the end-points, U0 and Um+1. In the next
section, the MOL is used to solve the heat equation numerically.
3.1.2.2
Solving the heat equation
Consider the one-dimensional heat equation:
ut = κuxx,
for a ≤x ≤b,
(3.5)
with initial and Dirichlet boundary conditions:
u(x, 0) = η(x),
(3.6a)
u(a, t) = b1(t) for t > 0,
(3.6b)
u(b, t) = b2(t) for t > 0.
(3.6c)
Now, using the MOL and considering the j’th interior point, the discretization of the
equation using (3.4) is:
U ′′
j (t) = κ
h2 (Uj−1 −2Uj + Uj+1) , for j = 1, ..., m,
(3.7)
where the prime denotes differentiation with respect to time. This shows that by
discretizing the spatial dimension, a system of m coupled ODEs is obtained. Now,
the equation can be integrated with respect to time using a numerical method for an
ODE, such as the forward Euler method. In general, for an ODE: x′(t) = f(x), the
forward Euler method is characterized by the following discretization at time step i:
xi+1 −xi
k
= f(xi),
xi+1 = xi + kf(xi),
==PAGE:36==
20
3 Methodology
where k is the time step size and given some initial value, x0 = η. Transferring this
idea to eq. (3.7), the fully discretized equation reads:
U i+1
j
= U i
j + kκ
h2
 U i
j−1 −2U i
j + U i
j+1

, for j = 1, ..., m and i = 0, ..., T,
(3.8)
where superscripts denote time step and subscripts denote space grid point and T is
the number of time steps. The time step size will be denoted k, whereas the spatial
grid spacing is denoted h.
This choice of discretization schemes in space and time is known as the forward-
time-central-space (FTCS) since it uses a first order forward-difference scheme for
time integration and a second order central-difference scheme for space integration.
Other schemes can also be used and the choice of scheme depends on the type of
problem. In appendix C.2, the spatial order of the scheme is shown numerically.
The order of the scheme can be shown analytically using a Taylor series expansion
around the point (x, t) for the points u(x, t + k), u(x + h, t) and u(x −h, t):
u(x, t + k) = u(x, t) + kut + k2
2 utt + ...
u(x + h, t) = u(x, t) + hux + h2
2 uxx + h3
6 uxxx + h4
24uxxxx + ...
u(x −h, t) = u(x, t) −hux + h2
2 uxx −h3
6 uxxx −h4
24uxxxx + ...
These are inserted into the FTCS scheme written in terms of the true function u(x, t):
1
k (u(x, t + k) −u(x, t)) = 1
h2 (u(x −h, t) −2u(x, t) + u(x + h, t)).
The truncation error, by subtracting the left-hand-side from the right-hand-side and
inserting the Taylor series expansions, is:
τ = 1
k (u + kut + k2
2 utt + k3
6 uttt −u + O(k4)) −

uxx + h2
12uxxxx + h4
360u(6x) + O(h6)

= ut + k
2utt + k2
6 uttt + O(k3) −

uxx + h2
12uxxxx + h4
360u(6x) + O(h6)

.
From the definition of the heat equation, we have ut = uxx, which simplifies the
expression. Differentiating the heat equation with respect to t yields: utt = uxxt =
utxx = uxxxx, which further simplifies the equation. Similarly: utt = uttxx = u(6x).
In the end, this yields the truncation error:
τ =
k
2 −h2
12

uxxxx +
k2
6 −h4
360

u(6x) + O(h6 + k3).
This shows that the formal order of the FTCS-method is O(k + h2).
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Numerical methods for solving PDEs
21
3.1.2.3
Solving the advection equation
For reasons described in section 3.2 and appendix C.3, it turns out that a FTCS-
scheme is unstable for the advection equation.
Instead, other methods should be
used.
In the case of the advection equation, it is possible to utilize the fact that the
initial values are shifted in one direction with time. As shown previously, for a > 0,
the values are shifted to the right. In that case, one can choose to only take informa-
tion from grid-points to the left of a certain grid point, resulting in an asymmetric
method, called the upwind method. For example, this could be the one-sided first-
order method:
U n+1
j
= U n
j −ak
h (U n
j −U n
j−1),
for a > 0,
(3.9a)
U n+1
j
= U n
j −ak
h (U n
j+1 −U n
j ),
for a < 0.
(3.9b)
The method is first order in both space and time. In order to obtain second order
accuracy, one can use the Beam-Warming method:
U n+1
j
= U n
j −ak
2h(3U n
j −4U n
j−1 + U n
j−2) + a2k2
2h2 (U n
j −2U n
j−1 + U n
j−2),
(3.10a)
U n+1
j
= U n
j −ak
2h(−3U n
j + 4U n
j−1 −U n
j−2) + a2k2
2h2 (U n
j −2U n
j+1 + U n
j+2),
(3.10b)
where (a) is for a > 0, and (b) is for a < 0. The scheme consists of a one-sided
approximation of the first derivative as well as a one-sided approximation of the
second derivative. The second derivative is introduced due to Taylor expansions of
the PDE. The derivations will not be presented here but can be found in chapter 10
of [28].
A different scheme, which is second order accurate in space is the Lax-Wendroff
method:
U n+1
j
= U n
j −ak
2h(U n
j+1 −U n
j−1) + a2k2
2h2 (U n
j−1 −2U n
j + U n
j+1).
(3.11)
This scheme is similar to the Beam-Warming method, but it consists of central ap-
proximations to the derivatives instead of one-sided approximations. Both the Lax-
Wendroff and the Beam-Warming methods are stable under some conditions that are
presented in section 3.2. In appendix C.2, the spatial orders of the Beam-Warming
and Lax-Wendroff schemes are shown numerically.
3.1.2.4
Solving Burgers equation
As presented in section 2.2, Burgers equation can be transformed to the heat equation.
Thus, upon transforming the initial values, one can solve the equation using the
methods for solving the heat equation presented in section 3.1.2.2 and then transform
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Methodology
it back to the original domain. For example, given the initial value u(x, 0) = sin(πx),
the initial value in the transformed domain is given by (2.8). Discretizing this onto
a spatial grid one can simply use the MOL-integration as prestented for the heat
equation in section 3.1.2.2, for instance, using the FTCS-scheme.
For each time integration step, one can transform the solution back to the original
domain by u = −2vψx
ψ . For this, a second order central difference discretization for a
first derivative as presented by (3.1) can be used to obtain ψx.
For the Neumann boundary conditions (2.9) in the transformed domain, we can
handle the boundaries of the domain in a smart way. Consider an approximation to
the boundary condition ψx = 0 on the boundary x = 0:
ψx(0, t) = ψ(0 + h, t) −ψ(0 −h, t)
2h
= 0,
⇒
ψ(0 + h, t) = ψ(0 −h, t).
This comes from a second order central difference approximation of the first derivative.
The last equality can be utilized when considering the approximation of the heat
equation (since we are considering the transformed domain) on the boundary:
ψn+1
0
= ψn
0 + vk
h2 (ψn
−1 −2ψn
0 + ψn
1 ),
ψn+1
0
= ψn
0 + vk
h2 (2ψn
1 −2ψn
0 ).
Hence, resulting in a specific scheme on the left boundary, which consists only of
grid points inside the domain. Similarly, the right boundary will be ψn+1
m+1 = ψn
m+1 +
vk
h2 (2ψn
m −2ψn
m+1).
A more straight-forward method for solving the Burgers equation is to directly
discretize the equation. A FTCS-scheme around the jth gridpoint is given by:
U n+1
j
= U n
j −Uj
k
2h(U n
j+1 −U n
j−1) + vk
h2 (U n
j−1 −2U n
j + U n
j+1).
(3.12)
This scheme is second order accurate in space and first order accurate in time.
In appendix C.2, the spatial order of the methods are shown both for solving
Burgers directly and for the transformed Burgers method.
3.2
Stability of numerical methods
There are different ways of analyzing the stability and convergence properties of a
numerical method. For instance, it is possible to use theory on stability regions of
the time-integration method from ODEs to show stability of the FTCS method for
PDEs. Another way is to use von Neumann analysis, which will lead to the same
conclusion. For this thesis, a von Neumann analysis has been performed for the two
linear equations, the heat and advection equations. This analysis is left out, but it
can be found in appendix C.3. The key result of the analysis is a stability criterion
which will be presented here.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Higher order methods
23
3.2.1
Heat equation
According to the von Neumann analysis, the FTCS scheme is stable under the condi-
tion:
kκ
h2 ≤1
2.
It is natural to express this requirement as a relation between the grid spacing h and
the time-discretization step k:
k ≤1
2κh2.
Hence, when implementing the FTCS-method, the above restriction on k will be
employed.
3.2.2
Advection equation
In appendix C.3 it is shown that the FTCS-scheme is unconditionally unstable for
the advection equation. Therefore, it is more feasible to use other methods such as
the upwind method (3.9). According to a von Neumann analysis, the upwind method
is stable under the condition:
0 ≤ak
h ≤1.
For a > 0, the requirement can be expressed in terms of the relation between h and
k:
k ≤h
a,
The requirement, ak
h ≤C, is also known as the CFL-condition named after Courant,
Friedrichs and Lewy [35, 36]. The number Cr = ak
h is called the Courant number.
For the Beam-Warming and Lax-Wendroff methods, the stability requirements for
the explicit time stepping are [28]:
0 ≤ak
h ≤2
(Beam-Warming, a>0),
−2 ≤ak
h ≤0
(Beam-Warming, a<0),
ak
h
 ≤1
(Lax-Wendroff).
3.3
Higher order methods
This section introduces the higher order methods used for the HF-models. In general,
the order is increased by increasing the width of the stencil for the spatial discretiza-
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Methodology
tion. A wider stencil means the inclusion of more grid points which, ultimately, means
more information and a lower error.
3.3.1
Heat equation
A higher order method for solving the heat equation is the FTCS-scheme, where a
fourth order FD-method is used for the space differentiation:
U n+1
j
= U n
j + kκ
h2

−1
12U n
j−2 + 4
3U n
j−1 −5
2U n
j + 4
3U n
j+1 −1
12U n
j+2

.
(3.13)
A von Neumann analysis on this scheme will shows stability requirements.
This
analysis is performed in appendix C.4. The result is that the method is stable for
k
h2 ≤2
5.
Thus, a stability requirement for the fourth order solution is k ≤
2
5h2. Appendix
C.4 also shows that the numerical, spatial order of the method is O(h4) for k = ch4,
which is the strict requirement used for implementation of this higher order method.
3.3.2
Advection equation
A higher-order method for solving the advection equation can be obtained by using
4th order central differences in the Lax-Wendroff method. The method is then:
U n+1
j
=U n
j −ak
h ( 1
12U n
j−2 −2
3U n
j−1 + 2
3U n
j+1 −1
12U n
j+2)
+ a2k2
2h2 (−1
12U n
j−2 + 4
3U n
j−1 −5
2U n
j + 4
3U n
j+1 −1
12U n
j+2).
Appendix C.4 shows that the numerical, spatial order of the method is O(h4) for
k = ch2, which is the requirement used for implementation of this higher order
method.
3.3.3
Burgers equation
A higher order method for solving Burgers equation can be achieved by transforming
using a fourth order scheme for the derivative, as well as using the fourth order
method for solving the heat equation, (3.13). In this case, the Neumann Boundary
conditions once again have to be considered. Using a fourth order approximation to
the first derivative on the left boundary in the transformed domain, yields:
ψx =
1
12ψ(0 −2h, t) −2
3ψ(0 −h, t) + 2
3ψ(0 + h, t) −1
12ψ(0 + 2h, t)
h
= 0.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Convolutional Neural Networks
25
For ψ(0 −2h, t) = ψ(0 + 2h, t) and ψ(0 −h, t) = ψ(0 + h, t), this equation is true.
Inserting this into the fourth order approximation of the left boundary yields:
ψn+1
0
= ψn
0 + vh
h2 (−1
12ψn
−2 + 4
3ψn
−1 −5
2ψn
0 + 4
3ψn
1 −1
12ψn
2 ),
= ψn
0 + vh
h2 (−2
12ψn
2 + 8
3ψn
1 −5
2ψn
0 ).
Now, the scheme on the boundary only consists of grid points inside the domain. The
grid point ψ1 also has to be handled, since its scheme also consists of a grid point
outside the domain.
ψn+1
1
= ψn
1 + vh
h2 (−1
12ψn
−1 + 4
3ψn
0 −5
2ψn
1 + 4
3ψn
2 −1
12ψn
3 ),
= ψn
1 + vh
h2 (4
3ψn
0 −
 1
12 + 5
2

ψn
1 + 4
3ψn
2 −1
12ψn
3 ).
Similarly, on the right boundary, the scheme is: ψn+1
m+1 = ψn
m+1 + vh
h2 (−2
12ψn
m−1 +
8
3ψn
m −5
2ψn
m+1), and next to the boundary the scheme is: ψn+1
m
= ψn
m + vh
h2 ( 4
3ψn
m+1 −
  1
12 + 5
2

ψn
m + 4
3ψn
m−1 −1
12ψn
m−2).
Appendix C.4 shows that the numerical, spatial order of the method is O(h4) for
k = ch4, which is the strict requirement used for implementation of this higher order
method.
3.3.4
Overview of numerical methods
Table 3.1 shows an overview of the methods that have been presented in the previous
sections together with their orders and the discretization requirements that they are
implemented with. For later tests, the two shown methods for the heat equation are
used, the upwind method and fourth order Lax-Wendroff for the advection equation
are used, and for Burgers, the direct second order and transformed fourth order
methods are used. This will be relevant in chapter 5, where the lower order method
is corrected by a CNN to approach the higher order method to create a multi-fidelity
model.
3.4
Convolutional Neural Networks
This section introduces convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which is the network
structure used for this thesis. In the past decade, CNNs have gained a lot of atten-
tion for their performance in, among others, computer vision and natural language
processing tasks. The convolutional layers of the CNNs are responsible for extract-
ing local features, which makes the network especially well suited for such tasks [37].
More recently, CNNs have also been used for modeling dynamical systems and, more
specifically, PDEs.
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Methodology
Table 3.1: Overview of methods
Equation
Numerical method
Order
Discretization requirement
Heat
FT1-CS2
O(h2)
k ≈h2
FT1-CS4
O(h4)
k ≈h4
Advection
Upwind (T1, S1)
O(h)
k ≈h
Beam-Warming (T2, S2)
O(h2)
k ≈h
Lax-Wendroff (T2, S2)
O(h2)
k ≈h
Lax-Wendroff (T2, S4)
O(h4)
k ≈h2
Burgers
transformed FT1-CS2
O(h2)
k ≈h2
direct FT1-CS2
O(h2)
k ≈h2
transformed FT1-CS4
O(h4)
k ≈h4
direct FT1-CS4
O(h4)
k ≈h4
A CNN is a type of feed-forward neural network that consists of convolutional
layers and, in some cases, pooling layers and fully connected layers. Activation func-
tions can also be applied between layers. The kernels used in the convolution layers
are obtained through training the network on data. Complex CNNs can consist of
many layers including pooling layers that decrease or increase the dimension of the
input, for example in the form of a UNet [38]. In the case of a simple CNN with only
one convolutional layer and no pooling layers, there is a resemblance to the finite dif-
ference kernel, seen in the previous section. Due to this feature, CNNs are expected
to be scalable (computational effort increases linearly or less with input dimension)
in the same way as finite difference methods are. This is the reason for the choice of
CNN as the preferred network type in this thesis.
In this section, the important features of CNNs are presented to understand their
great potential when using data-driven methods for solving PDEs. This forms a basis
for investigating the use of CNNs for learning finite difference stencils.
3.4.1
Understanding CNNs
The fundamental part of a CNN is the convolution, which gives the CNN its feature
extraction properties. Mathematically, a convolution is defined by:
(f ∗g)(t) =
Z ∞
−∞
f(τ)g(t −τ)dτ.
Thus, it is an integral of a product of two functions, where one is reversed and shifted.
The discrete version of the convolution on a finite domain of width 2M is given by
the summation:
(f ∗g)[n] =
M
X
m=−M
f[m]g[n −m].
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Convolutional Neural Networks
27
In practice, a discrete convolution operation can be visualized by flipping and sliding
a convolution kernel across a domain, and multiplying and summing the overlapping
entries. The sliding can be performed with different strides, that is, one could choose
to skip entries when sliding (stride above 1), or they could slide over all entries (stride
of 1). This thesis only considers strides of size 1. The convolutions will be visualized
with an example below.
In the convolution layers of a CNN, a cross-correlation operation1 is performed
using a kernel of a chosen size, often in the range of 3 to 5. For a 2-dimensional
input, the kernel could, for example, be a quadratic matrix of size 3 by 3. The cross-
correlation operation is illustrated in figure 3.1. In order to maintain the dimension
of the input arrays, zero-padding is applied, which is visualized by the gray boxes
surrounding the input image. In a certain convolutional layer, the same kernel is
used for the entire input channel. The kernel weights (visualized in the blue box in
the figure) are learned through training the CNN, and thus, these are the parameters
that will depend on the training data.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
2
1
1
0
0
2
2
1
1
2
0
0
1
2
2
3
3
0
0
3
3
1
2
3
0
0
4
4
4
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
9
Input image
Output image
Convolution
Kernel
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the convolution operation. The input image has been zero-padded.
The application of activation functions between layers has several purposes. First
of all, it is a way of introducing non-linearity into the network, since the activation
function itself can be nonlinear. Second, some activation functions ensure that a limit
is put to the magnitudes of the outputs from the layer. For instance, the activation
function a(x) = tanh(x) = ex−e−x
ex+e−x has an S-shape with values between -1 and 1. This
means that if this function is applied between layers, the output values are restricted
to be between these two values. Other widely used activation functions include the
Softmax and the ReLU-function (Rectified Linear Unit).
1Even though the name indicates that CNNs should be using convolution operations, they are,
in practice, implemented as cross-correlation operations.
Though, since the weights are adapted
through an optimization process, this makes no difference, since a convolution is simply a cross-
correlation operation with a flipped kernel.
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Methodology
Considering the computational efforts of using CNNs, one can consider the number
of floating point operations (FLOPs or useful FLOPs): One convolution operation
for a kernel of size K requires K multiplications and K −1 additions, and therefore
has a total time complexity of 2K −1. Performing convolutions on a one-dimensional
domain of size N, therefore requires N · (2K −1) floating point operations, resulting
in a time complexity of O(N · K). Having more than one convolutional layer will
not change the asymptotic time complexity, if the number of layers is limited. The
same holds for additions of transfer functions, since these scale with N. If the kernel
size is considered constant (limited), the asymptotic time complexity simply is O(N).
Therefore, the CNNs are said to scale linearly with N and are therefore very eﬀicient
in terms of increasing the spatial domain.
The key take-away from this section is that CNNs with only convolutional layers
(no fully-connected layers) are local approximators. The convolution kernels are used
on the entire domain, which means that the network (if successful) is able to extract
local features that are valid everywhere. Therefore, the network structure is expected
to be generalizable, which will be explored later in this thesis.
3.5
Connection between numerical methods and
CNNs
In section 3.1.2, it was seen how PDEs can be discretized using the method of lines
and a set of finite difference schemes for time and space. This could, for example, be
the FTCS-scheme. In the case of the heat-equation, the FTCS-scheme corresponds
to performing a convolution operation2 on the vector U = [U1, U2, ..., Um] with the
convolution kernel kκ
h2 [1, −2, 1]. This means, that in order to move forward in time,
one can simply slide this kernel across the spatial domain, perform the convolution,
and add to the previous value.
3.5.1
Convolutions for time-integration
Considering the FTCS scheme (3.8), the heat equation can be integrated using con-
volution operations in a PyTorch environment. Figure 3.2 visualizes a convolution
with the FTCS-kernel for a second order spatial derivative for h = k = κ = 1. In
order to have the same output dimension as input dimension, the input array has to
be padded, which is illustrated by the gray boxes. Note: the choice of padding dra-
matically influences how the boundary conditions are imposed. This will be discussed
further in section 3.5.3.
Thus, in order to describe the time update of the FTCS-scheme (3.8), the convo-
lution operation can be used. The scheme (3.8) does not consider the boundary grid
2The term ’convolution’ is used here, even though the PyTorch implementation of the function
conv1d() uses cross-correlation operations [39]. It makes no difference in this case, since the kernels
are symmetric, and therefore the term ’convolution’ is used.
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Connection between numerical methods and CNNs
29
0
1
3
2
1
1
0
1
-2
1
1
Input array (1×5)
Kernel
0 " 1 + 1 " −2 + 3 " 1 = 1
Output array (1×5)
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the convolution operation. The input array has been zero-padded.
points, U0 and Um+1. The boundary grid points will be affected by the boundary
conditions. If the equation is defined in terms of Dirichlet conditions, this corresponds
to keeping the grid points constant to some value. This can be imposed by adding a
corrective forcing gi, which corrects the boundary points according to the boundary
conditions. It is zero for all other grid points. Given input array U i, which contains
the whole space dimension, the update is:
U i+1 ←U i + ConvK(U i) + gi
where ConvK is the padded convolution operation with kernel K = kκ
h2 [1, −2, 1] and
gi is the boundary correction terms, which is derived in appendix C.5.
In listing 3.1, an example code is shown, where the PyTorch function conv1d is
used to perform the convolution with the kernel kκ
h2 [1, −2, 1]. Lines 3-9 define the
constants of the system including the initial values of U, which are set as random,
uniformly distributed numbers between 0 and 1. Inside the simulation loop, U is
padded, the convolution is performed and the correction terms are calculated to
account for boundary conditions. In this case, the Dirichlet boundary conditions are
set as the initial values.
1 import torch
2 import torch.nn.functional as F
3 kappa = 1
# From heat equation
4 m = 500
# Number of interior points
5 T = 100
# Number of timesteps
6 u = torch.zeros(T,m+2)
# Allocate room
7 u[0,:] = torch.randn(size=(1,m+2)).squeeze() # Random initial values
8 h = 1/(m+1)
# Grid spacing
9 k = 0.1*h**2
# Time step size
10 K = k*kappa/(h**2)*torch.tensor([1,-2,1]).reshape(1,1,3) # Kernel
11 g = torch.zeros(m+2)
12 for i in range(T-1):
# Loop over timesteps
13
u_pad = F.pad(u[i,:],pad = (1,1), mode = 'constant',value=0).\
14
reshape(1,1,m+4)
# Padding
15
u_conv = F.conv1d(u_pad,weight = K,padding=0) # Convolution operation
16
g[0] = -u_conv[:,:,0]
# Correction term
17
g[m+1] = -u_conv[:,:,m+1]
# Correction term
18
u[i+1,:] = u[i,:] + u_conv + g
# Discretized heat-equation
Listing 3.1: Convolution for time discretization in PyTorch
Figure 3.3 shows the result of the simulation. It is seen that the initial values are
random, and that the boundaries are kept constant. Also, it is seen that the heat
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Methodology
equation has a diffusion property, since the the values of U are blended out more and
more as time passes.
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
20
40
60
80
100
t
Time development of heat equation 
−2
0
2
Figure 3.3: Result of the simulation shown in listing 3.1
Using the PyTorch framework for the time-integration has several advantages.
First of all, PyTorch is a highly optimized framework with parallelizations performed
under the hood. This is much more time-eﬀicient than performing the time-integration
using a for-loop. PyTorch also has several built-in functions that are very useful, for
instance for padding. The padding function in line 13 in the code above has the input
mode, which allows for different kinds of padding, for instance, replication padding
(where the boundaries values are simply replicated outside the domain) and reflec-
tion padding (where the inner grid points near the boundaries are reflected over the
boundaries). Last but not least, PyTorch has a framework for building CNNs, which
is utilized in the next section, where a CNN is used to recreate FD-stencils from
simulation data.
3.5.2
Using CNNs for discovering FD-stencils
This section uses the current knowledge to explore the connection between finite
difference methods and convolutional neural networks. Focus will be on using CNNs
for discovering finite difference stencils based on simulation data of a time-dependent
PDE.
3.5.2.1
Previous work
Two examples of research groups have investigated the use of CNNs to predict the de-
velopment of a group of PDEs over time. Kim and Choi [10] design a five-point stencil
CNN which resembles the structure of a five-point Laplacian to learn the dynamic
of reaction-diffusion type equations such as the two-dimensional heat equation, the
Allen-Cahn equation and Fisher’s equation. Similar to this, Qu, Cai and Zhao [40]
train a CNN which is separated into a linear and a non-linear part to fit a range of
example problems, such as the heat equation, the KS-equation and Burgers equation.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Connection between numerical methods and CNNs
31
Both groups argue that restricting the structure of a CNN can reduce training time
and make the model less prone to overfitting.
Both research groups recreate the exact finite difference stencil used for solving the
heat equation, which in itself is an interesting result. This means that using only data
generated from a simulation, it is possible to recreate the numerical method used for
that simulation, as described in the previous section. Using the CNN for predictions
would therefore have very little error or, at least, be as good as the numerical method
used to generate the data. This could also, in principle, allow one to obtain knowledge
about the order of the method in cases where only the data and no knowledge about
the simulation method is available.
This result, though, is only obtained in the simulation of the linear heat equation.
For the non-linear equations, the groups also obtained good CNN models, but these
are, due to their structure, less comparable to the original numerical methods. In
[10], the authors add a trainable polynomial to their model to fit the non-linear part
of the system, whereas in [40], the authors already have a non-linear CNN included
in their model. Since both groups obtain good results even with relatively simple,
shallow CNN-structures, this shows the amount of creativity which can be put into
the design of a good CNN for numerically solving non-linear PDEs.
3.5.2.2
Investigating the method by Kim and Choi
In June 2023, I carried out a special course under supervision by Allan Engsig-Karup,
where the method by Kim and Choi was further investigated. The work was reported
in a final assignment [41], of which the most important results are presented in this
section. The investigations show some fundamental concepts that help understanding
the background for using CNNs for the MF-models in this thesis. Using the code by
Kim and Choi as a base, their work was first recreated. Then, it was further developed
to investigate performance for an unconstrained CNN-kernel. Before digging into the
results, the training framework is first demonstrated for a one-dimensional case, where
the goal is to recreate the stencil used to simulate the one-dimensional heat equation.
Training framework
The aim of training a CNN to discover a finite difference stencil is to be able to replace
the update of the discretized heat equation (3.8) with a CNN. That is, we wish to
replace the following operation:
U i+1 = U i + FF D(U i),
(3.14)
with
U i+1 = U i + FCNN(U i),
(3.15)
where FF D(·) denotes the FD method given by a convolution with a known stencil
(as described in section 3.1.2) and FCNN(·) denotes a trained convolutional neural
network. First, let us consider the structure of the CNN.
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Methodology
The code in listing 3.2 shows how a very simple CNN can be defined as a PyTorch
module.
This particular code is inspired by the code by Kim and Choi [10].
It
is chosen to do a replication padding, where the boundary values are used for the
padding. This makes the network the least sensitive to boundary dynamics, since
this implementation does not take boundary conditions into account. The CNN is
characterized by a single convolutional layer with a kernel of size 3, which is defined
using the function Conv1d. In the forward() function, the order of the operations
are seen; first, the input is padded, then a convolution is performed. The output
corresponds to the update in (3.15).
1 import torch
2 import torch.nn as nn
3 class CNN(nn.Module):
4
def __init__(self): # Initialize
5
super(CNN, self).__init__()
6
self.pad = nn.ReplicationPad1d(1) # pads with own values on the sides
7
self.conv1 = nn.Conv1d(in_channels=1, out_channels=1, kernel_size=3,
stride = 1, padding=0,bias=False)
8
def forward(self, x): # Forward function
9
x_pad = self.pad(x)
# Pad
10
x_out = self.conv1(x_pad)
# Convolution
11
return
x + x_out # Skip connection by addition
Listing 3.2: Definition of a CNN as a PyTorch module
The training data can be created in the same way as presented in listing 3.1.
Setting the simulation time, discretization sizes (h for space and k for time) and the
discretization kernel, one can integrate in time using some initial conditions to obtain
a data set.
The code in listing 3.3 shows the training of a CNN model. Training a neural
network essentially means to choose the parameters of the convolution kernels such
that a loss function is minimized. In this case, the loss function is chosen as the mean
squared error (MSE) of the prediction and reference value:
Loss = MSE(U ref −˜U) = 1
N
N
X
j=1
(U ref
j
−˜Uj)2,
(3.16)
where U ref is the reference solution, ˜U is the approximation using the CNN step
(3.15) and N is the size of U. In order to minimize the loss, the Adam optimizer [42,
43] from the PyTorch module is used.
In the code, some training data is generated (details on the data generation func-
tion is omitted here), and the model is initialized in lines 3-4. In line 5, the Adam
optimizer is initialized. A loss function is defined as the mean squared error in line 6.
Then, the training is performed by repeating the following sequence 1000 times: line
8: compute the output from the model given the input of the training data (the first
time step), line 9: compute the loss of the model when compared to the second time
step of the training data, lines 10-12: compute the gradients and update the weights
==PAGE:49==
3.5 Connection between numerical methods and CNNs
33
of the network. This way, the model will gradually become better at mapping from
one time step to the next. In appendix C.5, the loss history of the training is visu-
alized. The figure simply shows that the training converges very quickly (within the
first 200 epochs).
1
import torch
2
import torch.nn as nn
3
train_data ,val_data = generate_data(heat,100,1)
4
model = CNN()
# Initialize model
5
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(),lr = 1e-2)
6
loss_fn = nn.MSELoss()
# Define loss function
7
for epoch in range(1000):
8
out = model(train_data[0])
# Forward step
9
loss = loss_fn(out,train_data[1])
# Calculate loss
10
optimizer.zero_grad()
# Reset gradients
11
loss.backward()
# Compute gradients
12
optimizer.step()
# Step with optimizer
Listing 3.3: Training a CNN
This code holds for a one-dimensional PDE, but it can easily be modified for a two-
dimensional case by changing the structure of the CNN and the data.
In order to test the framework, the model is trained on data generated using the
one-dimensional heat equation (3.5) on a domain with 100 discretization points, grid
size of h = 0.1, a time step of size k ≈9.8 · 10−6 and κ = 1. The initial values are
chosen randomly, and only one time step is simulated. The simulation kernel for the
FDM update (3.14) is:
kκ
h2 [1, −2, 1] = [0.0980, −0.1961, 0.0980].
The CNN kernel resulting from the training is:
[0.0976, −0.1963, 0.0982].
Thus, there is very little difference between the two kernels. This shows that the
original simulation stencil can be recreated from the data in a very simple training
setup. One application case for this result is: given a dataset with no knowledge of
the simulation method, one can recreate the simulation stencil and use the stencil for
approximating the order of the simulation method, given that the time step and grid
sizes are known.
3.5.3
Boundary conditions
As already touched upon in section 3.1.2, using a convolution operation to resemble
an FDM will only be correct on interior points, since boundary values are dictated by
boundary conditions. Therefore, that section showed how to numerically correct for
the error on the boundary, when simulating a known equation using a specific FDM. In
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Methodology
section 3.5.2, it was shown how a CNN can be trained to resemble an FD-stencil, but
where boundaries were not handled according to boundary conditions. Boundaries
were simply handled passively using replication-padding, but without any corrections
or checks of compliance with the boundary conditions. This section discusses the
possibilities of handling boundary conditions, when training a CNN.
When boundary conditions are not explicitly handled, the padding mode has a
huge effect on boundary dynamics. All padding modes will introduce some error,
and when simulating many iterations, this error will accumulate and spread and can
potentially corrupt the whole simulation domain. There are many types of padding
modes. In the PyTorch package, four types of padding are available: constant padding
(for instance with zeros), replication padding (where boundary values are repeated
outside the boundary), reflection padding (where values in the interior are reflected
to the exterior) and circular padding (where values from the opposite side of the
domain are used for padding). The extent of the error introduced by the padding
will depend on the boundary conditions and the system that is simulated. This is
explored in greater detail in appendix C.5 with examples and by consulting papers
for inspiration on how to handle boundary conditions.
In summary, there are different possibilities of handling boundaries when training
the CNN: the active approach; where an action is enforced on the boundaries either
by training layers that act solely on the boundaries or by explicitly overwriting the
values on the boundaries, and the passive approach; where boundaries are handled
implicitly, for instance by using some padding method or a different approach, where
it is not controlled what happens to the boundaries. In some cases, for instance with
periodic domains, it is possible to impose the boundary conditions using a specific
padding approach, but this is not always the case. For the CNN-based MF-models
developed in this thesis, an explicit approach is chosen where the boundary values are
explicitly overwritten by analytic values (unless otherwise stated), since the focus of
the thesis is to prove the concept of CNN-based MF-models and not to test methods
for handling boundary conditions. This approach is applied for all methods (both the
MF-models and the regular numerical methods) so it allows for fair comparison.
3.6
Multi-fidelity models
The above sections introduced a literature study, an introduction to the test PDEs
and numerical solutions to them as well as an introduction of CNNs and their ability
to approximate finite difference methods. Focus is now turned towards multi-fidelity
models. In this section, a general multi-fidelity framework is introduced as well as
the specific form of CNN-based multi-fidelity models investigated in this thesis.
3.6.1
A general multi-fidelity framework
The general multi-fidelity framework is formulated for usage in this thesis but also
with generalizations for future work. The authors of [44] propose a notation for a
==PAGE:51==
3.6 Multi-fidelity models
35
generalized residual network (gResNet), which will be adopted and extended here.
Consider the general initial value problem (IVP):
du
dt = f(u),
u(t0) = u0,
where u holds the state variables. This corresponds to the IVP in a MOL-discretization
of a PDE. Now consider the operator, L : Rn →Rn, such that:
u(tk+1) ≈L(u(tk)).
In the context of MF-models, L can be considered a low-fidelity operator (flowmap),
which maps the state variables from time step k to time step k + 1. The low fidelity
operator can be based on any simplifications of the true function, for instance, com-
promising physical knowledge, such as leaving out wind resistance in a physical model,
or using a linear model on a non-linear system.
The gResNet of [44] mapping has the form:
N(·; Θ) = L + N(·; Θ),
(3.17)
where N : Rn →Rn is a deep neural network operator.
Let’s generalize the expression (3.17) even further.
Let’s consider any type of
operator: F : Rn →Rn. This operator could be a neural network, a function of the
state variables, a finite difference method or some other structure. Now, the update
could be assumed to take the form:
u(tk+1) = L(u(tk)) + F(u(tk)).
(3.18)
In the framework (3.18), F can be understood as a correction to the low fidelity
operator L(u(tk)), and the framework is therefore characterized as a type of multi-
fidelity model.
For the scope of this thesis, the general framework (3.18) is nailed down to the
following: the low-fidelity operator L is an explicit finite difference method, where the
fidelity is determined by the order of the method, and the operator F is a convolu-
tional neural network that is trained on high-fidelity data to improve the low-fidelity
operator.
3.6.2
A CNN-based MF-model
Considering an explicit finite difference method used for solving a PDE, there are
limitations in terms of the accuracy of the method, which is quantified by the trun-
cation error. It was in this chapter seen how different choices of the scheme results
in different accuracies.
If considering a fixed grid with m interior points of fixed
grid-spacing, it is possible to decrease the error of the method mainly in two ways:
by reducing the time-step size or choosing a higher order method than the current
for the time-integration and/or the spatial derivatives. Both options will increase the
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Methodology
computational expenses for using the method. This motivates the use of multi-fidelity
models that operate together with a low-fidelity (LF) finite difference method.
The goal of the MF-models introduced in this thesis is to utilize data (e.g. from
a HF-model or a true solution function) to obtain a correcting CNN, FCNN, which
is added to the explicit LF-method, FLF , in each time-step.
U i+1 = FLF (U [i−Nin,i]) + FCNN(U [i−Nin,i]),
i = 0, 1, ..., NT .
(3.19)
where k is the time step size and U i contains the domain grid points [U i
0, U i
1, ..., U i
m+1]
and NT is the number of simulation time steps. The superscript, [i −Nin, i], on U
indicates that Nin time steps can be given as input, meaning that the FDM and the
CNN can have the character of a linear multi-step method. In terms of the general
framework (3.18), the LF-model, FLF , corresponds to the LF operator, L, and it can
be any explicit finite difference scheme, such as a FTCS or a Runge-Kutta method.
The label of low-fidelity has to be considered in relation to another method, which
is high-order, but the exact model is not specified in this MF-framework. The CNN
corresponds to the additive operator F in (3.18).
The purpose of the CNN is to correct the local truncation error of the explicit
method in order to obtain a higher order error. In general, a finite difference method
has the truncation error: τLF = O(hp + kq). This means, that for a general explicit
FDM, the time step is:
u(xj, ti+1) = FLF (u(¯xj, ti)) + τLF ,
for i = 0, 1, ..., NT and j = 0, ..., m + 1 and where ¯xj = [xj−K, ..., xj, ..., xj+K] for a
kernel of size K. Therefore, the CNN is supposed to fit to the terms in τ = O(hp +kq).
As an example, consider the FTCS-method for the heat equation. This method
was introduced in section 3.1.2.2, where the local truncation error was derived. The
truncation error is
τ =
k
2 −h2
12

uxxxx +
k2
6 −h4
360

u(6x) + O(h6 + k3).
(3.20)
Thus, if successful, the correcting CNN will constitute an accurate representation of
the first term(s) to formally allow for achieving higher accuracy. This highlights that
the CNNs explored in this thesis will be dependent on the grid discretization (given
by the time-step size, k, and grid-size, h) as well as the structure of the LF-model.
This is therefore a limitation to bear in mind. The CNN will also be dependent on
an expression for the derivative uxxxx, and this will be explored further in section 4.1.
The gains of a good multi-fidelity model are many: first of all, decreasing the com-
putational cost of running simulations for PDEs, while maintaining a high accuracy
is desired for many reasons, for instance, the possibility of accurate online computa-
tions, lower costs in terms of energy consumption and quicker delivery of results from
industrial models. Second of all, with the emergence of explainable AI one might even
be able to learn something from these models; are there ways to represent fine-grained
data in a coarse-grained scheme?
==PAGE:53==
3.6 Multi-fidelity models
37
3.6.2.1
Offline vs. online phase
For the MF-model of the type (3.19) with a trainable correcting CNN, the work can be
separated in an offline and an online phase. The online phase, is where the simulation
of the PDE is performed according to the update (3.19), whereas the offline phase
consists of preparing for the online phase. This includes training the CNN as well as
generating the data for the training. Figure 3.4 summarizes the characteristics of the
offline and the online phases; the offline phase is generally computationally expensive,
but is only performed once. Once the CNN is trained, the CNN can be passed onto
the online phase, where the execution of (3.19) is performed and can be repeated
many times.
In order for all the work in the offline phase to be worth the trouble, the gains of
the online phase have to be noticeable. This could for example be if it is possible to
reuse the CNN for many purposes, or if the simulation with the MF-model has to be
performed many times. It is even better, if the model obtained from the offline phase
can be generalized to unseen data, for instance, by expanding the simulation domain.
As mentioned above, an MF-model can be very useful, but if the offline phase is
too expensive, it might be better to use other, maybe more conservative methods
such as simply using a higher fidelity model. The ultimate goal of the MF-models is,
first of all, to outperform the LF-models in terms of accuracy, but also to compete
with HF-models when considering the trade-off between accuracy and computation
time. To make these comparisons of the MF-models with the LF- and HF-models,
the performances in the online phase will mainly be considered.
Figure 3.4: Summary of the offline vs. the online phase
Summary
This chapter presented the methodology of the thesis; an understanding of numerical
methods and CNNs is fundamental before exploring CNN-based multi-fidelity models.
The key points of the chapter are:
• The three test PDEs can be solved numerically using finite difference discretiza-
tions. It is decided to use explicit methods that are first order in time. The
low-fidelity models are first or second order in space and the high-fidelity models
are fourth order.
==PAGE:54==
38
3 Methodology
• The truncation errors of the numerical methods can be derived. They can also
be used to set up stability criteria, which restrict the time step size, k, in relation
to the grid spacing, h, by the CFL-condition ak
h ≤C.
• The convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in this thesis consist of convolu-
tional layers and activation functions. The convolutional layers are responsible
for extracting local features, and they are represented by a cross-correlation
operation with a kernel. CNNs consisting of only convolutional layers and acti-
vation functions are characterized by an asymptotic time complexity of O(N),
where N is the dimension of the input.
• CNNs and numerical methods are closely related.
Explicit finite difference
schemes can be represented by a cross-correlation (similar to the convolution)
operation. A CNN of only one convolutional layer can be trained to fit sim-
ulation data, such that it is exactly the same as the original finite difference
stencil.
• A general framework for multi-fidelity models is proposed. The framework con-
sists of a low-fidelity operator, L, and a correcting operator, F, which corrects
the low-fidelity operator. This framework allows for any type of low-fidelity
model and any kind of corrective forcing.
• The general MF-framework is specified for the work in this thesis. The low-
fidelity operator L is an explicit finite difference method and the additive oper-
ator F is a CNN. It is shown that the CNN then corresponds to the truncation
error of the finite difference method.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Unveiling Multi-Fidelity
Models
This chapter reports some introductory explorations of the CNN-based multi-fidelity
models introduced in section 3.6.2. The chapter will start with a simple example using
numerical methods (and no CNNs) to correct a LF-model. That is, the operator F in
(3.18) is a finite difference method. This is followed by an experiment, where a CNN
is trained to, correspondingly, fit to the same correction term as in the numerical
case. Thus, in this case F is a neural network. In section 4.2, a method from the
literature, which uses analytical solutions as training data, is tested. Emphasis will be
put on linking the practical use of CNNs for numerical analysis through the concept
of truncation errors and absolute stability based on Taylor series expansions.
4.1
Correcting an FDM to achieve high order method
This section considers the heat equation (3.5). The truncation error of the FTCS-
scheme for solving the heat equation numerically is given by (3.20). The leading term
of the spatial error is κh2
12 uxxxx(xj, ti). An idea of improving this method could be to
correct the FD scheme by estimating κh2
12 uxxxx(xj, ti) and subtracting this from the
solution. This way, a more accurate solution is expected. This is done numerically
first and later using a CNN.
4.1.1
Correction with FD-scheme
Say, we want to estimate the leading term κh2
12 uxxxx(xj, ti) with a second order FD-
scheme around the point ¯x, where (omitting the t-input to the function u):
u(4x)(¯x) ≈D4u(¯x) = u(¯x −2h) −4u(¯x −h) + 6u(¯x) −4u(¯x + h) + u(¯x + 2h)
h4
. (4.1)
This finite difference scheme is well known (found in, for instance, [45]) and is a second
order scheme. Since the leading term of the error is positive, we want to subtract
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Unveiling Multi-Fidelity Models
1
12h2D4u(¯x) from the original FD-scheme:
u′′(¯x) ≈D2u(¯x) −1
12h2D4u(¯x)
= u(¯x −h) −2u(¯x) + u(¯x + h)
h2
−u(¯x −2h) −4u(¯x −h) + 6u(¯x) −4u(¯x + h) + u(¯x + 2h)
12h2
= −1
12u(¯x −2h) + 4
3u(¯x −h) −5
2u(¯x) + 4
3u(¯x + h) −1
12u(¯x + 2h)
h2
.
(4.2)
This corresponds exactly to the fourth order scheme for the second derivative
known in literature (for instance [45]) and as shown in section 3.3.1. Thus, we have
eliminated the leading error term, which itself is second order, with use of a second
order approximation.
In practice, one can therefore use the above scheme to obtain a higher order
solution. Though, it should be noted that for the purpose of this experiment, stability
requirements are not considered, and focus is mainly on replicating the stencil 4.2.
With the aim of training a CNN to estimate the correcting term, splitting the fourth
order method into two second order methods is preferred for now. The concept is
shown numerically using the same framework as in listing 3.1, where a simulation
of the heat equation is performed. Listing 4.1 shows the updated code, where the
correction term is added to the original output. Note, boundary conditions are not
considered here. In general, the loop is identical to the one in listing 3.1, except for
the fact that the input is padded with two zeros in both ends and the correcting term
is computed and added.
1 import torch
2 import torch.nn.functional as F
3 kappa = 1
# From heat equation
4 m = 500
# Number of interior points
5 T = 100
# Number of timesteps
6 u_corr = torch.zeros(T,m+2)
# Allocate room
7 u_corr[0,:] = torch.randn(size=(1,m+2)).squeeze() # Random initial values
8 h = 1/(m+1)
# Grid spacing
9 k = 0.1*h**2
# Time step size
10 K_2 = k*kappa/(h**2)*torch.tensor([1,-2,1]).reshape(1,1,3) # 2nd deriv.
11 K_4 = k*kappa/(h**4)*torch.tensor([1,-4,6,-4,1]).reshape(1,1,5) # 4th deriv.
12 for i in range(T-1):
# Loop over timesteps
13
u_pad = F.pad(u_corr[i,:],pad = (2,2), mode = 'constant',value=0).\
14
reshape(1,1,m+6)
# Padding
15
u_conv = F.conv1d(u_pad,weight = K_2,padding=0)[:,:,1:m+3] # Convolution
16
u_conv_correct = F.conv1d(u_pad,weight = K_4,padding=0) # Correction term
17
# Add correction term
18
u_corr[i+1,:] = u_corr[i,:] + u_conv -1/12*h**2*u_conv_correct
Listing 4.1: Time discretization with correcting term.
Figure 4.1 shows the difference between a fourth order numerical solution and the
second order solution from earlier (figure 3.3) and the corrected second order solution,
respectively. The fourth order solution is obtained by using the FD scheme in (4.2).
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Correcting an FDM to achieve high order method
41
Note that the scales of the two plots are different, which can be seen from the color
bars.
The figure shows that the original method has errors of order 10−1, when
compared to the fourth order method, whereas the corrected method only has errors
up to order 10−7, and the largest errors occur after some time, while they are small
in the beginning of the simulation. This shows that the corrected method is equal to
the fourth order method except some computational differences, which are probably
due to built-up of round-off errors. This confirms the theory presented before; it is
indeed possible to numerically correct an FDM to achieve a higher order method.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.59
0.79
0.99
x
0
10
20
30
40
time step
|u4
u2|
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.59
0.79
0.99
x
0
10
20
30
40
time step
|u4
u2, corrected|
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1e
7
Figure 4.1: Absolute difference between fourth order solution u4 and the uncorrected and corrected
second order solution, u2 and u2,corrected, respectively.
4.1.2
Correction with CNN
Instead of using a numerical method for increasing the accuracy of the method, this
section investigates using a CNN for the corrective function, FCNN, in (3.19). Two
types of CNNs are tested. During the training, the CNN-corrected result is compared
to a fourth order FDM (4.2).
The PyTorch implementation of the first network is seen in listing 4.2. CNN_corr1
consists of one convolutional layer with zero-padding and a kernel of size 5. The
idea of this network structure is to see if it can reconstruct the FD approximation of
the fourth derivative, which was presented in (4.1). Thus, this network resembles a
situation, where there is knowledge about the original FDM and the correction term,
because we assume knowledge about the kernel size of the correction term.
1 class CNN_corr1(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self):
3
super(CNN_corr1, self).__init__()
4
self.conv1 = nn.Conv1d(in_channels=1, out_channels=1, kernel_size=5,
stride = 1, padding=2,bias=True,padding_mode='zeros')
5
def forward(self, x):
6
x1 = self.conv1(x)
7
return x1
Listing 4.2: PyTorch implementation of correcting CNN number 1.
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Unveiling Multi-Fidelity Models
The second network, which is tested, is shown in listing 4.3.
CNN_corr2 has two
convolutional layers with zero-padding and kernels of size 3. There are three output
channels from the first layer to the next, which means that the network increases
the dimension of the data in order to widen. This network resembles a situation,
where there is less knowledge about the correction term; that is, we do not assume
knowledge about the kernel size of the correction term, instead, we hope that two
kernels of size 3 with 3 channels are enough to capture the dynamics of the corrective
terms.
1 class CNN_corr2(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self):
3
super(CNN_corr2, self).__init__()
4
self.conv1 = nn.Conv1d(in_channels=1, out_channels=3, kernel_size=3,
stride = 1, padding=1,bias=True,padding_mode='zeros')
5
self.conv2 = nn.Conv1d(in_channels=3, out_channels=1, kernel_size=3,
stride = 1, padding=1,bias=True,padding_mode='zeros')
6
def forward(self, x):
7
x1 = self.conv1(x)
8
x1 = self.conv2(x1)
9
return x1
Listing 4.3: PyTorch implementation of correcting CNN number 2.
4.1.2.1
Training procedure
The training procedure can be seen in listing 4.4.
The optimization of the CNN
weights is performed using the Adam optimizer [42, 43], and the loss is calculated using
the mean squared error (3.16), where the reference solution U ref is a fourth order
FDM. The array init_data_all consists of randomly chosen, uniformly distributed
initial values between 0 and 1 in the span of the domain. In each epoch, there is a
loop over all training data. In each iteration, one such initial value is given as input
to the second and fourth order FDMs and the CNN-model (called model() here).
In line 9, the forward step using the second order FDM and the correcting CNN is
performed, and in line 10, the error compared to the reference (the fourth order FDM)
is calculated. In lines 11-13, the gradients are reset, calculated and an optimization
step is taken. After each epoch, the model is tested on a validation set, and only
the models with a low validation error are saved. An important thing to note here is
the use of random data and only a single time step. In appendix D, the convergence
progress of the training is visualized.
1
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(),lr = 1e-3)
2
loss_fn = nn.MSELoss()
3
for epoch in range(n_epochs):
4
for i in range(num_train_data):
5
input = init_data_all[i,:]
# Input
6
fdm_4_out = fdm_4(input)
# Fourth order FDM
7
CNN_out = model(input)
# CNN correction
8
# Forward step with CNN correction
9
u_fdm2Corr = fdm(input.reshape(1,1,nx)) + CNN_out
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Correcting an FDM to achieve high order method
43
10
loss = loss_fn(fdm_4_out,u_fdm2Corr)
# Calculate loss
11
optimizer.zero_grad()
# Reset gradients
12
loss.backward()
# Compute gradients
13
optimizer.step()
# Step with optimizer
Listing 4.4: PyTorch implementation of the training procedure of CNN_corr1 and CNN_corr2.
4.1.2.2
Results
Figure 4.2 shows the absolute difference between the fourth order FD solution and
the second order solution corrected by CNN_corr1 and CNN_corr2, respectively. The
left-most figure resembles the one obtained in the previous section, where the sec-
ond order solution is corrected by an FD approximation of the leading error term,
1
12h2D4u(¯x). This is because, the trained CNN_corr1 is almost identical to the FD-
kernel for
1
12h2D4u(¯x). In the numerical example, h ≈1.996 · 10−3, k ≈3.984 · 10−7
and κ = 1, such that the FD-stencil of the correction is:
[−0.0083, 0.0333, −0.0500, 0.0333, −0.0083].
The resulting convolution kernel for CNN_corr1 is the exact same (with four decimal
numbers), and the bias term is order 10−11. Therefore, it is shown that it is possible
to learn the exact FD-stencil for the correcting term using a CNN.
In the right-most figure it is seen that the alternative network, CNN_corr2, also
is able to correct the second order FDM to a satisfying level, when compared to a
fourth order FDM. The MSE of the corrected solution is of order 10−6.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.59
0.79
0.99
x
0
10
20
30
40
time step
|u4
u2, CNN1|
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.59
0.79
0.99
x
0
10
20
30
40
time step
|u4
u2, CNN2|
0
1
2
3
4
5
1e
7
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1e
6
Figure 4.2: Absolute difference between fourth order solution u4 and the CNN corrected second
order solution, using networks CNN_corr1 (left) and CNN_corr2 (right). Note, the scales are different
in the two plots.
Thus, this section uses a simple example to show that it is possible to correct a
lower order numerical method to a higher order numerical method using a CNN and
training data from the higher order method. This hereby concludes the first example
of a multi-fidelity neural network explored in this thesis.
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Unveiling Multi-Fidelity Models
4.2
A method from the literature: DeepFDM
In the previous section, it was shown how to use a higher order FDM to train a
correction term.
In this section, the same principle is explored, but instead of a
higher order FDM, a true solution to the PDE is used to for the training. The work
in this section is inspired by a journal pre-proof from 2023 by Kossaczká, Erhrhardt
and Günther [27].
In [27], the authors train a CNN using training data from an analytical solution.
Their goal is, similar to the previous section, to estimate a correcting CNN to the
heat equation. The authors also investigate the diffusion-convection equation and a
finance problem, but in this section, focus will be on their results for the heat equation.
By formulating a specific form of the IVP, they have access to the analytic solution
of the equation. The IVP is:
ut = uxx,
u(x, 0) = c + asin(bπx),
−π ≤x ≤π,
0 ≤t ≤T,
(4.3)
with the exact solution
u(x, t) = c + ae−b2π2tsin(bπx).
(4.4)
Boundary values are determined by the analytic solution. The training data is sam-
pled by randomly choosing values of a = [1, 2], b = [0.3, 0.5] and c = [0, 0.25] from a
uniform distribution. The code of the article is not available, so results presented in
this section are based on my implementation of the method.
The authors propose a method called deep FDM, which has the ansatz:
U i+1
j
= U i
j + k
 
U i
j+1 −2U i
j + U i
j−1
h2
+ h2F( ¯U i
j)
!
,
(4.5)
where ¯U i
j = (U i
j−K, ..., U i
j+K) is the input to the correcting neural network, F, which
uses a kernel of size K. With this formulation, the CNN is trained to fulfill the
approximation: F( ¯U i
j) ≈
1
h2 ϵ2, where ϵ2 is the truncation error of the second order
central difference scheme. This formulation ensures that convergence and consistency
properties are preserved according to [27].
The CNN for the deep FDM method is constructed as shown in listing 4.5. This
is similar to the CNN called CNN_corr2 in listing 4.3. The differences are: the second
convolutional layer has a kernel of size 1 instead of 3, and an activation layer is added
after each of the two convolutional layers. First the ELU() function [46] is used, then
the tanh() function.
1 class deep_FDM(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self):
3
super(deep_FDM, self).__init__()
4
self.conv1 = nn.Conv1d(in_channels=1, out_channels=3, kernel_size=3,
stride = 1, padding=1,bias=True,padding_mode='zeros')
5
self.act1 = nn.ELU()
==PAGE:61==
4.2 A method from the literature: DeepFDM
45
6
self.conv2 = nn.Conv1d(in_channels=3, out_channels=1, kernel_size=1,
stride = 1, padding=0,bias=True)
7
self.act2 = nn.Tanh()
8
def forward(self, x):
9
x1 = self.conv1(x)
10
x1 = self.act1(x1)
11
x1 = self.conv2(x1)
12
x1 = self.act2(x1)
13
return x1
Listing 4.5: PyTorch implementation of correcting CNN for the Deep FDM method.
4.2.1
Training procedure
The training procedure of the proposed method is very similar to that in the previous
section except for two main differences: 1) the loss of the step in (4.5) is calculated
using the analytic solution (in the previous, a fourth order FDM was used as a
reference) and 2) for each initial value, the training is performed on many time-steps
instead of just one. In each time step, the loss is calculated as the mean squared
error, and the weights of the model are updated. The randomization of the training
data comes from sampling different values of a, b and c in (4.4). In appendix D, the
convergence progress of the training is visualized.
The specifications for the training are: the spatial domain is discretized into 100
grid points, which results in a grid size h. The relationship between grid size and
time step size, k, is chosen as k = 0.3h2. In the article, they use k = 0.5h2, but
I experienced numerical instability in some cases, and therefore a smaller constant
was chosen. 1000 training cycles are performed, where one training cycle corresponds
to the full time-discretization up to T for one set of initial values. In [27], they use
T = 0.25, resulting in 125 time steps with their choice of k. I chose to use a shorter
time span in my implementation, since I experienced better convergence this way. I
used T = 0.01, resulting in 9 time steps with my choice of k. In order to perform the
optimization of the model parameters, the Adam optimizer was used with a learning
rate of 10−1.
The boundary conditions are handled explicitly by overwriting the boundary val-
ues by the values stated by the boundary conditions (based on the reference solu-
tion). This is done, since the work by [47] presented in section 3.5.3 and appendix
C.5 showed that in similar cases, the explicit method was more stable than the im-
plicit method. For completeness, the implicit approach with zero-, replication- and
reflection-padding were tested too, but convergence could not be obtained.
With the factor h2 in the formulation (4.5), it was experienced that it was diﬀicult
to obtain convergence of the optimization of the Deep FDM model. This is because
the term h2F( ¯U i
j) became very small for the small h, so the contribution of the
network was too small for the optimization to be successful. Therefore, the factor,
h2, was removed, but in the end, similar results to those of the article, was obtained.
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Unveiling Multi-Fidelity Models
To quantify the quality of the Deep FDM method, the authors choose to calculate
the improvement ratio as:
improvement ratio =
||uT
ref −uT
F DM||2
||uT
ref −uT
DeepF DM||2
,
where uT
ref is the analytical reference solution at time T, uT
F DM is the standard second
order FDM at time T, and uT
DeepF DM is the result from the deep FDM method at
time T, and all errors are expressed in terms of the 2-norm. Thus, the improvement
ratio expresses the improvement of the corrected method compared to a classical
FDM.
4.2.2
Results
The model resulting from the training, is validated using a validation set, which comes
from sampling new values of a, b and c in (4.4). The improvement ratios from 30 of
these are seen in table 4.1. In most cases, the improvement ratio is above 1 meaning
that the Deep FDM method is better than the second order FDM, but in a few cases,
the improvement ratio is below 1, meaning that the correcting CNN worsens the
estimation. This result is similar to that of [27], where the L2 improvement ratios1
do not exceed 17.73. The differences between the results in table 4.1 and the results
in the paper, might be due to the difference in implementation, for instance the time
step size.
Figure 4.3 shows the error of the second order FDM compared to the analytical
solution (left-most pane) and the error of the CNN-corrected second order FDM
(right-most pane).
The plot shows that the MSE of the CNN-corrected FDM is
approximately 1/10 of the MSE of the FDM method. The figure shows that even
though the CNN is only trained on 9 time steps up until T = 0.01, the method
generalizes somewhat well to later time-steps. In both cases, the largest errors occur
later in the simulation.
Table 4.1: The improvement ratios of 30 different validation problems at T = 0.25.
Ratios
2.92
5.66
2.63
2.55
5.31
1.28
2.89
3.03
1.96
4.86
1.71
2.99
8.23
0.47
2.47
3.66
39.54
2.98
1.29
2.82
4.91
6.59
0.56
3.34
0.74
3.19
2.81
19.98
1.49
2.11
Thus, the results from my implementation as well as the original authors’ results
are that the CNN is successful in correcting the LF-model, but the results are not
1The Deep FDM paper uses the L2-error but they do not define how this is calculated. It is
assumed that it is simply a scaled version of the 2-norm according to (5.4), and in this case, it does
not make a difference since the scalar is eliminated in the ratio.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 A method from the literature: DeepFDM
47
entirely impressive; only a small improvement can be obtained with the presented
method. Considering the work in the offline phase compared to the gain in the online
phase, it might not be worth it, to obtain improvement ratios in the range 0.5 and
24, but this, of course, depends on the problem at hand.
-π
0
π
x
0
20
40
60
80
100
time step
|u
−
u
2
|, MSE: 1.145e-09
-π
0
π
x
0
20
40
60
80
100
time step
|u
−
u
2,
CNN
|, MSE: 1.231e-10
0
2
4
6
8
1e−5
0
1
2
3
1e−5
Figure 4.3: Errors of the standard second order FDM and the CNN corrected FDM compared to
the analytic solution. Simulation up to time T = 0.12.
4.2.3
Understanding the results
In order to understand why the results presented in the previous section are a bit
underwhelming, we need to take a look at the numerical theory, more specifically,
the truncation error that the neural network seeks to estimate. In chapter 3, the
truncation error of the FTCS-scheme for the heat equation was derived and the result
was highlighted in (3.20).
Essentially, what the correcting CNN in DeepFDM does, is to estimate the trun-
cation error (3.20).
This is done by estimating the weights such that DeepFDM
resembles data obtained from the expression of τ as well as possible. In practice, the
data is not generated using (3.20), as explained in the previous sections, but this is, in
theory, what happens. In (3.20), it is clear that the first terms,

k
2 −h2
12

uxxxx, will
be much larger than later terms,

k2
6 −h4
360

u(6x) +O(h6 +k3), due to multiplication
with powers of k and h. Let’s understand this using a numerical example.
In the work with DeepFDM, the problem was formulated such that the solution
is known and given by (4.4). This solution is a smooth function that can be dif-
ferentiated an infinite amount of times. Differentiating the solution 4 and 6 times,
respectively, wrt. x yields:
uxxxx = ab4π4e−b2π2tsin(bπx),
u(6x) = −ab6π6e−b2π2tsin(bπx).
One example of sampled constants a, b, c is: a = 1.5110, b = 0.3848 and c = 0.0071. In
the simulations presented in the previous sections, we had h = 0.0635 and k = 0.0012.
Thus, the leading terms of the truncation error function are (by insertion in (3.20)):
τ(x, t) = (2.1 · 10−3 −2.9 · 10−6)e−1.46tsin(1.21x),
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Unveiling Multi-Fidelity Models
where the first term in the parenthesis, corresponds to the first term in (3.20), and
the second corresponds to the second term in (3.20).
Thus, the leading term in
the truncation error, has a numerical value that is 1000 times the value of the second
leading term of the truncation error. Therefore, it is expected that the CNN primarily
fits to the leading order term, which could explain why the correcting powers of the
CNN is not overwhelming.
Since the truncation error function is known, it is tempting to plot it and compare
to the CNN output. This is done in figure 4.4. The figure shows the difference between
the CNN and the truncation error with only the first term (τ1) and both the first and
the second term (τ2), respectively. Here, it is seen that there is almost no difference
between including one or two terms, which indicates that the CNN actually does fit
to the leading order term.
-π
0
π
x
0
20
40
60
80
time step
τ
1
−
CNN, MSE: 4.326e-14
-π
0
π
x
0
20
40
60
80
time step
τ
2
−
CNN, MSE: 4.35e-14
−1
0
1
2
3
4
1e−7
−1
0
1
2
3
4
1e−7
Figure 4.4: Comparison of CNN output and truncation error function, where only the first term
is included (left) and where the first two terms are included (right).
From the above analysis, it is evident that the correcting CNN is trained to ul-
timately fit the leading order term of the error. This means that with the current
framework, there is a limit to how good the correcting term will be; it is no better
than a fourth order finite difference method.
In order to increase the accuracy of the CNN, one would have to ensure that it fits
to the higher order terms, namely, the terms which depend on a smaller discretization
step. In this case,

k2
6 −h4
360

u(6x).
4.3
Discussion
This section shows the power of the CNN-structure: the local kernels resemble finite
difference stencils, and therefore it is possible in section 4.1.2 to obtain a correcting
CNN, which exactly corresponds to a finite difference discretization of the truncation
error. In a real-world scenario, though, this would never be of interest, because if we
know the stencil, why then fit a CNN to it? Therefore, it is also shown in section
4.1.2 that with a less ”manufactured” and more general CNN it is also possible to fit,
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Discussion
49
to a satisfying level, to the truncation error term. This property is relevant, since it
can then be applied in a setting where the simulation data is given and there is less
or no knowledge about the stencils used. The section shows that a CNN is a strong
structure even when very shallow, since it, in theory and in practice, can act as a
local operator similar to finite difference methods. With this property, the CNN is
expected to generalize well to other parts of the domain.
This section and the Deep FDM paper both use a very simple example, the heat
equation with a periodic solution (in the paper they also test two more complex but
linear problems), to prove the concept. It is expected that for more complicated cases,
such as a non-linear problem, the CNN would have to be deeper or more complex in
terms of activation functions. This is explored further in chapter 5.
An essential limitation of the MF-model, which is highlighted in this section, is
the fact that the CNN fits to the leading order term of the error. As long as this
is the case, there will always be an upper limit to how well the MF-model performs.
This was also a result of the work by Manrique de Lara and Ferrer in [25, 26]; their
networks also reached a limit for how well they corrected the low-order model, even
when testing different network structures. The challenge is, first of all, that the higher
order error terms are much smaller than the leading order terms. A second challenge
is that the next terms depend on higher order derivatives, which need a wider stencil
to be approximated. For instance, for the heat equation the second leading term
is

k2
6 −h4
360

u(6x). In order to estimate u(6x) with a second order finite difference
approximation, a stencil of size 7 (half-width 3) is needed. In other words, more
information needs to be included. This could be implemented for the CNN simply
by widening the stencil or deepening the network, similar to the multi-resolution
convolutional auto-encoder by Liu, Ponce, Brunton and Kutz [23] as introduced in
section 1.2.
One way to improve the current method is to gradually deepen the network during
the training. So, starting with a shallow network that fits to the leading term, and
then introduce more layers and fit these layers to the next terms of the error. This
would mean an expensive offline phase, and in the online phase the computations
would also increase with the deeper network, but the gains might be large. With this
network structure there would, therefore, be a trade-off between computation time
and accuracy. These are ideas for possible future work on the MF-models proposed in
this thesis. In the next section, the ideas from Deep FDM are tested in a more general
way with different network structures and a slightly different training procedure to
create a novel MF-model framework.
==PAGE:66==
50
4 Unveiling Multi-Fidelity Models
Summary
This chapter initialized the work with multi-fidelity models. The main points of the
chapter are:
• Using the heat equation as an example, the truncation error of a low-fidelity
explicit solver is used to create a simple MF-model. It is first estimated by a
finite difference method to obtain a numerical multi-fidelity solver. Then it is
estimated by training a CNN, and it turns out that the CNN fits exactly to the
truncation error as expected.
• A CNN-based multi-fidelity model from the literature is implemented.
The
model is successful, yet with a limit to how well it corrects the low-order method.
As an extension to the original work, it is shown that the reason for the limit
is that the CNN fits only to the largest error term, and it is therefore limited
to a fourth order method.
• In the discussion, it is suggested to get inspiration from a different model from
literature, which gradually deepens the network during training. This way it
allows for absorbing more information, which could potentially allow for an even
higher order of the error of the MF-model.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
A Novel Multi-Fidelity
Model
This chapter introduces a multi-fidelity model based on the methodology of (3.19)
and based on the experiences of chapter 4. The MF-model of this chapter has two
main differences from the Deep FDM: the formulation of the CNN is more general, so
that the CNN can take more than one previous time step as input, and the training
data is higher order simulation data. Furthermore, the CNN structure is not specified,
so several different CNN-structures are tested.
In section 5.1, thorough testing of the MF-model is presented for the three test
equations; the heat, advection and Burgers equation. In section 5.2, the framework
is tested for a case, which relates to real world applications, namely the Shallow-
Water Equations (SWE). In section 5.3, the MF-framework is discussed for use for
the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE), where some initial tests are performed. The SWE
and NSE are comprised of coupled linear and non-linear PDEs and, hence, constitute
a more diﬀicult setting for the training. Section 5.4 rounds off the chapter with a
discussion of the novel MF-model. For the most part of this chapter, the LF-model
will be represented by an explicit Euler step in time and some spatial approximation
to the PDE. Though, in the two test cases, the SWE and NSE, the LF-model is
based on a Runge-Kutta-step in time. This showcases that the framework (3.19) can
be generalized to different types of explicit methods.
5.1
MF-models for the test equations
This section explores multi-fidelity models for the heat, advection and Burgers equa-
tion. The low- and high-fidelity models introduced in chapter 3 will be used. In
all test cases, the MF-model corresponds to the correction of an explicit LF-model,
which uses a forward Euler scheme:
U i+1 = U i + DLF (U i) + kFCNN(U [i−Nin,i]),
i = 0, ..., NT ,
(5.1)
given some initial conditions U 0 and where NT is the number of time-steps. This is a
specification of the general MF-model (3.19). DLF is the low-fidelity finite difference
operator for the given equation as presented in section 3.1.2. kFCNN is the correcting
==PAGE:68==
52
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
CNN-model multiplied by the time step size k. This term is chosen to include the CNN
in the forward Euler step, such that the CNN fits to the local truncation error, τ, as
described in section 3.6.2. The CNN can take the form of a linear multi-step method,
hence the superscript on the input, but the LF-model is a one-step method. For the
purpose of exploring the possibilities of a correcting CNN, boundary conditions will
not be considered, and boundary grid points will therefore be explicitly handled.
Due to the use of the first order Euler step for the time-integration, the stability
requirements of the time step, k, is very strict for the HF-model, as introduced in
chapter 3. Therefore, it is desirable to use multi-fidelity models, which correct the
time-eﬀicient low-order simulation to have higher-order accuracy while avoiding the
strict stability requirements. This section will explore to what extent it is possible to
obtain such an MF-model as well as its possible limitations and advantages. Different
structures of CNNs will be explored.
The work of this section is organized as follows:
• Descriptions of simulation data (sec. 5.1.1)
• Descriptions of training procedure and CNN-structures and their computational
complexities (sec. 5.1.2)
• Choosing a preferred CNN-structure for each of the three test equations based
on training and validation errors (sec. 5.1.3)
• Evaluating performance of MF-model for a fixed spatial grid by discussion of
errors and computational complexity (sec. 5.1.3.1)
• Generalization of results to different grid sizes (sec. 5.1.4)
• Generalization outside of training domain (sec. 5.1.5)
• Generalization to different initial value function (sec. 5.1.6)
• Stability analysis of MF-model for heat equation (sec. 5.1.7)
The performance of the MF-models will be evaluated according to their accuracy and
their computational complexity compared to the LF- and HF-models.
5.1.1
Data
The data used in this section will be simulation data based on the fourth order,
explicit methods presented in section 3.3 and appendix C.4, from now on referred
to as the HF-model. High-fidelity data will be used for training and validating the
MF-model in the offline phase, when the training procedure is performed. Because
the HF-model is obtained by increasing the order of the spatial derivative and still
using the first order forward Euler, the stability criterion expressed by (5.2) is very
==PAGE:69==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
53
strict. Therefore, the HF-models of this section are characterized by also having very
small time-steps compared to the LF-model.
k ≤c · hp,
(5.2)
Tables 5.1 and 5.2 show specifications of the simulation domain for each of the
three equations and for the LF- and HF-models, respectively. The LF-model has
order 1 for the linear advection equation, whereas the heat and burgers equation use
a second order LF-model. The gap between the time-stepping in the LF- and the HF-
models are bigger for the heat and burgers equation than for the advection equation,
due to a different value of p in (5.2). This is because the stability requirements are less
strict for the advection equation, as presented in section 3.3. Since a smaller range
of the spatial domain is used for the burgers equation, the number of grid points, m,
also has to be smaller in order to limit the number of time-steps.
Table 5.1: Specifications of the simulation domain for each of the three test-equations. Ntrain
is the size of the training set, Nval is the size of the validation set, Tend is the end-time of the
simulation, x-range is the range of the spatial domain, m is the number of interior grid points and
h is the grid spacing.
Equation
Ntrain
Nval
Tend
x range
m
h
Heat
100
50
0.1
[−π, π]
100
0.0622
Advection
100
50
1
[−π, π]
100
0.0622
Burgers
100
50
0.1
[0, 1]
35
0.0278
Table 5.2: Specifications of the simulation domain for each of the three test-equations and for each
type of model (HF is high-fidelity and LF is low-fidelity). k is the time-discretization size, and the
problem-dependent, c, and the order of the numerical scheme, p, correspond to the relation k = chp,
which differ for each equation and model.
Equation
Model
order
c
p
k
Heat
LF
2
0.49
2
1.89 · 10−3
HF
4
0.49
4
7.31 · 10−6
Advection
LF
1
0.3
1
1.85 · 10−2
HF
4
0.3
2
1.16 · 10−3
Burgers
LF
2
0.49
2
3.77 · 10−4
HF
4
0.49
4
2.92 · 10−7
In all cases, 100 training sets and 50 validation sets are generated. One training
set corresponds to the time-development with an initial value given by the initial value
functions in table 5.3 for a set of variable parameters, a, b and c. That is, 150 different
sets of constants are generated, ensuring 150 sine waves with different characteristics
in terms of their amplitude and their period.
==PAGE:70==
54
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Table 5.3: Initial value functions for each equation with the ranges of their variable parameters as
well as the value of their constants. The constants are named corresponding to the formulations of
the equations in (2.2) (heat), (2.4) (advection) and (2.6) (Burgers).
Equation
Initial function
Variable parameters
Constants
Heat
c + a sin(bπx)
a ∈[1, 2], b ∈[0.3, 0.5], c ∈[0, 0.25]
κ = 1
Advection
a sin(bπx)
a ∈[0.5, 2], b ∈[0.5, 2.5]
v = 1
Burgers
a sin(bπx)
a ∈[0.5, 2], b ∈[0.5, 2]
v = 1
5.1.2
Training procedure
The training procedure is outlined in algorithm 1. One for-loop surrounds two sets
of nested for-loops. The outer-most loop, iterates through a number of epochs (it-
erations), and makes sure that the training and validation procedures are repeated
Nepochs times. In the first set of nested for-loops, the training procedure is carried
out. The outer loop iterates through the time-steps whereas the inner loop iterates
through the training data. Thus, the loop is constructed such that all training data
is visited for one time-step before moving on to the next time-step. For each time
step, the function output is calculated using a low-fidelity finite difference method,
FLF , and an additive CNN, FCNN. The loss, when compared to the correct out-
put obtained from the training data, is calculated using a mean-squared-error (MSE)
function. The gradient of the loss-function is used to update the weights of the CNN
according to the Adam optimizer.
After the first set of nested for-loops a learning rate scheduler (LR_scheduler) is
used to update the learning rate of the Adam optimizer. The scheduler used is the
ReduceLROnPlateau-scheduler from Pytorch [48]. This scheduler makes sure that if
the mean loss of the CNN has not changed enough (given some threshold) over the
last number of iterations (given some patience), the learning rate is reduced such that
the optimizer takes smaller steps. The plateaus usually occur when the step of the
optimizer is too large, such that instead of stepping down towards a local minimum
(in the landscape of the errors of the model given the weights), the optimizer jumps
from ”hillside” to ”hillside”. Therefore, decreasing the step allows the optimizer to
descend towards the minimum. The patience used is 30 iterations and the step is
decreased by a factor 10 on a plateau. The scheduler is only based on the loss from
the training loop, not the validation loop.
The next set of nested for-loops constitutes the validation procedure. It is only
accessed if the training loss is below some tolerance in order to save computation
time. For the validation procedure, the outer loop iterates the data and the inner loop
iterates the time-steps, such that one set of data is iterated through before moving
on to the next. The CNN is not updated in the validation loop. The validation loss is
based only on the last time step. If the validation loss is lower than for the previously
saved model, the new model is saved. See section 1.1 for information on the machine
and software used for collection of results.
A selection of CNN-structures for the correcting CNN is tested. All CNNs are
==PAGE:71==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
55
Algorithm 1 Training procedure for MF-model
Require: Dtrain, Dval, Ntrain, Nval, Nepochs, Tend, k, FCNN, FLF , tol, tolsave
Calculate number of time-steps, NT , using Tend and k
for e in range(0, Nepochs) do
for i in range(0, NT −1) do
for n in range(0, Ntrain) do
input ←Dtrain[n, i]
▷Time-step i in data set n
U ←FLF (input) + kFCNN(input)
▷Corrected time-stepping
Uref ←Dtrain[n, i + 1]
▷Reference solution is next time step
loss ←MSE(Uref, U)
▷Calculate loss
Update weights of FCNN using ∇(loss)
end for
Calculate mean(loss)
end for
LR_scheduler(mean(loss))
if mean(loss) ≤tol then
▷Condition for performing validation
tol ←mean(loss)
▷Update tolerance level
for n in range(0, Nval) do
▷Repeat loops but with validation data
for i in range(0, NT −1) do
input ←Dval[n, i]
U ←FLF (input) + kFCNN(input)
Uref ←Dval[n, i + 1]
lossval ←MSE(Uref, U)
end for
Calculate mean(lossval)
end for
if mean(lossval) ≤tolsave then
▷Condition for saving model
tolsave ←mean(lossval)
Save FCNN
end if
end if
end for
chosen as relatively shallow (no more than 4 layers), and they are depicted in the
diagrams in figure 5.1. All network structures are comprised of 2-4 convolutional
layers with kernels of size 3 or 5. The network, Deep_FDM, is the same structure as
the one explored in section 4.2, and it contains non-linear activation functions. In
all cases, the input has dimension N × Nin, where N = m + 2 is the number of grid
points including boundary points, and Nin is the number of time-steps included, such
that Nin = 2 means that U n−1 and U n is included in the input. The final output of
the networks is U n+1
corr ≈U n+1
ref −U n+1, corresponding to a correction to the next time
step. In between the input and output, the dimension is increased to three channels,
==PAGE:72==
56
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
where convolutions and activations are performed on all three channels with each of
their individual convolution kernels. Zero-padding is used to maintain the dimension.
For the Burgers equation, further one network structure is tested, since many
tests showed that there is a need for non-linearity in the network.
This network
uses a hyperbolic tangent function as an activation function between layers, and it is
depicted in the diagram in figure 5.2.
5.1.2.1
Analysis of Floating Point Operations
The choice of shallow networks is to maintain a low computational complexity both
in the offline and online phase. In terms of the number of floating point operations
(FLOPs, not to be confused with FLOPS, which is floating point operations per
second), the networks differ slightly, but they all exist in terms of the 1D convolution
operation given by PyTorch’s function Conv1D [39]. The FLOPs or useful FLOPs
(these terms will be used interchangeably) are the number of floating point operations
necessary to perform, in this case, when simulating the finite difference and CNN-
schemes. Thus, they do not count the FLOPs of other parts of the code. Different
frameworks (such as the parallelized PyTorch framework) can optimize these FLOPs
in different ways. Therefore, keeping count of the FLOPs allows for a fair comparison,
which is independent of the implementation framework.
According to the PyTorch documentation [39], one convolution operation with
an input of size (1, Cin, Nx) and an output of size (1, Cout, Nx), has the following
operation:
out(Cout,j) = bias(Cout,j) +
Cin−1
X
k=0
WCout,j,k ∗input(1, k),
(5.3)
where ∗is the cross-correlation operator, C is the number of channels and W is the
weight corresponding to the convolution kernel for the given channel. In general, the
number of floating point operations of a convolutional layer with kernel size K is:
CoutNx + Cout(CinNx(2K −1) + Nx(Cin −1)).
The product CoutNx is the bias being added to each entry. The product CinNx(2K −
1) comes from the convolutions of Cin input channels of size Nx. This is without con-
sidering the slightly increased dimension because of padding. The kernel is multiplied
to each of the Nx values and the results are added together (= Nx(2K −1) FLOPs).
The product Nx(Cin −1) corresponds to the addition of values from each input chan-
nel. Considering the simplest network CNN_corr3, there are two layers, where the
first layer has C1,in = 1 and C1,out = 3, and the next has C2,in = 3 and C2,out = 1, as
well as a kernel of size K = 5, resulting in the number of FLOPs for one evaluation
of the model:
30NinNx + 30Nx = O(NinN).
==PAGE:73==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
57
Figure 5.1: Network structures tested. In all cases, the input is Nin previous time steps of U,
whereas the output is a correction to U in the next time step. N is the size of the domain, that is
N = m + 2. In all cases, the dimension is increased by copying the input into three channels in the
first convolution step such that the dimension is 3 × N × Nin.
==PAGE:74==
58
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Figure 5.2: Network structures tested for Burgers equation. The input is Nin previous time steps
of U, whereas the output is a correction to U in the next time step. N is the size of the domain,
that is N = m + 2. The dimension is increased by copying the input into three channels in the first
convolution step such that the dimension is 3 × N × Nin.
Thus, in asymptotic terms, the number of floating point operations is a product of
Nin and N.
For the other networks, the number of useful FLOPs per evaluation is:
Deep_FDM:
18NinNx + 22Nx,
CNN_corr4:
18NinNx + 126Nx,
CNN_corr5:
30NinNx + 210Nx,
CNN_corr6:
30NinNx + 217Nx.
Thus, it is now quantified in terms of floating point operations that the least expensive
network is Deep_FDM followed by CNN_corr3 and CNN_corr4 (depending on the value
of Nin), CNN_corr5 and then CNN_corr6. In all cases, the number of floating point
operations is linear wrt. the input dimension. In practice, Nin is a small number
(max. 10).
5.1.3
Results
Table 5.4 shows the training and validation errors from training the different networks
on data from the heat equation using the training procedure shown in algorithm 1.
The relative validation error is calculated by
√
MSE(e)
MSE(e) , where e contains the errors in
the last time step.
For easier comparison, only the error in terms of powers of 10 is shown, since
the mantissa differs slightly for different seeds. Different sizes of the input dimension
is tested. That is, it is tested whether including more than one previous time step
in the input improves the performance. This is shown by the column Nin, which
indicates that the training is performed with 1, 2 and 10 input time-steps to predict
the correction for the next time-step. The table further shows the epoch number
where the final model is saved, Nepochs, together with the training MSE and relative
validation error of the final model. The last column shows a measure of the training
==PAGE:75==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
59
times, given by the mean time spent on each epoch, measured for 25 epochs without
the validation loop, when training on the machine used for this thesis (information
can be found in section 1.1). These training times should not be considered the one
truth, since they might change significantly if the training is performed on a different
machine. Instead, they work as a measure for comparing the expense of the offline
phase for each of the model structures.
The table shows that the training converges to a satisfying level (rel. val. error ≈
10−7) for all network structures and input dimensions. The first structure CNN_corr3
converges faster than the other model structures.
Since this network is also the
simplest structure, this model is preferred. There seems to be no difference in how
many time-steps need to be included, and therefore it is preferred to use Nin = 1.
Table 5.4:
Training results for the heat equation for different network structures.
Nin is the
number of time-steps used as input to the network. Nepochs is the number of epochs used to reach
the model that is reported. NT,train is the number of time-steps used for training (first loop in alg.
1). The column ’epoch time’ shows the mean time spent on each epoch when running 25 epochs of
the training loop (without validation loop).
Nin
Nepochs
NT,train
train
MSE
rel. val.
error
epoch
time [s]
CNN_corr3
1
190
50
10−14
10−7
2.04
2
44
47
10−14
10−7
2.38
10
19
39
10−13
10−7
2.21
CNN_corr4
1
699
50
10−14
10−7
3.86
2
699
47
10−13
10−7
3.95
10
570
39
10−13
10−7
3.58
CNN_corr5
1
159
50
10−13
10−7
3.63
2
197
47
10−13
10−7
3.79
10
172
39
10−13
10−7
3.42
Deep_FDM
1
699
50
10−13
10−7
1.34
2
345
47
10−13
10−7
1.46
10
893
39
10−14
10−7
1.74
Table 5.5 shows the results of training the four different network structures on data
from the advection equation. In this case, it is seen that the network Deep_FDM is not
able to converge. This is somewhat expected, since the advection equation is linear,
and the non-linear parts of Deep_FDM might therefore be spoiling the convergence.
CNN_corr3 is slightly better than the other network structures. There is also a slight
increase in performance when using Nin = 2 compared to Nin = 1. In favor of simple
network structures, the CNN_corr3 with Nin = 2 is preferred.
Similarly, table 5.6 shows the results of training the five different network struc-
tures on data from Burgers equation. In this case, the validation errors are in the
range 10−6 to 10−4. Looking at the training error, though, CNN_corr3, CNN_corr5
and CNN_corr6 with Nin = 10 are best. During some further tests, it turned out that
CNN_corr6 performed better than the other two, and therefore this is presented as
==PAGE:76==
60
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Table 5.5: Training results for the advection equation for different network structures. Nin is the
number of time-steps used as input to the network. Nepochs is the number of epochs used to reach
the model that is reported. NT,train is the number of time-steps used for training (second loop in
1). The column ’epoch time’ shows the mean time spent on each epoch when running 25 epochs of
the training loop (without validation loop).
Nin
Nepochs
NT,train
train
MSE
rel. val.
error
epoch
time [s]
CNN_corr3
1
74
50
10−9
10−5
2.37
2
699
47
10−11
10−6
2.76
10
499
39
10−11
10−6
2.38
CNN_corr4
1
222
50
10−8
10−4
4.27
2
699
47
10−10
10−5
4.10
10
799
39
10−10
10−5
3.82
CNN_corr5
1
799
50
10−10
10−5
4.05
2
699
47
10−11
10−6
4.08
10
699
39
10−10
10−5
3.82
Deep_FDM
1
-
50
-
-
1.56
2
-
47
-
-
1.66
10
-
39
-
-
1.97
the preferred model.
In all three cases, it is seen that the offline phase is more expensive for CNN_corr4,
CNN_corr5, and CNN_corr6 than the other network structures. This is expected since
these structures have the most layers. It is also seen that the Deep_FDM structure is
less expensive than CNN_corr3, which is due to the larger kernel of the latter.
5.1.3.1
Analysis of selected models
After the above tests of different model structures, the preferred models are tested on
their performance in terms of errors and time requirements. The time is measured as
the wall-clock time, and it therefore depends on many conditions such as the machine
and other programs running in the background, and the time results should therefore
be analyzed with care.
For the heat and the advection equation, the LF- and HF-models are simulated on
100 sets of new constants, a, b and, for the heat equation, c. Similarly for the CNN-
corrected LF-model. The simulations are timed, and their solutions are compared
to the analytical solution to the test equations. This is reported in table 5.7. The
LF-, MF- and HF-models for Burgers equation are only tested and timed for one
simulation for a = b = 1 and compared to the analytical solution, since this is the
only available analytical solution. The errors and the timing results are also reported
in table 5.7.
The discrete L2-norm of the mean of errors across the 100 simulations is reported
==PAGE:77==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
61
Table 5.6: Training results for Burgers equation for different network structures. Nin is the number
of time-steps used as input to the network. Nepochs is the number of epochs used to reach the model
that is reported. NT,train is the number of time-steps used for training (second loop in 1). The
column ’epoch time’ shows the mean time spent on each epoch when running 25 epochs of the
training loop (without validation loop).
Nin
Nepochs
NT,train
train
MSE
rel. val.
error
epoch
time [s]
CNN_corr3
1
1
50
10−7
10−5
2.85
2
334
49
10−9
10−5
2.68
10
529
41
10−11
10−6
2.22
CNN_corr4
1
18
50
10−6
10−4
4.04
2
39
49
10−8
10−5
3.85
10
312
41
10−10
10−6
3.68
CNN_corr5
1
5
50
10−8
10−5
3.74
2
59
49
10−9
10−5
3.95
10
349
41
10−11
10−6
3.35
Deep_FDM
1
-
50
-
-
1.53
2
3
49
10−6
10−5
1.68
10
182
41
10−8
10−5
1.80
CNN_corr6
1
399
50
10−10
10−4
3.83
2
399
49
10−11
10−6
4.12
10
246
41
10−11
10−6
3.57
as well as the infinity norm. The norms are defined as follows:
|e|2 = σmax(h|U ref −U mod|),
(5.4a)
|e|∞=
max
0≤n≤NT −1
Nx−1
X
j=0
|U ref
j
−U mod
j
|,
(5.4b)
where U mod and U ref are all values across the time and space domain of the model
and the reference solution, respectively. Thus, the L2-norm is the largest singular
value of the absolute error matrix scaled by the grid spacing, and the infinity norm
is the maximum absolute error across the time and space domain. The reason for
including both types of norms is that the infinity norm will report the largest error
of the domain, whereas the L2-norm takes into account the errors across the domain.
Thus, the L2-norm gives insight into the general performance of the model, whereas
the infinity norm is important for knowing the extreme limitations of the model. Both
norms are calculated only for the same time steps across all models, such that the
HF-model is not penalized for using more time steps.
The improvement in terms of simulation time is calculated for the corrected model
and shown in the fourth- and third-to-last column. The last two columns show the
==PAGE:78==
62
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
improvement ratio of the norm, as defined by:
Rp = |eLF |p −|eHF |p
|eMF |p −|eHF |p
.
Thus, Rp, is quantifying the improvement of performance of the corrected MF-model
when compared to the LF-model in terms of the p-norm. An Rp > 1 indicates that
the MF-model is better than the LF-model.
Table 5.8 reports the number of FLOPs for each method as well as the FLOPs-
ratio between the HF- and MF-model. For the finite difference methods, the number
of FLOPs is calculated taking into account the FLOPs of the convolution with a
single finite difference kernel and the multiplications and additions corresponding to
the time-stepping scheme. For the HF-model of the Burgers equation, the FLOPs of
the transformation process is also accounted for. The calculations can be found in
appendix E.1.
Table 5.7: Performance of the preferred correcting CNNs for the three test equations and a new
set of 100 generated constants a, b and c, corresponding to 100 new data sets. Reported with 2
significant digits. The models used for the table is CNN_corr3 with Nin = 1 for the heat equation,
CNN_corr3 with Nin = 2 for the advection equation and CNN_corr5 with Nin = 10 for Burgers
equation.
time 100
/1 sim[s]
|e|2
|e|∞
TMF
TLF
THF
TMF
R2
R∞
Heat
LF
0.43
3.9 · 10−4
2.2 · 10−4
4.2
67
13
12
HF
120
2.1 · 10−6
1.2 · 10−6
MF
1.8
3.3 · 10−5
2.0 · 10−5
Advection
LF
0.44
0.97
4.9 · 10−1
5.9
4.2
28
30
HF
11
0.0064
5.1 · 10−3
MF
2.6
0.041
2.1 · 10−2
Burgers
LF
0.021
6.6 · 10−4
4.4 · 10−4
4.4
1200
4.2
4.5
HF
110
3.1 · 10−6
3.7 · 10−6
MF
0.093
1.6 · 10−4
1.0 · 10−4
Results for the heat equation
Table 5.7 shows that the MF-model has improvement ratios just above 10, which
indicates that this model is a factor 10 better than the LF-model in terms of approxi-
mating the HF-model. In terms of the errors, the MF-model is placed approximately
in between the LF- and HF-model. The improvement in terms of time when com-
pared to the HF model is remarkable with a speed-up of a factor of 67. In general,
this model is very promising in terms of the trade-off between speed and accuracy,
and is remarkably better than the LF-model.
Considering the number of FLOPs used for the MF-model in table 5.8, there is
a gain of a factor 42 when compared to the HF-model, which is comparable to the
==PAGE:79==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
63
Table 5.8: Number of floating point operations per simulation for each model.
The number is
calculated by NT (NF LOP s,CNN + NF LOP s,F DM), not taking into account boundary handling and
padding (as this is assumed approximately constant accross models) but taking into account kernel
sizes and transformations in the case of the HF-model for Burgers equation.
NFLOPs per
sim.
NFLOPs,MF
NFLOPs,LF
NFLOPs,HF
NFLOPs,MF
Heat
LF
3.9 · 104
HF
1.6 · 107
9.7
42
MF
3.8 · 105
Advection
LF
4.0 · 104
HF
1.9 · 106
14
3.5
MF
5.5 · 105
Burgers
LF
1.4 · 105
HF
3.0 · 108
37
58
MF
5.2 · 106
speed-up in terms of time. Compared to the LF-model, there is a factor 9.7 increase
in FLOPs when using the MF-model. All in all, an improvement of a factor 10 is
penalized by a factor 10 increase in FLOPs.
Figure 5.3 shows the difference between the three types of models when compared
to the analytical (true) solution. Note, that the scales of the plots are different, which
is seen from the color bars. The figure shows that the solution obtained with the MF-
model does not resemble the solution of the HF-model. Instead, the MF-model seems
to have some non-linear characteristics, which prove useful in large parts of the time-
space domain.
Figure 5.3: Absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to
the analytical (true) solution of the heat equation. This simulation uses the parameters: a = 1.2233,
b = 0.3990 and c = 0.1433, which come from the validation set.
Results for the advection equation
Looking at table 5.7 for the advection equation, there is an improvement of a factor
around 30 for both norms. Once again, the MF-model sits in-between the two other
models in terms of the errors. The speed-up compared to the HF-model is approxi-
mately the same as the slow-down compared to the LF-model. Looking at the FLOPs,
==PAGE:80==
64
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
though, there is a factor 14 increase in computation compared to the LF-model. This
is not ideal, but it might be worth the extra computations to obtain the improvement
of the errors of the MF-model, especially in an optimized framework like PyTorch.
Figure 5.4 shows the difference between the three types of models when compared
to the analytical (true) solution for the advection equation. It is seen from the middle
pane, that the Lax-Wendroff method has an artifact in the right part of the spatial
domain, which is due to the use of central differences. The CNN in the MF-model
seems to learn this artifact, which is quite interesting, though not desirable.
Figure 5.4: Absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to the
analytical (true) solution of the advection equation. This simulation uses the parameters: a = 0.6002
and b = 1.3867, which come from the validation set.
Results for Burgers equation
In table 5.7, there is an increase in performance of around a factor 5 given by the
improvement ratios when using the MF-model. The increase in computation time
compared to the LF-model is around the same, whereas the computation time of
the MF-model is far smaller than the time of the HF-model. Comparing the FLOPs
results in almost the same conclusion: the factor increase in FLOPs going from the
LF-model to the MF-model is smaller than going from the MF-model to the HF-
model. Though, the benefit of the MF-model is less pronounced in terms of FLOPs
than in terms of time. This shows that even with the remarkable difference in the
needed number of time-steps (266 for the LF- and MF-model and 3.4 · 105 for the
HF-model), the computational complexity of using the slightly deeper CNN in the
MF-model results in a big step-back of the model.
Figure 5.5: Absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to
the analytical (true) solution of the Burgers equation. This simulation uses the parameters: a = 1
and b = 1.
==PAGE:81==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
65
Figure 5.5 shows a comparison of the three models to the analytical solution. It is
not clear from the plots, whether the MF-model is similar to the HF-model, since the
HF model has some systematic errors coming from the boundaries. This error occurs
due to assumptions on the boundaries as presented in section 3.3.3. Though, it is
seen from the figure that the magnitude of the errors of the MF-model are smaller
than that of the LF model (seen from the color bar), and there are larger areas with
small errors than large errors, when compared to the LF-model.
5.1.4
Generalizing the results to different grids
In the previous section, the analyses are conducted using a fixed number of grid
points, m, for each of the three test equations. In this section, it is tested whether
the previous results are general for different values of m. This analysis serves an
important purpose; when implementing numerical methods for PDEs in practice, one
will often have an accuracy requirement rather than a fixed value of grid points. This
could be for practical reasons, if the model is to be used for computations in eg. the
industry and therefore has to comply with certain standards. For instance, if the
accuracy requirement is 10−4, one would choose the value of m such that the model
obtains an accuracy of that level. One could choose a second order model with a very
large m instead of a fourth order model with a small m. This could be one way of
avoiding the strict discretization requirements of a high-order model. Now, it will be
explored whether a MF-model could compete with the HF- and LF-model in each of
those cases.
The model structures that were selected in the previous section are now tested for
different values of m and compared to the LF- and HF-models. This means that a new
model is trained for each value of m. The resulting model is tested with the same 100
initial value functions as in the previous section for the heat and advection equation,
and for the one initial value function for the Burgers equation (where a = b = 1).
For the heat equation, the values m = 20, 40, 80, 160 are tested. For advection, the
CNN did not converge for m = 20, so only the values m = 40, 80, 160 are tested. For
Burgers, the values m = 10, 20, 40 are tested. The results are analyzed one equation
at a time below using graphs that show the errors in terms of the infinity norm and
L2-norm, respectively, as well as the number of FLOPs. The data for generating
the figures are found in tables E.1 and E.2 in appendix E.1.2. Data on computation
time can also be found in appendix in table E.3.
Table 5.9 shows a summary of
the improvement ratios of the MF-models when compared to the LF-models. This
summary will also be used in the analyses below.
Results for the heat equation
In all cases, the MF-model performs better than the LF-model in terms of the er-
rors, so, in general, the results from the previous section generalize. Looking at the
improvement ratios, it seems that the MF-model has greater potential for a small m
==PAGE:82==
66
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Table 5.9: Improvement ratios of the MF-model compared to the LF-model for each of the three
equations and for different values of m. Reported with 2 significant digits.
Ratios | m
10
20
40
80
160
Heat
R∞
-
26
16
12
5.0
R2
-
66
18
13
6.1
Advection
R∞
-
-
13
25
63
R2
-
-
13
23
45
Burgers
R∞
1.2
2.4
5.9
-
-
R2
1.7
4.6
5.5
-
-
than for a large m. This is also reflected in figure 5.6, where the gap between the
MF- and HF-model grows with m. This indicates that there is a limit to how well
the network structure fits to the HF-model.
With the figure, the errors can be interpreted in relation to a potential accuracy
requirement. Say, for instance, one has a requirement of 10−4 for the L2-norm (shown
as the horizontal, dashed line in the plot). In such a case, the figure shows that one
would have to choose larger values of m than 160, in order to fulfill this requirement
with the LF-model. For m > 40, the MF-model is suﬀicient to satisfy the accuracy
requirement and with the advantages in terms of computation time, the MF-model
would clearly be preferred over the HF-model.
Figure 5.6: The lines show the absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models
when compared to the analytical (true) solution of the heat equation for different number of grid
points given by the value m (left y-axis). The bars show the number of FLOPs (right y-axis). The
numbers are mean values across 100 simulations.
For the infinity norm, one could also consider a requirement of 10−4. In this case,
one could either choose to use the LF-model with m = 160 (1.54 · 105 FLOPs), the
MF-model with m = 80 (1.96 · 105 FLOPs) or the HF-model with m = 40 (2.14 · 105
FLOPs). In this case, the LF-model would be preferred over the MF-model, but the
MF-model is preferred over the HF-model. Considering both error norms, though,
the MF-model with m = 80 is preferred with the given accuracy requirements.
In this regard, it should be noted that these accuracy requirements are chosen
==PAGE:83==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
67
arbitrarily to provide an example. The purpose is to show that there are situations,
where the MF-model would be preferred over existing methods. This procedure is
used in the two next sections as well.
Results for the advection equation
For the advection equation, results are given for the first order upwind method, the
MF-model and the fourth order Lax-Wendroff method, which is the HF-model, but
also for the second order Lax-Wendroff method. This is because, when given the
task to choose a suitable model to comply with an accuracy requirement, it would, of
course, be natural to also consider available second order models.
In all cases, the MF-model performs better than the first and second order models
in terms of the errors. Looking at the improvement ratios in table 5.9, the advantage
of the MF-model over the LF-model grows with m. This is because the gap between
the LF- and HF-models (in terms of the errors) grows more rapidly than the gap
between the MF-model and the HF-model. Even though trained to improve the first
order method, the MF-model also shows to be better than the second order Lax-
Wendroff method. Though, the slope of the graph of the MF-model is similar to that
of the second order Lax-Wendroff, indicating that the MF-model has indeed fitted to
the highest order truncation error term, resulting in something similar to a second
order method.
Figure 5.7: The lines show the absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models
when compared to the analytical (true) solution of the advection equation for different number of
grid points given by the value m (left y-axis). The bars show the number of FLOPs (right y-axis).
Also the results from a second order model (LF (2)), the Lax-Wendroff method, is shown.
The
numbers are mean values across 100 simulations.
Once again, the figure can be used for considering cases where an accuracy require-
ment is in place. With the (arbitrary) requirements examples shown as the dashed
lines in both plots, the MF-model with m = 80 (3.54 · 105 FLOPs) is competing with
the HF-model with m = 80 (1.11 · 106 FLOPs) and the second order model with
m = 160 (1.87 · 105 FLOPs). In this case, the second order Lax-Wendroff method
would be preferred due to the lower number of FLOPs.
==PAGE:84==
68
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Results for the Burgers equation
Looking at the improvement ratios, the potential of the MF-model also grows with
m. This is supported by figure 5.8, where the MF-model, in general, has a smaller
error than the LF-model, and the slope of the infinity-norm of the error is more steep
for the MF-model than the LF-model. Thus, this shows that it is indeed possible to
fit a MF-model to correct a LF-model for the Burgers equation.
Using the accuracy requirements in the figure, the LF-model with m = 40 (1.05·105
FLOPs) would be preferred compared to the other two. The MF-model with m = 20
(1.06 · 106 FLOPs) is comparable to the HF-model with m = 10 (1.06 · 106 FLOPs)
in terms of computational complexity and accuracy.
Figure 5.8: The lines show the absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models
when compared to the analytical (true) solution of the Burgers equation for different number of grid
points given by the value m (left y-axis). The bars show the number of FLOPs (right y-axis). This
simulation uses the parameters: a = 1 and b = 1.
5.1.5
Generalizing the results to a different domain
One of the key features of the CNN, is its ability to extract local features, and in
this case, to act as a local operator, just as for finite difference stencils known from
numerical theory.
This ability should allow for the correcting CNN to generalize
outside of the domain that it was trained on. This concept is tested in this section
simply by increasing the simulation domain and performing the time-stepping with
the MF-model without retraining the CNN.
Figure 5.9 shows the error of the MF-model for the heat and the advection equation
for an increased domain. The domain used for training is to the left of the red, dashed
line. It is seen that the dynamics of the model is the same outside the training domain
as inside the training domain. Thus, for these linear test equations, the model is
indeed generalizable to other areas of the domain given that the initial value function
is the same as the one used for training.
Figure 5.10 shows the error of the MF-model for the Burgers equation on an
increased domain together with the errors of the LF-model. There is an area just
==PAGE:85==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
69
Heat equation, |e|∞= 1.0 · 10−3.
Advection equation, |e|∞= 2.4 · 10−2.
Figure 5.9: Errors of the MF-models compared to the analytical solution (true) on an increased
domain, x = [−π, 4π], for the heat and advection equation. The original domain used for training is
to the left of the red dashed line.
outside of the training area (x from appr. 1 to 2.5), where the error of the MF-model
is very high compared to other locations of the domain. Therefore, it seems that the
correcting CNN is not generalizing as well outside the training domain. The reason
for this could be the shape of the solution: the initial data only consists of half a sine-
curve, and it seems that the part of the domain where the errors of the MF-model
occur is on the other half of the first period of the sine-curve. As seen in figure 2.3,
the crest of the first half-period of the sine-wave is moving rightwards, whereas in the
second half-period of the sine-wave, the wave trough is moving leftwards. The CNN
might be adapting to the right-ward motion, and therefore produces an error in the
second half-period of the wave. An idea to improve the method is to include a larger
portion of the domain in the training data such that more dynamics of the solution
is captured.
Figure 5.10: Absolute errors of the solutions of the LF- and MF-models when compared to the
analytical (true) solution of the Burgers equation for an increased simulation domain, x = [0, 4]. The
original domain used for training is to the left of the red dashed line. The captions show the mean
infinity norm across 20 simulations.
==PAGE:86==
70
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
5.1.6
Generalizing the results for different initial value function
It was shown in chapter 4 that the correcting CNN will fit to the leading term of
the truncation error, which for the heat equation contains a fourth derivative. It was
shown in section 4.1, how the CNN ends up approximating a second order central
difference stencil for that derivative. Even though the truncation error contains a
derivative of the solution function (e.g. uxxxx for the heat equation), the CNN in the
MF-model is not dependent on this solution, but instead it seems to approximate a
finite difference stencil, which is invariant to the solution function but simply takes
the previous state as input.
To check this property, the trained CNNs are tested for a new initial value func-
tion for the heat equation and the advection equation. Table 5.10 shows these two
new initial functions and the corresponding solution functions for each equation. In
appendix E.1.3, the initial values are visualized for a set of the constants a, b and c
for the two equations.
Table 5.10: New initial value functions and the corresponding solution functions for the heat and
advection equation for testing the already trained MF-models.
Equation
Initial function
Solution function
Heat
c + a cos(bπx) + sin( b
4πx)
c + a cos(bπx)e−b2π2t + sin( b
4πx)e−b2
16 π2t
Advection
a cos(bπx) + sin( b
4πx)
a cos(bπ(x −t)) + sin( b
4π(x −t))
Figures 5.11 and 5.12 show the results for different values of m without retraining
the networks. It is seen that the dynamics are quite similar to those of figures 5.6
and 5.7, but with slightly larger errors for the MF-model for the heat equation. The
reason for this is not entirely clear, but could be due to the problem being a bit more
stiff with the new initial value function.
Overall, it seems that the expected invariance towards the solution function and
the initial value function is confirmed.
Figure 5.11: Errors for different values of m for the new initial values in table 5.10 for the heat
equation. The numbers are mean values across 20 simulations.
==PAGE:87==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
71
Figure 5.12: Errors for different values of m for the new initial values in table 5.10 for the advection
equation. The numbers are mean values across 20 simulations.
5.1.7
Stability analysis of MF-model
This section introduces a decomposition of the CNN with the purpose of applying
classical numerical theory on absolute stability. The MF-model for the heat equation
consists of a linear CNN with only one time step as input. This means that it can
be analyzed whether the method has absolute stability using simple stability analysis
for a system of linear ODEs. Due to the MOL-discretization, each grid point can be
simulated as one coupled ODE, and therefore analyses for systems of ODEs apply.
First, to understand the analysis, we’ll start with a simple forward Euler step, which
can be written as:
U n+1 = U N + kAU n = (I + kA)U n,
n = 1, ..., NT ,
(5.5)
where U = [U0, ..., Um+1] contains each grid point, k is the time step size, I is the
identity matrix of appropriate size and A is a matrix with −2 in the diagonal and 1 in
the first super- and sub-diagonals, corresponding to the central difference scheme for
a second derivative. When A is diagonalizable, ie. A = RΛR−1 (where R contains
the eigenvectors and Λ is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues in the diagonal), the
step (5.5) can be rewritten to:
V n+1 = (I + kΛ)V n,
(5.6)
where V n = R−1U n. (5.6) is now a system of decoupled ODEs, and each equation
can therefore be analyzed individually. The jth equation is:
V n+1
j
= (1 + kλj)V n
j .
Now, Eulers method is formulated simply by applying a transfer function FLF =
(1 + kλj) to the grid point V n
j , and the method is said to have absolute stability if
|1 + kλj| ≤1 for all j = 0, ..., m + 1. This means that the stability region for Eulers
method is −2 ≤kλ ≤0. Therefore, the method is absolutely stable if all eigenvalues
of kA are in the stability region of Eulers method.
==PAGE:88==
72
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Generalizing this theory to the MF-model for the heat equation is straight-forward
but somewhat cumbersome. The MF-model consists of the forward Euler method
shown above as well as the CNN_corr3 structure with the update:
U n+1 = U n + kALF U n + kFCNN(U n),
where k is the time step size, FCNN() is the CNN function and ALF is the block-
diagonal matrix for the central difference scheme as described above, with
1
h2 [1, −2, 1]
in the diagonal.
The CNN consists of two layers with three channels in each and some biases. Let’s
now bring the CNN on a structure similar to the transfer-function above. Consider
each kernel of each layer and channel on the structure of a block-diagonal matrix with
the kernel in the block diagonal. Let’s call the kernel of layer l and channel c, Klc,
such that the kernel of the first layer and third channel has the name K13. Using the
same system of subscripts, the block diagonal matrices would be:
Layer 1
Layer 2
Channel 1
A11 = diag([K11])
A21 = diag([K21]),
Channel 2
A12 = diag([K12])
A22 = diag([K22]),
Channel 3
A13 = diag([K13])
A23 = diag([K23]).
Now consider the input U n, which contains the m+1 grid point values at time-step
n. This input would first be passed to each channel in the first layer and multiplied
by the kernel corresponding to each channel. Using the same subscript system for
outputs from each channel in each layer, the outputs would be:
Layer 1
Channel 1
U 11 = A11U n + b11e,
Channel 2
U 12 = A12U n + b12e,
Channel 3
U 13 = A13U n + b13e,
where blc is a bias term and e is a vector of ones of appropriate size. For the second
layer, there are 3 input channels and 1 output channel. According to the PyTorch
documentation [39], there will be three kernels (one for each channel), and each kernel
is used on the corresponding input channels, and the result is added together and a
bias is added:
Layer 2
Channel 1
U out = A21U 11 + A22U 12 + A23U 13 + b21e.
This term can be expanded such that it is written in terms of the input U n:
U out = A21A11U n + A22A12U n + A23A13U n + A21(b11e) + A22(b12e) + A23(b13e) + b21e
= U n(A21A11 + A22A12 + A23A13) + BIAS TERMS.
==PAGE:89==
5.1 MF-models for the test equations
73
Now, the update of the MF-model can be written as:
U n+1 = (I + k(ALF + A21A11 + A22A12 + A23A13)) U n + k · BIAS TERMS.
Since the bias terms are constant, the terms can be ignored in the stability analysis.
Now, the absolute stability of the method can be evaluated in terms of the eigen-
values of the matrix k(ALF +A21A11 +A22A12 +A23A13). If the eigenvalues are all
greater or equal to -2 and smaller or equal to 0, the MF-model is absolutely stable.
The trained CNN_corr3 structure for the heat equation with m = 100 has the
following kernels:
Layer 1
Channel 1
K11 = [0.0133, −0.0802, 0.1596, −0.2850, 0.2139],
Channel 2
K12 = [−0.0271, 0.0516, 0.0864, 0.3264, −0.4714],
Channel 3
K13 = [0.4703, −0.1783, −0.1442, −0.0307, −0.0928].
Layer 2
Channel 1
K21 = [0.0097, −0.0686, −0.1349, 0.1606, 0.0171],
Channel 2
K22 = [−0.2118, 0.0232, 0.1951, 0.0446, −0.0317],
Channel 3
K23 = [−0.0125, 0.0234, −0.1398, −0.0865, 0.2004].
These kernels are used to construct the matrices A11, A12, A13, A21, A22 and A23.
The eigenvalues of k(ALF + A21A11 + A22A12 + A23A13) are then calculated. The
largest and smallest eigenvalues are reported here:
λmin = −1.95,
λmax = −4.6 · 10−4.
The largest and smallest eigenvalues are both within the stability region. Thus, the
MF-model for the heat equation is absolutely stable.
A different way to perform a stability analysis on a linear one-step method like
the MF-model for the heat equation, is to analyze the Jacobian of the right-hand-side
function of the initial value problem (as presented in [49]):
ut = f(u) = FDM(u) + CNN(u).
The Jacobian for the MF-model can be obtained by evaluating the right-hand-side
function, for the unit vectors ei, i = 1, ..., N, where the ith entry is 1 and the rest
are zero, such that the ith unit vector corresponds to the ith column in the Jacobian.
Doing this, the above decomposition of the CNN is not necessary, since the CNN
itself can be evaluated directly. With this method, the extreme eigenvalues of the
Jacobian are identical to the ones found above, confirming the result. Though, the
above decomposition is still useful, since it allows for greater understanding of what
parameters influence the stability, thereby contributing to the interpretability of the
model. In the case of instability, it would therefore be possible to consult the matrices
above and consider if they could be tweaked to obtain stability, or if other measures
could be applied to avoid the instability, for instance by inputting a stabilizing layer.
==PAGE:90==
74
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
5.2
Case 1: The Shallow Water Equations
In the previous section, a novel multi-fidelity model was introduced and tested. In this
section, the framework will be extended to apply to a system of equations that have
more real-life relevance, namely the shallow water equations (SWE). The SWE are a
system of equations, which model the movement of water under certain conditions;
most importantly, that the water height is much smaller than the wave length. This,
of course, limits the application possibilities of the equations, but the equations are
still applied in a range of real-life cases.
A few examples, where the SWE are used to successfully model real-life cases, is
given in [50], where the authors test their implementation of a numerical solver on the
two-dimensional SWE on four different cases. One example is a model of a tsunami
run-up on an island, and another is a model of rainfall-runoff in the city of Glasgow.
Another example, where the SWE are applied to real-life cases, is in the commercial
MIKE-model by DHI [51].
This section first gives an introduction to the mathematical model of the SWE.
Then, the CNN-framework of the MF-model is extended to include systems of two
equations. In section 5.2.3, the MF-model is tested for a linearized version of the
SWE, and in section 5.2.4 the non-linear SWE are used for testing the MF-model.
Note, that in this section the symbols h and k are no longer used to denote grid-
spacing and time-step size, since they are common symbols used in wave theory, and
this might therefore cause confusion. Instead, the symbols ∆x and ∆t will be used.
5.2.1
Governing equations
The shallow water equations (SWE) are a system of coupled PDEs, which is a sim-
plified form of the Navier-Stokes equation (NSE). The NSE describes the flow (given
by the three-dimensional velocities) of a viscous fluid [52]. Under certain assump-
tions, the three-dimensional NSE can be integrated over depth, which results in a
two-dimensional system called the SWE with a mean velocity across depth.
The
SWE (like the Navier-Stokes) consist of a momentum and mass continuity equations
for an inviscid fluid and are, as described in [53], given by:
momentum:
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x + v ∂u
∂y = −g∇η,
mass continuity:
∂η
∂t + ∇· (ηu) = 0,
where u = (u, v) is the vector of velocities and g is the local gravitational acceleration.
The equations are considered in Cartesian coordinates. The assumption of a shallow
fluid means that the vertical velocities of the NSE can be neglected. The situation
is sketched in figure 5.13. η is the height of the free surface and d is the mean water
depth. L is the wave length.
For the purpose of this thesis, only one dimension is considered, which corresponds
to assuming that the gradient in the v-direction is zero. This simplifies the equations
==PAGE:91==
5.2 Case 1: The Shallow Water Equations
75
Figure 5.13: This figure comes from [54]. It is a sketch of the situation outlined: the shallow water
system modeled by the SWE. The figure has been modified; in the original figure, the symbol d is
represented by an h.
to the set of two coupled equations also known as the Saint-Venant equations (SVE):
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x = −g ∂η
∂x,
(5.8a)
∂η
∂t + ∂(ηu)
∂x
= 0.
(5.8b)
In the following, the names SWE and SVE will be used interchangeably to denote
the one-dimensional case of the SWE.
Before testing the MF-model on the non-linear SVE (5.8), the system is further
simplified under conditions described by [54].
Most importantly, small-amplitude
waves are assumed, which results in a linearization of the equations, such that the lin-
ear set of coupled, constant coeﬀicient, hyperbolic equations called the linear shallow
water equations (LSWE) are obtained:
∂u
∂t = −g ∂η
∂x,
(5.9a)
∂η
∂t = −d∂u
∂x,
(5.9b)
where d is the mean depth of the water.
A traveling wave solution for u is given by:
u(x, t) = πHL
2πTh cos(ωt −kx),
==PAGE:92==
76
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
which is a result from [54]. Note, that the symbol k is used to describe the wave num-
ber in this context, not the time step size. Inserting this into (5.9b) and integrating
wrt. t, yields the solution for η:
η(x, t) = πHLk
2πTω cos(ωt −kx) = H
2 cos(ωt −kx).
The last equality is obtained using the relations T = L
c and k = ω
c from [54]. In
table 5.11, the characteristic constants and the parameter values of the system are
outlined. The parameter a, which is the amplitude of the wave, is the parameter used
for varying the simulation data for training the neural network in the next section.
Table 5.11: Characteristic constants for the wave modeled by the LSWE (5.9).
Parameter
Description
Value
Unit
g
Local gravitational acceleration
9.81
m/s2
d
Mean water depth
0.25
m
c
Propagation velocity
√gd ≈1.57
m/s
a
Wave amplitude
a ∈[0.2, 1]
m
H
Wave height
2a
m
L
Wave length
1
m
T
Wave period
L
c ≈0.659
s
ω
Wave frequency
2π
T ≈9.84
s−1
k
Wave number
ω
√
gh = 2π
L = 2π
m−1
The traveling wave solution to the LSWE is shown in figure 5.14. The figure shows
that the solution is, as expected, a traveling wave.
0.0
0.24
0.49
0.73
0.98
x
0.0
0.12
0.24
0.36
0.48
0.6
0.71
0.83
0.95
t
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
x
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
t
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
Figure 5.14: Traveling wave solution to the LSWE. Only the solution for the free surface elevation,
η, is shown. Note, that the z-axis of the system shown in figure 5.13 is placed at h, and therefore, η
has negative values. The solution is shown for a = 0.6255.
==PAGE:93==
5.2 Case 1: The Shallow Water Equations
77
5.2.2
CNN framework for the SWE
Since the equation now consists of two one-dimensional equations, the CNN-framework
from this chapter has to be extended. The extended framework has to be able to take
two inputs, η and u, and Nin time steps of each variable and it has to have two
outputs. It is chosen to represent the inputs as 2 · Nin input channels (in chapter 4,
it was Nin input channels), which are extended to 6 channels in the middle layers (as
opposed to the 3 channels from earlier).
A diagram of the CNN-framework can be seen in figure 5.15. The diagram shows
an example where Nin = 2. The input therefore has dimension N × (2Nin) = N ×
4.
This input is extended to 6 channels by creating six kernels for each of the 4
columns, a total of 24 kernels in the first convolution. The output is then collapsed
(by summation) into 6 channels of 1 column followed by the addition of bias.
If
more layers are present, the outputs are passed onto these layers. In the end, the 6
channels are combined into 2 channels. Each channel then corresponds to a correction
to the stepping of the u-variable (denoted ˜u) and a correction to the stepping of
the η-variable (denoted ˜η).
This framework is implemented for a selection of the
Figure 5.15: Diagram of the extended MF-CNN structure. An example with Nin = 2 is shown.
The input is extended to 6 channels. In the very first convolutional layer, a kernel is created for each
column in each channel. After this, the dimension is collapsed to 6 one-dimensional channels. In the
end, the 6 channels are collapsed to two output channels.
CNN-structures in figures 5.1 and 5.2 from the previous section, namely CNN_corr3,
CNN_corr5 and CNN_corr6. The training framework of alg. 1 is used, but where the
patience of the learning rate scheduler is set to 10 epochs. As opposed to earlier, the
boundaries are not explicitly handled. Instead, a circular padding is implemented to
impose the periodic boundary conditions.
==PAGE:94==
78
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
5.2.3
Linear SWE
The numerical simulations of the LSWE are performed using an implementation of a
5-stage 4th order Runge-Kutta method, meaning that the time-derivative is 4th order.
The spatial derivatives are computed using Fornberg’s algorithm [55] (for only one
order of the derivative), where the width of the stencil can be varied in order to change
the order of the spatial derivative. The boundaries are periodic. The implementation
details are not the focus of this section and will be left out1.
Specifications of the simulation can be seen in table 5.12. The first table shows
the domain range and the grid resolution, and the second table shows specifics of the
LF- and HF-models. The LF-model is based on a stencil with a half-width of α = 1
(stencil of size 3), and the HF-model has a stencil with half-width α = 2 (stencil of
size 5). The choice of implementation method means that the restrictions on ∆t in
the relation ∆t = c(∆x) is the same for the two models.
Table 5.12: Specifications of the simulation domain the LSWE and for each type of model (HF
is high-fidelity and LF is low-fidelity). Ntrain is the size of the training set, Nval is the size of the
validation set, Tend is the end-time of the simulation, x-range is the range of the spatial domain, m
is the number of interior grid points and ∆x is the grid spacing. In the second table, the α column
denotes the half-width of the stencil used for the spatial derivative in the explicit fourth-order 5-
stage Runge-Kutta method used for the simulation. A higher α means a higher order, since α is the
half-width of the finite difference stencil. ∆t is the time-discretization size, and c corresponds to the
relation ∆t = c(∆x).
Equation
Ntrain
Nval
Tend
x range
m
∆x
LSWE
100
50
1
[0, 1]
40
0.0244,
Equation
Model
α
c
∆t
LSWE
LF
1
0.49
0.01190
HF
2
0.49
0.01190
Notes on the implementation and training
The RK-method and Forberg’s algorithm are implemented in Matlab. Therefore, in
order to use the PyTorch framework of the MF-model, the Matlab code is called from
Python using the Matlab engine API [56]. This API, even though useful, is very
slow compared to earlier implementations of numerical solvers in PyTorch. This has
significant impact on the training schedule in this and the next section.
For this section, the largest impact was on the computation time of each iteration
in the training algorithm 1. Each time the LF-solver is called, the Matlab engine
API is used. Due to the increased computation time, some of the trainings had to
be stopped prematurely. This, however, did not have any consequences for the MF-
1All credit for implementation of Forberg’s algorithm and the Runge-Kutta method goes to Allan
Engsig-Karup. The code is found in Github. The code has been modified to fit the LSWE-problem.
==PAGE:95==
5.2 Case 1: The Shallow Water Equations
79
model for the LSWE, which is evident in the next section, but it did have an impact
on the results for the non-linear SWE in section 5.2.4.
5.2.3.1
Results
The different network structures are tested for the LSWE and it turns out that the
simplest network CNN_corr3 with Nin = 1 converges to a very satisfying level, and
therefore this model is preferred. Table 5.13 shows the performance of the MF-model
together with the performance of the LF- and HF-models for 100 new data sets
that differ from the training and validation sets of the training cycles. The L2- and
infinity-norms are reported according to the definitions (5.4). The number of FLOPs
are calculated as described in appendix E.2.1.1.
Table 5.13: Performance of the preferred correcting CNN for the LSWE and a new set of 100
generated constants, a, corresponding to 100 new data sets. Reported with 3 significant digits. The
model used for the table is CNN_corr3 with Nin = 1.
time 100
sim. [s]
FLOPs
|e|2
|e|∞
LF
27.5
3.31 · 105
0.0864
0.145
HF
29.5
4.19 · 105
4.05 · 10−4
6.80 · 10−4
MF
29.8
1.14 · 106
4.04 · 10−4
6.79 · 10−4
It is seen that the MF-model has approximately the same errors as the HF-model.
This is because the MF-model has converged to be an almost exact copy of the HF-
model. This is possible, because the time-discretization sizes are the same for the
HF-model and the MF-model, as was also the experience from section 4.1. Though,
it is seen that the computational expense of using the MF-model is higher than for
the HF-model, which means that even though it is possible to replicate the HF-model,
the replication is not preferred over the original. Figure E.2 in appendix E.2 shows
the errors of the LF- HF and MF-models, respectively, for u and η.
For a more general result, models have been trained for different values of m.
These models are then tested on the same 100 new data sets as before, and the result
given by the mean 2-norm and the mean infinity norm is shown as lines in figure 5.16.
The bars show the number of FLOPs of the models. The data behind this figure is
found in table E.5 in appendix E.2.
The figure shows that the MF-model has almost the exact same errors as the
HF-model. This means that the MF-model is very successful in its task. Though,
the figure also shows that, in all cases, the computational expense of the MF-model
is higher than that of the HF-model. This is discussed in section 5.4.
==PAGE:96==
80
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Figure 5.16: The lines show the L2 errors and infinity norm of the errors of the solutions of the
LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to the analytical (true) solution of the linear shallow water
equations for different number of grid points given by the value m (left y-axis). The bars show the
number of FLOPs (right y-axis). The numbers are mean values across 100 simulations. Note that
the blue line is placed behind the red line.
5.2.4
Non-linear SWE
The non-linear SWE (5.8) can also be written in the conservative form (for instance,
found in [57]):
∂tU + ∂xF (U) = S,
(5.10)
U =
 h
hu

, F (U) =

hu
hu2 + 1
2gh2

,
where h is the water height measured from the bottom: h(x, t) = η(x, t) + d. For
the purpose of this thesis, the homogeneous version of the equation is used, meaning
that the source terms, S, are zero. For simulation of the non-linear SWE (5.10), the
following initial value functions are used:
u(x, t) =1
2kHccosh(k(z + h(x, t))
sinh(kh(x, t))
cos(ωt −kx)
+ 3
16c(kH)2 cosh(2k(z + h(x, t)))
sinh(kh(x, t))4
cos(2(ωt −kx)) −
gH2
8ch(x, t)
(5.11a)
h(x, t) =d + H
2 cos(ωt −kx) + 1
16kH2(3 coth(kh(x, t))3
−coth(kh(x, t))) cos(2(ωt −kx)),
(5.11b)
where coth(x) is the hyperbolic co-tangent function given by ex+e−x
ex−e−x , and sinh(x) is
the hyperbolic sine function given by
ex−e−x
2
, and cosh(x) =
ex+e−x
2
. The initial
condition (5.11) corresponds to a second order Stokes wave as described by [54] (p.
146-150). The characteristic constants of the wave are the same as for the LSWE
shown in table 5.11, except that a ∈[0.0003, 0.002]. The boundaries are periodic.
For the non-linear form of the SWE with the initial conditions (5.11), no analytical
solution is used. Instead, for reference, a simulation with an even higher order of the
==PAGE:97==
5.2 Case 1: The Shallow Water Equations
81
error is used, namely where the stencil used for simulation has a half-width of size 3
(stencil of size 7) and with a much finer discretization step in both time and space.
Table 5.14 shows the specifications of the LF-model and the HF-model for m = 40
interior points, as well as the model for the reference solution for m = 1000.
The choice of m and c for the reference model results in a ∆x and ∆t, which are
different from those of the two other models. There is no guarantee with the given ∆x
and ∆t that the three models will report on the same time-step and grid point. Since
later analyses consider different values of m for the LF-, HF- and MF-models, this
complicates the choice of ∆x and ∆t for the reference model even further. Therefore,
the values of ∆x and ∆t for the reference model are chosen such that the evaluation
points (grid points and times) are the same to (and including) the fourth decimal
point.
Table 5.14: Specifications of the simulation domain the SWE and for each type of model (HF is
high-fidelity and LF is low-fidelity, ref is the reference solution). The α column denotes the half-width
of the stencil used for the spatial derivative in the Runge-Kutta method used for the simulation. A
higher α means a higher order, since α is the half-width of the finite difference stencil. ∆t is the
time-discretization size, and c corresponds to the relation ∆t = c(∆x).
Equation
Model
α
c
∆x
∆t
SWE
LF
1
0.49
0.0244
0.01190
HF
2
0.49
0.0244
0.01190
ref
3
0.1
0.0010
9.99 · 10−5
Figure 5.17 shows the reference solution for h(x, t) for the value a = 0.0012. The
shape of the Stokes wave is clear with one wave with a high amplitude surrounded
by two waves with a smaller amplitude.
0.0
0.24
0.49
0.73
0.98
x
0.0
0.12
0.24
0.36
0.48
0.6
0.71
0.83
0.95
t
0.024
0.025
0.026
0.027
0.028
x
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
t
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.024
0.026
0.028
Figure 5.17: Traveling wave solution to the SWE. Only the solution for the depth of the water
with the free surface elevation, h, is shown. The solution is shown for a = 0.6255.
==PAGE:98==
82
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Notes on the training
As mentioned in the LSWE-section, the Matlab Engine API is used to call the FD-
methods from Python. For the SWE, this has a huge impact on the results in the
following way; due to the increased computation time, the training had to be stopped
prematurely. For all networks, it was observed that the optimization of the model
parameters converged very slowly, meaning that the training and validation errors
decreased only very little in each iteration. Therefore, there was a need for many
iterations, which simply was not possible to perform within the limited time frame
of this project. Therefore, it is expected that with more time, better convergence of
the models could be obtained.
5.2.4.1
Results
The network structures CNN_corr3, CNN_corr5 and CNN_corr6 are tested for the
values Nin = 1, 2, 5 and 10. It turns out that the structure CNN_corr3 with Nin = 2
has a suﬀicient performance, and therefore this model is preferred. Table 5.15 shows
the performance of the MF-model as well as the LF- and HF-model, when compared
to the reference model. The errors are reported as a mean across 20 simulations. The
reason for the fewer number of simulations compared to previous sections is that the
fine discretization of the reference solution leads to a very large computation time
(approximately 1 minute per simulation), so only 20 simulations are performed.
The table shows that the MF-model places itself approximately in between the
LF-model and the MF-model in terms of the mean error norms. This shows that it
is possible to fit a correcting CNN to the non-linear SWE. Looking at the number of
FLOPs, the conclusion is the same as for the LSWE; the MF-model uses many more
FLOPs than the HF-model, so the HF-model is definitely preferred. The absolute
errors across the whole domain are shown in figure E.3 in appendix E.2.
Table 5.15: Performance of the preferred correcting CNN for the SWE and a new set of 20 generated
constants, a, corresponding to 20 new data sets. Reported with 3 significant digits. The model used
for the table is CNN_corr3 with Nin = 2.
time 20
sim. [s]
FLOPs
|e|2
|e|∞
LF
5.41
3.75 · 105
1.54 · 10−4
5.78 · 10−4
HF
6.78
4.46 · 105
2.29 · 10−5
1.15 · 10−4
MF
5.76
1.92 · 106
1.15 · 10−4
2.36 · 10−4
Figure 5.18 summarizes the performance of the MF-model compared to the LF-
and HF-models for different values of m. The data behind the figure is found in
table E.6 in appendix. Overall, the same pattern is observed; the MF-model has an
error, which is approximately in between the two other models. For m = 120, though,
the error is slightly larger. This might be due to the premature interruption of the
training procedure, since the optimization algorithm hadn’t converged entirely.
==PAGE:99==
5.3 Case 2: The Navier-Stokes Equations
83
Figure 5.18: The lines show the L2 errors and infinity norm of the errors of the solutions of the
LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to the reference solution of the shallow water equations
for different numbers of grid points given by the value m (left y-axis). The bars show the number
of FLOPs (right y-axis). The errors are mean values across 20 simulations.
5.3
Case 2: The Navier-Stokes Equations
In this section, the MF-framework is tested for an explicit solver for the Navier-
Stokes equation (NSE). The solver is a new, high-order accurate explicit free surface
implementation of the equations for two spatial dimensions. All credit for the code
goes to Allan P. Engsig-Karup and Anders Melander [58]. This is an exploratory
section, which lays out the challenges of applying the MF-model framework to the
NSE. The goal of this section is not to obtain a well-performing MF-model, rather, it
is to get an indication of whether the current MF-model framework could be successful
if extended properly to correct an explicit model for the NSE. In other words, the
goal is to get one step closer to applying the frame-work in a real-world setting.
In Cartesian coordinates, the NSE models the evolution of the free water surface,
η(x, y, t) as well as the velocity field given by u(x, y, z, t), v(x, y, z, t) and w(x, y, t),
which are the velocities in the x-, y- and z-directions, respectively.
The fluid is
assumed incompressible. As mentioned, the solver of the NSE is implemented for
two spatial dimensions, x and z, meaning that the implemented state-variables are:
η(x, t), u(x, z, t) and w(x, z, t).
5.3.1
Governing equations
The details of this section come from [58]. The governing equations of the NSE are:
ρut = −∇p + µ∇2u + F −ρ(u · ∇)u,
t > 0, x ∈Ω,
(5.12)
where u = (u, v, w), Ωis the fluid domain, µ = 1.3059mPa·s is the dynamic viscosity,
which is assumed constant, p is the pressure, F = ρg is the net force vector acting on
the fluid volume with g = (0, 0, −gz) = (0, 0, 9.81)m/s2 being the gravitational effect.
The free water surface is governed by the kinematic boundary condition
ηt = w −uηx −vηy,
t > 0,
z = η(x, y, z)
(5.13)
==PAGE:100==
84
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
There is no governing equation for the pressure.
An assumption of commutative
property of the divergence and rate of change operators is enforced in order to rewrite
the problem into a geometric conservation law for mass continuity:
ρ(∇· u)t = −∇2p + µ∇(∇2u) −ρ∇· (u · ∇)u,
t > 0, x ∈Ω,
(5.14)
The momentum equation (5.12) is transformed using a σ-transformation, where σ ≡
z+h(x,y)
d(x,y,t) , where d(x, y, t) = η(x, y, t) + h(x, y) is the water column at any given time.
This results in the σ-transformed momentum equations:
ρut = −∇σp + µ∇2
σu + F −ρ(u · ∇σ)u −ρσtuσ,
t > 0, (x, y, σ) ∈Ωσ,
(5.15)
The numerical scheme implemented in [58], seeks to solve the discrete governing
equations (5.13) and (5.15), while enforcing the geometric conservation law (5.14).
The latter is done by solving, at each stage, a poisson-problem for the dynamic
pressure, which satisfies the mass continuity condition. For this purpose, the pressure
is divided into a dynamic and a static contribution, p = pD + ps, where the static
pressure, ps = ρgz(η −z), and pD is the dynamical pressure.
The temporal discretization is performed using a low-storage explicit 4th order
5-stage Runge-Kutta (LSERK45) method. For the work in this section, the fidelity
of the solver is varied by changing the width of the finite difference stencils used in
the LSERK45-steps.
The initial function for η is a stream function wave (assumed µ = 0) in a periodic
domain in 2D, such that the horizontal boundaries are assumed periodic. In order to
vary the training data, the product kh for the wave, where k is the wave number and
h is the mean height of the water column, is varied between 0.8 and 1.5. Figure 5.19
shows the initial value function for the two extreme values of kh. The initial value of
u and w is zero across the (x, z)-plane.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
kh = 0.8
kh = 1.5
Figure 5.19: The initial value function is a non-linear stream wave. The training data is varied by
sampling a value of kh between 0.8 and 1.5, where k is the wave number and h is the mean height
of the water column.
Figure 5.20 shows the solution of the NSE for η(x, t) for kh = 1.5 up to time t = 1.
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Case 2: The Navier-Stokes Equations
85
x
0.000.250.500.751.00
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(x,t)
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Figure 5.20: The solution of the NSE for η(x, t) for kh = 1.5 up to time t = 1.
5.3.2
The MF-setup
For the two-dimensional NSE, three state-variables are given at any given time step;
u(x, z, t), w(x, z, t) and η(x, t). In a discrete MOL-setting, this corresponds to Nx×Nz
matrices for u and w (called U and W ) and a one-dimensional matrix of length Nx
for η (called E) as illustrated in figure 5.21.
This means, that in order to apply
the MF-update (3.19), the CNN would need to be able to handle inputs of different
dimensions. This is not straight-forward, especially when it comes to the optimization
of the model parameters; in order to optimize the parameters of the CNN for all state
variables simultaneously, the loss function should only be given one collected input,
which is compared to a collected reference solution. But how is that done, when the
inputs have different dimensions, and therefore cannot be concatenated into a single
matrix?
Figure 5.21: Illustration of the matrices for the three state variables in the 2D NSE.
The following solutions, which are all illustrated in figure 5.22, come to mind:
==PAGE:102==
86
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
1. Flatten the matrices U and W to obtain two one-dimensional matrices of length
Nx · Nz. Concatenate these to E, such that a long one-dimensional matrix of
length Nx(Nz + 1) is obtained.
• This means that the reference values for u, w and η in a given time-step
can also be flattened and concatenated. This way the loss-function can be
used such that the optimization is performed simultaneously.
• The CNN would have to use 1D-convolutions even on the 2D-variables,
meaning that some information is lost.
• It is not clear how the optimization algorithm will handle that the different
state variables (which might have different needs in terms of the kernels
used) are collected into one column.
It is expected that it will not be
handled well, since the same kernels would have to be applied to the entire
column.
2. Only handle surface-values of u and w such that U and W are one-dimensional
matrices of length Nx.
• This way, one CNN can be trained where U, W and E are given as inputs
as separate channels, similar to the procedure for SWE in section 5.2.
• A lot of information is lost by only correcting surface values of u and w. It
is not expected that the CNN will be able to correct u and w as a whole,
and the effect might therefore be minimal.
3. Zero-pad the the matrix E such that it obtains the same dimension as U and
W but with zero values under the surface. The three matrices could then be
given to the CNN as three input channels.
• Passing though the CNN, the channel corresponding to E would end up
with non-zero values under the surface, but these could be ignored. The
effect of this is not known.
• This solution could also be accompanied by a dense layer in the end of the
CNN, which converts the output to the proper dimension for E.
4. Use different CNNs for the different state-variables. The challenge here is that
the optimization cannot be performed simultaneously.
a) The CNNs can be trained completely independently from each other. If
the CNNs are then used to correct each state variable, it is expected that
they might interfere with the other states and cause the error to grow.
b) The CNNs could be trained in a series in the training algorithm; in epoch
1, the CNNE is trained. In epoch 2, the CNNU is trained, while CNNE
is kept constant. In epoch 3, the CNNW is trained while the others are
kept constant, and so forth. This option is very computationally expensive.
Also, convergence is expected to be made diﬀicult due to the non-converged
CNNs interfering with the optimization of the others.
==PAGE:103==
5.3 Case 2: The Navier-Stokes Equations
87
c) The CNNs could be trained in a series, but where the training algorithm
is finished completely for one CNN, say, CNNE, and then the next CNN
is trained while also applying CNNE.
Figure 5.22: Illustration of the ideas for applying the MF-framework for the NSE.
In order to get a first indication whether the MF-framework could be applied to
the NSE, it is decided to try option 4a, but to only train a CNN for E. The CNN
structures tested for the MF-model for E are the same as presented in section 5.1
in the diagrams in figures 5.1 and 5.2. The tested CNN-structures are CNN_corr3,
CNN_corr5 and CNN_corr6. The training procedure is the same as shown in algorithm
1. The training procedure is repeated for 1000 epochs.
5.3.3
Results
The results in this section are based on mean values across 5 simulations with unseen
values of hk, such that the initial value function differs from those used for training
and validation during the optimization in algorithm 1. The reference solution used
for comparing the models is an analytical solution for the stream function waves given
by [58].
Table 5.16 shows the improvement ratios of the MF-model for η for each CNN-
structure and different values of m, which is the number of interior points in the
x-direction. Figure 5.23 illustrates the errors of the MF-models as well as the LF-
and HF-model for different values of m. Both the figure and the table shows that
the MF-model does not constitute an impressive improvement. The improvement
ratios are just above 1, and the figure shows that the graphs for the MF-models lie
very close to that of the LF-model. There is a small difference between the CNN-
structures, with the structure CNN_corr3 being a tiny bit better at approximating
the HF-model for m = 40, while CNN_corr5 is a bit better at approximating the HF-
model for m = 60. However, the figure also shows that in one case, for m = 20, the
HF-model actually has a larger error than the LF-model, hence the also marginally
==PAGE:104==
88
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
larger error of the MF-models compared to the reference solution, so the results for
m = 20 are ignored.
Table 5.16: Improvement ratios of the MF-model compared to the LF-model for different values
of m for the Navier-Stokes equations. The results are based only on errors of the state variable η.
Reported with 3 significant digits.
Ratios | m
20
40
60
CNN_corr3
R∞
1.11
1.15
1.04
R2
1.27
1.16
1.06
CNN_corr5
R∞
1.01
1.12
1.07
R2
1.10
1.14
1.09
CNN_corr6
R∞
0.96
1.02
1.02
R2
0.98
1.03
1.03
Figure 5.23: The figure shows the L2 errors and infinity norm of the errors of the solutions of the
LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to the reference solution of the Navier-Stokes equations
for different numbers of grid points given by the value m.
These results show that with the decision of only training a CNN for E, only
some marginal improvements can be obtained using the MF-model presented in this
chapter. Though, the results do indicate that some improvements can be made, and
this encourages further investigations of applying the MF-framework for the NSE.
Unfortunately, this was not possible within the time frame of this thesis, but these
results serve as an invitation for future work.
The first task of future investigations would be to explore possible ways of training
CNNs for E, U and W simultaneously. Section 5.3.2 provided some ideas but also
the challenges connected to those ideas. In my opinion, option 3 seems to be the most
promising option and would be my starting point for future research.
5.4
Discussion
This discussion wraps up the findings of chapter 5. The discussion will also include
ideas for future work. The chapter investigated the proposed MF-model for the three
==PAGE:105==
5.4 Discussion
89
test-equations, the heat, advection and Burgers equation, as well as two test cases:
the shallow water equations (SWE) and a two-dimensional implementation of the
Navier-Stokes equations (NSE).
The numerical solvers and the results of the MF-models
The very first discussion point for this chapter is the choice of the LF- and HF-models
for the three test equations.
It was chosen to fix the time-discretization method
to a first order forward Euler step for both the LF- and HF-model, such that the
spatial discretization decided the order of the method. This meant that the stability
requirement on the HF-model was very strict in order to avoid the time-discretization
having the largest error. In reality, when keeping the time-discretization fixed and
varying the spatial discretization, it would have been more feasible to choose a higher
order time-discretization such as a fourth order Runge-Kutta method, which was also
the method used for the two test cases. With the RK-method for the time-stepping,
the spatial discretization would have a lower or the same order, and it would therefore
be the spatial discretization that limits the method. Therefore, the time-step would be
the same for the HF-method and the LF-method in order for the spatial discretization.
For this reason, the numerical methods used in this thesis would not be the first
choice in a practical setting, due to the time complexity of the HF-model. With this
being said, the difference in time step size between the HF and LF-models allows
for an interesting investigation, namely, what happens when a correction from a low-
order method is trained using a much more fine time-step in the HF-solution? In
section 4.1.2, we saw that when training the CNN on a HF-solution which used the
same time-steps, it was possible to obtain the exact or almost exact (depending on
the CNN structure) HF-model. But what if the time-steps are not the same?
The results from section 5.1.4 show that it is not possible to obtain a model
that lies in between the HF-model and the LF-model in terms of accuracy, when the
HF-model uses a finer time step. This makes sense, since it would be surprising if
the MF-model was as accurate as the HF-model, and all the details from the finer
time step would be represented on the coarser time step using just a shallow CNN.
For the advection equation, the MF-model turned out to have approximately the
same convergence rate as the second order reference model, but the MF-model had
a smaller error. This shows that the CNN does still mainly fit to the leading order
term of the truncation error. In the case of the Burgers equation, the MF-model
had a slightly steeper graph than the LF-model. Thus, it seems that it is possible
to obtain something in between the two possible central difference approximations
for the FTCS scheme. This is, though, not the case for the heat equation, where the
error graph is less steep for the MF-model compared to the LF-model, which indicates
that the performance of the MF-model might not generalize for even higher number
of interior grid points, m.
For the SWE, the HF-model used the same time-discretization as the LF-model.
For the linear SWE, it turned out to be possible to fit the MF-model to replicate the
error level of the HF-model, which is a great success. Though, this was not the case
==PAGE:106==
90
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
for the non-linear SWE. As noted, this might be due to computational limitations
and early stopping of the training, but it does still indicate that it is more diﬀicult
to fit an MF-model for the non-linear equations.
Considering the results in terms of useful FLOPs and computation time, the work
on the SWE, where the 4th order RK-method was used for time-stepping, showed
that there was no gain in terms of computation when using the MF-model.
For
the three test-equations, on the other hand, there was a huge gain (up to a factor
1200) in computation time when using the MF-model compared to the HF-model.
This is because the MF-model uses a much coarser time-step than the HF-model,
so even with the extra computational effort of the CNN in the online phase (when
compared to the LF-model), the MF-model was still much better than the HF-model.
This, together with the results for the SWE, indicates that there is only a gain in
performance, when the time-step of the HF-model is much stricter.
The results when testing the trained models for the three test equations on an
expanded spatial domain showed that for the linear equations, the model generalizes
well, but for the Burgers equation, the model seemed to be sensitive towards what it
had seen during the training. These test equations used a very simple initial value
function, namely the sine-function, but this result indicates that if using a more
complicated initial value function, the MF-model might not generalize well. This is
a possible limitation that would require some more investigations.
The CNN structure
In this chapter, 5 CNN-structures were tested, all depicted in fig. 5.1. It was seen that
for the three test equations, the network CNN_corr3 had the best performance for the
linear equations, and for Burgers, the network CNN_corr6 had the best performance.
It is interesting to try and understand why that is. First of all, both networks (as
opposed to two of the other possible networks) have kernels of size 5. If we remind
ourselves the analysis made in chapter 4, the CNN seeks to fit to a truncation error,
which depends on a higher order derivative (in the case of the heat equation, it is the
fourth derivative). In order to approximate this derivative using a central difference
scheme, a wide stencil is needed (for the fourth derivative, a stencil with size 5).
Therefore, since the parallel between the CNN and finite difference stencils can be
drawn, it is straight-forward that the wide kernel is preferred. In more general terms,
a wider kernel simply means that more information is included. In most cases, this
leads to a smaller error, but in some cases it might make convergence more diﬀicult.
Taking a look at the layers of the networks, the MF-models for the linear equations
have no activation functions, whereas the MF-model for Burgers equation has non-
linear activation function. Thus, it seems that to represent a non-linear dynamic,
a non-linear CNN is needed, which makes perfect sense. Regarding the amount of
layers, it seems that these relatively shallow CNNs (2-4 layers) are enough to ensure a
good performance of the MF-model. In general, it is often the case that deepening the
neural network (adding layers) can increase the accuracy, resulting in the increased
interest for deep neural networks, though, it also comes with challenges such as the
==PAGE:107==
5.4 Discussion
91
vanishing gradient problem [59] and risk of over-fitting. Further, in the context of
this thesis, where the cost of the online phase is desired low, a shallow network is
definitely preferred. This, together with the fact that the results are acceptable, is
the reasoning behind the choice of layers of the CNN-structures.
One idea for improvement is to constrain the layers or the kernels. For example,
in some cases, it is known that the stencil to approximate is symmetric, so it could
improve convergence and maybe even accuracy to apply a symmetry-restriction on the
kernels. This could be in all layers or, for instance, just the last layer. Applying these
or similar constraints could be viewed as applying a type of PINN. One could also
experiment with differentiating the network for the non-linear and linear dynamics.
This is done in several examples mentioned in the literature study, for instance [10,
18, 15, 27]. In the case of the Burgers equation, this could be done by outputting
two values from the CNN; one value, which corrects the FD-approximation for uux
and one, which corrects the FD-approximation for vuxx. This would allow for the
CNN to exhibit different dynamics for the non-linear and linear parts, and it would
be interesting to investigate whether the performance could be improved this way.
Limitations of the current MF-model
The CNN-based MF-model structure introduced in this chapter has some important
limitations that should be kept in mind. First of all, the correcting CNN is sensitive
to the chosen grid discretization, that is, the distance between nodes in space, h,
and the time step size, k. This was described in chapter 4 with equation (3.20), but
deserves to be highlighted here. This means that the CNN is dependent on the grid
and cannot easily be transferred to different grids without retraining. The CNN is
also dependent on the LF-solver, so if a different model is corrected, it is not expected
that the CNNs can be reused directly. Last but not least, the CNN is dependent on
the constants of the equations. For instance the diffusion rate κ in the heat equation.
All results in this chapter are for κ = 1, but if this value is changed, the CNN has to
be retrained.
With these limitations, it is tempting to start imagining how to make the seemingly
impossible possible. A possible way of limiting the computational efforts of having
to train new CNNs for every little change such as coarsening or refining the grid
could be: transfer learning. This concept was already introduced in the introductory
literature study, but to be more concrete, transfer learning simply consists of using
the already trained networks in a new training. Say, we want to refine the grid such
that hnew =
h
2 . Then the old CNN-weights could be used as a starting point for
the optimization algorithm when training a new CNN. One could also choose to use
an encoder/decoder structure. This would mean to train an encoder to receive the
input, apply weights and pass the output to the CNN, and to train a decoder to
take the output from the CNN and apply its weights and output the result. It is
not guaranteed that transfer learning has a good effect, but it is a starting point for
investigating how to ease the retraining of networks to new cases.
==PAGE:108==
92
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
Apart from the above limitations, one major limitation of using CNNs is the
assumption of a uniform, structured grid. In many cases, a unstructured mesh is
preferred for simulation of PDEs. This is, for instance, the case in the commercial
MIKE-model by DHI, where an unstructured mesh is used for simulation of the SWE.
The standard CNN-structure, as well as the analyses that couples numerical theory to
the CNN-structure cannot be applied for an unstructured mesh. The reason simply
is that the convolution operation cannot be performed with a simple kernel as the
ones used in this thesis. Though, considering the general MF-framework (3.6.1), one
can apply the multi-fidelity idea in many different settings, but it is necessary to
adjust the methods according to the problem. In the case of an unstructured mesh,
the LF-operator L could, for instance, be a Finite Element Method (FEM), and the
additive operator F could be a multi-layer perceptron type neural network, an LSTM,
a graph-CNN or similar.
Perspectives for the future
While opportunities for future investigations have been mentioned throughout this
discussion, it is relevant to consider the future perspectives for constructing CNN-
based MF-models in general. Chapter 4 and chapter 5 presented promising results and
in-depth analyses of strength and weaknesses of the CNNs used in an MF-framework.
One important property shown in chapter 4 was that when training the CNN using
an analytical solution as a reference, the CNN would fit to the leading term of the
truncation error, corresponding to a higher order finite difference method. Connecting
this to the result of this chapter, where it was shown that the MF-model could
generalize to a different initial value function, opens up a great potential for future
investigation; the results indicate that there is a potential for training CNNs using
a computationally inexpensive analytical solution for a problem where the analytical
solution actually can be derived, and then apply the MF-model on a problem where
the analytical solution cannot be derived. If this is possible, expensive higher order
simulations for generating training data can be avoided.
This indicates that the perspectives for the future of the CNN-based MF-model
are good.
Yet, the investigations have yet to be performed for more complicated
equations such as the NSE, as this chapter also shows the challenges of applying the
framework on nonlinear equations and systems of equations.
==PAGE:109==
5.4 Discussion
93
Summary
This chapter presented the work on a novel MF-model based on the general framework
(3.18). The key points of the chapter are:
• The MF-model presented in this section is based on a one-step, explicit finite
difference model combined with a correcting CNN, which can take Nin previous
time steps of the state as input.
• A training procedure is presented, where a training loop is combined with a
validation loop in order to optimize the weights of the CNN. In the training loop,
the optimization of the weights are performed based on the mean squared error
of the MF-model ouput compared to some high-fidelity data. The validation
loop tests the MF-model on a different data set, and if the error is also low for
the validation set, the model is saved.
• Five different network structures are presented for the CNN. The computational
complexity of the networks is introduced by evaluating the useful FLOPs, that
is, the amount of needed floating point operations to evaluate the CNN for some
input of a given size.
• The MF-models are fitted for the three test equations, the heat, advection and
Burgers equation. It turns out that the most shallow network, CNN_corr3 (with
Nin being 1 and 2, respectively) is the preferred model for the heat and advec-
tion equation, and CNN_corr6 (with Nin = 10) is preferred for Burgers equation.
The decisions are based on the validation errors as well as the networks’ com-
putational complexities. Hence, it was clear that non-linear components were
needed in the CNN-structure in order to capture the non-linearity of the Burgers
equation.
• The performance of the MF-models are compared to the LF- and HF-models
using the analytical solutions as reference, and in all cases, the MF-model has
a lower error than the LF-model and a higher error than the HF-model. The
improvement ratios lie in the range of 4.2-30. The models are also discussed
and compared taking into account their requirements in terms of FLOPs. In
most cases, the MF-model is preferred over the LF- and HF-models due to
their increased accuracy wrt.
the LF-model, and their lower computational
requirements compared to the HF-model.
• In order to generalize the results for different numbers of nodes in the spatial
grid, MF-models for different values of m (interior nodes) are trained and their
errors compared to the LF- and HF-models. The results do generalize to other
values of m, but there seems to some limit to the performance of the MF-model
for the heat equation. For the advection equation, it is shown that the MF-
model has similar convergence rate to a second order model, which indicates
that the CNN did indeed fit to the leading order term of the truncation error,
resulting in a second order model (when correcting a first order model).
==PAGE:110==
94
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
• It is shown that the trained models generalize well outside the training domain.
Though, the generalization is slightly worse for Burgers equation than for the
heat and advection equations.
It is also shown that the trained models for
the linear test equations can be used for a different initial value function, and
therefore a different analytical solution.
• The structure of the linear CNN can be utilized to show absolute stability of the
MF-model for the heat equation. This is done by showing that the eigenvalues of
the system matrix for the MF-model has eigenvalues inside the stability region
of the forward Euler method.
• The MF-model is tested for the shallow water equations, both on a linear form
(LSWE) and their regular form (SWE). This requires an expansion of the frame-
work to take two inputs and give two outputs, one for the height of the free
surface and one for the velocity component. It is shown for different values of
m, that the MF-model succeeds in obtaining a lower error than the LF-model.
Though, in this case, it becomes clear that the computational efforts spent on
evaluating the CNN is not worth it, since the HF-model still has a lower or
similar error and uses a smaller amount of FLOPs. Since the purpose of this
case is to show the applicability of the MF-model to other, more complicated
systems, the experiment is deemed successful.
• When extending the MF-model for the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE), some
challenges occur, due to the state-variables of the NSE being different dimen-
sions. Therefore, it is not trivial how to train a CNN for the state-variables
simultaneously. Different ideas are presented together with their expected chal-
lenges. The MF-framework is tested by training a CNN to correct the solver
for one state variable only. The result is improvement ratios in the range of
1.02-1.27 (for m = 40 and m = 60), which is not impressive. Though, it is
an indication that the framework might be successful if a different approach is
adopted.
• In the discussion, a critical point of view is taken towards the numerical solvers
used; the HF-models have very strict stability requirements, which would not
be necessary with a different choice of model.
Though, the strict stability
requirement is used as a starting point for discussing what happens to the MF-
model when the HF-model uses a much finer time step than the LF-model.
It is also discussed what the role of the CNN-structure is; the need for non-
linearity for Burgers as well as the choice of depth of the model and a possible
improvement for future work, which is to design the network to handle non-
linear and linear dynamics separately. Finally, the MF-model setup is discussed
with reference to the model’s sensitivity towards the grid discretization, and
future perspectives on the CNN-based MF-model are discussed.
==PAGE:111==
Conclusion
This concludes the research on data-driven convolutional neural network-based multi-
fidelity modeling for solving partial differential equations.
The thesis is based on
a literature study that covers data-driven multi-fidelity techniques and explores the
use of neural networks for constructing accurate and eﬀicient multi-fidelity surrogate
models through correcting low-fidelity models. The methodology section is a funda-
mental part of this thesis as it introduces finite difference methods for solving PDEs
and it describes CNNs as well as some fundamental similarities between the two. This
forms the basis of the ’gray-box’ modeling of this thesis; the aim is to obtain accurate
MF-models, but at the same time to be able to explain their performance. This is
achieved by formulating a general framework for MF-models, which is specified for
use in this thesis, but which is applicable for future research on MF-models as well.
In chapter 4, the first CNN-based MF-models are trained and tested. The chapter
finds inspiration in the literature, where a model called Deep FDM is proposed. The
model uses a forward-time-central-space discretization of the heat equation and a cor-
recting CNN, which estimates the truncation error. The method is implemented and
tested. The chapter shows the use of numerical methods for analyzing the limitations
of the obtained models. It is experienced that when training a CNN to correct a
truncation error of a numerical method, the CNN will fit to the leading order term
of the error. Thus, the network is limited in the extent to which it can correct the
numerical method.
Chapter 5 holds the formulation of a novel MF-model that is more general than the
Deep FDM. It allows for different CNN-structures and for a more flexible input. The
MF-model that is based on a forward Euler step, a low-fidelity spatial approximation
and an additive CNN is tested on the three test equations; the heat, advection and
Burgers equation. The framework is extended for two coupled PDE formulations;
the shallow water equations and the Navier-Stokes equations.
For the three test
equations, the MF-model has an accuracy that is higher than the LF-model with
improvement ratios in the range 4.2-30, yet lower than the reference HF-model. Its
computational expense is lower than that of the HF-model with a decrease of a factor
3.5-58 in the number of FLOPs, which makes it a feasible choice for simulating the
PDEs. Further, the model is generalizable outside of the training domain and, in the
case of the linear test PDEs, for a different initial value function, and its performance
is general for different sizes of the grid spacing.
The results for the shallow water equations are similar, both for a linear and
==PAGE:112==
96
5 A Novel Multi-Fidelity Model
non-linear form of the equations; an increase in accuracy can be achieved for the
MF-model compared to the LF-model for different sizes of the grid spacing. Though,
in this case, there is not a gain in the computational expense, since the HF-, the
LF- and MF-models use the same time-step and, therefore, the expense of evaluating
the CNN in the MF-model exceeds the expense of evaluating the HF-model. For
the Navier-Stokes equation, the goal is only to get an indication of whether the MF-
framework could work if extended correctly, since the form of the equations results
in some challenges that are not easily solved. A first step towards extending the MF-
framework to the NSE is taken, when it is shown that by training a CNN to correct
only one out of the three state-variables, a marginal improvement can be obtained.
In its current form, the proposed MF-model composes some challenges. First of
all, the CNN-based model is only appropriate for a uniform grid, and when changing
the grid, the CNN requires retraining as it dependent on the grid spacing. Second,
the thesis shows that there are only gains in terms of computations, when there is
a difference in the time-steps between the HF- and LF-model.
If the models are
evaluated exactly the same amount of times, the MF-model is more expensive than
the HF-model and will therefore not have a practical use case.
This invites for a look into the future; the first interesting investigation of the cur-
rent framework would be to test it on a case where the LF- and HF-model not only
differ in terms of their orders, but also in terms of other simplifications. For instance,
a linear LF-model for approximating a non-linear system. It is expected that the
current MF-framework could be useful for such a setting, where the CNN not only
approximates truncation errors but also the neglected non-linear terms. A second
interesting investigation would be to make the connection to PINNs; is it possible to
apply some physical knowledge of the system to the MF-model, which can improve
convergence and robustness? This could be by adding constraints to the kernels or
incorporating boundary conditions. Last, but not least, the promising results regard-
ing generalization of the MF-models to other solutions invites for experiments where
inexpensive analytical solutions are used for training the MF-models, which can then
be used with other initial values.
In conclusion, this thesis serves as a proof of concept, demonstrating the applica-
tion of convolutional neural networks to improve the fidelity of a finite difference
method, while maintaining a connection to the established principles of classical nu-
merical theory. Emphasis has been on the interpretability of the neural networks as
well as exploiting the local CNN-structure to ensure generalizability and scalability
of the multi-fidelity models. While being inspired from prior research, this work has
contributed with: 1) utilization of the CNN-structure to show connection to actual
numerical truncation errors with use of examples, 2) decomposition of a linear CNN
into matrices in order to show absolute stability and 3) showing the opportunities
of utilizing CNNs to construct multi-fidelity methods when solving the Navier-Stokes
equations. The thesis demonstrates that, while CNNs have previously been recognized
for their capabilities in image recognition tasks, there is now compelling evidence for
acknowledging their potential in the field of Scientific Machine Learning.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1]
I.E. Lagaris, A. Likas, and D.I. Fotiadis. “Artificial neural networks for solving
ordinary and partial differential equations.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neu-
ral Networks 9.5 (1998), pages 987–1000. issn: 1045-9227. doi: 10.1109/72.
712178.
[2]
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G.E. Karniadakis. “Physics-informed neural net-
works: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems in-
volving nonlinear partial differential equations.” In: Journal of Computational
Physics 378 (2019), pages 686–707. issn: 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045.
[3]
Nathan Baker et al. Brochure on basic research needs for scientific machine
learning: Core technologies for artificial intelligence. Technical report. USDOE
Oﬀice of Science (SC)(United States), 2018.
[4]
PyTorch. PyTorch. 2023. url: https://pytorch.org/ (visited on December 28,
2023).
[5]
F.T. Petersen. DataDrivenMultiFidelityTechniquesForPDEs. January 2024. url:
github.com/FrejaTerpPetersen/DataDrivenMultiFidelityTechniquesForPDEs.
[6]
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. “Multilayer feedfor-
ward networks are universal approximators.” In: Neural Networks 2.5 (1989),
pages 359–366. issn: 0893-6080. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0893 -
6080(89)90020-8.
[7]
R Rico-Martinez, I Kevrekidis, and K Krischer. “Nonlinear system identifica-
tion using neural networks: dynamics and instabilities.” In: Neural networks for
chemical engineers (1995), pages 409–442.
[8]
R. González-García, R. Rico-Martínez, and I.G. Kevrekidis. “Identification of
distributed parameter systems: A neural net based approach.” In: Computers
Chemical Engineering 22 (1998). European Symposium on Computer Aided
Process Engineering-8, S965–S968. issn: 0098-1354. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0098-1354(98)00191-4.
[9]
Ding-Xuan Zhou. “Universality of deep convolutional neural networks.” In: Ap-
plied and Computational Harmonic Analysis 48.2 (2020), pages 787–794. issn:
1063-5203. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2019.06.004.
==PAGE:114==
98
Bibliography
[10]
Yongho Kim and Yongho Choi. “Learning finite difference methods for reaction-
diffusion type equations with FCNN.” In: Computers Mathematics with Appli-
cations 123 (2022), pages 115–122. issn: 0898-1221. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.camwa.2022.08.006.
[11]
M. Giselle Fernández-Godino. Review of multi-fidelity models. 2023. doi: 10.
3934/acse.2023015.
[12]
Raphael T Haftka. “Combining global and local approximations.” In: AIAA
journal 29.9 (1991), pages 1523–1525.
[13]
W. J. Roux, Nielen Stander, and R. T. Haftka. “Response surface approxi-
mations for structural optimization.” In: International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering 42.3 (1998), pages 517–534. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1002/(SICI)1097-0207(19980615)42:3<517::AID-NME370>3.0.CO;2-L.
[14]
Dehao Liu and Yan Wang. “Multi-fidelity physics-constrained neural network
and its application in materials modeling.” In: Journal of Mechanical Design
141.12 (2019), page 121403.
[15]
Ilia Chiniforooshan Esfahani. “A data-driven physics-informed neural network
for predicting the viscosity of nanofluids.” In: AIP Advances 13.2 (2023).
[16]
Nicholas Geneva and Nicholas Zabaras. “Multi-fidelity generative deep learning
turbulent flows.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04731 (2020).
[17]
Souvik Chakraborty. “Transfer learning based multi-fidelity physics informed
deep neural network.” In: Journal of Computational Physics 426 (2021), page 109942.
[18]
Xuhui Meng and George Em Karniadakis. “A composite neural network that
learns from multi-fidelity data: Application to function approximation and in-
verse PDE problems.” In: Journal of Computational Physics 401 (2020). doi:
10.1016/j.jcp.2019.109020.
[19]
Paolo Conti et al. “Multi-fidelity surrogate modeling using long short-term mem-
ory networks.” In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
404 (2023), page 115811. issn: 0045-7825. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cma.2022.115811.
[20]
Y. Lecun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pages 2278–2324. doi: 10.1109/5.
726791.
[21]
Yohai Bar-Sinai et al. “Learning data-driven discretizations for partial differ-
ential equations.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116.31
(2019), pages 15344–15349. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1814058116.
[22]
Jiawei Zhuang et al. “Learned discretizations for passive scalar advection in a
two-dimensional turbulent flow.” In: Physical Review Fluids 6.6 (2021), page 064605.
[23]
Yuying Liu et al. “Multiresolution convolutional autoencoders.” In: Journal of
Computational Physics 474 (2023), page 111801.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
99
[24]
Xiao-Jiao Mao, Chunhua Shen, and Yu-Bin Yang. “Image restoration using con-
volutional auto-encoders with symmetric skip connections.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.08921 (2016).
[25]
Fernando Manrique de Lara and Esteban Ferrer. “Accelerating high order dis-
continuous Galerkin solvers using neural networks: 1D Burgers’ equation.” In:
Computers & Fluids 235 (2022), page 105274.
[26]
Fernando Manrique de Lara and Esteban Ferrer. “Accelerating high order dis-
continuous Galerkin solvers using neural networks: 3D compressible Navier-
Stokes equations.” In: Journal of Computational Physics (2023), page 112253.
[27]
Tatiana Kossaczká, Matthias Ehrhardt, and Michael Günther. “Deep FDM:
Enhanced finite difference methods by deep learning.” In: Franklin Open (2023),
page 100039.
[28]
Randall J. LeVeque. Finite Difference Methods for Ordinary and Partial Dif-
ferential Equations, Steady-State and Time-Dependent Problems. University of
Washington: SIAM, 2007. isbn: 9781009098489.
[29]
Julian D Cole. “On a quasi-linear parabolic equation occurring in aerodynam-
ics.” In: Quarterly of applied mathematics 9.3 (1951), pages 225–236.
[30]
Eberhard Hopf. “The partial differential equation ut + uux = vuxx.” In: Com-
munications on Pure and Applied mathematics 3.3 (1950), pages 201–230.
[31]
S. Kutluay, A.R. Bahadir, and A. Özdeş. “Numerical solution of one-dimensional
Burgers equation: explicit and exact-explicit finite difference methods.” In: Jour-
nal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 103.2 (1999), pages 251–261.
issn: 0377-0427. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-0427(98)00261-1.
[32]
Patrick W McDonald. The computation of transonic flow through two-dimensional
gas turbine cascades. Volume 79825. American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
1971.
[33]
Robert MacCormack and Alvin Paullay. “Computational eﬀiciency achieved by
time splitting of finite difference operators.” In: 10th aerospace sciences meeting.
1972, page 154.
[34]
M Jon Turner et al. “Stiffness and deflection analysis of complex structures.”
In: journal of the Aeronautical Sciences 23.9 (1956), pages 805–823.
[35]
Richard Courant, Kurt Friedrichs, and Hans Lewy. “Über die partiellen Dif-
ferenzengleichungen der mathematischen Physik.” In: Mathematische annalen
100.1 (1928), pages 32–74.
[36]
Richard Courant, Kurt Friedrichs, and Hans Lewy. “On the partial difference
equations of mathematical physics.” In: IBM journal of Research and Develop-
ment 11.2 (1967), pages 215–234.
[37]
Zewen Li et al. “A Survey of Convolutional Neural Networks: Analysis, Applica-
tions, and Prospects.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems 33.12 (2022), pages 6999–7019. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3084827.
==PAGE:116==
100
Bibliography
[38]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-Net: Convolutional
Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation.” In: CoRR abs/1505.04597 (2015).
[39]
PyTorch Documentation. CONV1D. 2023. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/
stable/generated/torch.nn.Conv1d.html (visited on December 15, 2023).
[40]
Jiagang Qu, Weihua Cai, and Yijun Zhao. “Learning time-dependent PDEs
with a linear and nonlinear separate convolutional neural network.” In: Journal
of Computational Physics 453 (2022), page 110928. issn: 0021-9991. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110928.
[41]
Freja M.T. Petersen. Final Report, Special Course: Thesis Preparation. Techni-
cal report. Technical University of Denmark (DTU), June 2023.
[42]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimiza-
tion. 2017. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
[43]
PyTorch Documentation. ADAM. 2023. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/
stable/generated/torch.optim.Adam.html (visited on December 15, 2023).
[44]
Zhen Chen and Dongbin Xiu. “On generalized residual network for deep learning
of unknown dynamical systems.” In: Journal of Computational Physics 438
(2021), page 110362. issn: 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcp.2021.110362.
[45]
Bengt Fornberg. “Generation of finite difference formulas on arbitrarily spaced
grids.” In: Mathematics of computation 51.184 (1988), pages 699–706.
[46]
PyTorch Documentation. ELU. 2023. url: https : / / pytorch . org / docs /
stable/generated/torch.nn.ELU.html (visited on January 2, 2024).
[47]
Antonio Alguacil et al. “Effects of boundary conditions in fully convolutional
networks for learning spatio-temporal dynamics.” In: (2021), pages 102–117.
[48]
PyTorch Documentation. REDUCELRONPLATEAU. 2023. url: https : / /
pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.lr_scheduler.ReduceLROnPlateau.
html (visited on December 19, 2023).
[49]
Allan P. Engsig-Karup and Per Grove Thomsen. “6.4 Stability Matrix.” In: Nu-
merical Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations - analysis and applications.
APEK & PGT, 2018, pages 70–72.
[50]
Pilar Garcı́a-Navarro et al. “The shallow water equations and their application
to realistic cases.” In: Environmental Fluid Mechanics 19 (2019), pages 1235–
1252.
[51]
DHI. MIKE 21 Flow Model FM: Hydrodynamic and Transport module, Scientific
Documentation. Available at https://manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/
2024/Coast_and_Sea/MIKE_21_Flow_FM_Scientific_Doc.pdf, accessed:
2024-01-04. Agern Allé 5, 2970 Hørsholm, DK, 2024.
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
101
[52]
S. Friedlander. “Stability of Flows.” In: Encyclopedia of Mathematical Physics.
Edited by Jean-Pierre Françoise, Gregory L. Naber, and Tsou Sheung Tsun.
Oxford: Academic Press, 2006, pages 1–7. isbn: 978-0-12-512666-3. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-512666-2/00252-2.
[53]
Geoffrey K Vallis. Essentials of atmospheric and oceanic dynamics. Cambridge
university press, 2019. Chapter 4.
[54]
IA Svendsen and IG Jonsson. “Hydrodynamics of coastal regions. Den Private
Ingeniørfond.” In: Technical University. Lyngby. Denmark (1982).
[55]
Bengt Fornberg. “Calculation of Weights in Finite Difference Formulas.” In:
SIAM Review 40.3 (1998), pages 685–691. issn: 00361445.
[56]
MathWorks Help Center. Call MATLAB from Python. 2023. url: https://se.
mathworks.com/help/matlab/matlab-engine-for-python.html (visited on
December 19, 2023).
[57]
Anton Jakob Sørensen. “Physics constrained surrogate modelling for computa-
tional hydraulics.” Masters thesis. Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University
of Denmark, April 2022.
[58]
A.P. Engis-Karup and A. Melander. “A High-Order Finite Difference Incom-
pressible Navier-Stokes model for Water Waves and Wave-Structure Interac-
tion.” In: The 39th International Workshop on Water Waves and Floating Bod-
ies, 14-17 April 2024, Scotland.
[59]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv:
1512.03385 [cs.CV].
[60]
Brent J Lewis, E Nihan Onder, and Andrew Prudil. Advanced Mathematics for
Engineering Students: The Essential Toolbox. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2021.
[61]
Esteban G. Tabak. Material of Introduction to PDEs, 6. The Burgers Equation.
Accessed 2023-11-02.
[62]
Carlo Innamorati et al. “Learning on the edge: Investigating boundary filters in
cnns.” In: International Journal of Computer Vision 128 (2020), pages 773–782.
==PAGE:118==
102
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX A
Project overview
In this appendix, a retrospective overview of the project process is found. The process
is divided into the project weeks, and are approximate. The purpose of this overview
is to give an idea of how much time has been spent on the different parts of the
project.
==PAGE:120==
Date 19.08
26.08
02.09
09.09
16.09
23.09
30.09
07.10
14.10
21.10
28.10
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Report
Writing/editing
Literature study/scoping project
Initial work on connections between CNN and 
numerical methods
Study on numerical methods for PDEs
Analysis of CNN and FDM-stencils (sec. 3.5)
Implementing and analyzing Deep FDM
Work on novel MF-model
Implementing numerical solvers for test PDEs
Heat
Advection/Burgers
Implementing and testing MF-model for test PDEs
Test MF-model for cases
Other
Study background
PDEs
Fluid mechanics
Defined own MF-model
==PAGE:121==
4.11
11.11
18.11
25.11
2.12
9.12
16.12
23.12
30.12
6.01
13.01
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Linear SWE
Nonlinear SWE NSE
SWE
NSE
==PAGE:122==
106
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX B
Details of chapter 2
B.1
Summary of relevant knowledge
This section summarizes some relevant background on PDEs. It is based on theory
obtained from a collection of books and articles [28, 60, 61, 31].
B.1.1
Introduction to PDEs
A PDE is an equation consisting of an unknown function of two or more variables
as well as the partial derivatives of some order with respect to these variables. This
could, for instance, be a one-dimensional equation, where the unknown function is a
function of time, t, and space, x.
If a PDE is a function of time, it will require an initial condition (a value of the
function at time t = 0), and if x is bounded, a ≤x ≤b, it will require boundary
conditions in order to determine a unique solution. A different case is the Cauchy
problem, which in one dimension is the unbounded initial value problem, namely for
−∞< x < ∞.
Linear, two-variable PDEs up to second order can be written on the general form:
Auxx + Buxy + Cuyy + Dux + Euy + Fu = G,
where the real-valued constants, A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, can depend on x and y,
and u(x, y) is the unknown function satisfying the PDE. If a second-order PDE is not
on the above form, it is nonlinear. Most PDEs for practical purposes are not on the
above form. However, based on this form of the equation, it can be categorized into
one of the thee types:
• elliptic: B2 −4AC < 0
• hyperbolic: B2 −4AC > 0
• parabolic: B2 −4AC = 0
Some PDEs are purely categorized as one of the above, whereas most equations are
a mix of the categories. The test equations used in this thesis are hyperbolic and
parabolic.
==PAGE:124==
108
B Details of chapter 2
B.1.2
Boundary conditions
There are two types of boundary conditions for bounded PDEs: Neumann boundary
conditions and Dirichlet boundary conditions, named after the German mathemati-
cians, Carl Neumann and and Johann Dirichlet. Dirichlet boundary conditions specify
the value of the function on the boundaries:
u(a, t) = α(t),
u(b, t) = β(t),
whereas Neumann boundary conditions specify the derivative of the function on the
boundaries, for instance the derivative with respect to x in the one dimensional case:
ux(a, t) = α(t),
ux(b, t) = β(t).
B.2
Fourier solutions to the heat equation
One can use Fourier analysis to obtain solutions to linear PDEs or to analyze the
behaviour of the PDE. The Fourier transform of u(x, t) to ˆu(ξ, t) is given by:
F(u(x, t)) = ˆu(ξ, t) =
1
√
2π
Z ∞
−∞
u(x, t)e−iξxdx.
The inverse is:
F−1(ˆu(ξ, t)) = u(x, t) =
1
√
2π
Z ∞
−∞
ˆu(ξ, t)eiξxdξ.
(B.1)
Finding derivatives of (B.1) one can realize that the PDE can be described by an
infinite number of decoupled ODEs (as a function of ξ), which can be solved. The
ODE for the one-dimensional heat equation is:
ˆut(ξ, t) = −κξ2ˆu(ξ, t),
since the Fourier transform of uxx(x, t) is (iξ)2ˆu(ξ, t) = −ξ2ˆu(ξ, t). For a certain wave
number, ξ, this equation is only time-dependent, and is therefore no longer a PDE.
For initial data u(x, 0) = η(x), which has the Fourier transform ˆη(ξ), one can see that
the solution to the ODE is:
ˆu(ξ, t) = e−κξ2tˆη(ξ).
(B.2)
Thus, according to the above solution, each of the Fourier modes, ˆu(ξ, t) will decay
exponentially fast, with a speed depending on the wave number, starting with the
initial value, hence, the diffusive properties of the heat equation.
Because of the
exponential decay of the solution, the equation can give rise to numerical diﬀiculties
such as stiffness.
==PAGE:125==
B.2 Fourier solutions to the heat equation
109
The diffusive properties can further be elaborated with use of convolution theory:
According to the convolution theorem, a point-wise multiplication in the Fourier-
domain (as seen between the functions e−κξ2t and ˆη(ξ) in (B.2) above) corresponds
to a convolution in the original domain. Thus, the above equation in the Fourier-
domain, corresponds to a convolution between F−1(e−κξ2t) and F−1(ˆη(ξ)) = η(ξ),
where F−1 is the inverse transform.
Since e−κξ2t is a Gaussian, and the Fourier
transform of a Gaussian is another Gaussian, the solution is a convolution of the
initial value with a Gaussian function.
Convolutions with Gaussian functions are
also called Gaussian smoothing, since such a convolution has smoothing properties
and are widely used in computer vision tasks. Thereby, another example of how the
smoothing properties of the heat equation can be explained.
==PAGE:126==
110
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX C
Details of chapter 3
C.1
Solving an elliptic PDE
This section contains theory on how to numerically solve an elliptic PDE. This doesn’t
relate directly to the numerical methods used in this thesis, but it is useful background
knowledge for understanding how a boundary value problem can be solved by solving
a linear system of equations.
Consider, as an example, the one-dimensional PDE:
uxx = f(x),
for 0 ≤x ≤1,
(C.1)
with Dirichlet boundary conditions:
u(0) = α,
u(1) = β.
This equation is the one-dimensional version of the Poisson problem, which is catego-
rized as an elliptic PDE.
Solving this equation numerically can be done by discretizing the space dimension
onto a uniform grid given by grid points U0, U1, ..., Um, Um+1. In this case, the grid
has m interior points with grid spacing h =
1
m+1. The boundary conditions define
the end-points, U0 = α and Um+1 = β. Now, consider the j’th interior point, and
estimate it using a FD approximation:
D2Uj = Uj−1 −2Uj + Uj+1
h2
= f(xj),
for j = 1, 2, ..., m.
If the values of the interior grid points Uj, j = 1, 2, ..., m are collected in a vector
U = [U1, U2, ..., Um]T , the linear system of equations can be collected as:
AU = F ,
where
A = 1
h2


−2
1
1
−2
1
1
−2
1
...
...
...
1
−2
1
1
−2


,
F =


f(x1) −α/h2
f(x2)
f(x3)
...
f(xm−1)
f(xm) −β/h2


.
==PAGE:128==
112
C Details of chapter 3
It is seen that the boundary conditions are included in F . Solving this system for U
can be done easily, since A is nonsingular and can be inverted. Thus, this shows how
an FD approximation can be used for solving an elliptic PDE with a second order
error, O(h2).
C.2
Showing order of numerical methods
C.2.1
FTCS for heat equation
In the case of the numerical FTCS scheme (3.8), we use a first order discretization in
time and a second order discretization in space for a certain grid point in a certain
time step. That is, we have the local truncation error:
τ =
U i+1
j
−U i
j
k
−κ
h2
 U i
j−1 −2U i
j + U i
j+1

= O(k + h2),
Taking the Euler step yields:
U i+1
j
= U i
j + kκ
h2
 U i
j−1 −2U i
j + U i
j+1

+ O(k2 + kh2).
Implementing the stability criterion k = ah2, where a ≤
1
2κ, the error terms are:
O(h4). Therefore, even though the formal order of the method is second order in
space, the one-step-error results in a fourth order error, in practice. To show that the
global error is second order in h, consider a simulation up to time T. The number of
time-steps required to reach this time is N = T
k ≈
T
h2 . If we take N time steps, the
global error is:
Eglobal = N · O(h4) = T
h2 O(h4) = O(h2).
This global error can be shown numerically, by simulating the heat equation up to
time T for different values of h, and then comparing the values in the final time step
to a true solution. This is done for the same initial value and true function as for
the simulation in figure 2.1. The infinity norm is reported for 17 different values of h.
Figure C.1 shows the errors in a double logarithmic plot together with functions h2,
h4 (for comparison) and the analytical expression for the truncation error. It is seen
that the rate of convergence corresponds to h2, and that the numerical error is very
close to the analytical truncation error.
C.2.2
Beam-Warming and Lax-Wendroff for advection equation
Similarly, the order of the Beam-Warming and Lax-Wendroff methods for the advec-
tion equation can be shown. The local truncation error of both methods is O(k2+h2),
==PAGE:129==
C.2 Showing order of numerical methods
113
10
2
10
1
h
10
8
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
|utrue
ufdm|
Heat equation, FT1-CS2
|utrue
ufdm|
(h2)
(h4)
((1/2k
1/12h2)u4x)
Figure C.1: Convergence plot of the FTCS (1st and 2nd order) method for the heat equation.
which means that the one-step error is kO(k2 + h2) = O(k3 + kh2). For the restric-
tions k ≈h for both methods, the one-step error is, in practice, O(h3 + h3). After
N = T
h time-steps, the global error is O(h2).
This order is shown numerically in the same manner as in the previous section.
The initial value and thereby the true function is the same as in the simulation in
section 2.1.2. The errors are collected at time T = 1, and the infinity norm of the
absolute error is saved and shown in figure C.2. The figure shows the convergence
rate for the Beam-Warming method, but the result is similar for the Lax-Wendroff
method.
C.2.3
Transformed Burgers and FTCS for Burgers
This section will show order of convergence of the numerical methods for Burgers
equation in the two cases: 1) when Burgers equation is transformed to the heat
equation, solved with FTCS, and transformed back using a second order discretization
scheme and 2) when Burgers equation is solved directly using the FTCS scheme (3.12).
In both cases, the initial value presented in section 2.2.1 will be used. In the first
case, the transformed initial value is given by (2.8).
==PAGE:130==
114
C Details of chapter 3
10
3
10
2
10
1
h
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
|utrue
ufdm|
Advection equation, Beam-Warming method
|utrue
ufdm|
(h2)
Figure C.2: Convergence plot of the second order Beam-Warming method for the linear advection
equation.
Case 1) Transformed Burgers
Using the stability restriction from solving the heat equation with the FTCS method,
k ≈h2, the expected global error is O(h2) (with the same argument as in section
C.2.1). Figure C.3 shows the error of the numerical method after transforming back
to the original domain, and comparing to the true solution (2.10). The slope of the
error corresponds to a second order convergence rate, confirming the expected second
order error of the method.
Case 2) Directly solving Burgers
The direct discretization (3.12) has a truncation error of O(k + h2), and therefore
a one-step error of O(k2 + kh2). Using the restriction k ≈h, the one-step error is:
O(h4). After N = T
k ≈T
h2 time-steps, the global error is:
Eglobal = 1
h2 O(h4) = O(h2).
Figure C.4 shows the error of the numerical solution when compared to the true
solution (2.10) for different values of h. The slope of the error corresponds to the
slope of h2, hence showing the expected convergence rate.
==PAGE:131==
C.3 Stability analysis
115
10
2
h
10
9
10
8
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
|utrue
ufdm|
Burgers equation, transformed FT1-CS2
|utrue
ufdm|
(h2)
(h4)
Figure C.3: Convergence plot of the FTCS (1st and 2nd order) method for the transformed Burgers
equation.
C.3
Stability analysis
Von Neumann analysis is a stability analysis for constant coeﬀicient linear PDEs,
which utilizes Fourier analysis. Consider the grid function U n
j , which describes the
development of grid point j for n = 1, .., , N. According to Fourier analysis, the grid
function in the Fourier domain, ˆU n
j , corresponds to a single wave number ξ and will
evolve independently of other wave numbers. Its evolution can be described by a
recurrence relation:
ˆU n+1
j
= g(ξ) ˆU n
j ,
where g(ξ) is referred to as the amplification factor and it depends on the numerical
method. If we can show that |g(ξ)| ≤1 + αk, then the method is stable. This will
now be used for analyzing stability of numerical methods for the heat equation and
the advection equation.
C.3.1
Heat equation
In the case of the FTCS method for the heat equation, von Neumann analysis can be
used by setting the grid function for a single wave number:
U n
j = eijhξ,
==PAGE:132==
116
C Details of chapter 3
10
2
h
10
9
10
8
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
|utrue
ufdm|
Burgers equation, direct FT1-CS2
|utrue
ufdm|
(h2)
(h4)
Figure C.4: Convergence plot of the direct FTCS (1st and 2nd order) method for the Burgers
equation in the original domain.
where i = √−1. Then it follows that U n+1
j
= g(ξ)eijhξ. Inserting this in the FTCS
scheme (3.8) for the heat equation yields:
g(ξ)eijhξ = eijhξ + kκ
h2 (ei(j−1)hξ −2eijhξ + ei(j+1)hξ),
= eijhξ

1 + kκ
h2
 e−ihξ −2 + eihξ
,
resulting in the amplification factor:
g(ξ) = 1 + kκ
h2
 e−ihξ −2 + eihξ
= 1 + kκ
h2 (2 (cos(ξh) −1)) .
The last equality comes from the trigonometric identity cos(x) =
eix+e−ix
2
, which
means that 2 (cos(x) −1) = 2

eix+e−ix
2
−2
2

= eix + e−ix −2.
Since cos(ξh) is bounded; −1 ≤cos(ξh) ≤1 for all values of ξ, we can find upper
an lower bounds for g(ξ) by inserting the bounds of cos(ξh):
g(ξ) ≤1 + kκ
h2 · 0 = 1,
g(ξ) ≥1 + kκ
h2 (−4),
==PAGE:133==
C.3 Stability analysis
117
assuming κ > 0. From this, we can induce that |g(ξ)| ≤1 if
1 −4kκ
h2 ≥−1,
4kκ
h2 ≤2.
This is a requirement that ensures that the FTCS scheme is stable for the heat
equation. It is natural to express this requirement as a relation between the grid
spacing h and the time-discretization step k:
k ≤1
2κh2.
C.3.2
Advection equation
As mentioned previously, the FTCS scheme is unconditionally unstable for the advec-
tion equation. This will be shown in this section. A FTCS-scheme for the advection
equation is (based on a central difference approximation of the first derivative in space
and a forward Euler method):
U n+1
j
= U n
j −ak
2h(U n
j+1 −U n
j−1).
Following the approach from the previous section, we now insert U n+1
j
= g(ξ)eijhξ
and U n
j = eijhξ:
g(ξ)eijhξ = eijhξ −ak
2h

ei(j+1)hξ −ei(j−1)hξ
= eijhξ

1 −ak
2h
 eihξ −e−ihξ
,
g(ξ) = 1 −ak
2h
 eihξ −e−ihξ
.
In order for the method to be stable, we need |g(ξ)| ≤1. Using the identity sin(x) =
1
2i
 eix −e−ix
we have g(ξ) = 1−ak
2h(2i sin(x)). The squared modulus of this complex
number is:
|g|2 = 1 + a2k2
h2
sin2(hξ).
Since this |g|2 is greater than 1 for all wave numbers ξ, the same holds for |g|, hence,
the FTCS-scheme is unconditionally unstable.
For the upwind method (3.9), we have:
g(ξ)eijhξ = eijhξ

1 −ak
h (1 −e−ihξ)

,
g(ξ) = 1 −ak
h + ak
h e−ihξ,
==PAGE:134==
118
C Details of chapter 3
From the relation eix = cos(x) + i sin(x), it is now evident that for some value of ξ
the amplification factor g is located on the circle with radius ak
h and center in 1 −ak
h .
In order for g to be within the unit circle, it is required that 0 ≤ak
h ≤1. This is
therefore the stability requirement of the upwind method, which can be expressed in
terms of the relation between h and k:
k ≤h
a,
since both values as well as a are positive.
C.4
Higher order methods
C.4.1
Heat equation
A higher order method for solving the heat equation is the FTCS-scheme, where a
fourth order FD-method is used for the space differentiation:
U n+1
j
= U n
j + kκ
h2

−1
12U n
j−2 + 4
3U n
j−1 −5
2U n
j + 4
3U n
j+1 −1
12U n
j+2

.
A von Neumann analysis on this scheme will show stability requirements. Consider
U n
j = eijhξ and U n+1
j
= g(ξ)eijhξ. Upon insertion in the scheme:
g(ξ)eijhξ = eijhξ

1 + kκ
h2

−1
12(e−2ihξ + e2ihξ) + 4
3(e−ihξ + eihξ) −5
2

,
g(ξ) = 1 + kκ
h2

−1
12(e−2ihξ + e2ihξ) + 4
3(e−ihξ + eihξ) −5
2

.
Since cos(x) = eix+e−ix
2
and cos(2x) = e2ix+e−2ix
2
:
g(ξ) = 1 + kκ
h2

−1
12(2 cos(2hξ)) + 4
3(2 cos(hξ)) −5
2

,
= 1 + kκ
h2

−1
6 cos(2hξ) + 8
3 cos(hξ) −5
2

.
Now, since −1 ≤cos(x) ≤1 −1 ≤cos(2x) ≤1, we know that the amplification
function g is bounded:
g ≤1 + kκ
h2 · 0 = 0,
g ≥1 −5kκ
h2 .
==PAGE:135==
C.4 Higher order methods
119
Now, we can deduce that |g(ξ)| ≤1 if:
1 −5kκ
h2 ≥−1,
k
h2 ≤2
5.
Thus, a stability requirement for the fourth order solution is k ≤2
5h2.
Now, to check the order of the method, we consider the Euler step of eq. (3.13).
The one step error is kO(k+h4) = O(k2+kh4). Introducing the stability requirement
k ≈h2, gives the one-step error: O(h4 + h6). After N = T
k ≈
T
h2 steps, the global
error is:
Eglobal = N · O(h4 + h6) = T
h2 · O(h4 + h6) = O(h2 + h4).
It turns out that with the relation k ≈h2, which was required for stability, the global
error is second order, and not fourth order. In order to get fourth order, it is therefore
necessary to use k ≈h4, such that the one-step error is O(h8 + h8), and the global
error is:
Eglobal = N · O(h8) = T
h4 · O(h8) = O(h4).
Thereby, it is possible to obtain a fourth order global error, if the requirement k ≈h4
is enforced. This is a very strict requirement, where it is evident that one would
require a large N to evolve to time step T, when compared to a second order method.
The order of the method is shown with the same procedure as in section C.2.
That is, using a harmonic initial value such that the true function is know, and then
calculating the error of the numerical solution in time T for different simulations
correpsonding to different sizes of h. The result is shown in figure C.5, where it is
seen that the rate of convergence of the numerical solution corresponds to O(h4)
C.4.2
Advection equation
A higher-order method for solving the advection equation can be obtained by using
4th order central differences in the Lax-Wendroff method. The method is then:
U n+1
j
=U n
j −ak
h ( 1
12U n
j−2 −2
3U n
j−1 + 2
3U n
j+1 −1
12U n
j+2),
+ a2k2
2h2 (−1
12U n
j−2 + 4
3U n
j−1 −5
2U n
j + 4
3U n
j+1 −1
12U n
j+2).
The truncation error of this method is O(k2 + h4), so the one-step method error is
O(k3 +kh4). Using k ≈h2, the one-step error is O(h6), and the total number of time
steps is N = T
k ≈T
h2 . The global error ends up being:
Eglobal = 1
h2 O(h6) = O(h4).
==PAGE:136==
120
C Details of chapter 3
10
1
h
10
8
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
|utrue
ufdm|
Heat equation, FT1-CS4
|utrue
ufdm|
(h2)
(h4)
Figure C.5: Convergence plot of the FTCS (1st and 4nd order) method for the heat equation.
The order is shown numerically in figure C.6, where is is seen that the slope of the
error matches the slope of h4, indicating a fourth order convergence rate.
C.4.3
Burgers equation
A higher order method for solving Burgers equation is simply to transform using a
fourth order scheme for the derivative, as well as using the fourth order method for
solving the heat equation, (3.13). In this case, the Neumann Boundary conditions
once again have to be considered. Using a fourth order approximation to the first
derivative on the left boundary in the transformed domain, yields:
ψx =
1
12ψ(0 −2h, t) −2
3ψ(0 −h, t) + 2
3ψ(0 + h, t) −1
12ψ(0 + 2h, t)
h
= 0.
For ψ(0 −2h, t) = ψ(0 + 2h, t) and ψ(0 −h, t) = ψ(0 + h, t), this equation is true.
Inserting this into the fourth order approximation of the left boundary yields:
ψn+1
0
= ψn
0 + vh
h2 (−1
12ψn
−2 + 4
3ψn
−1 −5
2ψn
0 + 4
3ψn
1 −1
12ψn
2 ),
= ψn
0 + vh
h2 (−2
12ψn
2 + 8
3ψn
1 −5
2ψn
0 ).
Now, the scheme on the boundary only consists of grid points inside the domain. The
grid point ψ1 also has to be handled, since its scheme also consists of a grid point
==PAGE:137==
C.4 Higher order methods
121
10
2
10
1
h
10
9
10
7
10
5
10
3
10
1
|utrue
ufdm|
Advection equation, 4th order Lax-Wendroff method
|utrue
ufdm|
(h2)
(h4)
Figure C.6: Convergence plot of the Lax-Wendroff method with a 4th order discretization in space
outside the domain.
ψn+1
1
= ψn
1 + vh
h2 (−1
12ψn
−1 + 4
3ψn
0 −5
2ψn
1 + 4
3ψn
2 −1
12ψn
3 ),
= ψn
1 + vh
h2 (4
3ψn
0 −
 1
12 + 5
2

ψn
1 + 4
3ψn
2 −1
12ψn
3 ).
Similarly, on the right boundary, the scheme is: ψn+1
m+1 = ψn
m+1 + vh
h2 (−2
12ψn
m−1 +
8
3ψn
m −5
2ψn
m+1), and next to the boundary the scheme is: ψn+1
m
= ψn
m + vh
h2 ( 4
3ψn
m+1 −
  1
12 + 5
2

ψn
m + 4
3ψn
m−1 −1
12ψn
m−2).
The expected truncation error is O(k + h4), and with the same argument as in
section 3.3.1, the global error should be Eglobal = O(h4), for k ≈h4. This is confirmed
by figure C.7, where the slope of the error of the numerical solution corresponds to
the slope of h4.
==PAGE:138==
122
C Details of chapter 3
2 × 10
2
3 × 10
2
4 × 10
2
6 × 10
2
h
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
|utrue
ufdm|
Burgers equation, transformed FT1-CS4
|utrue
ufdm|
(h2)
(h4)
Figure C.7: Convergence plot of the FTCS (1st and 4th order) method for the transformed Burgers
equation.
C.5
Connection between numerical methods and
CNNs
C.5.1
Handling Dirichlet conditions for the heat equation
The FCTS-scheme for solving the heat equation (3.8), holds for interior points, but
boundary values have to be treated differently according to the boundary conditions.
First, let us redefine the vector U i to contain boundary grid points and let us assume
that the vector is zero padded:
U i = [0, U i
0, U i
2, ..., U i
m, U i
m+1, 0]T .
(C.2)
Let us now consider equation (3.8) in the boundary points, where we add a correction
g0 and gm+1. If the PDE is defined with Dirichlet conditions, we wish the value in
iteration i + 1 to be equal to the value given by the boundary conditions. Using
the notation from (3.6), the discretized versions of the boundary functions b1(t) and
b2(t) are denoted bi
1 and bi
2 for the ith iteration. The boundary version of eq. (3.8)
==PAGE:139==
C.5 Connection between numerical methods and CNNs
123
including correction terms is:
U i+1
0
= U i
0 + kκ
h2
 0 −2U i
0 + U i
1

+ gi
0 = bi+1
1
,
U i+1
m+1 = U i
m+1 + kκ
h2
 U i
m −2U i
m+1 + 0

+ gi
m+1 = bi+1
2
.
To estimate the correction, we can now isolate g0 and gm+1.
gi
0 = bi+1
1
−U i
0 + kκ
h2
 2U i
0 −U i
1

,
gi
m+1 = bi+1
2
−U i
m+1 + kκ
h2
 −U i
m + 2U i
m+1

.
It is clear from this, that for constant boundary conditions, bi+1
0
= U i
0 and bi+1
2
=
U i
m+1, this simply results in using the negative kernel on the boundaries.
It is now possible to define the full, discretized system, which also accounts for
boundary conditions:
U i+1
j
= U i
j + kκ
h2
 U i
j−1 −2U i
j + U i
j+1

+ gi
j, for j = 0, ..., m + 1, i = 0, ..., T,
(C.3)
where gj = 0 for j = 1, ..., m and gj ̸= 0 for j = 0, m + 1, and U is the zero-padded
vector in eq. (C.2).
C.5.2
Training loss history
In section 3.5.2, a CNN is trained to approximate a finite difference stencil. The
training procedure is presented in listing 3.3. In figure C.8, the loss history of this
training procedure is presented. It can be seen that the method converges very quickly.
The training took only approximately one second to perform.
C.5.3
Handling boundary conditions
In the context of using CNNs for simulating PDEs, boundary conditions have to be
handled. This is discussed in section 3.5.3. This appendix holds some more details
in this regard.
For instance, in a simple case where a first derivative is calculated with a zero
boundary (Dirichlet boundary condition), a reflection padding can be correct, whereas
a zero-padding would introduce an error. If using a second order central difference
scheme, the stencil is:
1
2h[−1, 0, 1]
==PAGE:140==
124
C Details of chapter 3
Figure C.8: The training loss for different epochs of the training procedure when fitting a CNN to
approximate an FDM.
Consider using this stencil on the domain: U = [0, 4, 5, 3, 0]. If U is padded using
zeros and reflection padding, respectively, we have:
U 0 = [0, 0, 4, 5, 3, 0, 0]
U reflect = [4, 0, 4, 5, 3, 0, 3]
After performing the convolution (assume h = 0.5):
conv(U 0) = [4, 5, −1, −5, −3]
conv(U reflect) = [0, 5, −1, −5, 0]
In the latter case, the boundary condition is maintained.
This is a very simple
example, where the choice of boundary conditions and system results in a correct
convolution, when using a reflection boundary, but this result is rare. In general, one
will experience that the different types of paddings will be favorable in some cases and
unfavorable in other cases, but in almost all cases, they introduce an error, and this
can in some cases be fatal for the training procedure. In [47], the authors investigate
three ways of handling boundary conditions when training CNNs for solving PDEs.
The first is the implicit method, where only the padding method affects the boundary.
In the second, they include spatial context. The spatial context consists of a boolean
mask that indicates whether each entry in the input array is a boundary. Including
this information as a separate channel in the convolutional layer allows the neural
network to adjust its weights accordingly. The third version is the explicit encoding,
where the boundary values are explicitly enforced by overwriting the boundary values
in the output from the CNN by the correct values. They test all three approaches
each with use of the four padding modes: zero-, circular-, replication- and reflection-
padding. The methods are tested on two different PDEs: 1) acoustic propagation of
gaussian pulses with i) reflective walls, ii) periodic walls and iii) absorbing walls as
==PAGE:141==
C.5 Connection between numerical methods and CNNs
125
well as 2) the heat equation with i) zero-flux Neumann boundary conditions. Only
the results for the first PDE will be summarized here.
In summary, their result with PDE 1 show that the choice of boundary conditions
affects what padding mode that is best. In case 1i, the circular padding performs the
worst for all three methods, whereas in case 1ii, replication-padding and zero-padding
have the highest errors. In 1iii, the replication-padding performs badly in the implicit
and context-including methods. The reflection padding also has an exploding error
in the latter, whereas all three padding methods perform equally well in the explicit
case. In all tests with PDE 1, the best-performing paddings have approximately the
same order of the error across the types of methods.
In summary, the authors conclude that for PDE 1, the most diﬀicult boundary
condition to model is the absorbing walls. They argue that the challenge for the net-
work is ”to correctly propagate the initial pulses outside the domain without spurious
reflections at boundaries” [47]. The authors observe that, in this case, the explicit
enforcing of boundary conditions lead to a stabilizing effect, whereas in the implicit
case, artifacts occur that later lead to instabilities.
In a different paper [62], the authors explore the explicit enforcing of boundary
conditions. They present a method, where the goal is to use data to train a rule on
the boundary. This is implemented by introducing convolutional layers that are only
used on the edges and the corners of the domain. That is, in the two-dimensional
case, a specific filter is trained on the upper left corner, another on the top edge of the
domain, a third on the top right corner and so on. In the one-dimensional case, only
one filter for each of the two boundaries is trained. A padding will still be required
on the input in order to maintain the resolution. The addition of these layers to the
original CNN will only require a constant additional amount of computation, which
means that the asymptotic computational complexity is unchanged.
The authors test their method on a variety of computer vision problems. They
experience slightly better results (lower error) using their learned explicit boundaries
compared to using a zero-padding and a reflecting padding. Having the results of
[47] in mind, this might be a very satisfying result, since the authors in [47] find
that enforcing the actual boundary conditions explicitly has approximately the same
order of the error as the implicit method with some types of padding. Therefore, the
authors of [62] might have succeeded in learning the exact boundary conditions using
their framework. Though, they do not check whether this is true.
To conclude, there are different possibilities of handling boundaries when training
the CNN: the passive approach; for instance using the implicit method or context-
including method where we don’t control what happens to the boundaries, and the
active approach; where we enforce action on the boundaries either by training lay-
ers that act solely on the boundaries or by explicitly overwriting the values on the
boundaries.
==PAGE:142==
126
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX D
Details of chapter 4
D.1
Convergence plots of initial MF-model
This section shows convergence of the simple MF-models fitted in section 4.1. Fig-
ure D.1 shows convergence of CNN_corr1, whereas figure D.2 shows convergence of
CNN_corr2. Listing 4.4 does not show a validation loop, but a validation does take
place during the optimization process in the following way: if the mean training loss
in an epoch is low enough (best so far), the mean loss of a validation set of size 50
when using the MF-model is found. If this mean validation loss is low enough (best
so far and below some threshold), the model is saved. The model weights are not
updated in the validation loop.
CNN_corr1 converges extremely fast, and within the first 20 epochs, it has con-
verged to a very low validation and training error that corresponds to machine preci-
sion. For CNN_corr2 it takes some more iterations, and only around epoch 200 has
the model converged suﬀiciently. In both figures, a black line indicates the epochs
where the learning rate has been changed. The role of the learning rate is described
further in chapter 5.
Figure D.1: Convergence of the simple MF-model based on a CNN_corr1 network. The figure has
a logarithmic y-axis showing the mean squared error across 50 validation sets and 500 training sets.
==PAGE:144==
128
D Details of chapter 4
Figure D.2: Convergence of the simple MF-model based on a CNN_corr2 network. The figure has
a logarithmic y-axis showing the mean squared error across 50 validation sets and 500 training sets.
D.2
Details for Deep FDM
D.2.1
Convergence plots
In figure D.3, the convergence progress of the training of the Deep FDM model can
be found. The vertical black line indicates the epochs where the learning rate has
been changed. The role of the learning rate is described further in chapter 5. It is
seen that the model converges to a satisfying level, but compared to the figures in
the previous section, the errors are much larger for the Deep FDM, which will be
discussed in section 4.2.3.
Figure D.3: Convergence of the Deep FDM model. The figure has a logarithmic y-axis showing
the mean squared error across 50 validation sets and 1 training set in each epoch.
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX E
Details of chapter 5
E.1
Details of section 5.1
This section contains details relevant to the results of section 5.1.
E.1.1
Calculation of FLOPs for table 5.8
This section presents how the number of useful FLOPs are calculated for the LF-,
HF- and MF-models for each of the three equations.
E.1.1.1
Heat equation
The LF-model of the heat equation is a FTCS scheme of first and second order for
the time- and space discretization, respectively. The scheme is:
U i+1
j
= U i
j + kκ
h2
 U i
j−1 −2U i
j + U i
j+1

, for j = 1, ..., m and i = 0, ..., T −1.
The number of interior points is m, and the total number of grid points is N = m+2.
If the input is padded, it has dimension N +2. In practice, the scheme is implemented
as a convolution operation with a kernel of size K = 3:
U i+1
j
= U i
j + kκ
h2 Conv(U i
j).
The convolution operation consists of the multiplication of the kernel [1, −2, 1] with
subsets of the input. There will be a total of N +2 subsets, and for each subset there
will be K multiplications and K −1 additions. In total for one convolution operation,
there are (N + 2)(2K −1) = 5N + 10 FLOPs.
The scheme further consists of the multiplication with kκ
h2 after the convolution
(= N FLOPs), and the addition of the input U i
j (= N FLOPs), resulting in a total
of (N + 2)(2K −1) + 2N = 7N + 10 FLOPs per time step. For a total of NT time
steps, the number of FLOPs is NT (7N + 10).
In the standard case, a value of m = 100 is employed for NT = 54 time steps.
This results in the number of FLOPs:
NF LOP s,LF = NT (7N + 10) = 39096
==PAGE:146==
130
E Details of chapter 5
Similarly, for the HF-model, the kernel has size K = 5, and the padded dimension
will be N + 4. Further, the HF-model uses NT = 13628. Therefore, the number of
FLOPs will be:
NF LOP s,HF = NT ((N + 4)(2K −1) + 2N) = 15781224
The multi-fidelity model is a combination of the LF-model and an additive CNN.
It has already been established that CNN_corr3 uses 30NinN + 30N FLOPs for one
evaluation. According to the scheme:
U i+1 = U i + FLF (U i) + kFCNN(U i),
i = 0, ..., NT ,
the output from the CNN is multiplied by the time step k. Therefore, the contribution
from the CNN is 30NinN + 30N + N FLOPs per time step. The total number of
FLOPs is (using NT = 54 and Nin = 1):
NF LOP s,MF = NF LOP s,LF + NT (30NinN + 30N + N) = 375084
E.1.1.2
Advection equation
The LF-model for the advection equation is the upwind method and it therefore
consists of the same parts as for the heat equation: a convolution with kernel size
K = 3, a multiplication with a constant and addition to the input. In this case, the
number of time steps is NT = 55:
NF LOP s,LF = NT (7N + 10) = 39820
The fourth order method is the Lax-Wendroff method with two convolutions with
kernels of size 5, a multiplication for each convolution as well as addition to the input
and NT = 863. Therefore, the number of FLOPs is:
NF LOP s,MF = NT (2(2K −1)(N + 4) + 3N) = 1910682
Again, the multi-fidelity model consists of the LF-model and an addition of CNN_corr3
with Nin = 2. For NT = 55, this results in:
NF LOP s,MF = NF LOP s,LF + NT (30NinN + 30N + N) = 550330
E.1.1.3
Burgers equation
The LF-model for Burgers equation is a FTCS scheme consisting of a convolution for
the first derivative and a convolution for the second derivative along with multiplica-
tions with constants onto each of them and addition to the input. In total, there will
be three two additions (addition of one convolution output to the input, and then
addition of the second convolution output) and two multiplications, a total of 4N
==PAGE:147==
E.1 Details of section 5.1
131
FLOPs. The LF-model is second order, so the convolution kernels have size K = 3.
Therefore, the number of FLOPs is (with m = 35, which is the standard model):
NF LOP s,LF = NT (2(2K −1)(N + 2) + 4N) = 143108
The HF-model is simulated as the heat-equation in a transformed domain and then
transformed back. The number of FLOPs of the HF-model for the heat equation was
NT ((N + 4)(2K −1) + 2N) = 15781224. The transformation is given by u = −2vϕx
ϕ .
Therefore, a convolution with a kernel of size K = 5 is used to obtain ϕx, and
the division with ϕ and multiplication with the constant corresponds to 2N FLOPs.
Therefore a total of (2K −1)(N + 4) + 2N = 256 FLOPs is needed in each time step
to transform the solution back to the original domain.
In total, adding the contribution from solving the heat equation and transforming
back, the number of FLOPs for the HF-model with NT = 342780 is:
NF LOP s,HF = NT ((N + 4)(2K −1) + 2N) + NT ((2K −1)(N + 4) + 2N) = 303703080
For the MF-model, the structure CNN_corr6 is used with Nin = 10, and it uses
30NinN + 217N FLOPs per evaluation. This results in a total amount of FLOPs:
NF LOP s,MF = NF LOP s,LF + NT (30NinN + 217N + N) = 5241264
E.1.2
Performance tables
This section holds the data used for constructing the figures in section 5.1.4.
Table E.1: Mean absolute errors of the models across 100 simulations (in the case of the heat and
advection equation, only one simulation for Burgers) given by the infinity norm. Reported with 2
significant digits.
order | m
10
20
40
80
160
Heat
2 (LF)
-
3.3 · 10−3
1.3 · 10−3
3.4 · 10−4
8.5 · 10−5
2+ (MF)
-
6.8 · 10−4
1.2 · 10−4
3.2 · 10−5
1.7 · 10−5
4 (HF)
-
5.7 · 10−4
4.2 · 10−5
2.9 · 10−6
2.6 · 10−7
R∞
-
26
16
12
5.0
Advection
1 (LF)
-
1.1
0.84
0.56
0.34
2
-
1.2
0.58
0.19
5.3 · 10−2
1+ (MF)
-
-
0.20
0.03
6.4 · 10−3
4 (HF)
-
0.95
0.15
0.012
8.2 · 10−4
R∞
-
-
13
25
63
Burgers
2 (LF)
4.2 · 10−3
1.2 · 10−3
3.4 · 10−4
-
-
2+ (MF)
3.7 · 10−3
5.4 · 10−4
5.9 · 10−5
-
-
4 (HF)
3.7 · 10−4
3.1 · 10−5
2.2 · 10−6
-
-
R∞
1.2
2.4
5.9
-
-
==PAGE:148==
132
E Details of chapter 5
Table E.2:
Mean absolute errors of the models across 100 simulations (in the case of the heat
and advection equation, only one simulation for Burgers) given by the L2-norm. Reported with 2
significant digits.
order | m
10
20
40
80
160
Heat
2 (LF)
-
3.6 · 10−3
1.5 · 10−3
5.4 · 10−3
1.9 · 10−4
2+ (MF)
-
6.6 · 10−4
1.3 · 10−5
4.6 · 10−5
3.2 · 10−5
4 (HF)
-
6.2 · 10−4
5.1 · 10−4
4.6 · 10−6
4.8 · 10−7
R2
-
66
18
13
6.1
Advection
1 (LF)
-
2.5
1.8
1.1
0.66
2
-
2.6
1.1
0.30
0.077
1+ (MF)
-
-
0.34
0.065
0.016
4 (HF)
-
1.8
0.21
0.015
0.0010
R2
-
-
13
23
45
Burgers
2 (LF)
3.5 · 10−3
1.4 · 10−3
5.4 · 10−4
-
-
2+ (MF)
2.1 · 10−3
3.3 · 10−4
1.0 · 10−4
-
-
4 (HF)
1.8 · 10−4
2.0 · 10−5
2.0 · 10−6
-
-
R2
1.7
4.6
5.5
-
-
Table E.3: Time (in seconds) spent on simulations for each of the three models for 100 simulations
(in the case of the heat and advection equation, only one simulation for Burgers). Reported with 2
significant digits.
order | m
10
20
40
80
160
Heat
2 (LF)
-
0.029
0.081
0.28
1.1
2+ (MF)
-
0.093
0.28
1.1
4.1
4 (HF)
-
0.30
3.2
49
760
THF
TMF
-
3.2
11
45
190
Advection
1 (LF)
-
0.10
0.14
0.31
0.68
2
-
0.11
0.19
0.37
0.69
1+ (MF)
-
-
0.68
1.4
3.6
4 (HF)
-
0.50
1.3
5.1
24
Burgers
2 (LF)
0.20
0.80
2.7
-
-
2+ (MF)
0.57
2.4
9.7
-
-
4 (HF)
100
1600
19000
-
-
E.1.3
New initial value functions
Figure E.1 shows the new initial value function compared to the old initial value
function for the heat and advection equations. These initial value functions are used
for generalizing the MF-model to other solutions.
==PAGE:149==
E.2 Shallow Water Equations
133
Table E.4: Number of FLOPs for one simulation of each of the three models.
order | m
10
20
40
80
160
Heat
2 (LF)
-
656
3040
20440
154440
2+ (MF)
-
6024
28660
195510
1488510
4 (HF)
-
1.11 · 104
2.141 · 105
5.48 · 106
1.61 · 108
Advection
1 (LF)
-
2132
6992
25696
99528
2
-
4238
13478
48664
186702
1+ (MF)
-
-
94898
354024
1382082
4 (HF)
-
34710
175536
1105104
8160426
Burgers
2 (LF)
2444
15088
104880
-
-
2+ (MF)
164060
1063520
7610700
-
-
4 (HF)
1.06 · 106
2.24 · 107
5.77 · 108
-
-
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
x
1
0
1
u
Old
New
Heat equation, a = 1.68, b = 0.38, c = 0.18.
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
x
2
0
2
u
Old
New
Advection equation, a = 1.13, b = 1.87.
Figure E.1: The new initial value functions, as defined in table 5.10 compared to the old initial
value function, as defined in table 5.3.
E.2
Shallow Water Equations
This section holds details relevant to the test of the MF-model for the SWE in section
5.2.
E.2.1
Linear SWE
E.2.1.1
Calculation of FLOPs
This section presents the calculations of FLOPs for solving the LSWE using the HF-,
LF-, and MF-models. The calculations are based on the Matlab implementation of
the 5 stage RK-method. All padding operations are left out.
The 5 stage RK-method consists of a loop over the five stages. In each stage, two
multiplications with each state vector of size Nx is performed to calculate a residual
and to reset the spatial derivative (a total of 4Nx FLOPs). Then, there is a loop over
the domain, where a stencil of size K is multiplied to the state vector and the result
is added together (a total of Nx(2K −1) FLOPs). Last, some residuals are calculated
and the RK-step is taken (a total of 10Nx multiplications and additions). Doing this
==PAGE:150==
134
E Details of chapter 5
for the 5 stages in time step i, yields:
NF LOP s,i = 5(4Nx + Nx(2K −1) + 10Nx) = (10K + 65)Nx.
Since the LF-model and the HF-model use the same number of time steps, NT , the
number of FLOPs are:
NF LOP s,LF = NF LOP s,HF = NT (10K + 65)Nx.
The CNN-structure CNN_corr3 uses the 1D-convolution operation presented in
(5.3), meaning that the number of floating point operations of a convolutional layer
with kernels of size K is:
CoutNx + Cout(CinNx(2K −1) + Nx(Cin −1)).
In the first layer, Cin = 2 and Cout = 6, and in the second layer, Cin = 6 and Cout = 2.
K is 5 for CNN_corr3. This means that the number of FLOPs, when executing the
CNN is:
NF LOP s,CNN = 6Nx + 6(2Nx(2 · 5 −1) + Nx(2 −1)) + 2Nx + 2(6Nx(2 · 5 −1) + Nx(6 −1))
= 360Nx
Now, adding this to the FLOPs coming from the LF-model and collecting for all time
steps:
NF LOP s,MF = NT (10K + 65)Nx + 360NT Nx
Inserting the appropriate values for Nx and NT (depends on m), yields the results in
table 5.13.
E.2.1.2
Results
Figure E.2 shows the absolute errors of the LF-, HF- and MF-models, respectively,
when compared to the analytical solution for m = 40. It is seen from the figures, and
especially the colorbars that the MF-model has the same error as the HF-model.
==PAGE:151==
E.2 Shallow Water Equations
135
Figure E.2: Absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to
the analytical (true) solution of the LSWE. This simulation uses the parameter: a = 0.6255.
Table E.5 shows the data behind figure 5.16.
Table E.5: Statistics of the models for solving the LSWE for different resolutions of the grid given
by the number of interior points, m. The rows show the mean infinity norm of the error, the mean
2-norm of the error and the number of FLOPs, respectively. Reported with 3 significant digits
model | m
10
20
40
60
|e|∞
LF
1.98
0.550
0.145
0.0655
MF
0.126
9.80 · 10−3
6.790 · 10−4
1.35 · 10−4
HF
0.126
9.79 · 10−3
6.80 · 10−4
1.41 · 10−4
|e|2
LF
1.25
0.334
0.0864
2.37
MF
0.0800
5.95 · 10−3
4.05 · 10−4
8.25 · 10−5
HF
0.0800
5.95 · 10−3
4.04 · 10−4
7.77 · 10−5
FLOPs
LF
27360
91960
339150
742140
MF
96768
325248
1199520
2624832
HF
33120
111320
410550
898380
E.2.2
Nonlinear SWE
E.2.2.1
Calculation of FLOPs
The calculation of FLOPs is the same in the case of the nonlinear SWE, except that
Cin of the first layer in CNN_corr3 is 4 instead of 2.
==PAGE:152==
136
E Details of chapter 5
E.2.2.2
Results
Figure E.3 shows the absolute errors of the LF-, HF- and MF-models, respectively,
when compared to the analytical solution for m = 40. It is seen from the figure that
the difference between the MF- and LF-model is not as great for this model as it was
for the LSWE.
Figure E.3: Absolute errors of the solutions of the LF-, MF- and HF-models when compared to
the reference solution of the SWE. This simulation uses the parameter: a = 0.0012.
Table E.6 shows the data behind figure 5.18.
Table E.6: Statistics of the models for solving the SWE for different resolutions of the grid given
by the number of interior points, m. The rows show the mean infinity norm of the error, the mean
2-norm of the error and the timing of the 20 simulations for each model, respectively. Reported with
3 significant digits
model | m
10
20
40
60
120
|e|∞
LF
2.50 · 10−3
1.35 · 10−3
5.78 · 10−4
3.32 · 10−4
1.29 · 10−4
MF
1.17 · 10−3
5.05 · 10−4
2.36 · 10−4
9.66 · 10−5
9.79 · 10−5
HF
9.42 · 10−4
3.93 · 10−4
1.15 · 10−4
7.63 · 10−5
5.55 · 10−5
|e|2
LF
1.56 · 10−3
5.03 · 10−3
1.54 · 10−4
7.46 · 10−5
2.39 · 10−5
MF
5.92 · 10−4
1.99 · 10−4
1.15 · 10−4
3.06 · 10−5
3.10 · 10−5
HF
4.64 · 10−4
9.66 · 10−5
2.87 · 10−5
1.66 · 10−5
1.47 · 10−5
FLOPs
LF
30240
101640
374850
820260
3176880
MF
134208
451088
1663620
3640392
14099296
HF
36000
121000
446250
976500
3782000
==PAGE:153==
==PAGE:154==
