==PAGE:1==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Use of L1000 Expression Data
to Elucidate Biological Mechanisms
35 ECTS Master's Thesis
by
Casper Rasmussen, s206220
at
Technical University of Denmark - Department of Health Technology
Supervisor: Leon Eyrich Jessen, Associate Professor &
Head of the Computational Autoimmunity Group
in collaboration with
Novo Nordisk - Digital Science & Innovation - Computational Biology
Supervisor: Ib Groth Clausen, Head of Department for New Modalities and Drug Delivery
January 17, 2024
==PAGE:2==
This 35 ECTS MSc. project was initiated on 2nd of January 2023 and concluded with
the submission of the present thesis on the 17th of January 2024.
All work described here was done by the signatory below in collaboration with the
New Modalities and Drug Delivery team at the Computational Biology Department of
Novo Nordisk and the Department of Health Technology at the Technical University of
Denmark.
Casper Rasmussen, s206220
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Connectivity Map is a large-scale compendium of signatures representing gene
expression changes upon perturbation of cultured cells and it was generated using
a purpose-made low-cost assay, the L1000 platform. The resulting resource can be
queried with differential gene expression signatures from other sources, enabling the
hypothesis generation based on similarity. The foundation for this project was the idea
that clustering Connectivity Map and disease signatures from obese and non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis patients could lead to new insights into these diseases. In order to es-
tablish the robustness of this approach and choose the best similarity measure, cluster-
ings of Connectivity Map signatures were evaluated against externally derived ground
truth labels. The results of this was inconclusive, and an approach following the tra-
ditional Connectivity Map paradigm more closely was utilized for analysis the disease
signatures. The top results showed some enrichment for known mechanisms in both
diseases, though an equivalent number of results had no obvious connection. It was
shown that the Connectivity Map method can successfully be used to discover relevant
biological mechanism but that the lack of external validation is a concern. In conclusion
it was recommended that only highly reproducible signatures from a cellular background
relevant to query data are used when querying the Connectivity Map and that new and
better methods should be developed to extract full value from the resource.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First of all I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to Ib Groth Clausen for going
above and beyond what could be expected of a supervisor. Thank you for the countless
hours of advice and guidance. I wish you all the very best for your upcoming retirement.
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude towards Leon Eyrich Jessen for taking
me in for a thesis in collaboration with Novo Nordisk, looking out for me and sticking
with me for the rough patches. Thank you both for your unwavering support.
I would also like to thank the whole of the computational biology department here at
Novo Nordisk. Thank you to Asli Ismihan Ozen for facilitating the initial contact with Ib
and to Alexander Valentin Nielsen for helping me wrap my head around the clustering
and statistics. I would also like to extend a special thanks to the New Modalities and
Drug Delivery team for our many good talks and your inputs. I look forward to working
together with you in the future.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Obesity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The Signature of a Cellular Phenotype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Transcriptomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Connectivity Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.7
Project Aims
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Materials
15
2.1
The Connectivity Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Disease Differential Gene Expression Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Night A Peptide Perturbation Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Methods
26
3.1
Connectivity Scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Reactome Pathway Enrichment Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Most Relevant Neighbors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Results
37
4.1
Data Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Connectivity Map Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Query Data Analysis using the cMap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Discussion
60
5.1
Connectivity Map Data Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
The Problem of Establishing a Ground Truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Connectivity Score Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
iii
==PAGE:6==
5.4
Clustering Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.5
Query Data vs cMap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Conclusion
71
7
Future Perspectives
72
7.1
Establishing a Robust Ground Truth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.2
Learning Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3
Clustering Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.4
Understanding the Landmark Genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Bibliography
75
8
Supplementary Information
84
8.1
Python Packages Used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
8.2
Supplemental Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AMI
Adjusted Mutual Information
API
Application Programming Interface
ARI
Adjusted Rand Index
BMI
Body Mass Index
CPM
Constant Potts Model
CRISPR
Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
CS
Connectivity Score
CSS
Connection Strength Score
cMap
Connectivity Map
ER
Endoplasmic Reticulum
FFA
Free Fatty Acid
GEO
Gene Expression Omnibus
GSEA
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
HPC
High Performance Computing
Jac
Jaccard Similarity
JIT
Just-In-Time code compiling
KFN
K Furthest Neighbours
KNN
K Nearest Neighbours
KS
Kolmogorov-Smirnov
LINCS
Library of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures
LMA
Ligation-mediated Amplification
MoA
Mechanism of Action
MRN
Most Relevant Neighbors
NAFLD
Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
NASH
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
NIH
National Institutes of Health
NN
Novo Nordisk
OLS
Ordinary Least Squares
PCC
Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient
PCL
Perturbagen Class
PCR
Polymerase Chain Reaction
ROS
Reactive Oxygen Species
v
==PAGE:8==
RNA-seq
RNA sequencing
RNFN
Reciprocal Nearest/Furthest Neighbours
scRNA-seq single-cell RNA sequencing
shRNA
short-hairpin RNA
SNN
Shared Nearest Neighbours
SpCC
Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient
ssCos
Scaled Subsetted Cosine Similarity
TAS
Transcriptional Activity Score
TF
Transcription Factor
TLR
Toll-like Receptor
UTR
Untranslated protein Response
VAT
Visceral Adipose Tissue
WTCS
Weighted Connectivity Score
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Cardiometabolic diseases are a group of multifactorial diseases with system-wide ef-
fects on many tissues. They are intricately linked to each other, and are associated
with morbidities of the heart, blood vessels and circulation. Despite their prevalence
increasing worldwide at great cost to both patients and societies, treatment and pre-
vention remains challenging due to their complexity and numerous associated risk fac-
tors [1]. Novo Nordisk (NN) has a long history with the treatment of diabetes which has
resulted in considerable institutional knowledge on the mechanisms underlying car-
diometabolic disease. This has facilitated advancements in the treatment of obesity in
recent years, though many other cardiometabolic complications such as Non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) still have no available treatment.
New computational tools and resources are emerging which enable researchers to un-
derstand the mechanisms underlying disease at the cellular level. One such resource
is the Connectivity Map (cMap), a large-scale compendium of perturbation-induced dif-
ferential gene expression data. This Master’s Thesis project for the Bioinformatics &
Systems Biology programme at the Technical University of Denmark was done in col-
laboration with NN as a continuation of prior internal work at NN by Ib Groth Clausen
and Djordje Djordjevic. The aim was to take advantage of the cMap resource for an-
notating NN gene expression data, focusing on target discovery and drug repositioning
for obesity and NASH.
1.1
Obesity
Obesity is a medical condition characterized by excessive accumulation of body fat
which is linked to increased risk of a multitude of cardiometabolic complications such
as diabetes, hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, atherosclerosis and arrhythmia. Despite
limitations of the method, the Body Mass Index (BMI) is often used as an initial diag-
nostic tool due to a strong statistical link between BMI and cardiometabolic disease.
However, the obesity-induced risk of developing cardiometabolic complications is con-
troversial even in the medical field due to the heterogeneity of risk at a given BMI; some
patients do not exhibit the health issues expected from their BMI. The condition emerges
from the complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors, and it has
been proposed that the causal relationships between obesity and overall health are too
complex for obesity to be considered a single condition or risk factor, and there has
been an increased focus on distinguishing between high-risk and low-risk types of obe-
sity [2].
1
==PAGE:10==
The accumulation of adipose tissue occurs through a balance of adipocyte hypertro-
phy (lipid droplet expansion) and adipogenesis (differentiation of precursor cells into
new adipocytes). Adipocyte hypertrophy has links to dysregulation and inflammation of
adipose tissue, whereas adipogenesis is comparatively benign. The fat compartments
in the body have different capacities for these two modes of expansion, and there is
evidence that the distribution of excess adiposity in the patient is a major determinant
of obesity-related health risks, with accumulation of Visceral Adipose Tissue (VAT) in
particular being associated with metabolic alterations. VAT has many endocrine func-
tions and a lower capacity for adipogenesis. This means that VAT expansion mainly
occurs through hypertrophy, and excessive adipocyte hypertrophy has been shown
to cause oxidative and Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress. Oxidative stress impacts
many metabolic pathways, and can also trigger ER stress due to protein misfolding.
Sustained ER stress triggers the Untranslated protein Response (UTR) which activates
proinflammatory signaling and cellular autophagy. Severe or prolonged UTR may in-
duce apoptosis or autopagic cell death. All of these factors recruit immune cells and
thus result in inflammation and fibrosis, which can develop into further endocrine dys-
regulation and cardiometabolic complications [2, 3, 4, 5].
1.2
Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis
Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) is a condition characterized by an accumu-
lation of fat in the liver (hepatic steatosis) which is not caused by other factors such as
high alcohol consumption, drug use or diseases affecting the endocrine system. NASH
is a progressive form of NAFLD characterized by chronic inflammation and fibrosis of
the liver.
Free Fatty Acid (FFA)s released into the bloodstream by adipocytes are the main en-
ergy source of the liver during fasting. Following a meal the concentration of FFAs
in the bloodstream increases, and the liver instead converts them intro triglycerides
for the adipocytes to store. Under normal physiological conditons there is a balance
between these states, but conditions which skew this balance towards increased lipid
storage or de-novo lipogenesis can cause progressive steatosis. The progression from
NAFLD to NASH happens as continued steatosis causes oxydative and ER stress in
the liver. This causes apoptosis of liver cells (referred to as ballooning due to a size
increase of the affected cells) and also initiates a series of lipoprotein abnormalities
which result in the accumulation of apolipoproteins in vascular walls. Apolipoproteins
are ligands of Toll-like Receptor (TLR)s, mediators of the innate immune response. The
pro-inflammatory signals secreted by stressed and balloning cells as well as the pre-
sentation of TLR ligands recruits immune cells. This causes inflammation, and can lead
to irreversible fibrosis caused by inflammation-induced overproduction of extracellular
2
==PAGE:11==
matrix components by hepatic stellate cells. Eventually the progression of this state
can lead to permanently reduced liver function (cirrhosis). The progression of NASH
is determined histologically by the degree of balloning and fibrosis present. Fibrotic
progression is classified into stages F0 (no fibrosis) through F4 (cirrhosis). NASH is
strongly associated with other cardiometabolic conditions [6, 7, 8].
1.3
The Signature of a Cellular Phenotype
The cells of the human body are diverse and highly specialized in both form and function
despite containing the same set of genes. This diversity arises from the differential
expression and tight regulation of gene products at the epigenetic, transcriptional and
translational levels. Attempting to understand how the observed diversity emerges from
these hierarchical layers of regulation therefore requires characterizing the individual
parts and their interactions. The scientific fields undertaking this are colloquially referred
to as omics, and they have enabled researchers to generate snapshots of the biology
underlying various cellular phenotypes, revolutionizing the way biomedical research is
conducted [9].
The cellular phenotype is a very fluid concept however: Distinguishing e.g. a hepato-
cyte from an adipocyte using simple microscopy is trivial, but such morphological ob-
servations reveal limited information about function. Asking questions about e.g. how
two hepatocytes differ from one another thus requires a specific definition of what a
distinct cellular phenotype is and how it is different from others. This necessitates dis-
secting the cells at the molecular level, a task of which requires increased resolution as
more minute differences are sought to be established (Figure 1.1). Complicating this
further is the fact that most such studies have be done using various model systems,
such as in vitro cell culture. Most cell culture models use immortalized (cancer) cells
grown as a monolayer, and it is under continuous debate to which degree such models
preserve the conditions found in vivo [10]. Though the shortcomings of any model have
to be kept in mind, the use of tissue culture models has enabled many breakthroughs
in disease understanding and treatment.
One way of unravelling a biological system is to perturb it, then observe and quantify the
outcome. This is the approach taken by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Library
of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) Consortium, with the overall
aim of establishing a knowledge base on cellular phenotypes in health and disease
and making this available to the research community. The programs under the NIH
LINCS umbrella generate many types of data including various biochemical assays,
imaging, omics and more. The fundamental unit of any NIH LINCS data is a cellular
signature: A reduced dimensionality descriptor of a cellular phenotype defined by data
captured from perturbation of cultured cells [11]. Transcriptomics data is commonly
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: The phenotype of a cell can be established at many levels: Developmental
lineage, tissue, functional subtype, cellular state etc.
used to distinguish and define cellular phenotypes, and for the NIH LINCS program this
is done by the acLINCS Center for Transcriptomics at the Broad Institute.
1.4
Transcriptomics
The transcriptome of a cell is the full set of both coding and non-coding RNA tran-
scripts present in the cell. The products of some genes are uniformly expressed across
most cellular phenotypes, often core cellular machinery such as e.g. histones or ribo-
somes, while others are expressed only in very specific cellular contexts. As such, the
specific combination of RNA transcripts and proteins present can be used to identify
unique cellular phenotypes. As the set of transcripts present in the cell also dictates
the possible set of present proteins in the cell, transcriptomics is a solid platform for
understanding the identity and state of a cell. Proteomics has historically been more
laborious and expensive as compared to transcriptomics which has benefited greatly
from Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) amplification and Next Generation Sequencing
technologies [12]. This has enabled high-throughput approaches with RNA sequenc-
ing (RNA-seq) now being the most widely utilized (based on number of publications),
having surpassed the previously dominant Microarray-based platforms.
The collection of RNA has historically been done in bulk from aggregates of cells, either
derived in vivo or in vitro, but the field of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has
grown rapidly as the technology has matured. scRNA-seq enables a new level of res-
olution for understanding the molecular underpinnings of and distinguishing between
cellular phenotypes, but comes with its own challenges: Increased cost and complex-
4
==PAGE:13==
ity, decreased throughput and increased susceptibility to noise. Though bulk-based ap-
proaches are more easily scaled, the resulting gene expression profile can be thought
of as an average of the profile of all cells underlying the experiment. This has several
implications, one of which can illustrated with a simple case of two distinct cellular phe-
notypes within a single experiment. The bulk-based gene expression profile results in a
transcriptional profile analogous to an average between the two subtypes, a phenotype
somewhere in-between the two subtypes (which may not actually exist) while scRNA-
seq would be able to capture the two distinct subtypes. Bulk-based approaches still
have some technical advantages over scRNA-seq however: Higher sequencing depth
can be achieved for a given price as more material is used. This makes it easier to
capture rare transcripts (lowly expressed genes), and the resulting gene expression
profiles are much more robust to stochastic noise which is mostly averaged out [13].
This a classical example of the bias-variance tradeoff, and the choice of method in the
end comes down to the aim of the experiment. Massive amounts of transcriptomics
data has been generated with both approaches, and large publicly available databases
housing this have emerged. These enable researchers to share knowledge and help
guide future investigations. The gene expression data generated by the NIH LINCS is
freely available in the cMap, which is a database containing transcriptomics signatures
generated at the Broad Institute.
1.5
Connectivity Map
The concept behind the cMap was to establish a compendium of transcriptional signa-
tures induced by perturbing cultured human cell lines (Figure 1.2). Such a compendium
can be used as a reference for researchers to characterize novel signatures from e.g.
drugs or diseases in silico. The agent used to perturb the cells in the cMap is referred
to as a perturbagen, and these include small molecule compounds (of both known and
unknown biological activity), endogenous protein or peptide ligands, gene overexpres-
sions (via lentivirus transfection), short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdowns or
Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)-mediated gene
knockouts. A small scale pilot was published in 2006. Here cultured cells from primarily
the epithelial breast cancer cell line MCF7 were treated with 164 small molecule com-
pounds and their gene expression profiled using Affymetrix mRNA microarrays [14].
As with all NIH LINCS data sets, the fundamental unit of the cMap data is a signature.
A cMap signature is a vector quantifying the directionality and magnitude of changes
in the expression of individual genes upon perturbation. This can be used to identify
connections between a gene expression signature of interest (henceforth referred to as
a query signature or simply a query) and all the reference signatures found in the cMap
by establishing how similar or dissimilar the signatures are by some similarity measure
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.2: The cMap concept. Cultured cells are incubated with a wide array of per-
turbagens and the induced changes in gene expression quantified. The outcome is a
compendium of signatures representing differential gene expression upon perturbation.
[15, 16]. The conclusions which can be drawn from cMap-based analysis rests on the
nature of the query and reference signatures, but four specific use cases are proposed
by the Broad Institute (Figure 1.3). As an example, having obtained gene expression
profiles from in healthy and diseased patient tissue samples a disease signature can be
established based on the differential expression. The researcher may then query the
cMap to find signatures which show a similar pattern of changes in gene expression. If
such a similar signature was established e.g. using a small molecule with a Mechanism
of Action (MoA) well-defined in literature, that knowledge may provide new insights into
causal effects of the disease (Figure 1.3b). Alternatively, if a signature inverting the
disease signature was induced by a drug which has already been approved and mar-
keted for another indication that may even provide a candidate for drug repositioning,
potentially shrinking the gap between research and clinical application (Figure 1.3a).
There are many publications demonstrating the utility of the cMap. One study which
inspired the efforts at NN prior to this project was the 2015 paper by C. Greenhill [17]
where he identified celastrol as a leptin-sensitizer in mouse obesity models. Leptin
is a hormone which induces the sensation of satiety and reduces appetite, typically
released after a meal. Decreased sensitivity to leptin is typically observed in obesity,
and celastrol could thus potentially lead to novel treatments for obesity.
Such results showcasing the potential of the cMap methodology garnered high interest
and adoption from the scientific community. This eventually led to a more than 1000-fold
expansion of the cMap by 2017, which was facilitated by a novel high-throughput assay
developed at the Broad Institute specifically for the NIH LINCS project: The L1000
platform [15]. The cMap had a final update in 2020 and now contains over 1.2 million
signatures which is the data set used for the work presented here.
6
==PAGE:15==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.3: Use cases for the cMap. a) Reversal of e.g. a disease signature by a
drug signature can reveal novel therapeutical candidates. b) Signature similarity be-
tween perturbagens with respectively known and unknown MoA can be used to gen-
erate hypotheses about unannotated perturbagens. c) Signatures induced by genetic
perturbation can reveal links between genes. d)Signature variation following compound
structure modification can be used to screen for potentially beneficial outcomes.
1.5.1
The L1000 Assay Platform
The data for the pilot version of the cMap was generated using Affymetrix microarrays
[14], but in the interest of reducing cost to facilitate a large expansion of the cMap
the L1000 platform was developed. It is a multiplexed gene expression assay utilizing
Ligation-mediated Amplification (LMA) of probes for mRNA sequences of interest, fol-
lowed by fluorescence-based detection with the Luminex FlexMap 3D platform. The
details of the L1000 assay protocol and data processing pipeline is expanded upon in
the Materials section. The platform uses only low-cost reagents. Due to the high de-
gree of correlation in gene expression, where groups of genes show similar expression
patterns across cellular phenotypes, it was it was hypothesized by Subramanian et al.
that it would be possible to represent changes in gene expression across the genome
by probing only a subset of the transcriptome using this protocol and computationally in-
ferring the expression level of other transcripts. The subset of transcript chosen would
have to be both widely expressed across cellular lineages and have high predictive
power for a significant part of the rest of the transcriptome [15].
The choice representative transcripts was done by starting from Gene Expression Om-
nibus (GEO) Affymetrix data and performing principal component analysis. Co-regulated
7
==PAGE:16==
transcripts were identified by k-means clustering on this reduced dimensionality rep-
resentation.
If a set of transcripts were determined to be commonly co-regulated,
they could be represented by any one of the transcripts in the set. Transcripts which
were found to be expressed across a set of 30 different tissue types and which were
amenable to accurate measurement by the LMA-based approach were nominated as
potential landmark transcripts. In order to choose which combination of landmark tran-
scripts could be used to optimally predict the rest of the transcriptome, a backwards
selection approach was taken. The Affymetrix-based cMap pilot had revealed some
robust and expected connections between certain small molecule induced signatures.
Subsets of various sizes and compositions of nominated landmark transcripts were
used to train Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) linear regression models for imputing the
expression values of left-out transcripts. The capability of the partially imputed signa-
tures to recover previously observed connections was evaluated which resulted in the
selection of a set of 978 landmark transcripts, from which 11350 further protein-coding
transcripts are imputed [15].
For further validation, RNA-seq and L1000 profiling was performed in parallel on a set
of samples and the sample recall between paired L1000 and RNA-seq samples evalu-
ated. Here it was shown that 81% of the 11350 inferred transcripts were imputed with
high reliability. A set of 80 control transcripts was also included due to their invariant
expression levels across cell phenotypes. These can be grouped into 10 sets of in-
creasing expression levels, with 8 transcripts in each set. This allows for downstream
normalization and reduction of non-biological signature variation [15].
The upper limit on how many landmark transcripts could be used was imposed by the
capabilities of the Luminex FlexMap 3D platform, which can detect 500 unique bead
colors for a total of 1000 transcripts by using the 2:1 mixture described above. The
major advantage of this approach is that it avoids introducing batch effects by having to
split the detection into two batches. This necessitates 489 bead colors for the landmark
transcripts, leaving only 11 for the control transcripts. It is not described in detail by the
authors how this is handled.
1.5.2
Connectivity Scores
The Connectivity Score (CS) between two signatures is a way of establishing a relat-
edness between them [18]. This has been approached by various authors in using
different conceptual frameworks to calculate a measure 1 of similarity [18, 19]. Gene
expression signatures can e.g. be interpreted as vectors, in which case the similarity
1The somewhat vague term measure is used throughout this thesis rather than metric. This is due to
the specific mathematical definition of a true metric. Many of the measures of similarity used with cMap
signatures, both here and in literature, do not satisfy e.g. the triangle inequality requirement of a true
metric.
8
==PAGE:17==
between them can be described in terms of angles and distances. They can also be in-
terpreted as jointly distributed random variables, and the relationship between them can
then be described in terms of correlation. In either case the goal is ultimately the same,
and henceforth the terms CS and similarity/dissimilarity will be used interchangeably to
refer to any such measure of relatedness.
The concept behind the CS is quite intuitive: If two different perturbagens interact with
the same molecular machinery, one would expect to see a similar transcriptional re-
sponse and a high positive CS. I.e., the signatures should lie closer to each other in
high-dimensional gene expression space than to signatures generated by unrelated
perturbagens. Alternatively, when expecting an inverse relationship such as that be-
tween the signature of a disease and the drug used to treat it, one may expect them to
be far apart in gene expression space which should be reflected by a high negative CS.
The similarities between a query signature and all signatures in the cMap can conse-
quently be ranked, and the top and bottom entries of the ranked list could reveal new
biological insights [16].
This otherwise intuitive idea becomes less clear when comparing distinct cellular phe-
notypes: The same perturbation in two different cell lines does not necessarily induce
similar transcriptional responses. An example could be perturbing the cells with a drug
inhibiting the action of a specific protein. Ignoring off-target effects, if the target protein
is expressed in cell line a but not in cell line b we would expect to see some transcrip-
tional response in a but not in b. As such, the same perturbation may generate unique
signatures depending on cellular context. This can make it difficult to interpret the re-
sults of the ranking approach above, especially when the query signature comes from
a cellular phenotype which is not well-represented in the cMap [15, 20, 21].
As gene expression data is high-dimensional it is susceptible to the curse of dimen-
sionality: If a d-dimensional hypersphere with radius r is placed inside a d-dimensional
hypercube with sides of length 2r then the proportion of the volume of hypercube which
is inside the hypersphere tends towards zero as d increases, meaning that the density
of the hypercube is increasingly found in the corners. As the number of corners a hyper-
cube has (and thus the total volume of data space) grows exponentially with the number
of dimensions this has the consequence of increasing the average euclidean distance
between data points as they are more likely to lie in the corners of the hypercube. Un-
less the number of data points is also increased exponentially with the dimensionality
of the data the ratio of distances between the nearest and furthest neighbours of a point
approaches 1 as d increases, rendering euclidean distance less and less meaningful
[22]. This also means that as the number of dimensions increase, the distance between
two data points is increasingly influenced by any noise in the data [23].
The curse of dimensionality and the resulting low signal-to-noise ratio, as well as the
9
==PAGE:18==
irregularity introduced into gene expression space by correlated expression patterns
between genes, results in great difficulties in establishing a robust measure of similar-
ity for gene expression profiles.
The CS employed by the Broad Institute has evolved over the years, but is fundamen-
tally based on Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) as proposed by Subramanian et
al. [24, 15]. Many alternative methods for comparing signatures have been proposed
over the years, and the choice of CS method influences the result significantly [19, 25].
The methods differ in the framework for interpretating a signature and thus the used
similarity measure, way of normalization, and input information used varies greatly [19]
with no consensus method having emerged. This lack of consensus is exacerbated
by the lack of a gold standard ground truth from which expected connections can be
defined, and against a proposed CS can be benchmarked. Even for highly investigated
drugs with a well-defined MoA and set of targets our knowledge is incomplete. This
means that any label, or set of labels, assigned to a perturbagen will not fully encom-
pass the information required to define the effect of that perturbagen on a biological
system. Nevertheless, if the cMap signatures to an extent reflects the best current
knowledge that may still establish a certain degree of confidence in the cMap data. To
validate the cMap against external sources, Subramanian et al. [15] used manually cu-
rated annotations collected from publicly available from databases for a subset of the
perturbagens used to generate cMap signatures [26]. These annotations were used
to construct a pairwise binary association matrix: If two perturbagens shared at least
one type of annotation they were considered associated. For a given perturbagen P
all other perturbagens were partitioned into a collection of those expected to connect
to P and background perturbagens which were not expected to connect. ROC analy-
sis was performed at a range of CS thresholds to obtain the AUC. Lin et al. [18] took
a similar approach by defining expected drug-drug similarities using those same per-
turbagen annotations. They tested a range of CS to determine which one was the most
robust, as evaluated by AUC. However, neither of these approaches take into account
expected negative connections, which was noted by Tham & Langley [25] who were
interested in benchmarking three CS methods for the cMap’s drug retrieval capability:
Finding expected negative connections between a disease signature and a drug which
had been approved or experimentally validated for treating that disease. The authors
themselves noted that their results however did not agree with those of Yang et al. [21],
who sought to establish a standardized procedure for signature-based predictions.
1.6
Clustering
The output of querying a single signature against the cMap, regardless of which method
is chosen, is a vector of values indicating the similarity between the query and each
10
==PAGE:19==
signature of the cMap. Extending this to an all-against-all approach, i.e. calculating
the connectivity between all signatures included in the analysis, results in a symmetric
square matrix of pairwise CS between any two of the included signatures. Such a
matrix can be used for unsupervised clustering, a fundamental approach to exploratory
data analysis. In fact, most clustering methods ultimately rely on a quantification of the
pairwise affinities (e.g. euclidean distance) between data points. Assuming low-noise
data and a set of known ground truth labels, a good clustering should result in clusters
whose members have the same ground-truth label. Many clustering algorithms exist
and it is not given a priori which algorithm will lead to the most correct segmentation of
a given data set, even in the case where a ground truth for such segmentation is known
[27].
Clustering is routinely used for exploratory analysis of gene expression data. A re-
searcher could be interested in finding groups of genes which are co-regulated in a
specific cellular phenotype, and a common approach is to calculate pairwise correla-
tion between the transcript expression values across experimental conditions. Utilizing
a clustering algorithm can then reveal groups of genes which were similarly affected by
experimental conditions [28]. The same approach can also be used to cluster experi-
mental conditions to find sets which show similar or dissimilar patterns of gene expres-
sion, which is commonly done with scRNA-seq data in order to distinguish between
unique cellular phenotypes. This is immediately analogous to the goals of this project:
Partitioning cellular phenotypes into clusters based on transcriptional similarity. The
underlying physical entity (single cell versus bulk derived RNA), assay platform (L1000
versus RNA-seq) and data processing pipelines are different, but ultimately each data
point (single cell or bulk-derived transcriptional signature) can be interpreted as a rep-
resentation of a single cellular phenotype.
The approach used for this project was therefore inspired by the methodologies em-
ployed by some of the established software tools used for the analysis of scRNA-seq
data. In particular, both the R packages Seurat [29] and Monocle [30], as well as the
Python package Scanpy [31] utilizes a method based on the construction of a so-called
Shared Nearest Neighbours (SNN) graph [32]. A graph G = (V, E) is a mathematical
structure in which the relationship (defined by the set of edges E) between a set of ob-
jects (V , also known as vertices or nodes) is modeled. A matrix of pairwise affinities can
be interpreted as the adjacency matrix of a fully connected weighted graph where each
vertex vi is connected to any other vertex vj by edge ei,j. Each edge e can be weighted
which denotes the strength of the pairwise connection. The SNN graph construction is
then followed by a graph-based clustering algorithm. This approach has the advantage
that it does not require prior knowledge about the number, size or shape of clusters in
the data and will be decribed in further detail in the Methods section.
11
==PAGE:20==
In the present project each vertex of a graph is a gene expression signature, and the
edge weight between nodes is the CS which specifies how similar or dissimilar the
signatures are. The vertices of such a graph can be partitioned into a set of discrete
communities C based on the weight of the edges. The goal of most graph community
detection algorithms 2 is to find a partitioning where the sum of edge weights within
each community is maximized and the sum of edge weights between communities is
minimized. This is done by optimizing some objective function f(Cn) over the n possible
ways of partitioning the graph [33].
1.7
Project Aims
The overall goal of this project was to explore the use of the cMap resource for analyz-
ing and annotating three NN differential gene expression datasets. The initial project
idea was to generate a matrix of pairwise CS between all differential gene expression
signatures included in the project, perform clustering on the resulting CS matrix, and
then investigate the clusters containing NN gene expression signatures.
The first challenge was to calculate the pairwise CS between hundreds of thousands of
signatures, as pre-existing implementations of the methods commonly used with cMap
signatures were not designed for this. The second challenge was that while applying
a clustering algorithm to a given dataset always returns some partitioning of the data,
it can be more difficult to evaluate whether those partitions reflect any real underlying
phenomenon.
It was consequently decided that the project would consist of two parts, the first of
which was an evaluation of the cMap signatures and their ability to recover expected
connections. These expected connections were defined from external data sources,
including a novel way of defining such connections for the cMap from Reactome Path-
way Enrichment Analysis. This evaluation of the cMap also enabled benchmarking of
a set of published CS approaches. The outcome of the evaluation efforts would then
guide the approach for the second part of the project, the analysis of the NN differential
gene expression datasets with the cMap as a reference dataset. This would be done by
calculating the pairwise CS between reference signatures, creating a reference graph
structure based on these similarities and using a graph-based clustering method to par-
tition the cMap signatures. Incorporating the signatures from the NN datasets into the
2Clustering is not exactly synonymous with community detection. For most clustering algorithms the
data points are partitioned based on a similarity measure derived from the attributes of the data points
themselves. Community detection algorithms are specific for graph-structured data and partitions data
points based on edge attributes. Edge attributes do not necessarily reflect data point attribute similarity.
It is the case here however, which makes the distinction somewhat arbitrary. For that reason the two
terms are used interchangeably throughout this thesis.
12
==PAGE:21==
reference graph structure based on their similarities to the reference signatures would
allow the selection of potentially interesting query signatures based on whether they
were located inside a well-separated cluster of cMap signatures. If such a cluster was
defined by a shared annotation, e.g. common MoA for the used perturbagen, this would
also suggest that the perturbagen of the query signature had similar MoA properties.
Figure 1.4 describes the overall workflow of the project.
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 1.4: The overall workflow of the project. In yellow: First, cMap signatures were
filtered and annotated with external labels for the used perturbagens. In blue: The cho-
sen CS methods were implemented and evaluated for their ability to reveal meaningful
clusters in the data, resulting in the choice of an optimal methodology. In green: Next,
NN differential gene expression signature datasets were extracted and filtered. In red:
Finally, the methodology chosen from the validation was used to investigate and anno-
tate the NN signatures.
14
==PAGE:23==
2
Materials
The datasets used for this project can be divided into three categories: Reference data,
query data and external annotations. The reference data was the cMap , or subsets of it,
as well as all associated metadata from the Broad Institute. The query data was three in-
house NN differential gene expression datasets made available for this project. Two of
these were datasets associated with obesity and NASH, which were generated mainly
from biopsies of healthy and diseased subjects, while the last was an L1000 dataset
generated at the Broad Insititute in collaboration withNN using a series of unannotated
peptides as perturbagens. The external annotations were various extra annotations for
the cMap obtained from sources outside of the Broad Institute used to classify the cMap
signatures.
2.1
The Connectivity Map
The 2020 cMap signature data and associated metadata was downloaded1 on the 6th
of February 2023. The data was generated by the Broad Institute using the L1000
platform, and the raw assay data was processed in four steps, resulting in five levels of
data. The last three levels of data is available from the Broad Institute but only the final
level 5 data was used for this project. This follows the recommendations of the Broad
Institute and was also necessary due to the time constraints of the project. The L1000
Assay protocol2, cMap data processing pipeline and available metadata are described
in the following sections.
2.1.1
L1000 Assay Protocol
When setting up an L1000 experiment, the experimental conditions are chosen so as to
generate signatures representing cellular phenotypes of interest. Cells are cultured in
384-well tissue culture plates and a single cell line is used for all wells of a single plate.
The cells are then treated with the perturbagens of interest at a given concentration and
incubated for a specific duration. The primary four variables of an L1000 experiment
are thus the cell line and perturbagens used, the concentration of the perturbagens and
the duration of incubation.
After incubation the cells are removed from the plate, suspended in a lysis buffer and
transferred to oligo-DT-coated 384-well plates (Figure 2.1a). The oligo-DT-coating cap-
tures the mRNA from the cell lysate and the captured mRNA is used as template to
generate cDNA attached directly to the plate. Biotinylated probes for the transcripts of
1https://clue.io/data/CMap2020#LINCS2020
2https://clue.io/sop-L1000.pdf
15
==PAGE:24==
interest, unique barcoded with 24-mer sequences, are ligated to the cDNA and then
amplified using PCR (Figure 2.1b). Fluorescent beads coupled to to oligonucleotides
complimentary to the unique barcode sequences is then hybridized to the amplificaiton
product. Each bead color can be used for measuring two different transcripts by cou-
pling each bead color to two different oligonucleotides and then pooling them at a
2:1 ratio (Figure 2.1c). The bead-bound amplification product is then stained with a
streptavidin-phycoerythrin (SAPE) conjugate. SAPE binds to biotin with high affinity
and emits bright light upon excitation. The plates are then fed into the flow cytometry-
based Luminex platform which uses lasers to excite first the fluorescent bead, and then
the SAPE. The wavelength of the fluorescence emitted by the bead establishes the
identity of the transcript, and the intensity of the fluorescence emitted by the SAPE pro-
vides information about the abundance of transcript bound to the bead (Figure 2.1d)
[15].
2.1.2
L1000 Data Processing
The raw data generated by the L1000 assay is processed in four steps, resulting in five
levels of data in total (Figure 2.2). Only the level 5 data pre-processed by the Broad
Institute was used for the present project, but here all the data levels associated with
the cMap are briefly described so as to clarify the nature of the data, as well as to enable
scrutiny of the used methods.
Level 1 - Luminex Raw Data
The first level of data (Figure 2.2a) consists of the raw fluorescence intensity values
measured for each bead in each well by the Luminex platform. All the reads in a single
well is a sample. The output from the assay is a separate file for each sample which
contains intensity reads for each individual bead.
Level 2 - Deconvolution of Peaks
As each bead color is used for two transcripts it is necessary to deconvolute the two flu-
orescence intensity signals. As described previously, this is made possible by utilizing
the same bead color for two different transcripts at a 2:1 ratio. Visualizing the counts
of fluorescence intensities in a histogram reveals two peaks: higher mRNA abundance
will increase the fluorescence intensity shifting the peak right, whereas bead abundance
will increase the height of the peak. The two signals are deconvoluted with the k-means
clustering algorithm, and the expression value of a transcript is assigned as the median
fluorescence intensity value of its cluster. This outputs expression values for each of
the 978 landmark transcripts and 80 control transcripts for each sample (Figure 2.2b).
It has been reported that this deconvolution methodology introduces noise into the
higher data levels as it cannot accurately determine the expression level of genes in
many cases. The k-means algorithm is non-deterministic which also means that the de-
convolution on the same raw data will vary slightly. There have been efforts to improve
16
==PAGE:25==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.1: The L1000 assay protocol. a) RNA from cells is captured and RNA reverse
transcribed. b) Biotinylated primers specific for genes of interest is hybridized and am-
plified. c) Fluorescent beads hyrbidized to the barcoded primers. Each bead color can
be used for two transcripts. d) The biotinylated bead-bound primers are stained with
SAPE and expression level of genes of interest quantified by flow cytometry. Adapted
from Subramanian et al. 2017 [15].
the deconvolution methodology [34, 35, 36] but these have not been integrated into
the official pipeline and data repository. As such, the final data used for this project is
based on the originally published deconvolution method from Subramanian et al. [15].
Level 3 - Normalization & Inference
Following deconvolution a normalization step is performed to reduce non-biological vari-
ance in the data. This is vital as the data in the cMap has been generated over several
years and is consequently susceptible to batch effects. From the expression levels of
the 80 invariant transcripts a calibration curve is constructed for each sample to which
the landmark genes are fitted using locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (LOESS).
Next, quantile normalization is performed by sorting the 978 expression values within
each sample and assigning the median expression value at each rank as the expres-
17
==PAGE:26==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 2.2: The five L1000 data levels. a) Raw reads from Luminex platform. b)
Deconvoluted expression levels for each landmark gene. c) Normalized expression
levels for landmarks and inferred genes. d) Gene differential expression values per
individual experimental replicate. e) Replicate-collapsed differential gene expression
levels per experimental condition. Adapted from Subramanian et al. 2017 [15].
sion value for that rank across all samples. The expression of 11350 unmeasured
transcripts is then inferred using 11350 separate ordinary least-squares (OLS) linear
regression models. These take as input the 978 quantile normalized landmark tran-
script expression values to impute each of the unmeasured transcripts. The models
were trained using the backwards selection approach described in the introduction.
This results in gene expression values for a total of 12328 transcripts (978 measured
plus 11350 imputed) (Figure 2.2c).
As mentioned in the introduction, of the 11350 imputed transcripts only 9196 (81%)
were shown to be reliably inferred with this method. These are labeled in the cMap
metadata as best inferred. This leaves some uncertainty for the last 2154 transcripts,
which are labeled in the metadata as simply inferred. It can be speculated that perhaps
a simple linear model cannot capture the expression patterns for some genes, or per-
haps the 978 landmark transcripts to not contain the information necessary to impute
the expression of these genes. It is also of interest to increase coverage to atleast all
protein-coding genes which would make L1000 platform signatures more easily com-
parable to data generated by most RNA-seq platforms. Jeon et al. [37] implemented a
modified CycleGAN deep learning model to impute the expression of 23614 transcripts,
showing a marked improvement over the baseline cMap signatures as compared to
RNA-seq profiles. This indicates that the 978 landmark transcripts contain more infor-
mation than is exploited by the original method, but the data used for this project was
generated with the originally published OLS-based method.
Level 4 - Differential Expression
To obtain the direction of a given perturbagen relative to others, robust Z-scores are
calculated for each transcript (Figure 2.2d). For normally distributed data, the Z-score
is given by z =
x−µ
σ
where the mean mu is the statistical measure of location and
18
==PAGE:27==
the standard deviation σ is the statistical measure of dispersion. However, the data
in the cMap has heavy tails. Therefore the Z-score for gene x in the i’th sample is
calculated against a population-control, with the plate-wide medians of each transcript
as the measure of location, and the Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) as the measure
of dispersion:
zi = xi −median(X)
1.4826 · MAD(X)
(2.1)
This results in a 12328-dimensional vector of robust Z-scores for each sample.
Level 5 - Replicate-collapsed Signatures
In the final step, biological replicate samples on the same plate are collapsed into a
single signature while mitigating the effect of outlier samples (Figure 2.2e). This is done
by calculating pairwise Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient (SpCC) between the
replicates from the level 4 landmark transcript Z-scores, ignoring self-correlations. The
weight of a level 4 replicate is the sum of its correlation to all other level 4 replicates,
with the sum of all weights normalized to 1. The final level 5 signature is the weighted
sum of the level 4 samples.
The level 5 signature data is found in a set of 6 .gctx files; a binary hierarchical file
format developed for the NIH LINCS consortium which can be read in Python using the
cmapPy package [38]. In combination, these 6 files contain a total of 1201944 differential
gene expression Z-score signatures for the differential expression of the 978 landmark
genes and 11350 inferred genes. The metadata associated with the level 5 signatures
is contained in plain tab-separated value files. They include information about the cell
lines and small molecules used, the landmark and inferred genes, and various quality
metrics and technical information for each L1000 assay experiment used to generate
a given signature. An overview of the contents of the full level 5 data can be found in
Table 2.1.
Perturbagen Type
Compound
shRNA
CRISPR
cDNA
Ligand
Control
Other
TOTAL
Signatures
720216
238351
140945
34171
7546
59978
737
1201944
Perturbagens
33609
4960
5157
4040
329
76
27
46993
Cell lines
230
22
27
20
15
248
12
248
Table 2.1: Overview of all level 5 signatures in the 2020 cMap data.
The SpCC calculated for generating the final level 5 signatures can also be used to de-
rive a measure of overall reproducibility. This measure is defined as the 75th quantile
of the pairwise SpCC between level 4 replicates, a number between -1 and 1. Subra-
19
==PAGE:28==
manian et al.[15] also define a measure of signature strength (SS):
SS =
978
∑
i=1
[|zai| ≥2], za = z · √nrep
where z is a level 5 signature, a vector of Z-scores and nrep is the number of level 4
samples underlying the signature. This simply counts how many landmark genes are
significantly differentially expressed (defined by the authors as an absolute Z-score ≥2)
in a signature, adjusted for shrinkage caused by increasing numbers of replicates, as
a way of quantifying the transcriptional activity of a given perturbagen. If a perturbagen
is completely inert it is implicitly assumed that any non-zero Z-score values are noise.
These two measures are used to define an overall measure of responsiveness to a
perturbagen shown by a signature, the Transcriptional Activity Score (TAS):
TAS =
√
SS · max(SpCC, 0)
978
If a perturbagen is inert in a given cell line any signal found in such a signature (non-
zero Z-scores) is considered noise. Such a signature should have very few significantly
differentially expressed landmark genes with low reproducibility, resulting in a TAS score
close to 0, while a score of 1 indicates both that the signature is highly reproducible
and that the perturbagen caused a marked change in landmark transcript expression.
A threshold of 0.2 is typically used (Figure 2.4) as a signature below this threshold is
classified as either inert, noisy or weak. A significant number of cMap signatures have
a TAS below 0.2 (Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: Distribution of TAS scores across the 1201944 level 5 cMap signatures. A
large number of signatures have a TAS below the suggested threshold of 0.2
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.4: The relationship between signature strength (number of landmark genes
with an absolute Z-score ≥2), replicate correlation and TAS. From https://clue.io/
connectopedia/signature_quality_metrics.
2.1.3
Signature Annotations
Subramanian et al. [15] generated Perturbagen Class (PCL) annotations for a subset of
perturbagens used in the cMap by extracting MoA information about them from external
sources which are available from the supplementary materials for their paper. The MoA
annotations were used to generate candiate PCLs, and these were refined by excluding
perturbagens for which their signatures failed to recover connections to signatures from
other perturbagens of the same PCL in at least one cell line. This means that while
PCLs can be useful to interpret results when querying the cMap with external data they
cannot be used as a ground truth against which to evaluate clustering of cMap data, as
they are partially defined from the data.
To obtain ground truth levels in a data-independent way further annotations were com-
piled from external sources during this project.
Small Molecule Compound Annotations
For 8046 of the 33609 unique small molecule compounds used in the cMap the Broad
Institute supplies MoA and target annotations [26]. As unannotated cMap signatures
were not considered useful for neither validation nor analysis of in-house data, the anno-
tations for signatures were sought to be expanded with publicly available data. Further
21
==PAGE:30==
small molecule compound target annotations were downloaded from the Therapeutic
Target Database3 [39] on the 4th of September 2023, and from the International Union
of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology / British Pharmacology Society4 [40] on the 5th of
September 2023. These new target annotations were also refined to include the sign
of the interaction between drug and target: Positive if the drug was annotated with an
activating (agonism, potentiation etc.) effect on the target, negative if the drug had a
repressive (inhibition, antagonism etc.) effect. In cases where the sign was ambiguous
that target was excluded. This yielded target annotations for 726 small molecules com-
pounds in the cMap. Furthermore, 220 unique compound MoA annotations for 3332 of
the 33609 compounds used in the cMap were obtained from Huang et al. [41]. These
will be referred to as the Huang MoA labels.
In total, external target annotations were found for 109963 of the 1201944 cMap signa-
tures, and Huang MoA labels covered 164918 signatures.
Transcription Factor Target Annotations
In order to include signatures from genetic perturbations (cDNA-mediated overexpres-
sions, shRNA-mediated knockdowns and CRISPR-induced knockouts) in the validation
it was necessary to find labels which could relate them to compound-induced signa-
tures. One way of defining such a relationship would be to establish a list of down-
stream protein targets which the genetic perturbation would alter the activity of, simi-
larly to the target list for a compound. For this purpose the subset of genes encoding
any Transcription Factor (TF) targeted by perturbations in the cMap was selected, as
resources detailing the transcriptional targets of TFs exist. Here it is reasoned that
knocking out a TF which upregulates (or overexpressing a TF which downregulates)
the transcription of a given gene has a roughly similar effect on cellular functions to in-
hibiting the protein target of that gene. This is a considerable over-simplification which
relies on several underlying assumptions, and these will be discussed in the Discussion
section.
The decoupler Python package [42] was used to extract signed human TF regulatory
targets from the Collection of Transcriptional Regulatory Interactions resource [43]. The
data was extracted on the 22nd of September 2023 yielding target annotations for 9750
signatures from genetic perturbations of 582 unique TFs and other transcriptionally reg-
ulatory proteins.
Cell Lineage Annotations
The cMap signatures were generated across 248 unique cell lines, though some are
much more represented than others. The tissue lineage and source is defined for a
subset of cell lines in the cMap metadata but some are either partially or entirely unan-
3https://db.idrblab.net/ttd/full-data-download
4https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/download.jsp
22
==PAGE:31==
notated. The lineage/tissue annotation of each of the 248 cell lines was reviewed for
this project (see Results section).
2.2
Disease Differential Gene Expression Signatures
An internal NN NoSQL-based database, BioPages, integrates several internal and
external data sources to make the most relevant information readily available for re-
searchers at NN. The data is sourced from literature, clinical trials and collaboration
partners, and is mapped to various identifiers which allows it to be mined using an
internal Elasticsearch-based Python Application Programming Interface (API).
The
database contains a collection of differential gene expression data, of which a large
part comes from the company Nebion, who have processed and quality controlled pub-
licly available gene expression data for use with their GeneVestigator software.
In this project human differential gene expression studies tagged with either obesity
or NASH keywords was extracted from BioPages (overview of contents in Table 2.2)
resulting in the two datasets DataOB and DataNASH. The data has been filtered on
p-value prior to this project which combined with the diverse origins of the data means
that the disease signatures cover disparate sets of genes (Figure 2.5). Only the subset
of genes which are also found in the cMap can be used to establish similarities between
disease and cMap signatures.
(a)
Tissue
Kidney
Liver
Blood
Adipose
Skeletal Muscle
Small Intestine
N/A
Studies
1
9
8
19
5
1
4
Signatures
9
56
30
43
39
6
42
(b)
Tissue
Bone
Heart
Liver
Blood
Skin
Lymphatic
Adipose
N/A
Studies
3
1
21
1
3
1
2
29
Signatures
14
6
124
3
8
2
6
250
Table 2.2: Overview of disease data composition for a) DataOB and b) DataNASH.
Both gene expression data and metadata is stored in the .json format but the data was
wrangled into a tabular format. This allows the generation of signature-like vectors of
differential gene expression. The values in these signatures are distinct from those
of the L1000 platform in that they are not Z-scores but log2-transformed fold change
(log2FC) values. The per-gene expression values have been pre-filtered on Benjamini-
23
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: Histograms showing the number of genes per signature for the a) Obesity
and b) NASH disease data. Total number of genes in the raw data is shown in red,
number of genes overlapping with the cMap landmark and best inferred genes (10174
total genes) is shown in green.
Hochberg corrected p-values (p ≤0.05) prior to this project. This means that when
calculating connectivities between the disease data signatures and cMap signatures the
scores will be based on a comparison of Z-scores and log2FCs. However, Subramanian
et al. [15] assert that their cMap query methodology should be platform-independent.
The CS methods employed for this project are described in the Methods section, and
the assertion of platform-independence should hold for most of these methods: Except
for the Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (PCC) none of the methods rely directly on
the raw differential expression values (Z-score or log2FC) for their calculations, being
instead based on either the sign (cosine similarity, Scaled Subsetted Cosine Similarity
(ssCos)) or ranks (Weighted Connectivity Score (WTCS), SpCC, Connection Strength
Score (CSS)) of the genes in each signature.
The disease gene expression data is highly heterogenous: It has been generated by
various authors under different experimental conditions and quantified using a variety
of platforms. Some of the data originates from cultured primary or immortalized cell
lines, some from differentiated patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells, and some
from direct profiling of biopsies or blood samples. The comparative studies are also
comparing between individuals: A group of healthy subjects vs a group of diseased
subjects. The underlying gene expression pattern may be more different within groups
than between groups.
24
==PAGE:33==
2.3
Night A Peptide Perturbation Signatures
Prior to this project a collaboration between NN and the Broad Institute was estab-
lished. This collaboration originated from an internal NN project concerned with the
functional elucidation of known peptides in the context of diabetes and obesity. These
peptides were identified either from peptides annotated in uniprot or experimentally
through mass spectrometry: Blood samples from healthy and diabetic and/or obese
mice were analyzed by mass spectrometry to identify potentially disease relevant dif-
ferentially expressed peptides in the animal disease models. The existence of human
analogs of these peptides was investigated computationally from open reading frames
in the human genome, and the verified subset was synthesized by NN. The synthesized
peptides were used as perturbagens in 7 different cell lines and analyzed by L1000
assay, resulting in the Night A dataset of L1000 signatures. A set of small molecule
compounds used in the cMap was also included in Night A as positive control.
The Night A level 5 signature data and metadata was made available by NN for this
project, and consisted of 2160 signatures using the 12328 L1000 genes (Table 2.3).
Cell lines
CFPAC1
YAPC
HA1E
HEPG2
HT29
HUVEC
MCF7
Tissue
Pancreas
Pancreas
Kidney
Liver
Colon
Endothelium
Breast
Signatures
480
360
360
240
240
240
240
Perturbagens
81
81
81
81
81
81
81
Table 2.3: Overview of the contents of Night A
25
==PAGE:34==
3
Methods
All work for this thesis was done using a Dell Precision 7670 workstation laptop provided
by NN. The laptop runs Windows 10 and has a 16-core Intel Core i7-12850HX CPU
and 32GB RAM, however most development and computational work was done on NN’s
High Performance Computing (HPC) platform DataLab which is a multi-tenant platform
with user workspaces in individual docker containers. The platform OS is Ubuntu 20.04
and the user workspace is set up with the environment management system conda
v4.13, Python v3.10.4 and JupyterLab v3.5. DataLab has 96 processor cores from 4
Intel Xeon Platinum 8360H processors and 1.5 TB RAM shared between users. Graph
visualizations were created using the open graph visualization platform Gephi v.0.10.1.
3.1
Connectivity Scores
With no clear consensus on a best CS it was necessary to choose which to implement
and test. They were chosen based on the following criteria:
• Familiarity: PCC, SpCC and cosine similarity were included in the comparison
due to their ubiquitous use for establishing pairwise relationships between data
points.
• cMap literature: A selection of methods from the literature associated with the
cMap were included. The WTCS employed by the Broad Institute themselves
was included as a baseline, and the CSS proposed by Zhang & Gant [44] was
included due to positive evaluations in literature [18, 25].
• In-house knowledge: A method used internally at NN, the ssCos, was also im-
plemented. The ssCos has succesfully been used with to identify compounds
optimizing human embryonic stem cell differentiation protocols at NN, with cur-
rently pending patent approvals.
• Simplicity: The methods chosen had to be reasonably easy to implement in a
common framework using Python while utilizing only the pre-processed level 5
cMap signatures, which was required to keep the scope of the project within the
allotted time. This excluded many otherwise promising methods from literature
due to their higher complexity, a few of which will be discussed on the Future
Perspectives section.
• Scalability:
The all-versus-all approach of calculating pairwise connectivity
scores for a significant number of cMap signatures necessitated that the imple-
26
==PAGE:35==
mented methods could scale to well enough to calculate the pairwise connectivi-
ties between up to of a few hundred thousand 12328-dimensional vectors on the
available HPC; this was a challenge both in terms of run-time and memory usage.
Several of the chosen methods have pre-existing implementations, but these are frag-
mented across programming languages (primarily R and Matlab) and do not scale well
to a high number of queries. For the WTCS two implementations were found, the first of
which is the Broad Institute’s own implementation in Matlab1. There was no Matlab en-
vironment available for the NN HPC, and even if such an environment could be setup
locally on the provided laptop it would not be possible to work with the full cMap di-
rectly in memory. Combining this with a lack of prior Matlab experience, it was decided
against using the Matlab implementation. Regretfully this prevented using the Broad
Insitute’s own implementation as a baseline against which other implementations could
be tested.
Another implementation of the WTCS, as well as for the CSS, was found to be available
through the RCSM R package by Tham & Langley [25], and this was indeed possible to
test on the available HPC platform. This testing unfortunately revealed that these im-
plementations were more geared towards a researcher querying a single or a few sig-
natures against the cMap: They are not implemented to run queries in parallel, instead
utilizing parallelization to perform permutation testing. The logic for these implementa-
tions also primarily relies on high-level languages, and for this project it would be nec-
essary to handle the calculation of pairwise similarities between hundreds of thousands
of signatures, which was simply not feasible with these pre-existing implementations.
As a C++ or similar low-level implementation would be too time consuming, the code
for this project was written in Python where frameworks exist which can be used to ap-
proach C++ speeds. This could be achieved by using Numpy arrays as the data struc-
tures and reimplementing the logic for all CS functions using the Just-In-Time code com-
piling (JIT) decorator from the Numba package. The JIT decorator compiles base Python
and functions from the scientific computing package Numpy into efficient machine code
resulting in significantly faster computation with minimal extra development required
[45]. Numba also has built-in parallelization functionality making it an ideal choice for
taking advantage of the available HPC resources.
In the end, 6 CS methods were chosen and implemented.
3.1.1
Weighted Connectivity Score
The Weighted Connectivity Score (WTCS) is adapted from GSEA and calculated us-
ing a weighted, signed Kolmogorov-Smirnov-like statistic. The classical two-sample
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test is a non-parametric test of the equality of one-dimensional
1https://github.com/cmap/cmapM
27
==PAGE:36==
continuous probability distributions [46]. In other words, it is used to test the likelihood
of drawing the two given samples from the same underlying but unspecified probabil-
ity distribution. The query is the set of genes S which were significantly differentially
expressed in response to the perturbation of interested SX (SX ⊆S), split into a list
of upregulated and a list of downregulated genes. The reference is a list of genes R
which have been ranked based on their level of differential expression grj in response
to the perturbation which the reference represents. The KS statistic is calculated as a
running sum over the ranked reference (below indexed by i) which increases when the
reference gene is found in the query, and decreases when it does not.
First, the value of a hit or a miss is calculated:
Phit(SX, i) =
∑
grj∈SX
j≤i
|grj|wES
N ′
SX
, N ′
SX =
∑
grj∈SX
|grj|wES
(3.1)
Pmiss(SX, i) =
∑
grj /∈SX
j≤i
1
NR −NSX
(3.2)
Next, the positional enrichment scores (es) are calculated:
esi = Phit(SX, i) −Pmiss(SX, i)
(3.3)
The maximum deviation from 0 is taken as the final enrichment score ES:
ES = maxiesi
(3.4)
This reflects the degree to which the query genes are overrepresented at the extremes
of the ranked reference list, and the ES is calculated for the set of up (ESup) and down
(ESdown) genes separately. The WTCS is a composite of the two individual enrichment
scores:
WTCS =



ESup−ESdown
2
,
if sign(ESup) ̸= sign(ESdown)
0,
otherwise
(3.5)
The WTCS is not symmetric; WTCS(A, B) is not necessarily equal to WTCS(B, A).
This is a result of using only significantly differentially expressed genes for the query
but all measured genes for the reference. This is handled here by simply setting the
WTCS between two signatures a and b to the mean of WTCS(a, b) and WTCS(b, a),
an approach suggested by Cheng & Yang [47].
3.1.2
Cosine Similarity
The cosine similarity Cos between two Euclidean vectors is defined as the dot product
between them, divided by the product of their magnitudes:
cos(A, B) =
A · B
∥A∥· ∥B∥=
∑
i ai · bi
√∑
i a2
i · ∑
i b2
i
(3.6)
The cosine is consequently the dot product of the vectors scaled to unit length and
determined solely by the angle between them, not their magnitudes.
28
==PAGE:37==
3.1.3
Pearson's Correlation Coefficient
The Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (PCC) is a measure of the linear relationship
between two jointly distributed random variables. It can be computed as the cosine
similarity between centered vectors [48]:
PCC(A, B) = cov(A, B)
σA · σB
=
∑
i(ai −¯a) · (bi −¯b)
√∑
i(ai −¯a)2 · ∑
i(bi −¯b)2
(3.7)
3.1.4
Spearman's Rank Correlation Coefficient
Where the PCC is a measure of linear correlation, Spearman’s Rank Correlation Co-
efficient (SpCC) measures the degree to which the relationship between two jointly
distributed random variables can be expressed with a monotonic function. It does so
by calculating the PCC between the rank values of the two variables [48]:
SpCC(A, B) = cov(R(A), R(B))
σR(A) · σR(B)
(3.8)
3.1.5
Scaled Subsetted Cosine Similarity
It was proposed by Cheng et al. [49] to use only the N genes with most extreme values
in the query signature when calculating the cosine similarity, a method they named eX-
treme Cosine (XCos), which was extended to both Pearson and Spearman correlation
[47]. This approach consequently discards much of the information found in the query
signature. However, many of the lower values are more likely to be noise while the
extreme values are more likely to be genuine signal and is a common approach when
dealing with differential gene expression data, which is usually filtered on p-value and
thresholded on absolute differential expression value.
At Novo Nordisk an internal R Shiny app for use with the cMap, SigHunter, was de-
veloped by Djordje Djordjovic. It utilizes a similarity measure based on the idea of the
XCos, the ssCos. The method starts by thresholding the absolute differential expres-
sion values of both the query and reference signatures. As the cMap signatures are
made up of Z-scores the thresholding values can easily be defined with a given p-value.
E.g. if a p-value threshold of 0.05 is required a thresholding value of 1.96 can be used.
The Broad Institute themselves implicitly interpret their signature Z-scores in this way
when quantifying the response of a cell to a perturbation with their TAS: They define the
strength of response to a perturbation as the count of landmark genes with an absolute
Z-score equal to or above 2 [15]. This approach also lends itself to a stricter definition
of when a transcript is differentially expressed by applying multiple testing corrections
such as either Bonferroni or Bejamini-Hochberg, resulting in a higher Z-score threshold.
After thresholding both signatures consist only of values for the genes determined to be
significantly differentially expressed in both signatures, and the cosine similarity is then
29
==PAGE:38==
calculated between these subsetted signatures. This however leads to the complication
that the cosine similarity is calculated from vectors of different lengths for each pairwise
comparison. To adjust for this, the resulting score is scaled based on the number of
”overlapping” significantly differentially expressed genes between the two signatures.
This can be thought of as a weight on the amount of evidence for the resulting similarity
score. An example of the ssCos approach:
Query = [−3.1, 0.4, 0.3, 5.5, 1.5, −3.2, −0.8, 4.7]
Reference = [−2.1, 3.3, 0.0, 5.2, −0.7, 2.9, 3.8, −0.2]
would be subsetted to
Query = [−3.1 , 5.5, −3.2]
Reference = [−2.1, 5.2, 2.9]
which results in a cosine similarity of 0.578. This is then scaled by
(1 −(
1
noverlaps
))2
(3.9)
where noverlaps = 3 in this example, resulting in a final ssCos of 0.578 · 0.444 = 0.257. If
the number of overlaps is zero, the final score is set to zero. This approach also enables
specifying a minimum number of overlaps required to return a non-zero score, which
has been implemented in the Python function (default value is 5). This does however
have the quirk of returning a self-similarity below 1.
3.1.6
Connection Strength Score
The Connection Strength Score (CSS) was proposed by Zhang & Gant [44] and is
based on the signed ranks of the differential expression values. Similarly to WTCS, the
significantly differentially expressed m genes are used for the query signature while all
measured N genes are used for the reference signature. The genes are ranked based
on their absolute expression values, and the sign of the direction of the differential
expression is then reintroduced to the rank. The i’th gene gi of the reference R or
query S thus gets a rank of either N −i + 1 or −(N −i + 1) depending on whether the
gene was up- or downregulated. A similarity between the query and reference is then
calculated:
css(R, S) =
m
∑
i=1
[rank(Rgi) · rank(Sgi)]
(3.10)
The maximum possible score is given as
css0
max(N, m) =
m
∑
i=1
(N −i + 1) · (m −i + 1)
(3.11)
and the final CSS is
CSS(R, S) =
css(R, S)
css0
max(N, m)
(3.12)
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.1: The Reactome pathway annotations were generated based on pathway
enrichment analysis using the target sets of perturbagens in the cMap. This resulted in
matrix designating whether a perturbagen was expected to be positively or negatively
affiliated with a pathway.
3.2
Reactome Pathway Enrichment Analysis
Counting the external target annotations for both small molecule compounds and TFs a
total of 109964 signatures had at least one target annotation. From these signatures a
dataframe Dtar was constructed where each row of the dataframe denoted a signature
and each column a target gene. A total of 3098 unique genes were found in the target
annotations. The value of Dtarij is −1, 0 or 1 depending on whether the perturbagen
used to generate the i’th signature has a repressing, none or activating effect, respec-
tively, on the protein product of the j’th target gene. Dtar was used as the input for
pathfindR’s Reactome pathway enrichment tool. PathfindR identifies active protein-
protein interaction sub-networks in the target gene set and then performs pathway en-
richment analysis via one-sided hypergeometric testing on each identified sub-network.
A scoring function then estimates the overall activity of the enriched pathways for each
input sample [50]. The output of this is a dataframe Dpw where each row denotes a
signature and each column a pathway (Figure 3.1). The value of Dpwij is in the range
[-1,1], designating whether the i’th signature was determined by pathfindR to have a
repressing, activating or no effect on the activity of the j’th pathway. Dpw contains a
total of 108341 signatures with 1022 unique Reactome pathways as variables.
3.3
Clustering
For this project clustering was done based on the PhenoGraph framework introduced
by Levine et al. [32]. In PhenoGraph a SNN graph is constructed from pairwise rela-
tionships between the data points. The SNN graph is then used as input for the Leiden
graph clustering algorithm.
31
==PAGE:40==
3.3.1
Shared Nearest Neighbour Graph
The construction of the SNN graph in PhenoGraph is based on the Jarvis-Patrick algo-
rithm [51]. First the binary adjacency matrix of a K Nearest Neighbours (KNN) graph
is constructed using the scikit-learn Python package [52]. In a KNN graph an edge
is allowed to exist only between a vertex and its’ k nearest neighbours. The weight
of such an edge is 1, and in the adjacency matrix all other edge weights are set to 0.
Calculating all pairwise similarities between signatures yields the adjacency matrix of a
fully connected weighted graph. Creating a KNN graph from this, where each vertex is
only connected to the k most similar other vertices, means that the implementation in
this project is in essence a brute force KNN search, meaning that the exact KNN graph
is returned.
A problem with KNN graphs is that the choice of k will heavily influence the structure of
the graph: If k is too large, small clusters will be obscured by a large number of edges
connecting vertices of the small cluster to vertices in other clusters, and if k is too small
vertices belonging to the same cluster could become disconnected. To remedy this
issue the next step is to refine the KNN graph by computing the pairwise Jaccard Sim-
ilarity (Jac) between the KNN-sets of every vertex yielding a new adjacency matrix W:
Wi,j = Jac(e(vi), e(vj)) = |e(vi) ∩e(vj)|
|e(vi) ∪e(vj)|
(3.13)
W contains the Jac of the KNN edge sets e(vi) and e(vj) between any two vertices vi
and vj. The resulting refined graph has high edge weights in densely connected areas
of the KNN graph while penalizing edges spanning sparse regions of the KNN graph.
A visual representation of the generation of a SNN graph is shown in figure 3.2 Levine
et al. [32] have shown that the result of this approach is relatively unaffected by the k
parameter when k is chosen from a reasonable range of values. The resulting matrix
W is thus the adjacency matrix of the SNN graph, which in this project is put into a
graph framework using the igraph Python package [53].
3.3.2
Leiden Clustering Algorithm
To partition the SNN graph Levine et al. [32] apply the Louvain algorithm which works
by optimizing a measure of the difference between the number of edges inside a com-
munity c and the expected number of edges in c if the graph had randomly assigned
edges. In other words, the measure compares the partitioning or modules of the graph
to a random null model. The measure is aptly named modularity and has the objective
function
H =
1
2m ·
∑
c
(
ec −γ · K2
c
2m
)
(3.14)
where m is the total number of edges in the network, ec is the number of edges in
community c, Kc is the sum of degrees of the nodes in the community c and γ > 0 is
32
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.2: The generation of a SNN graph. Similarities are calculated between signa-
tures and connections established to the k nearest neighbours of each signature in the
KNN graph. The edges in the SNN graph are weighted based on agreement of nearest
neighbor sets. This has the effect of putting higher weights on edges in densely con-
nected connected sections of the KNN grah.
the tunable resolution parameter. One problem with modularity is that it has a resolu-
tion limit: Due to the normalization factor of
1
2m modularity depends on the size of the
network, and one cannot identify communities of size √m or smaller. The resolution pa-
rameter γ alleviates this to some degree and increasing γ results in more communities
while decreasing it leads to fewer. Exact optimization of modularity is computationally
intractable, and the Louvain algorithm is consequently an approximation algorithm [54,
55].
Traag et al. [56, 57] proposed an alternative to both the modularity objective function
and the Louvain algorithm itself. Their alternative objective function, the Constant Potts
Model (CPM) is defined as
H =
∑
c
[
ec −γ ·
(nc
2
)]
(3.15)
where ec is the number of edges in community c and nc is the number of nodes in com-
munity c. The resolution parameter γ can be interpreted as a threshold specifying that
the edge-density inside communities should be at least γ, while the edge-density be-
tween communities should be lower than γ.
It was also demonstrated by Traag et al. that the Louvain algorithm under certain con-
ditions may return communities that are internally disconnected: One part of the com-
munity can be reached by another only by traversing a path of edges lying outside the
community. They consequently introduce the Leiden algorithm which is shown to avoid
this issue while also converging faster. For this project the implementation of the CPM
objective function and Leiden algorithm by Traag et al. found in their Python leidenalg
package was used [57].
33
==PAGE:42==
3.3.3
Clustering Evaluation Measures
The evaluation of a clustering can be based on either internal or external criteria. The
internal criteria do not require a ground truth to be known, and the Leiden clustering
algorithm optimizes such an internal quality score, either modularity or CPM. External
criteria require a known ground truth against which one can evaluate the performance of
the clustering. One cannot use the same metrics as for simple supervised classification,
as the absolute label itself is not relevant: Only the similarity between the partitionings
of the data. Some of the most commonly used clustering evaluation metrics include the
Rand index [58] and Mutual Information [59, 60]. Versions adjusted for chance exist
for both of these, the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) [61] and Adjusted Mutual Information
(AMI) [62]. In these adjusted metrics, random cluster assignment results in a score
of 0, while complete agreement between cluster assignment and ground truth results
in a score of 1. Analysis by Romano et al. [63] led to them propose the use of ARI
when the ground truth clusterings are uniform and large, and AMI when the ground truth
clustering is unbalanced and contains small clusters. The ARI and AMI as implemented
by scikit-learn were used for this project to evaluate the results of clusterings against
labels derived independently from the data.
3.4
Most Relevant Neighbors
In a KNN graph edges only exist between a given vertex and its k nearest neighbors.
Constructing such a graph from a distance matrix thus only retains information about
nearest neighbors. In terms of signatures and the similarities between them this means
that the KNN graph constructed from signature similarities, and the SNN graph derived
from it, has a structure where communities will be formed based only on shared positive
similarities between signatures. This is an issue as a high negative similarity between
two signatures can be as informative as a positive one, and the graph therefore does
not faithfully reflect all the available information. The SNN concept would have to be
extended to reflect this information, which was approached in a simple manner: Just as
a KNN graph can be constructed from the calculated similarities, so can a K Furthest
Neighbours (KFN) graph. In the KFN graph, edges exist only between a vertex and it’s
k furthest neighbors, here defined as the most negative similarities.
From the KNN and KFN graphs a counterpart to the SNN approach can be taken: For
a given vertex vi the pairwise Jaccard similarity is calculated between its KNN edge set
eKNN(vi) and the edge sets of all other vertices eKNN(vj) is calculated, but on top of that
the Jaccard similarity between nearest and furthest neighbor sets are also calculated:
W KNN
i,j
= Jac(eKNN(vi), eKNN(vj))
(3.16)
W KFN
i,j
= Jac(eKFN(vi), eKNN(vj)
(3.17)
34
==PAGE:43==
where W KNN
i,j
is again the adjacency matrix of a SNN graph, while W KFN
i,j
is the ad-
jacency matrix for a Reciprocal Nearest/Furthest Neighbours (RNFN) graph. This re-
inforces edges between vertices vi and vj if the k furthest neighbors of vi are the k
nearest neighbors of vj, thereby reinforcing connections between signatures found in
separate but highly negatively connected clusters in terms of pairwise signature sim-
ilarities. More plainly stated, the SNN graph states that signatures which have high
positive similarities to each other and to each other’s neighbours should belong to the
same cluster, and the RNFN states that signatures which have high negative similar-
ities to each other and to each other’s nearest neighbours not only should not belong
to the same cluster, but their clusters should also be far apart. One can therefore also
think of the SNN as a way of representing local cluster structures and the RNFN graph
as representing global placement of clusters relative to one another. The global struc-
ture is not well reflected by the SNN alone, as it cannot be used to discern whether
the similarity between two signatures was highly negative or close to zero. The RNFN
can also be thought of as a refinement of the KFN graph, or a majority voting on nega-
tive similarities between signatures, and combining the SNN and RNFN graphs could
be seen as separate edge layers for the same set of vertices, for which multiplexed
community detection is possible [64].
Unfortunately it would be difficult to scale such community detection algorithms to graphs
containing hundreds of thousands of vertices and potentially hundreds of millions of
edges. To avoid this issue an approximation was done by finding the KNN and KFN in
the cMap for a given query signatures q, then finding the KNN and KFN of those cMap
signatures and calculating the edge weights of the SNN and RNFN graphs between
q and its nearest/furthest neighbors. This avoids having to generate the entire graph
while for a given query signature q preserving information about nearest and furthest
neighbors in a given set of reference signatures in the SNN and RNFN graphs. This
will be referred to as the Most Relevant Neighbors (MRN) method, and for a set of n
query signatures and m reference signatures can be illustrated with the pseudocode
of Algorithm 1. To create a measure which takes into account both the CS between
signatures as well as the degree to which they share neighbors, the final score of the
relationship between a given query signature q and reference signature r is the product
of the CS between them and the SNN or RNFN between them.
35
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 1 Most Relevant Neighbors Pseudocode
Require: n × m Query Signature Matrix, m × m Reference Signature Matrix, k
for each Query Signature Q do
Find k nearest Reference signatures →QKNN
Find k furthest Reference signatures →QKFN
for each QKNN do
Find k nearest Reference signatures →RKNN
Calculate Jac(QKNN, RKNN) →QRSNN
end for
for each QKFN do
Find k nearest Reference signatures →RKFN
Calculate Jac(QKFN, RKFN) →QRRNFN
end for
end for
36
==PAGE:45==
4
Results
4.1
Data Preprocessing
4.1.1
Connectivity Map Data Filtering
In order to exclude signatures dominated by assay noise the initial 1201944 level 5
cMap signatures were filtered using the metadata included with the cMap. Signatures
generated using small molecule compounds, endogenous ligands, knockdowns, knock-
outs or overexpressions were kept while untreated and miscellaneous signatures were
excluded. Furthermore, the Broad Institute have refined shRNA knockdown signatures
into consensus signatures: By identifying single shRNAs which have different seed se-
quences but share target, or shRNAs which share seed sequence but have different
targets they were able to normalize out the off-target effects introduced by different seed
sequences. These consensus knockdown signatures were shown to improve recovery
of expected connectivities [15, 65] over single shRNA signatures, and so for this project
the single shRNA signatures were excluded.
The included metadata for the cell lines used in the cMap was found to be incomplete:
Of the 248 total cell lines only 155 had naming conventions or annotations enabling
easy identification of the cell line from a basic internet search. For this reason a manual
inspection was conducted for all 248 cMap cell lines via the Cellosaurus knowledge
resource [66]. This resulted in a manually curated list of 179 cell line names which could
be identified with sources external to the cMap. The label denoting which primary tissue
the cell represents was also refined (22 unique tissue labels). 58794 level 5 signatures
generated in cell lines for which no references could be found were excluded for further
use.
The TAS described in the Materials section reflects the magnitude and consistency of
the perturbation-induced transcriptional activity and was thus a good candidate for re-
moving signatures where the signal was either weak or irreproducible. As the TAS for
a given level 5 signature relies on the pairwise Spearman correlations between the un-
derlying level 4 signatures, a level 5 signature must comprised of at least two level 4
signatures for the TAS to be calculated. Level 5 signatures originating from two or fewer
level 4 signatures were thus excluded so as to ensure robustness of the TAS score. This
turned out be a significant number of signatures, 460192 out of the 1201944 level 5 sig-
natures.
Perturbing a biological system with e.g. a drug and quantifying the dose-response rela-
tionship typically results in a monotonic sigmoidal curve. This curve reflects the thresh-
37
==PAGE:46==
olding effect: At too low a dose the drug is practically inert and elicits no response. As
the dose is increased the drug will elicit some quantifiable response from the system
up to some maximum above which increasing the dose cannot further amplify the re-
sponse. There are signatures generated with small molecule compounds at a range
of concentrations and incubation durations in the cMap, and it was hypothesized that
if the TAS is a good measure of the effect of a perturbation it should be possible to
construct dose-response curves for a given compound in a given cell line. Such curves
were constructed for a set of well-represented drugs and cell lines in the cMap (Figure
4.1).
Figure 4.1: Dose-response curves based on TAS and stratified by perturbagen and
cell line.
For the HDAC inhibitor Vorinostat a sigmoidal response curve is observed in each cell
line, indicating that the drug is inducing a transcriptional response in all these cell lines
which becomes stronger and more reproducible as the dose is increased. It can be
38
==PAGE:47==
seen for the PDE4 inhibitor Ibudilast that the TAS remains low despite increasing dose.
For EGFR inhibitor Erlotinib the response differs between cell lines, with the epithelial
melanoma cell line A375 displaying the clearest dose response.
Having verified expected behaviour from the TAS, the threshold of 0.2 suggested by
Subramanian et al. [15] was used to filter the level 5 signatures, excluding any signature
under this threshold.
Finally, only the 978 landmark genes which were directly measured and the 9196 genes
marked as well-inferred (total of 10174) were used for any further analysis.
Taken together, the various filtering steps (Figure 4.2) excluded a total of 1027855
level 5 signatures leaving 174089 for further use in the project. This subset was named
cMapreference and a condensed overview can be found in table 4.1.
(a)
Perturbagen type
# of signatures
# of cell lines
# of perturbagens
Compound
124309
91
15168
Overexpression
12048
19
3208
Knockdown
3766
15
1959
Knockout
32227
18
6659
Ligand
1693
15
285
174043
105
24497
(b)
Tissue
# of signatures
# of cell lines
# of perturbagens
Breast
28636
10
7642
Prostate
26427
8
12164
Lung
25042
19
9588
Skin
14883
3
7460
Kidney
12622
5
5540
Colon
11423
7
6085
Neural
10504
7
5779
Liver
7594
4
3787
Pancreas
4676
1
2823
Adipose
1269
1
974
Endothelium
614
1
230
Others
30353
39
10649
174043
105
24497
Table 4.1: Overview of cMapreference contents in terms of a) perturbagen types and b)
tissue lineages represented.
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.2: Filtering of the cMap signatures. A core set of perturbagen types were
selected and cell lines without tissue lineage annotations filtered out. Only triplicates
with a TAS above 0.2 were kept. Genes determined by Subramanian et al. [15] to not
be robustly inferred were excluded.
In order to investigate the recovery of expected connections between cMap signatures
using the various CS methods, the TAS filtering stringency was increased to a threshold
of 0.4 and cMapreference was then subsetted into two validation subsets: One contain-
ing signatures which had Huang MoA annotations cMapvalidation_MoA and one containing
signatures which had Reactome pathway annotations cMapvalidation_PW.
Some perturbagens appear far more frequently in the cMap, and this imbalance could
be an issue for the validation efforts. To partially remedy this, as well as to include
only the most robust signatures for the validation, the signatures in each of the two val-
idation subsets were grouped into cell line-perturbagen combinations. For each such
condition only the 3 signatures with the highest TAS were kept, with the aforemen-
tioned 0.4 threshold as a lower bounds. This resulted in a total of 9683 signatures
for cMapvalidation_MoA (table 4.2a) and 5571 signatures for the cMapvalidation_PW (table
4.2b).
4.1.2
Disease Data Filtering
Due to the different origins of the disease data the genes for which expression has
been quantified varies. For each disease signature only a subset of gene expressions
overlap with the set of 10174 landmark and well-inferred genes and cannot be used to
establish connectivity to the cMap signatures. For this reason expression values were
kept only for this subset of genes, and where missing they were simply set to zero.
To look at only the most disease-relevant parts of the obesity and NASH differential
gene expression datasets they were first subsetted based on tissue annotations. For
investigating obesity only the 43 adipose tissue signatures were selected, and for NASH
the 124 liver signatures were selected. For each of these two subsets the metadata de-
scription of comparison groups per signature was manually inspected. For the obesity
data the inclusion criteria were for the samples to consist of adipose tissue biopsies
from overweight (BMI ≥25) and lean individuals (BMI < 25). For the NASH data the
inclusion criteria were for the samples to consist of liver tissue biopsies from healthy
40
==PAGE:49==
(a)
Perturbagen type
# of signatures
# of cell lines
# of perturbagens
Compound
8451
23
488
(b)
Perturbagen type
# of signatures
# of cell lines
# of perturbagens
Compound
5177
47
257
Overexpression
253
10
131
shRNA
21
10
13
CRISPR
120
7
67
5571
48
450
Table 4.2:
Overview of the content of the cMap validation subsets.
a) The
cMapvalidation_MoA subset only contains signatures from compound perturbations as the
Huang MoA labels only cover this perturbagen type. b) The cMapvalidation_PW includes
signatures from genetic perturbations as well as compounds. This was possible due to
the definition of target sets for TFs perturbed in the cMap
individuals (no histological evidence of fibrosis, stage F0) and (fibrosis stage F1 or
higher).
This resulted in a final obesity dataset QueryOB consisting of 17 signatures, and a final
NASH dataset QueryNASH consisting of 44 signatures.
To investigate the variation within QueryOB and QueryNASH, the pairwise similarities
between all signatures within each dataset were calculated and subjected to hierarchi-
cal clustering to generate a clustered heatmap. Figure 4.3 shows that there appears
to be greater variance between the QueryNASH signatures (Figure 4.3a) than between
QueryOB (Figure 4.3b).
4.1.3
Night A Data Filtering
The Night A signatures were generated on the L1000 platform, and thus had a TAS
on which they could be filtered. As for the cMap signatures any signatures with a TAS
below 0.2 were excluded. This reduced the number of Night A signatures from 2160 to
454; this subset is referred to as QueryNight (Table 4.3)
Cell lines
CFPAC1
YAPC
HA1E
HEPG2
HT29
HUVEC
MCF7
Tissue
Pancreas
Pancreas
Kidney
Liver
Colon
Endothelium
Breast
Signatures
104
79
71
47
52
50
51
Perturbagens
46
40
39
29
32
34
51
Table 4.3: Overview of the contents of QueryNight
41
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Pairwise ssCos between disease query signatures for a) QueryOB and
b) QueryNASH. An ssCos value of zero between signatures can, as described in the
Methods section, mean that there were not enough overlapping genes (overlaps < 5) to
establish the ssCos similarity between them. Such signatures were not used for further
analysis.
4.2
Connectivity Map Validation
The NN datasets which were to be queried against the cMap for this project consist of
signatures for which no prior knowledge about expected connections is readily avail-
able. When using connectivity to cMap signatures to annotate the NN data sets, it was
consequently necessary to verify that the CS reflects underlying biological similarities
between signatures. This was done by selecting annotated robust subsets of the cMap
(as described in the Connectivity Map Data Filtering section) for which expected con-
nections between signatures could be established using external annotations. A unified
framework implementing the chosen six CS methods was developed for computing the
pairwise connectivities between signatures, yielding a matrix of similarity scores for
each CS method. The signatures were then partitioned into clusters based on the sim-
ilarity matrix using the PhenoGraph approach described in the Methods section, and
the resulting partitions of the data evaluated against the partitions expected from the
external annotations. This workflow is visualized in Figure 4.4.
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.4: Generation of graphs for the validating the 6 chosen CS methods. The
pairwise CS was calculated for each of the 6 methods. Each of these was used to
generate 11 KNN and SNN graphs.
43
==PAGE:52==
4.2.1
Implementation of Connectivity Scores
The chosen CS methods were implemented from scratch in Python utilizing the Numba
framework as described in the Methods section. Each implemented CS function takes
as input two 2D Numpy arrays: Q consisting of n query signatures and R consisting of
m reference signatures. The output is an n by m array, SQ,R, holding the pairwise CS
between every input query and reference signature. The CS values are in the range
[−1, 1] for all CS methods used here, with a value of -1 indicating perfect dissimilarity
and a value of 1 perfect similarity. All implemented methods run scale well with the
number of CPU threads used and run reasonably fast, though the WTCS function is
significantly slower than all others (Supplementary figure 8.1).
Though permutation testing of the calculated connectivity scores was not performed
due to run-time constraints, the code for this project also contains functions enabling
permutation testing. The permutation testing functionality make nperm permutations of
the reference signatures, with nperm specified by the user, and re-calculate the CS to
the query signature for each permutation, resulting in a p-value for every pairwise CS.
The p-value can furthermore be corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-
Hochberg procedure. The computation time of the current implementation scales lin-
early with nperm which made run-time unfeasible for more than a few thousand total
signatures.
4.2.2
Validation by Mechanism of Action
For each of the implemented CS methods a matrix of similarity scores was calculated
for cMapvalidation_MoA resulting in 6 8451 by 8451 CS matrices. For the WTCS and CSS
where the query signature should only be the most differentially expressed genes, a
threshold value of 2 was applied to query for any given pairwise comparison: Genes
with an absolute Z-score below 2 were set to 0. The same approach was used for the
ssCos where this filtering was applied to both query and reference signature.
SNN graphs were then generated in accordance with the PhenoGraph procedure de-
scribed in the Methods section: KNN graphs were constructed using the kneighbors_graph
function from sklearn. This function expects a distance matrix as input, and so the CS
matrices S were converted to distance matrices D by subtracting each CS value from
one, Di,j = 1 −Si,j. The KNN graphs were constructed with the value of k set to 5,
10, 15, 25, 40, 50, 60, 75, 90, 105 and 120, resulting in 11 KNN adjacency matrices for
each distance matrix. The pairwise Jac between all nearest neighbour sets was then
calculated for each KNN adjacency matrix, resulting in the adjacency matrix for a SNN
graph. Finally the resulting adjacency matrices were converted into graph objects using
igraph for a total of 66 SNN graphs. Only the 1 million edges with the highest weights
were kept for any SNN graph to keep parameter search time manageable.
44
==PAGE:53==
Next it was investigated whether Leiden clustering of the cMapvalidation_MoA signatures
based on SNN graphs would recover the partition expected by the ground truth Huang
MoA labels. To do so it was first determined which resolution parameter γ optimized
the CPM objective function for the Leiden clustering by doing a parameter search using
built-in functionality from the leidenalg package. This was done for each of the 66
individual SNN graphs, resulting in an optimal γ value for each SNN graph. For each of
the 66 SNN graphs the cluster assignment labels resulting from Leiden clustering with
the optimal γ value was extracted. The ARI and AMI was then calculated between the
ground truth MoA labels and the cluster assignment labels (Table 4.4).
KNN
5
10
15
25
40
50
60
75
90
105
120
Connectivity Score
WTCS
CPM
0.766
0.644
0.582
0.518
0.668
0.689
0.699
0.719
0.738
0.749
0.760
AMI
0.328
0.338
0.345
0.342
0.354
0.357
0.360
0.361
0.362
0.363
0.366
ARI
0.089
0.114
0.129
0.146
0.186
0.185
0.194
0.195
0.200
0.201
0.200
Pearson
CPM
0.779
0.642
0.573
0.502
0.627
0.646
0.679
0.707
0.717
0.728
0.743
AMI
0.311
0.322
0.319
0.315
0.329
0.335
0.338
0.338
0.338
0.337
0.340
ARI
0.078
0.105
0.117
0.130
0.171
0.169
0.173
0.182
0.181
0.185
0.187
Spearman
CPM
0.753
0.618
0.549
0.480
0.609
0.653
0.650
0.683
0.703
0.711
0.713
AMI
0.306
0.315
0.315
0.305
0.317
0.325
0.326
0.327
0.330
0.331
0.330
ARI
0.083
0.111
0.115
0.123
0.145
0.160
0.167
0.179
0.182
0.182
0.181
Cosine
CPM
0.767
0.632
0.563
0.496
0.618
0.661
0.661
0.686
0.710
0.719
0.722
AMI
0.308
0.320
0.319
0.311
0.328
0.331
0.330
0.332
0.334
0.333
0.335
ARI
0.081
0.106
0.115
0.126
0.155
0.162
0.164
0.172
0.180
0.181
0.183
ssCos
CPM
0.687
0.579
0.514
0.436
0.653
0.646
0.700
0.704
0.717
0.733
0.740
AMI
0.320
0.324
0.323
0.323
0.352
0.354
0.361
0.364
0.368
0.369
0.371
ARI
0.080
0.095
0.101
0.111
0.174
0.180
0.194
0.200
0.205
0.210
0.214
CSS
CPM
0.796
0.679
0.606
0.530
0.618
0.687
0.693
0.721
0.732
0.734
0.740
AMI
0.318
0.335
0.340
0.332
0.337
0.339
0.344
0.349
0.350
0.353
0.354
ARI
0.079
0.109
0.131
0.140
0.166
0.186
0.184
0.186
0.191
0.193
0.196
Table 4.4: Best ARI and AMI values for partitions of cMapvalidation_MoA as compared to
Huang MoA labels. The result is reported for each selected Method and k value.
The SNN graph resulting in the highest AMI score was then visualized using Gephi
(Figures 4.5, 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8) in order to evaluate how well the various labels of the
signatures were reflected by the graph structure and Leiden clustering.
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.5: cMapvalidation_MoA-derived SNN graph with k=120.
Colours represent
Huang MoA labels as a ground truth.
46
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.6: cMapvalidation_MoA-derived SNN graph with k=120. Colors represent com-
munities found by Leiden community detection.
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.7: cMapvalidation_MoA-derived SNN graph with k=120 colored by cell lineages.
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.8: cMapvalidation_MoA-derived SNN graph with k=120 colored by the TAS score
of the signatures.
4.2.3
Validation by Reactome Pathways
The validation against the Huang MoA labels has the limitation of only being able to
include signatures created using small molecule compounds. In order to extend the
validation to signatures from genetic perturbations the Reactome pathway annotations
were utilized.
For each of the implemented CS methods a matrix of similarity scores was calculated
for cMapvalidation_PW (using the same Z-score thresholding value of 2 for the WTCS,
CSS and ssCos as described in the section above) resulting in 6 5571 by 5571 CS
matrices.
The pairwise cosine similarities between the Reactome pathway annotations of each
49
==PAGE:58==
signature were also calculated, resulting in another 5571 by 5571 CS matrix reflecting
the expected signature similarities based on shared Reactome pathway annotations.
The matrices were converted to distance matrices and SNN graphs were then gener-
ated. This was done by first constructing KNN graphs from the distance matrices with
the value of k set to 5, 10, 15, 25, 40, 50, 60, 75, 90, 105 and 120, resulting in 11
KNN adjacency matrices for each distance matrix. The pairwise Jac between all near-
est neighbour sets was then calculated for each KNN adjacency matrix, resulting in the
adjacency matrix for a SNN graph. Finally the resulting adjacency matrices were con-
verted into graph objects using igraph for a total of 77 SNN graphs. Only the 2 million
edges with the highest weights were kept for any SNN graph to keep parameter search
time manageable.
To generate a set of ground truth labels based on the Reactome pathway annota-
tions, Leiden clustering was first applied to the 11 SNN graphs based on Reactome
pathway annotation similarity. The resolution parameter γ optimizing the CPM objec-
tive function was determined for each of the 11 SNN graphs using functionality from
the leidenalg package. The cluster assignment labels were extracted from the Leiden
clustering resulting in the highest CPM value across k and γ parameters (Table 4.5a).
These were defined as the Reactome pathway-based ground truth labels for the 5571
cMapvalidation_PW signatures.
In order to investigate to which extent the Reactome pathway-based labels aligned
with the Huang MoA labels, the subset of cMapvalidation_PW signatures which also had
Huang MoA labels were chosen. This consisted of 3948 signatures, and for this subset
the Reactome pathway-based ground truth labels were scored against the Huang MoA
labels by their AMI and ARI (Table 4.5b).
Having defined a ground truth of which cMap signatures were expected to cluster to-
gether based on Reactome Pathway annotations, it was then investigated whether Lei-
den clustering of the cMapvalidation_PW signatures based on SNN graphs would result
in a similar clustering. To do so it was again determined which resolution parameter γ
optimized the CPM objective function by doing a parameter search for each of the 66
L1000 signature-based SNN graphs. For each of the 66 SNN graphs the cluster as-
signment labels resulting from Leiden clustering with the optimal γ value was extracted.
The ARI and AMI was then calculated between the Reactome pathway ground truth la-
bels and the cluster assignment for each the optimal solution for each of the 66 SNN
graphs (Table 4.6).
50
==PAGE:59==
(a)
γ
k
CPM
# of clusters
0.0021
5
0.957
179
(b)
AMI
ARI
# of clusters, PW labels
# of clusters, Huang MoA labels
0.827
0.440
179
78
Table 4.5: Parameters for the generation of ground truth labels for cMap signatures
based on the Reactome Pathways annotations. a) The resolution γ and number of
neighbors k values used to create and partition the SNN graph which results in the
highest value for the CPM objective function. b) Agreement between the two ground
truth label sets in terms of AMI and ARI, as well as the number of cluster the data points
are partitioned into.
KNN
5
10
15
25
40
50
60
75
90
105
120
Connectivity Score
WTCS
CPM
0.734
0.607
0.541
0.470
0.502
0.515
0.547
0.564
0.582
0.589
0.602
AMI
0.322
0.331
0.331
0.324
0.333
0.330
0.333
0.332
0.336
0.335
0.332
ARI
0.081
0.093
0.100
0.099
0.108
0.109
0.118
0.125
0.133
0.136
0.141
Pearson
CPM
0.724
0.595
0.536
0.458
0.521
0.545
0.552
0.566
0.577
0.587
0.593
AMI
0.314
0.307
0.308
0.299
0.308
0.310
0.310
0.310
0.311
0.312
0.309
ARI
0.083
0.087
0.086
0.088
0.094
0.099
0.103
0.107
0.112
0.119
0.120
Spearman
CPM
0.699
0.578
0.514
0.439
0.494
0.518
0.524
0.552
0.541
0.550
0.544
AMI
0.306
0.303
0.296
0.288
0.293
0.296
0.295
0.298
0.295
0.293
0.293
ARI
0.080
0.083
0.082
0.082
0.089
0.091
0.094
0.101
0.103
0.106
0.110
Cosine
CPM
0.715
0.590
0.529
0.462
0.516
0.542
0.548
0.576
0.579
0.572
0.574
AMI
0.309
0.305
0.305
0.295
0.300
0.304
0.305
0.308
0.307
0.305
0.302
ARI
0.081
0.085
0.084
0.084
0.092
0.095
0.096
0.104
0.107
0.112
0.115
ssCos
CPM
0.524
0.443
0.405
0.360
0.482
0.523
0.542
0.556
0.557
0.567
0.580
AMI
0.287
0.294
0.290
0.284
0.321
0.329
0.332
0.334
0.333
0.333
0.332
ARI
0.055
0.056
0.052
0.053
0.078
0.087
0.097
0.107
0.115
0.122
0.126
CSS
CPM
0.747
0.621
0.563
0.496
0.509
0.554
0.568
0.571
0.591
0.600
0.602
AMI
0.327
0.328
0.324
0.316
0.316
0.319
0.323
0.324
0.325
0.325
0.324
ARI
0.083
0.091
0.092
0.091
0.098
0.104
0.108
0.113
0.122
0.129
0.130
Table 4.6: Best ARI and AMI values for partitions of cMapvalidation_PW as compared to
Reactome Pathway clustering labels. The result is reported for each selected Method
and k value.
4.3
Query Data Analysis using the cMap
It was of interest for NN to investigate two of the proposed use cases for the cMap, gen-
eration of MoA hypotheses and identifying candidates for drug repurposing. A wealth of
gene expression data is available to NN, and new ways of using this data could result in
novel knowledge on disease mechanisms, therapeutical targets or potential treatments.
For this project two diseases central to NN were chosen: Obesity and NASH.
51
==PAGE:60==
As the validation efforts did not reveal a specific CS outperforming all others, the choice
fell on the ssCos measure based in the previous internal success at NN. Using this mea-
sure all pairwise connectivities between all signatures from the cMapreference, DataOB,
DataNASH and DataNIGHT were calculated. This resulted in a 176841 by 176841 CS
matrix, ssCosall, containing all data needed for the further analysis steps.
4.3.1
Obesity Disease Signatures
To narrow the scope of the analysis only signatures from cell lines annotated as repre-
sentative of adipose tissue were used. These were the 17 signatures of QueryOB which
were used as query dataset, and 1269 signatures from cMapreference which were used
as reference dataset. The cMapreference signatures used were all generated in the pri-
mary human adipocyte cell line ASC. A 17 by 1269 matrix containing the CS between
query and references signatures and a 1269 by 1269 matrix containing the pairwise
CS between the reference singatures was extracted from ssCosall. The MRN approach
described in the Methods section with k = 100 was then applied, and for each of the 17
query signatures the resulting reference signatures were ranked by the product of their
CS and SNN/RNFN to the query signature. The reference signatures with the highest
absolute product were manually inspected for each query signature. This revealed both
similar and dissimilar signatures of interest, and overview of three example signatures
can be found in Tables 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9. The perturbagens of the 10 most similar and
10 most dissimilar cMap signatures were investigated in literature (see Discussion).
52
==PAGE:61==
(a) Query signature
ID
Source
Groups
2_HS-02321
GEO - GSE24883
Omental adipose tissue from lean female donors
Omental adipose tissue from obese female donors
(b) Most similar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN
ssCos
SNN
TAS
t-stat %
MoA
piperlongumine
Compound
ASC
0.037
0.377
0.099
0.518
43.411
alkaloid
OTS-167
Compound
ASC
0.035
0.359
0.099
0.614
52.799
MELK inh.
BRD-A43155244
Compound
ASC
0.032
0.320
0.099
0.623
82.601
N/A
NSC-3852
Compound
ASC
0.024
0.246
0.099
0.520
68.963
HDAC inh.
vorinostat
Compound
ASC
0.024
0.163
0.147
0.550
75.596
HDAC inh.
belinostat
Compound
ASC
0.023
0.159
0.147
0.578
75.596
HDAC inh.
mocetinostat
Compound
ASC
0.019
0.126
0.147
0.508
71.806
HDAC inh.
vorinostat
Compound
ASC
0.018
0.112
0.164
0.656
43.411
HDAC inh.
vorinostat
Compound
ASC
0.018
0.123
0.147
0.716
60.408
HDAC inh.
vorinostat
Compound
ASC
0.017
0.117
0.147
0.587
82.601
HDAC inh.
(c) Most dissimilar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN
ssCos
RNFN
TAS
t-stat %
MoA
parthenolide
Compound
ASC
-0.089
-0.758
0.117
0.252
68.963
terpenoid
ouabain
Compound
ASC
-0.088
-0.517
0.170
0.533
68.963
cardiac glycoside
NBI-27914
Compound
ASC
-0.086
-0.551
0.156
0.538
63.508
CRFR1 antagonist
prednicarbate
Compound
ASC
-0.086
-0.692
0.124
0.243
80.362
glucocorticoid
PHA-793887
Compound
ASC
-0.081
-0.344
0.235
0.679
71.806
CDK inh.
BRD-K37340241
Compound
ASC
-0.079
-0.611
0.130
0.370
75.596
N/A
BRD-K69569876
Compound
ASC
-0.078
-0.522
0.149
0.630
75.596
N/A
gabexate
Compound
ASC
-0.078
-0.522
0.149
0.405
68.963
serine protease inh.
EI-231
Compound
ASC
-0.071
-0.455
0.156
0.442
71.806
CK1/2 inh.
BRD-K21005091
Compound
ASC
-0.069
-0.481
0.143
0.712
82.601
N/A
Table 4.7: Top 10 and bottom 10 MRN scores in cMapreference for obesity signature
2_HS-02321. Disease signature mimickers for which literature is in agreement are
marked in green, disease signatures reverters for which literature is in agreement are
marked in red.
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Query signature
ID
Source
Groups
10_HS-04123
GEO - GSE162653
Subcutaneous white adipose tissue from metabolically healthy obese subjects
Subcutaneous white adipose tissue from healthy lean subjects
(b) Most similar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSSNN CS
TAS
t-stat %
MoA
NSC-663284
Compound
ASC
0.127
0.749
0.170
0.304
80.362
Cdc25 inh.
niclosamide
Compound
ASC
0.085
0.624
0.136
0.381
68.963
anthelmintic
AZD-9291
Compound
ASC
0.084
0.645
0.130
0.231
52.799
EGFR inh.
SA-792709
Compound
ASC
0.078
0.575
0.136
0.228
68.963
RA receptor agonist
GDC-0068
Compound
ASC
0.078
0.702
0.111
0.370
52.799
pan-AKT inh.
xanthohumol
Compound
ASC
0.077
0.695
0.111
0.358
71.806
chalconoid
butein
Compound
ASC
0.075
0.636
0.117
0.289
68.963
chalconoid
wortmannin
Compound
ASC
0.073
0.618
0.117
0.327
75.596
PI3K-i
BRD-K32896438
Compound
ASC
0.072
0.585
0.124
0.435
82.601
N/A
JTC-801
Compound
ASC
0.071
0.495
0.143
0.523
80.362
opioid receptor antago-
nist
(c) Most dissimilar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSRNFN CS TAS
t-stat %
MoA
RAD23B
shRNA
knockdown
ASC
-0.086
-0.734
0.117
0.281
92.679
DNA repair
cycloheximide
Compound
ASC
-0.061
-0.473
0.130
0.623
43.411
protein syn. inh.
dasatinib
Compound
ASC
-0.046
-0.529
0.087
0.369
52.799
TKI
BRD-K12244279
Compound
ASC
-0.045
-0.604
0.075
0.239
68.963
MEK/ERK-i
cycloheximide
Compound
ASC
-0.041
-0.330
0.124
0.405
68.963
protein syn. inh.
dasatinib
Compound
ASC
-0.039
-0.454
0.087
0.463
60.408
TKI
anisomycin
Compound
ASC
-0.038
-0.306
0.124
0.408
63.508
protein syn. inh.
EMF-BCA1-57
Compound
ASC
-0.033
-0.474
0.070
0.280
71.806
N/A
alrestatin
Compound
ASC
-0.030
-0.507
0.058
0.226
63.508
N/A
cephaeline
Compound
ASC
-0.028
-0.287
0.099
0.684
63.508
protein syn. inh.
Table 4.8: Top 10 and bottom 10 MRN scores in cMapreference for obesity signature
10_HS-04123. Disease signature mimickers for which literature is in agreement are
marked in green, disease signatures reverters for which literature is in agreement are
marked in red.
54
==PAGE:63==
(a) Query signature
ID
Source
Groups
2_HS-03453
GEO - GSE94752
Abdominal subcutaneous white adipose tissue from healthy lean women
Abdominal subcutaneous white adipose tissue from obese women
(b) Most similar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSSNN CS
TAS
t-stat %
MoA
BRD-K98634983
Compound
ASC
0.060
0.486
0.124
0.201
75.596
N/A
xanthohumol
Compound
ASC
0.060
0.602
0.099
0.358
71.806
chalconoid
pyroxamide
Compound
ASC
0.047
0.509
0.093
0.358
75.596
HDAC-i
fenretinide
Compound
ASC
0.046
0.412
0.111
0.535
80.362
RA receptor agonist
T-0070907
Compound
ASC
0.044
0.500
0.087
0.336
68.963
PPAR-γ antagonist
BRD-K30715099
Compound
ASC
0.043
0.436
0.099
0.261
75.596
N/A
butein
Compound
ASC
0.043
0.613
0.070
0.289
68.963
chalconoid
SA-792709
Compound
ASC
0.042
0.522
0.081
0.228
68.963
RA receptor agonist
SEW-00445
Compound
ASC
0.041
0.594
0.070
0.203
75.596
N/A
TUL-XX023
Compound
ASC
0.041
0.469
0.087
0.247
75.596
N/A
(c) Most dissimilar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSRNFN CS TAS
t-stat %
MoA
dasatinib
Compound
ASC
-0.108
-0.723
0.149
0.300
52.799
TK inh.
dasatinib
Compound
ASC
-0.075
-0.481
0.156
0.369
52.799
TK inh.
midostaurin
Compound
ASC
-0.060
-0.544
0.111
0.393
43.411
PKC-i
dasatinib
Compound
ASC
-0.052
-0.526
0.099
0.278
52.799
TK inh.
KI-16425
Compound
ASC
-0.051
-0.681
0.075
0.294
75.596
LPAR antagonist
latrunculin-b
Compound
ASC
-0.047
-0.329
0.143
0.401
82.601
actin poly. inh.
NVP-TAE684
Compound
ASC
-0.040
-0.340
0.117
0.354
71.806
ALK-i
aloisine
Compound
ASC
-0.039
-0.423
0.093
0.223
43.411
CDK-i
dasatinib
Compound
ASC
-0.036
-0.281
0.130
0.400
52.799
TKI
AZD-4547
Compound
ASC
-0.036
-0.305
0.117
0.412
60.408
FGFR inh.
Table 4.9: Top 10 and bottom 10 MRN scores in cMapreference for obesity signature
2_HS-03453. Disease signature mimickers for which literature is in agreement are
marked in green, disease signatures reverters for which literature is in agreement are
marked in red.
55
==PAGE:64==
4.3.2
NASH Disease Signatures
To narrow the scope of the analysis only signatures from cell lines annotated as rep-
resentative of liver tissue were used. These were the 44 signatures of QueryNASH
which were used as query dataset, and 7594 signatures from cMapreference which were
used as reference dataset. The cMapreference signatures used were all generated in the
immortalized hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines HEPG2, HUH7 and HUH751, or pri-
mary human hepatocyte cell line PHH. A 44 by 7594 matrix containing the CS between
query and references signatures and a 7594 by 7594 matrix containing the pairwise
CS between the reference singatures was extracted from ssCosall. The MRN approach
described in the Methods section with k = 100 was then applied, and for each of the 44
query signatures the resulting reference signatures were ranked by the product of their
CS and SNN/RNFN to the query signature. The reference signatures with the highest
absolute product were manually inspected for each query signature. This revealed both
similar and dissimilar signatures of interest, and an overview of two example signatures
can be found in Tables 4.10 and 4.11. The perturbagens of the 10 most similar and 10
most dissimilar cMap signatures were investigated in literature (see Discussion).
56
==PAGE:65==
(a) Query signature
ID
Source
Groups
11_HS-04235
GEO - GSE162694
Liver tissue samples from obese patients with normal liver histology
Liver tissue samples from patients with NASH fibrosis stage F3
(b) Most similar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSSNN CS
TAS
t-stat %
MoA
Podophyllotoxin
Compound
HUH7
0.054
0.713
0.075
0.299
48.550
antimicrotubule
vinblastine
Compound
HUH7
0.051
0.678
0.075
0.400
48.550
antimicrotubule
STK-249718
Compound
HEPG2
0.051
0.729
0.070
0.535
45.248
N/A
withaferin-a
Compound
HEPG2
0.050
0.664
0.075
0.645
53.747
NFKB inh.
ryuvidine
Compound
HUH7
0.045
0.711
0.064
0.387
48.550
SETD8 inh.
NSC-663284
Compound
HUH7
0.042
0.658
0.064
0.443
48.550
Cdc25 inh.
GW-843682X
Compound
HEPG2
0.041
0.709
0.058
0.326
94.516
PLK-i
CYT-997
Compound
HEPG2
0.029
0.790
0.036
0.265
70.772
antimicrotubule
BRD-K19876534
Compound
HEPG2
0.028
0.672
0.042
0.349
45.248
N/A
NSC-663284
Compound
HUH7
0.028
0.665
0.042
0.426
48.550
Cdc25 inh.
(c) Most dissimilar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSRNFN CS TAS
t-stat %
MoA
ALW-II-38-3
Compound
HEPG2
-0.077
-0.653
0.117
0.432
74.993
EphA3 inh.
BRD-K33164466
Compound
HEPG2
-0.074
-0.665
0.111
0.436
74.993
N/A
BRD-K37340241
Compound
HEPG2
-0.068
-0.689
0.099
0.352
74.993
N/A
BRD-K58547240
Compound
HEPG2
-0.062
-0.627
0.099
0.340
74.993
N/A
BRD-K74840245
Compound
HEPG2
-0.057
-0.661
0.087
0.233
60.322
N/A
tebuthiuron
Compound
HEPG2
-0.057
-0.611
0.093
0.244
37.927
pesticide
promazine
Compound
HEPG2
-0.051
-0.634
0.081
0.260
37.927
antipsychotic
auraptene
Compound
HEPG2
-0.051
-0.633
0.081
0.324
67.413
coumarin
THADA
shRNA
HEPG2
-0.047
-0.621
0.075
0.301
92.621
N/A
ARNT
shRNA
HEPG2
-0.033
-0.700
0.047
0.215
92.621
N/A
Table 4.10: Top 10 and bottom 10 MRN scores in cMapreference for NASH signature
11_HS-04235. Disease signature mimickers for which literature is in agreement are
marked in green, disease signatures reverters for which literature is in agreement are
marked in red.
57
==PAGE:66==
(a) Query signature
ID
Source
Groups
20_HS-03087
GEO - GSE162694
Liver tissue with normal histology from obese patients
Liver tissue with steatosis of grade 2 obtained from obese NASH patients
(b) Most similar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSSNN CS
TAS
t-stat %
MoA
brefeldin-a
Compound
HEPG2
0.096
0.482
0.200
0.756
46.684
ER stressor
brefeldin-a
Compound
HEPG2
0.088
0.441
0.200
0.805
46.684
ER stressor
brefeldin-a
Compound
HEPG2
0.084
0.421
0.200
0.794
46.684
ER stressor
brefeldin-a
Compound
HEPG2
0.077
0.386
0.200
0.787
46.684
ER stressor
brefeldin-a
Compound
HEPG2
0.061
0.305
0.200
0.792
46.684
ER stressor
BRD-K76674262
Compound
HEPG2
0.019
0.213
0.091
0.796
46.684
protein syn. inh.
thapsigargin
Compound
HEPG2
0.018
0.642
0.029
0.678
46.684
ER stressor
MG-132
Compound
HEPG2
0.010
0.165
0.059
0.809
67.585
proteasome inh.
PIK-75
Compound
HEPG2
0.007
0.114
0.059
0.838
49.325
PI3K inh.
mitoxantrone
Compound
HEPG2
0.005
0.173
0.029
0.788
46.684
Topo inh.
(c) Most dissimilar signatures in cMapreference
Pert. Name
Pert. Type
Cell Line
MRN CS
ssCos CSRNFN CS TAS
t-stat %
MoA
BRD-K22552152
Compound
HEPG2
-0.170
-0.371
0.458
0.811
17.542
N/A
cadmium
Compound
HEPG2
-0.167
-0.364
0.458
0.814
17.542
N/A
mitoxantrone
Compound
HEPG2
-0.157
-0.344
0.458
0.761
17.542
Topoisomerase inh.
tanespimycin
Compound
HEPG2
-0.151
-0.331
0.458
0.715
17.542
HSP inh.
vorinostat
Compound
HEPG2
-0.131
-0.271
0.483
0.776
17.542
HDAC inh.
amsacrine
Compound
HEPG2
-0.123
-0.268
0.458
0.790
17.542
Topoisomerase inh.
BRD-K22552152
Compound
HEPG2
-0.117
-0.242
0.483
0.793
17.542
N/A
tanespimycin
Compound
HEPG2
-0.114
-0.250
0.458
0.786
17.542
HSP inh.
tanespimycin
Compound
HEPG2
-0.110
-0.240
0.458
0.711
17.542
HSP inh.
BRD-K22552152
Compound
HEPG2
-0.108
-0.236
0.458
0.804
17.542
N/A
Table 4.11: Top 10 and bottom 10 MRN scores in cMapreference for NASH signature
20_HS-03087. Disease signature mimickers for which literature is in agreement are
marked in green, disease signatures reverters for which literature is in agreement are
marked in red.
58
==PAGE:67==
4.3.3
Night A Signatures
As QueryNight contained over 400 signatures even after TAS filtering the manual in-
spection approach used for the obesity and NASH disease signatures was not feasible
within the timeframe of the project. Prior to this project potentially interesting connec-
tions between peptides within Night A had been observed. These connections were
however between signatures with low signal strength and reproducibility (TAS < 0.2).
A cursory investigation was done with the pairwise ssCos between all 2160 Night A
signatures, but this did not recover those same connections. It was therefore decided
to divert more time towards the disease queries instead.
59
==PAGE:68==
5
Discussion
5.1
Connectivity Map Data Reliability
The version of the cMap used for this project boasts to contain over 1.2 million level
5 gene expression signatures, but coverage for a large number of cell lines and per-
turbagens is irregular. Many cell lines are generally not well-represented in the cMap
(e.g. cardiomyocytes) and a large set of perturbagens was only tested in a select few
cell lines which limits the potential for hypothesis generation. In the case where the
cMap does not contain signatures from a cell lineage which can be considered repre-
sentative of the biology of a query signature it can be hard to interpret the CS between
the signatures. Querying the cMap with e.g. a disease signature obtained from cardiac
tissue would be problematic due to the lack of representative cell lines in the cMap.
Even if a set of cMap signatures (from various cell lines) generated using set of com-
pounds with a common MoA were to show a high degree of disease signature reversal
it cannot be assumed that the compound would have the same effect in an unrepre-
sented tissue, and thus that the MoA is relevant for the disease. Furthermore, for some
cell lines the narrow range of perturbagens used will limit the breadth of transcriptional
responses represented in that cell line. This is exacerbated by the fact that the concen-
trations of small molecule compounds were confined to certain ranges which may not
include the biologically active dose for all compounds in all cell lines. The duration of
treatment could also have a large effect due to cellular adaptation over time, resulting
in short-term acute and long-term sustained signatures existing for a perturbation.
For this project these issues were sought to be remedied by carefully choosing which
parts of the cMap to use. By annotating as many cell lines as possible with a tissue
lineage they could be considered representative of, more cMap signatures could be
included for a given query signature based on the tissue rather than the specific cell
lineage. This makes the assumption that signatures from different cell lines originating
from the same tissue will have a high degree of similarity, and it was not investigated
whether this assumption holds. Many such assumptions are in fact made in the Broad
Institute’s own workflow for the cMap; if e.g. a query signature originates from a cell line
not directly represented in the cMap it is already implicitly assumed that different cell
lines can be compared. Likewise, several of the most represented cell lines in the cMap
are immortalized or tumor-derived cell lines which are known to not always represent
in vivo biology [10].
Another concern with the cMap is the degree to which the signatures are affected by as-
60
==PAGE:69==
say noise, batch effects and other confounding factors. Here the TAS was used to filter
out cMap signatures where perturbation signal could not be distinguished from noise.
As can be seen from Figure 4.1 the TAS reflects expected behaviour. All the cell lines
have a strong and reproducible response to the pan-HDAC inhibitor vorinostat. HDACs
regulate gene expression through histone modification and presumably have a strongly
conserved role across cellular phenotypes. It should however be noted that even if a
given perturbagen results in a similar dose-response curve across different cell lines,
the resulting transcriptional signatures are not necessarily similar. The PDE4-inhibitor
ibudilast does not generate a significant response in any of the chosen cell lines how-
ever. Such a lack of response can have several underlying causes. The concentrations
used to generate the cMap signatures were in a set range, and this range may not reach
the biologically active threshold. Alternatively, as seen for the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor Erlotinib, the response could differ across
cellular contexts, e.g. due some cells not expressing the protein upon which the drug
acts.
It must be noted that almost a third of the cMap signatures, 0.46 of the 1.2 million,
did not originate from experimental triplicates or better. This precludes the use of the
TAS as a robust quality metric for those signatures, which generally should result in
apprehension for hypotheses generated using them. While some of those signatures
may indeed reflect a real and informative transcriptional phenotype, this observation
led to a fairly harsh filtering of the cMap for this project in the interest of removing
uncertainty and avoiding false positives.
These findings conform with the findings of Lim & Pavlidis [20] who sought to compare
signature reproducibility both between and within two iterations of the cMap. They found
that signature reproducibility varied greatly with the strength of the induced differential
expression which was to an extent based on cell line responsiveness and perturbagen
concentration. They advice that researchers carefully consider the biological relevance
to their studies of the cMap cell lines, and to filter out perturbagens with poor self-
retrieval performance. They conclude that a sizeable portion of the cMap may not be
very useful in its current state, which is in agreement with the stringent filtering done for
this project.
5.2
The Problem of Establishing a Ground Truth
Establishing a ground truth classification for a signature is a fundamental challenge
for the cMap. In an ideal scenario two signatures arising from identical experimental
conditions would be expected to show near-perfect similarity, and lesser similarity re-
veals that there are unaccounted for factors affecting the experiment; noise, whether
biological or technical. However, as one starts to vary the conditions it quickly be-
61
==PAGE:70==
comes muddled how to define the expected degree of similarity. For instance, what is
the expected similarity between signatures generated with the same perturbation but in
different cell lines? How about two functionally similar, but not identical, compounds?
The same compound in the same cell line but at different doses and time points? All
of these factors would have to be weighed for the expected similarity. This is of course
unrealistic and one instead has to settle for some approximation.
Here two such approximations of ground truth labels were utilized to investigate whether
this can be used to validate the core concept underlying the cMap: Using some mea-
sure of similarity between a query signature and a set of reference signatures to gain
new biological insights about the query. For such an approach to work the reference
data must be internally consistent, meaning that the signature similarity must reflect
biological similarity.
The expected biological similarity was here defined first from MoA classifications of
compounds used in the cMap, a common approach in the literature. These have the
advantage of being relatively well-curated, but have the disadvantage of only enabling
the use of compound-based signatures. In an attempt to remedy that, Reactome path-
way annotations based on either the primary interaction target of drugs or the tran-
scriptional targets of TFs were used. Here are genetic perturbation and a compound
were expected to be in the same cluster if the compound inhibited a gene which the
TF repressed and vice versa. This is clearly a very simple approach disregarding e.g.
that knocking a protein out is not the same as inhibiting its catalytic activity. Inhibiting
a specific function of a protein may not nullify its interaction with other binding partners
and preserving a partial signal that way. Worse still for the case of an overexpression, if
the protein is not normally expressed in a given cell line, a drug with an agonistic effect
would have had no effect, whereas artificially induced expression may lead to novel
interactions which do not occur under normal biological conditions.
With these shortcomings in mind, Table 4.5 shows that the two label sets to some extent
still partition the data similarly. This is perhaps not too suprising as compounds sharing
MoA labels are also likely to at least partially share target sets and thus result in similar
sets of enriched Reactome pathways. That said, establishing labels using Reactome
pathway labels may not be very robust either. The size of the target sets varies greatly
per perturbagen and this, as well as the way the Pathway enrichment is performed, can
heavily influence the result. Some Reactome pathways are also much more generic
than others, and a similarity based on these quite vague. One way of investigating
whether the retrieved pathways reflect what is observed in the signatures would be
to perform Reactome pathway enrichment analysis directly on the most significantly
perturbed genes for each signature. The resulting enriched pathways could then be
compared against the expected perturbed pathways. However, at the end of the day
62
==PAGE:71==
each step of the entire process of generating labels would have to be revisited and
carefully tested to validate it. This was outside the scope of this project.
As can be seen from Tables 4.4 and 4.6 the overall agreement between Leiden clus-
tering of the signatures and either set of labels was low in terms of AMI. However,
inspecting figures 4.5 and 4.6 reveals that the SNN graph structure does in fact cap-
ture information about perturbagen type: Some perturbagen types form distinct clus-
ters, e.g. HDAC and MDM inhibitors. HDACs and MDM2 have an important role in the
modulation of chromatin accessibility and thus gene expression through the transcrip-
tion factor p53 the activity of which they both inhibit. PI3K and mTOR are members of
a conserved signaling cascade and also form a tight cluster. It can also be seen that
cardiac glycosides and protein synthesis inhibitors are found in close proximity, concor-
dant with the general inhibition of protein synthesis by cardiac glycosides [67]. These
strongly shared transcriptional responses across cell lines hints at strong conservation
of the affected pathways. Other perturbagen types however are either split across sev-
eral clusters or completely scattered, for which there could be a number of reasons.
It could be that the effect on transcription is weak enough that it is drowned out by noise
for some perturbations. Though a simple approach, this was sought mitigated through
the filtering on TAS, though a TAS of 0.2 can still signify low signature reproducibility
which would indeed lead to a high degree of uncertainty for the similarity scores, pre-
senting as less well-defined clusters. Comparing figures 4.8 and 4.5 it is not clear that
higher TAS dictates clearer clustering alone, but it does appear perturbagens with cer-
tain MoAs generally have higher TAS and generally cluster together better.
Alternatively, it could be that other covariates of the signatures have a stronger effect
than perturbagen type, though this is not the case for cell lineage as seen from figure
4.7.
It is evident that labels based solely on a single annotation type will not reflect the
cellular phenotype well. The ground truth labels used should reflect combinations of
covariates, but this is problematic. As posited in the introduction, the cellular pheno-
type is a fluid concept whereas categorical labels are by definition not. Categorical
labels are intuitive to understand, but they eventually hit a problem of resolution: As
the number of covariates which they require to take into account increases the number
of labels explodes; it is like calculating the area under a curve via algebraic approxima-
tions instead of calculus. A slightly more refined approach than using a single ground
truth label for each signature could be adopting a multi-label approach against which to
benchmark.
63
==PAGE:72==
5.3
Connectivity Score Performance
There has been a number of publications surrounding the choice of CS for establish-
ing pairwise relationships between signatures. A goal of the validation efforts were
to examine a number of these in an attempt to establish which of the examined CS
methodologies would result in the best clustering results, as scored against an exter-
nally defined ground truth. However, as can be seen from Tables 4.4 and 4.6 the
overall difference in clustering quality does not vary to a large degree between the dif-
ferent CS methods. It cannot be stated with certainty whether the small differences are
significant without performing a permutation test, which was not done due to time limi-
tations. However, assuming that the small differences are not significant the methods
perform virtually identically. This was hardly surprising considering no consensus has
been reached despite many published efforts, but it is difficult to know to which extent
this would change given a better ground truth against which to benchmark clustering or
given other clustering approaches.
One weakness of the approach here is visible from the AMI and ARI increasing with k.
This is likely caused by a necessity for keeping the total number of edges of the SNN
graph below two million. This has a thresholding effect where only the edges with the
highest weights are kept.
5.4
Clustering Approaches
As described in the Methods section, the SNN graph does not the available information
about negative similarities as these are simply thresholded out in the KNN graph gen-
eration step. The simple extension with the RNFN graph attempts to remedy this and
does appear useful for looking at the similarities between a given query and the cMap
signatures. However this extension was not used for the Leiden clustering as many
graph community detection & visualization layout algorithms do not allow for negative
edge weights.
Though the Leiden community detection method used here, as well as its predecessor
Louvain, have established themselves as the algorithm of choice for several scRNA-seq
analysis frameworks, the problem tackled here is different; both in terms of the physical
entity underlying the data and the data itself and in scope. A much wider array of cellular
phenotypes are represented in the cMap than in most scRNA-seq experiments, and the
variation is spread on many more axes; cell type, perturbation type, experiment duration
and perhaps also undocumented laboratory condition changes over the years.
As described in the Introduction, bulk RNA-seq tends to average out the variance of the
cells within the experiment, something the L1000 platform would also be susceptible
to. This could actually mean that all signatures become more similar on average which
the fact that the median pairwise cosine similarity between signatures is shifted right
64
==PAGE:73==
(supplemental figure 8.2) may hint at. This would make it harder for any clustering
algorithm to separate them.
5.5
Query Data vs cMap
The similarity between disease signatures was first investigated, which showed a higher
degree of similarity between obesity signatures than expected. This was surprising as
these signatures come from different publications and different patients, which reflected
to a higher degree for the NASH signatures.
The initial idea behind the project was to then perform clustering on the entirety of
the cMap along with all query signatures, visualizing the clusters and then inspecting
query signatures found within well-defined clusters of the cMap. However, even for a
robust subset of the cMap obtaining such well-separated clusters for a wide range of
cell phenotype representations was not accomplished. Therefore the more traditional
paradigm of cMap-based analysis was taken where a list ranked list of most similar
and most dissimilar cMap signatures was generated for each query signature, though
with the modification of still factoring in the graph structure introduced with the SNN
and RNFN values. The idea behind this was that the resulting top hits would be more
robust as the sharing of neighbours would indicate well-connected clusters.
The results (discussed below) show that despite the shortcomings of the cMap method-
ology decribed above, cMap-based analysis be used to discover relevant biology. This
positive result agrees with both published literature and results internally at NN, but
the same point of critique raised by Lim & Pavlidis [20] rears its head; Even though
seemingly relevant biology can be found from the n most similar/dissimilar reference
signatures, there are also entries with no readily explicable connection to the query.
This is an issue as it adds a large degree of uncertainty to cMap analysis results and
also necessitates manual filtering through the top hits. Ideally the top k hits should
be significantly enriched for relevant biology for a query signature from a well defined
biological background - provided it is represented in the cMap.
5.5.1
Query: Obesity Signatures
Despite the shortcomings mentioned above, the example obesity signatures in Tables
4.7, 4.8 and 4.9 revealed some potentially interesting mechanisms for obesity.
The amide alkaloid Piperlongumine is an inducer of oxydative stress through the for-
mation of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) [68, 69], something which is known to con-
tribute to the metabolic changes observed in obesity [3].
Cycloheximide inhibits protein synthesis by blocking the translocation step of elongation
[70]. This has been shown to reduce ER stress-induced apoptosis [71]. Anisomycin
similarly reduces ER stress through inhibition of the peptidyl transferase activity of ri-
65
==PAGE:74==
bosomes [72].
GDC-0068 is a pan-Akt inhibitor [73]. PI3k/Akt signaling is activated by a multitude of
growth factors, giving the pathway a central role in the regulation of cellular metabolism
and proliferation. One mechanism by which it stimulates proliferation is through the
prevention of p21-mediated inhibition of CDKs. PI3k/Akt activation also stimulates the
degradation of p53 through MDM2, blocking the stress response mediated by p53.
Montazeri et al. [74] showed that there is decreased expression of Akt in adipose tis-
sues of obese individuals, and that the beneficial effects of physical activity for obese
individuals is in part due to the increased PI3K/Akt pathway activation in adipose tissue
[75, 76, 77]. Activation of Akt1 has been proposed as a potential strategy to alleviate
ER stress in obesity [5].
Working in reverse, Midostaurin inhibits Protein Kinase C (PKC). PKC negatively reg-
ulates Akt activity in mouse adipocytes [78] giving it a key role in the regulation of lipid
and glucose homeostasis. A high-fat diet has been shown to induce elevated PKC-
β expression in adipocytes which disrupts mitochondrial function, inducing oxidative
stress and increased lipid storage [79, 80].
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) signaling upstream of PKC and Akt
is also represented here. Dasatinib is a tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitor affecting a wide
array of TKs including PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β. PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β have been
shown to inhibit adipogenesis in adipocyte progenitors and instead differentiating them
into myofibroblast-like cells which produce extracellular matrix, promoting fibrosis [81,
82].
Kim et al. [83] showed that parthenolide can suppress an obesity-induced inflammatory
response in a co-culture of human adipocytes and macrophages, and that partheno-
lide supplements decreased body weight significantly for high-fat diet-fed mice. These
effects were shown to be mediated through the Nrf2/Keap1 signaling pathway which
is propagates the cellular response to inflammation and metabolic and oxidative stress
[84]. Another study in mice also showed beneficial effects of parthenolide for obesity
through inhibition of the NLRP3 inflammasome, an intracellular sensor of microbial mo-
tifs and endogenous danger signals [85].
T-0070907 inhibits peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ), a well-
established core regulator of adipose tissues. It controls adipogenesis and adipocyte
hypertrophy, and there is solid support for its anti-inflammatory effects [86, 87] and
thereby decreases adipogenic potential. AZD-9291 is an EGFR inhibitor, and studies
have shown that EGFR has increased expression in adipose tissue of obese individu-
als, that it is required for human adipogenesis, and that EGFR signaling inhibition leads
to adipose tissue dysregulation mediated by decreased expression of PPAR-γ. [88,
66
==PAGE:75==
89].
OTS-167 is an inhibitor of the Maternal Embryonic Leucine Zipper (MELK) kinase, and
it was shown by Seong & Ha [90] that MELK interacts with p21, a downstream target
of the stress response protein p53, through the cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)-binding
region of p21. This stimulated nuclear translocation of p21, where it prevented the acti-
vation of PPAR-γ. It was later shown by the same authors [91] that MELK-/- male mice
were predisposed to obesity while also showing increased inflammation and impaired
metabolism.
The above results suggest that the gene expression changes reflected by the query
disease signatures indicate the presence of inflammation and oxydative/ER stress in
the obese patients from which the signatures originated. These mechanisms are linked
with the decreased potential for adipogenesis and increased adipocyte hypertrophy,
mechanisms which are also well-documented in obesity. These results corroborate the
ability of the cMap to identify well-established disease mechanisms.
More evidence has pointed towards a role for CDKs in obesity. NSC-663284 inhibits cell
division cycle 25 (CDC25) phosphatases, activators of CDK1 [92]. CDKs are canonical
regulators of the cell cycle, with CDK1 canonically marking the beginning of the mitotic
phase [93]. Inhibition of CDC25 and thus prevention of CDK1 activation, could be hy-
pothesized to prevent entry into the M-phase and thus prevent adipogenesis.
Encouragingly, one of the results here has even seen recent proposals for drug reposi-
tioning in the treatment of diet-induced obesity. PHA-793887 and aloisine are inhibitors
of CDK1, CDK2, CDK4 and CDK5, and CDK4/6 have emerged as targets for the treat-
ment of diet-induced obesity. Several FDA-approved CDK4/6 inhibitor drugs, such as
the breast cancer drug abemaciclib, are under investigation for repositioning in the treat-
ment of diet-induced obesity [94, 95]. This repositioning was suggested following in vivo
mouse studies, and the ability to independently rediscover such mechanisms with the
cMap illustrates that there concept is sound.
There are however also more unclear results. Prednicarbate is a corticosteroid, a class
of steroid hormones commonly used in the treatment of multiple inflammatory diseases.
Intiutively anything that reduces inflammation would be a logical result as a reverser of
the disease signature, and while there are reports that short-term or intermittent glu-
cocorticoid treatment can have positive effects on metabolic health, chronic use often
results in weight gain [96, 97]. Despite a wealth of publications on the effects of glu-
cocorticoids upon adipose tissues the relationship between them is not fully elucidated
[98]. On account of the shorter treatment duration for the in vitro L1000 assay it could
67
==PAGE:76==
be speculated that the effect of prednicarbate reflected in the cMap signature would
be more similar to the short-term effects of glucocorticoid use in patients. This would
explain the observed negative similarity, and agrees with Quattrocelli et al. [97] on the
suggestion of intermittent glucocorticoid use as a novel therapeutical agent for obesity.
5.5.2
Query: NASH Signatures
Similarly to the obesity signatures, the chosen examples of NASH signatures (Tables
4.10 and 4.11) reflected several known mechanisms for NASH.
Podophyllotoxin, Vinblastine and CYT-997 destabilizes the formation of microtubules,
a process which also occurs in NASH during ballooning. This disrupts vesicular trans-
port organized in hepatocytes to a large extent by microtubules [99, 100]. Disruption
of the microtubules in a NASH patient hepatocyte could be merely a side-effect of the
physical expansion of the ballooning hepatocyte, but it could also be speculated to be
involved in a feedback loop where ballooning causes further ER stress to the resulting
accumulation of proteins.
Brefeldin-A and Thapsigargin also induce ER stress. Brefeldin-A does so through dis-
ruption of the Golgi apparatus structure which affects vesicular transport between the
ER and Golgi apparatus, whereas Thapsigargin does so through inhibition of Sarcoplas-
mic/Endoplasmic Reticulum Ca2+-ATPases (SERCA) which depletes ER Ca2+ stores
[101]. Interestingly, another link to SERCA is found with thyroid adenoma associated
(THADA). THADA is a key regulator of the balance between energy storage and energy
expenditure, and knockdown in fruit flies was shown to lower cold tolerance and induce
obesity. It has also been subject to strong selection connected with cold climate adap-
tations during human evolution, suggesting an implication in the lower metabolic rates
and increased propensity for high-fat diet-induced life-style diseases of human popula-
tions adapted to warm climates [102]. Zhang et al. [103] recently showed that THADA
knockdown protects against type 2 diabetes in mice, and that this effect is mediated
by relieving inhibition of ER Ca2+ re-uptake in pancreatic β-cells through SERCA. They
also showed that THADA interacts with a pro-apoptotic complex during persisent ER
stress.
Taken together this suggests THADA and SERCA as potential targets for reversing
NAFLD-induced ER stress in hepatocytes, in line with the findings of Ali & Petrovski
[104].
Though no clear molecular mechanism was idenfied, the ephrin-A receptor EphA3 may
also be of interest. EphA3 is a receptor tyrosine kinase involved in signalling through
cell-cell adhesion which ALW-II-38-3 inhibits. EphA3 has been reported to be upreg-
ulated in patients with severe NASH (fibrosis stages F3-F4) [105, 106], and Lu et al
[107] found that high EphA3 levels were associated with poor prognosis in hepatocel-
68
==PAGE:77==
lular carcinoma, suggesting it as both a candicate marker for disease severity and a
potential therapeutic target.
Another potential target could be suggested from Ryuvidine which is an inhibitor of
SETD8, a lysine methyltransferase involved in epigenetic regulation of gene expres-
sion through methylation of Histone 4 lysine residue 20 (H4K20). Hepatocyte-specific
deletion of the SETD8 analog PR-SET7 has been shown to result in liver necrosis, in-
flammation and fibrosis in mice [108], and H4K20 hypo-methylation has been linked to
the overexpression of Fatty Acid Synthase (FAS) driving increased lipogenesis [109].
Ligand-free cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is involved
in the response to hypoxia through the transcriptional activation of hypoxia inducible
factor 2-α (HIF-2α) [110]. HIFs have emerged as drivers of liver fibrosis through the
regulation of pro-fibrotic factors in liver cells [111], and hypoxia can also lead to the
formation of ROS and trigger oxidative stress [112]. In line with this role of oxidative
stress is the finding of Auraptene, a natural compound found in citrus fruits which has
been reported to have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties [113]. Nagao et
al. [114] found that Auraptene normalized hepatocyte lipid metabolism abnormalities
in vitro, and that it lowered the hepatic accumulation of triglycerides in rat livers in a
dose-dependent manner. This effect appeared to be mediated through activation of
fatty acid β-oxidation pathway members. More recently, Wen et al. [115] synthesized
an Auraptene analog which was shown to have therapeutical potential for the treatment
of NASH.
Finally, several hits for Tanespimycin are found for one of the NASH query signatures.
Tanespimycin inhibits HSP90 which plays a central role in the development of NAFLD.
There is evidence from studies in mice that inhibition of HSP90 reduces hepatic fat
accumulation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, thereby alleviating liver
steatosis and fibrosis [116]. There are studies showing that this effect could be mediated
through the downregulation of PPAR-γ and Sterol regulatory element-binding protein
(SREBP) activity [117, 118].
5.5.3
Query: Night A Signatures
As described in the results section an initial investigation of internal Night A connections
failed to recover connections found prior to this project, most likely due to the different
choice of CS. However, even if the same approach had been used the low TAS of those
signatures would have not conformed with the observations that connections between
such signatures are more likely to be spurious. There may however have been other
connections of interest between Night A signatures above the TAS threshold, and it
would have been especially interesting to see whether any disease and Night A sig-
natures shared their nearest (or furthest) neighbours in the cMap. Such a relationship
69
==PAGE:78==
could have suggested mechanisms for peptides and proteins of Night A in either obesity
or NASH.
70
==PAGE:79==
6
Conclusion
Much research in biology and pharmacology involves establishing relationships be-
tween biological systems, regardless of unit: Connections between genes, cellular phe-
notypes or patient cohorts. The cMap concept was established as a framework with a
clear vision of integrating this process into a common workflow, with the L1000 platform
facilitating doing so at scale.
In this project a set of signature connectivity scoring methods for the cMap workflow
were implemented. This allowed benchmarking them based on their ability to connect
signatures in a way enabling consistent clustering. The result of this benchmarking ef-
fort was inconclusive, in part owing to the difficulty of establishing a ground truth against
which to evaluate, underlining the need for a gold standard against which proposed
methods can be validated. The benchmarking was also inconclusive due to the issue
of internal consistency in the cMap L1000 data. This lack of consistency stems from the
many variables contributing to a specific transcriptional signature, seen here from the
inconsistent clustering with regards to perturbagen MoA and expected pathway-level
similarity. There were signs that this inconsistency was tied to the strength and repro-
ducibility of the transcriptional response to a perturbation, which is a result of the many
covariates that must be considered when predicting the outcome of perturbing a cell.
The inconclusive results of the validation effort led to the use of an approach closer to
the traditional cMap workflow for annotating query data, though incorporating informa-
tion about shared nearest/furthest neighbors when ranking reference signature similar-
ities. To my knowledge this project was the first effort attempting to approach cMap
hypothesis generation based on signature clustering. It was possible to find relevant
biology and propose targets for disease signatures using this approach, though the lack
of consistency also demonstrated by other authors was not resolved. This hampers the
ability of the cMap approach for discovering entirely novel biology, as any result which
cannot readily be corroborated with literature is at least as likely to be a false positive
as an exciting new avenue of inquiry.
71
==PAGE:80==
7
Future Perspectives
7.1
Establishing a Robust Ground Truth
While there has been much debate on the connectivity scoring methodology in the liter-
ature [19], the issue of data quality and how to verify it has not received anywhere near
as much attention. It could be argued however that this should take precedence, as
any benchmarking efforts for connectivity will be more or less inconclusive if the ground
truth against which they are evaluated is too simplistic, or if the subset of signatures
used for various benchmarks is different.
A robust ground truth should encompass all perturbation types represented in the cMap,
not just compounds, and should also capture cellular context. One could imagine the
ground truth to follow a hierarchical structure, which is similar to how e.g. Reactome
Pathways and GO-terms are structured. Expanding on the Reactome Pathway-based
approach in this thesis one could first make comprehensive target lists for compounds
and canonical physical interaction partners for the protein products of genetic perturba-
tion targets. Utilizing databases of per-cell line expressed genes the target lists could
then be curated for each signature, such that the genes expected to be perturbed could
only be genes expressed in that cell line. An alternative simpler approach would be to
expand the ground truth to a multilabel approach.
7.2
Learning Similarity
All measures of similarity used here were fairly simple. More complex methods have
been published which appear to yield better results.
Zhou et al. [119] developed an method weighting genes on their basal expression level
(necessitating the use of level 3 L1000 data) when calculating signature similarities,
reducing the contribution of lowly expressed genes. They used this with three other
methods in an ensemble-approach which they showed to outperform other tested ap-
proaches, though the top 20 hits for a given query still included signatures of unclear
relatedness. Wei et al. [120] proposed learning-based framework, DrSim, using linear
discriminant analysis to learn similarity based on cMap data labels such as cell line,
perturbagen dose and treatment duration. Jiang et al. [121] used a contrastive deep
learning model to learn signature embeddings based on perturbagen MoA annotations
which outperformed a wide range of other methods. Smith et al. [122] similarly showed
improved performance when using a weakly supervised learning model.
These results show that novel methods of establishing connectivity may improve the
results seen in this project.
72
==PAGE:81==
7.3
Clustering Approaches
There exists a plethora of clustering algorithms, and though the PhenoGraph approach
and Louvain/Leiden community detection has established itself within the field of scRNA-seq
it may not be the optimal approach. Ideally, partitioning of a graph containing both pos-
itive and negative edges should obey two rules: The sum of positive internal edge
weights should be high within a community, and the absolute sum of internal negative
edge weights should be low. The connections between different communities on the
other hand should have a low sum of positive edge weights and a high absolute sum
of negative edge weights. This is in essence equivalent to the correlation clustering
problem as defined by Bansal, Blum & Chawla 2004 [123]. Deterministically solving
the correlation clustering problem is computationally intractable, and though various
approximation algorithms have been published [124] they would be time-consuming to
implement and do not appear to scale to very large graphs. However, given more time
it could be interesting to test if this would result in a better clustering.
Given that the ground truth for the cMap signatures is probably better captured by multi-
ple labels than a single label, one could imagine a layered approach to clustering where
e.g. correlation clustering is first applied to the full data, as this would take into account
the negative similarity values and could generate a global signature landscape. The
data could then be subsetted based on the revealed global clusters, and another round
of clustering applied to each subset. This clustering could be done using e.g. the SNN
approach, as the negative connections should already be reflected in the global struc-
ture. The end-result of such an approach might be more refined as the clustering done
on the subsets would be less affected by e.g. spurious strong connections between
signatures belonging to different global clusters. It may also better capture the fact
that the response to some perturbations is conserved across cellular contexts. Such
a conserved response would result in a single global cluster reflecting e.g the MoA of
the perturbagen, as observed with HDAC inhibitors in this project. It would be interest-
ing to investigate if there is enough variation within such a cluster for a ”subclustering”
to meaningfully partition it into e.g. cell lineages. In contrast, a perturbation where
the response is highly dependent on cellular context can be hypothesized to result in
a separate global cluster reflecting also the cellular context, and ”subclustering” par-
titions may reflect e.g. treatment duration thus capturing early and late effects of the
perturbation.
7.4
Understanding the Landmark Genes
It is an open question why the specific combination of the 978 chosen landmark tran-
scripts have such predictive power for a large subset of the rest of the transcriptome.
Part of the explanation could be the distribution of expression of these transcripts across
73
==PAGE:82==
different tissues as shown by as Subramanian et al. [15]: The majority of the 978 land-
mark genes were found to be expressed across 30 sampled tissues with similar median
expression and variance, which explains why a model could learn to discern between
cellular states from the landmark genes. It does however not explain if there is any
underlying biology tying these genes together. Subramanian et al. [15] conducted
functional enrichment analysis using annotations for the landmark genes from various
external databases, but they did not find any non-generic functions to be enriched in
particular. Perhaps this could indicate that the 978 landmark genes represent such a
wide selection of cellular processes that their combined expression pattern reveals the
state of most cellular pathways. It could also be that the protein products of the land-
mark genes are highly promiscuous, acting in a large number of different molecular
contexts. In such cases they could be thought of as a sort of transcriptional ”sensors”.
However, not much work has been done to look further into this, and such efforts may
lead to new insights into crosstalk between cellular functions or could be used to further
refine the choice of landmark genes for the L1000 platform.
74
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Joseph Fomusi Ndisang, Sharad Rastogi, et al. “Cardiometabolic diseases and
related complications: current status and future perspective”. In: BioMed re-
search international 2013 (2013).
[2]
Marie-Eve Piché, André Tchernof, and Jean-Pierre Després. “Obesity pheno-
types, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases”. In: Circulation research 126.11
(2020), pp. 1477–1500.
[3]
Peter M Masschelin et al. “The impact of oxidative stress on adipose tissue
energy balance”. In: Frontiers in physiology 10 (2020), p. 1638.
[4]
Paul Victor, Dronamraju Sarada, and Kunka Mohanram Ramkumar. “Crosstalk
between endoplasmic reticulum stress and oxidative stress: Focus on protein
disulfide isomerase and endoplasmic reticulum oxidase 1”. In: European Journal
of Pharmacology 892 (2021), p. 173749.
[5]
Amir Ajoolabady et al. “ER stress in obesity pathogenesis and management”.
In: Trends in pharmacological sciences 43.2 (2022), pp. 97–109.
[6]
Abdel-Rahman El-Zayadi. “Hepatic steatosis: a benign disease or a silent killer”.
In: World journal of gastroenterology: WJG 14.26 (2008), p. 4120.
[7]
J. L. Maiers and H. Malhi. “Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress in Metabolic Liver
Diseases and Hepatic Fibrosis”. In: Semin Liver Dis 39.2 (May 2019). PMID:
30912096; PMCID: PMC6530577, pp. 235–248. DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1681032.
[8]
Philipp Kasper et al. “NAFLD and cardiovascular diseases: a clinical review”. In:
Clinical research in cardiology 110 (2021), pp. 921–937.
[9]
Yehudit Hasin, Marcus Seldin, and Aldons Lusis. “Multi-omics approaches to
disease”. In: Genome biology 18.1 (2017), pp. 1–15.
[10]
Eva Ramboer et al. “Immortalized human hepatic cell lines for in vitro testing
and research purposes”. In: Protocols in In Vitro Hepatocyte Research (2015),
pp. 53–76.
[11]
Alexandra B Keenan et al. “The library of integrated network-based cellular sig-
natures NIH program: system-level cataloging of human cells response to per-
turbations”. In: Cell systems 6.1 (2018), pp. 13–24.
[12]
Zhong Wang, Mark Gerstein, and Michael Snyder. “RNA-Seq: a revolutionary
tool for transcriptomics”. In: Nature reviews genetics 10.1 (2009), pp. 57–63.
[13]
Maria Kuksin et al. “Applications of single-cell and bulk RNA sequencing in onco-
immunology”. In: European journal of cancer 149 (2021), pp. 193–210.
75
==PAGE:84==
[14]
Justin Lamb et al. “The Connectivity Map: using gene-expression signatures to
connect small molecules, genes, and disease”. In: science 313.5795 (2006),
pp. 1929–1935.
[15]
Aravind Subramanian et al. “A Next Generation Connectivity Map: L1000 Plat-
form and the First 1,000,000 Profiles”. In: Cell 171.6 (Nov. 2017), 1437–1452.e17.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.049.
[16]
Alexandra B Keenan et al. “Connectivity mapping: methods and applications”.
In: Annual Review of Biomedical Data Science 2 (2019), pp. 69–92.
[17]
Claire Greenhill. “Celastrol identified as a leptin sensitizer and potential novel
treatment for obesity”. In: Nature Reviews Endocrinology 11.8 (2015), pp. 444–
444.
[18]
Kequan Lin et al. “A comprehensive evaluation of connectivity methods for L1000
data”. In: Briefings in bioinformatics 21.6 (2020), pp. 2194–2205.
[19]
Kewalin Samart et al. “Reconciling multiple connectivity scores for drug repur-
posing”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 22.6 (2021), bbab161.
[20]
Nathaniel Lim and Paul Pavlidis. “Evaluation of connectivity map shows limited
reproducibility in drug repositioning”. In: Scientific reports 11.1 (2021), p. 17624.
[21]
Chen Yang et al. “A survey of optimal strategy for signature-based drug reposi-
tioning and an application to liver cancer”. In: Elife 11 (2022), e71880.
[22]
Peter Hall, James Stephen Marron, and Amnon Neeman. “Geometric repre-
sentation of high dimension, low sample size data”. In: Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology 67.3 (2005), pp. 427–444.
[23]
Dominic Grün, Lennart Kester, and Alexander Van Oudenaarden. “Validation of
noise models for single-cell transcriptomics”. In: Nature methods 11.6 (2014),
pp. 637–640.
[24]
Aravind Subramanian et al. “Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles”. In: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 102.43 (2005), pp. 15545–15550.
[25]
Nevin Tham and Sarah R Langley. “Evaluating the robustness of connectivity
methods to noise for in silico drug repurposing studies”. In: Frontiers in Systems
Biology 2 (2022), p. 1050730.
[26]
Steven M Corsello et al. “The Drug Repurposing Hub: a next-generation drug
library and information resource”. In: Nature medicine 23.4 (2017), pp. 405–408.
[27]
Absalom E Ezugwu et al. “A comprehensive survey of clustering algorithms:
State-of-the-art machine learning applications, taxonomy, challenges, and fu-
ture research prospects”. In: Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
110 (2022), p. 104743.
[28]
Patrik D’haeseleer. “How does gene expression clustering work?” In: Nature
biotechnology 23.12 (2005), pp. 1499–1501.
76
==PAGE:85==
[29]
Yuhan Hao et al. “Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data”. In: Cell
184.13 (2021), pp. 3573–3587.
[30]
Xiaojie Qiu et al. “Reversed graph embedding resolves complex single-cell tra-
jectories”. In: Nature methods 14.10 (2017), pp. 979–982.
[31]
F Alexander Wolf, Philipp Angerer, and Fabian J Theis. “SCANPY: large-scale
single-cell gene expression data analysis”. In: Genome biology 19 (2018), pp. 1–
5.
[32]
Jacob H Levine et al. “Data-driven phenotypic dissection of AML reveals progenitor-
like cells that correlate with prognosis”. In: Cell 162.1 (2015), pp. 184–197.
[33]
Santo Fortunato. “Community detection in graphs”. In: Physics reports 486.3-5
(2010), pp. 75–174.
[34]
Zhao Li, Jin Li, and Peng Yu. “l1kdeconv: an R package for peak calling analysis
with LINCS L1000 data”. In: BMC bioinformatics 18.1 (2017), pp. 1–7.
[35]
Yue Qiu et al. “A Bayesian approach to accurate and robust signature detection
on LINCS L1000 data”. In: Bioinformatics 36.9 (2020), pp. 2787–2795.
[36]
Andrea Blasco et al. “Improving deconvolution methods in biology through open
innovation competitions: an application to the connectivity map”. In: Bioinformat-
ics 37.18 (2021), pp. 2889–2895.
[37]
Minji Jeon et al. “Transforming L1000 profiles to RNA-seq-like profiles with deep
learning”. In: BMC bioinformatics 23.1 (2022), p. 374.
[38]
Oana M Enache et al. “The GCTx format and cmap {Py, R, M, J} packages:
resources for optimized storage and integrated traversal of annotated dense
matrices”. In: Bioinformatics 35.8 (2019), pp. 1427–1429.
[39]
Ying Zhou et al. “TTD: Therapeutic Target Database describing target drugga-
bility information”. In: Nucleic acids research 52.D1 (2024), pp. D1465–D1477.
[40]
Simon D Harding et al. “The IUPHAR/BPS guide to PHARMACOLOGY in 2024”.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 52.D1 (2024), pp. D1438–D1449.
[41]
Chen-Tsung Huang et al. “Perturbational gene-expression signatures for com-
binatorial drug discovery”. In: Iscience 15 (2019), pp. 291–306.
[42]
Pau Badia-i-Mompel et al. “decoupleR: ensemble of computational methods
to infer biological activities from omics data”. In: Bioinformatics Advances 2.1
(2022), vbac016.
[43]
Sophia Müller-Dott et al. “Expanding the coverage of regulons from high-confidence
prior knowledge for accurate estimation of transcription factor activities”. In: Nu-
cleic Acids Research 51.20 (2023), pp. 10934–10949.
[44]
Shu-Dong Zhang and Timothy W Gant. “A simple and robust method for con-
necting small-molecule drugs using gene-expression signatures”. In: BMC bioin-
formatics 9 (2008), pp. 1–10.
77
==PAGE:86==
[45]
Siu Kwan Lam, Antoine Pitrou, and Stanley Seibert. “Numba: A LLVM-Based
Python JIT Compiler”. In: LLVM ’15 (2015). DOI: 10 . 1145 / 2833157 . 2833162.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2833157.2833162.
[46]
Vance W. Berger and YanYan Zhou. “Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test: Overview”. In:
Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online. John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2014.
ISBN: 9781118445112. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/9781118445112.stat06558. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118445112.stat06558.
[47]
Jie Cheng and Lun Yang. “Comparing gene expression similarity metrics for
connectivity map”. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Biomedicine. IEEE. 2013, pp. 165–170.
[48]
Patrick Schober, Christa Boer, and Lothar A Schwarte. “Correlation coefficients:
appropriate use and interpretation”. In: Anesthesia & analgesia 126.5 (2018),
pp. 1763–1768.
[49]
Jie Cheng et al. “Evaluation of analytical methods for connectivity map data”. In:
Biocomputing 2013. World Scientific, 2013, pp. 5–16.
[50]
Ege Ulgen, Ozan Ozisik, and Osman Ugur Sezerman. “pathfindR: an R package
for comprehensive identification of enriched pathways in omics data through
active subnetworks”. In: Frontiers in genetics 10 (2019), p. 858.
[51]
Raymond Austin Jarvis and Edward A Patrick. “Clustering using a similarity
measure based on shared near neighbors”. In: IEEE Transactions on computers
100.11 (1973), pp. 1025–1034.
[52]
Fabian Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python”. In: the Jour-
nal of machine Learning research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[53]
Gabor Csardi, Tamas Nepusz, et al. “The igraph software package for complex
network research”. In: InterJournal, complex systems 1695.5 (2006), pp. 1–9.
[54]
Vincent D Blondel et al. “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks”. In:
Journal of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment 2008.10 (2008), P10008.
[55]
Renaud Lambiotte, J-C Delvenne, and Mauricio Barahona. “Laplacian dynamics
and multiscale modular structure in networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:0812.1770
(2008).
[56]
Vincent A Traag, Paul Van Dooren, and Yurii Nesterov. “Narrow scope for resolution-
limit-free community detection”. In: Physical Review E 84.1 (2011), p. 016114.
[57]
Vincent A Traag, Ludo Waltman, and Nees Jan Van Eck. “From Louvain to
Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities”. In: Scientific reports 9.1
(2019), p. 5233.
[58]
William M Rand. “Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods”. In:
Journal of the American Statistical association 66.336 (1971), pp. 846–850.
[59]
Claude Elwood Shannon. “A mathematical theory of communication”. In: The
Bell system technical journal 27.3 (1948), pp. 379–423.
78
==PAGE:87==
[60]
J Kreer. “A question of terminology”. In: IRE Transactions on Information Theory
3.3 (1957), pp. 208–208.
[61]
Lawrence Hubert and Phipps Arabie. “Comparing partitions”. In: Journal of clas-
sification 2 (1985), pp. 193–218.
[62]
Nguyen Xuan Vinh, Julien Epps, and James Bailey. “Information Theoretic Mea-
sures for Clusterings Comparison: Variants, Properties, Normalization and Cor-
rection for Chance”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 11.95 (2010),
pp. 2837–2854. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v11/vinh10a.html.
[63]
Simone Romano et al. “Adjusting for chance clustering comparison measures”.
In: The Journal of Machine Learning Research 17.1 (2016), pp. 4635–4666.
[64]
Peter J. Mucha et al. “Community Structure in Time-Dependent, Multiscale, and
Multiplex Networks”. In: Science 328.5980 (2010), pp. 876–878. DOI: 10.1126/
science.1184819. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1184819.
URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1184819.
[65]
Ian Smith et al. “Evaluation of RNAi and CRISPR technologies by large-scale
gene expression profiling in the Connectivity Map”. In: bioRxiv (2017). DOI: 10.
1101/147504. eprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/06/08/147504.
full.pdf. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/06/08/147504.
[66]
Amos Bairoch. “The cellosaurus, a cell-line knowledge resource”. In: Journal of
biomolecular techniques: JBT 29.2 (2018), p. 25.
[67]
Andrea Perne et al. “Cardiac glycosides induce cell death in human cells by
inhibiting general protein synthesis”. In: PloS one 4.12 (2009), e8292.
[68]
Fang-Ping Kung et al. “Piperlongumine, a potent anticancer phytotherapeutic,
induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in vitro and in vivo through the ROS/Akt
pathway in human thyroid cancer cells”. In: Cancers 13.17 (2021), p. 4266.
[69]
Harsharan Dhillon, Shireen Chikara, and Katie M Reindl. “Piperlongumine in-
duces pancreatic cancer cell death by enhancing reactive oxygen species and
DNA damage”. In: Toxicology reports 1 (2014), pp. 309–318.
[70]
Tilman Schneider-Poetsch et al. “Inhibition of eukaryotic translation elongation
by cycloheximide and lactimidomycin”. In: Nature chemical biology 6.3 (2010),
pp. 209–217.
[71]
Eva Szegezdi et al. “Mediators of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apop-
tosis”. In: EMBO reports 7.9 (2006), pp. 880–885.
[72]
Mehdi Hammadi et al. “Modulation of ER stress and apoptosis by endoplasmic
reticulum calcium leak via translocon during unfolded protein response: involve-
ment of GRP78”. In: The FASEB Journal 27.4 (2013), pp. 1600–1609.
[73]
Jie Lin et al. “Targeting activated Akt with GDC-0068, a novel selective Akt in-
hibitor that is efficacious in multiple tumor models”. In: Clinical Cancer Research
19.7 (2013), pp. 1760–1772.
79
==PAGE:88==
[74]
Marzieh Montazeri et al. “Association of physical activity with increased PI3K
and Akt mRNA levels in adipose tissues of obese and non-obese adults”. In:
Scientific Reports 13.1 (2023), p. 9291.
[75]
Brian A Hemmings and David F Restuccia. “Pi3k-pkb/akt pathway”. In: Cold
Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 4.9 (2012), a011189.
[76]
Lothar Rössig et al. “Akt-dependent phosphorylation of p21Cip1 regulates PCNA
binding and proliferation of endothelial cells”. In: Molecular and cellular biology
(2001).
[77]
Tanya M Gottlieb et al. “Cross-talk between Akt, p53 and Mdm2: possible im-
plications for the regulation of apoptosis”. In: Oncogene 21.8 (2002), pp. 1299–
1303.
[78]
Luowei Li et al. “Protein kinase C negatively regulates Akt activity and modi-
fies UVC-induced apoptosis in mouse keratinocytes”. In: Journal of Biological
Chemistry 281.6 (2006), pp. 3237–3243.
[79]
Kamal D Mehta. “Emerging role of protein kinase C in energy homeostasis: A
brief overview”. In: World journal of diabetes 5.3 (2014), p. 385.
[80]
Priya Nijhawan, Tapan Behl, and Sandeep Arora. “Role of protein kinase C in
obesity”. In: Obesity Medicine 18 (2020), p. 100207.
[81]
Christian Dani and Alexander Pfeifer. “The complexity of PDGFR signaling: reg-
ulation of adipose progenitor maintenance and adipocyte-myofibroblast transi-
tion”. In: Stem cell investigation 4 (2017).
[82]
Chengyi Sun et al. “Mosaic mutant analysis identifies PDGFRα/PDGFRβ as
negative regulators of adipogenesis”. In: Cell Stem Cell 26.5 (2020), pp. 707–
721.
[83]
Chae Young Kim et al. “Parthenolide, a feverfew-derived phytochemical, amelio-
rates obesity and obesity-induced inflammatory responses via the Nrf2/Keap1
pathway”. In: Pharmacological research 145 (2019), p. 104259.
[84]
Yudong Xia et al. “The Nrf2 in Obesity: A Friend or Foe?” In: Antioxidants 11.10
(2022), p. 2067.
[85]
Pavan Kumar Chinta et al. “Effect of parthenolide, an NLRP3 inflammasome
inhibitor, on insulin resistance in high-fat diet-obese mice”. In: Canadian Journal
of Physiology and Pharmacology 100.3 (2022), pp. 272–281.
[86]
Rinke Stienstra et al. “PPARs, obesity, and inflammation”. In: PPAR research
2007 (2007).
[87]
David Montaigne, Laura Butruille, and Bart Staels. “PPAR control of metabolism
and cardiovascular functions”. In: Nature Reviews Cardiology 18.12 (2021),
pp. 809–823.
80
==PAGE:89==
[88]
Jèssica Latorre et al. “The relevance of EGFR, ErbB receptors and neuregulins
in human adipocytes and adipose tissue in obesity”. In: Biomedicine & Pharma-
cotherapy 156 (2022), p. 113972.
[89]
Carlyle Rogers et al. “EGF receptor (ERBB1) abundance in adipose tissue is re-
duced in insulin-resistant and type 2 diabetic women”. In: The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism 97.3 (2012), E329–E340.
[90]
Hyun-A Seong and Hyunjung Ha. “Thr55 phosphorylation of p21 by MPK38/MELK
ameliorates defects in glucose, lipid, and energy metabolism in diet-induced
obese mice”. In: Cell Death & Disease 10.6 (2019), p. 380.
[91]
Hyun-A Seong and Hyunjung Ha. “Ablation of AMPK-Related Kinase MPK38/MELK
Leads to Male-Specific Obesity in Aged Mature Adult Mice”. In: Diabetes 70.2
(Dec. 2020), pp. 386–399. ISSN: 0012-1797. DOI: 10.2337/db20-0436. eprint:
https://diabetesjournals.org/diabetes/article-pdf/70/2/386/511107/db200436.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.2337/db20-0436.
[92]
Lixia Pu et al. “Dual G1 and G2 phase inhibition by a novel, selective Cdc25
inhibitor 7-chloro-6-(2-morpholin-4-ylethylamino)-quinoline-5, 8-dione”. In: Jour-
nal of Biological Chemistry 277.49 (2002), pp. 46877–46885.
[93]
Lei Ding et al. “The roles of cyclin-dependent kinases in cell-cycle progression
and therapeutic strategies in human breast cancer”. In: International journal of
molecular sciences 21.6 (2020), p. 1960.
[94]
Niloy Jafar Iqbal et al. “Cyclin-dependent kinase 4 is a preclinical target for diet-
induced obesity”. In: JCI insight 3.17 (2018).
[95]
Reyes Benot-Dominguez et al. “The Emerging Role of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase
Inhibitors in Treating Diet-Induced Obesity: New Opportunities for Breast and
Ovarian Cancers?” In: Cancers 14.11 (2022), p. 2709.
[96]
Kezia John et al. “The glucocorticoid receptor: cause of or cure for obesity?” In:
American Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism 310.4 (2016),
E249–E257.
[97]
Mattia Quattrocelli et al. “Intermittent prednisone treatment in mice promotes
exercise tolerance in obesity through adiponectin”. In: Journal of Experimental
Medicine 219.5 (2022), e20211906.
[98]
Rebecca A Lee, Charles A Harris, and Jen-Chywan Wang. “Glucocorticoid re-
ceptor and adipocyte biology”. In: Nuclear receptor research 5 (2018).
[99]
Eiji Miyoshi and Yoshihiro Kamada. “Hepatosteatosis and Primary Hepatoma”.
In: Glycoscience: Biology and Medicine. Ed. by Naoyuki Taniguchi et al. Tokyo:
Springer Japan, 2015, pp. 1365–1371. ISBN: 978-4-431-54841-6. DOI: 10.1007/
978-4-431-54841-6_185. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-4-431-54841-6_185.
[100]
Ryan J Schulze et al. “The cell biology of the hepatocyte: A membrane trafficking
machine”. In: Journal of Cell Biology 218.7 (2019), pp. 2096–2112.
81
==PAGE:90==
[101]
Heike L Pahl and Patrick A Baeuerle. “A novel signal transduction pathway from
the endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus is mediated by transcription factor NF-
kappa B.” In: The EMBO journal 14.11 (1995), pp. 2580–2588.
[102]
Alexandra Moraru et al. “THADA regulates the organismal balance between en-
ergy storage and heat production”. In: Developmental Cell 41.1 (2017), pp. 72–
81.
[103]
Yuqing Zhang et al. “THADA inhibition in mice protects against type 2 diabetes
mellitus by improving pancreatic β-cell function and preserving β-cell mass”. In:
Nature Communications 14.1 (2023), p. 1020.
[104]
Eunüs S Ali and Nikolai Petrovsky. “Calcium signaling as a therapeutic target for
liver steatosis”. In: Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism 30.4 (2019), pp. 270–
281.
[105]
Cynthia A Moylan et al. “Hepatic gene expression profiles differentiate presymp-
tomatic patients with mild versus severe nonalcoholic fatty liver disease”. In:
Hepatology 59.2 (2014), pp. 471–482.
[106]
Shanzhou Huang et al. “A comprehensive bioinformatics analysis on multiple
Gene Expression Omnibus datasets of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis”. In: Scientific Reports 8.1 (2018), p. 7630.
[107]
Cheng-Yi Lu et al. “High levels of EphA3 expression are associated with high
invasive capacity and poor overall survival in hepatocellular carcinoma”. In: On-
cology Reports 30.5 (2013), pp. 2179–2186.
[108]
Kostas C Nikolaou et al. “Spontaneous development of hepatocellular carci-
noma with cancer stem cell properties in PR-SET 7-deficient livers”. In: The
EMBO journal 34.4 (2015), pp. 430–447.
[109]
Can Cai et al. “Histone modifications in fatty acid synthase modulated by carbo-
hydrate responsive element binding protein are associated with non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease”. In: International Journal of Molecular Medicine 42.3 (2018),
pp. 1215–1228.
[110]
Christopher Scott et al. “Hepatocyte-specific deletion of ARNT (aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator) results in altered fibrotic gene expression in the
thioacetamide model of liver injury”. In: PLoS One 10.3 (2015), e0121650.
[111]
Katherine J Roth and Bryan L Copple. “Role of hypoxia-inducible factors in the
development of liver fibrosis”. In: Cellular and molecular gastroenterology and
hepatology 1.6 (2015), pp. 589–597.
[112]
David Kung-Chun Chiu et al. “Hypoxia regulates the mitochondrial activity of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells through HIF/HEY1/PINK1 pathway”. In: Cell death
& disease 10.12 (2019), p. 934.
[113]
Bahram Bibak et al. “A review of the pharmacological and therapeutic effects of
auraptene”. In: Biofactors 45.6 (2019), pp. 867–879.
82
==PAGE:91==
[114]
Koji Nagao et al. “Effects of citrus auraptene (7-geranyloxycoumarin) on hep-
atic lipid metabolism in vitro and in vivo”. In: Journal of agricultural and food
chemistry 58.16 (2010), pp. 9028–9032.
[115]
Fen Wen et al. “SU5, a new Auraptene analog with improved metabolic stability,
ameliorates nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in methionine-and choline-deficient
diet-fed db/db mice”. In: Chemical Biology & Drug Design 99.3 (2022), pp. 504–
511.
[116]
Aditya Ambade et al. “Inhibition of heat shock protein 90 alleviates steatosis and
macrophage activation in murine alcoholic liver injury”. In: Journal of hepatology
61.4 (2014), pp. 903–911.
[117]
Matthew C Wheeler and Nicholas Gekakis. “Hsp90 modulates PPARγ activity
in a mouse model of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease [S]”. In: Journal of lipid
research 55.8 (2014), pp. 1702–1710.
[118]
Yen-Chou Kuan et al. “Heat shock protein 90 modulates lipid homeostasis by
regulating the stability and function of sterol regulatory element-binding pro-
tein (SREBP) and SREBP cleavage-activating protein”. In: Journal of Biological
Chemistry 292.7 (2017), pp. 3016–3028.
[119]
Xianxiao Zhou et al. “EMUDRA: Ensemble of Multiple Drug Repositioning Ap-
proaches to improve prediction accuracy”. In: Bioinformatics 34.18 (2018), pp. 3151–
3159.
[120]
Zhiting Wei et al. “DrSim: similarity learning for transcriptional phenotypic drug
discovery”. In: Genomics, Proteomics & Bioinformatics 20.5 (2022), pp. 1028–
1036.
[121]
Likun Jiang et al. “MOASL: Predicting drug mechanism of actions through simi-
larity learning with transcriptomic signature”. In: Computers in Biology and Medicine
169 (2024), p. 107853.
[122]
Ian Smith, Petr Smirnov, and Benjamin Haibe-Kains. “Similarity metric learning
on perturbational datasets improves functional identification of perturbations”.
In: bioRxiv (2023), pp. 2023–06.
[123]
Nikhil Bansal, Avrim Blum, and Shuchi Chawla. “Correlation clustering”. In: Ma-
chine learning 56 (2004), pp. 89–113.
[124]
Vincent Cohen-Addad, Euiwoong Lee, and Alantha Newman. “Correlation clus-
tering with sherali-adams”. In: 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Founda-
tions of Computer Science (FOCS). IEEE. 2022, pp. 651–661.
83
==PAGE:92==
8
Supplementary Information
8.1
Python Packages Used
• cmappy v4.0.1
• decoupler v1.5.0
• dill v0.3.7
• igraph v0.10.8
• leidenalg v0.10.1
• llvmlite v0.40.1
• matplotlib v3.7.2
• numba v0.57.1
• numba-progress v1.1.0
• numpy v1.24.0
• pandas v1.5.3
• plotly v5.14.1
• pyarrow v8.0.0
• scikit-learn v1.3.1
• scipy v1.9.3
• seaborn v0.13.0
• tqdm v4.66.1
84
==PAGE:93==
8.2
Supplemental Figures
(a)
(b)
85
==PAGE:94==
(c)
(d)
Figure 8.1: The scaling of the implemented CS functions with a) number of CPU
threads, b) number of signature genes, c) number of query signatures and d) num-
ber of reference signatures. Each data point is the result of 5 runs of 10 repeats each.
86
==PAGE:95==
Figure
8.2:
The
distribution
of
all
pairwise
cosine
correlations
between
cMapvalidation_MoA signatures. The median is shown at 0.139 (dashed line).
87
